
A “make or break” report on allegations of continued IRA activity is due that 
could be decisive in the survival of the power-sharing government inNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

Ahead of its publication on Tuesday, the two main parties in the region – the 
Democratic Unionists andSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> – have been trading warnings 
about its possible implications.


Peter Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-robinson>, the DUP 
leader and recently resigned first minister, has said unionists would seek to 
expel Sinn Féin from the power-sharing coalition if the report found evidence 
that the IRA was still preparing for terrorist activity.

Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, the Sinn Féin 
president, in turn warned the DUP on Monday night against seeking to deny “the 
rights of citizens who vote for Sinn Féin”.

The report will focus heavily on the murder of ex-Provisional IRA prisoner 
Kevin McGuigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/12/ex-ira-gunman-shot-dead-in-apparent-revenge-killing>
 in August. His killing sparked the current political crisis at Stormont, 
particularly after George Hamilton, the chief constable of the Police Service 
of Northern Ireland (PSNI), said individual IRA members killed McGuigan in 
retaliation for the murder of their IRA colleague Gerard “Jock” Davison in May.

The chief constable stressed that the murder was not sanctioned by the IRA 
leadership – an assessment that many republican sources and long-term observers 
regarded as incredulous given the organisation’s reputation for centralised 
leadership and discipline.


A 47-year-old man remains in police custody in connection with the McGuigan 
murder.

In response to allegations of ongoing IRA activity, Robinson stepped down as 
first minister while his DUP ministers have only played a shadow role in the 
power-sharing administration since the crisis erupted in late summer.Three 
legal and security experts including Lord Carlile, who has conducted reviews on 
the UK’s anti-terrorist legislation, were called in to examine the claims of 
continued IRA structures and role in attacks such as the McGuigan murder. It is 
they who have drawn up Tuesday’s crucial report and their assessment will be 
made public by the Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, in the House 
of Commons at about 12.30pm.

Sinn Féin continues to insist the IRA has “left the stage” and no longer poses 
a threat. However, many unionists believe the IRA is still operating in the 
shadows. Devolution was restored to Northern Ireland in 2007 on the basis that 
the IRA would dissolve as a paramilitary force and republicans would support 
the PSNI and the rule of law.

However, one hardline unionist, Jim Allister of the Traditional Unionist Voice 
Assembly, predicted on Tuesday that the DUP was “mad keen” to get back into 
full devolved government with Sinn Féin, and the report would give the largest 
unionist force the excuse to do so.

Allister said: “The farce of repeated resignations and reappointments were 
perhaps the only cases in history of resignations designed specifically to keep 
a government afloat rather than ministers resigning on principle.”
 