 The Anti-Terrorist Branch called for help from the public yesterday as the 
Stock Exchange became the latest target in the IRA 's sustained mainland 
campaign against buildings deemed to represent the establishment.
Just after 8 am, a man with an Irish accent, using a new codeword, telephoned 
a series of eight warnings of a bomb in the Exchange to London offices.

The device exploded at 8.49 am, destroying the public gallery and putting the 
London Traded Options Market out of operation until Monday. The building had 
been evacuated in time and no one was injured.

Stock market dealings were computerised in October 1987 in an operation known 
as Big Bang and the majority of trading in the City was not affected. Office 
workers were later evacuated from several City security firms following hoax 
warnings of other bombs.

The device was estimated by Commander George Churchill-Coleman, head of the 
Anti-Terrorist Branch, to have contained between five and 10 lbs of high 
explosive. It was believed to have been planted either that morning or days 
earlier, using a timer in the mens' toilets behind the public viewing area. The 
attack was assumed by the police to be the work of the IRA . It is believed to 
be the first time a warning had been given in Britain since the Harrods blast 
in 1983.

Last month, the IRA claimed responsibility for demolishing the entrance of the 
Carlton Club in St James's Street, in the West End of London, and badly 
damaging the former home of Lord McAlpine, the ex-treasurer of the Conservative 
Party, in West Green, Hampshire. Earlier in the year a string of attacks on 
military targets killed three soldiers.

The recent shift from military sites to targets said to represent the 
establishment was a search for greater publicity, Mr Churchill-Coleman 
suggested. 'It does not suprise us that they are now moving away from military 
targets to softer ones.'

A Scotland Yard press conference after the explosion was used to launch a new 
police anti-terrorist initiative. Posters advertising a new free telephone 
number (0800-789321) are to be sent out in the next few weeks. A similar 
approach, using a confidential hotline, has been in operation for a long time in
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

Mr Churchill-Coleman said: 'We need the vigilance of the general public. 
Somewhere, there's somebody who knows these individuals. They may be renting 
accommodation for cash, there may be possibly one or two men and a female.'

Andrew Hugh Smith, the chairman of the Stock Exchange, suggested that an IRA 
member may have joined a touring group. 'I shudder to think what the 
consequences would have been had the security forces not reacted as fast as 
they did to the warning,' he said. Around 300 people were evacuated, though 
many ignored alarms at first, believing it was fire drill.

The warning calls, which did not give the precise location of the bomb, were 
made to, among others, Reuters news agency, the Financial Times, the Salvation 
Army and the City Police.
 