
Ireland’s taoiseach has stepped up his warnings about the consequences of a 
British exit from the European Union, saying it might spark a return to 
violence inNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
and trigger an economic slowdown in the Republic. Enda Kenny said he and his 
ministers would be campaigning in the UK to try to persuade Irish-born 
residents to vote to remain.

It is understood that there is concern in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> that some younger Irish people in 
the UK are less inclined to vote to remain than more established Irish settlers.

In a speech in Dublin, Kenny – freshly installed as leader of a new coalition 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/enda-kenny-wins-second-term-as-irelands-prime-minister>
 – said no future arrangement between Ireland and a UK outside the EU could 
possibly work as effectively as the current one. His remarks will be seen as a 
direct rebuff to the UK’s Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, who has 
claimed that trade relations with Ireland would be unaffected.

Without specifically warning of a return to violence, Kenny said he was 
concerned that a British departure from the EU would undermine some of the 
institutions that have acted to support the Northern Ireland peace process. 
Citing €3bn of EU funding for north-south economic cooperation, he said: “In a 
jurisdiction that still has ‘peace walls’ physically dividing communities, the 
importance of the EU’s support for these small building blocks of economic and 
social infrastructure should not be taken for granted.

“The trust that enables that kind of close cooperation was forged at least in 
part through years of working side by side in Brussels since 1973. North-south 
cooperation – a keystone of the Good Friday agreement – is so much easier when 
both jurisdictions are members of the same union.”

A similar warning of a return to conflict in Northern Ireland in the event of 
Brexit was made on Thursday by Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter 
Steinmeier. He said: “If the United Kingdom were to quit the EU, there will be 
a border again between Ireland and Northern Ireland. And that could at least 
have the potential of rekindling a conflict that has seemingly calmed down.”

Brexit vote would bring EU states closer together, says French finance minster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/eu-referendum-brexit-britain-michel-sapin-economy>
Kenny also used his speech to make an economic case for a remain vote. “We can 
argue all day about what new arrangements could be put in place after a Brexit 
and how long that would take,” he said. However, no alternative arrangement 
will be better than the one we have: a single market and seamless flows of 
goods, services, capital and people.

“There are a myriad of different trading models that could be put in place. 
Each of the alternatives would impede, not improve, trade flows. They would 
build in extra bureaucracy, not reduce red tape.” He said as many as 400,000 
jobs in Ireland and the UK were at stake.

There has been speculation that Ireland might benefit from Brexit, as some of 
the UK’s financial services industry might transfer to Dublin, but Ireland says 
that has not been a factor in its decision to campaign for remain.
 