
Ireland’s parliament is sitting on Thursday for the first time since the 
country’s inconclusive election last month, but a new taoiseach is unlikely to 
be elected.

The outgoing Fine Gael-Labour coalition government was punished by voters on 
26 February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/27/irish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses>
 in an election that left no party with a majority in the Irish parliament – 
the Dáil. There is no sign of a viable coalition being formed, meaning 
negotiations to form a government are set to continue at least until Easter.

Enda Kenny’s Fine Gael lost 26 seats at the election, but remains the largest 
party with 50 seats. It will nominate Kenny to return to the post of taoiseach. 
Fianna Fáil, which made a stunning recovery from a historic low of 21 seats in 
2011 to 44 in this election, will nominate its leader Micheál Martin, andSinn 
Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> will put forward its 
president, Gerry Adams, even though he has said his party does not have a 
mandate to govern.

None of the candidates is likely to win a majority. Instead, it is likely that 
Kenny will remain as “caretaker taoiseach” for St Patrick’s Day on 17 March, 
and will probably take the salute during the centenary commemorations the end 
of the month for the 1916 Easter Rising against British rule.

The Guardian understands that the two main parties – Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil 
– are still ruling out a historic “grand coalition”. Sinn Féin MP Pearse 
Doherty has challenged Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil to “end the charade” and form 
a government together. But Fianna Fáil sources are adamant the party will not 
walk into a coalition that will leave Sinn Féin as the main opposition inIreland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Instead, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil have restated they want a “political 
ceasefire”that would allow Fine Gael to cobble together a minority 
administration propped up by independent MPs.

One signal of this possible deal this week has been Kenny and Fine Gael’s 
willingness to discuss reforming parliamentary structures with both Fianna Fáil 
and a large group of independents. Such reforms would distribute power and give 
the Dáil more scrutiny over legislation. Dáil reform has been one of the key 
demands of some of the independent groupings in return for supporting a 
minority administration.

In the likely event of no taoiseach and thus no government being formed on 
Thursday, Kenny will travel to the official residence of the Irish president, 
Michael D Higgins, in Dublin’s Phoenix Parkto inform him that a new 
administration has not yet been constituted.

On Thursday afternoon the Dáil elected Fianna Fáil’s Seán Ó Fearghaíl as its 
new speaker.



 