
Members of the Irish government have signalled support for UK plans to shift 
the frontline of immigration controls to Ireland’s ports and airports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/britain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border>
 post-Brexit in an attempt to avoid a “hard border” between the north and the 
south.

The Irish Republic’s finance minister, Michael Noonan, said neither the Irish 
nor the UK government wanted a hard border onceNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has left the EU along with the 
rest of the UK.

Post-Brexit world could see Ireland carrying out Britain’s passport checks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/ireland-could-carry-out-britain-passport-checks-post-brexit>
“If you do not have a border going from Newry, going across, dividing Sligo 
and Donegal from the northern counties, the next step is to have controls at 
the ports. That would mean Rosslare and Larne [sea ports] and the airports, but 
that wouldn’t be much more than the normal checks we have at airports already, 
where you show your passport,” hetold the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/government-agreeable-to-using-irish-ports-and-airports-to-control-immigration-to-uk-1.2823763>
.

Frances Fitzgerald, the Irish deputy prime minister and justice minister, said 
her government was agreeable to the plan, adding there was “not anything 
surprising” in the proposals.

Earlier, James Brokenshire, the UK’s Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> secretary, said London and Dublin 
would work together to strengthen Ireland’s external borders in order to combat 
illegal immigration into the UK once it leaves the EU.

While Noonan and Fitzgerald welcomed Brokenshire’s promise that the common 
travel area between Britain and Ireland would continue to exist, the Irish 
coalition government has stressed that any new intelligence-gathering and 
data-sharing system on people entering Ireland who may also travel into 
Northern Ireland must win support from all of the Republic’s EU partners.

Any system designed to enable the UK to control immigration via Ireland is 
bound to be controversial, and one Irish politician has called the proposal 
ridiculous.

Matt Carty, the Sinn Féin MEP for the Midlands North-West constituency of 
Ireland, said British immigration problems should be the least of Ireland’s 
worries, given economic and social turmoil caused directly by the referendum 
result.

He said: “The Irish government and a succession of its representatives have 
been deferential to the British government from time to time. What we are 
saying is that this is not an occasion for this. We need to be pointing out the 
needs of this island and making demands for the Irish people. It is not their 
job to be pushing for the wishes of the British government.

“Brexit has presented a huge amount of challenges for the Irish government in 
terms of the trading relationship with Britain, both to the UK and between 
Northern Ireland and Ireland. To add on the task of immigration controls, I 
think is ridiculous.”



His colleague Mairead McGuinness, a Fine Gael MEP for the same constituency, 
said she did not support the notion of Ireland taking on Britain’s immigration 
controls.


But she said no such discussions had taken place and that Brokenshire’s 
remarks centred on “increased cooperation between the UK and Ireland with 
regard to combatting illegal immigration, such as sharing immigration data for 
non-EU nationals entering the common travel area”. She said this built on 
existing efforts that were unrelated to the outcome of the UK’s EU referendum.

The former taoiseach John Bruton recently warned of the “incalculable 
consequences” that Brexit would have on trade.

“The underlying assumption of the Good Friday agreement … was that both parts 
of Ireland would be included in a zone of free movement of goods and people, an 
assumption that is in the process of being unilaterally reversed by the UK 
side’s decision to leave that zone. Brexit will thus devastate trade flows, and 
human contact, within Ireland, with incalculable consequences,” he said in an
article in the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/30dabf70-2f1c-11e6-bf8d-26294ad519fc>. 

Britain is Ireland’s largest export partner, with €1.3bn (£1.2bn) a week 
traded between the two countries. The collapse of sterling since the referendum 
has devastated small businesses, who have seen the cost of exporting rise by as 
much as 17%.

It has also seen a return to booming cross-border trade, with Irish shoppers 
travelling to the north for cheaper goods including petrol, clothing and 
footwear, and groceries.
 