
Parents who are driven to distraction by their toddler’s picky eating can take 
comfort in the fact that it’s just as likely to be down to nature as nurture.

According to research into the behaviour of 16-month old children, fussy 
eating and a refusal to try new foods are both heavily influenced by the 
child’s genetic makeup, and are not just a result of upbringing.

“That these traits were so significantly influenced by genes so early on 
really indicates how innate the tendency is, and that it is not because of the 
parents that are kind of moulding [children] into fussy eaters - it is already 
there when they are 16 months old,” said Andrea Smith, PhD student and lead 
author of the research from University College, London.

Picky eaters may grow into depressed and anxious kids, research suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/03/picky-eaters-depression-anxiety-adhd-study>
But, she adds, shared environmental factors such as the home setting also play 
an important role, and parents should be reassured that fussy eating behaviour 
can be modified.

Writing in the Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/%28ISSN%291469-7610>, 
researchers from the UK and Norway describe how they sought to probe the impact 
of genetics on the eating behaviour of toddlers by harnessing data from twins 
registered with a large UK project known asGemini 
<http://www.geministudy.co.uk/default.asp>. 

More than 1,900 families with twins aged 16 months took part in the study. 
Parents completed a questionnaire which investigated the eating habits of their 
toddlers, including whether the children enjoyed eating a variety of foods and 
whether they refused new foods.

By looking at how similar the results were from identical twins (who share all 
their genes) compared with how similar they were from fraternal twins (who 
share on average 50% of the genes that make people different), the researchers 
were able to tease apart the influence of genetic factors on the eating 
behaviour of the children.

The findings showed that fussy eaters were also likely to reject unfamiliar 
foods, with many of the environmental and genetic factors common to both 
traits. What’s more, the results suggest that genes play a key role in the 
eating behaviour of the children. “At 16 months we found that overall 46% of 
the variation in food fussiness was explained by genes, and we found that 58% 
of food neophobia (rejection of new foods) was explained by genes,” said Smith.

Shared environment factors, such as home life, affected both traits, exerting 
an equal effect to genes on variations in food fussiness, but a smaller effect 
on food neophobia. That suggests that despite the genetic tendencies, parental 
actions can still influence toddler behaviour, the authors say.

“We know that genes are not our destiny,” said Smith. “Parents can positively 
influence their child’s eating behaviours.”


Smith says that parents should not force or bribe their child to eat a 
“problem” food but instead repeatedly offer it to the child outside of 
mealtimes and praise any attempt by the child to touch or smell it.

It is not know exactly which genes are involved in influencing picky eating 
and the refusal of unfamiliar food, but Smith says that many genes are likely 
to play a role.


Feeding fussy kids: top five ways to get them eating better food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/sep/11/feeding-fussy-kids-top-five-ways-to-get-them-eating-better-food>
“There will never been one gene which is the food fussiness genes - they are a 
lot of different ones,” she said. “These genetic effects might be working 
through slight differences in personality in eating behaviours, in how 
sensitive individuals are to texture and flavours, to how extroverted and how 
open they are to new situations.”

While previous studies have highlighted the influence of genes on such eating 
behaviours in older children and adults, the new study, says Smith, shows that 
such genes exert a heavy influence from an early age.

Tim Spector, professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London, who 
was not involved in the study, agrees that the study offers parents an 
optimistic outlook.


“Every kid is different,” he said. “There is a genetic tendency to be more or 
less fussy.” But, he adds, parents should take heart that such behaviour isn’t 
immutable. “You can modify it by changing the family’s habits, the way you 
present food to the child and the whole concept of the mealtime,” he said.
 