
The drawn-out capture of Sirte, the last major Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) stronghold in Libya, has been 
completed after months of fighting and a stubborn resistance by snipers.


Rida Issa, a spokesman for the Misrata brigades, said they had led forces 
backed by US airstrikes to take the last Isis-held buildings in the city. He 
said the brigades “control all of Sirte’s Ghiza Bahriya neighbourhood and are 
still securing the area”.

Isis fighters clinging on in a few dozen buildings in the district had earlier 
on Monday surrendered to Libyan forces, and at least three women had left 
militant-held ground, officials said.

In recent days, dozens of women and children had left the last group of 
buildings controlled by militants, Libyan forces said. But several women 
carried out deadly suicide attacks on Friday as they were being granted safe 
passage with their children.

Isis commanders were also captured trying to escape by sea, along with some 
Tunisian fighters.

The militant group took over Sirte in early 2015 and at one point had access 
to 150 miles of Mediterranean coastline. The US claimed about 6,000 Isis 
fighters were inside Sirte, but subsequent analysis suggested the true number 
was closer to 3,000.

The anti-Isis fight in Sirte has been led by brigades from the western city of 
Misrata, who have taken heavy casualties, with the support of at least 470 US 
airstrikes since August.

The absence of any recognisable Libyan intelligence forces means the west has 
little idea where the defeated fighters escaping the siege may have fled over 
the past few months, either withinLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> or the largely unguarded Libyan 
borders.


The capture of Sirte does little to help resolve the fundamental political 
problems dogging the Libyan Government of National Accord, led by Fayez 
al-Sarraj.

The GNA has little or no authority, and the Libyan parliament – the House of 
Representatives – has refused to pass the constitutional amendments necessary 
to bring the GNA fully into constitutional existence.

Although oil production is slowly rising, government financial reserves are 
depleted and the Libyan dinar is overvalued. Fighting between rival militias in 
the capital, Tripoli, has worsened in the past week, with many deaths.

In recent weeks, Russia has become more closely involved in trying to resolve 
the political stalemate by giving visible backing to Khalifa Haftar, the 
Egyptian-backed leader of the Libyan National Army. Western governments regard 
Haftar as an obstacle to developing a political consensus. Last week he met the 
Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Moscow.

Russia has insisted it will not arm Haftar but believes he must be integral to 
any new political compromise, and a reshaping of the GNA.

 