
The 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
<http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/> is often seen as a 
watershed moment, when many governments came together and said: “All human 
beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.”


For many social workers across the world, the declaration also represents a 
significant moment in global social development. However, as we approach its 
70th anniversary, it is important to recognise that not all social workers 
agree and many believe it is not comprehensive enough to contribute to 
sustainable wellbeing.


Social workers practise in the context of competing rights everywhere. We work 
with families, communities and places of employment where the rights of one 
group or one person may be at odds with those of another. The rights of the 
child, of culture, of individual expression, of self-determination – all these 
create a maze through which the social worker must skilfully navigate.

The UN declaration doesn’t give voice to the concept of competing rights and 
the processes needed to bring people together to find consensus. Indeed, it 
developed from a top-down perspective, where governments gave rights to the 
individuals over whom they governed. This is why the declaration focuses mostly 
on civil and political rights, such as the rights to vote, to a fair trial, 
freedom of speech and so on.

As a global profession that seeks to transform social systems to end 
oppression, marginalisation and disadvantage, it is time for social work to 
develop a more inclusive and holistic framework of rights, based on the 
profession’s principles of social justice, dignity, diversity and 
sustainability.

 This social work rights framework must focus on the four key international 
themes developed at the2010 Joint World Conference on Social Work 
<http://www.swsd2010.org/en/welcome.html>, when 3,000 practitioners from across 
the globe gathered to set an agenda to guide the future of the profession.

We could all be Daniel Blake: social workers stand with disabled adults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/02/we-could-all-be-daniel-blake-social-workers-stand-with-disabled-adults>
Dignity rights

This relates to the individual’s right be understood as a unique person with 
strengths and capabilities. As a profession that focuses on the whole person, 
social workers have taken action on this right. For example, in the Netherlands 
social workers have redesigned social services to enable a more holistic 
approach to wellbeing. This includes rebuilding social structures to address 
issues such as depression and isolation, and creating health and wellbeing 
plans not just for the individual, but for the whole community.

The right to dignity also includes the right to self-determination – the 
ability to influence one’s own life. Research consistently shows that when 
people are able to make decisions over their own lives they are happier, 
healthier and live longer.

Social and economic rights

Some of the most profound developments in human rights arose from mass 
participation in democratic structures and non-violent protest. The civil 
rights movement, disability networks, trade unions and women’s movements have 
(along with others) transformed the conditions of how people live and have made 
societies more inclusive and balanced.

Social work identifies the right of people to shape their environment. For 
example, African social workers and the communities they work with argue that 
“aid” is degrading and not a sustainable approach to fighting poverty. They say 
transforming the global tax system to ensure that multinationals and offshore 
governments pay their taxes in Africa rather than putting it in tax havens 
would raise more money than all of the aid that Africa currently receives. A 
simple demand, where people want their economic and social rights based on fair 
systems in global practice.

Social workers have been consistent advocates for the active involvement of 
individuals in shaping their future wellbeing.

New manifesto for social care is essential – service users should write it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/06/new-manifesto-for-social-care-is-essential-service-users-should-write-it>
Environmental rights

The International Federation of Social Workers <http://ifsw.org/> recently 
formally recognised the importance of the rights of nature and identified the 
role of social workers in creating sustainable communities and environments. In 
many parts of Latin America and Asia-Pacific, social workers have advocated 
that land, water and air be given rights as if they were people, so they will 
not be exploited, but instead be able to thrive for generations to come. Such 
an approach is essential in the context of the planet’s limited and fragile 
resources, and the increasing over-exploitation of nature, which will directly 
affect the symbiotic relationship between the billions of people and earth.

Relationship rights

Social work aims to preserve and enhance social relationships, because we 
understand intrinsically that the interdependence of people is a core 
requirement for achieving quality of life.

Social workers understand that a person’s family plays the most fundamental 
role in their future wellbeing and, as such, we recognise that people have a 
right to secure relationships in their families and communities.

Sadly, however, in the social legislation of some countries, rights only focus 
on the child, while the family and community are not usually considered. This, 
all too often, results in children being removed from their birth parents, 
rather than the more humane and economically-viable approach of providing the 
original family with the support, resources and education needed to secure the 
rights of the family relationships. We must continue to challenge such 
practices.

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> will always be at 
the core of social work. There is no question that practitioners will continue 
to protect and promote people’s fundamental rights. The four key areas 
mentioned above, while not yet a professional tool or guideline, highlight a 
broader framework that social workers encounter in their work between family, 
community and group members.

This understanding of rights spans beyond the UN declaration and takes into 
account the differing perceptions of rights as they relate not just to 
individuals but also to the social, relational and environment contexts in 
which we live. It is time to open the discussion both within and outside the 
profession and work towards a more comprehensive social work framework of 
rights.


This is an edited version of Rory Truell’s message for International Human 
Rights Day <http://ifsw.org/news/towards-a-social-work-rights-framework/>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 