
Under a blood-red sky in gentle Lancashire, a band of eager victims have come 
to experience Horror Camp Live, a gore-tastic camping night incongruously 
pitched at a working dairy farm near Blackburn, home of Mrs Dowson's Ice Cream. 
I have arrived late.

A cocktail of medicines with which I am treating a stomach bug start to take 
haphazard effect on my body. "I think I'm a bit high," I whisper to my 
companion, Emily.

This does go some way to stilling the riptide of anxiety I've been feeling 
since reading the event's website, in particular the small print. "You may be 
forcibly handled, bound, hooded, chained and subjected to simulated torture," 
it says. In addition to "strong verbal and graphic visual sexual content", I'm 
told to expect the use of "total darkness, water spray and splash, crouch 
spaces and latex".

It sounds like 50 Shades of Guantánamo Bay. The website also has a convoluted 
back story about a cannibal neurosurgeon called Lockjaw which I don't 
understand at all, but it doesn't seem to have much bearing on the experience 
anyway. 

On arrival we find the Horror Camp team have helpfully pitched the guest tents 
around a huge campfire in the farm's large parkland. Beyond us in every 
direction roll the beautiful fields of Clayton-le-Dale. We briefly introduce 
ourselves, before moving into a dim shed for burgers and (very) local ice cream 
at 9pm. We also watch a horror film, Scarezone, which feels unnecessary – 
everyone really wants to get on with being terrorised by strangers in makeup.

Scarezone's teen-American spunkiness is also ill-suited to the very British 
camp-ness of the night, which manifests itself in jokey transvestism and saucy 
innuendo, traded relentlessly by our grown-up scout guides Davey and Dawny.

"Are we in Skegness?" Emily asks me early on. Eventually, however, as the 
night draws in, man-eating Lockjaw wrests control of our night from the adults 
in shorts, and the games begin.

Far from the solitary nightmare I was expecting, the evening is a 
rambunctious, group-bonding jolly. Among the 30 horror fans here are a 
paranormal investigator and a couple celebrating their wedding anniversary. The 
female-weighted group immediately gets into the spirit.

I had anticipated running scared through the woods, but we spend most of the 
night in the screening shed, where a virtual Lockjaw growls at us via a 
projector. He seems fixated less on sweet flesh than on setting up his own 
misguided Duke of Edinburgh scheme: we're sent striding around the farm with 
maps, and conga-lining through grimy tunnels.

After each mission he rewards us with DVDs and Toffifee sweets. Proceedings 
veer close to a comedy night in a working men's club thanks to the quick wit 
and foul mouth of Dybuk, an "old fortune-telling Irish Gypsy" who harangues 
each team at length between their 20-minute excursions. I wince slightly at the 
"Gypsy" description, but leave political correctness at the door; she's a far 
more rounded and charming character than the other guides and ghouls.

Emily, whom I have tricked into coming, is dressed inappropriately, tramping 
through cowpats in hotpants and ballet flats. She's quite angry with me, but 
I'm starting to really enjoy myself. There's a creepily beguiling doll who 
silently beckons us on masked dates. We visit a twisted surgeon in an outhouse 
who sounds like he has throat cancer. We're kidnapped, bundled into vans and 
driven to seances and Satanic masses, all the while singing The Farmer Wants A 
Wife. We happily eat insects. Around us, the cows low non-judgmentally. It's 
like a Halloween hen night, though for safety reasons the beers are restricted 
to two per person, and running is not allowed.

Scare attractions are a growing trend in UK entertainment. Atmosfear, the 
entertainment group behind tonight's fun, will run a larger Halloween "scream 
park", a sort of Crystal Maze of terror, on the farm in October and November, 
with a larger cast of scare-actors and more zones of political incorrectness to 
navigate – Inbreeds Impound, Gaunt Hill Asylum …

The Horror Camp is a more intimate thrill, though sensation junkies might find 
insufficient threat here (aside from Dybuk's deliciously close-to-the-knuckle 
verbal abuse). Blindfolded in the back of a van, I listen with bemusement to 
the plaint of a female camper beside me: "I was told I'd be hooded and bound. 
I'm not bound!"
 Face-to-face with cannibal neurosurgeon Lockjaw 
The schlocky shenanigans "end" around 2.30am, and we retire to our canvas 
sanctuaries. But don't count on a quiet night. One after-hours prank – enacting 
every camper's worst nightmare – succeeds in scaring me stupid. Ripped from 
sleep, I wake to my own screaming. If that sounds like your bag, you know where 
to come.

As I've failed to organise our travel with any degree of sense, bespattered 
Emily and I are ferried back to town the next morning by Mr Dowson, a farmer 
definitely not in want of a wife – her name adorns the signs around us.

After all the monsters, it's nice to put a human face to Hawkshaw Farm. We 
talk about how falling milk prices impose a harsh choice on UK dairy farmers: 
branch out or shut up shop.

"For most, diversifying means getting a yoghurt counter," he says. "We've 
tried to be a bit more creative."

I listen to his gruesome ideas for how Horror Camp can go much, much further. 
The organisers, who are planning to develop the night, should listen to him, 
too. My stomach, dormant until now, has started to lurch again.

• The next Horror Camp Live (0845 519 4271, horrorcamplive.co.uk 
<http://www.horrorcamplive.co.uk/>) is on 29 September, 8pm-9am, £85pp. No 
under-14s, under-18s must be accompanied by an adult. Buffet dinner and 
breakfast included. Tents included, but bring your own bedding
 