
This was a match for the partisan supporter – from Birmingham. It is now 
ingrained that scores of 300 are required in this format. But here, on a tired, 
dry old surface in the middle of the square, Surrey collapsed from 99 for two 
to a paltry 136 all out, which leftWarwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> with the simplest of tasks. 
There have been only three lower scores in a Lord’s final.

Warwickshire knocked off the runs with eight wickets and 19.4 overs to spare 
with Jonathan Trott giving an exhibition of high-class efficiency. He finished 
this mismatch with an exquisite cover drive and 82 runs to his name. Job done 
and dusted by 4pm. The only thingSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> won was the toss.

“We have not turned up today,” said their captain, Gareth Batty. “It hurts 
like hell and it’s a little bit embarrassing. We have no one to blame but 
ourselves.”

Surrey’s line-up had a top-heavy feel to it and for half an hour their opening 
batsmen, Jason Roy and Steve Davies, who was playing his last game for the 
county before joining Somerset next year, suggested that the standard 300 was a 
possibility.

Davies unveiled those silky square drives that somehow bisected a packed 
off-side field; Roy, after a cagey start by his standards, began to strike the 
ball cleanly; the pitch seemed to be behaving decorously.

Two chance dismissals, both a consequence of superb reflexes on the 
Warwickshire side, changed the tenor of the match. Roy unleashed one of his 
trademark pull shots off the front foot against Chris Wright and our eyes 
swerved instinctively to the midwicket boundary – to no avail.

Instead, Laurie Evans in the ring on the leg-side stuck out his right hand and 
it transpired that this was where the ball would come to rest. A disbelieving 
Roy was compelled to start his characteristically slow meander back to the 
pavilion.

Ian Bell soon tossed the ball to his second spinner, Ateeq Javid, whose first 
delivery returned unexpected dividends. It slid down the leg side 
disappointingly except for the fact that Davies had already begun an advance 
down the pitch. Tim Ambrose gathered cleanly and Davies was easily stumped, a 
wanton dismissal.

Now the pitch seemed to play some tricks, no matter who was bowling. Oliver 
Hannon-Dalby, who has a front arm lazier than a lobster, took the prized wicket 
of Kumar Sangakkara, who had set himself the task of playing the long game 
while accruing 21 from 39 balls without finding the boundary. An outside edge 
was safely taken by Ambrose and Surrey had lost their third prized wicket.

Eoin Morgan set to return as England’s one-day captain in India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/eoin-morgan-return-england-one-day-captain-india>
They did not know whether to stick or twist from there. Rory Burns, who would 
top-score with 40, battled dutifully; most of the others in an exalted lower 
middle-order came and went in the blink of an eye. Neither of England’s latest 
spin twins, Zafar Ansari and Batty, could get off the mark; nor could the 
highly regarded Ben Foakes.

Jeetan Patel made a couple of deliveries turn sharply, which caused alarm, and 
Chris Woakes gratefully mopped up the tail. Warwickshire could barely believe 
how easy it had all been. Modern batsmen in this format sometimes have no idea 
of how to adjust to a one-day pitch that is not a batsman’s paradise. An 
unfashionable 220 would have been a handy score.

Trott, however, had the nous to bat appropriately when faced with such a small 
target. Along with Sam Hain he dealt with the new ball without alarms. Batty 
quickly shuffled his quartet of pacemen and then tossed the ball to Ansari, 
more in hope than expectation. This was betrayed by the field set by Batty; the 
field was back as if this was a conventional run-chase with no one around the 
bat.

Even so, Hain succumbed when mis-hitting a reverse sweep, but thereafter more 
experienced batsmen picked off the runs against Ansari and during the four 
overs that Batty allowed himself. They spun the ball on a slow surface but 
there was no real threat. There was little evidence to suggest that Ansari is 
the best left-arm spinner in the country.

Stuart Meaker came back and dismissed Bell, who was caught behind off the 
glove when hooking. But Trott remained imperious in his understated way. As 
ever he clipped over-pitched deliveries through midwicket with quiet economy. 
And he milked the spinners with the serenity of an old farmer. Tim Ambrose 
leant commonsense support.

Any Indian spies looking on will not have sent alarming dossiers about the 
spin twins back to their new head coach, Anil Kumble (mind you, dear old Keith 
Fletcher once sent a similar report back about Kumble’s inability to get the 
ball off the straight). Trott was the man of a very forgettable match for those 
from beyond Brum.

England desire remains but Ian Bell focuses on success with Warwickshire | 
Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/ian-bell-england-ambitions-warwickshire-surrey-lords-final> 