
I’ve got attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which I find to be both a 
crippling barrier to productivity and the most essential ingredient of my 
creativity. Truth be told, I haven’t actually been diagnosed with ADHD, but 
whenever I take one of those self-assessments online, I check at least 18 of 
the 20 boxes. As a case in point: it took me half an hour to write the 
preceding two sentences, during which time I also read five articles about the 
US presidential election and transferred the contents of my old wallet into a 
new one. Plus, I did a lot of mugging for the mirror on the wall in front of my 
hotel room desk. When it comes to writing, this is how it goes for me.

As much of an impediment as my ADHD is, it allows me to jump the tracks in my 
thinking, which is essential in writing humour. Rather than try to correct my 
condition, I strive to harness it.

Anyone who’s read one of my Diary of a Wimpy Kid books knows, I’m not writing 
literature. My books are really longform comics, and comics are based on jokes. 
For me, writing always starts with the jokes. Now, 11 books in, I know what’s 
required: 350 gags, minimum. Anything less than that and the book feels thin. 
What’s maddening to me is that I don’t know where the jokes come from, or how 
to manufacture them. I’ve tried everything under the sun to try to force the 
ideas to come.

I bought a bicycle and I sometimes spend hours riding in giant circles in my 
cul de sac, staring down at the pavement. I bought a swing, and can be seen 
most afternoons cutting giant arcs in my front yard, trying to lull my brain 
into a creative rhythm. I bought a hot tub in hopes that it would be a joke 
incubator, but I recently had to give it away after waking up in it after 
midnight too many times.

Nothing works, or at least not consistently. And the harder I work at it, the 
worse it is. My brain is like a teenager: it knows what I want but refuses to 
give it to me.

So I’ve taken to going on long walks, because I get the additional benefit of 
exercise. Sometimes a joke or two will come, but more often, I end my walk 
empty-headed. What I’ve found is that I can’t take a round trip, because once I 
reach the halfway point, my mind decides it’s done working and shuts down. So 
now I walk in one direction, away from home, never taking the same path twice. 
I start off in the morning and walk until I can’t bear to walk any further, 
which is usually about three or four hours. Then I call my assistant and beg 
her to come find me, praying my phone battery doesn’t die and leave me stranded 
on some empty country road.

My brain is like a teenager: it knows what I want but refuses to give it to me

Routine can stifle creativity, so I try to jolt myself into new modes of 
thinking. This spring I flew 500 miles to return to my childhood neighbourhood 
and walked the streets I walked as a kid, in the hope it would stir up humorous 
memories (it didn’t). A few weeks later I packed my bags for Florida, hoping 
the warm weather would be stimulating. But on my way to the airport I changed 
my mind and bought a ticket to Iceland instead. I arrived at six in the morning 
with a suitcase full of shorts and T-shirts with nowhere to stay, and somehow 
spent the next five days doing my best writing of the year.

As hard as it is for me to eke out 350 jokes, eventually, I reach my goal. 
That’s when the real writing starts, and here’s where my ADHD becomes a 
formidable enemy. I do my writing on a computer, but my web browser, just a 
click away, is a siren song that lures me into the internet’s murky depths. I 
read somewhere between 100-150 articles a day, on subjects ranging from 
politics to basketball.

To try to beat back the distractions of the internet, I bought a typewriter 
and tried my hand at writing a book the old fashioned way. That experiment 
lasted approximately 20 minutes (if you know someone who’s looking for a gently 
used Brother GX-6750, I’ve got one that’s looking for a good home).

Most of my latest book was written longhand, in messy handwriting and violent 
strike-throughs. I’ve got whole pages where there are only two or three usable 
words. But I got the job done, and I made another deadline.

Next year, I’m sure the method will be different, but the result will be the 
same. Frustration, self-loathing, distraction, and a few snatches of actual 
productivity. And at the end of it all, there will be a new book on my shelf, 
and the cycle will start again.

• Jeff Kinney’s Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Double Down is published by Puffin. To 
order a copy for £10.65 (RRP £12.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/double-down-447269.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 