
Jeff Sessions <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> makes many 
people nervous for good reasons. Donald Trump’s nominee for attorney general of 
the United States allegedly called an African American lawyer on his staff 
“boy” when he was a US attorney in the 1980s. He said the Ku Klux Klan was OK, 
except that its members smoked marijuana. And he prosecuted storied civil 
rights legends for registering poor blacks to vote. He is also opposed to 
voting rights – which is one of the key provisions that the attorney general is 
entrusted to safeguard and fight for.

No wonder some want to re-educate him.

Senator Dick Durbin, the second-highest ranking Democrat in Congress, handed 
the nominee a copy of my book, White Rage: The Unspoken Truth of our Racial 
Divide. He hoped that Sessions would read it so that the Alabaman would at 
least know the history of the Voting Rights Act (VRA) and how – under the guise 
of protecting democracy – the courts, presidents, legislators and governors 
have done everything possible to undermine African Americans’ access to the 
ballot box.

Durbin’s attempt to educate Sessions was real. The Alabama senator’s 
statements and actions indicate a serious misunderstanding of how the Voting 
Rights Act worked and what it was designed to accomplish. The VRA emerged out 
of vast disfranchisement of black voters. Places such as Lowndes County, 
Alabama, in the early 1960s had 0% of a sizeable African American age-eligible 
population registered.

Jeff Sessions as attorney general: a terrifying prospect for black Americans | 
Bakari Sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
After the bloodbath in Selma, the nation finally moved. But the bill required 
repeated reauthorization. During 2006, Sessions, although he eventually voted 
for the measure, complained that it was unfair because it singled out the 
south. That portrayal was beyond inaccurate.

The VRA applied to those jurisdictions that had a pattern of discriminating 
against American citizens based on race or language. So, yes, large areas in 
the south were covered because decades after the passage of the bill, many 
continued to try to suppress or dilute the African American vote.

But, contrary to Sessions’ portrayal of southern victimization, the VRA also 
applied to areas in California, New York, Alaska, Arizona, and more. Sessions, 
frankly, should have known that.

Then in 2014, the Alabama senator refused to support a bill to repair the 
damage to voting rights done by the previous year’s supreme court decision in 
Shelby County v. Holder. The 5-4 decision sanctioned the gerrymandered district 
lines of Shelby County, Alabama, which were successfully drawn to eliminate the 
lone African American on city council.

The supreme court’s ill-conceived ruling allowed states and municipalities to 
implement voting requirements, redraw boundaries and more without prior 
Department of Justice approval. Sessions seemed pleased.

He was convinced that the need for the VRA was over because in “Alabama, 
Georgia, North Carolina, people aren’t being denied the vote because of the 
color of their skin”, he said. Well, that was true as long as the VRA was 
intact, but with its intentional hobbling, all of America’s racist demons came 
out to play.

Immediately after the supreme court’s decision, Texas passed a draconian voter 
suppression law, SB14, that disenfranchised more than 1 million Texans. The 
federal courts ruled repeatedly that SB14 was discriminatory. Similarly, 
beginning in 2013, North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin openly targeted black 
voters.

Yet when the proposed 2014 Congressional bill to address the gaping holes in 
the VRA left by Shelby County came up for discussion, Sessions openly opposed 
the measure. He had earlier given voice to the voter fraud fig leaf used to 
cover racial discrimination at the polls, although there were only 31 
documented instances out of one billion votes between 2000 and 2014.

Sessions minimized the damage to voting rights brought about by the ruling, 
saying: “The supreme court only struck down a small part and there remains very 
powerful provisions ... to stop any form of discriminatory voting actions.” He 
also fell back on the stance that the south was still being singled out.

“To pass a law in the US Congress that provides penalties only to some states 
and not to others can only be justified for the most extraordinary 
circumstances. And,” Sessions confidently asserted, “the justification no 
longer exists.” Once again, he was wrong.

Texas, Wisconsin, North Carolina and other states targeted black voters, as 
the Fourth Circuit noted in the North Carolina case, “with nearly surgical 
precision”, wreaking electoral havoc. Alabama was among the most blatant 
offenders.

In 2015, after passing a law requiring a certain type of government-issued 
photo ID to vote and disallowing others (such as public housing ID), Alabama’s 
governor ordered the Department of Motor Vehicles closed in counties that just 
happened to have sizeable black populations. Huge public protest led the 
governor to retreat, but just barely.

He finally agreed to have the DMVs opened but, he made clear, for only one day 
a month. And, yet, Sessions still insists that race and racism is not in play 
at the ballot box.

Durbin was right to want to educate a man who could be the nation’s chief 
legal officer, responsible for ensuring that the right to vote is not impaired, 
impeded or denied. Whether Sessions is ready to learn, however, is the question.
 