
Trump’s dilemma: to please his friends by trashing the Paris climate deal, or 
not? | Bill McKibben
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/trump-paris-climate-deal-president-elect>
One of the more famous tag lines from President-elect Trump on the campaign 
trail was: “To my African-Americans: what do you have to lose?” If Alabama 
senatorJeff Sessions <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> 
becomes the next attorney general of the United States, the answer is: 
everything.

There is no doubt that Steve Bannon – the executive chairman of the far-right 
website Breitbart News and newly minted senior adviser to the president-elect – 
has no place in the White House. Nor does Lt Michael Flynn, an Islamophobe with 
ties to Vladimir Putin who is Donald Trump’s nominee to serve as national 
security adviser. And yet, the most troubling appointment thus far has to be 
Alabama senator Jefferson Beauregard Sessions to serve as attorney general.

Sessions’ record on race first came to light during his confirmation for a 
federal judgeship in 1986. A prosecutor testified before Congress that Sessions 
had said he thought the Ku Klux Klan was “OK until I found out they smoked 
pot”. Sessions said he had been joking, but his judgeship was rejected. Many 
alarming allegations were made during the hearings, but the most disturbing 
involved the “Marion three”.

In 1984, the then US attorney Sessions prosecuted three civil rights workers, 
who were registering black people to vote in Alabama, for purportedly 
committing voter fraud. Sessions charged Albert Turner, his wife Evelyn Turner, 
and their fellow activist Spencer Hogue with 29 counts of fraud under the 
Voting Rights Act – with the group facing a sentence of over 100 years if they 
were convicted. All three were found not guilty.


Protests won't stop Trump. We need a movement that transforms into a party | 
Micah White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/protests-donald-trump-democracy-party>
The Marion Three never received a sincere apology from Sessions. And the 
senator’s existing hostility toward African Americans is proof that he has not 
learned anything from that experience.

There will be some who will argue that we should not judge someone’s present 
qualifications based on their past. Even if that’s the case, Sessions’ current 
record on race and as a US senator is equally terrifying.

Sessions believes the Voting Rights Act of 1965 is an “intrusive piece of 
legislation”. He has opposed efforts to remove the Confederate flag from state 
property. He has voted against the reauthorization of the Violence Against 
Women Act. He called for a constitutional amendment to stop granting automatic 
citizenship to people born in the US. He agreed with President-elect Trump’s 
ban on Muslims migrating to the US. He opposes same-sex marriage, and when 
Trump was quoted about grabbing women by their vaginas, Sessions called it a 
“stretch” to characterize that as “sexual assault”.

 These are all deeply problematic views for anyone to hold – let alone the top 
law enforcement officer of the United States.

The Department of Justice’s mission is, among other things, to protect 
Americans from discrimination regardless of race, color, creed or sexual 
orientation. With Sessions, we have a well-documented history of hostility 
toward minority communities and vocal opposition to the laws that he would be 
sworn to protect and enforce should he be confirmed. Someone who was too 
problematic for the US Senate to confirm in 1986 should be too problematic for 
the Senate to confirm in 2017.

During an era of rampant voter suppression and strained police-community 
relations, the Department of Justice is as important as it has ever been in the 
lives of Americans – especially African Americans and Latino Americans who bear 
the brunt of police violence and voter suppression. An attorney general with a 
track record of hostility towards women, communities of color and theLGBT 
community is 
<http://www.politico.com/agenda/story/2016/11/7-big-areas-where-jeff-sessions-could-change-policy-at-doj-000234>
 simply unfit to serve.

So to answer President-elect Trump’s question: “What do African-Americans have 
to lose?” With Sessions’ appointment to serve as the 84th attorney general of 
the United States, the answer is easy: everything.

 