
The Conservative former cabinet minister Jim Prior has died aged 89, according 
to the official website for parliament.

Lord Prior served for five years in Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet. Originally 
appointed employment secretary when she became prime minister in 1979, he was 
moved to the post ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> secretary two years later.

The move was widely regarded as a sign of her frustration at his refusal to 
press ahead more quickly with her trade union reforms. Thatcher was deeply 
suspicious of his “wet” tendencies and opposition to her monetarist economic 
policies.

Prior was sent to Belfast just a month after the 1981 republican hunger strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/mar/04/northernireland.northernireland>
 in Maze prison and spent the next three years in the region. His tenure as 
secretary of state came at one of the most turbulent and violent periods in the 
Troubles.

During his time in the post there were a number of high-profile Provisional 
IRA attacks in Northern Ireland and England, including the 1982 Hyde Park 
bombings in London and theattack outside Harrods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,1376054,00.html> in the 
Knightsbridge area of the city in 1983. Also in 1982, the Irish National 
Liberation Army murdered 17 people in a bomb attack on the Droppin’ Well bar 
and disco in Ballykelly, County Derry.

In 1982, Prior had tried in vain to hand back some power to politicians in 
Northern Ireland with his plan for “rolling devolution” at Stormont. But the 
plan failed because the main nationalist party at the time, the Social 
Democratic and Labour party, boycotted the assembly.

The SDLP’s line was in large part in response to the rise of modern Sinn Féin, 
which was rising on the tide of nationalist anger over the deaths of 10 hunger 
strikers at Maze prison. The party also opposed Prior’s plan because the 
political agreement contained no input from the Irish government and did not 
result in a power-sharing settlement like the failed 1974 Sunningdale agreement.

His failure to restore devolved power was compounded by the trials of a strict 
security regime he lived under as Northern Ireland secretary. For three months 
in the early days of office, Prior was not allowed to sleep over in the region 
because, in his own words: “They [republicans] were trying to blow me up.”
 