
Rotherham council is to host a special jobs fair to recruit social care staff 
at its Riverside House headquarters in the town centre next month.

As part of its improvement journey, the council has overhauled the way it runs 
its social services. Changes include lower caseloads, better management and 
more learning and development opportunities, as well as locality based social 
work teams.


All these changes have resulted in the need to recruit more permanent social 
workers to the council and from 10am on Saturday 8 October, the council will be 
showcasing the excellent work done by social work teams while also promoting 
Rotherham as a place to live, as well as to work.


As part of its transformation of children’s services, Rotherham council has 
made significant changes to social work jobs, and at the heart of this is 
making sure the right support is in place for frontline staff.


The changes, which are part of the council’s commitment to being a child 
centred borough, mean social workers are now able to have a much better 
work-life balance and can concentrate on their case work without feeling 
overwhelmed by work pressures.

Because of these changes, a number of vacancies have been created across 
children’s social services and the council is holding an open day next week to 
help people find their dream job.

The council’s deputy leader and cabinet member for children and young people’s 
services, Cllr Gordon Watson, said: “Rotherham council has already undergone 
major changes in the last 14 months since the Jay and Casey reports, and we 
have many more ambitious plans to come. The perception about Rotherham is now 
very different to the reality.

“One of the criticisms was our social workers had far too high caseloads and 
were not able to deliver their jobs properly as a result. We have changed this 
significantly. Now we have some of the smallest caseloads in the country – with 
social workers having an average of 15 cases each. We really want social 
workers to come and be part of the change here in Rotherham. Social workers are 
the key to us changing and becoming a council which others regularly benchmark 
themselves against.”

The council held its first ever job fair for social care staff at the New York 
Stadium in Rotherham town centre in July. From this a number of vacancies were 
filled, but more social workers and team mangers are still needed.

Ian Thomas, strategic director of children’s and young people’s services at 
the council, added: “We want to take the opportunity to share the journey we 
are on from being classified as inadequate to starting to be recognised as 
leaders of emerging best practice, particularly in child sexual exploitation.

“There is still much rewarding work to be done and we are looking for 
passionate, committed experienced social workers and team managers to join us 
to continue to make a difference, by consistently improving outcomes for 
children and young people.”

The council has restructured its social worker teams to reduce caseloads, 
improve supervision and as an authority aspiring to become outstanding, more 
improvements are planned. There has already been a noticeable shift in 
perception about Rotherham, with more people applying to join the council than 
ever before. Standards are high as it is striving to ensure that only the very 
best are appointed.

More information about the job fair and current job vacancies is available here
 
<http://childrenssocialcarejobs.org.uk/?utm_source=GJ&utm_medium=content&utm_campaign=rotherham-council-social-workers-job-fair>
.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Rotherham council

 