
Former Proteas skipper Johan Botha says spin is king as he eyes BBL glory with 
the Sydney Sixers – and maybe even a call-up to the Australian T20 team.

Botha’s 1-26 – including a suffocating start to the Perth Scorchers’ innings – 
as part of a rare three-man spin attack was key to the Sixers’ six-wicket win 
at the SCG on Tuesday night.

The former South Africa one-day captain also took a spectacular catch on the 
boundary before belting the winning runs and finishing unbeaten on 30 off 19 
balls in a man-of-the-match display.

Shaun Marsh dismisses Chappell criticism, targets strong Big Bash return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/marsh-dismisses-chappell-criticism-targets-big-bash>
Now the new Australian citizen hopes his performances are catching the eye of 
national selectors.

“I suppose you might be a chance, a very slim chance. As long as there’s 
that,” Botha said.

“But it’s up to Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia. 
I just need to hopefully help the Sixers win some games and if it comes my way, 
then great.”

Botha grew up idolising Kepler Wessels and admits the chance to follow in his 
footsteps and represent both countries would be a dream.

“It would be unbelievable,” the 34-year-old said.

“It’s a team that I’ve watched for a long time. Especially growing up when 
South Africa didn’t play international cricket, Australia was my favourite team 
to watch.

“So to do that, I think it’ll feel a little bit unreal.

“But we’ll have to wait and see.”

Botha, Will Sommerville (2-10) and Steve O’Keefe (1-23) sent down exactly half 
of the Sixers’ 20 overs and collected half the wickets in restricting the 
Scorchers to a modest 8-130.

Botha believes the trio working in tandem proves once again how important slow 
bowling is in the BBL.

“Over all the T20 cricket we’ve seen, spinners seem to somehow find a way of 
getting the job done most of the time,” he said.

Meanwhile, Shaun Marsh’s much-awaited comeback to cricket has lasted just 11 
balls.

In his first game since breaking his finger in Australia’s second Test loss to 
South Africa last month, Marsh managed only eight.


The opener had hoped to remind Test selectors of his worth, the 33-year-old 
believing he still has much to offer on the international stage.


Australian selector Mark Waugh was in the commentary box at the SCG and 
suspected Marsh would have been nervous on his return.


He certainly made a tentative start to his innings, with Marsh and Michael 
Klinger scoring just five runs off the first two overs from Botha and O’Keefe.

Marsh’s brother and Test discard Mitch fared a little better, the 
all-rounder’s unbeaten 31 off 29 balls ensuring the Scorchers at least batted 
out their 20 overs to finish at 8-130.


Sam Whiteman had briefly raised the run rate with a 16-ball 28 before falling 
victim to Botha’s spectacular outfield catch.

Brad Haddin, promoted to opening in Jason Roy’s absence, made only seven, but 
his 34-run first-wicket stand with Sam Billings (40 off 30 balls) in barely 
four overs set up the Sixers’ innings.


Handy contributions from skipper Moises Henriques (24 off 21), Jordan Silk (28 
off 28) and Botha’s unbeaten 30 ensured the Sixers got home comfortably with 
two full overs to spare.

The Sixers’ next assignment comes on Sunday against the winless Adelaide 
Strikers, who will be chasing their fourth win from as many games when hosting 
a New Year’s Eve BBL match.
 