
John Glenn plans to mark the 50th anniversary of his historic spaceflight with 
a series of events Monday at Ohio State University, including a celebratory 
dinner and a chat with the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station.

The astronaut and senator from Ohio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> 
became the first American to orbit the earth on 20 February 1962, circling it 
three times in five hours and helping to lead the nation into space. The trip 
helped the United States catch up to the Soviet Union’s accomplishments, and 
Glenn said he thinks it was a turning point for the national psyche.

John Glenn obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-obituary> 
“It’s amazing to me to look back and think that it’s been 50 years,” Glenn 
told the Associated Press last month.

He and Nasa administrator Charles Bolden were expected to speak with the space 
station on Monday to kick off a Nasa forum about the agency’s future and its 
role in advancing fields such as science, technology and the economy. Glenn and 
Annie, his wife of almost seven decades, will cap the day by participating in a 
student-led question-and-answer session during an evening gala featuring a 
keynote speech by former astronaut Mark Kelly, the commander of the space 
shuttle Endeavour’s final mission.

Glenn was among the top military test pilots presented in 1959 as the Mercury 
Seven. The only other surviving Mercury astronaut is Scott Carpenter, who 
called out the memorable line “Godspeed John Glenn” moments before the rocket 
ignited for Glenn’s spaceflight.
 John Glenn 
The trip is among the accomplishments that made Glenn, as Ohio State president 
E Gordon Gee put it, one of the country’s “greatest treasures.”

“John Glenn is, quite simply, an extraordinary American patriot,” Gee said in 
a statement ahead of the event. “He is a man of boundless courage, limitless 
optimism and unswerving honour. I am deeply grateful for this opportunity to 
celebrate his tremendous achievements and his important leadership at Ohio 
State.”

In 1998, when he was 77, Glenn became the oldest person to fly in space.

Now 90, Glenn shares his name with a Nasa research center in Cleveland and a 
public affairs school at Ohio State. He’s given the university more than a 
thousand boxloads of materials and artifacts to display, including the hand 
controller with which he flew the Friendship 7 capsule on that historic orbit 
50 years ago.
 