
Donald Trump’s nominee for homeland security secretary distanced himself from 
some of the president-elect’s most controversial election pledges on 
immigration, potentially including the construction of a wall at the southern 
border and the implementation of a Muslim registry, during his Senate 
confirmation hearing on Tuesday.

Former Marine Corps general John Kelly took cordial questions from senators on 
the homeland security and governmental affairs committee for a little less than 
two and a half hours before his likely confirmation, which is expected to pass 
the Senate with little dissent.

John Kelly confirmation hearing for homeland security secretary: the key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/john-kelly-homeland-security-confirmation-hearing-news>
Under questioning from Republican senator John McCain of Arizona, who had 
earlier introduced the 66-year-old to the hearing, Kelly argued that building a 
full border wall along the US’s border with Mexico was not a sufficient measure 
to secure it.

“A physical barrier in and of itself will not do the job,” Kelly told the 
committee, adding he was in favour of “layered defense” that used technological 
assets including drones.

During later questioning, Senator Gary Peters, a Democrat from Michigan, told 
the 45-year veteran there was “a great deal of fear” in the Muslim communities 
of Michigan following Trump’s incendiary election pledges to vet migration from 
certain Muslim majority countries, to introduce a so-called Muslim registry and 
to increase surveillance of mosques throughout the United States.

Kelly told the committee he was not in favour of targeting individuals for law 
enforcement activity on the basis of religion alone.

“I don’t think it’s ever appropriate to focus on something like religion as 
the only factor,” Kelly said, adding he was not in favour of creating a 
registry of people based on their faith.

Kelly is among three former senior US military personnel picked for 
cabinet-level positions in Trump’s administration and would be the first 
homeland security secretary to come from a non-civilian background if confirmed.

Kelly retired from the military last year as a four-star general and commander 
of the US southern command, where he held responsibility for all US military 
activities in South and Central America, including the controversial detention 
camp at Guantánamo Bay. He had previously served as a senior assistant to the 
Obama administration defense secretary Leon Panetta and completed numerous 
postings in the Gulf war and the Iraq war.

Known as a straight-talking, no-nonsense pragmatist, Kelly’s self-proclaimed 
desire to “speak truth to power” was well received by senators on both sides of 
the partisan divide.

What you need to know: confirming Trump's cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-confirmation-process-senate>
The committee’s ranking member, Democratic senator Claire McCaskill of 
Missouri, said the attribute was “music to my ears” during opening remarks.

“You will need it in your next job to speak truth to the commander-in-chief, 
who has used some his most extreme and divisive rhetoric about issues under the 
department of homeland security’s jurisdiction,” McCaskill said.

During perhaps the most pointed exchange of the hearing, newly elected 
Democratic senator Kamala Harris of California questioned Kelly on his 
immigration enforcement intentions and his plans to deal with the roughly 
700,000 Deferred Action for Child Arrival (Daca) recipients, undocumented 
migrants who have benefited from Barack Obama’s executive order on immigration 
that entitled them to education and work rights.

Harris asked whether Kelly could guarantee that information Daca recipients 
have provided to immigration authorities through their application process will 
not be used against them by law enforcement authorities with regards to 
deportation.

Kelly told the committee he “did not know where the incoming administration 
was going” with that cohort of migrants, adding, “I have not been involved in 
those discussions”. The president-elect had pledged to deport all 11 million 
undocumented migrants from the US, a pledge he has since softened.

The former general is set to assume control of a department that oversees US 
domestic security, disaster management and immigration control, employing more 
than 240,000 people across 23 federal agencies, with a budget of more than 
$40bn. The department, formed by the Bush administration after the September 11 
attacks, will also be responsible for implementing some of Trump’s most 
controversial policy pledges, including mass deportations, curtailing 
immigration from some Muslim majority countries, and enhanced security at the 
southern border.
 