
In Flann O’Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/books/flannobrien>’s great 
surrealist novelThe Third Policeman, the enigmatic Policeman MacCruiskeen takes 
the hero aside at one point and says: “Come over here, till I show you 
something to tell your friends about.” It turns out that this is one of his 
rare jokes, because “what he showed me was something that I could tell nobody 
about, there are no suitable words in the world to tell my meaning”. In fact, 
the policeman merely shows the hero some “things” that are glimpsed falling 
down a chute for a few seconds, but “these objects, not one of which resembled 
the other, were of no known dimensions”. They have no shape that can be 
described, no colour that can be identified, and after hours of “wild‑eyed, 
dry-throated” thought afterwards, the hero can only say that what made them 
astonishing was simply that “They lacked an essential property of all known 
objects.”

And here, in a nutshell, is the problem of describing my writing day. It seems 
to lack an essential property of all other working days. It lacks shape; it 
lacks structure; it is of indeterminate duration and its texture is infinitely 
variable. No one writing day bears any resemblance to another.

It might start at six o’clock in the morning or it might start at five o’clock 
in the afternoon. It might last for 12 hours and result in the writing of 5,000 
words, but these words might have to be thrown away the next day, whereas it 
might alternatively last for three seconds and consist of sitting on the top 
deck of a bus and being visited by a momentary idea which will solve the entire 
problem of a novel-in-progress and make the next six months’ writing finally 
possible.

It might take place in my study at home, a room nine feet long and five feet 
wide, into which I have for some reason crammed two desks, three filing 
cabinets, three bookcases and several hundred records which I never play but 
can’t bear to be parted from. Or it might take place in my sister-in-law’s 
flat, a few miles from my own, which I sometimes use when she’s out of the 
country. Or in a country cottage I’ve rented for a week. Or in a cafe or a pub, 
or on a train, or in Starbucks at Heathrow terminal five, or any of the other 
places I can remember writing in the last few years. One good thing about this 
job – it’s very portable, at least. And writing under the influence of caffeine 
generally produces good results. (Alcohol, less so.)

I do like writing in noisy, public places. If you’re deeply focused on the 
work, the voices around you will fade to nothing; if you’re stuck for an idea, 
listening to them might help. By the same token, the internet doesn’t bother 
me. I like having Twitter open on one of my tabs: it’s like a conversation 
going on at the next table, and I can either ignore it or dip in and out at 
will. In any case, the books come at their own pace. They will allow themselves 
to be written when they’re ready, and not before, and learning to recognise 
when that moment has arrived is my key to time management. Yes, a clear day of 
writing, free of family commitments and professional distractions, can be 
a rare and wonderful luxury, but quite often it ends in frustration: eight 
uninterrupted hours in front of a computer screen are no use at all if the book 
you’re working on hasn’t gestated and come to fruition. On the other hand, if a 
book is up and running, if you’re two-thirds of the way through and the rest is 
bursting to come out, you can squeeze the day’s work around any number of 
school runs and dentist’s appointments and still finish up with a good quota of 
pages.

I wish I could be more helpful and prescriptive, but in short, even after 11 
novels, and three decades of published writing, the process remains deeply 
mysterious to me. As Policeman MacCruiskeen would say: “It is nearly an 
insoluble pancake … a conundrum of inscrutable potentialities, a snorter.”
 