
Just briefly, it seemed Jos Buttler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler>, formerly of third-placed 
Somerset, might smash Lancashire, arch-enemies of second-placed Yorkshire, to 
an unlikely, outrageous win over first-placed Middlesex.

Just briefly, though. Promoted to open a chase of 309 from 44 overs, Buttler 
smote 24 from his first nine balls, including carved fours through the offside 
off Steven Finn and a ramped six off Toby Roland-Jones. When Finn found 
Buttler’s leading edge and Nick Compton took a simple catch at cover, Buttler 
had scored all 26 of his teams runs. It was brief, but it was brutal and 
brilliant, too.

There ended Lancashire’s dart at the total. Out ambled Haseeb Hameed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/haseeb-hameed-lancashire-england-squad-tour-bangladesh>
 to join Rob Jones, the 20-year-old first-innings centurion, and together they 
dug in to score 25 each, seldom playing a stroke in anger, and looking utterly 
unfazed by the circumstances.

As he had in the first innings, Jones got after Ollie Rayner, while Hameed 
just found gaps and accumulated without fuss; for years, higher honours 
notwithstanding, these two could make a very profitable partnership indeed. At 
4.30pm, the Middlesex captain, James Franklin, offered a handshake that meant a 
nine-point draw forLancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire>.

An hour or so later, Durham’s win against Surrey confirmed their survival. As 
a result, going into their game (which will not, Ashley Giles was quick to make 
clear, be a day-nighter, as was once mooted) against seventh-placed 
Warwickshire, sixth-placed Lancashire are 14 points above eighth-placed 
Hampshire, who face newly safe Durham. The scrap to join Nottinghamshire in 
Division Two is not quite as delicately poised as the title race, but it is not 
far off.

“It’s funny how it’s all panned out,” Franklin said of the title race, which 
sawMiddlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> set Lancashire such 
a lofty target. The 11 points they take from this game gives them a nine-point 
cushion over Yorkshire – who are one ahead of Somerset – going into the top 
two’s meeting at Lord’s, which will be a rare televised County Championship 
fixture, when the final round of matches start on Tuesday.

Perhaps most fascinating of all is the pitch prepared at Taunton for the visit 
of Nottinghamshire; Somerset need batting points, so the raging turner of 
“Ciderabad” in recent weeks may need to be put out to pasture.

Franklin knew Middlesex could not afford to risk losing the five points they 
earned through this draw, but their first imperative on the final morning was 
avoiding defeat. Kyle Jarvis and Simon Kerrigan, who ended up with match 
figures of 10 for 166, bowled well, but Dawid Malan and John Simpson, 
Middlesex’s second innings specialist, grew into their innings, and brought up 
classy half-centuries in a wicketless morning session. They ran hard, while 
Malan struck Kerrigan down the ground for six and Simpson cover-drove and 
flicked through midwicket beautifully.

Both fell in a flurry of wickets during Middlesex’s big push. Malan was caught 
behind cutting, Toby Roland-Jones skewed to point and Franklin found long-on, 
to give Kerrigan six in the innings. Simpson was bowled by Luke Procter shortly 
before the declaration, which it seemed was pushed back even further through a 
fear of Buttler, although those believing this to be a defensive declaration 
should remember Middlesex chasing 300 in 45 overs at Taunton in July. Nerves 
will be even more frazzled, it seems, at Lord’s from Tuesday.
 