
The judge in a dispute over the Rev Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr’s Nobel peace prize 
and traveling Bible has ruled the Bible belongs to the civil rights leader’s 
estate, which is controlled by two sons who had proposed selling it.

But the question of ownership of the peace prize medal and its accompanying 
certificate will proceed to trial next month unless the two sides in the 
dispute can reach an agreement beforehand, Judge Robert McBurney of Fulton 
County superior court said in an order dated 1 July.

Selma to Montgomery: Martin Luther King and the march for freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/from-the-archive-blog/2015/mar/20/selma-montgomery-freedom-march-martin-luther-king-1965>
The Estate of Martin Luther King Jr Inc, controlled by his sons, filed a 
lawsuit in January 2014 asking a judge to order King’s daughter to surrender 
the items. King’s three surviving children are the sole shareholders and 
directors of the estate. In a board of directors meeting earlier that month, 
Martin Luther King III and Dexter Scott King voted 2-1 against Bernice King to 
sell the artifacts to an unnamed private buyer.

Bernice King has said the idea of selling two of their father’s most cherished 
items is unthinkable.

The Bible and peace prize medal were in Bernice’s possession, but they have 
been in a safe deposit box, with the keys held by the court, since March 2014.

About a year after the lawsuit was filed, the judge halted all action in the 
case to give the two sides a chance to talk and see if they could resolve their 
differences outside of court.

Lawyers for the two sides told McBurney in May 2015 that that they were close 
to an agreement but not quite there. McBurney ordered them to use a mediator to 
resolve the dispute after a lawyer for Bernice King asked the judge to order 
mediation, and the estate’s lawyer did not object. In October, the former 
president Jimmy Carterconfirmed he was working as a mediator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/06/jimmy-carter-mediating-martin-luther-king-heirs-dispute>
 in the case.

McBurney said at a hearing last month that he had been willing to allow the 
long delays in the case because the issues at stake are very important. But he 
added that it’s important to keep pending cases moving.

In the order, McBurney said the remaining issue in the case – whether the 
estate is the owner of the Nobel peace prize medal – is set for trial on August 
15.
 