
Does the world need my book? It might sound conceited even to ask the 
question, since strictly speaking the answer is almost always no. But for those 
of us writing about philosophical ideas, where there is rarely anything 
genuinely new under the sun, it is well worth considering what our books can 
usefully add to the reams already written.

The question is particularly pressing when the book is about free will, one of 
the most discussed and debated subjects in the history of philosophy. There may 
be some who think they have a startling new take on the problem, offering a 
solution superior to the ones offered by the greatest minds of the past 2,500 
years. This justification is not available for those of us not suffering 
delusions of genius.

So why did I write Freedom Regained? It seemed clear to me that false and 
pernicious ideas about free will were being bandied around as though they were 
uncontroversial. Time and again, I read or heard that science – in particular 
neuroscience – had proved that free will was an illusion. In philosophy 
departments, people knew full well that this was simplistic scientism at its 
worst, but in pubs, cafes and broadsheet newspapers, the view usually went 
unchallenged.

Worse, the most vocal public advocates for free will were generally defending 
an untenable form of magic, often for theological reasons. Free will for them 
is a mysterious power that is exempt from the laws of physics and acts 
unfettered by the forces of nature and nurture.

Challenges to the airy advocates and numskulled naysayers are rarely heard, 
for good reason. Free will is a notoriously thorny philosophical issue, and the 
philosophers who best understand it are usually so deep in the thickets of the 
debate that they are unable to make sense of it for the rest of us. There are 
certainly some very good and readable introductory texts, but these suffer from 
approaching the topic with all the baggage of the orthodox academic curriculum. 
The result is that readers are treated as though their interest is in passing 
an exam rather than understanding the human condition.

For me, the challenge was to get to the heart of why free will matters to us 
today and then draw on millennia of learning about the subject to shed some 
light. So rather than leading on standard academic arguments and debates, I 
started from real-world examples of when freedom is expressed or curtailed. 
Psychologists typically look at subjects pushing buttons in labs, and 
philosophers at people choosing between tea or coffee. I look at addicts and 
psychopaths, artists and dissidents, people for whom freedom is of serious, 
existential concern. The science and philosophy is still all there, but only to 
illuminate what matters for the rest of us.

In many ways this goes against all received opinion about what a good (or at 
least good-selling) book of ideas should be like. Sales figures prove that the 
public is much more likely to go for a book that presents itself as offering a 
bold new way of seeing the world, trampling over conventional wisdom as it 
marches on to claim virgin territory. This is true even when the thesis is 
neither bold or new, just extreme and simply put.

Freedom and slavery to the market with Julian Baggini and Joanna Biggs – books 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/may/08/freedom-market-slavery-julian-baggini-joanna-biggs-podcast>
Compared to a book that tells you that free will is an illusion or a kind of 
superpower, one that argues it is real but not what people generally think it 
is can sound rather unexciting. I can’t imagine my publisher being keen to 
proclaim on the cover that my argument is reasonable, moderate, and though 
creative in its approach, rests on ideas that are all unoriginal. But it is 
more important to be right than original, to be truthful than exciting.

The world of non-fiction promulgates too many shrill, extreme and simplistic 
claims. I believe that it is possible to be measured and nuanced without being 
dull and convoluted, to give readers a reason to turn each page without being 
shrill or gimmicky. Does the world need books that exhibit these virtues? I 
write in the hope that it does.

Extract

No sane person would want the ability to chose anything at all. If you are 
appalled by needless violence, you want it to be true that you would recoil 
from torture, not that you would be as free to do it as to not do it. The power 
to choose just anything is not a freedom worth wanting. The person who believes 
he could equally well have rejected or accepted a life partner clearly doesn’t 
have the strength of conviction necessary to make the choice. We want many our 
choices to flow with a kind of necessity from our beliefs and values.

We cannot change our characters on whim and we would not want it any other 
way. A Christian does not want the freedom to wake up one day and become a 
Muslim. A committed family man does not want to find it as easy to run off with 
the au pair as to stick with his children and their mother. A fan of 
Shostakovich does not, usually at least, wish she could just decide to prefer 
Andrew Lloyd-Webber.

The critical point is that these key commitments don’t strike us primarily as 
choices. You like the things you do because you think they are great. You live 
with the person you do because you love her. You support a political cause 
because you think it is just. You don’t choose what you think is great, who you 
should love, or what is just. To think of these fundamental life commitments as 
choices is rather peculiar, perhaps a distortion created by the contemporary 
emphasis on choice as being at the heart of freedom.

More about Freedom Regained


Julian Baggini is that happy thing – a philosopher who recognises that readers 
go glassy-eyed if presented with high-octane philosophical discourse. And yet, 
as his latest book … makes clear, it is in all our interests to consider 
crucial aspects of what it means to be human. Indeed, in this increasingly 
complex world, maybe more so than ever. –Salley Vickers


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/26/freedom-regained-possibility-free-will-review-julian-baggini-beyond-determinism>
.

Buy the book

Freedom Regained: The Possibility of Free Will is published by Granta at £9.99 
and isavailable at the Guardian bookshop at £7.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376997/s/freedom-regained/>
.
 