
Glyn Edwards vividly recalls his first glimpse of Mr Punch. It was a summer's 
day in 1948, when he was four, and he was taking shelter under Brighton's West 
Pier. The show was a riot of colour, noise and silliness – and the boy was 
entranced. "I can see it now. Everything is black and white except this square 
of colour and a madcap little figure leaping around. I was crying with 
laughter. From then on I pretty much had to see every show, every day."

Now 69, Glyn has been a Punch and Judy performer (they are known as 
professors) for 54 years. "I still love it just as much. It satisfies that 
inner spirit of anarchy that I don't think anyone in their right mind should 
ever lose."

Punch and Judy is, he says, "a way of life" – fortunately one embraced by his 
family. Glyn's wife, Mary, and daughter Katey are both in the business, and his 
granddaughter, Roisin, eight, is already a keen apprentice.

While Glyn was the first in his family to make a living out of Punch and Judy, 
he wasn't the first to try. His parents, Billie and Connie, were entertainers 
with Brighton's celebratedJack Sheppard's concert party 
<http://www.mybrightonandhove.org.uk/page_id__11141_path__0p117p158p.aspx>, a 
1930s seafront variety show. Billie did tap dance and light comedy, Connie 
played the violin.

When concert parties began to disband in the 1940s, Billie became a pantomime 
and variety show producer. Spotting a potential sideline, he bought a Punch and 
Judy set.

"He loved Punch and Judy, but he just could not get on with it," says Glyn. 
"He couldn't get his hands to work separately, he felt claustrophobic in the 
booth and he was petrified of swallowing the swazzle [the device used to 
produce Mr Punch's distinctive voice]. The kit was stashed away with the junk 
under my bed."

Glyn realised that if he could master the dusty puppet set he might earn some 
money. "While my friends were making five shillings doing their paper rounds, I 
could get £10 doing a kids party." By the age of 16 he was performing regularly 
at weekends.

Two years later, he enrolled at teacher training college – "Dad was keen that 
I get a proper job" – and a friend invited him to an evening course in 
puppetry. Also present was Mary, a puppet maker with theLittle Angel theatre 
<http://www.littleangeltheatre.com/> run by her uncle John Wright.

They got on very well and began to work together, putting on a Saturday 
morning Punch and Judy show at the Little Angel. They were married in 1967. "We 
haven't been married quite as long and Mr and Mrs Punch," says Glyn, laughing.

When Katey was born, five years later, Mary left her job and began to juggle 
puppet-making, performing her own children's show, helping with Glyn's weekend 
Punch and Judy work (he was also working as a producer on the 70s TV show 
Tiswas) and family life. Work has always dominated their life. "Punch and Judy 
has always been there. It takes up all our time. It meant we never had weekends 
separate from work, but because we were both doing it, it didn't matter too 
much."

Katey, 41, recalls a very happy childhood. "The best thing was Mum's workshop. 
There were benches and tools and big shelves with loads of jars – eyes, big 
noses, small noses, squeakers, growlers. There was one labelled 'Katey 
project', which I think was something to do with school, but they used to say 
was how I had been assembled. "

She loved the rejected prototypes that came her way. "Lamby was my favourite – 
Mum made soft toys and he was a dog who went a bit wrong."

Weekend work was an inevitable consequence of the trade and Katey spent lots 
of time with her grandparents. They, too, were often performing and would rope 
her in. "They used to dress me up as a clown or a cat. Grandad did magic and 
comedy. I think that's where I got the bug."

Katey was proud of her parents' work – enjoying the early responsibility of 
passing Mary the puppets when she accompanied her on jobs – but there were 
downsides. "It was sometimes difficult seeing your parents giving lots of 
attention to lots of other children."

As a teenager, Katey earned extra pocket money helping her father with his 
shows, but it was only when she was stuck for a project for drama A-level that 
she began to use the puppets herself. She was soon doing fetes and parties, 
realising, as her father had once done, that this was a lucrative Saturday job.

Now as Professor Peanuts (in honour of her grandad, Peanuts the Clown), Katey 
presents a Punch and Judy show and workshop for local schools and performs with 
her parents at their base at theFishing museum on Brighton beach 
<http://www.brightonfishingmuseum.org.uk/quarter_punch-and-judy.html>.

"I very much feel part of a tradition. That connection is important to me. It 
has been such a big part of my life. I had this amazing family model to fall 
back on."

As a woman, though, Katey says it is especially important that her show be 
individual and not a rehash of her father's. "I couldn't have worked it all out 
without him. I'll always want to learn from him, but my show is different. Judy 
is usually performed by a man as a naggy, pantomime dame. Mine is bossy, but 
sillier. I think of her as a cross between Sybil Fawlty and Catherine Tate with 
the hair of Ruby Wax."

The puppets play a part in shaping their own personalities, says Glyn, and 
over the years they have pretty much become part of the family. Last year, 
chronic shoulder problems due to years of working with his arms above his head 
forced Glyn to retire the original Mr Punch in favour of a lighter version – 
with a perkier character. "You get very attached to the puppets. They've done 
so many shows, made so many kids laugh. Mary had refurbished that Punch so many 
times, he was better dressed than me!"

Katey admits that – to her great surprise – she found the change upsetting. 
"I've told Dad that even if he leaves me nothing else when he goes, that Punch 
is mine."

Meeting Glyn, Mary, Katey and Roisin in Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>, it is clear how proud of each other 
they are. Despite the zany, larger-than-life nature of Punch and Judy, they are 
all softly spoken, listening carefully to what each other has to say.

"Katey does a brilliant show and I believe we are the only father and daughter 
professors," says Glyn. "Sadly, my dad died too soon, but to have her doing 
this, right here in Brighton, would have meant so much to him. Being down on 
the beach on a nice day, making people laugh, is life- enhancing. There's 
nothing like seeing a family having a shared moment, enjoying something 
together. You're giving them something to talk about and it has been happening 
for generations."

• brightonbeachpunchandjudy.com 
<http://brightonbeachpunchandjudy.com/The_Original_World_famous_Brighton_Punch_and_Judy_Show.html>
 