
It seems a simple enough question – what does your writing day look like? And 
yet, there is a weight behind the question, something that resembles anxiety, 
large and gnawing. Do I even have writing days? I’m not always sure. The 
evidence says I must have had. Nine books in 10 years, as well as articles and 
essays and reviews and blogs and lectures. There is even an unwieldy PhD, 
something about epistolary practices throughout the Caribbean between 1900 and 
2000. Ten years. About 3,652 days. Some of them – in fact, a great many of them 
– must have been writing days. And yet there is no pattern, no routine, no 
discernible shape that I can think to describe here what a “typical” writing 
day looks like.

By themselves, days are such neat things – divided up in their hours and their 
minutes like slices of a birthday cake your most fastidious aunt cut with 
perfect symmetry. There are writers who know the hours that are best for 
writing – in the quiet, undisturbed mornings, or the afternoons when everything 
is awake including their thoughts – and the hours that are best reserved for 
other things, crosswords, taking a walk, picking the children up from school, 
sleeping. I envy such writers.

Writing periods, when they come to me, do not come neatly. They stretch across 
days, from 10 at night to five in the morning, me going to sleep only when I 
see the sky brightening and suddenly in my head is the warning voice of an old 
Caribbean woman: “Don’t make tomorrow catch you looking into yesterday!” I go 
to sleep then, but it is a restless sleep, and I wake up just a few hours later 
to write again – the pattern of this new day different from the day before. I 
do not even have a writing space. Sometimes it is at home, in my office on the 
computer, but other times it is in bed on the laptop, and other times still in 
cafes, or in loud airport lounges.

When I write, I write furiously, maybe because there are many more days of not 
writing than there are of writing. There are too many distractions. I succumb 
to them all. And I would like to tell you that my distractions are noble – 
rereading the classics, diligent research. But they are not. I am distracted by 
bad TV shows from the US, by the top stories in the Jamaican newspapers, by
Candy Crush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2014/apr/01/candy-crush-saga-app-brain>
 (God did I just admit that?), by the entirety of the internet. I am a 
productive writer, but only the evidence assures me of this: the nine books – 
the spines that I wake up to count some mornings as if to be sure it wasn’t a 
dream, as if to remind myself that yes, this is true. This is what you do!

I wake up and count the spines of my books some mornings as if to remind 
myself that yes, this is what you do

If most days are not filled with writing, they are filled with the thought 
of writing – the fixing of a sentence I haven’t even written yet, testing it 
on my tongue, trying to figure out its pauses or its cadence, or else the 
chasing of some strange idea, the way I imagine Jamaican maroons would have 
once chased wild hogs through the thicket. And always I want to grab hold of 
this idea, to wring its neck then flop it down on the table like some mad 
surgeon, as if to determine how many poems or stories or essays can be removed 
from its guts. I have a bad knee though, and seem to chase elusive and slippery 
things. Most days I do not grab hold of anything. Most days they slip away, 
grunting happily in the undergrowth. I go to bed most nights, disappointed, but 
I say to the sound in the bushes just beyond me, tomorrow! Tomorrow I will 
catch you.

I am a productive writer – I’ve said that, I know. What I am not, what I have 
never been, is a disciplined writer. I am only a writer who lives with a weight 
behind him – something large and gnawing. It is an anxiety.

• Augustown by Kei Miller is published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson on 14 July.
 