
My father, Kenneth Carpenter, who has died aged 93, was an eminent nutritional 
scientist.

Born in London, Kenneth was the son of James, managing director of a chain of 
hardware shops, and Dorothy (nee George), a teacher. As a boy he horrified his 
parents by wasting his pocket money – as they saw it – on collecting antiques; 
he had a particular passion for English Delftware, of which he later presented 
some specimens to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.

He attended Merchant Taylors’ school, London, leaving in 1941 with an open 
scholarship to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, to study natural sciences, 
then a PhD at the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory (nowMRC Human Nutrition Research 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MRC_Human_Nutrition_Research>), interspersed 
with war work on nerve gases. Characteristically, he combined all this with 
obtaining a first in economics as an external student at the University of 
London.

In 1945 he married Daphne Holmes. Three years later he was appointed 
scientific officer at theRowett Institute 
<http://www.abdn.ac.uk/rowett/index.php> in Aberdeen. There he worked on the 
availability of energy and protein in animal feeds, and also enjoyed attending 
the local music hall, and sessions of all-in wrestling.

Our family returned to Cambridge in 1956, on his appointment as a lecturer and 
then reader in nutrition. In 1974, Daphne, my mother, died after a long and 
debilitating illness, during which Kenneth cared for her.

Following a year as Storer lecturer 
<http://biology.ucdavis.edu/seminars-and-events/storer-endowment/storer-lectureship.html>
 at the University of California, Davis, in 1977, he accepted an appointment as 
professor of experimental nutrition at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Meanwhile, he met Antonina (Nina) Borgman, a teacher, and they married and set 
up home permanently in Oakland.

An important area of his research both there and in Cambridge was how 
traditional methods of preparing such foods as maize and bulghur affected their 
nutritional value. For his work on improving the diet of people around the 
world he received the Atwater medal from the US department of agriculture in 
1993.

Gradually his interests began to move towards the history of nutrition. His 
magisterial but also very readableHistory of Scurvy and Vitamin C  
<http://nutritionhistory.org/history-of-scurvy-vitamin-c-by-kenneth-carpenter/>
focused on a profound question at the heart of nutritional science: why did it 
take so long to realise that scurvy was due not to a harmful agent, but to a 
dietary deficiency? Other books on protein and on beri-beri (a disease usually 
caused by thiamine deficiency) followed.

Kenneth wrote with both elegance and clarity; his integrity and intelligence 
might have been intimidating had he not been so kind and supportive of his 
family, colleagues and the many students whom he encouraged and nurtured. He 
also had a strong social conscience, and in later years devoted a great deal of 
time to the mentoring of local disadvantaged students, helping them to obtain 
university places.

He is survived by Nina, me, his grandchildren and his great-grandchildren.
 