
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> led the 
Melbourne Stars to a thumping 46-run win over the Renegades in their Big Bash 
League derby. The former England international belted 73 from 46 balls as the 
Stars posted 200-7 at Etihad Stadium, setting the scene for the emphatic 
victory.

Faced with an imposing chase, Renegades captain Aaron Finch came out firing. 
He belted 27 from 13 balls but he and fellow opener Sunil Narine both fell to 
Scott Boland in the fourth over, leaving the Renegades on shaky ground.

Big-hitting Chris Lynn called up for Australia's ODI series against Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/big-hitting-chris-lynn-called-up-for-australias-odi-series-against-pakistan>
Veteran Cameron White added a composed 38 but found little support, with Stars 
spinners Adam Zampa and Michael Beer tearing through the middle-order as the 
Renegades fell well short on 154-9 from their full 20 overs.

Zampa took BBL career-best figures of 3-19, while Beer finished with 3-32 but 
it was Pietersen’s swashbuckling knock which did the most damage for the Stars.

The former Test star was in no mood to waste time, belting the first of three 
sixes from his first ball faced. “I’m in boundary mode at the moment,” 
Pietersen declared. “As long as I pick the right options, I should be OK.”

Pietersen’s ninth half-century from just 20 BBL innings came to an end when he 
was caught off the bowling of Narine in the 17th over.

Renegades quick James Pattinson was expensive in his first match back from a 
hamstring injury but looked to have lost none of his explosiveness, finishing 
with 3-44.

Pattinson reached 145kph with his third delivery and had Stars opener Luke 
Wright caught at mid-on two balls later. But it was Wright’s partner Rob Quiney 
who felt the most pain, copping a menacing 146km/hr delivery from Pattinson 
which cannoned into his box and left him doubled over.

Quiney wasted no time seeking revenge, belting three sixes during an 
entertaining 51 off 30 balls, while David Hussey chipped in with 27 off 11 
balls.

In the women’s game between the two sides played earlier at Etihad, a 75-run 
third wicket stand helped the Renegades scrape to victory. Chasing 128 to win, 
the Renegades reached their target with just three balls to spare.

Danielle Wyatt and Kris Britt’s steady partnership proved important for the 
Renegades, with the pair combining for eight boundaries before Wyatt was caught 
by Meg Lanning off Gemma Triscari’s bowling in the 17th over.

Britt was run out the following over, while Grace Harris lasted just nine 
balls before being caught in the deep but the Stars were left to rue several 
missed catches and runout opportunities.

“That’s been a little bit of a theme throughout our tournament, really,” said 
Stars allrounder Natalie Sciver, who had earlier top-scored with 37 in the 
Stars’ 127-7.

It is the second time this week the Stars have come up short against their 
Melbourne rivals, and gives the bottom-placed Renegades hope they might still 
be able to scrape through to the finals.

“I think we probably have to win our next four games pretty well to have any 
chance of that but you just never know with T20 cricket,” Renegades captain 
Rachel Priest said.

“Probably a couple of other results would have to go our way but I said to the 
girls just before, ‘look, we’ve won three in a row. Who says we can’t win four 
more?’ You just never know.”
 