
Australia dug in on day three of the second Test to reach 121-2 when bad light 
ended play, but their first-innings failure means South Africa remain 120 runs 
ahead and well placed to clinch a series victory in Hobart.


Steve Smith and Usman Khawaja, confronted with swing and seam movement from 
Proteas pacemen Kyle Abbott, Kagiso Rabada and Vernon Philander on Monday, did 
well to be unbeaten on 18 and 56 respectively at stumps. Earlier, Quinton de 
Kock’s knock of 104 helped the tourists build a first-innings total of 326 
despite a six-wicket haul from Josh Hazlewood.

Schedule no excuse for slump, say Cricket Australia after latest collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/cricket-australia-crisis-james-sutherland>
Based on how Australia’s batting order has folded in a four-Test losing 
streak, and most recently for 85 on day one at Bellerive, it is likely Smith or 
Khawaja will have to bat through most of day four to give their side a chance 
of salvaging something from the match.


It remains unlikely but signs of South African frustration showed late on a 
day that featured a handful of short rain delays. Australia batted through 36 
overs, during which Faf du Plessis unsuccessfully reviewed two lbw shouts from 
Philander.

Philander all but demanded his skipper refer a not-out verdict when Khawaja 
was on 35 in the 30th over. Furious with a decision of “umpire’s call”, the 
right-armer snarled at the batsman and soon after had a shy at the stumps when 
Khawaja defended a delivery back to him. Khawaja was typically relaxed, while 
Smith laughed at Philander’s attempt to intimidate.

Earlier, Temba Bavuma missed a chance to run Khawaja out for 10. The 
left-hander and David Warner both regularly played and missed as the new ball 
zipped around after Australia again lost a wicket in the opening over of their 
innings.

Joe Burns was caught behind down the leg side for a duck, with du Plessis’ 
successful review capping a horrible Test for the recalled opener. Warner was 
45 when he was bowled by Kyle Abbott in incredible fashion. The ball ricocheted 
off the opener’s thigh pad, elbow and dislodged one bail.

Rain has impacted all three days of the match but the forecast is much better 
on days four and five. South Africa took control of the contest on day one by 
sending the hosts in and skittling them for Australia’s lowest Test total at 
home since 1984.

The visitors resumed at 171-5 on Monday after showers forced day two to be 
abandoned without a ball being bowled. De Kock shared a 144-run stand with 
Bavuma, making it the highest sixth-wicket partnership at the venue by a 
touring Test side.
 