
There is nothing new in camping out. The Boy Scouts and Girl Guides, the 
Woodcraft Guild of Chivalry, and other movements which have grown out of the 
original Seton’s Scouts, founded on the other side of the water, have by this 
time accustomed our youth to the idea of going out from the city to seek nature 
and live under canvas. But there is, I think, something new in the most modern 
of these open-air movements -Kibbo Kift Kindred <http://www.kibbokift.org/>, 
whose queer-sounding name comes from an old Cheshire expression meaning 
“strong” or “proof” of great strength.

After a week-end spent at the Kibbo Kift camp on the occasion of their yearly 
Althingamote, one was better able to appreciate what it was all about than by 
merely remaining a nominal member of it. Three special features seem to me to 
distinguish it from other camping-out movements, which it naturally resembles 
in many ways. In its membership it recognises no artificial distinctions of 
age, sex, class or race; it lays great stress on handicraft; and, thirdly, it 
insists on a real belief in world peace and brotherhood, its flag being a map 
of the world showing no frontiers.


Boys and girls, men and women, are alike eligible for membership provided they 
accept these main principles of Kibbo Kift, which are embodied in a covenant 
that is signed by all Kindred over the age of eighteen. Those below that age 
make a declaration in the following words: “I wish to be Kibbo Kift, and to (1) 
camp out and keep fit; (2) help others; (3) learn how to make things; and (4) 
work for world peace and brotherhood.”


The other KKK: how the Kindred of the Kibbo Kift tried to craft a new world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/02/kindred-of-the-kibbo-kift-1920s-youth-movement>
A characteristic feature is the group called a family roof-tree, consisting of 
the parents and their “cubs”; we had one or two family roof-trees in our 
Whitsuntide camp, and one babe of three had his own tiny tent. There are also 
clans and lodges and tribes and other groups, which may or may not be 
associated to form a “Thing” - the Epping Thing, the Poplar Thing, and so on - 
holding their own meetings and camps throughout the year and coming in as large 
numbers as possible to the yearly Althingamote, when all gather round the 
council fire and speak their mind and form and re-form the Kibbo Kift movement.

“White Fox” describes Kibbo Kift
But the machinery of Kibbo Kift is of little consequence. As the headman 
“White Fox” (John Hargrave in dull mortal life), said at this year’s Mote, when 
Kibbo Kift has really fulfilled its ultimate function it will have become 
merged in the life of the people and the whole nation will be Kibbo Kift. What 
matters is that, as I read it, Kibbo Kift now makes it possible for people of 
all ages, who enjoy camping out and who want to escape from town life to the 
woodland, to do this without the slightest tinge of militarism. It means that 
boys and girls, parents and children, can play the game together (to say 
nothing of their uncles and their aunts); and the Kibbo Kift camp is the 
miniature of a bigger world which is equally made up of people of all ages and 
all kinds. For every true Kibbo Kift tries to make the brotherhood of man a 
reality and not an empty phrase; and only passport and other difficulties 
prevented the Althingamote from being attended by representatives from Kibbo 
Kift groups in Germany, Holland, Russia, France, Algeria, Italy, and elsewhere.

Several things struck me during the Althingamote. It was splendid fun, to 
begin with; and that is the salient feature of a camping movement, whatever its 
ethical side. There were all kinds of people there; large Things from Poplar, 
Epping, Shoreditch; Co-operatives from Woolwich; the Heron Tribe, a 
middle-class boy-and-girl school, from the neighbourhood; the Sadhana Lodge; a 
philosophic group from all parts; the Ndembo (Little Things), another group 
formed on another basis, besides numbers of Lone Kinsmen of all kinds, from 
unskilled workers to artists. But no “Who’s Who” would be a guide to their 
identity. As each speaker rose at the Mote with the opening word “Hough!” his 
or her hand uplifted with the palm turned outwards, the Kibbo Kift name alone 
would be given - Silver Tongue, Eagle Bye, Batswing, Grey Squirrel, Nikomis, 
and so on. All being dressed in the simple camping costume of the Kibbo Kift, 
there was nothing to indicate, for instance, that Red Wolf was a great 
traveller and writer, or Lotosta (“Looking to the Stars”) a well-known woman 
reformer, or Mingan, a profound student of Eastern lore. That was part of the 
fun, of course.


This is an edited extract. Read the full article 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/17/KibbiKift_25_May_1923.jpg>


Founded in 1920, by John Hargrave, the Kindred of the Kibbo Kift attracted a 
diverse range of followers including the likes of Julian Huxley and HG Wells.

Evelyn Sharp was a suffragist, writer, and the first regular columnist on the 
Manchester Guardian’s Women’s page. She was the mistress, and later wife, of 
the paper’s war correspondent Henry W Nevinson, a Kibbo Kift member.

Read more articles like this in The Guardian under canvas: A history of camping
 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Guardian-Under-Canvas-History-Camping-ebook/dp/B008L0MLXU>
 