
What a lovely day to be the third umpire. This occupation has been described 
by one who knows as “hours of boredom punctuated by moments of panic”. But for 
most of this lazy Sunday at the MA Chidambaram Stadium it was not such a taxing 
job.

Until 4.36pm Bruce Oxenford could recline happily up in his eyrie with a cup 
of tea, some tiffin, the crossword perhaps and without any tiresome 
interruptions. The umpire was not called upon to make a single decision until 
there was a desperate review from Moeen Ali followed by a slightly more 
plausible one in the gloaming from Adil Rashid, which was also swiftly denied. 
Otherwise there was nothing for Oxenford to do which gives an idea of how 
infrequently the ball missed the middle of the bat on thethird day of a 
run-soaked Test. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/18/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-three-live>

India’s KL Rahul will not sleep easy despite epic innings against England | 
Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/18/kl-rahul-india-england-199-runs>
Such tranquillity has been a rare luxury for the third umpire throughout 
England’s winter tours of Bangladesh and India. Usually his room has been a 
hive of tense activity often leading to sentences beginning with the words, 
“Sorry, Kumar mate, but …” But here Oxenford could have spent the day enhancing 
the features of the protective shield that he has recently designed to guard 
against fierce straight drives when he is standing out in the middle. The only 
gadget he required until the final half-hour was a kettle for another 
invigorating cup of tea.

Not that the cricket was dull. But it was predictable. India scored lots of 
runs, the sole surprise being that Virat Kohli hit only 15 of them and 
England’s bowlers sweated buckets in a noble, resigned sort of way.

KL Rahul managed a wonderfully fluent century, the fourth and the highest of 
his career but his first in India. But for an aberration against Rashid just 
before the close, when he sliced a very wide leg-break to cover, it would have 
been a double century. Parthiv Patel scurried to 71 and Karun Nair eagerly 
registered his best Test score so far. Kohli and Cheteshwar Pujara were finally 
dismissed cheaply but the peripheral players came good, which will satisfy an 
Indian camp that may now contemplate“doing a Mumbai” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/india-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket>
 in this match.

Rahul prompted something special right from the start.

Alastair Cook decided to begin with Liam Dawson alongside Stuart Broad, which 
at least had the virtue of giving the debutant left-arm spinner an early 
baptism as a Test bowler, after propelling his solitary maiden over on Saturday 
night.

Dawson was on target but that did not disturb Rahul, who soon darted down the 
pitch to drive the ball over the long-off boundary; in the next over he drove 
the same distance to long-on; two respectable deliveries, two audacious shots.

Thereafter all was serenity for India’s makeshift opening pair. Patel scuttled 
eagerly and cheerfully like an understudy suddenly elevated to the West End 
stage. In fact, since Patel came into the side he has performed rather better 
than indisposed Wriddhiman Saha.

However, Patel could not take full toll. Maybe he was too ambitious against 
Moeen when an attempted drive sliced gently to cover. Rahul, by contrast, 
stayed for over six hours, sensing his golden opportunity to cement a place in 
the side.

Currently there are some notable absentees, Rohit Sharma, Ajinkya Rahane and 
Shikhar Dhawan, but an innings of this proportion surely guarantees his place 
when India play their next Test – against Bangladesh.

Rahul is a delight to watch, a willowy figure, who needs no encouragement to 
play his shots and he has plenty of them: wristy drives, lofted drives, deft 
cuts that often escape third man and effortless flicks of his toes. He is a 
21st-century opening batsman, who does not like to hang around.

Liam Dawson: ‘I’ve never experienced this type of pressure before’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/england-india-liam-dawson-chennai>
Even so, a century from Rahul was not quite top of the wishlist of a 
substantial Sunday crowd. After Pujara was caught at slip, off Ben Stokes for 
16, there was a rapturous reception for Kohli who has inherited the mini-deity 
status that was Sachin Tendulkar’s for a decade or more.

Only the edges of the seats were occupied as Kohli settled in, alert and 
feline as he dabbed hostile deliveries from Stokes towards the third-man 
boundary. But then a stunned silence overwhelmed the stadium. Broad, in the 
middle of a miserly spell, opted to go around the wicket and there was a gasp 
of disbelief as the ball was driven in the air straight to Keaton Jennings at 
short extra cover. England celebrated gleefully but there would be little else 
to bring a smile to their faces at the end of a gruelling day, except that its 
conclusion took them 24 hours nearer the flight home.

Rahul briefly reined himself in after Kohli’s departure and Nair took his time 
to settle in on the most benign batting surface encountered by England this 
winter. One chance was spurned when Cook at slip failed to hold on to a tricky 
catch from the edge of Nair’s bat off Jake Ball. Soon after, Cook removed 
himself from the slips, possibly out of self-disgust, more likely because of a 
bruised finger. Thereafter the partnership flourished easily against a bowling 
attack that looked increasingly toothless.

If Ball was the unluckiest England bowler, Broad was the canniest. Of the 
spinners Dawson was the most economical and the most used, which was an 
achievement in itself, but he is still searching for that first wicket; Rashid, 
despite gaining his 23rd victim of the series, was below his best. For all of 
the bowlers this was a trial, although the way the game is going they may not 
be required to do much bowling in an Indian second innings. Once again it looks 
as if the height of England’s aspirations will be for their batsmen to save the 
match.

Eoin Morgan: Everyone I trust backed my decision to pull out of England tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/eoin-morgan-england-bangladesh-india-tour> 