
Some of America’s most bitterly divided political organizations, untangling 
from mortal combat over the role of government and the presidency, have agreed 
to set aside their disagreements and join forces in a drive to tackle the 
country’s addiction to mass incarceration.

On one side of the divide are the Koch brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/koch-brothers>, the energy tycoons who 
have used their vast wealth to fund rightwing conservative policies and 
candidates. On the other is the Center for American Progress, the progressive 
thinktank founded by John Podesta, the outgoing White House adviser who left 
the administration last week to spearhead Hillary Clinton’s bid to succeed 
President Obama.

While the powerful groups will soon return to spending their billions against 
each other in the 2016 presidential race, they have agreed to bury the hatchet 
– and spend a few million – on criminal justice reform.

Together with a spate of funding bodies and thinktanks from both right and 
left of the political spectrum, they have formed the Coalition for Public 
Safety. Launched on Thursday, it plans over the next few years to lobby for 
legislative changes at both federal and state level that the groups hope will 
reduce the US prison population, cut prison budgets and lead to greater 
fairness for all Americans.

The new alliance will combine the financial might of Koch Industries, the 
brothers’ company, with prominent philanthropic funders that include Laura and 
John Arnold, the conservative body Right on Crime and the John D and Catherine 
MacArthur foundation. On a Thursday call with reporters, the director of the 
coalition, Christine Leonard, said the initiative reflected “our desire to get 
past the differences between us and find solutions”.

Speaking from the left-of-center, Neera Tanden, president of the Center for 
American Progress and a former Clinton adviser, admitted that she was “much 
more used to debating some of the leaders of this coalition than joining them”. 
But she said there was a united determination to tackle the unintended 
consequences of a criminal justice system that had increased the US poverty 
rate by 20% between 1980 and 2004.

On the right, Matt Kibbe, president of the Tea Party-alligned and Koch 
brothers-funded FreedomWorks, said the new alliance “marks a potential shift in 
the traditional left versus right, Republican versus Democratic split. That 
suggests that something big is going to happen on criminal justice reform.”

The coming-together of such strange bedfellows is a reflection of how the 
crisis of criminal justice in America has spread alarm across all political 
persuasions. Over the past 30 years, the prison population has risen 
relentlessly to more than 2 million people 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/world-map-of-incarceration-rates-2014-1>, by 
far the highest number in the world. The annual cost of incarceration is now 
$80bn a year, while one in three Americans have criminal records.

Those kinds of statistics please neither the right, which likes to talk tough 
on crime but is also wedded to balancing budgets and small government, nor the 
left, with its accent on justice and equal treatment under the law. The passage 
through Congress of legislation such as the 2010Fair Sentencing Act 
<https://www.aclu.org/fair-sentencing-act>, which reduced the racially 
significant disparity between punishments for crack and powder cocaine, and the 
Death in Custody Act 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/12/death-custody-reporting-act-police-shootings-ferguson-garner>
, which introduces a federal record of deaths in police custody, have shown 
that incarceration – and perhaps incarceration alone – is able to pierce 
through the partisan gridlock of Washington.

In an address last week, outgoing attorney general Eric Holder said the US 
needed to confront an “over-reliance on incarceration”.

“While old habits are hard to break, these numbers show that a dramatic shift 
is under way,” Holder said. “I believe we have taken steps to institutionalize 
this fairer, more practical approach such that it will endure for years to 
come.”

Several state legislatures, including several in the deep south such as 
Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi and Texas, where the criminal justice system 
faces some of the most severe challenges, have also embraced a bipartisan 
approach to reform in recent months.

Some outside monitoring groups remained skeptical about the true motivation of 
the Koch brothers, however, in attaching themselves to the new bipartisan push. 
Lisa Graves, who has investigated the Kochs as the leader of the Center for 
Media and Democracy, pointed out that as a major backer of the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), the brothers have helped to spread 
policies across the states such as “three strikes and you’re out” that have 
helped to inflate the incarcerated population and encourage the proliferation 
of private prisons throughout the country.

“Criminal justice reform is long overdue but Alec fueled the crisis with Koch 
Industries as a leader of it. Now the Kochs want to take credit for trying to 
solve a problem they helped cause,” Graves said.

Certainly, the sums involved in funding the new coalition are miniscule for 
the Kochs, who are estimated to be worth $50bn each. The backing for the 
alliance begins at $5m, shared among various partners include the billionaire 
brothers.

By contrast, the Kochs alone are estimated to have spent about $100m backing 
rightwing candidates 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/politics/the-koch-network-spent-100-million-this-election-cycle-20141104>
 in November’s midterm elections. They haveset a budget of nearly $900m for the 
2016 campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/26/koch-brothers-889m-budget-2016-presidential-election>
.

But the previous track record of the brothers has not dissuaded prominent 
groups from joining the alliance. Anthony Romero, executive director of the 
American Civil Liberties Union, said he was “thrilled” to find common cause 
with Koch Industries.

“We finally have the wind in our backs. It’s taken over 40 years to build this 
addiction to incarceration, and now we need to undo it,” he said.

One of the earliest issues that the coalition is likely to tackle is civil 
forfeiture 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/investigative/2014/10/11/cash-seizures-fuel-police-spending/>
 – the controversial practice by police forces that takes money and property 
from individuals without having to prove any crime has occurred. Legislation to 
restrict such programs is seen as potentially attractive to members of Congress 
from both main parties.
 