
It was 2.06pm before Lancashire uttered an appeal in anger but as the 
afternoon wore on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/24/county-cricket-surrey-lancashire-live-blog>
, they chipped away and prised out six Surrey wickets. Still, in flicking, 
driving and late-cutting their way to elegant half-centuries before contriving 
to get themselves out, Surrey’s series of stylish southpaws collectively carved 
out a lead of 67, and the dominant position their bowlers’ efforts of the first 
day deserved.

County cricket: Surrey v Lancashire and much more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/24/county-cricket-surrey-lancashire-live-blog>
First came Rory Burns, picking up where he left off on the first evening, then 
on 88 wafting hard outside off-stump. Next was Kumar Sangakkara, for 73 
sumptuous balls, the last of which he drilled straight to gully. And then 
Steven Davies, with whom Sangakkara appeared to be engaged in some sort of 
aesthetic contest, before he too gave his wicket away, insouciantly flicking an 
Arron Lilley off-break to the lone man catching on the leg side.

The size of Surrey’s first-innings lead will depend on the last of their 
lefties, Sam Curran, who battled a tough period – the pitch is beginning to 
take spin – to reach the close unbeaten on 28 in the company of his older 
brother Tom.

At every county there is a cricketer who coaches and players alike wonder 
aloud why they do not receive more international attention. Kent’s Sam 
Northeast or Essex’s Tom Westley, for instance. And as Burns coasted through a 
sweltering morning session, he and Dominic Sibley added 100 to their overnight 
50, it was easy to see why he is that player atSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey>. He is brutal when bowlers drift on 
to his pads, cuts balls hard that are simply not there to be cut, invariably 
picking up four. Meanwhile, he seldom seems in doubt about the locality of his 
off stump.

Sibley, also productive through midwicket, was the one to survive that first 
appeal, just asLancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> were 
starting to complain to the umpires about the ball becoming mis-shapen. He was 
adjudged not to be lbw to Kyle Jarvis, but did not survive the over, playing 
on. Burns, to everyone’s surprise, including his own, followed soon after; 
another accomplished innings ending with a century in sight.

Sangakkara was operating on a different plane, especially when joined by 
Davies after Lilley trapped Arun Harinath in front. The spinners, Lilley and 
Simon Kerrigan, were there for Sangakkara to hit, and he sent the former to the 
OCS stand and the latter into the pavilion, while driving the seamers through 
and over cover, and flicking to leg. The ball after one such uppish extra-cover 
drive, Sangakkara hit a cut so cleanly that Haseeb Hameed, in the gully, did 
well to cling on to it.

Batting at No5, Davies, who defends every bit as elegantly as he attacks, 
looked set for stumps only to lose concentration – perhaps in the beauty of his 
own cover drive – and find midwicket. At the close, Sibley remarked: “We’ve all 
missed out on hundreds today, and that’s very frustrating.”

Davies, who is in danger of becoming one of English cricket’s great 
unfulfilled talents, is out of contract at season’s end and likely to leave due 
to his desperation to keep wicket. As he strolled off slowly, head to the sky, 
infuriated with his impulsive – if familiar – lapse, he looked more frustrated 
than most.
 