
Grapes are the third most common cause of death among children who die in 
food-related choking incidents, and doctors say a lack of awareness among 
parents, carers and health professionals could be leaving young children at 
risk.


The size and shape of grapes means that they can completely plug children’s 
airways, with the tight seal produced by fruit’s smooth, flexible surface 
making them tricky to shift with first aid manoeuvres.

Research <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18455807> from the US and Canada 
suggests that grapes are behind only hotdogs and sweets as the most common 
cause of death in food-related incidents.

But doctors say there is a lack awareness of the choking risks posed by soft 
fruits, adding that the small number of cases seen in a given hospital each 
year doesn’t reflect the true extent of the problem, with many more near-misses 
likely to be occurring.

“We only see the tip of the iceberg, we only see it when it is not 
alleviated,” said Dr Jamie Cooper, consultant in emergency medicine at the 
Royal Aberdeen Children’s Hospital and co-author of a new “plea for awareness” 
published in the journalArchives of Disease in Childhood 
<http://adc.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/archdischild-2016-311750>.

In a warning to adults, the authors of the research outline a number of tragic 
cases that have occurred in recent years – one of which involved the death of a 
17-month-old boy who choked on a grape at his home.

Toddler died after choking on grape in Pizza Hut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/toddler-died-choking-grape-pizza-hut>
“The parents and other people were there and they did everything appropriately 
to try and dislodge the obstruction,” said Cooper. The attempts were to no 
avail and he was rushed to the local community hospital. “Experienced people 
still failed to dislodge the obstruction with non-invasive first aid 
manoeuvres,” Cooper added. “A paramedic did attend but the child had gone into 
cardiac arrest before the grape was able to be removed. Everything was tried to 
resuscitate the child, but he died later.”

In another case, a five-year-old boy choked on a grape at an after school 
club, with first aid attempts by staff and an ambulance team unable to dislodge 
the fruit. The child went into cardiac arrest and, despite a paramedic managing 
to remove the grape with a special pair of forceps, died.

 “It is not just tiny, little kids – we would suggest up to the age of five 
the kids are more at risk because they don’t chew as well, their swallowing is 
not quite as coordinated and they get distracted when they are eating,” said 
Cooper.

In a third instance, a two year old boy remained in intensive care for five 
days after choking on a grape but went on to make a full recovery.

Cooper says parents and carers should chop up soft fruits such as grapes and 
cherry tomatoes into quarters before giving them to children, and make sure 
youngsters are supervised while eating. But, he adds, further measures could 
also help to prevent tragedies. “Ideally we would like supermarkets and big 
chains to consider putting some choking hazard warning labels on [grapes], just 
like they do on toys and other things,” said Cooper.

Tina Newton, a consultant in the emergency department at Birmingham Children’s 
Hospital, said choking on grapes was a common issue. “It is a definite problem, 
we have recognised it for years; I have seen children die from choking on 
grapes” she said.


Like Cooper, Newton recommends that the fruit should be cut up for children, 
adding that parents should also be aware ofwhat to do if their child chokes 
<https://www.resus.org.uk/resuscitation-guidelines/paediatric-basic-life-support/#choking>
. “For a child, turn them upside down and slap them hard on the back between 
the shoulder blades,” she says.


Katrina Phillips, chief executive of the Child Accident Prevention Trust, 
reiterated the advice for adults to chop up grapes. “We’ve heard from thousands 
of parents and carers onFacebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/ChildAccidentPreventionTrust/> and many just don’t 
realise how easily a young child can choke to death on a grape. But they’re 
vulnerable because they’re still learning to chew and their airway is tiny, so 
a whole grape can completely block it,” she added. “We hope these case reports 
go a long way to raising awareness of the risk and the simple steps families 
can take to keep children safe.”

 