
It would have been a travesty had Haseeb Hameed finished this match on the 
losing side. TheLancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> 
opener, who is fast becoming a candidate for the England winter tours, scored 
his second century of the match before Yorkshire put themselves in position for 
a late charge at an imposing victory target of 367.

As it was, that charge surprisingly failed to materialise after tea as the 
teams settled for a draw that arguably does the Red Rose more good than the 
White Rose. Lancashire were the dominant force for the vast majority of this 
contest and in trying to force a win they opened the door for the usually 
ultra-positive champions.

Set their stiff target in a minimum of 71 overs, Alex Lees and Adam Lyth built 
a platform by sharing 148 in 41 overs up to tea, with both scoring solid 
half-centuries. That left 219 more required from a minimum of 30 in the final 
session. In the end, they decided the task was just too tall and they had to 
take 10 points from their 11th match of the campaign having shaken hands at 
5pm, with Lees finishing 114 not out.

That leaves them 26 points behind the leaders, Middlesex, in second place with 
five games to play. They have one in hand, which comes against struggling 
Nottinghamshire at Scarborough next week.Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> travel to Lord’s in the final 
round of fixtures next month.

Lancashire took 11 points and are fourth in the table. They are 34 points 
behind Middlesex, who they face here next month, with four matches to play. 
Perhaps more importantly, a solid haul from this match keeps a late relegation 
fight firmly at arm’s length before next week’s trip to face resurgent Surrey 
at The Oval.

Without doubt, Hameed was the star of this match. An opener in his first full 
season of Championship cricket, the 19-year-old right-hander put himself into 
the record books during an entertaining session of batting, which brought 162 
runs from 23 overs. In moving from 30 overnight to 100 not out off 124 balls, 
sharing 168 for the first wicket with Tom Smith (87) along the way, Hameed, 
aged 19 years and 212 days, became the youngest Lancastrian to post 1,000 
Championship runs in a season – and the fifth youngest in all.

He also became the youngest Lancastrian to post two hundreds in the same match 
against any opponent, the first to do it against Yorkshire and only the third 
for either side in this fixture. He is also the youngest to post two hundreds 
in an English first-class match.

Finished? Not quite. Hameed also became the first teenage opener to post four 
hundreds in a County Championship season, with Michael Vaughan, Marcus 
Trescothick and Rob Key among those to score two.

Ashley Giles, Lancashire’s cricket director and head coach, has, on numerous 
occasions, spoken of his admiration for Hameed and how he believes the 
Boltonian will play for England. This month he said: “I said that he would play 
for England within four years, but I think it’ll be earlier than that now.

“I wouldn’t want him to get so that he can’t get his head through the door, 
but he has that temperament and the desire to keep getting better and better.”

Lees went on to post his first Roses hundred, off 154 balls, in the early 
stages of the evening, but it was a major surprise that he and his fellow 
left-hander Lyth did not show more intent. With all their wickets in hand, 
Yorkshire had little to lose.
 