
As far as artisan producers go," says chef Rob Talbot, "Lancashire is 
absolutely spectacular and, possibly, a little bit forgotten about. Cumbria's 
been in the limelight for a long time now, but I think people are starting to 
learn about Lancashire."

Talbot should know: he is a Cumbrian but his rural pub, the Redwell Inn, in 
Arkholme to the north-east of Lancaster, uses the best Lancashire ingredients – 
Goosnargh chicken, beef fromDalesbred <http://www.dalesbredfinestmeats.co.uk/> 
Meats in the Trough of Bowland – on its "honest" menus. And, in his other life, 
as creator of the Lune Valley Smokehouse (lunevalleysmokehouse.co.uk 
<http://www.lunevalleysmokehouse.co.uk/>), he is also one of the fastest rising 
stars among Lancashire's producers.

His experiments in smoking started about three years ago, using an 
old wardrobe he had found in the pub's attic: "It took about 30 sides of 
salmon."

Today, that smoked salmon (sweet, delicate, residually fruity, meaty, too) is 
sold to some of the north's top restaurants and hotels. Less glamorously but 
equally importantly, it was also recently stocked, on a trial basis, by the 
Penrith Co-op (penrithco-op.co.uk <http://www.penrithco-op.co.uk/>).

Not one to stand still, when he isn't busy putting a Lancastrian spin on 
well-known food stuffs ("laggis" is a haggis made from Lune Valley lamb breast 
and offal), Talbot is in the smokehouse and shop in the Redwell Inn's grounds – 
the wardrobe has been retired –, smoking anything that he can get his hands on. 
That means butter and teabread, as well as more orthodox mackerel fillets, 
which, as well as being remarkably moist, pack a deeply mellow, moreishly smoky 
tang.

"With smoking," he explains, "there are no set ways; it's about experience and 
your expertise. It has been a big learning curve and you make mistakes but the 
way forward is to keep dabbling, keep trying new things, taste the food. 
Ultimately, that's what it comes down to."

• What to see: The Redwell Country Inn and Smokehouse (Kirkby Lonsdale Road, 
Arkholme, Carnforth, 015242 21240,redwellinn.net <http://www.redwellinn.net/>)
 