
Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> fans will have 
realised on Tuesday that Rob Jones was a cricketer with a bit about him. Having 
faced the first ball, the 20-year-old Jones, playing his third first-class 
match (his second as an ersatz opener), had stood at the other end as his side 
crumbled to six for four, then battled to 42 off 117 balls to begin 
the rearguard.

Another 159 balls later, Jones crashed Ollie Rayner for a second six over 
long‑on – where a man was stationed for the shot – to move from 94 to 100, 
breaking into raucous celebration of a magnificent maiden century. Jones has a 
superstition,in evidence after all 12 of his boundaries, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/14/county-cricket-yorkshire-somerset-lancashire-middlesex-sussex-worcestershire-live>
 where he goes and taps his bat in at the non-striker’s end; when he was done 
celebrating, he did so again. “That probably looked a bit stupid, but it’s what 
I’ve always done,” he said bashfully.

He had faced 24 more balls, 290 in all, when Rayner bowled Toby Lester, to 
make Jones the youngest Lancashire batsman to carry his bat in a Championship 
innings since Cyril Washbrook in 1935 against Worcestershire. There from first 
ball to last, through bad light, high‑quality bowling, two vital batting 
points, 10 partners, six hours and 45 minutes, as well as a run-in with the AA; 
Jones broke down in torrential rain on the way home on Tuesday evening, and his 
dad had to pick him up. “I had a bit of a stinker,” he said. “I’ll have to get 
on to the insurance company tonight.”

Jack Leach spins Somerset to victory against Yorkshire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/yorkshire-somerset-county-championship-division-one-day-three-match-report>
Soon, on this evidence, Lancashire will have two young openers on everyone’s 
lips. If the hallmarks of an innings of this length have to be sound judgment 
of a leave and sturdy defence, Jones possesses a beautiful drive, particularly 
down the ground, and a sharp eye for a single.

He got after Rayner, aiming from long-on to cow, and survived trial by spin, 
reverse swing and two new balls. It was a magnificent innings that led Steven 
Finn, who took four wickets, to wander up to him when in the 90s and remark 
that he hoped Lancashire’s last two would not leave him stranded.

“He deserved that ton,” said Finn who, along with all 10 of his team-mates, 
ran over to shake Jones’s hand when his innings ended.

Jones’s partnership with Liam Livingstone swelled to 106, with his partner 
reaching a stylish half-century, before guiding Finn to Rayner, who took a 
brilliant catch at second slip, next ball. Then came 92 with Tom Bailey, who 
pulled well for a maiden first-class 50, but edged Finn to first slip, with 
Kyle Jarvis fending a rising snarler to gully first ball. Just as it looked like
Middlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> might be denied a final 
bowling point, Finn trapped Simon Kerrigan in front but, by now, Jones’s 
terrific ton was complete. Watching him (or indeed listening to him talk), it 
seems remarkable that he had not opened the batting for “four or five years” 
before Luke Procter fell ill against Somerset and he stepped in.

“This morning we spoke about trying to bat the whole day and grind it down,” 
he said. “It was attritional but we tried to grind it down and got the job 
done. It was a tough ask to rebuild from six for four but I just stayed in my 
bubble, it didn’t matter how many balls I faced, just soak up the pressure. 
Dots are fine. Words can’t describe it, it’s so special. I can’t believe it, 
it’s a bit of a blur. My job now is to go again tomorrow!”

Jones’s team-mates were emboldened by the sheer chutzpah of every act of his 
innings. When they came out to bowl, they snarled. On a slow pitch, Kyle Jarvis 
immediately found swing and Nick Gubbins edged to second slip, while Kerrigan 
bowled 11 probing, turning overs, trapping Sam Robson (pulling), Nick Compton 
(on the front foot) and Stevie Eskinazi (playing back), all lbw.

Dawid Malan and John Simpson did well to survive 69 balls until stumps with 
runs at a premium, the lead crawling to 140, and their unbeaten record – andthe 
chance to call the shots going into the final round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/yorkshire-somerset-county-championship-division-one-day-three-match-report>
of an enthralling title race – on the line.
 