
A new set of siblings are looking to make their mark on Australian cricket 
alongside the Marsh, Waugh and Chappell families. Australian skipper and world 
No.1-rated batter Meg Lanning will be joined by her younger sister Anna in the 
Melbourne Stars when they open the Women’s Big Bash League (Wbbl) against 
Brisbane Heat on Saturday.

ICC appoints four female umpires for World Twenty20 Qualifier in Bangkok
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/25/icc-appoint-four-female-umpires-world-twenty20>
The teams will play two back-to-back matches at the Junction Oval in Melbourne 
to kick off the inaugural Twenty20 competition, which has attracted many of the 
world’s best players. A local derby with the Sydney Sixers against Sydney 
Thunder follows at the Howell Oval in Penrith on Sunday.

Meg, 22, said she was excited about having her sister, who is exactly two 
years younger, in the line-up. Anna is an all-rounder, although has been 
focusing on batting this year with her Victorian club side. “It’s fantastic 
that she’s been able to join me playing at the Stars as we really enjoy playing 
together,” Meg said. “Hopefully she can move through the ranks with more 
experience at the top level.”

The Lanning duo will be put to the test by England fast bowler Kate Cross, who 
has signed with the Heat. Cross starred for England in their Ashes series loss 
to Australia and captured headlines as the first female to play in the Central 
Lancashire League, where she claimed figures of 8-47 for her team Henley.

Cross said it was exciting to play among the best in the world and she was 
looking forward to proving the women’s game was just as entertaining as the 
men’s version. “We’ve got a stage to showcase our product and as you know we 
don’t get a lot of airtime,” Cross said. “I think it’s something that’s been 
needed. I think it’s something that’s been a long time coming and Australia’s 
put it all together ... it’s going to be a great competition.”

The first of the Stars-Heat games is at 10.30am and entry is free.



 