
Donald Trump’s attorney told a federal judge on Thursday that he’s open to 
settlement talks in a class-action fraud lawsuit involving the president-elect 
and his now-defunct Trump University.


Attorney Daniel Petrocelli also asked during a hearing that the trial be 
delayed until early next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/donald-trump-university-trial-request-delay-denied>
 because Trump needs time to work on the transition to the presidency.

Trump's legal schedule is crowded, even before he takes office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-lawsuits-university-washington-dc-hotel>
The lawsuit alleging Trump University failed on its promise to teach success 
in real estate is currently set to begin 28 November in San Diego.

Petrocelli said he agreed to an offer by US district court judge Gonzalo 
Curiel to have US district judge Jeffrey Miller work with both sides on a 
possible settlement.

“I can tell you right now I’m all ears,” Petrocelli told Curiel. 

Petrocelli said he planned to file a formal request for a delay by Monday. 

Curiel didn’t say how he would rule but encouraged efforts to settle. 

Petrocelli said it didn’t appear possible for Trump to attend the trial, and 
Curiel said he didn’t expect attendance by the president-elect.

“We’re in uncharted territory. We need a little bit of time,” Petrocelli said. 

Earlier in the day Curiel, the Indiana-born jurist who was accused of bias by 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/judge-accused-by-trump-of-bias-to-hold-university-case-pre-trial-hearing>
 over his Mexican heritage, tentatively denied a request to ban statements made 
by and about Trump during his campaign from being used at the trial.

The highly unusual petition would apply to Trump’s tweets, a video of Trump 
making sexually predatory comments about women, his tax history, revelations 
about his private charitable foundation and the public criticism of the judge.

Petrocelli told the judge last month that evidence tied to the campaign would 
be irrelevant to the civil case and may prejudice or inflame a jury, 
jeopardizing the right to a fair trial.

The lawyer warned that allowing the jury to consider Trump’s remarks “carries 
an immediate and irreparable danger of extreme and irremediable prejudice to 
defendants, confusion of issues and waste of time”.

Curiel said he was prepared to deny the request because Trump’s attorneys 
didn’t specify what evidence they wanted to exclude. He said he would consider 
specific objections at trial.

The lawsuit filed in 2010 on behalf of former customers alleges that Trump 
University, which was not accredited as a school, gave seminars and classes 
across the country that were like infomercials, pressuring people to spend up 
to $35,000 for mentorships and, in the end, failing on its promise to teach 
success in real estate.

The claims mirror another class-action complaint in San Diego and a lawsuit in 
New York.

Petrocelli told reporters in May that Trump planned to attend most, if not 
all, of the trial and would testify.

“He has very, very strong feelings about this case,” Petrocelli said at the 
time.

At the May hearing, Petrocelli asked for a trial after Inauguration Day on 20 
January , but the judge raised concerns about distractions if Trump won the 
election.

The liability phase of the trial is expected to last four to six weeks. If 
Trump is found liable, the trial would move to a second phase on damages.
 