
What will liberalism do in the new, terrifying world the 2016 election has 
inaugurated? More than any other presidential election in a century, its 
outcome turned not on issues but on resentment and alienation. It was a vote in 
which anger overrode optimism, a corrosive sense of failure overrode hope and 
in which the very impracticality of a Donald Trump presidency proved one of his 
strongest drawing cards. He would not improve politics, his core supporters 
told interviewers. He would blow it up.

Liberals have urgent work to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/25/progressive-donations-us-election-planned-parenthood-aclu>
 to block the most reckless, punitive efforts of a Trump presidency. But 
liberalism must also come to terms with the fact that the base on which it has 
rested since the 1940s in this election fell almost completely apart. The 
effectiveness of the Republican party’s Southern Strategy of the late 1960s in 
peeling off southern white Americans was the beginning of the New Deal 
coalition’s breakup.


To save global liberalism, time to look beyond government | Peter Westmacott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/02/save-global-liberalism-look-beyond-government>
The desertion of the northern, white working class in the 2016 election, 
should it persist, would leave liberalism without a viable electoral base. 
Unless the Trump victory literally splits apart the Republican party, 
liberalism threatens to become a permanent minority of the educated, the 
bi-coastal, the urban, the nonwhite, and the poor. Despite changing 
demographics, national elections cannot be won on that basis alone.

Where will liberals turn? A tempting possibility will be to retrench to their 
territorial homelands and build there the kind of society and politics they 
imagine. Perhaps it is time to abandon the idea that all of America will 
respond to the ideas of equality, decency, inclusivity, respect, justice and 
care for one another to which liberals are committed. Or perhaps an awful 
blow-up, economic or global, will precipitate yet another momentous realignment 
in which liberalism, this time, emerges with the better hand.

More realistically, liberals must find ways to win back some of those who 
swung to Donald Trump’s camp. Populists, the press routinely calls them. But 
aside from their distrust of distant experts and cosmopolitan elites, Trump’s 
core voters have little in common politically with the People’s party of the 
American 1890s.

The 1890s Populists, like today’s Trump supporters, sometimes fell for 
terribly oversimplified answers. But the Populists hurled their political fury 
at the forces of organized money: the bankers, the monopolists, the railroad 
magnates, and the politicians who wrote the back-room deals of the money-men 
into law. The conviction that powers Trump voters’ imaginations is just the 
reverse.

Trump and Brexit left progressives aghast. They should be emboldened | Jeff 
Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/02/trump-brexit-left-progressives-aghast-they-should-be-emboldened>
Theirs is a world in which not capitalist institutions but the political 
establishment hogs the seats of power. In their minds, government rigs the game 
for its own advantages, tying up the potential expansive force of business with 
rules that only serve to keep the regulators in jobs and the poor as their 
clients. Only through this story is it possible to redirect anger at plant 
closings from the corporations who order them to the liberal establishment that 
is said to be covertly responsible.

To bring back this election’s swing voters, liberals will need to dramatically 
change the narrative line in these voters’ heads. They need to find new means 
of talking truth to the American people – sources of information that can 
breach the communication silos of our fractured age and return political 
debates to some recognizable terrain of facts. The newspaper age is virtually 
over. More blogposts alone will not bring its assets back.

Liberalism also needs a clearer a storyline about itself that can more 
effectively counter the government-is-about-to-swallow-us-all story that 
conservatives began honing long before Trump. That liberal narrative needs a 
much more vigorous sense of power. It needs a much clearer explanation of how 
organized money acts in modern law and politics, and how, under the cover of 
releasing excessive restrictions or emancipating “speech”, organized money so 
often prevails.

The sharp rise in inequality needs to become a permanent fixture of liberals’ 
program and rhetoric. But talk of inequality alone will not bring those who 
feel themselves outsiders in modern America back to the Democratic party. If 
higher taxes on the rich had been Trump voters’ core concern, Hillary Clinton 
would have won in a landslide. The liberal story must also be about power. It 
must promise change: the asset that Trump’s admirers came back to so 
insistently.

Above all, it must not only promise to make life better for those whom a 
slow-growth, globally uncertain economy has treated poorly. It must promise to 
hear them: to give them voice in the rooms where the experts and the 
college-educated now use up so much of the airspace.

Finally, with Congress in disarray and the presidency gone amok, liberals will 
need to turn still more of their attention to thelocal, the regional, and the 
state <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/women-politics-us-election>
 levels of politics. This is where the legislation and policies that affect 
most people’s lives originate: property taxation, police procedures, school 
outcomes, the fates of neighborhoods, the administration of health and social 
services, the meting out of criminal justice, sane gun control measures, the 
apportionment of legislatures, and the defense of voting rights. This is where 
the racism re-enabled by the Trump campaign will rear its head and must be 
confronted. This is where toleration and rights must be secured. This is where 
everyday justice is done.

Liberalism need not be on the retreat – rightwing populism is beatable | Cas 
Mudde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/liberalism-austria-clinton-us-populist>
Conservatives ran up a string of spectacular statehouse victories during the 
Obama years. If liberalism is to hold more than intermittent possession of the 
presidency, this is a contest it cannot concede. There is more room for 
democratic debate and deliberation outside Washington DC than in it, as James 
Fallows has recently emphasized. The fury of the national rightwing media 
cannot be as powerfully focused at the local level.

Counter-forces can be more effectively organized: stronger parent-teaching 
associations and forums, much more active dialogue between police and 
neighbors, strengthened socially conscious religious groups and charitable 
organizations, new roles for town and civic coalitions, more intensive 
recruitment of public-spirited candidates for state legislative office. Some of 
these are venues where angry Donald Trump supporters might find a more 
constructive voice and a less one-dimensional political message than what 
streams into their lives now.

Not coincidentally, it is the place where progressive politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/25/progressive-donations-us-election-planned-parenthood-aclu>
 began in the United States a little over a century ago. Cities were the 
seedbeds of democracy, progressives preached in the early years of the 20th 
century. States were heralded as laboratories of public policy. Liberal 
policies in the progressive era filtered up, as they still do. But presidential 
primary elections – costly, noisy, spectator-riveting, and emotionally 
wrenching – soak up almost unlimited amounts of energy.

If liberalism is to survive the kind of challenges that Trump’s voters threw 
at it, it will have to come back, with energy, imagination, and still greater 
investment, to its origin points. It will have to think and act locally as well.

This essay was first published on Democracy 
<http://democracyjournal.org/magazine/43/what-next-for-liberalism/>. This is an 
abridged version
 