
On 5 November, my family and I marched in the first national demonstration for 
libraries, museums and galleries. As part of my mission to dismantle poverty, 
I’ve placed social literacy – and the fight to promote our libraries and local 
bookshops – at the heart of my work. Make no mistake; if we lose our libraries, 
if we sit by and watch as our communities are philistinised not only will we 
have paved the way for the privatisation of leisure centres, parks and social 
centres but we will have stoked the fires of that false economy – austerity – 
and passed on yet more “efficiency savings” to our prisons, A&E departments and 
rough sleepers’ services.

If we truly want to protect our cultural hubs, the trade union movement now 
needs to unite, organise nationally and speak with one voice. And if we wish to 
make headway with the government, I see the autumn statement as the perfect 
opportunity to call on the chancellor to provide emergency relief funding for 
councils to maintain their library services. This would give councils the time 
to think about how they should retune their services to meet local communities’ 
needs. Ultimately, it is down to all of us to save our libraries. So ask 
yourself; what are you doing to help?
John Bird
House of Lords

• Your report (Authors join national protest against library closures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/05/authors-join-national-protest-against-library-closures>
, 5 November) highlights the precarious position of public libraries. Less 
obvious, but even more insidious, is the threat posed to local museums. Public 
sector spending cuts have affected local authority museums more than other 
types of cultural organisation. Several in the West Midlands have already 
closed, and there are plans to close others. Elsewhere, local authorities are 
setting wildly optimistic commercial targets or zero budgets for their museums. 
The number at risk is now so great that theMuseums Association 
<https://www.museumsassociation.org/home> has set up a working group to provide 
guidance on museum closure. It is fair to say that regional museums face an 
existential crisis. The problems facing the museum sector go much deeper.

Many now have “orphaned collections”, for which no one within the museum has 
specialist knowledge. As curatorial posts are lost, exhibits may disappear from 
the public view, and no longer be used in exhibitions or displays. Although the 
Department for Culture, Media and Sport is conducting a review of museums, it 
has no coherent strategy. It is time it stopped pretending that closures are 
simply a local government issue and started addressing the huge disparity 
between the national museums and the rest of the sector. WhileTate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> has a £260m extension, 
many local museums are reducing opening hours, laying off staff, introducing 
admission charges or facing closure for want of tens of thousands. If the 
government does not act, the trickle of closures will soon become a flood.
Ian Lawley
Chair of trustees, Friends of the Potteries Museums & Art Gallery

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 