
John Kerry and Boris Johnson are hosting crisis talks with Libya’s leaders in 
London in an attempt to ward off the collapse of the country’s war-torn economy.

The World Bank has said Libya’s economy is near collapse as the civil war 
worsens and bank reserves plummet.

In a US-led initiative, the US secretary of state and UK foreign secretary, 
joined by the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, planned to urge 
Libya’s embattled prime minister, Fayez al-Sarraj, to enact drastic reforms.

Libya’s economy has atrophied and with oil exports down, the bulk of the 6 
million-strong population depends on fast-depleting foreign reserves.

One western official said Sarraj would be urged to mend fences with the 
Central Bank ofLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> governor, Saddek 
al-Kabir, who has accused the prime minister of failing to formulate an 
economic policy. “It is making clear the severity of the situation and the need 
to act,” the official said.

But some fear the window for remedial action may be closing. Six months after 
arriving in Tripoli, Sarraj’s Government of National Accord (GNA), appointed by 
a UN-chaired commission, has failed to win over the population.


Sarraj’s administration is one of three vying for power. In Tripoli, he is 
facing off against the self-declared National Salvation government,which 
captured the Rixos government complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/libya-coup-attempt-as-tripoli-militias-seek-to-topple-un-backed-government>
 in an attempted coup two weeks ago.


A third government operates through the elected parliament in the eastern city 
of Tobruk. Forces there, led by the controversial general Khalifa Haftar,last 
month seized the country’s key oil ports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/key-libya-oil-terminals-seized-by-rival-government-sparking-call-for-military-action>
, and while oil exports have since doubled, it has left Tobruk controlling the 
bulk of the industry.

Last week, London defence analyst Jane’s reported that Tobruk’s hand had been 
strengthened after its key ally, the United Arab Emirates, opened an airbase to 
support ground troops in eastern Libya.

With the GNA unable to form a security force of its own, Tripoli is at the 
mercy of warring militias, with murders, kidnappings and firefights a daily 
occurrence.

The GNA’s single success has been an ongoing offensive by allied militias, 
backed by US airstrikes, which has destroyed the bulk of Islamic State forces 
at their main base in Sirte.


But the government’s lack of authority has resulted in a surge in migrant 
smuggling, while the capital is facing power cuts and inflation, with cash 
shortages provoking riots at the few banks still open.


Nadia Ramadan, a Tripoli resident, said: “Life is getting harder all the time. 
We are literally hearing loud shootings almost every night, there is no money 
and food inflation.”

US officials are conscious of the effect Libya’s chaos may have on the closely 
contested presidential election, with Hillary Clinton, as the former secretary 
of state, having overseen America’s 2011 Libya bombing intervention that 
toppled Muammar Gaddafi.

Barack Obama said in April that failure to follow up intervention with support 
for Libya’s fledgling democracy wasthe worst mistake of his presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/12/barack-obama-says-libya-was-worst-mistake-of-his-presidency>
, and the administration hopes to show that some progress is being made.

America’s Libya envoy, Jonathan Winer, summoned the spirit of Benjamin 
Franklin by urging Libyans to unite, tweeting:

But some fear that with power contested by three rival governments, and a 
fast-disintegrating administration, economic reform may prove impossible.

“Several measures must be taken simultaneously, a high level of coordination 
is required, but confidence in the banking system has evaporated,” said Jalel 
Harchaoui, a Libya analyst at the University of Paris.

 