
Legs sliced off and torsos flayed open, a line of plastic bodies looks out 
from the double-height windows of theUniversity of Limerick's new medical school
 
<http://www2.ul.ie/web/WWW/Faculties/Education_&_Health_Sciences/Departments/Graduate_Medical_School>
, their colourful guts exposed for all to see. If only they could enjoy the 
fine view across the square below, and the strong morning sunlight throwing 
shadows across the deep masonry of their new home.

"Coming here every day feels like being part of something really important," 
says Louise O'Rourke, a final-year medical student, who spent her first two 
years in the department's nondescript temporary home. "It has given us a whole 
new identity and changed the way we work." These might sound like quotes lifted 
straight from the prospectus, but as you approach the complex, set on the edge 
of the university's rolling green campus, it's hard not to feel a little awed.

The project – also comprising student accommodation in the form of gently 
angled big brick structures that meander down the hillside – is the work of
Dublin-based Grafton Architects <http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/>. The firm 
have created a sublime ensemble that's now in the running for best building of 
the year, having beenshortlisted for the RIBA Stirling prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/18/stirling-prize-2013-shortlist>
. It would be my choice to win, given how radically it has reinvented two 
building types often consigned to dismal mediocrity.

We have come to accept the idea that student housing blocks must look like 
high-security hutches, with stacked faces of mean windows jazzed up with cheap, 
colourful cladding, keen to tap into the lucrative summertime conference trade. 
University faculties tend to fare little better. Buildings for science and 
medicine are heavily serviced, thanks to all their labs and technical 
equipment, but must they take the form of clinical boxes and grim, windowless 
sheds? They usually have more in common with the anonymous world of data 
centres than spaces conducive to learning, where people can gather and be 
inspired.
 'The buildings make you slow down and be sociable' ... Limerick medical 
school, with student accommodation (left) 
Grafton have shown how things can be different, bringing a human edge to the 
world of swabs and scalpels. Their medical school stands proud, its grand 
structural bays holding the public space like a town hall or a church fronting 
a piazza. Clad in the local blue-grey limestone, the school is a finely 
chiselled echo of the county's Burren landscape – the criss-crossing limestone 
pavement of clints and grikes that rolls out to Galway Bay, 40 miles to the 
north.

Like the Burren's fissures and cracks, the windows open from the building's 
monumental mass in sloping cuts, while a deep threshold provides shelter 
against the wind and rain – frequent visitors to this exposed site in the west 
of Ireland. In contrast to the faculties of music and health sciences next 
door, which turn their ample backsides to the square in an unneighbourly 
fashion, the medical school seems to have a proud sense of its public role, 
lined with buttress-like ribs that draw you inside. "We've worked in a lot of 
urban sites," says Shelley McNamara, director of Grafton, "but we've never 
tried to make a public space in a rural setting. We wanted the buildings to 
hold the space, but not fully enclose it, to keep a feeling of permeability."

This porous sense continues within: the school feels as if it has been 
hollowed out in a process of carving and cleaving. Exposed concrete planes and 
beams rise up through a top-lit atrium, bouncing light down on to a broad 
timber staircase that weaves through this central fissure of the building. 
Punctuated with generous landings that lead on to open-plan mezzanine study 
spaces, the staircase acts as a kind of social thoroughfare, fitted with 
shelves and ledges to encourage people to loiter and chat. "Before, I had a 
kind of tunnel vision – I would never stop and talk to anyone," says O'Rourke, 
comparing the previous warren of rooms-off-corridors to this more open 
environment. "The building makes you slow down and be sociable, and have those 
productive chance conversations you miss in a world of closed doors."

It is all part of school head Paul Finucane's philosophy of non-hierarchical 
teaching and problem-based learning, in which students are left to fill in gaps 
in their knowledge through discussion. "A tutor works best when they're like a 
football referee," he says. "They should stay in the background and let the 
students get on." A kettle and supply of cakes are also essential, he adds.

A floor of seminar rooms, lined with whiteboards ("strictly for the students") 
provides the setting for such student-led discussions while, on the level 
above, two long wings of clinical skills labs are where the practical, hands-on 
training happens. Scattered with plastic body parts – an amputated arm awaiting 
a blood test, a thorax complete with a beating heart – these airy galleries are 
awash with natural daylight: they have the feel of an artist's studio, rather 
than the hospital wards where most graduates will end up. A series of folding 
room dividers and looping curtain tracks allow these two vast galleries to be 
divided into no fewer than 32 individual spaces for the final exams – when the 
students are let loose on real-life patients.
 The feel of an artist's studio ... a seminar room at Limerick medical school 
The uppermost level is home to offices and research labs, where a team of 30 
postgrad researchers are probing everything from gastroenterology to circadian 
rhythms in soaring 5m-high labs. "Lofty ideas require head space," grins 
research director Colum Dunne, standing in the west-facing prow of the 
building, where his team can poke pathogens and prod tissue cultures while 
looking out across the hills through floor-to-ceiling windows.

From here, there is also a good view back to the accommodation blocks, 
designed as super-sized houses, their varied orientation lending them a more 
jumbled, informal character than the sober school. With jaunty tilted rooftops 
that follow the lie of the land, their faceted brick forms are punctured with a 
similar language of deep, splayed openings and sloping limestone sills, giving 
the buildings a grander scale than the neighbouring villagey accommodation.

Entered off courtyard undercrofts and shared patios, the apartments are 
arranged in four- and six-bedroom units, each with a big communal living and 
dining space that looks out over the square. "We wanted to delay the point 
where you go inside," says McNamara of the undercroft entrances, which follow 
the school's logic of providing "loose spaces" for encounters. "We're hoping 
these archways will become lively social areas." She cites the example of the
1960s Cripps building 
<http://www.c20society.org.uk/botm/cripps-building-st-johns-college-cambridge/> 
in Cambridge, where open undercrofts are the scene of impromptu dinners and 
night-time mischief.

It has certainly proved a popular formula: all 100 bedrooms were snapped up in 
a week – although perhaps this has more to do with the provision of a double 
bed in every room than it has to do with architecture.
 