
I’ve always been a bit averse to being precious about writing. Where I work is 
an office not a study, basically a second bedroom at home, a narrow sliver in a 
small postwar block of flats on a hill in north London facing two much larger 
blocks slightly hidden by London plane trees which are pollarded into lollipops 
every couple of years. Through the gap, perfectly framed, isthe Shard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/the-shard>, mistily indistinct today 
on a watery autumn morning, but sometimes ferociously lit up by orange fiery 
sunsets. I moved here three years ago. I brought my desk with me; it is 
laminate fromIkea <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ikea> and took me two 
days to assemble in the 90s. It’s longer than the width of the room, and with 
the bookshelves lining the wall, it had to go in first. Now it could only be 
removed by sawing it in half. I’d like a beautiful desk fromthe Conran Shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/27/terence-conran-biggest-disappointment-merging-bhs>
 but realistically that’s not going to happen.

My rituals of writing are so calcified I could be an elderly colonel at his 
gentleman’s club: ironed newspaper, tea piping hot, shoes the correct colour 
for in town. Without the scaffolding of my habits, I’m superstitiously 
convinced I’d never write a word. I don’t – can’t – write after lunch, in a 
cafe or any other public place, including trains and planes, or when anyone 
else is in the house. It’s an act of severe, intense solitude, partly now 
destroyed by the internet, and its deceptive promise of the ease of looking 
things up as you go along.

I could be an elderly colonel at his gentle­man’s club: ironed newspaper, tea 
piping hot, shoes the correct colour

I’ve always woken early, eyelids snapping open, surging out of lurid but 
usually pointless anxiety dreams. I skim the iPad edition of a newspaper, 
listen toRadio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> and the purring 
companionship of Petroc Trelawny. I usually have breakfast in bed. Everything 
is focused on getting started. I have no time to lose because I’ve no idea what 
I’m going to be writing and only until I’m at the desk can I be certain that 
anything will get done. I’ve used a computer since 1989 and the established 
codes of layout have been in place since then with only a single variation in 
the font: Arial, double-spaced, justified. Arial took over from Courier New 
which most resembled a typewriter. I wouldn’t touch Times New Roman or anything 
that looks as if it has already been printed. Writing should look provisional, 
because, until it is finally sent off to be typeset, it is.

I don’t plan and don’t make many notes. Any ideas that are written down in a 
notebook are fragmentary, half a thought. If I knew what I was going to be 
writing I wouldn’t bother making the effort of actually doing it. I am driven 
by my own curiosity – who are these people, what happens next? I don’t write 
for very long, three hours at most. Staying nailed to the chair for any longer 
out of some sense of clerical duty is pointless, as nothing good will come of 
it. Yes, it is possible to continue to write, but only to write rubbish. My 
printer is an old laser mono warrior which prints out hundreds of pages of 
typescript, for after writing comes printing, printing, printing. The boxes of 
paper under the desk, the toner cartridges are, like the font and the 
justification, part of the fortress world I’m writing in, the protection. A few 
hours after I’ve finished for the day I sit down with what I have written in 
the morning and go at it with a ballpoint pen scribbling all over the thing, 
crossing out great blocks of text. It’s a process of fits and starts.

Sometimes I am invited to leave London and replant myself at a writers’ 
retreat in a cottage. I have absolutely no idea why I would want to go to a 
cottage in the middle of fields. I do not yearn for wood burning stoves or 
bracing walks when there are parks five minutes away from here. Without the 
sight of London in all its raging multitudinous complexity I’d go mad. Alone 
with my keyboard I have everything I need until I turn off the screen, brush my 
hair, go out, be part of life.

• The Dark Circle by Linda Grant is published by Virago. To order a copy for 
£13.93 (RRP £16.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dark-circle.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 