
I don’t start when I get up. I know a lot of people work in the early morning, 
but I am not one of them. I get up and do whatever chores need to be done – 
I’ll bring the dog out for a walk or I might go for a run. I have a friend in 
Ireland who’s a crime novelist, Arlene Hunt, and she runs as well. She says, 
“Isn’t it wonderful, when you run and get all these ideas?” That has never 
happened to me. All I think about is how I don’t want to be running any more. 
No ideas.

I’ll come back and have breakfast, and at some stage I know I’m going to have 
to think about going to the computer. So I sit there drinking my coffee, and 
getting more and more belligerent. Once I go up there, though, I set a thousand 
words. I can’t finish work for the day without it done, even if it’s 1,000 
words of rubbish, that I may actually scrap.

Before I wrote my first novel, I wrote a blog, “Arse End of Ireland” 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/?_escaped_fragment_=What-Happened-To-Arse-End-Of-Ireland-Anyway/c1q8z/5548a2390cf273133516c0d1>
, about life on a council estate. Writing that was hugely different: there was 
no such thing as the 1,000 words. Five days a week I had to sit down and come 
out with something, because I had a readership, and they would let me know if 
things were not going to their plan. That gave me a work ethic. But the 
blogging days are long gone.

I’m scruffy when I’m at home – I wear pyjamas, or tracksuit pants, the hair 
piled up on top of my head, big fluffy socks on. And I’m at the computer having 
a terrible time. Because I fight against it. I have to put out the internet 
because if it’s there, it’s too much of a distraction. You say to yourself, I’m 
just going to look up this word, and before you know it, you’ve spent 45 
minutes on Twitter. The phone has to be in another room. And even then I’ll 
play Minesweeper. There’s a constant fight.

That said, a lot of writing work is done when you’re not writing, it’s done 
when you’re thinking, or when you look like you’re doing nothing. So if I am 
playing Solitaire, it’s because I’m perhaps working a conversation through in 
my head. It’s a grand old life, really.

I am so easily distracted, my surroundings have to be very austere. I have the 
desk, the computer, the printer; a couple of little pop culture figurines from 
videogames keeping me company. Over my computer, I’ve got six postcards from a 
project calledYeats in Love, by Irish artist Annie West 
<http://www.anniewest.com/index.php/portfolio/>. She imagines WB Yeats’s life, 
and they’re very funny and irreverent. Yeats had a summer house just a few 
miles away from my home, so it’s nice to feel connected.

I have a very long suffering husband, who has gone through every iteration of 
character, every possible outcome, every sentence. He knows the characters as 
well as I do – and bless him for putting up with all the people who live in my 
head.

I really want to be the kind of writer who can soak up the place around them, 
and listen and eavesdrop, but I don’t find it works like that at all. It 
happens in my head, I play it out as scenes, almost like a movie. I will stand 
in the middle of what’s going on, look around and pick out the little details 
that I want to write down. But I am trying with the next novel to go into town 
with a notebook, to sit somewhere and listen. Because I’m not naturally 
observant, which is a terrible curse for a writer. It’s fitting in those 
details that is my weak point. I think all writers should feel that there is 
something that doesn’t come naturally.

Dialogue does come very naturally. I live in fear that someone will pass the 
window and see me having an animated conversation with myself. I know the 
characters really well, and I know what they would say. I have a better time 
with them than I do with most people.

• The Glorious Heresies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/01/the-glorious-heresies-lisa-mcinerney-review-sweary-lady>
, published by John Murray, won theBaileys women’s prize for fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/baileys-prize-goes-to-the-glorious-heresies-by-lisa-mcinerney-margaret-mountford>
 this week.
 