
Daily rinsing and gargling with a commercial brand of mouthwash could help 
control the spread of gonorrhoea, a study has found.

Researchers at a Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> clinic had noted more 
cases of gonorrhoea among men who had sex with men and sought to establish 
whether Listerine had an “inhibitory effect” against the bacteria that causes 
the infection.

They conducted a clinical trial involving 196 gay or bisexual men who had 
previously tested positive for gonorrhoea in their mouths and throat and were 
returning for treatment.

Of these, 58 tested positive for the bacteria in their throats on their return 
visits between May 2015 and February 2016.

The researchers split that group so that 33 men were randomly assigned to 
rinse and gargle with Listerine, and 25 did the same with a saline solution.

Mapping antibiotic resistance in real-time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/11/antibiotic-resistance-real-time-open-data>
Results showed the proportion of viable gonorrhoea in the throat was 52% after 
rinsing and gargling with Listerine for one minute, compared with 84% among the 
saline solution group.

The study, published in the journal Sexually Transmitted Infections, 
concluded: “Our data provides preliminary evidence to support the further 
investigation of mouthwash as a non-condom-based control measure for gonorrhoea.

“Listerine mouthwash is a cheap, easy to use and effective agent that inhibits 
gonorrhoea growth and requires further careful consideration and study.”

Researchers are conducting a larger trial to confirm the results and see 
whether the use of mouthwash could curb the spread of gonorrhoea. They must 
also establish how long the apparent effects of using the mouthwash lasted.

They said it was important to find a preventive measure that did not rely on 
condoms to ensure antibiotic-resistant strains ofNeisseria gonnorhoeae did not 
develop.

According to the study, the manufacturer of Listerine claimed in 1879 that it 
could be used to cure gonorrhoea in the pre-antibiotic era, but no published 
scientific studies assessed the claim.

Gonorrhoea <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gonorrhoea> can be easily 
passed between people through unprotected vaginal, oral or anal sex, as well as 
sharing vibrators or other sex toys that have not been washed or covered with a 
new condom each time they are used.

About one in 10 infected men and almost half of infected women do not 
experience any symptoms.

The study was carried out by researchers from the Melbourne sexual health 
centre, Monash University faculty of medicine and the University of Melbourne 
microbiological diagnostic unit public health laboratory.
 