
There’s a café in downtown Lviv near the Armenian church that takes its 
customers back to the 1980s: little tables on wobbly legs, cakes covered in 
bright buttercream frosting flowers, then-fashionable liqueurs lined up above 
the bar—not to mention the unusual way they have of brewing coffee. The woman 
at the bar taps out sugar and organic coffee into a special little long-handled 
pot to which she then adds water. Next she sets the pot atop a very 
anachronistic-looking contraption, a box in which tiny iron filings are heated 
up on a very low current. Paying absolute attention, she keeps the pot on the 
device until exactly the right moment, when she stirs its contents with a thin 
wooden stick. She meticulously monitors her clientele’s movements once the 
coffee’s served, delivering well-timed instructions to stir again or to pick up 
the little pot, or, finally to pour it into the little cup. The coffee’s foam 
must increase threefold before it can be considered ready.

It was here, in 'the Armenian,' that the city’s bohemians would gather in the 
70s, 80s, and part of the 90s

The particular flavor of this coffee is held dear by several generations of 
Lvivians. It was here, in “the Armenian,” that the city’s bohemians would 
gather in the 70s, 80s, and part of the 90s. In those internetless days it was 
important to have a meeting point where you could regularly cross paths with 
key people—every day, if you wanted—and inform them of something, discuss 
something with them, or just sit and have coffee with them.

Just a little further down on the same street you’ll find Dziga, the first and 
still the most successful Lviv institution engaging in the business of culture. 
Every day Dziga hosts concerts, readings, exhibits, or just the regular 
get-togethers of book clubs and writing groups. It’s all so much more civilized 
now, deprived of its former wild Soviet charm, today only extant in the 
reminiscences of old-timers over coffee or a glass of wine.

Back then, too, at “the Armenian,” the little pot was delicately placed in 
iron filings, and the coffee was stirred with a little wooden stick and poured 
inside tiny white porcelain cups customers would take outside, setting them on 
the broad sills of the sturdy medieval buildings as they smoked and talked. 
Accustomed to this ritual, the waitresses would eventually come out to collect 
the empty cups and noiselessly ferry them back inside.
 ‘The coffee was stirred with a little wooden stick and poured inside tiny 
white porcelain cups customers would take outside.’ Photograph: Kateryna 
Slipchenko 
The women behind the bar were always very important people here. They’ve been 
written about in novels, turned into TV shows, and had gigabytes upon gigabytes 
dedicated to them online. Now “the Armenian” has long since lost its role as 
social framework, frequented today by pot-bellied sexagenarian granddads who 
come to drink coffee with cognac, as was the fashion in their youth, and by 
ladies of the same age who chat over coffee and pieces of highly calorific, and 
similarly nostalgic, cake – and by tourists and TV crews. The women at the bar 
don’t allow anyone to take their picture – they’re famous enough as it is among 
tourists and on Facebook and Twitter. Their contemplative process of brewing 
coffee, on the other hand, may be filmed ad infinitum – though there always 
comes a point where the women can’t stand it anymore, breaking up the cameras 
as though their presence might interfere with their beverage preparation 
technology, which they will not have damaged for the sake of a pretty picture. 
“The Armenian” is said to be the last café of this style.

Ukrainian literature – or Ukrainian culture more broadly –employs the word 
'last' often

Ukrainian literature – or Ukrainian culture more broadly – employs the word 
“last” quite often: last territory, last bastion, the last issue of a magazine, 
the last books of a bankrupt publisher, the last Ukrainian-speaking readers, 
writers, translators. There is a well-known contemporary classic, a collection 
of essays by one of Ukraine’s best-known authors, Yuri Andrukhovych, calledMy 
Last Territory; there is an art management agency called Last Bastion. Because 
Ukrainian literature has been aware of being in a sort of intellectual ghetto 
at least since the 1920s, for a long time there was a program on local radio 
called “Music from the Ghetto.” Ukrainian literature had kept pace with all the 
European trends and traditions, arriving at modernism right on time in the 
early ’20s, but with the advent of Soviet rule in eastern Ukraine, 
intellectuals began to be shot and then slaughtered en masse, particularly 
writers, many of whom actually lived on the same street in a kind of cozy 
little writers’ colony in what was then the capital city, Kharkiv – a city now 
located just a few dozen kilometers from the Russian border, so that these days 
its residents wake up every morning and flip on the news to find out if the 
Russian invasion is underway yet or not.

But in the ’20s, while Ukrainian intellectuals in the east were being murdered 
outright, Ukrainian intellectuals in Galicia – in western Ukraine, belonging to 
Poland at that time – were suffering from Polish persecution. Bans on the use 
of the Ukrainian language – both spoken and written – had been in effect for 
some time in territories annexed by the Russian Empire. In western Ukraine 
there had been no such prohibitions, but nor did the Ukrainian language ever 
have a chance to become a language of education and culture, or politics, or 
business. It was, nonetheless, the mass exterminations of Ukrainians, first and 
foremost of Ukrainian artists, that dealt the biggest blow to Ukrainian 
culture, along with forced Russification throughout the twentieth century and 
continuing into the twenty-first. With Russification, the Ukrainian language 
was reduced in the popular imagination to a “dialect” of Russian, unable to 
function on its own in the cultural sphere. An impoverished, ignorant, 
provincial discourse was artificially cultivated in Ukrainian literature, while 
more contemporary or cosmopolitan topics were condemned or banned. Even today 
the same false principles determine the selection of which Ukrainian books are 
to be read in schools. The field of Ukrainian linguistics was totally destroyed 
in the Soviet era, Ukrainian dictionaries undermined as words that had no 
direct equivalent in or obvious etymological similarity to Russian were simply 
discarded, replaced by blatant calques.
 ‘Ukrainian literature has been aware of being in a sort of intellectual 
ghetto at least since the 1920s.’ Photograph: Kateryna Slipchenko 
Sadly, this suppression of Ukrainian culture is still ongoing. The Soviet 
tradition of labeling all things Ukrainian as “nationalistic” is deeply rooted, 
and even now it is employed by Russian propaganda. Any attempt to protect the 
rights of the Ukrainian-speaking population is automatically seen as an 
infringement upon the rights of the dominant, Russian-speaking population. Such 
efforts, then, are dismissed out of hand. This creates a bizarre situation in 
which on the one hand Ukrainian men are being mobilized to fight a war against 
Russia, while on the other Ukraine continues to be dominated by Russian and 
Russophone culture. Russian and Ukrainian are used seemingly interchangeably on 
television that is officially Ukrainian; the apparently indiscriminate use of 
Russian without the provision of translations requires that Ukrainian audiences 
be at least bilingual.

The Ukrainian language was reduced in the popular imagination to a 'dialect' 
of Russian, unable to function on its own

The first Ukrainian publishing houses came into being right after Ukraine 
gained independence in 1991, but they mostly published classics of world 
literature that had been banned in the USSR, and mostly in Russian. Very 
occasionally they’d do a classic of Ukrainian literature taken from the school 
curriculum. Contemporary Ukrainian literature was barely published at all 
during this period. Any volume of new Ukrainian poetry or prose that did get 
published became a big event – not only because these works were of astonishing 
quality, but also because of how infrequently even amazing books were getting 
printed.


After the Orange Revolution of 2004 there was a brief thaw, and a fashion for 
contemporary Ukrainian literature. The publishing industry picked up, and 
dozens of new names appeared. Aside from the biggest – although let’s face it: 
the only – Ukrainian book fair in Lviv, other, similar events were established 
in other cities. But the last few years, unfortunately, have seen a return to 
the harsh literary realities of the 90s. Many publishers are going out of 
business, and those that linger are still unable to permit themselves to 
publish debut authors, opting instead and exclusively for famous names that can 
guarantee them sales.

To the above particularities of the Ukrainian book market we should also add 
the very high rate of piracy. Within a few weeks of its arrival in stores, any 
even moderately famous Ukrainian author’s book will turn up online, its 
contents available in their entirety for free. Pirate sites actually claim to 
support the Ukrainian language, and the vast majority of people who download 
these books really do believe that they are supporting Ukrainian. The rest do 
it because they have no other option: bookstores exist only in big cities, and 
even then, their selection is often considerably more limited than that of 
pirate sites.
 ‘Writers in Ukraine are usually political – often passionately so.’ 
Photograph: Kateryna Slipchenko 
And despite the military operations in eastern Ukraine, it is an essentially 
Russian cultural product, most often openly anti-Ukrainian, that continues to 
dominate the Ukrainian cultural market. Thus far, the Ukrainian government has 
also failed to make any even remotely convincing attempts at defending its own 
culture, despite the fact that a special Ministry of Information Policy was 
even created expressly for this purpose.

Many publishers are going out of business, and those that linger are still 
unable to publish debut authors

Ukrainian media outlets – and not only the Russophone ones – are mostly 
Russian-owned, which results in the domination of their content by 
Ukrainophobic propaganda. The lion’s share of books sold in Ukraine are 
produced in Russia and imported into Ukraine duty-free, but most of these are 
also in Russian, especially commercial titles. The exceptions to this system – 
few, highly intellectual – merely prove the rule. Yet it is this intellectual 
niche and its intellectual production that earn recognition outside of Ukraine. 
This typically occurs without the participation of the state, on the initiative 
of foreign partners. Ukrainian writers are the people foreign commentators turn 
to first when Ukrainian politics become bewildering, and Ukrainian writers 
frequently take place in various roundtables abroad as provisional experts on 
everything, since, as opposed to Ukrainian officials, these writers are 
educated, speak foreign languages, and are able to articulate their own ideas 
and paint an informative picture of the state.

Writers in Ukraine are usually political – often passionately so. When on 
November 30 of last year the first battles began on Kiev’s Maidan, I heard 
about it from the Facebook page of a friend, the writer Svitlana Povalyeva. Her 
post appeared barely thirty minutes after students were first beaten at 4:00 
am. Only later did journalists’ and politicians’ posts begin to flood the 
internet. Svitlana and her husband and their two sons remained on the Maidan 
for all three of the ensuing months, from the first to the last day. Her son 
immediately volunteered for the army; he is now fighting in eastern Ukraine. 
Svitlana’s is not a unique, or even atypical, story.

 ‘Ukrainian literature is not only divided into Ukrainian-language and 
Russian-language, pro-west and pro-Russian, but also into official and 
independent.’ Photograph: Kateryna Slipchenko 
Writers collect money for the army, for displaced persons, and for the 
wounded, organizing charitable reading tours in the eastern territories and in 
the ATO zone, as well as signing up for the army themselves. Whether they 
volunteer or are drafted, there are a number of writers in the east now writing 
very good literature inspired by their experiences, which they often publish in 
fragments over social media. I would love for them to come home and become the 
Ukrainian Remarques, Dos Passos, Hemingways.

'Professional' writers who live solely off the work they publish in Ukraine 
simply do not exist

Ukrainian literature is not only divided into Ukrainian-language and 
Russian-language, pro-west and pro-Russian, but also into official and 
independent. Official literature is produced by a sizeable state-sponsored 
Writers’ Union, which has central and regional offices with different 
facilities, staff, their own media channels – even resorts of their own for 
their summer vacations. But the literature of its members often exists more 
hypothetically than it does in actual fact. As a rule, its aesthetics are those 
of socialist realism – a holdover from Soviet times. These writers periodically 
receive government awards – officially for books that can’t be found in any 
bookstore, unofficially for being somebody’s relatives, colleagues, friends. 
They run the regional Writers’ Unions, get together for conventions, even 
publish the occasional newspaper – every so often, even a book. These papers 
and books rarely reach any readers: print runs are miniscule, and the books are 
essentially intended to serve as gifts for the same government officials who 
give out the awards.

Independent Ukrainian literature, meanwhile, makes do without any state 
support – no grants, no official organizations, no conferences, no awards, and 
no subsidized publications. There are no public or private programs to support 
independent Ukrainian writers and operating according to fair and transparent 
criteria; there is no program to represent Ukrainian literature abroad (as 
there is in most European nations); there is no institution for the protection 
of copyright. If a Ukrainian author is translated into a foreign language, it 
is usually the result of a happy coincidence, and of the efforts of 
self-driven, enthusiastic individual translators.

I am often asked abroad how Ukrainian writers earn a living, given that there 
are no grants or awards or honorariums for readings or participating in 
festivals, and that payment for books with print runs in the tens of thousands 
is a few hundred dollars at best – payment for newspaper columns often comes 
out to less than fifteen dollars, if they pay at all – and I honestly never 
really know how to answer this question, except to say that somehow everything 
always ends up working out. For now, at any rate. Of course there are 
exceptions, and many people do give up on writing. Many emigrate. 
“Professional” writers who live solely off the work they publish in Ukraine 
simply do not exist. The lucky few not forced to earn their living through 
means other than writing do so thanks to foreign fellowships, residencies, and 
honorariums.

Ours is a form of proletarian solidarity, but it is powerful and reliable

Really not having any way out seems to have a strange effect on literature. 
For the most part, it results in the pessimism you might expect. But sometimes 
unexpected things occur. For example, the remarkably active participation in 
literary events by the general public. Especially in the Russophone eastern 
regions of Ukraine – especially, in other words, in places where Ukrainian 
books are scarce. There is an unexpectedly high level of interest in Ukrainian 
culture on the front. Books often show up on army requisitions, and in fact 
writers often finance the acquisition of books for troops themselves.

I recently heard from one of those few publishers still in business that there 
is a new “trend” in Ukrainian publishing, namely, the translation into 
Ukrainian of world literature. This same publisher had previously claimed – 
like most of his colleagues – that translations into Ukrainian would simply 
never sell. And even more amazingly, publishers have become interested in 
contemporary – rather than classic – world literature. Most surprising of all 
is the fact that these translations appear to be immune to piracy. Although 
perhaps it’s not that surprising after all when you consider the low level of 
erudition on the part of the pirates.

The objective absence of a literary market, and with it the absence of any 
commercial motives, has had a surprisingly positive impact on Ukraine’s 
literary scene. For the most part, Ukrainian writers not only know each other, 
but are also genuinely friends, actively promoting and supporting one another. 
The infrequent conflicts between them are generally over political differences, 
unlike in other countries where petty jealousy can sometimes run amok. Ours is 
a form of proletarian solidarity, but it is powerful and reliable.

The number of women in Ukrainian literature is also steadily on the rise, 
although I’m not exactly sure why this is the case, whether because there are 
fewer literary prospects (in the Soviet era, being a writer was not only 
prestigious, but also lucrative, thanks to the state funding provided to those 
“loyal” to the regime), or because Ukraine is gradually shedding the vestiges 
of its old patriarchal system. This is happening very gradually, however: the 
word “feminist,” for example, is only used as an insult, whether it’s applied 
to men or to women. Successful women, including writers, are usually afraid of 
being labeled feminists, so they tend to try not to publicize their own 
successes. Writing remains incompatible with the personal lives of most women. 
Successful female authors are expected to be young and unwed: women in general 
have to choose between writing and having a family, as the equitable 
distribution of domestic responsibilities remains rare among Ukrainian families 
(not only literary ones).

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
The landscape of Ukrainian literature is changing in unexpected ways. If in 
the 90s the critical mass of writers was concentrated in the less Russified 
western territories of the country, now the majority of writers live in Kiev 
(though few are from there) or even further east. Ukraine is a country with 
considerable regional diversity, with a so-called “Kiev school of poetry,” “the 
Zhytomyr school” after the city in western Ukraine, or the “Stanyslaviv 
phenomenon,” named for the city of Ivano-Frankivsk, also in western Ukraine, 
and formerly known as Stanyslaviv. But today when writers (and others) move, it 
is almost always to Kiev – almost never, that is, from periphery to periphery. 
Instances of students from Kharkiv, for example, going to school somewhere 
other than in Kiev (or occasionally Lviv, which is closer to the west) are 
practically non-existent. Meanwhile, the largest publishers are concentrated in 
eastern Ukraine, almost at the Russian border – in Kharkiv, in fact, the very 
city where almost all Ukraine’s most famous writers lived during the 1920s, and 
the place where they were killed en masse. There is a term in Ukrainian 
literary criticism for this: “the Executed Renaissance.” The Ukrainians have 
been waiting for almost a century for a new kind of renaissance, which would 
encompass literature and more. But until that happens, we seek safety in 
literature as a kind of last bastion.

 * Translated from the Ukrainian by Jennifer Croft  