
Literary fiction by the likes of Salman Rushdie, Harper Lee and Toni Morrison 
helps improve readers’ understanding of other people’s emotions, according to 
new research – but genre writing, from authors including Danielle Steel and 
Clive Cussler, does not.

Academics David Kidd and Emanuele Castano, from the New School for Social 
Research in New York, put more than 1,000 participants through the “author 
recognition test”, which measured exposure to fiction by asking respondents to 
identify writers they recognised from a list. The list included both authors 
and non-authors, and ranged from writers who are identified as literary, such 
as Rushdie and Morrison, to those such as Cussler and Steel who are seen as 
genre authors. The participants then did the “reading the mind in the eyes” 
test, in which they were asked to select which of four emotion terms most 
closely matches the expression of a person in a photograph.

In a paper just published in the journal Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, 
and the Arts <http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/aca/>, the academics reveal that 
those who had recognised more literary fiction authors in the list were better 
at inferring others’ feelings, a faculty known as theory of mind. Genre fiction 
is defined in the paper “by its focus on a particular topic and reliance on 
relatively formulaic plots”, while literary fiction is defined “more by its 
aesthetic qualities and character development than its focus on plot or a 
particular set of topics and themes”.

“Results indicate that exposure to literary but not genre fiction positively 
predicts performance on a test of theory of mind, even when accounting for 
demographic variables including age, gender, educational attainment, 
undergraduate major … and self-reported empathy,” they write in the paper,
Different Stories: How Levels of Familiarity With Literary and Genre Fiction 
Relate to Mentalising <http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/2016-37488-001/>. “We 
propose that these findings emerge because the implied (rather than explicit) 
socio-cognitive complexity, or roundness of characters, in literary fiction 
prompts readers to make, adjust, and consider multiple interpretations of 
characters’ mental states.”

Castano and Kidd had previously conducted research in which they gave 
participants extracts from literary or genre novels to read, and then assessed 
how well they couldrecognise emotions in others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/oct/08/literary-fiction-improves-empathy-study>
, finding that those who read the literary fiction extracts scored highest. 
Their latest research set out to look at the emotion-recognition responses of 
those who choose to read either literary or genre fiction in their daily lives.

“We thought it was important to try and measure a lifetime’s exposure to 
fiction, and how it affects these processes,” said Castano.

“In those 2013 experiments, we focused on the question of causation – can 
reading fiction cause improved theory of mind, at least in the immediate 
context of reading? We found evidence that it can, but this effect was only 
observed when we assigned participants to read literary fiction. It did not 
appear when they were asked to read popular genre fiction,” said Kidd.

This time round, said Kidd, they did something new. “We examined patterns of 
author recognition in two large (each more than 850) independent samples using 
a technique called factor analysis, and we found evidence of two clusters of 
authors that could be classified as generally literary or generally popular 
genre writers.,” he said. “We then tested how levels of familiarity with each 
type of fiction related to theory of mind performance … The results across 
three independent samples consistently showed that familiarity with literary 
fiction, but not genre fiction, reliably predicts better theory of mind 
performance.”

Their latest evidence, said Kidd, shows that “not all fiction draws on the 
same psychological processes in the same way”, and that “over time, habitual 
reading of literary fiction is associated with differences in interpersonal 
perception that are not associated with regularly reading genre fiction”.

The academics are keen to stress that they are not claiming a superiority for 
literary fiction. “What we are saying is that there are different ways of 
telling a story, and they have different impacts on the way we perceive social 
reality. Literary fiction, we say, tends to challenge social categories – the 
characters are category-resistant … Popular fiction, on the other hand, uses 
types of characters which help us immediately understand what is going on. 
That’s how we learn about the social world – how we build our national and 
cultural identities,” said Castano.

“This is not to say that reading popular genre fiction cannot be enjoyable or 
beneficial for other reasons – we suspect it is,” agreed Kidd. “Nor does the 
present evidence point towards a clear and consistent distinction between 
literary and popular genre fiction. Instead, it suggests that the broad 
distinction between relatively complex literary and relatively formulaic genre 
fiction can help us better understand how engaging with fiction affects how we 
think.”

The academics hope that their findings will have implications for the study 
and teaching of literature, as well as in helping to improve theory of mind in 
those who lack it. “It doesn’t mean you can give Don DeLillo to an autistic 
child and they’ll be fine – but may help us to understand how theory of mind 
process[es] could be fostered in individuals with known deficits,” said Castano.
 