
Lord Snowdon, the celebrity, society and documentary photographer who was as 
well known for his marriage and divorce to Princess Margaret, has died aged 86.

Buckingham Palace said the Queen had been informed of his death. In a 
statement Camera Press, the agency with which he worked, said: “The Earl of 
Snowdon died peacefully at home on 13 January 2017.”

Snowdon, born Antony Armstrong-Jones, was one of the UK’s best-known 
photographers for more than 50 years.

He was already established as a fashion photographer when he met and married 
Margaret in 1960, choosing to be the 1st Earl of Snowdon, after his favourite 
mountain.

The marriage meant he too was a member of the royal family, giving him a 
cachet which helped him become, in effect, the official photographer of the 
1960s establishment. The list of who Snowdon photographed is staggering, being 
more or less anybody who was anybody.
 Lord Snowdon and Princess Margaret wave to onlookers from the Buckingham 
Palace balcony on their wedding day on 6 May 1960. Photograph: Ullstein 
Bild/Getty Images 
In 2014 he gifted 130 original prints to the National Portrait Gallery 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/about/press/news-release-snowdon-gives-his-most-iconic-photographs.php>
, portraits which included actors John Hurt, Alan Bates and Julie Christie, 
musician Yehudi Menuhin, writer Graham Greene, artist Barbara Hepworth and 
historian Anthony Blunt. The gallery also held a display of his work in 2014.

The gallery’s director, Nicholas Cullinan, said Snowdon’s “contribution to 
photography has been profound and far-reaching”.

Related: Lord Snowdon - a life in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2017/jan/13/lord-snowdon-a-life-in-pictures>

He added: “His portraits, many of which he has generously gifted to the 
gallery, have become a major part of the permanent collection, and stand as 
some of the most striking and enduring images of the 20th and 21st centuries. 
Lord Snowdon was also a frequent visitor to the gallery, whose warmth, good 
humour, and gentleness will be sorely missed. Our thoughts are with his family 
at this difficult time.”

In 1956 Snowdon joined Vogue magazine and became its longest-serving 
photographer. His portraits of David Bowie and an intense Martin Amis featured 
in last year’s Vogue 100 show at the National Portrait Gallery.


Alexandra Shulman, British Vogue’s editor-in-chief, said 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/article/lord-snowdon-antony-armstrong-jones-photographer-has-died>
 Snowdon was “one of the great photographers of the age”. She added: “His 
relationship with British Vogue over more than half a century has been one of 
the most important in the magazine’s history.

“Working across fashion, portraiture and reportage, his body of work contains 
many of the most memorable images of the time and demonstrated an eye that 
simultaneously framed what was before him whilst making that subject completely 
his own. His acute sense of style, his prowess as a raconteur, and his passion 
for his work made him a remarkable colleague and contributor.”

Snowdon also regularly worked for the Sunday Times magazine, becoming its 
artistic adviser, and worked on documentary subjects including mental health, 
disability and loneliness.

Born into a wealthy, well-connected family, Snowdon was educated at Eton 
before going to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he studied architecture but 
failed his finals. He did, however, cox the Cambridge boat to victory in the 
1950 Boat Race.
 Snowdon at an exhibition in 1974. Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
His wedding to Margaret was the first royal marriage to be televised, but it 
was a relationship which was often difficult and tempestuous. It was not 
something he talked about – he was always discreet and rejected lucrative 
offers to write a book.

Margaret and Snowdon, who enjoyed many breaks abroad at the villa given to the 
princess as a wedding present, Les Jolies Eaux on Mustique, separated in 1976 
and divorced in 1978. Snowdon later married Lucy Lindsay-Hogg and they too 
divorced in 2000.

Related: Lord Snowdon - a career photographing the stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2017/jan/13/lord-snowdon-a-career-in-photography>

Although highly regarded as a photographer, Snowdon was modest about his 
abilities, once telling the Guardian: “None of my photographs are great 
photographs – they’re just pictures that hopefully record a moment to make you 
laugh, or smile, and sometimes cry.”

Nor was he one for technology. “I’m not remotely interested in lenses and all 
that, so I’m buggered if I’m going to explain the technical details behind this 
picture. I’ll just say I never think about flash. Bugger flash. Nor do I use 
digital things. I don’t understand them and I don’t want to.”

The process of taking a picture should be simple, with the subject more 
important than the photographer, he believed. “I think a photographer should be 
a chameleon, or a fly on the wall. I want to be invisible when I’m wandering 
about. That’s why my camera is very small. The photographer himself is 
unimportant.”

In a long career Snowdon produced 14 photography books, made seven 
documentaries and in1962 designed the aviary at London zoo, which still stands 
<https://www.zsl.org/zsl-london-zoo/exhibits/snowdon-aviary>.

He is survived by his four children: the furniture designer David Armstrong 
Jones, Viscount Linley; the artist Lady Sarah Chatto; Lady Frances von 
Hofmannsthal; and Jasper William Oliver Cable-Alexander.


 