
The colour blue is calming. Cooling. It is the colour that Lord Snowdon 
("Tony" to his first wife, Princess Margaret), now 82, has always preferred his 
sitters to wear. If a session is not going to plan, his assistant quietly pops 
off to find one of Snowdon's own blue shirts, which his subjects presumably 
slip into without a fuss.

"'Let's try a blue shirt… Would you mind changing into one?' is a question 
I've often heard while holding the reflector board," explains his youngest 
daughter, Frances. "In the darkroom is the boiler cupboard and on a shelf in 
there is a warm pile of blue shirts. These are worn by my father to go out for 
lunch, or to drain the pond, or they are worn by the likes of David Bowie, Ian 
McKellen and David Cameron for their Snowdon photograph. My father enjoys 
knowing this history behind the shirts, all a little frayed around the collar. 
And it's not only for the colour blue in its utilitarian hues that he likes 
them, but also for the democratic anonymity it gives the sitters."

"The blue shirt is anonymous and yet a kind of uniform," says Snowdon. "It's a 
simple backdrop that leaves us to focus on the sitter's face without 
distraction." His is a clear, almost arrogant vision – in dressing his sitters 
he both neutralises their surroundings and imposes his own airy, aristocratic 
non-style on the image.

It was this trademark that led to Frances contacting Swedish fashion label 
Acne, a company founded on blue jeans. Together they collaborated on a "blue" 
project, producing a book of portraits and a limited edition of blue shirts 
inspired by those on the portraitees' backs. There's Charles and Diana, snapped 
mid-joke, the blue balancing the rosiness of their grins, while Tony Blair's 
blue shirt and tie give the impression of an awkward prefect posing for his NUS 
card. There is something of the school photo in all these blue portraits – not 
that the photos appear skill-less, more that the muted monotony of these sky 
tones gives the impression that Snowdon's sitters, however celebrated, are all 
in the same class. Equally, the shirt's sameness highlights the differences in 
their faces. The lines. The eyes.

For Snowdon, it's more basic. "Blue is a soft colour," he says. "A practical 
colour. A working colour. Like blue jeans – blue denim is international." His 
favourite photographs ("The one of Yves Saint Laurent where we found an old 
mirror and he drew the water lilies with his finger in the dust,") are 
remembered with fondness, but there's an edge there, even when he is talking 
about royalty. "My favourite sitter was the Queen Mother, I think. She was 
wonderful in her blue mackintosh," says Snowdon. "But," he admits, "even if I 
didn't really like someone I'd still put them in a blue shirt." Instead of 
rose-tinted spectacles, it appears Snowdon's are tinted pale blue.

Snowdon Blue, £80 (snowdon-review.com <http://snowdon-review.com>). Shirts 
from £180, Acne (020 7629 9374;acnestudios.com <http://acnestudios.com>)
 