
I’ve got two writing places. There’s a shed, next to the vegetable patch, 
which is a lovely place to write but I can get uptight about the pigeons and 
squirrels. I tend to write things in there that don’t need any research because 
you can’t keep many books in a shed or they go rotten. It’s powered by solar 
panels, which I fitted myself, and heated by a caravan gas heater. More often, 
though, I write in my library, which has thousands of books. I’ve also got 
absolutely stacks of notebooks, which makes my creative life a bit chaotic 
because I don’t know where to find things.

I write poetry longhand, often on trains, because poetry needs to be musical 
and it’s quite a help when you’ve got railway wheels going, “da‑da-dum, 
da-da-dum, da-da-dum …” Prose I usually write straight on to the computer. But 
I wrote my first novel, and some ofBirds Without Wings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jul/10/fiction.louisdebernieres>, 
longhand. My poor sister used to type things up for me. Eventually, she gave me 
£500 and said, “Get yourself a word processor.” So my next three books were 
written on a Brother with a tiny black screen and green writing, which I called 
Esmerelda. It was actually my most fertile period, and I often wonder whether I 
should go back to Esmerelda. I still have her in the attic.

I avoid listening to vocal music when I’m writing or I end up listening to the 
words, at least if it’s in a language I understand. When I was writingCaptain 
Corelli’s Mandolin I was listening to Greek and Italian music. I like writing to
Ludovico Einaudi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/24/pianist-ludovico-einaudis-haunting-iceberg-performance-to-draw-attention-to-arctic-plight-video>
 because he’s a bit like Bach: you can either treat him as wallpaper or listen 
very intensely.

When I was fuelled by black coffee and cigarettes I could write for 16 hours. 
Now I just do mornings and then life kicks in; things like fetching the 
children from school. Also, in Norfolk it’s hopeless: people keep calling in 
for cups of tea. I try to do a complete chapter in a morning, and then I tinker 
with it for the next couple of days. If I can do a chapter a week I’ll get 
quite a lot of books done. An author tour can really interrupt, but your 
publishers don’t actually want you to write too much, they can’t cope with it. 
And I do write too much. So they’re probably grateful when I’m away in some 
little stone town in the West Country talking. And I love it.

I used to do all the research in advance, but it all went terribly wrong with 
Birds Without Wings because I had mountains of notes and I couldn’t organise it 
in my mind. Now I just do the research as I need it. I don’t use the internet 
much, because having looked up things about myself I know how much of it is 
rubbish. I prefer phoning or emailing people and interviewing them. I do a lot 
of reading, after breakfast with my feet up on the table. And you have to 
travel a lot. I’ve never written about a place I haven’t been to, I would feel 
very cheeky doing that.

I’m currently working on volumes two and three of a trilogy, and I’m writing 
them both at the same time. I never write in a linear way; I just write what I 
feel like and then put it all together at the end. In a way, it is a bit 
bonkers, but when I get to do volume three it will save me an awful lot of work 
because I’ll have already done it.

• The Dust That Falls from Dreams by Louis de Bernières is out now in 
paperback (Vintage, £7.99). To order a copy for £5.99 go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-dust-that-falls-from-dreams-385201.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 