 The first meeting of the Ulster Assembly ended last night in outright 
parliamentary rebellion by the so-called Loyalist minority, led by the Rev. Ian 
Paisley and Mr William Craig, which refused to accept the adjournment and 
continued with an unofficial meeting of its own.
The Loyalists, who hold 27 of the 78 seats in the Assembly, are committed to 
"wrecking" the Government's constitutional scheme, and on yesterday's evidence 
they have decided to filibuster their way though every meeting and, if 
necessary, challenge the Assembly's authority in the courts.

Mr Paisley and Mr Craig said after their rival meeting in the Assembly 
debating chamber at Stormont that theirs had been a legal, properly constituted 
assembly.

If any attempt were made to interfere with its decisions the matter would be 
taken to the High Court.

The disorderly, heated and at times farcical first meeting has embarrassed and 
deeply depressed many Government officials. Even more important than the 
Loyalists' action, which officials believe to be little more than a publicity 
stunt is the lack of evidence of reconciliation and cooperation among the 
parties.

A well planned filibuster by the Loyalists took up most of the official 
meeting: which was adjourned after four hours. The Loyalists refused to accept 
the adjournment, and 25 of them took over the hall.

They complained furiously when the lights were turned out, and after a heated 
protest from Mr Paisley the giant chandeliers were lit again. Then they 
demanded that a press reporter should take a note of their deliberations.

The row began after the newly elected presiding officer had invited 
nominations in writing for membership of the standing orders committee. The 
Loyalists insisted that he was out of order. When the meeting was adjourned and 
most members had left the hall the Loyalist moved to the front, put their own 
man in the chair, and insisted that they had a proper quorum to continue the 
Assembly meeting.

The Loyalist meeting was later adjourned until September 1, which Mr Paisley 
suggested would give a proper interval in which to take legal advice. The 
meeting closed with singing of the National Anthem.

There was so much hubbub when the first properly constituted meeting was 
adjourned that no date was fixed for it to resume. But it is hardly likely to 
meet again before the autumn, by which time the Government will be hoping that 
passions will have cooled.

The first meeting was supposed to deal only with formalities: the election of 
a presiding officer, who would then organise the selection of a standing orders 
committee. But it lasted all afternoon and into the evening, as Loyalist after 
Loyalist rose to put points of order or to make political speeches.

The election of a presiding officer took nearly two and a half hours. At the 
end of the debate, the official Unionist leader, Mr Brian Faulkner, normally 
the most optimistic of politicians, remarked that it had been "a most 
depressing experience".

The man eventually selected to preside over the Assembly was Mr Nat Minford, 
an official Unionist. Mr Minford, who was proposed by Mr Faulkner, was a 
minister of the old Stormont Government, and was also for several years the 
leader of the Stormont House of Commons. In yesterday's election he beat Mr 
William Beattie, of the Democratic Unionist Party, by 31 votes to 26.

Mr Minford owes his election to the moderate Alliance Party. If the eight 
Alliance members had abstained as did the Social Democratic and Labour Party, 
then Mr Beattie, a committed constitutional "wrecker" would have become the 
presiding officer.

This is an abridged version of the original article
 