
Maestra began as a combination of two fictional failures. Several years ago, 
my then agent suggested I try writing something erotic, but she disliked the 
result, and I set it aside to finish the project I was working on, a political 
biography of Elizabeth I. One of the ideas I wanted to explore within 
Elizabeth’s governance was her capacity to manipulate the expectations of 
patriarchy; she confounded and bamboozled several generations of ambassadors by 
playing on their assumptions about gender when it suited her, inverting their 
prejudices to her own ends. Maybe that was lingering in my head when I turned 
back to those rejected pages and decided to put them together with a story I 
started during my time as an intern at an auction house.

The product was pretty hopeless, derivative stuff, but there was quite an 
interesting narrative line about a fake painting by the eighteenth century 
artist George Stubbs. Juxtaposing an erotic story with an art world thriller 
required a very particular protagonist, and once I heard Judith Rashleigh’s 
voice, I found I couldn’t let her go until the novel was finished just two 
months later. Much of it was written in the South of France, and perhaps it was 
that which gave the book what I felt was a holiday air. As someone who usually 
loathes writing and will do almost anything to avoid it, this was the first 
time, after eight previous books, that I experienced anything like pleasure in 
constructing a story.


One person’s erotica very swiftly becomes another person’s comedy.

Everyone hated my book. My agent hated it, and my publisher hated it, and 
pretty much everyone I showed it to hated it. Even now that Maestra has been 
sold in 42 countries and garnered a film deal, it still seems to make a lot of 
readers furious. Equally, I have been hugely flattered and encouraged by the 
number who love it, particularly younger women who have told me that they feel 
empowered by the story, seeing Judith as a new kind of feminist heroine. Yet 
both reactions surprise me, demonstrating the disconnect between intention and 
interpretation. I thought I’d written something quite playful and entertaining, 
about a latter-day Becky Sharp who, in Vanity Fair, finds herself adrift in a 
man’s world with nothing but her looks and her wits; I had no idea it would 
enrage some readers as much as it delighted others. Elizabeth: Renaissance 
Prince was a far more radical book, but 16th century gender politics apparently 
operate at a safer remove.

Many journalists have asked me why I turned from writing respectable history 
books to a presumably disreputable novel, to which all I can say is: if you 
spend as long as I have hanging around in Renaissance Europe, sex and violence 
have very little left to shock you with. I didn’t experience the process as 
different in any way, in that whether one is writing history or fiction, 
construction, pace, detail and narrative plausibility remain paramount. Maestra 
does contain sex scenes, but I was interested in the technical challenge of how 
to write them. One person’s erotica very swiftly becomes another person’s 
comedy, so I was engaged with forming scenes which play an integral part in the 
plot in a way that read as fresh, honest and most importantly modern. Judith is 
a product of theTinder generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/12/the-tinder-generation-is-real-app-has-online-meltdown-over-vanity-fair-article>
: the way she thinks about and recounts her experiences had to work 
linguistically, in her own voice, and in a vocabulary which is, I think, 
realistic – if not terribly “literary”.

Maestra by LS Hilton – digested read
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/03/maestra-ls-hilton-digested-read> 
Maestra has changed my life in many ways, not least in that I have spent much 
of the last year on planes. Sometimes I even get toturn left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/air-rage-inequality-happiness-plane-passengers>
. But I have also had to defend my work more thoroughly and publicly than was 
ever required by the more genteel tempo of historical biography. Staring at the 
sky, I reflect that it may not be a good book, but it has made me a much better 
writer, in that I have been forced to consider and investigate a process which 
was previously reflexive. I find I care about writing much more than I believed 
I did. I’d never really thought of myself as A Writer, but I find myself quite 
pleased that I’ve managed to make so many people angry. It must mean that I’m 
doing my job.

Extract

There was something close to the almost unbearable quality of desire to those 
next three days. The white noise of the beloved’s absence which hums and 
whispers constantly in the ear, in the veins. I waited like a woman in love, 
like a hidden mistress who will only be delivered from the languorous torment 
of lack by her lover’s tread in the passage of a cheap hotel. Each morning I 
ran, pushing myself up the vertiginous hiking tracks until my thighs shook and 
my calves burned. I ordered lunch and dinner, but could barely eat. I smoked 
until I retched water and lit cigarettes through the metallic taint of my own 
guts. I bought a bottle of cheap brandy and some over-the-counter sleeping 
pills and tried to knock myself out every night, but woke before the light with 
a thin wire of pain in my skull, watching my own heart beat under the frail, 
dawn-blue sheet. I felt the skin hollow out under my cheekbones; the plane of 
my hip became hard against my palm. I tried to read, on benches overlooking the 
postcard views, hunched on my windowsill, stretched out on the little shingle 
beach, but all I could really do was stare into space and endlessly, endlessly 
check my phone. I played games, like a crush-struck teenager. If the man in the 
blue baseball cap buys a chocolategelato they’ll call me, if the ferry horn 
sounds twice they’ll call me. Each time my phone buzzed I grabbed at it like 
water in the desert, my fingers stumbling greasily over the keypad, but apart 
from a single message from Steve – ‘Hey you’ – there was nothing except 
advertisements from Telecom Italia. I didn’t buy a newspaper; I didn’t trust 
myself to react authentically otherwise, though I knew that was probably 
stupid. I had wanted before – I had wanted, and I had coveted – but perhaps I 
had never yearned in my life as I did for Inspector da Silva’s voice when it 
poured like medicine into my ear, after those days which dripped by as slowly 
as amber oozing through a pine.

Review

The plot romps along, outlandish and entertaining. The inherent problem with 
erotica, though, is the law of diminishing returns; there are only so many ways 
to describe the act, and after the first few forays it starts to feel almost as 
repetitive as the inventory of designer names Judith provides every time she 
gets dressed. Stephanie Merritt.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/28/maestra-ls-hilton-erotica-fifty-shades-observer-review>

Buy the book

Maestra by LS Hinton is published by Bonnier Zaffre for £7.99 and is available 
from the Guardian Bookstore for £6.55 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/maestra-440572.html>.
 