
Bricks don't usually bend, or fold, or hang like sumptuous curtains. But then 
most bricks aren't arranged with the mastery of Irish architectsO'Donnell and 
Tuomey <http://www.odonnell-tuomey.ie/>, or with the patronage of a client such 
as theLondon School of Economics <http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx>. The two have 
come together, in the tangle of medieval lanes behind Aldwych in central 
London, to achieve gymnastic feats with humble blocks, producing an angular 
avalanche of a building that appears to tumble precipitously in all directions.

This striking piece of redbrick origami is the school's £24m new Saw Swee Hock 
Student Centre 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/intranet/students/campusLondonLife/sweeHockStudentCentre/Home.aspx>
, a souped-up home for the students' union that is as energetic on the outside 
as the activities going on within.

"It's a bit like a cruise ship," says Sheila O'Donnell. "A great stack of 
different functions, from a nightclub and gym, to cafes and prayer rooms, all 
these bits of different shapes and sizes interlocking together in a complicated 
jigsaw puzzle."
 The exterior of the Saw Swee Hock Student Centre. Photograph: Dennis Gilbert 
Shoehorned into an unpromising triangular site, the building has to limbo 
beneath a plethora of invisible restrictions, ducking and dodging below its 
neighbours' rights to light. "We took these limits as a corset, not a 
form-giver," says John Tuomey, explaining how they made a perspex "jelly-mould" 
of the maximum possible envelope, like a New York cityscape silhouette, which 
was then used to test their cardboard models.

A literal product of its surroundings, the form was then sculpted according to 
views down the narrow winding streets, such as from Lincoln's Inn Fields and St 
Clement's Lane, the folds of its facade determined by diagonals between 
pavements and rooftops. The result is a shapeshifting mass, chiselled into its 
form by an intricate web of urban ley lines.
 An interior shot of the centre. Photograph: Nigel Stead/LSE Images 
If it forces a double-take, that is part of the intention – to give presence 
to this 12,000-strong institution, which has been housed in largely anonymous 
buildings for the last hundred years. The buffeted envelope is designed, says 
Tuomey, to "disturb the street, to suck the pavement into the building and take 
it for a vertical walk". When the paving is finished, it will run seamlessly 
from street to foyer to a chunky concrete staircase that splays open to entice 
people to the levels above.

"We see this staircase as part of the medieval street pattern," says 
O'Donnell. "It is a public route with different facilities spilling off it, 
each managed by different people." There are no swipe-card doors and, like the 
rest of the LSE campus, which spreads from Kingsway to the Royal Courts of 
Justice in a hotchpotch of 12 buildings, is intended to feel like part of the 
city.

"What I like about the building is that its functional spaces feel porous," 
saysRichard Sennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/feb/03/books.guardianreview4>, who 
teaches on the LSE's Cities programme. "Walking through it you sense many 
things happening at once, just as on a live street."

The staircase forms a promenade of spirals and switchbacks, like a great 
concrete helter-skelter that corkscrews through the building, with internal 
windows positioned to give glimpses of the numerous activities going on at any 
time. On one landing we pass students painting banners for a demonstration 
against an oil company; on the next floor, a radio show is in full swing, with 
DJs visible in their glazed booth. Further up, groups of bulky boys flex their 
muscles on the window-side weight machines.
 The stairwell. Photograph: Nigel Stead/LSE Images 
"They call that the performance corner," grins O'Donnell, pointing out the 
nook they carved out especially for the exercise bikes, in prime position 
overlooking the surrounding rooftops. "If you've got to do spinning, you might 
as well have a good view."

As much attention has been given to crafting the plan, which feels entirely 
different from floor to floor, as the material qualities of the building, which 
are cast and moulded with a rare attention to detail. The curving walls that 
enclose the stair are formed from gnarled "elephant hide" concrete, ground to a 
sheen on the surface like nougat. The stairs and floors are of cast terrazzo 
and oak, with metalwork in the practice's trademark red oxide finish, while the 
brick skin dissolves into a perforated screen in places, providing privacy and 
shading, and giving the place a slightly Moorish feel. The lift core is clad in 
a jazzy wrapping of enamel panelling that cycles through harlequin segments, 
recalling the flags of exotic nation states as you skip between floors. It is a 
complex collage of things that are both rough and polished – as O'Donnell puts 
it, it is "warehouse meets gentleman's club".
 The Sacred Desert window by Christopher Le Brun, in the building's Faith 
Centre. Photograph: Nigel Stead/LSE Images 
"Our student facilities were very poor before," says Julian Robinson, the 
LSE's director of estates. "All this stuff was housed in scuzzy windowless 
basements, and the student union office was a glorified cupboard." He says that 
research conducted by the Higher Education Design Quality Forum, of which he is 
deputy chair, found that over a third of students now reject certain 
institutions, when deciding where to study because of the quality of their 
buildings. "It's an increasingly competitive market, and we've always scored 
badly on facilities, compared with the rest of the Russell Group," he says.

But with O'Donnell and Tuomey's mountainous fun palace under their belts, that 
is no doubt set to change – helped along by two further capital projects, each 
planned at over £100m. The first, designed byRogers Stirk Harbour and Partners 
<http://www.rsh-p.com/rshp_home>, will be a great glassy silo across the street 
from the student centre; the other is slated for a site on Lincoln's Inn 
Fields, recently acquired for £80m. So where's the money coming from? "Alumni 
donations, balance sheet surpluses and a private debt placement with North 
American pension funds," says Robinson. Surely one of the benefits of an 
institution run by economists.
 