
Sandy Lyle won the 1985 Open Championship at Royal St George's yesterday and 
in so doing proved wrong one of the oldest of all sporting adages. Nice guys 
can, and just did, win.

Lyle, 27, will be the most popular, the most loved, if you like, champion that 
anyone can remember. He is the first Briton since Tony Jacklin in 1969 to win 
and in brisk breezes, studded by sunshine, he played the steadiest golf of all 
the challengers. He emerged with a level-par 70 for a two-over total of 282 and 
won by one shot from Payne Stewart of the USA.

The men who had dogged him all the way and had been the overnight leaders, 
David Graham and Bernhard Langer, fell away at the last, leaving an emotional 
Lyle and his family in tears by the 18th green.

After a win that was almost hysterically received by the throngs around the 
final green, Lyle admitted that he had been "pretty nervous" but mostly at the 
start of the Championship. For the first two days he had wondered about the 
state of his game, but, on finding it to be in good shape, played with 
increasing confidence.

Before the start, he told me that if there was a course on the Open rota on 
which he could win the Championship, he felt that it would be Royal St 
George's. He said: "You have to drive the ball well, and you need to play long 
irons successfully." He proved himself eminently capable of doing that with the 
first two rounds of 68 and 71.

On Saturday he needed 73 but he remained unworried. Yesterday morning, while 
waiting for his 2.40pm start, he played Lego with his son, Stuart, and found 
the hands surprisingly steady. The championship fluctuated throughout the 
afternoon but Lyle, having holed a long putt at the 14th for an unlikely 
birdie, then holed a 12-footer at the 15th to spring right back into 
contention. He said: "At that point I nearly burst into tears - it was so 
exciting to be in there with the Open Championship at stake.

"I never got jumpy, there were no shakes and in fact I was thrilled to bits 
with the way I swung at the ball over the closing holes." Asked if he felt any 
pressure at all, he said: "Obviously you felt something but last November I 
played in a tournament where the first prize was £125,000 and I won it. The 
memories of that came back and I got a lot of comfort from knowing that I could 
win when there was a lot at stake."

There could be £1million and more at stake for Lyle now. The game in Europe 
has never been so prosperous and Lyle, who was always in demand by sponsors 
before all this, will now be at the top of their shopping lists.

For much of the day, the battle had seemed to be between Langer and Graham, 
both of whom had started at one under par. But neither could find his best form 
with Langer going to turn in 39, while Graham took 37. Lyle was out in 35, and 
at that point, was one behind Graham but one ahead of Langer. Then, as the 
heavyweights were watchfully sparring with each other, Tom Kite nipped in on 
the blind side, went out in 32, and stole a two-stroke lead over the field. But 
then he ran into a haymaker, delivered by the 10th hole, where he needed to 
hole a five-foot putt for a double bogey six and that wrecked his confidence. 
He came home in 40 to disappear from sight.

Meanwhile, Graham was playing the kind of sustained golf of which we know he 
is capable, but Langer seemed to be struggling. During the course of his round, 
he was in seven bunkers, and it may be that his chance finally disappeared when 
he failed to birdie the long 14th. He did hole a nine-foot putt at the 15th for 
a birdie, but promptly dissipated that by bunkering his tee shot at the short 
16th to go back to three over par.

Lyle, two groups ahead, had dropped a shot at the 13th when, after bunkering 
his drive, he missed the green with his recovery and then missed the green with 
his chip. But he responded in spectacular fashion with a 35-foot birdie putt at 
the 14th and then a 12-footer at the 15th. When he arrived at the 18th he felt 
that he needed a four to win the Championship, but when his second trickled off 
the left edge of the green into the semi-rough he had problems.

He elected, however, to go for a delicate, difficult, shot, aiming to get the 
ball to trickle over the crest of a ridge so that it could run down to the pin. 
The ball got to the crest all right but turned away and ran back down and Lyle, 
in the most emotional display I have seen from him in 16 years of watching him 
play competitively, sank to his knees and buried his head in the grass. He 
recovered quickly and ran a difficult 20ft putt 18 inches from the hole.

All this time, Graham and Langer had been having their own problems and, when 
they reached the 18th they needed a birdie to force Lyle into a play-off. 
Graham bunkered his second, Langer ran through the green, and although the 
latter's chip ran over the edge of the hole, neither man could prevent Lyle's 
triumph.
 