
Former Australian wicketkeeper Brad Haddin says he has been impressed by Nic 
Maddinson’s response to his Test axing.

Maddinson showed the first glimpses of form since his recent Test snub, 
thrashing 24 off 15 balls in Sydney Sixers’ three wicketBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> win in Brisbane on Tuesday 
night.

Unheralded Sixers opener Dan Hughes (85 off 55) inspired the visitors to 
eclipse Brisbane’s 6-186 in the final over and snap the Heat’s three-game 
season-opening run.

The rarest of all: David Warner's century before lunch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/the-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch>
Hughes’ heroics helped the Sixers reach 7-191 with two balls to spare.

But another left-hander also caught veteran gloveman Haddin’s eye – Sixers 
teammate Maddinson.

He hit three fours and one six in his entertaining knock.

Dumped for this week’s third Test against Pakistan in Sydney, Maddinson would 
have been tempted to think his fortunes had finally changed at the Gabba on 
Tuesday night.

Batting at No3, Maddinson was dropped on two and 16 before his luck ran out 
eight runs later, caught and bowled by Ben Cutting (2-44).

But Haddin had seen enough to believe Maddinson had put his Test dumping 
behind him.

He said Maddinson had only been a positive influence since returning to the 
Sixers squad.

“That (Test team stint) was a great experience for him,” Sixers ’keeper Haddin 
told AAP.

“Anyone who gets a chance to play Test cricket and be in that environment, 
they learn a lot.

“They understand the standards you need to get to and how you need to train to 
get better.

“That is what Nic brings to this squad.”

But the man of the moment was Hughes, who hit seven fours and four sixes 
before chopping on the first ball of the final over with three runs left to win.

Sean Abbott skied a match-winning six three balls later.

The Sixers (3-2 record) moved to third on the BBL ladder ahead of Monday’s 
home clash against the Melbourne Renegades.

“I think that is the highest chase the Sixers have achieved,” said Haddin who 
hit 32 in a crucial 59-run fifth wicket stand with Hughes.

“Having Hughesy there allowed us to control the tempo and let the rest of us 
play with a bit more freedom.

“But we haven’t played that perfect game yet.”
 