
A man has been shot dead in Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> 
in what local sources said was a so-called punishment shooting carried out by 
Irish republican dissidents.

The Police Service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> initially confirmed that a man 
had been shot and had sustained serious injuries at about 8.15pm in Poleglass, 
an area in the west of the city, and that he had been taken to hospital.

However, local and security sources later told the Guardian that the man had 
died from his injuries. He was believed to be in his early 60s.

The victim was shot at Glenwood Court, around the corner from Glenwood Drive 
where on Sunday night another man was shot, sustaining up to six bullet wounds 
to his legs.

The dissident republican paramilitary group Oghlaigh na hEireann released a 
statement admitting responsibility for Sunday night’s attack. In their 
communique they claimed to have attempted to murder another man in the same 
area whom they accused of dealing heroin in west and north Belfast.

The 56-year-old victim of Sunday’s shooting was from Ardoyne in north Belfast.

Condemning Thursday’s shooting, Alex Attwood, a member of the Northern Ireland 
assembly for the Social Democratic and Labour party, said such a “savage 
assault had no place in our past and they have no place in our society today”.

“This is a very small group of people, unrepresentative of the local 
community, who have now repeatedly taken the law into their own hands,” Attwood 
said. “The best response that we can make is to provide information to law 
enforcement and ensure that these individuals are caught, arrested and 
prosecuted under the full weight of the law.”

Speaking at the scene of the shooting, Jennifer McCann, a Sinn Féin member of 
the Northern Ireland assembly for Belfast West, said: “I condemn the murder of 
a man who was shot dead in his home in Poleglass tonight. This brutal killing 
has achieved nothing other than plunging another family into grief and despair.”
 