
Tourists may be forgiven in thinking Manchester is all about rain, baggy 
trousers and Coronation Street. Perhaps less known is its rich history of 
political radicalism.

You may have read about the homeless campers in tents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/jun/29/homeless-protesters-face-eviction-from-manchester-city-centre>
, or the 50,000 people who marched against the NHS cuts in 2013; maybe also of 
the rally against council rate-capping during the 1980s. But Mancunian revolts 
are neither recent nor isolated incidents. Without Manchester, the world today 
would have been a very different place.

St. Peter’s Square — currently a mess thanks to the Metrolink second crossing 
tramworks — is key site in Manchester’s history. Although this square was once 
a patch of open ground, and near land known as St Peter’s Field, it was being 
rapidly urbanised during the nineteenth century. Many thinkers, reformers and 
agitators would gather around here to advocate change long before the notorious 
Peterloo Massacre of 1819.

The massacre, its name a play on Waterloo, was commemorated on Sunday, with 
actors Maxine Peake and Christopher Ecclestonleading the tributes 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/peterloo-massacre-christopher-eccleston-manchester-9868464>
. For those unaware of its significance, it all began when a number of 
respected orators were calling for parliamentary reform amid a crowd of tens of 
thousands during one sunny Monday morning. But what was initially just another 
peaceful meeting in the fields ended in tragedy, as a sword-wielding cavalry 
charged into the defenceless crowd, leaving 15 dead and more than 600 injured.

“It was the largest crowd ever gathered at that point in British history,” 
says radical historian Michael Herbert. “The sight of the British army 
attacking its own people was unusual, almost unprecedented. It was a really 
shocking event with reverberations that went on throughout the nineteenth 
century.”

The outcry sparked was also one of the key contributing factors to the 
establishment of the Manchester Guardian.

To commemorate Peterloo, I’ve designed a walking tour around key sites in 
Manchester’s radical history:

A. Peter Street

To stand at the heart of the massacre, you have to go to Peter Street. You’ll 
walk past the Midland Hotel, which is to the west of the square, and which was 
formerly a group of houses and gardens, some owned by magistrates.

B. The Free Trade Hall

Now the Radisson Hotel, this luxurious palazzo-style building has a plaque 
dedicated to Peterloo and was once occupied by an earlier hall used by the 
Anti-Corn Law League. Just as handloom weavers had marched in favour of working 
class emancipation, the League had used the former Free Trade Hall to call for 
the strengthening of the middle classes. It was led by two manufacturers, a 
gregarious Liberal named Richard Cobden and his colleague John Bright. Cobden, 
who had owned a sizeable portion of St Peter’s Field, earmarked the area for a 
pavilion where entrepreneurs would gather for political purposes. Soon Cobden 
and Bright’s passion for free trade helped the League become the biggest 
lobbying group of the era.

Far from just a front for business, the League was an alliance between the 
middle and working classes – and its advocacy for free trade won even more 
support after Peterloo. The stalwarts targeted the repressive Corn Laws – a tax 
on imported grain – for raising bread prices, and for swelling the landed 
gentry’s coffers. Following the successful repealing of the tax in 1846, the 
group then disbanded, food prices dropped and profits soared.

C. Elliot House

If you leave Peter Street, more of Manchester’s history can be found on 
Deansgate, a road with a red building called Elliot House. Its name is new – 
derived from John Kenneth Elliot, the city’s chief education officer from 
1955-68 – but the House itself was built in 1888 for the old Manchester School 
Board. A woman named Lydia Becker was elected as the Board’s first female 
member in 1870, and she served there until her death in 1890.

“Lydia Becker was the one who began the suffrage movement through 
constitutional means in 1860s, choosing to argue by the book, rather than by 
burning art galleries down,” explains local tour guide Jonathan Schofield, 
referring to Manchester’s more notorious feminist, Emmeline Pankhurst. Although 
Pankhurst was an important figure for the women’s suffrage movement – and her 
home has now been refashioned The Pankhurst Centre in Nelson Street – Schofield 
describes Lydia Becker as a notable predecessor.

When she was not campaigning for women’s votes, Lydia Becker wanted more girls 
studying science and more boys learning housekeeping skills. As an astronomer, 
a biologist and a botanist, she had a formidable intellect, and the perfect 
choice for improving local schools. She once said: “It was a great mistake to 
suppose that domestic duties were limited to girls and women…every boy in 
Manchester should be taught to darn his own socks and cook his own chops.”

D. Abraham Lincoln statue

A detour from Deansgate into Queen Street leads to a square dominated by a 
bronze Abraham Lincoln statue. This was erected here as a tribute to 
Manchester’s citizens for their stance against slavery during the American 
Civil War. This was in spite of Lincoln’s embargo on slave-picked cotton, which 
starved England’s factories from much-needed imports. Although the blockade 
left many mills under-supplied and people out of work, a divided Manchester 
voted to support the Union cause in a mass meeting held in the Free Trade Hall 
in 1862.

One year later, the American president replied to Manchester’s working people 
with a letter, whose words are inscribed on the statue: “I cannot but regard 
your decisive utterances on the question as an instance of sublime Christian 
heroism which has not been surpassed in any age or in any country.”

It’s certainly one of the most admirable moments in the city’s history. It is 
hard to identify the source of Mancunians’ brazen independence, which may have 
ignited conflict between entrepreneurs and their employees, but it was also 
what united them to support the abolition of slavery. Although the 
laissez-faire influence is significant – and Manchester certainly had more 
pronounced class tensions than other Victorian cities – Herbert notes that 
during the English Civil War, “Manchester took the side of Parliament, as 
opposed to Lancashire who took the side of the King. So it’s always been a bit 
different.”

E. Chethams and F. Manchester Cathedral

Manchester Cathedral, which was ransacked during the Civil War, is the most 
visited tourist attraction of the Millennium Quarter, just north of Deansgate. 
But a hidden gem is located just behind the church. The neighbouring Chetham’s 
College, a medieval manor house-turned-school, has the oldest public library in 
Britain. It has been in continuous use since 1656, and was favoured by one Dr 
Karl Marx.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, who co-wrote the Communist Manifesto, spent 
many years in Manchester, and the city’s changing districts stirred their 
writings. They devised their critiques of capitalism together at a table by the 
bay windows, which remains untouched by modernity. You can’t help but wonder if 
the two communists sought respite here, as the library was cloistered in some 
of the worst slums in Victorian Manchester. Angel Meadow Park, a beautiful area 
just minutes away, was then known as Old Town, but Engels preferred to call it 
“hell upon earth”.
 