 Novelist Manuel Vázquez Montalbán, who has died at the age of 64, was the 
creator of Spain's most famous fictional detective, José "Pepe" Carvalho. Since 
his debut in I Killed Kennedy (1972), Carvalho's adventures have appeared in 22 
novels in 24 languages. The writer was returning from a trip to Australia to 
polish the fine details of the last Carvalho novel, Millennium, when he died of 
a heart attack at Bangkok airport.
A novelist, poet, essayist, political commentator, playwright and humorist, 
Vázquez was born in Barcelona's seedy Barrio Chino neighbourhood just after the 
Spanish civil war. His father, a communist labourer, was imprisoned for five 
years after the war, and his anarcho-syndicalist mother was a seamstress. The 
author was passionate about Barcelona, especially its football club.

Vázquez won a first-class degree in philosophy and literature at the 
University of Barcelona, then took a job selling funeral insurance policies. A 
lifelong socialist, he joined the anti-Franco resistance in the student-based 
Popular Liberation Front and the Front Obrer Català, later becoming a leading 
member of the region's communist party, the Partit Socialista Unificat de 
Catalunya.

He began his journalistic career as a contributor to the Francoist newspaper 
Solidaridad Nacional, using opportunities such as an obituary for Ernest 
Hemingway as a platform for thinly veiled criticism of the regime. He also 
contributed extensively to the underground anti-fascist press.

In 1962, having taken part in a demonstration supporting a miners' strike in 
Galicia, the 23-year-old was jailed for four years by a military tribunal and 
tortured. An amnesty marking the death of Pope John XXIII freed him after 18 
months, during which he managed to write a textbook on journalism that is still 
in use. His young wife, the historian Anna Sallés, was also imprisoned. After 
release, blacklisted from jobs in journalism, he worked as a researcher for the 
encyclopaedia publisher Larousse.

Manolo, as friends called him, emerged as a poet in 1967 with A Sentimental 
Education. Most of his verses were collected in the 1990 volume, Memory And 
Desire. Despite the ideological gulf, he admired TS Eliot's work and translated 
some of it into Spanish.

The launch of the progressive news magazine Triunfo in 1966 provided a new 
outlet for his work. He wrote essays on Spanish culture, later polished into 
one of his major books, A Sentimental Chronicle Of Spain. It was also in 
Triunfo that he developed his sharp, acrid style as an assassin of pomp, 
bullshit and mediocrity. In addition he wrote for a number of consumer 
magazines.

His creation Pepe Carvalho was born with a history. Coming from far-flung 
Galicia to work in the murky big city, Barcelona, was a start. He was an 
erstwhile communist and a former CIA agent; a sly and sarcastic hustler; a 
social psychologist, with ambiguous morals; and a Rabelaisian gourmet with a 
weakness for a charming prostitute called Charo. The character developed as 
times changed, becoming an observer who unravels small stories while 
deciphering the big picture and seeing how history affects individual lives. 
His sidekick, Biscuter, was also a complex character. Vázquez likened the duo 
to Don Quixote and Sancho Panza.

The Carvalho novel Southern Seas (1978) won the Planeta prize, Spain's richest 
literary award. Vázquez earned many other garlands, including the National 
Prize in Letters, the French Prix International de Littérature Policière, the 
Raymond Chandler prize and several honorary doctorates.

His journalistic output was prodigious in quantity, and of a consistently high 
standard. Major European titles such as La Repubblica, Il Manifesto and Le 
Monde Diplomatique vied for his byline, along with La Vanguardia and the 
Catalan newspapers El Periódico and Avui, the risqué newsweekly Interviú and 
the Madrid daily El País.

Much of his journalism was collected in book form but still awaits 
translation, including Lunches With Troublesome People, A Polish Visitor In The 
Court Of King Juan Carlos and his reflections on the Pope's visit to Cuba. The 
Autobiography Of General Franco (1992) casts Vázquez as a ghost-writer for the 
dictator's memoirs. His commentaries on José María Aznar's government were so 
acerbic that the pious official condolences on his death must be taken with a 
pinch of salt.

Vázquez wrote six or seven newspaper columns at a time. When he went into 
hospital nine years ago for a quadruple heart bypass - "a spot of cardiac 
plumbing" as he put it - he had enough articles stacked up to meet each 
deadline during his treatment. He still has several books lined up. A recent 
one covered his dialogue with Subcomandante Marcos of Mexico's Zapatista 
movement. A forthcoming essay on Spain's conservative government, entitled 
Aznaridad (roughly, what it means to be Aznar), promises a deliciously scabrous 
hatchet job, and another poetry volume is due. But in the long run, his fame 
will rest on the gumshoe, Carvalho, whose final adventures take in the Afghan 
and Iraqi conflicts and last year's Bali massacre.

Most critics agree that none of Pepe Carvalho's screen incarnations to date 
have measured up to Vázquez's literary creation. The same applied to his other 
works. Vázquez declared after the premiere of Galíndez, based on his 
award-winning 1990 novel: "It's a film I could probably have considered quite 
good, except that I wrote the damn novel."

Although he wrote mainly in Castilian, he was looking forward to the 
publication of the whole Carvalho series in Catalan. Food was another passion. 
Vázquez wrote an authoritative history of Catalan cuisine, and in his Raval 
neighbourhood he was part of the furniture at the restaurant Casa Leopoldo.

He is survived by his wife, Anna, and their son, writer and film-maker Daniel. 

· Manuel Vázquez Montalbán, novelist, journalist and poet, born July 14 1939; 
died October 18 2003
 