
Several of Donald Trump’s cabinet nominees have not completed a full review to 
avoid conflicts of interest, the government’s ethics office has said, even as 
Republican senators move quickly to hold at least nine confirmation hearings 
next week.

'He'll take a chainsaw to it': is Obama's legacy strong enough to survive 
Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/barack-obama-legacy-donald-trump-healthcare-climate-change>
In a letter to Senate leaders, the director of the Office of Government Ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethics> (OGE) described the current status 
of several nominees, some of whom are billionaires and millionaires, in the 
ethics process and expressed concern about the lack of ethics reviews just days 
from committee hearings.

The Associated Press obtained a copy of Walter Shaub’s letter.

“During this presidential transition, not all of the nominees presently 
scheduled for hearings have completed the ethics review process,” he wrote, to 
Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer and Senator Elizabeth Warren, both 
Democrats.

“In fact, OGE has not received even initial draft financial disclosure reports 
for some of the nominees scheduled for hearings.”

A copy of the letter also was provided to Senate majority leader Mitch 
McConnell.

Republicans are intent on getting as many of the president-elect’s choices 
through the arduous confirmation process as quickly as possible so his team 
will be in place soon after Trump takes the oath of office on 20 January. 
Democrats have complained that the GOP is moving too fast and that they lack 
information about some of the wealthiest Americans ever to serve a president.

Schumer said in a statement on Saturday that the letter “makes crystal clear 
that the transition team’s collusion with Senate Republicans to jam through 
these cabinet nominees before they’ve been thoroughly vetted is unprecedented”.

The forms in question are financial disclosures certified by the ethics office 
and also written ethics agreements between the nominee and the office that 
identify potential conflicts of interest and the ways in which the nominee will 
resolve those conflicts. They are required by the Ethics in Government Act of 
1978, passed after the Watergate scandal.

One of the committees that has not yet received the forms is the Senate 
health, education, labor and pensions committee, which has scheduled a hearing 
next week for Betsy DeVos, Trump’s pick to lead the education department.

Committee aides said the panel held hearings for former education secretary 
Roderick Paige and former labor secretary Elaine Chao before they received the 
same forms in 2001, and that they received the documents days after each of 
those hearings. Both were confirmed to serve in President George W Bush’s 
cabinet.

That committee’s rules state that it cannot hold a vote on the nominee without 
the ethics form. In a statement, the Republican committee chairman, Lamar 
Alexander, said the committee would “follow the Golden Rule and use the same 
procedures for these nominees that we did in 2001 for President Bush’s nominees 
and in 2009 for President Obama’s nominees”.

The Senate commerce, science and transportation committee said it had not 
received the forms for Trump’s pick for commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, though 
a spokeswoman said they expected them soon.

Committee aides said they had received ethics forms for Senator Jeff Sessions, 
Trump’s pick for attorney general;Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson>, Trump’s choice for 
secretary of state; James Mattis, his pick for defense secretary; and Chao, his 
pick for transportation secretary.

Shaub did not list which of Trump’s cabinet choices had not turned in their 
disclosures. Other confirmation hearings next week include Representative Mike 
Pompeo, for director of the CIA; retired Marine Gen John Kelly for homeland 
security secretary; and Ben Carson for housing secretary.

Committees handling those nominations did not return a request for comment on 
the records.

In the letter, Shaub said the lack of disclosure has left some of the nominees 
“with potentially unknown or unresolved ethics issues” just before their 
scheduled hearings.

He said the intensive process of checking nominees and creating the agreements 
has been complicated by the packed Senate hearing schedule and Trump’s 
announcements of his future nominees before consulting the office for 
evaluation of ethics issues.

UK intelligence gave US key tipoff about Russian hacking, report says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/russia-us-election-hacking-uk-intelligence>
Traditionally, a president or president-elect’s picks have not been announced 
until the office has already cleared the nominees, Shaub said.

“In the past, the ethics work was fully completed prior to the announcement of 
nominees in the overwhelming majority of cases,” Shaub wrote.

Shaub was appointed by Barack Obama to a five-year term in 2013 to lead the 
office, which is an independent agency within the government. He worked at the 
office for several years before that, including during the Republican Bush 
administration. The office attracted attention in November when it tweeted 
congratulations to Trump for a “total divestiture” that he had not promised.

Under divestiture, an incoming federal official can sell off massive 
investments, defer paying capital gains and house the proceeds in Treasury 
bonds or diversified mutual funds.

But Trump had not then confirmed – and still hasn’t – that he will turn over 
any assets as part of a divestiture.

Trump is expected to discuss the future of his business at a news conference 
Wednesday, the same day as many of the confirmation hearings.
 