
Some days I can’t write. Some weeks I can’t write. It wouldn’t be such a 
problem if I could identify those days and weeks in advance. I’d cut my losses 
and go on a long run up the Thames. I’d get in abox set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/your-next-box-set> of Scandi crime 
or take the train to London for a gallery crawl. I’d paint or draw. But the 
realisation dawns only around lunchtime after I’ve been staring at a blank 
screen for hours, or filling it with laboured, unconvincing prose that will 
need to be deleted later.

The problem, I think, is that I’m not a terribly good writer. I am, however, a 
very persistent and bloody-minded editor (who, providentially, happens to be 
married to an even better editor). I’m also ruthless about culling anything 
that isn’t working. I throw away at least three quarters of what I write, then 
I draft and redraft what remains until hopefully, somewhere between versions 15 
and 25, something happens. That frisson you get when you read your words back 
and they seem to have been written by someone – or something – that is not 
quite you. A rightness like a heavy oak door clicking softly home on to its 
latch.

Consequently, when I sit down to write I know that most of what I produce will 
end up being discarded, and to write in spite of that knowledge takes more 
confidence than I possess on a regular daily basis. It’s not an efficient way 
of working and I wish it were easier but it’s been reasonably productive thus 
far so I’m stuck with it for the foreseeable future.

It could be worse. I could have a real job. I had one a very long time ago, 
taking phone orders for Ridgeway Cycles in Ealing, west London. I managed seven 
weeks of going to the same office every morning and being told what to do 
before I rang up and said that I had a broken leg and wouldn’t be coming in 
again. There were several significant turning points in my life as a writer. 
One of them was reading theSelected Poems of RS Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/06/rs-thomas-serial-obsessive-review>
 for O-level (the first time I had read anything literary that was as exciting 
as science). Another was realising that I was unemployable and had better find 
a job in which I was the only person telling me what to do.

On the days when I do have the requisite confidence I spend the morning 
working in a string of local cafes (I won’t name them, but two are thanked 
specifically inThe Pier Falls 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-pier-falls.html>). The hubbub makes me 
feel part of the busy world and it’s harder to procrastinate when other people 
are watching. I go back over the last few pages of what I’ve written the day 
before and comb and tweak and polish, re-immersing myself in that imaginary 
world in preparation for getting some new words down.

Top 10 funny first-person narrators
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/21/top-10-funny-first-person-narrators>
After four hours of concentrated thinking the marginal returns begin rapidly 
to diminish. The consequences are less disastrous, but writing is like surgery 
or flying a plane: you need to be firing on all cylinders or you need to be 
doing something else. So I head home to empty the washing machine, to paint or 
draw or maybe take that long run up the Thames.

I don’t think I would keep writing without being driven by a constant nagging 
voice at the back of my head, saying, over and over, “That wasn’t good enough … 
Write more, write better … Time is running out … ”. On the rare days when I’ve 
written 1,000 words I enter a state of profound contentment which I rarely feel 
at any other time. I close my eyes, let out a long, deep breath, listen to 
what’s going on in my mind and hear … absolutely nothing.
 