
In the grand scheme it matters not that Sam Curran’s leading edge found its 
way back to Arron Lilley to leave theSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> teenager four short of a superb 
maiden first-class century. It is a case of when, not if, he goes four better 
and he has the potential to score a lorryload of tons. What is more, Curran had 
done well by his team, extending Surrey’s lead with an innings of elegance and 
enterprise.

By day’s end he was not looking so glum, as Mark Footitt’s first five-wicket 
haul for the county then built on the position Curran engineered – a lead of 
193 – to leave Surrey close to their fourth County Championship win in seven 
games; a remarkable turnaround after winning none of the first seven. Heading 
into the final day,Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> 
have only two tail-end wickets to increase their lead of 10, having lost six 
for 36.

Mark Footitt eager to answer England’s longing for a left-arm quick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/mark-footitt-england-debut-sidebottom>
As the day wound down and the runs dried up, Footitt produced the sort of 
spell Surrey signed him, at significant cost, to bowl. It has, by his own 
admission, been a “frustrating first season” because he missed the early part 
through a side strain and had only 13 wickets in his first five games; it 
certainly seems longer than eight months ago that Footitt toured South Africa 
with England.

Here he was back to his best. Footitt has a wild action at the end of an 
angled run, flailing limbs and leap-less, and an early spell accounted for the 
key wicket, Haseeb Hameed, who edged behind checking a drive. Stuart Meaker 
then got one to rear at Liam Livingstone and Steven Davies (who has been 
offered a new two-year contract) took a smart catch at second slip.

In Surrey’s way stood Luke Procter, short on grace but big on nous. Twice he 
edged past his stumps off Meaker, and a Sam Curran lifter struck him nastily on 
the hand, but Procter straight-drove neatly and swept Gareth Batty powerfully. 
He was joined by the more dashing Alviro Petersen, and they shared 78, 
chiselling away at that lead.

But then Footitt returned. Petersen slapped straight to cover, Steven Croft 
was caught behind and Procter was trapped in front. After Batty accounted for 
Rob Jones and Jordan Clark in an over, Lilley edged Footitt to second slip. The 
spell – nagging of line and length but pacy too – ended 10‑4‑19‑4 (which 
included two Petersen cover-driven fours in the first over), and ensured Surrey 
will win this game.

Earlier Curran’s walk-off had been far more agonising. Two balls beforehand he 
had dumped Lilley into the stand for the third time. There had been a cut then 
a pull in the first over of the day, then a triptych of boundaries – an 
uppercut, a fine glance and a cover drive – to move from 49 to 61 in three Kyle 
Jarvis deliveries. There was also a convention-defying pull, not through 
square-leg or midwicket, but down the ground. The dismissal, the third of five 
for Lilley, one of four bowlers Curran had taken for a run a ball or better, 
came from nowhere.

Curran is 18 and looks not a day older. Yet here he was batting with the 
sophistication of a man who has made scores of centuries, not one seeking his 
first. He shared 70 with his brother Tom – who hit a pair of perfect straight 
drives off Jarvis, either side of the standing umpire’s ankles – then kicked on 
with Batty. Curran Jr is already an excellent bowler, who impressed the former 
coach Graham Ford as much with his temperament and the clarity of his plans as 
the wizardry in his wrists, but his batting, it seems, might just have a higher 
ceiling. Certainly No7 is part of the journey, not the destination, as he 
learns his game.
 