
Months before the Rev Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr delivered his 
famous I Have a Dream speech to hundreds of thousands of people gathered in 
Washington in 1963, he fine-tuned his civil rights message before a much 
smaller audience in North Carolina.

Reporters had covered King’s 55-minute speech at a high school gymnasium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/dec/24/arts.usa> in Rocky Mount on 27 
November 1962, but a recording wasn’t known to exist until English professor 
Jason Miller found an aging reel-to-reel tape in a town library. Miller played 
it in public for the first time Tuesday at North Carolina State University.

“It is part civil rights address. It is part mass meeting. And it has the 
spirit of a sermon,” Miller said. “And I never before heard Dr King combine all 
those genres into one particular moment.”

King used the phrase “I have a dream” eight times in his address to about 
2,000 people at Booker T Washington High School in Rocky Mount in easternNorth 
Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina>, eight months 
before electrifying the nation with the same words at the March on Washington.

He also referred to “the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave 
owners”, saying he dreamed they would “meet at the table of brotherhood”. On 
the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, King changed that to “sit down together at 
the table of brotherhood”. In both speeches, “let freedom ring” served as his 
rallying cry.

“It’s not so much the message of a man,” the Rev William Barber, president of 
the state chapter of the NAACP, said Tuesday. “It’s the message of a movement, 
which is why he kept delivering it. It proves once again that the ‘I have a 
dream’ portion was not a good climax to a speech for mere applause, but an 
enduring call to hopeful resistance and a nonviolent challenge to injustice.”

Martin Luther King: the story behind his 'I have a dream' speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/martin-luther-king-dream-speech-history>
Miller discovered the recording while researching Origins of the Dream, his 
book exploring similarities between King’s speeches and the poetry of Langston 
Hughes. His ah-ha moment came when he learned through a newspaper story about a 
transcript of the speech in state archives. If there’s a transcript, then there 
must be a recording, he thought.

He sent emails and made calls until he eventually heard back in the fall of 
2013 from the Braswell Public Library in Rocky Mount, where staff said a box 
with the recording had mysteriously appeared on a desk one day. Handwriting on 
the box described it as a recording of King’s speech, and said “please do not 
erase”.

Before listening to the recording, Miller confirmed that the 1.5-millimeter 
acetate reel-to-reel tape could be played safely. He brought it to an audio 
expert in Philadelphia, George Blood, who set it as close to its original 
levels as he could. Then Blood, whose clients include the Library of Congress, 
digitized the tape.

Three people who were in the audience that day in 1962 listened again Tuesday 
as the recording was played at the university’s James B Hunt Library. Herbert 
Tillman, who was about 17 years old at the time, recalled how happy they were 
to see and hear such an inspiring leader.
 