
“We meet tonight in a world transformed,” sighed Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> at the opening of her 
Guildhall speech. Too right, she thought to herself. Normally the lord mayor’s 
banquet was a total blingfest, but compared with Donald Trump’s lift doors it 
looked like a food bank for bankers. When the new US president had been elected 
the previous week, it hadn’t occurred to her just how special the “special 
relationship” was going to be.

Ninth. She had only been the ninth world leader the president-elect had 
bothered to ring. It was humiliating. What’s more, she wouldn’t even have made 
it into the top 10 if Angela Merkel hadn’t been sulking in her bathroom, 
refusing to take any calls, and someone had not explained to Trump that Piers 
Morgan wasn’t prime minister. Then there was bloodyNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> running around acting as if 
he was foreign secretary. Wasn’t Boris enough of a clown already? A world 
transformed indeed.

PM betraying national interest by rejecting my Trump offer, says Farage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/pm-betraying-national-interest-by-rejecting-my-trump-offer-says-farage>
The prime minister glanced down at her script. She had been going to tell 
everyone a few home truths about Brexit being a lot trickier than she had 
imagined and that the economy would be in for a bit of a bumpy ride over the 
next few years, but all that suddenly seemed too downbeat. Too austere. In this 
post-truth world, where the Vote Leavers could win a referendum by telling more 
lies than the Vote Remainers, and where a narcissistic sociopath could become 
US president by saying anything his supporters wanted to hear, why should she 
be the only politician left who bothered to tell the truth?

She slowly and deliberately ripped up her speech, scattering the fragments 
like confetti, and began to ad lib. “Britain is going to lead the way in 
globalisation,” she said. “But we’re going to have a very special kind of 
progressive, liberal globalisation that makes sure none of the people at the 
bottom of the heap gets left behind.” Theresa felt a reckless thrill. Surely 
everyone must realise there was no magic wand to globalisation, as Trump would 
find out soon enough when, having deported the 3 million Mexicans who might 
have done the job, he tried to persuade white working-class Americans to build 
his 2,000-mile wall on wages of $8 a day.


But no one did realise. Or if they did, they didn’t show it. No one expected a 
politician to talk sense any more. Most of her audience were more interested in 
checking their mobiles to find out what Nigel was going to do next. Emboldened 
by the indifference with which she was being received, Theresa went on to talk 
about free markets. So what if Trump was an old-school protectionist? So what 
if Britain now had just over two years to come to a trade deal with the EU or 
face playing by WTO rules? So long as she said free trade confidently enough 
and ignored the obvious counterfactuals, she had a chance of getting away with 
it.

On and on she went, only occasionally lapsing into unintended moments of 
veracity about the pig’s ear of Brexit. But even these did not jar too much. It 
didn’t matter if most of what she was saying was nonsense, so long as it was 
good, Panglossian triumphalist nonsense. “Britain is leading the way …” she 
concluded. But what was it leading the way in? “Britain is leading the way in 
fighting terrorism. Britain is leading the way in making a globalisation that 
works for everyone.” Britain was leading the way in everything, really.

There’s a tradition at the lord mayor’s banquet that the speaker is 
slow-handclapped on the way in to dinner. It saves time that way.
 