
I get an email from a young architect after the Observer has asked if we can 
photograph her and her partner for this article. She is uneasy and wants to 
know the point of the photograph. Would it not be better just to show their 
work? Another group had severe misgivings when they were invited to appear in
Vogue. This reticence is striking and rare; I have almost never met an 
architect who didn't want their face in print. A media-tart gene seems to be 
buried somewhere in the DNA of most members of the profession.

My mission is to uncover the brightest of the newest generation of British 
architects and I am also struck to find young architects who really are young. 
Almost all are at some point in their 20s, with one or two past 30.Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> is a slow-moving 
business, which makes a young architect – that is, someone of tender years with 
a distinctive achievement to their name – a much-quested beast. Prizes, 
exhibitions and books are created to lure them into the light. Usually the 
definition of youth is elastic: under 40 is a common limit, or maybe a bit 
over. I was once involved in such a project where an over-40 raged at being 
excluded. Couldn't we recognise, she said, that she was young at heart?

Indeed, many gathered here are so young that they are not technically 
architects, in that they have not completed every stage of the seven-year 
qualification process. But they have all designed structures that have been 
built and that are worth a detour, make ripples or are just plain good. Many 
are ephemera, temporary structures, things the PR world has called pop-ups, 
whose short lives leave an impression on the memory.

They have also all built things with their own hands. They have wielded 
hammers and saws and chivvied and hustled construction materials from unlikely 
sources. They have, in some cases, approached questions such as building 
regulations and health and safety with a degree of youthful naivety and got 
away with it. Architecture is hit harder than most professions by the bad 
times, to which they respond by going and making their own work.

One architect, Maria Smith, says they are the "Challenge Anneka generation", 
inspired by the 1990s TV series in which Anneka Rice performed seemingly 
impossible tasks in implausibly short periods of time. Another, Paloma 
Strelitz, says they are reacting to the over-computerised processes of big 
architectural offices. "We wanted to escape microstation lethargy," she says.

Another describes, with a shudder, her stint in the back-back-office of a 
well-known maestro, being asked to apply a parody of the house style to a 
cultural building in the far east. Work like this is disembodied, abstract and 
remote from the physical experience of buildings, and self-built projects are 
an antidote.

Of these, the most impactful is the Cineroleum, the cinema formed out of a 
former petrol station in Clerkenwell, London, for 15 screenings last autumn, 
before disappearing again. It is not exactly the work of a practice, but of a 
group of students "with no coherent plan", and who "can't decide on a name", 
whose precise numbers and hierarchy are hard to define. They needed people to 
sign cheques and planning application forms, but these were "whoever turned up 
at the time".

One of the group, Lewis Jones, says the project grew out of "the general idea 
that it would be nice to do something", followed by the discovery that in 
Britain 600 petrol stations faced closure last year. They decided it would be 
interesting to make "a provocation, a prototype", something that might generate 
ideas that could be applied to other examples of this widespread form of modern 
dereliction, the ex-garage. "We always thought we'd find one," says Jones, and 
eventually a property company called Tiger Developments offered them the one in 
Clerkenwell.

They considered different uses and eventually came up with a cinema because, 
according to another of their number, Paloma Strelitz, they liked the idea of 
having a performance in the street. Their construction budget was £6,500, 
financed by ticket sales, with three weeks to build it. They "invited friends 
to come and build and there were 50 people there by the end".Construction 
methods were basic and "for more demanding elements we just asked for loads of 
help".

They worked their networks: friends, friends' dads, sisters. They were given 
some Tyvek, a synthetic fabric usually used as a water barrier in house 
building, to make a curtain which, hanging off the canopy that once covered the 
pumps, enclosed the auditorium. Theatrical chandlers, Alasdair Flint and Gerry 
Jeatt, showed them how to work the rigging that would make the curtain rise and 
fall. Film director Mike Leigh gave them his blessing, saying: "It's fantastic 
to see young people who believe in cinema as a physical space that can do 
something positive for the local community."

There were alarms and panics. One night, the bar sold bloody marys without 
vodka and on another the building inspector threatened to close Cineroleum 
down, only declaring himself satisfied "as people were coming in and the 
popcorn machine was filling up". "We had no idea it was going to be 
successful," says Jones, but it inspired "a weird internet frenzy". When 
tickets went on sale online, they sold out almost instantly.

Cineroleum is not the first of its kind, but part of a lineage of temporary 
installations fuelled by the "power of enthusiasm". Some of its makers were 
inspired by working on Frank's Café, a bar that has appeared in the last two 
summers. Its makers were in turn inspired by working on another project, 
Southwark Lido, in 2008.

Frank's Café is the work of Lettice Drake, Henry Stringer and another Paloma, 
Gormley, who call themselves Practice Architecture. Gormley had run a community 
arts space when an undergraduate at Cambridge University and decided she would 
love to do a bar. Gallerist Hannah Barry gave her the opportunity to put one up 
near her gallery in Peckham, south London, on the unused top deck of a 
10-storey car park with what would be, in another location, a millionaire's 
penthouse views. She started work on it while studying for her finals, without 
telling her tutors.

Volunteers built it in 25 days, for a budget of £5,000. Scaffolding boards 
were bolted together to make columns and a fabric roof was supplied by a 
company that usually makes the drop-down canvas for the sides of lorries. It 
got rave reviews, at least from those critics who were not perturbed by the 
noisome lifts you had to take to get there and the sometimes happy-go-lucky 
service. A fashionable crowd and sponsors – Mont Blanc, Campari – moved in.

Practice Architecture was happy and grateful and also slightly disconcerted. 
Drake says: "When Frank's exploded there was a feeling of, 'Oh shit, we've 
ruined Peckham.'" Worried that they had become agents of gentrification, they 
tried to atone with a plan to turn the old ticket office at Peckham Rye 
station, a disused "ballroom-like" space, into a "community restaurant". But 
they realised that the local communities were capable of setting up restaurants 
without their help. "We were trying to invent an infrastructure that already 
existed and it wasn't our place to do it. It felt patronising and dodgy."

They want to "make things with a social conscience", but are still feeling 
their way as to what this might mean. They have no imminent intention to 
complete their studies, but they don't have five-year business plan either. 
They are exploring what might happen next. They have built a 70-seat, open-air, 
wooden amphitheatre at Roche Court, near Salisbury, and a temporary art library 
with Hannah Barry is in the air.

Compared with the fluid group behind Cineroleum, and the slightly more 
firmed-upPractice Architecture <http://www.practicearchitecture.co.uk/>, Studio 
Weave <http://www.studioweave.com/> is almost venerable. Its partners, Je Ahn 
and Maria Smith, have just got their registrations as architects and they have 
a history of built projects going back nearly five years. It started when Ahn 
and Smith, then still students, created a project called 140 Boomerangs for the 
London Festival of Architecture in 2006. They invented a system of identical 
pieces of curved wood, which could be made into benches, play structures and 
pavilions.

The project caught the eye of the City of London's planners, ever eager for 
small, softening gestures amid the brute finance of the Square Mile, and the 
boomerangs started to adorn aprons of granite outside office blocks. They have 
also completed The Longest Bench, a wiggly thing in reclaimed timber on the 
beach at Littlehampton that can seat 300 people, and a pair of decorative 
shelters, called Freya and Robin, at Kielder Water in Northumberland. They have 
filled the courtyard of Somerset House, London, with a temporary installation 
of giant chairs, installed a charred wooden pyramid (for sitting on and looking 
at) at the Glastonbury festival and won a competition to make "a secret 
landscape garden" in the centre of Blackburn. They have volunteered to help 
find a site for a secondary school in Camden, London, in what might possibly be 
an example of that elusive thing, the "big society".

Their style is sweet. A jellybean dispenser and freshly made mince pies greet 
me on arrival at their office and they write little stories to generate ideas 
for their projects ("Not so long ago, not so very far from here, there lived a 
beautiful lady named Freya. Freya loved flowers…"). The Littlehampton bench is 
inspired by a charm bracelet. They have hit a winning streak with local 
authorities in search of public space improvements, for whom child-friendly 
charm is just what they want. They press some of the same buttons as the hugely 
successfulThomas Heatherwick <http://www.heatherwick.com/>.

It can get, at times, a teensy-weensy bit too icky-wicky, but their projects 
are redeemed by the quality with which they build. They do delightful things 
with gold-coloured finishes and plywood cut into elaborate tree-like curves. 
Their structures are polished and refined, compared with the necessarily 
rough-hewn finishes of structures thrown up with voluntary labour in a few 
weeks.

Also impressively organised is Feilden Fowles <http://www.feildenfowles.co.uk/>
, which, while still not fully qualified, has an orderly, professional-looking 
studio in east London deep inside an old Hackney factory, its walls covered 
with environmentally aware sheep-wool insulation. It has built a house in Wales 
where the materials come from within two miles of the site, including reused 
slate and larch grown nearby. The two partners, Edmund Fowles and Fergus 
Feilden, are keen to reel off the impressive data on how little carbon it 
consumes. They built part of it themselves and like to talk about the 
characters of different timbers.

"We didn't know we would have an office a year ago," they say. Now they have a 
studious-looking band of employees and a clutch of projects that includes 
another sustainable house in Wales, just granted planning permission on a 
sensitive site. Feilden Fowles is also remodelling a secondary school in Bath, 
a project being carried out under the protective wing of Feilden Clegg Bradley, 
the practice set up by Fergus's late father, Richard. Its buildings look both 
confident and thoughtful. They have an air of calm enthusiasm and ambition and 
look very much like a successful practice in the making.

Most grown up of all is HAT Projects <http://www.hatprojects.com/>, a 
Colchester-based practice run by Tom Grieve and Hana Loftus. It has a 
substantial, serious building due to open this year, the £4mJerwood Gallery 
in Hastings <http://www.jerwoodgallery.org/>. This aims to be "not too 
shocking, not the star, not dominating", but "an environment in which to 
experience and understand art". It stands next to one of Hastings's marvels, 
the ranks of black wooden towers built to serve the fishing fleet. The dark, 
ceramic cladding of the Jerwood aims to respect its neighbour but not mimic it. 
It is a cultural temple, but on the beach, so it has to be civic and informal 
at the same time.

They talk about "carefully calibrated" spaces like longer-established 
architects such as Tony Fretton, for whom Grieve once worked, but they are also 
keen to do more than just design buildings. Their work for Jerwood included 
finding the best location out of a number of potential towns, and consulting 
residents, which, as there were some vociferous objectors, was not entirely 
smooth.

Loftus also worked at the Rural Studio in Alabama, where architecture students 
have to build real projects, in her case, a house costing $20,000, for local 
communities. She, too, has the building bug: "There's a joy in making something 
and you can lose it too easily."

These five groups of architects do not constitute a movement. They do not have 
a polemic, a style or a grand theory. But they share a mood, of getting back to 
the basic pleasures of building. They are opposed to the computerised, 
corporate, compartmentalised ways big buildings are built now.

In building almost-free structures, it helps, it must be said, if you come 
from backgrounds sufficiently comfortable that making a living is not an 
overriding priority. As it now costs many tens of thousands of pounds to train 
to be an architect, and without much prospect of highly paid work at the end of 
it, there's a danger that architecture like this could become a delightful, 
middle class game.

There's also a danger that the idea of the pop-up, which is being rapidly 
commercialised by gin companies and smoothie-makers, becomes a charming 
distraction from the big, ugly buildings that go up without anyone much 
noticing until it is too late. It's not a good thing if architecture is always 
seen as a form of volunteer work, that costs almost nothing and requires only 
the most basic details.

But these young architects can't be expected to take on all the economic 
forces that surround them. Their overwhelming desire is to do stuff and to do 
it in a way that anyone, whether in Littlehampton, Alabama, Hastings or 
Peckham, can enjoy. It's not a bad way to start.
 