
Australian women’s cricket captain Meg Lanning hit the highest score of this 
season’s WBBL, powering the Melbourne Stars to a seven-wicket win on Saturday 
over the Sydney Sixers.

Stars skipper Lanning smashed an unbeaten 66 off 48 balls to steer her side 
side to victory in Melbourne with almost three overs to spare.

Also on Saturday, the Perth Scorchers, Adelaide Strikers and Hobart Hurricanes 
joined the Stars on two wins for the season, defeating the Brisbane Heat, 
Sydney Thunder and Melbourne Renegades respectively.

Several New Zealanders were also among the runs, but it was Lanning who scored 
highest. Chasing 123, the Stars lost two early wickets to the Sixers’ South 
African opening bowler Marizanne Capp, but Lanning put on 63 with Hayley Jensen 
and and an unbroken 47 with Katie Mack.

Opening bowlers Emma Kearney and Danielle Hazell did most damage to the 
Sixers, each taking three wickets. The Sixers were 3-5 inside three overs 
during which pace bowler Kearney dismissed in-form Sixers skipper Ellyse Perry 
and South African star Dane van Niekerk for ducks and England spinner Hazell 
removed Alyssa Healy.

Kearney later returned to claim the wicket of Ashleigh Gardner, who had added 
80 in 11 overs with New Zealander Sara McGlashan, who top-scored with 40.

Another Kiwi in the runs was Adelaide’s Sophie Devine, who scored 43 in the 
Strikers’ six-wicket win over defending champions the Thunder. Devine passed 40 
for the third time in as many innings in this season’s WBBL, as the Strikers 
reached their target at Sydney’s Howell Oval with 13 balls left after a good 
collective bowling effort limited the Thunder to 5-102.

Kiwi Amy Satterthwaite produced a fine all-round double in the Hurricanes’ 
three-run win over the Renegades in Bendigo. She scored an unbeaten 45 out of 
4-133 and took 2-22, denying the Renegades the 11 runs they needed in the final 
over, despite a fine unbeaten 51 from Kris Britt.

The Scorchers cruised to an eight-wicket win over the Heat at the WACA. 
Southern Stars batter Nicole Bolton scored 46 not out for the Scorchers. Her 
unbroken third-wicket stand of 68 with Heather Graham took Perth to their 
target of 102 with almost three overs to go.
 