
Donald Trump has called Angela Merkel’s open door policy to refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/merkel-rejects-calls-to-change-germanys-refugee-policy-after-attacks>
 a “catastrophic mistake”, which he said Germany would pay for.

Related: Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great thing' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>

In his first interview with mainland European media, Trump told the tabloid 
Bild that while he had “great respect” for the chancellor, calling her 
“magnificent” and a “fantastic chief”, she had made an “utterly catastrophic 
mistake by letting all these illegals into the country”, according to a 
translation from the German version of his interview.

 “Do you know, letting all these people in, wherever they come from. And no 
one knows where they come from at all. You will find out, you’ve had a clear 
impression of that,” he said, referring to the December attack in Berlin in 
which 12 people were killed when a lorry driven by an asylum seeker from 
Tunisia careered into a Christmas market. “So I am of the opinion that she made 
a catastrophic mistake, a very serious mistake.”

When asked whether he would be willing, like his predecessor Barack Obama, to 
support Merkel’s re-election when she stands for a fourth term as chancellor 
next autumn, he said: “I respect her, I like her. But I don’t know her so I 
can’t say anything as to who I might support - in the case that I would support 
anyone.”

In the simultaneous interview with Germany’s Bild and the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
, he was pressed as to whether he would repeat his claim that Merkel’s refugee 
policy towards Syrians was “insane”. Trump replied: “I think that it was not 
good. I think that it was a big mistake for Germany. In particular Germany. 
Germany was (in earlier times) one of the strictest countries in the world 
regarding immigration rules.”

He said he would meet Merkel. “I respect her and I like her, but I think it 
was a mistake,” he said. “People make mistakes, but I think it was a really big 
mistake.

“I think we should have set up security zones in Syria. That would have been 
considerably cheaper. And the gulf states should have had to pay for them. 
After all, they have money like hardly anyone else has. The whole thing would 
have been considerably cheaper than the trauma thatGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is now going through. I would have 
said: create security zones in Syria.
“Look, this whole thing should never have happened. Iraq should never have 
been attacked in the first place, right? That was one of the worst decisions, 
possibly the worst decision that has ever been made in the history of our 
country. We managed to unleash something; it was like throwing stones into a 
bees’ nest. And now, it is one of the biggest screw-ups of all time.

“I have just looked at something … Oh, I should not show you it at all, 
because it’s secret - but I have just taken a look at Afghanistan. If you look 
at the Taliban there, they’re just getting bigger and bigger and bigger every 
year. And you ask yourself ‘what’s going on there?’”

The president-elect also suggested that travel restrictions on Europeans 
wanting to come to the US could be tightened. “That could happen, but we’ll 
see. I mean, we’re talking here about parts of Europe, parts of the world and 
parts ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, where we have 
problems., where they come in and cause problems. I don’t want to have these 
problems,” he said.

Asked if he intended to move the US embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to 
Jerusalem, a move that would be hugely controversial, Trump said: “We will see.”

It was put to Trump that Merkel and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, 
know each other well, that he speaks fluent German and she speaks fluent 
Russian. He was asked which of the two he trusted more. “First and foremost, I 
trust both of them,” he said.

Asked if he understood why eastern Europeans might fear Putin and Russia, 
Trump responded: “Of course. Indeed. I know that. I mean, I understand what’s 
going on there. I’ve been saying for a long time, Nato has problems. It is 
obsolete because, for a start, it was created many many years ago and secondly, 
because countries don’t pay what they should pay.”

Trump also told Bild that the US would impose a border tax of 35% on cars that 
BMW, a German company, plans to build at a new plant in Mexico and export to 
the US.


The US president-elect said BMW should build its new car factory in the US 
because this would be much better for the company.

A spokeswoman for the carmaker said a BMW Group plant in San Luis Potosí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
 would build the BMW 3 Series starting from 2019, with the output intended for 
the world market. The plant in Mexico will be an addition to existing 3 Series 
production facilities in Germany and China.

The US president-elect went on to say that Germany was a great car producer, 
borne out by Mercedes-Benz cars being a frequent sight in New York, but there 
was no reciprocity. Germans were not buying Chevrolets at the same rate, he 
said, making the business relationship an unfair one-way street. He said he was 
an advocate of free trade but not at any cost.


The BMW spokeswoman said the company was “very much at home in the US,” 
employing directly and indirectly nearly 70,000 people in the country.

Asked in the interview conducted on Friday in New York city, whether there was 
anything typically German about him, Trump, whose grandfather was German, said: 
“I like orderliness. I like it when things are dealt with in an orderly way. 
That’s what the Germans are quite well-known for. But I also like order and I 
like strength.”

 