
My kitchen is ... comfortable. I have a bar counter with stools, so I can chat 
with my guests while cooking. I listen to music, drink nice wine and take 
plenty of time. It’s the opposite of my working environment and I love it.

My favourite kitchen tool is ... a sharp knife. As a professional chef I am so 
used to working with razor-sharp knives that to come home and try to cook with 
a dull one is practically impossible. I currently live with another chef and we 
both bring our knives home when we want to cook.

My storecupboard staple is ... anchovies. I like to chop them very finely and 
add to dressings, sauces, potatoes and pasta dishes.

When I’m starving I ... make pan con tomate: I grill bread and rub it 
vigorously with garlic and olive oil, cover it with sliced tomatoes, more olive 
oil, sea salt, ripped herbs and black pepper. I never get tired of eating this. 
Also, I love a cup of bone broth when I’m exhausted after work. My girlfriend 
picks up marrow bones and chicken feet from the butcher’s once or twice a week 
and simmers them slowly with vegetables for many hours. It does wonders for the 
stomach and soul!

My culinary inspirations are ... Jane Grigson and Fergus Henderson. Their 
recipes are always delicious without being too challenging. I’ve been buying 
cookery books in different countries for 10 years and on the rare occasion that 
I’m at home with nothing to do I’ll spend an hour or so on my sofa looking 
through books that I haven’t read in a while.

Ravinder Bhogal’s kitchen: ‘I don’t believe in secrets in the kitchen’ | 
Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/ravinder-bhogal-jikoni-restaurant-london-kitchen-encounters>
My best-kept kitchen secret is ... using acidity to balance dishes. It’s 
something I learned while working at In de Wulf restaurant in Belgium. We would 
make our own vinegars there either by infusing basic vinegars with other 
things, or completely from scratch. Now, whenever I have herbs, flowers or 
vegetables that are limp or vegetable trimmings that I have no use for, I throw 
them into vinegar and let them infuse. If I’m peeling apples, pears or quinces, 
I add sugar and water to the cores and peelings and let it turn naturally into 
vinegar, then strain it and put it into bottles. It’s a wonderful way to use up 
food waste that would otherwise be destined for the recycling bin.

Everything tastes better with ... sweet cooked onions, except in desserts ... 
although I may be wrong – something for us to try one day!

When I go shopping I ... tend to buy just what I need for that one meal, as I 
know I probably won’t be eating at home for another week.

For dinner tonight ... I’m making spiralised butternut squash with browned 
butter, apple vinegar, toasted hazelnuts and grated parmesan. I’m also making a 
salad with sprouting broccoli, rocket, cherry tomatoes and feta cheese. I might 
throw a bit of anchovy in there somewhere.

 * Merlin Labron-Johnson is the Michelin-star head chef of Portland 
<http://portlandrestaurant.co.uk/> and Clipstone  
<http://clipstonerestaurant.co.uk/>restaurants in London. @labronjohnson 
<https://twitter.com/labronjohnson>  