
All critics have a secret self that enjoys the unashamedly lowbrow. For me, 
it's a love of anything laced with innuendo. So imagine my delight when, 
pottering around the Isle of Wight in August, I came across a tiny, perfectly 
formed museum in Ryde devoted to the saucy seaside postcards of Donald McGill: 
that great artist who created a whole world out of randy men, flighty women, 
tight-fisted Scotsmen and befuddled vicars.

You could say McGill's universe is full of caricatures. But what I love is his 
ability to manipulate the English language so that every word acquires a 
potentially filthy meaning. It's a tradition that you can trace through Max 
Miller, Ken Dodd, the Carry On movies and I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue; and it's 
certainly on lavish display in Ryde. My all-time favourite McGill card shows a 
man going into a newsagents and asking the rosy-cheeked girl behind the counter 
"Do you keep stationery, miss?" To which she replies, "Well, I wriggle about a 
bit sometimes."

McGill was a superb draughtsman with an ear for the slippery power of 
language. He also appealed to our racing imaginations. With the Blitz back in 
the news, it's fascinating to be reminded of the way wartime blackouts 
unleashed English sexiness. In Ryde there's a whole series of entirely black 
McGill cards adorned with white speech bubbles. One runs "Is this Selfridges?", 
to which the answer is "No, it's mine." This is actually close kin to an old 
Max Miller joke where a girl, sitting on a man's lap in a packed train and 
reaching a blacked-out station, asks: "Is this Cockfosters?", to which he 
replies, "I don't know, lady, does it matter?"

Some may find all this too silly or sexually incorrect for words. But 
McGill, who died in 1962, was a product of a time, and a music-hall theatrical 
tradition, in which sex was seen as something thrillingly naughty. Today we can 
celebrate the fact that comedy, not least stand-up, has been liberated from 
past restraints. But, even if McGill's cards evoke a lost world, they confirm 
that a filthy mind is a joy for ever.

Next week: Brian Logan
 