
Toby Roland-Jones embodies so much of what makes this Middlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> side, who took another step 
towards a first County Championship title in 23 years, such a tough nut to 
crack. He provides roistering lower-order runs, never drops a catch, while his 
seam bowling – ever more like that of his director of cricket, Angus Fraser, is 
naggingly threatening.

It was Roland-Jones’s bowling that wrestled control back Middlesex’s way after 
a sloppy morning during which they lost their last seven wickets for 69 to be 
bowled out for 327, claiming just three batting points when they had designs on 
five.

After lunch, he and Tim Murtagh were straight on their immaculate length with 
three maidens, then Roland-Jones found a beauty – lifting from a length and 
nipping away from its off-stump line – to dismiss Haseeb Hameed for the second 
duck of his first-class career. After Luke Procter edged Murtagh to gully, 
Roland-Jones dismissed Alviro Petersen, caught down the leg side, and Steven 
Croft, stumps splattered, in the same over to leaveLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> eight for four.

Jos Buttler briefly resisted, with two delicious cover drives, but was soon 
gone in the same fashion as Petersen, albeit to an even better catch from John 
Simpson: 32 for five, and Roland-Jones had four of them.

County cricket: Yorkshire v Somerset, Lancashire v Middlesex and Sussex v 
Worcestershire – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/13/county-cricket-yorkshire-somerset-lancashire-middlesex-sussex-worcs-live>
As the light worsened and forecast rain arrived – the players took an early 
tea at 2.50pm and were gone for good by 4.30pm, 28 overs down – the impressive 
Rob Jones, in his third Championship game, dug in in the company of Liam 
Livingstone, a likely Lions tourist this winter, to steady Lancashire’s ship 
with a stoic and at times stylish stand of 70.

Middlesex’s bowling was again impressive but the light often dictated whether 
pace could be bowled and Lancashire – in very real need of points in a vicious 
relegation scrap – have plenty more battling to do, as they sit 225 behind. 
Jones, particularly, with a sound defence and an elegant drive, looks a batsman 
for a crisis.

Middlesex’s plan had been to bat once, and bat big, but the morning session 
had seen them forgo a match-shaping first‑innings total. As Dawid Malan became 
the fourth batsman to reach 50 and not kick on, they lost three for 10, and 
despite James Franklin trying to hold things together, Simon Kerrigan ended up 
with four for 80 as the tail nudged and nurdled. Lancashire had improved plenty 
from the first day, but Middlesex were uncharacteristically careless.

Should Middlesex claim full bowling points and win here, and Somerset complete 
victory against Yorkshire – although no one should discount a fightback from 
the double champions – the leaders will need just four points against Yorkshire 
next week. If they were to do that, they may well view Roland-Jones’s spell – 
just like Nick Gubbins’s gritty 75 from the wreckage of none for three at Trent 
Bridge last week – as a defining moment.
 