
Mikhail Bulgakov <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mikhail-bulgakov> was 33 
years old, a former doctor and an up-and-coming playwright and short-story 
writer when he invited a group of people to a reading of his new novella, The 
Heart of a Dog. He had held a similar soiree the previous year to launch 
another novella, The Fatal Eggs, and though the earlier reading had gone well, 
it had made him anxious enough to muse in his diary: “Is it a satire? Or a 
provocative gesture? … I’m afraid that I might be hauled off … for all these 
heroic feats.”

His premonition proved right. Among the 50 or so people who gathered in the 
Moscow apartment in March 1925 to be introduced to Sharik, the humanoid dog, 
and the arrogant surgeon who created him, was an informer who took violent 
exception to his send-up of Soviet society. Bulgakov’s flat was searched and 
the manuscript seized. Though it was returned to him four years later, and was 
widely read in samizdat, it would not be officially published in Russian until 
1987, nearly half a century after Bulgakov had died.

Sharik makes his first appearance as a mangy mongrel, cringing in a blizzard 
after being douched with boiling water by a cook. Out of a brightly lit shop 
walks a man (“definitely a citizen, not a comrade, or perhaps even – most 
likely – a gentleman”) with a nasty smell of hospital and cigars. Philip 
Philipovich also smells of the sausage he has just bought to lure Sharik back 
to his apartment, a seven-room suite in a building that has been requisitioned 
by a committee of zealous young revolutionaries.


This opening scene conveys so much about the early Soviet Union as Bulgakov 
saw it: the State Food Store selling cheap horsemeat sausage, the middle-aged 
professional “gentleman” hanging on to his privileges in an edifice that has 
been turned over to a proletarian command which struggles to keep the boilers 
working and the galoshes from being stolen from the communal hallway.


Into the middle of it all bounds the cat-hating Sharik, who literally shatters 
the glass between the two orders of society before being hauled on to an 
operating table and subjected to Philip Philipovich’s latest experiment, 
described in gruesome medical detail: to see what happens when a dog is 
implanted with the testicles and pituitary glands of a human.


The creature that emerges from the operation walks on two legs, drinks, 
smokes, and is “familiar with every known Russian swearword”. Issued with 
identity papers in the name of Polygraph Polygraphovich Sharikov, he is placed 
“in charge of the Moscow Cleansing Department responsible for eliminating 
vagrant quadrupeds (cats, etc)”, but not before he has stolen from gentlemen 
and comrades alike, brought vagrants in from the street and attempted to have 
his wicked way with the women of the house while they slept.


A year before the fateful reading of The Heart of a Dog, Trotsky 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leon_Trotsky> published an essay collection, 
Literature and Revolution, which argued for a people’s art capable of creating 
“a higher social biologic type, or … superman”.

But if Bulgakov the political commentator was sending up Soviet theories of 
human perfectibility though communism, Bulgakov the former physician was also 
poking fun at the western Europeans who were flocking to Paris-based celebrity 
quackSerge Voronoff  
<http://www.jameslefanu.com/articles/history-of-medicine-the-monkey-gland-secret>
in the belief that he could restore virility with an injection of monkey 
glands. These are the crumple-necked ladies, the men with green hair or heads 
as bald as dinner plates who Sharik woozily observes stripping off in 
Philipovich’s consulting room in the hope that their old money will buy them 
new vigour.


In Bulgakov’s own formulation, his novella is both satire and provocative 
gesture. Its genius is that its satirical energy and its provocations are so 
multi-directional that, 92 years and many regime changes later, it still seems 
freshly defiant.

It is also a riotous science-fiction comedy that anticipates the current vogue 
for political dystopias, while harnessing the gothic archetype of the 
overreaching scientist to the task of lampooning vanities that are too easily 
recognised in the age of cosmetic surgery and cryonics.

In some senses Bulgakov himself was Philipovich, the sceptical dandy in a 
communist house. He didn’t publish another novel in his lifetime, polishing and 
re-polishing his masterpiece The Master and Margarita until he died. But 
intriguingly, after some time in the doldrums, he seems to have had a special 
dispensation from Stalin to keep working as a dramaturg and playwright. I like 
to think of his life as a triumph of passive resistance.


 * The Heart of a Dog is available from Vintage in Michael Glenny’s 1968 
translation <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-of-a-dog.html> and from 
Penguin Classics in Andrew Bromfield’s 2007 version. Bromfield’s is the pacier 
of the two, but Glenny has fun with the officialese.  