
My father, Miles Vaughan Williams, who has died aged 98, received global 
recognition for his work on heart rhythm problems. He realised that these were 
the commonest cause of sudden death, and his main contribution was to put the 
pharmacological treatment of arrhythmias on a firm scientific basis. He 
conducted pioneering work on beta-blockers, which have saved countless lives 
since. The Vaughan Williams index of anti-arrhythmic drugs – established in 
1970 – is still used today. His work was recognised with an honorary fellowship 
of the American College of Clinical Pharmacology and an honorary doctorate from 
the Sorbonne.

Son of Stella (nee Pressey) and Arthur Vaughan Williams, he was born in 
Bangalore, India. His father, first cousin of the composer Ralph Vaughan 
Williams, was an engineer charged with managing all the steam engines of the 
Madras and Southern Mahratta railway. Aged six, Miles was sent to Crowthorne 
Towers prep school in Berkshire, then to Wellington college. He went to Wadham 
College, Oxford, in 1937 to read classics and philosophy.

A conscientious objector, he drove ambulances during the London blitz, then 
joined the Volunteer Ambulance Service and was posted to Northumberland with 
the Durham Light Infantry, acting both as ambulance driver and medical 
assistant. These experiences changed the course of his career and he began 
attaining the necessary qualifications to read medicine at Oxford, teaching 
himself chemistry, physics and biology with the help of local libraries. After 
completing his studies, he became a leading pharmacologist and in 1955 was 
appointed the first science fellow at Hertford. He taught medical students at 
Wadham and Hertford Colleges.

He found Hertford College to be “a complete slum” and decided to improve it, 
without dispensation from his other duties. He led a programme of rebuilding 
that transformed the college in the 1960s, providing hot and cold water to 
rooms that had previously relied on jugs of hot water delivered by college 
servants every morning. His pièce-de-résistance was his design for the Holywell 
Quadrangle, which was then created by the architectPeter Shepheard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/apr/15/guardianobituaries.obituaries>.

All income earned from pharmaceutical company consultancies was put into trust 
and remained unused until his retirement, when it became the Vaughan Williams 
Fund. This provides assistance to Hertford clinical medical students, including 
grants to work in the developing world.

Miles was keen to keep fit and enjoyed twice-weekly rounds of golf into his 
96th year. He was persuaded by younger golfing friends to write a book 
describing his fitness regime.You Don’t Need a Gym 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Dont-Need-Miles-Vaughan-Williams/dp/0956371507> was 
published in 2010.

He married Marie (nee Londés de Payen de L’Hôtel de Lagarde) in 1956. She 
survives him, along with their three children, Dominique, Roland and me, and 
two grandchildren, Hugh and Matthew.
 