
African American men from around the US gathered on the National Mall in 
Washington on Saturday, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Million Man 
March and call for policing reforms and changes in black communities.

Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louis-farrakhan>, who led the original 
march, lead an anniversary gathering at the Capitol called the Justice or Else 
march.

“I plan to deliver an uncompromising message and call for the government of 
the United States to respond to our legitimate grievances,” Farrakhan said in a 
statement.

Attention has been focused on the deaths of unarmed African American men and 
boys since the shootings of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin in 2012 in Florida and 
18-year-old Michael Brown in 2014 in Ferguson, Missouri. Deaths of unarmed 
black males at the hands of law enforcement officers have inspired protests 
under the “Black Lives Matter” title.

Family members of several men and women killed in such encounters with police 
encouraged the crowd to continue to speak out against police misconduct. The 
families asked the marchers not to forget the names of Michael Brown, Trayvon 
Martin and Sandra Bland – who died in disputed circumstances in a Texas jail 
earlier this year, after a traffic stop – and not be silent about their deaths.

Martin’s mother, Sybrina Fulton, said: “We will not continue to stand by and 
not say anything anymore.”

The original march, on 16 October 1995, brought hundreds of thousands to 
Washington to pledge to improve their lives, their families and their 
communities. Women, whites and other minorities were not invited then, but 
organizers said all were welcome on Saturday and that they expected to get 
hundreds of thousands of participants.

The National Park Service (NPS) estimated the attendance at the original march 
to be around 400,000, but subsequent counts by private organizations put the 
number at 800,000 or higher. The NPS has refused to give crowd estimates on 
Mall activities since.

President Barack Obama, who attended the first Million Man March, was 
scheduled to be in California on Saturday.
 