
Australian paceman Mitchell Johnson is adamant he can still get rival batsmen 
hopping as he prepares for his long-awaitedBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> debut for the Perth 
Scorchers this summer.

Johnson received offers from several other BBL franchises but says the only 
team he wanted to play for were the Scorchers.

The 34-year-old was unable to play a single BBL fixture over the past five 
years because of international commitments and he’ll enter this summer’s 
edition short of match practice after playing just three IPL games since 
retiring from the Test arena last November.


Australia coach Lehmann re-signs but likely to quit after 2019 World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/australia-coach-lehmann-re-signs-but-likely-to-quit-after-2019-world-cup>
But the two-time ICC cricketer of the year is confident he still has the pace 
and menace that once made him the best in the world.

“In the IPL, in the nets, I was bowling good pace. The guys were jumping 
around, which was good,” Johnson said on Tuesday.

“As soon as I get a sniff of the bounce, I get pretty fired up.

“I got a text from Mike Hussey just saying, ’Give it to the young blokes, 
don’t give an inch’. So he wants me to go pretty hard as well.”

Johnson is set to become the WACA’s cult hero this summer following the shock 
departure of fan-favourite Brad Hogg to the Melbourne Renegades.

It’s a role Johnson is keen to embrace – and he’s looking forward to renewing 
his friendly banter with Hogg.

“I’m not quite his age,” Johnson joked of 45-year-old Hogg.

“Every time I come up against him in the IPL, he’d say, ‘I’ll leave my stumps 
open, you just aim at the stumps’.

“And I used to say, ‘Mate, I can’t hit the stumps, I’m following wherever you 
go’.

“It’s a little bit disappointing he’s gone but it’s a business.”

Scorchers coach Justin Langer played a key role in convincing Johnson to play 
in the BBL this summer.

He’s urging Johnson to have fun and enjoy his stint.

Johnson’s other role will be to mentor the side’s younger bowlers, including 
Joel Paris and Jason Behrendorff, as he sets his sights on a coaching career.

The left-arm quick has only signed a one-season deal but left the door ajar to 
play on beyond that.

“A lot of the guys talk about how entertaining it is and how much fun they 
have playing it,” Johnson said.

“So you never know. I might actually really enjoy it and want to play a bit 
more.”

Johnson has played 73 Tests, 153 one-dayers and 30 T20s for Australia, making 
him a strong acquisition for the Scorchers.
 