
Mitchell Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson> struck 
Virat Kohli on the helmet in a short-pitched assault on day three of the first 
Test.


Johnson delivered a sharp three-over spell at the end of the morning session, 
peppering opener Murali Vijay with some short balls before the paceman had him 
caught behind.

But the next delivery shook up both Kohli and Johnson as the left-armer found 
the badge of Kohli’s helmet.

With the tragic death of batsman Phillip Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-hughes> still fresh in all the players’ 
minds, the Australian fielders rushed to the stand-in Indian captain’s aid.

But Kohli quickly got on with business, shooing them away to continue his 
innings. India are 196-3 with Kohli 36 not out. Cheteshwar Pujara made 73 
before being bowled by Nathan Lyon.

Australian skipper Michael Clarke declared before the start of play at 
Adelaide Oval on Thursday, with Steve Smith finishing 162 not out and Australia 
boasting a total of 7-517.

Clarke fielded despite the flare-up of his chronic injury, shifting out of the 
slips to better manage the three degenerative discs in his lower back.


The captain had to wait until the eighth over for Ryan Harris to engineer the 
first breakthrough.


Shikhar Dhawan was out driving for 25, the inside edge disturbing his stumps.


Harris, playing his first Test since undergoing major knee surgery in March, 
delivered an outstanding opening spell.


The 35-year-old maintained a consistent off-stump line, finishing with 1-6 
from five overs to tie down the tourists.


Australia put down two tough chances.


The most costly was the flying edge offered by Vijay on 11 in the 14th over.


Smith and Mitch Marsh, fielding at second and third slip respectively in a 
reshuffled cordon due to Clarke’s exit, both flung out their arms.


Marsh got his fingertips to the leather but couldn’t reel it in.


A diving Brad Haddin also failed to hang onto an inside edge from Dhawan when 
the left-hander was on one in the third over.


Dhawan struck three boundaries in the same over from Johnson and attacked the 
new ball until he was dismissed by Harris.


Vijay and Pujara continued to play positive cricket, with their 81-run 
partnership boosted by some swift running between the wickets.
 