
Speculation over Mitt Romney's choice of vice-presidential running mate 
intensified on Monday as the presumptive Republican nominee appeared at an 
event in Philadelphia accompanied by Florida senatorMarco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio>.

Rubio, the Tea Party darling of Cuban descent who was elected in 2010, could 
shore up Romney's perceived weakness with conservatives, as well as helping him 
among Hispanic voters. Romney has faced repeated questions about the 
vice-presidency.

But on Monday, at Romney's first press conference since mid-March, both men 
sidestepped questions about a possible partnership.

"The process for selecting a vice-presidential running mate is just 
beginning," said Romney. "We really haven't had a discussion yet of putting 
together a list or evaluating various candidates."

Romney was asked whether Rubio, now two years into his first term as senator, 
had enough experience to be vice-president. Romney declined to refer to Rubio 
directly.

"I don't think I have any comments on qualifications for individuals to serve 
in various positions in government at this stage," he said.

Rubio added: "I'm not talking about that process any more."

Rubio has been questioned repeatedly about the joining the Romney ticket. "I 
don't want to be the vice-president right now, or maybe ever" he said last 
Wednesday.

But Rubio's comments a day later may have been more telling. He referred to 
his current job as "vice-president" instead of senator.

"If in four to five years, if I do a good job as vice-president — I'm sorry, 
as senator — I'll have the chance to do all sorts of things,"Rubio said in an 
interview with the National Review 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/2012-presidential-campaign/rubio-s-vice-presidential-freudian-slip-20120419>
.

There is no shortage of horses in the race. Current favorites to serve as 
Romney's running mate include Ohio senator Rob Portman, a seasoned campaigner 
and a director of the office of the management of the Budget under George Bush; 
Indiana governor Mitch Daniels, a pragmatist straight-shooter with a reputation 
for budget hawkishness; and South Carolina governor Nikki Haley, another Tea 
Party favourite who breaks the white male mould.

Then there are Virginia's Bob McDonnell, a former army officer and attorney 
general; and Jeb Bush, George W's brother and a former governor of Florida.

If Romney was elusive in his responses to the running mate question, he was 
expansive when it came to a topic that has proven tricky for presidential 
candidates in the past: France.

A French reporter asked the candidate about his memories of the country, where 
he served as a Mormon missionary.

The question elicited a veritable flood of reminiscences from the politician 
who last held a news conference five weeks ago, although he spoke not of his 
missionary work in the 1960s but of more recent visits.

"I have a lot of memories of France," Romney said. "I think the best memories 
were with my wife on vacations from time to time in France. The last vacation 
we had there, walking around Paris, and walking not just on the Champs Élysées 
but also over to the Jardin of Luxembourg and around the city – it's one of the 
most magnificent cities in the world, and I look forward to occasional 
vacations again in such a beautiful place."

Highlighting his love of France is a risky move in US politics. When France 
refused to back the American war in Iraq, HouseRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> voted to rename the sauteed 
potatoes served in the cafeteria "freedom fries".

Bush's commerce secretary, Don Evans, said then-presidential candidate John 
Kerry "looks French." And a Newt Gingrich ad from the 2012 election cycle, 
called The French Connection, goes after Romney with the line "… and just like 
John Kerry, he speaks French, too."

• This article was amended on 24 April 2012. The original referred to Mitch 
Daniels as an Indiana senator. This has been corrected.
 