
The Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
has paid out tens of thousands of pounds in compensation to people sexually 
abused by Libyan military cadets brought to the UK for training with the 
British army.

More than 300 cadets came to Bassingbourn barracks, Cambridgeshire, for 
training in an attempt to help stabiliseLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> after the fall of Muammar Gaddafi. 
The exercise in 2014 cost the UK £13.9m.

But many of the cadets left the barracks unescorted during their stay, and one 
weekend several went on the rampage in Cambridge city centre and committed a 
string of sexual attacks.

Two are serving 12 years in prison for raping a man. Three others received 
shorter custodial sentences after they sexually assaulted four teenage girls.

Lawyers representing the rape victim and one of the girls who was sexually 
assaulted argued their human rights had been breached.

On Saturday, it emerged the MoD had agreed to pay damages to the two victims 
in an out-of-court settlement. While the sum was not disclosed by lawyers 
Slater and Gordon, it is believed to be tens of thousands of pounds.

The first claimant was raped at night in Cambridge city centre by Moktar Ali 
Saad Mahmoud and Ibrahim Abugtila,who were jailed in May 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/15/two-libyan-soldiers-jailed-for-raping-man-in-cambridge>
. The defendants had denied attacking the man but were caught on CCTV leading 
him to a park.

They were convicted by a jury at Cambridge crown court, who heard they had 
“behaved like two hunting dogs who had seen a wounded animal”.

Three others, Naji El Maarfi, Mohammed Abdalsalam and Khaled El Azibi, 
admitted sexual assaults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/30/libyan-soldiers-assaulted-women-seek-asylum-uk>
 on four women on the same night and were also jailed. They had stolen 
bicycles, pedalled from the barracks to Cambridge and assaulted the women.

The victims were all teenagers and the attacks included trying to kiss a woman 
without consent and then sexually assaulting her.

One of their victims said: “I was subjected to a degrading attack by these men 
that has traumatised me. I just hope that lessons are learned from what 
happened and nothing like this happens again.”

Kim Harrison, a human rights lawyer from Slater and Gordon who represented 
both victims, said: “Our clients were subjected to terrifying and degrading 
attacks but they are determined to rebuild their lives. Hopefully, now the 
Ministry of Defence has settled this case, they will both be one step closer to 
getting some closure over these unimaginably traumatic events.”

The arrests of the men coincided with other concerns over the conduct of the 
Libyan cadets at the base after a collapse of discipline.

The incidents prompted the MoD to send 300 soldiers back to their home country 
prematurely, ending an agreement to put 2,000 soldiers through basic infantry 
and junior command training in an attempt to help rebuild Libya.

The defence secretary, Michael Fallon, told parliament at the time there were 
“things we could have done better” and admitted regrets over the way the 
situation had been handled.

An MoD spokesman said: “Compensation payments have been made to two people 
treated appallingly by several Libyan cadets being trained in the UK. We have 
previously expressed regret that there were things we could have done better 
with this programme.”
 