
We have another mesmerising Test on our hands, which is often the way when the 
bowlers hold sway. There were 13 wickets – and there might have been more but 
for the arrival of a fierce storm at 4.30pm – yet only one of them fell in the 
first half of a day when cricket was played under grey, brooding skies in Dhaka.

The raw figures are startling enough. After 41 overs Bangladesh were 171 for 
one with Tamim Iqbal batting brilliantly on 104. Thereafter 12 wickets fell for 
99 runs. You cannot afford to miss an over inthis series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-in-bangladesh-2016-17>.

Bangladesh were bowled out for 220 with Moeen Ali finishing with five for 57 
while Ben Stokes and Chris Woakes snatched wickets at the other end. By the 
close England were 50 for three with not a pace bowler in sight – in fact, 
Bangladesh decided to go into this game with just one of them. Only a fool 
would predict where the balance of power lies – just with England perhaps? – 
but there is no doubt that there will be some relief in England’s dressing room 
after the mauling they took from Tamim and Mominul Haque in the first three 
hours.

After Imrul Kayesh had slapped a short ball straight to Ben Duckett at cover 
in Chris Woakes’s second over, England were pretty awful in the morning. 
Bangladesh, having felt obliged to have a couple more overs of reconnaissance, 
soon let their aggressive instincts run riot. Tamim, imperious in his own back 
garden, and Mominul shredded England’s bowlers with gusto.

Wherever Alastair Cook turned the runs flowed – with the inevitable exception 
of a five-over spell from Stokes before lunch. Tamim played some brilliant, 
audacious shots against the spinners, who were soon introduced on another dry, 
cracked surface. He ran down the wicket against Moeen and pummelled the ball 
through the off side; or he dabbed sweeps and cuts infuriatingly fine; Mominul 
favoured skimmed drives over the bowler’s head.

In such trying circumstances Zafar Ansari, who had been handed his first cap 
by Mark Ramprakash 45 minutes before the start, received his first invitation 
to bowl for England. Ansari’s second delivery found the outside edge of Tamim’s 
bat and just eluded Joe Root at first slip. Thereafter his deliveries kept 
finding the middle of the bat.

Ansari’s first over went for 13; his next three for seven, which would have 
been a good time to relieve him – with two left-handers at the crease Moeen was 
always going to offer a greater threat. In fact his first spell in Test cricket 
lasted six overs and yielded 36 runs. It was, as the newly arrived chairman of 
the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board 
might put it, a “mediocre” start, albeit in a taxing situation, but not a 
calamitous one in the manner of Simon Kerrigan at the Oval in 2013.

By lunch none of the spinners had managed a maiden over and Bangladesh had put 
118 on the board. Their progress was equally serene and rapid for the first 
hour of the afternoon session. Then Cook finally discovered a winning 
combination: Moeen alongside the irrepressible Stokes. Tamim reached his eighth 
Test century with a breathtaking lofted drive over extra cover off Moeen; he 
repeated the shot in celebration as if he had a wand in his hand.

Then he was out in an extraordinary way for a man who had the England attack 
at his mercy: lbw padding up to Moeen. Tamim naturally reviewed but this time 
the umpire Kumar Dharmasena’s instincts were justified – just.

Soon after Moeen dispatched Mominul with a delivery that was devilish since it 
did not spin. Instead it skidded on rapidly to hit the stumps.

At last England had a foothold and soon Stokes was Moeen’s partner as England 
discovered again that pace allied to spin applied more pressure on their 
opponents. Stokes was at his most imposing. He bowled aggressively; he began to 
conjure a little reverse swing; there was no rubbish. Suddenly the Bangladesh 
batsmen were intent upon little more than survival.

Soon Mahmudullah sparred outside the off stump against Stokes and Cook took 
the catch at slip. Then Mushfiqur Rahim was hit on the helmet by a lifter and 
he took a while to recover; perhaps he never did because two balls later an 
inside edge off Moeen was juggled and caught by Cook at leg-slip. Now the slide 
was inexorable. After tea Woakes was Moeen’s partner and he snatched two more 
wickets via catches to Jonny Bairstow as did Moeen, whose confidence and 
potency mushroomed once he had taken his first wicket.

However, there was no calm before the storm as England lost three wickets in 
the 12.3 overs that were possible under a slate‑grey sky. Duckett’s second 
scoring stroke was a six over long‑on against Shakib, whereupon he tamely 
gloved a leg‑side delivery later in the over. Cook was lbw after a review – 
yes, at Dharmasena’s end – to a skidder from Mehedi Hasan. Then Gary Ballance, 
as out-of-touch batsmen often do, feathered a catch to the keeper from another 
testing delivery from the young off-spinner.

The Olympian view, which we strive for before the tour to India, was still 
somewhat gloomy: clearly England’s frailties at the top of the order and among 
the spin bowlers remain. Yet everything was happening so quickly that these 
concerns were somehow overtaken by a feverish curiosity about the outcome of 
what is likely to be another remarkable, fluctuating game of cricket in its own 
right.

Bangladesh v England: second Test, day one – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/28/bangladesh-v-england-second-test-day-one-live> 