
The door before you is slightly ajar. A celestial light beckons beyond. Just 
as you are wondering whether this enticing spectacle down a long, dark corridor 
is a lifesize photograph or some kind of video projection, there is a sudden 
convulsion. The door slams shut in your face.

This is Monica Bonvicini <http://monicabonvicini.net/> at her most abrupt and 
direct, but it is characteristic nonetheless. This Italian-born, Berlin-based 
artist goes for the quick shock, the confrontation, the stabbing realisation. 
She works mainly in sculpture and installation. Her sculptures tend to be 
booby-trapped objects: a divan upholstered in leather belts, bristling with 
buckles; leather-clad axes; a graceful hammock that turns out to be made of 
heavy chains. Her installations are vast, environmental, threatening.

Her particular project – and it is exceedingly niche – is the convergence of 
construction and sexuality

In the past she has unleashed gale-force winds that hurtle through the 
gallery, knocking visitors off their feet. And beneath those feet, she has 
installed plaster floors that crumble a fraction more with every step. To say 
that Bonvicini is alive to the viewer’s every move would be true but an 
understatement. You feel her antagonistic presence everywhere, waiting to 
pounce.

At the Baltic in Gateshead 
<http://www.balticmill.com/whats-on/monica-bonvicini>, where Bonvicini is 
having her first British survey (somewhat belatedly, at the age of 51 and after 
winning the Golden Lion at Venice 17 years ago), the unsuspecting visitor is 
drawn like a fly to an alluring white beam that glows through the open 
entrance. Step inside and you are instantly blindsided. A massive sheaf of neon 
lights cancels your sight. These glowing tubes are strung up by chains – 
Bonvicini’s trademark – forming something like the shape of a gigantic hull. 
Lured by this monstrous wattage, your eyes are scorched and assaulted.
 Chain Leather Swing, 2009. Photograph: John McKenzie © 2016 Baltic 
But to what end? There’s the rub. Bonvicini steps briskly away. Light Me Black 
was originally shown at theArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
Institute of Chicago, and apparently referred to that museum’s lighting 
systems. Here at the Baltic, the same sculpture simply – barbarically – 
dazzles. A massive freestanding wall beyond, rising the full height of the 
cavernous fourth-floor gallery, is pierced by tiny peepholes positioned around 
waist-height, so that you have to bend down to look in. Images of empty, 
shattered galleries appear inside. Here too, you get nothing so much as a jab 
in your poor burned eyes.

There are other obstructions. Strange brickwork shafts into which you peer, 
discovering bottomless darkness; a peculiar wall clad in pixelated images of 
disembodied limbs, printed on something called Tyvek. These are builders’ 
terms, and local builders laid those bricks. You can’t help wondering what they 
thought of the maze of glass-walled rooms on the floor below, in which their 
tools become fetishes. A builder’s harness coated in black polyurethane dangles 
from the ceiling – its meaning suspended. A pickaxe, neatly laced in a black 
leather corset, lies in a glass case like some ominous sex toy. You can see but 
you can’t touch. There is a nightclub seediness in the atmosphere.
 Scale of Things (To Come), 2010. Photograph: John McKenzie © 2016 Baltic 
The Baltic wants us to think in polite terms about architecture, gender and 
power. But this is a body blow of a show and there is nothing polite about 
Bonvicini’s enterprise. A strap-on glass dildo couldn’t be more blatant – or 
obvious – in its late-surreal nastiness. An arc light hanging from a noose is 
only half a thought away from the actual live wires you see on building sites. 
Indeed Bonvicini has arranged just such a perilous sword of Damocles at the 
Baltic – a great barrage of lights dangling by a single fine thread.

It is true that her particular project – and it is exceedingly niche – is the 
convergence of construction and sexuality. That can mean sex and architecture, 
sex and workmen’s hardware – ice picks, hammers, tool belts – sex and the man’s 
world of building. Her neon tubes were supposedly guying Renzo Piano’s immense 
lighting design for the modern wing of Chicago’s Art Institute. At the Baltic, 
what looks like a rococo silver staircase is entirely made from scaffolding and 
chains: tough stuff turned pretty.

One of Bonvicini’s biggest projects is an ongoing survey of builders the world 
over, in which she needles away at the physical aspects of their trade. Lulled 
into compliance by her early questions – is their trade creative; have they 
ever designed their own buildings? – the respondents are then confronted by 
more personal probes. Is their work ever erotic, gay; do they get on with their 
gay colleagues; what do their wives think of their rough hands? Some are 
outraged, others amused; not everyone answers the final question – who would 
you like to wall up? Angry answers range from Newt Gingrich to their boss and 
the person who came up with this dumb-ass survey.

But Bonvicini aims to annoy, likes a sharp sting in the tail. This show 
contains many beautiful calligraphic drawings of birds in flight, or so it 
seems; in fact they are embroideries of pliers. Her black and white paintings, 
exquisitely made in tempera, are scenes of utter devastation. Mississippi 
burning, Alabama blown apart, they’re completely beguiling and yet they show 
pure damage.
 Leather Tool (wrench), 2009. Photograph: John McKenzie © 2016 Baltic 
These paintings are mounted on brutal scaffolding, as if the usual nail and 
wall method would be too dainty: which heaven forfend. It is extremely hard to 
catch the tone of Bonvicini’s work – humorous, mordant, fierce – just as it is 
hard to work out, if you didn’t know it, whether the artist was male or female, 
straight, trans or gay. But the mood is all retro-transgression.

And this is tiresome, in the end. Bonvicini has made some staggering works – 
above all, theglass-and-steel ship <http://monicabonvicini.net/work/she-lies/> 
that shivers on the fjord before Oslo Opera House, reprising Caspar David 
Friedrich’s painted shipwrecks – but scarcely any appear in this show. Here she 
is just asking for trouble throughout, until the affront starts to grate. The 
drill swings violently into action, the live wires crackle, the door slams 
repeatedly in your face.

• Monica Bonvicini: Her Hand Around the Room is at the Baltic Centre for 
Contemporary Art, Gateshead until 26 February 
<http://www.balticmill.com/whats-on/monica-bonvicini>
 