
Donald Trump’s plan to move the Israeli embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem 
would be a “game changer”, according to diplomats, as senior Palestinian 
officials warn that the move could provoke regional violence.


Criticised by international legal experts, analysts and former senior US 
officials, the proposal has heightenedconcern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/trump-presidency-bodes-ill-for-israel-palestine-peace-process>
 over what the president-elect’s policies would mean for an already moribund 
Israel-Palestine peace process and the future of a two-state solution.

In recent days, potential officials with the incoming administration have 
repeatedly made clear Trump’s desire to relocate the embassy early in his 
presidency.

Donald Trump's Israel ambassador is hardline pro-settler lawyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
That has included remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/us-embassy-israel-jersusalem-trump>
 by senior Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway and David Friedman, the controversial 
pro-Israel hardliner Trump has nominated to be his new ambassador to Israel. 
Friedman said last week helooked forward to serving in Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
.

And following Trump’s nomination of Friedman, the president-elect’s transition 
team spokesman, Jason Miller, again reiterated the issue in a briefing for 
reporters. “This is a commitment that the president-elect made numerous times 
on the campaign trail, that he remains firmly committed to.”

The US embassy has been housed in a modernist concrete cube on Tel Aviv’s 
HaYarkon Street since the 1960s. Moving to Jerusalem would mark a reversal of 
almost seven decades of US policy that has until now decreed that the final 
status of Jerusalem, whose eastern – and largely Arab – side has been occupied 
byIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> since 1967, should be 
determined in peace talks with the Palestinians.

In recent days, however, an escalating war of words has erupted between 
Israeli and Palestinian officials, and others, over the potential consequences 
of moving the embassy to Jerusalem.

On Tuesday evening, Israel’s ambassador to the US weighed in. Ron Dermer, a 
rightwing figure close to the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who 
has long had a cool relationship with the Obama administration, described the 
move of the embassy as a “great step forward to peace”, denying it would 
inflame tensions in the region.

But his comments follow remarks by Saeb Erekat, a senior Palestinian official 
and peace negotiator, who warned in answer to a question from the Guardian on 
Friday that moving the embassy to Jerusalem would result in the “destruction of 
the peace process as a whole”.

Speaking at a gathering of journalists following the nomination of Friedman as 
Trump’s pick for ambassador, Erekat added: “If you were to take these steps, of 
moving the embassy, annexing settlements in the West Bank – you are sending 
this region down the path of something that I call chaos, lawlessness and 
extremism.”

During the traditional lighting of Hanukah candles at Israel’s embassy in 
Washington on Tuesday, Derner said the move “should have happened a long time 
ago” and added he believed the relocation would “send a strong message against 
the delegitimisation of Israel”.

Both George W Bush and Bill Clinton made similar promises during their 
campaigns, and in 1994 Congress passed the Jerusalem Embassy Act which 
explicitly calls for relocation. But successive presidents have refrained from 
moving the embassy out of concern over the potential ramifications for US 
diplomacy in the Middle East.

Trump’s most definitive statement on the issue came in the middle of the 
election campaign.

“We will move the American embassy to the eternal capital of the Jewish 
people, Jerusalem – and we will send a clear signal that there is no daylight 
between America and our most reliable ally, the state of Israel,” he said to 
the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (Aipac) lobbying group.

If there is a difference with his predecessors, it is that Trump’s team has 
shown no signs of backing down on that commitment, instead emphasising it as a 
key foreign policy objective.

To some, that has suggested the influence of his advisers on an 
Israel-Palestine issue is dominated by his son-in-law Jared Kushner – whose 
family charity has given money to one of the West Bank’s most hardline 
settlements, Yitzhar – and Friedman, who has raised money for another hardline 
settlement.

“We were told by US officials that Kushner and Friedman are the ones who are 
advising Trump on the Israel-Palestinian issue,” said one Palestinian official.

If Palestinians are alarmed by the issue, US officials dealing with the 
Israel-Palestine question appear equally concerned over what the implications 
of such a sharp policy U-turn might be.

“It’s not a question of bricks and mortar,” said one, speculating, as others 
have, that the move could be accomplished easily by re-signing the large US 
consulate in Jerusalem. “It is a question of policy.”

In the wider diplomatic community, the move is seen as a “game changer” and 
one with multiple risks attached despite Dermer’s reassurances, including the 
risk of renewed violence between Israelis and Palestinians.

If the change in policy itself is one concern, another has been the way in 
which it has been articulated in such ad hoc fashion by Trump advisers.

Dan Kurtzer, a former US ambassador to Egypt and Israel and now an 
academic,described his surprise at Friedman’s breach with state department 
protocols.

“The president hasn’t been sworn in yet, the secretary of state hasn’t spoken 
about this, and [Friedman’s] already talking about the policy he is going to 
change. This is unheard of,” said Kurtzer.

But despite all this, Trump associates have not said when a move might happen. 

Trump’s spokesman Miller has avoided the issue, and while it appears the 
practical and policy implications have been discussed by US officials in 
Jerusalem, it seems no concrete steps are likely to be made until after Trump’s 
inauguration next month.

If Friedman is guiding Trump’s policy on Israel and Palestine, he has already 
set up the conditions for confrontation with the US state department over the 
issue.

In a speech in October to Trump supporters in Jerusalem – before his 
nomination as ambassador – Friedman made his views clear, accusing state 
department officials of “antisemitism”.

 “The lifers in the state department are absolutely, positively committed to 
never moving the embassy to Jerusalem. What’s different about Donald Trump? You 
all know Donald Trump. If there is anybody in the world politics who could 
stand up to the state department it is Donald Trump.

Trump presidency bodes ill for Israel-Palestine peace process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/trump-presidency-bodes-ill-for-israel-palestine-peace-process>
“When Donald Trump has his first meeting with the lifers in the state 
department and they say: ‘Mr Trump, with all due respect, you have only been 
president for a couple of days, we’ve been living here for the last 20 years, 
we don’t do it that way, we do it this way, we don’t move the embassy, that’s 
been state department policy for 20 years’ – the reaction from Donald Trump is 
going to be, ‘You know what, guys? You’re all fired!’”

All of which has left Palestinian officials such as Erekat holding on to the 
faintest of hopes: that some US institutions will put a brake on the issue.


“We will see, will he do it? I don’t think they will do it,” Erekat told 
journalists. “I think the United States, at the end of the day, is a country of 
institutions and they’re guided by their veteran interests, and not the 
interests, I believe, of this person or that person,” Erekat said.

If the move does occur, however, other Palestinian officials have warned they 
will fight the move in the UN, including the Palestinian ambassador to the 
United Nations, Riyad Mansour.

“If people attack us by moving the embassy to Jerusalem, which is a violation 
of security council resolutions, it is a violation of resolution 181 of the UN 
general assembly that was drafted by the US … it means they are showing 
belligerency towards us,” Mansour said. “If they do that, nobody should blame 
us for unleashing all of the weapons that we have in the UN to defend 
ourselves, and we have a lot of weapons in the UN.”

 