
The secretary of state for Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> is to address MPs after Martin 
McGuinness’s resignation plunged the power-sharing agreement into crisis.

James Brokenshire will update the House of Commons on Tuesday after the deputy 
first minister resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
 in protest at the Democratic Unionists’ handling of a botched green energy 
scheme.

Related: Key questions about Martin McGuinness's resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinnesss-resignation-key-questions-northern-ireland>

The decision by the Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> 
member of the legislative assembly for Foyle to walk away after 10 years of 
sharing power with the DUP came as the first minister, Arlene Foster, refused 
to stand aside to facilitate an investigation into the renewable heat incentive 
(RHI), or “cash for ash”, furore.

The UK government is set to call a snap assembly election in the wake of 
McGuinness’s resignation over the debacle, which has left the administration in 
Belfast with a £490m bill.

Foster, the DUP leader, oversaw the doomed RHI during her time as economy 
minister. She had rejected Sinn Féin’s demands to step down temporarily pending 
the outcome of a preliminary investigation.

Under the structures of the peace process-forged institutions, neither 
Stormont’s first minister nor deputy first minister can remain in post without 
the other, so unless Sinn Féin replaces McGuinness in the next seven days, his 
resignation spells the end of Foster’s tenure. McGuinness made clear on Monday 
that his party would not replace him.


“We in Sinn Féin will not tolerate the arrogance of Arlene Foster and the 
DUP,” he said. “I believe today is the right time to call a halt to the DUP’s 
arrogance.”

McGuinness denied his move was influenced by health problems, for which he is 
undergoing intensive treatment.

Foster accused McGuinness of putting politics before principle and said she 
was disappointed.

“His actions have meant that, at precisely the time we need our government to 
be active, we will have no government and no way to resolve the RHI,” she said. 
“It is clear that Sinn Féin’s actions are not principled, they are political.”

An election is unlikely to resolve the crisis if the RHI issue is not dealt 
with before an executive is reformed. Sinn Féin has said it will not accept a 
return to the “status quo”.

Brokenshire said: “Unless Sinn Féin nominates a replacement to the position of 
deputy first minister within the next seven days, it is incumbent upon me to 
call an assembly election within a reasonable period.”

The state-funded RHI was supposed to offer a proportion of the cost businesses 
had to pay to run eco-friendly boilers, but the subsidy tariffs were set too 
high and, without a cap, it ended up paying out significantly more than the 
price of fuel.

This enabled applicants to “burn to earn” – getting free heat and making a 
profit as they did so. Claims of widespread abuse include a farmer allegedly 
set to pocket around £1m in the next two decades for heating an empty shed.

While the DUP and Sinn Féin had agreed on the terms of a potential 
investigation into RHI, the sticking point was the position of Foster when the 
inquiry got under way.

Steps by the executive to cut the costs of the overspend will not be 
implemented in the short term.

McGuinness cited other disputes with the DUP, including over the Irish 
language and stalled mechanisms to deal with the legacy of the Troubles, in 
explaining his move.

The DUP claimed RHI was not the motivation behind Sinn Féin’s strategy, 
insisting it was exploiting the crisis to pursue a broader republican agenda.

A spokeswoman for Theresa May said: “The prime minister has been kept updated 
on the resignation ofMartin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>. The Northern Ireland 
secretary, James Brokenshire, is in contact with people there, encouraging all 
parties to continue the dialogue.”
 