
Given it is the only notable event Muirfield Golf Club now stages, I 
increasingly look forward to its biannual rowover whether to admit women members
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/muirfield-open-golf-royal-and-ancient-women-members>
. Last played in May 2016, the contest returns this month and promises to put 
observers right inside the action of ye olden tymes as they enjoy breathtaking 
views uttered in front of a backdrop of breathtaking views. Think of it as a 
sort of Westworld for golf, shot on a cost of £80m to the local economy, which 
is what estimations reckon hosting the Open would be worth. I’m not saying the 
row is comically quaint but you wouldn’t rule out hearing that during its 
course, someone or other had furiously cast his periwig to the floor.

A personal highlights reel from last time around would include interventions 
from Peter Alliss, who appeared to regard the Muirfield facilities as so 
superlative that they were worth entering into a high-stakes bargain for. “If 
someone wants to join,” he mused,“well, you’d better get married to someone 
who’s a member.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/19/peter-alliss-women-play-muirfield-marry-member>
 I don’t know about you, but I think if I were to enter into a marriage of 
state, I’d require in return something like dibs on the Habsburg empire, as 
opposed to the chance of a silent G&T in the 19th with a man who switches 
channel when Cialis adverts come on.

Related: Don’t rush to praise Muirfield if women are finally admitted | Ewan 
Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/06/royal-troon-muirfield-open-golf>

Anyway, other standout moments from last May’s failed revolution included a 
leaked letter from those bitterly opposed to admitting women, who were wetting 
their collective pants about a number of “the risks” of female membership. 
Primarily, these appeared to pose the greatest danger to the men’s “lunch 
arrangements”, which were mentioned not once but twice, and fretfully.

“We are not an ordinary club,” ran one instance of this preoccupation. “Our 
special nature; ‘a gentleman’s club where golf is played’ is quite unique with 
its fraternity built inter alia on foursomes play with a round taking only the 
same time as lunch and leaving enough time for a further round after lunch 
[even in mid-winter]. This is one of the miracles in modern day play and is 
much admired.”

If anything, I think “miracles in modern day play” understates it – but we go 
on. “The risks for the club are that a major change will fundamentally change 
our way of doing things,” ran another argument, “and once that process develops 
it will be impossible to stop.” I love that line, mainly because I’m fascinated 
by where they imagine the unstoppable process would be headed. Pretty sure it 
ends in extrajudicial murder on the greens. One minute you’re letting in women 
members, the next there’s a Prius in the car park, and before you know it 
you’re being led to Madame Guillotine on the 18th by a man who says Zimbabwe 
instead of Rhodesia. It’s the thin end of the wedge, isn’t it?

In any event, the abolitionists were unable to muster the two-thirds majority 
required for the motion to admit women members to be carried last year, with 
those in favour winning by 64% over 36%. Within approximately 12 seconds of the 
result becoming public, the R&A announced that it wasremoving Muirfield from 
the list of Open venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
.

So here we are again, with another vote this month on whether or not to enter 
the 20th century. I very much enjoyed the recent Sky News report into 
Muirfield’s latest agonies, which saw various frightful string-backed bores 
explain to the cameras that this wasn’t a course for women, that “quite a lot 
them” don’t want to be members anyway, and that: “C’est la vie.”

As for which way the vote will go this time, who can say? Perhaps the 
modernisers have managed to sway the requisite few of the old guard round to 
their way of thinking. Perhaps an enterprising reporter will find themselves at 
the right snug bar exit at the right time and manage to elicit another targeted 
intervention by scratch civil rights activist Alliss. Perhaps a new leaked 
letter will reveal anxiety about what female influence will do to Muirfield’s 
miraculously idiosyncratic drinks ordering conventions or make its inevitable 
journey to the issue of transgender bathrooms. Then again, perhaps one or two 
members have decided they like golf more than clubs and consequently would 
actually quite like the chance to see it played at its highest level in an Open 
on their home course. The last thing any of them need worry about is the notion 
that what they do really matters now.

On club membership, I am an unapologetic Marxist (Groucho, not Karl), and 
since the R&A have rightly removed Muirfield from the Open rota, this spectacle 
has become much more self-harming than anything else. Indeed, the good 
gentlemen of Muirfield should be under absolutely no illusion: watching their 
twice-yearly insistence on making pillocks of themselves is a hundred times 
more entertaining sport than anything that could be viewed on their course. If 
they feel they must persist in this particularly savage brand of self-satire, 
then it is not for us to impede their journey.
 