
The course has hosted golf’s prestigious Open championship no less than 16 
times in its 125-year history, the backdrop for wins by greats such as Nick 
Faldo, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player.

But Muirfield, with views over the Firth of Forth and a favoured retreat of 
Edinburgh’s judiciary, has forfeited its right to hold the championship again 
after members voted to continue its ban on women joining the club.

A postal ballot of members of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> Golfers, which runs the course, one 
of Scotland’s last remaining men-only clubs, returned 64% for and 36% against 
widening the membership.

The vote fell just short of the two-thirds majority required for the club to 
alter its constitution.

Martin Slumbers, the chief executive of the Royal and Ancient, which organises 
the tournament, responded almost immediately with a statement saying the 
championship would not be held at a venue that did not admit female members.

Scotland’s female leaders call for end to sexist golf club rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/scotlands-female-leaders-call-for-end-to-sexist-golf-club-rules>
Slumbers said: “The R&A has considered today’s decision with respect to the 
Open championship. The Open is one of the world’s great sporting events and 
going forward we will not stage the championship at a venue that does not admit 
women as members.


“Given the schedule for staging the Open, it would be some years before 
Muirfield would have been considered to host the championship again. If the 
policy at the club should change we would reconsider Muirfield as a venue for 
the Open in future.”

Rory McIlroy, the former world number one and Open champion, said Thursday’s 
result would damage golf’s image. “We’ve got the Olympics coming up, which is 
all about including everyone,” he told the Guardian. “It’s 2016 and times move 
on. Women make more than men these days. I think everyone should have the 
opportunity to join a club if they want to. I probably had my worst 
professional week of my career at Muirfield, so I don’t feel that bad not going 
back, to be honest.”

Announcing the results on the steps of the clubhouse on Thursday morning, the 
Muirfield captain, Henry Fairweather, emphasised that the policy complied 
“fully with equality legislation”, and insisted that women remained welcome as 
guests.

This was perhaps not the experience of the female executive of the European 
Tour who reportedly had to eat in the Muirfield kitchen at the staging of a 
Senior Open Championship because she wasn’t permitted in the clubhouse.

Revealing the depth of hostility felt by some Muirfield traditionalists 
towards the admission of women, it emerged that a group of about 30 members had 
written anonymously to fellow golfers before a ballot, urging them to reject 
the change.

The letter argued that “a traditional resistance to change is one of the 
foundations of our unique position in golf and our reputation”, and stated that 
“the introduction of lady members is bound to create difficulties”, suggesting 
that women’s presence would “endanger foursomes and speedy play”.

It went on: “Our special nature – ‘a gentleman’s club where golf is played’ – 
is quite unique with its fraternity built inter alia on foursomes play with a 
round taking only the same time as lunch and leaving enough time for a further 
round after lunch (even in mid-winter).”

Peter Alliss: women who want to play at Muirfield should marry a member
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/19/peter-alliss-women-play-muirfield-marry-member>
Scotland’s three female party leaders have repeatedly challenged the men-only 
policy and suggested they would be unlikely to attend any tournament held 
there. The television presenter Clare Balding revealed that she had refused to 
host coverage of the championship when it was last held at Muirfield because of 
the club’s stance.

Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first female first minister, described the vote as 
indefensible. Responding to the news on Twitter, she said: “Scotland has women 
leaders in every walk of life. It is 2016. This is simply indefensible.”
Nicola Sturgeon (@NicolaSturgeon) 
Scotland has women leaders in every walk of life. It is 2016. This is simply 
indefensible.https://t.co/qrULGuFG8v <https://t.co/qrULGuFG8v>
 <https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/733252630810636288> May 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/733252630810636288> 
Sturgeon later encouraged the club to revisit the issue, saying: “I understand 
and accept that, as a private club, it is for Muirfield to decide on its 
membership – but at a time whenScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is a country where women can get to 
the top in politics, law, business and other fields, this sends the wrong 
signal.

“The majority of members actually voted in favour of admitting women, which is 
encouraging, but I sincerely hope those who didn’t now reconsider and that the 
club as a whole revisits the issue.”

David Cameron backed the decision to bar Muirfield from hosting the Open. A 
Downing Street spokesman said: “His general rule is that sports clubs should be 
open to both sexes and that it is outdated not to do that, particularly if you 
think you are up to hosting a major championship.”

Lesley Sawers, the Equality <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> and 
Human Rights Commission Scotland commissioner, said the decision not to admit 
women would cost the Scottish economy £100m, referring to the estimated revenue 
to the country that hosts the Open championship.

She added: “Whilst it may be legal to operate single-sex clubs, clearly it 
isn’t desirable in this case. This is the consequence. We believe that in the 
21st century the outdated wishes of the few really shouldn’t be allowed to 
dictate the country’s economic interests. At a time when we are making good 
progress on equalities, what signal does this send to other organisations and 
businesses?”

Royal Troon, which will host this year’s Open in July, is the only other 
male-only Scottish club on the tournament’s rota, and it is undertaking a 
review of its own membership policy. Royal Troon shares its facilities with 
Troon Ladies, and will host the Open jointly with the women’s club.

In a statement on Tuesday, the Royal Troon captain, Martin Cheyne, said of the 
policy review: “We care very much for the reputation of Royal Troongolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> club and it is important the club, 
much like the wider game, reflects the modern society in which we exist.”

HSBC, one of the main sponsors of the Open, welcomed the decision. “As a proud 
patron and partner of the Open championship, we support the R&A’s position on 
this. As a long-term international sponsor of the sport, we are committed to 
opening up the world of golf. Central to this is our commitment to the value of 
diversity in the game and our support of women’s golf, which is right at the 
heart of our global golf portfolio,” it said.
 