
It’s taken time, a change in perspective and a slightly irritating encounter 
with raffle tickets, but I am finally able to talk confidently to the people my 
charity helps about fundraising.

During my career, I’ve always loved working with beneficiaries and with 
donors, but as separate groups. Talking to beneficiaries about fundraising 
often made me feel uncomfortable and awkward. It didn’t matter how much I knew 
about people wanting to give back – it was my job to support them by telling 
their stories with passion and dedication, not asking them for anything.

Then everything changed. I became a parent, a parent to a child with a 
lifelong medical and developmental condition. We needed help, and all of a 
sudden I became a beneficiary of not one, but 15 charities. Some were 
delivering statutory services, some were independent. Small charities, big 
charities – I was surrounded by them.

A fundraiser can’t care too much: the donor's letter that became my moral 
compass
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/04/fundraiser-cant-care-too-much-donors-letter-moral-compass-charity>
I have never been prouder to be part of the charity sector than during that 
time. I saw it at its best, and, admittedly, observed things that could be 
improved. But the strangest part of all was how I interacted with fundraising.

Each charity that helped us approached this differently – some wanted to 
protect me from the dark art of fundraising, while others made a direct ask. I 
learned all about the unique experience that a beneficiary donor has and it has 
made me a better fundraiser. I now know how important it is to understand a 
beneficiary’s journey.

For example, a charity that had just started supporting my child sent me a 
fundraising letter and a book of raffle tickets to sell. At first I felt uneasy 
– we were barely on our first date and it had ordered for me without even 
showing me the menu.

I can understand why I was sent the raffle tickets – I expect someone thought 
it a nice, soft ask. The charity wasn’t asking me directly for money or to 
climb a mountain, but it hadn’t taken into account where I was in my experience 
of the cause. We were just beginning to understand my child’s condition and 
people around us knew little about what we were going through. Raffle ticket 
selling has to be done face to face, and it would force conversations I wasn’t 
ready to have. It would be like that awkward moment when you saw a friend in 
the supermarket and they told you their cat had just died. It was that level of 
uncomfortable, multiplied by a hundred. So, I sent the raffle tickets back.

I was attacked for being a fundraiser, but won't be made to feel ashamed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/01/attacked-fundraiser-wont-be-made-feel-ashamed>
However, another charity gave me the time to get to know the organisation 
before asking for anything. When it came to fundraising, I was given a number 
of options. I was asked if I wanted to take on a sponsored challenge, and I 
did. Not just to raise money for the charity, but to take back control of our 
experiences and tell everyone who needed to know what was happening to my 
family.

You see, something I’d never realised about fundraising platforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/12/online-fundraising-platforms-small-charities-justgiving-paypal>
, such as Just Giving, is that they can be more than just a donation platform, 
they are also a communication channel. It was a way to tell our story in the 
least painful and uncomfortable way. It was a way to make a difference while 
feeling empowered. Being able to do that mattered to me as much as it did to 
the charity.

I am no longer nervous when talking about donations to the people my charity 
helps because I understand how much it can mean when it is done right. I know 
what can be achieved from understanding their journey as a supporter and how 
forgiving us beneficiaries can be when mistakes are made. Despite some clunky 
fundraising asks, my view of each charity hasn’t changed. I remain forever 
grateful to them and, with the right ask, I might just do more than they expect.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> anonymous 
series where charity workers tell it how it is. If you would like to pitch us 
an idea,click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
.
 