
When I was offered the role of chief executive of a small local charity, I was 
ecstatic. It was my dream job but 18 months later I had resigned – traumatised 
and bitter.

Before I joined, the charity had been in the hands of the trusted finance 
manager, Sharon. She had been in post for years and I was told “if it hadn’t 
been for Sharon the charity would have gone under”. She single-handedly managed 
the organisation and its finances and the trustees had left her to it.

A few months into the job I started to notice that something wasn’t right. The 
profit and loss figures Sharon was giving me didn’t meet the budget the board 
had agreed and our draft end-of-year accounts showed us to be in the red. The 
trustees were shocked, and agreed to my drastic proposals to spend our reserve 
and slash costs. I made staff redundant, found free office space, secured more 
core funding and recruited a new, energetic chair.

Are charities doing enough to protect themselves from fraud?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2012/may/22/charity-fraud>
It was a difficult time for everyone, but Sharon was consistently reassuring. 
When I asked for cashflow figures she produced them, she told me not to worry 
and she took care of the incomings and outgoings. It suited me to leave it to 
her because I was flat out, but when she went on leave it all unraveled.

Our external accountants asked whether I had managed to recoup monies on an 
invoice that, by fluke, they noticed Sharon had paid twice two years before. 
They had raised it with her at the time and were just following up. To my 
horror we found that Sharon had paid the second amount to herself by cheque 
with the forged signature of the previous CEO.

The evidence was irrefutable. We immediately initiated an investigation on 
suspicion of gross misconduct. It was a shattering experience. We looked at 
every single transaction going back years. We found Sharon had repeatedly 
stolen thousands of pounds by writing cheques to herself. She had fabricated 
expenses and pocketed the petty cash. I also suspected that she had pilfered 
takings from donation boxes and envelopes but had no proof.

We dismissed her and reported the crime to the police and the Charity 
Commission <https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/charity-commission>. I 
had lengthy interviews with the police, and as we carried on digging, we found 
a long history of cover-ups and mismanagement. The cashflow and the profit and 
loss figures she had been producing were rubbish. Cheques she claimed to have 
issued had never been sent. It was a huge and complicated mess that absorbed my 
entire attention for months, to the detriment of everything else.

The case eventually came to court. I took a deep breath and wrote to key 
business donors in advance of the press coverage, fearing they would abandon 
us. To my relief they replied with sympathy and often shared similar 
experiences.

I learned many harsh lessons during that time. We went from slack financial 
control, resting with one individual, to dual or triple authority on 
everything. We started to double check payments details sent by email or post 
with a phone call. Account details for payments were checked by a second 
person. Cash was particularly challenging to handle – trying to ensure the 
collection and counting of cash donations were witnessed and checked all the 
way to the bank is tough in a tiny charity. I employed a highly experienced 
finance manager who knew what she was doing and spent hours and hours with her 
– redesigning our system.

Sharon was given a suspended jail sentence and community service. The money 
was paid back, but I continued to feel deeply upset. I felt responsible and 
naive for accepting what I had been told, for not checking our bank accounts, 
for allowing a slack system to continue. I resigned shortly after she was 
sentenced.

At an event recently, donors were handing £10 and £20 notes to a lone charity 
representative. When she had a big bundle of notes in her hand she joked: “I’m 
off on holiday now”. I winced and put my purse back in my pocket.

Sharon is a pseudonym and other identifying features have been changed.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series where 
charity workers tell it how it is.
 