
Six years ago, I was a confident, outgoing person who couldn’t wait to start a 
new job in the charity sector, but one bullying chief executive changed that. 
Now, I feel humiliated and despite hours of counselling and numerous 
antidepressant prescriptions, I am still haunted by what happened.

I joined the charity as a fundraising manager – focusing on trusts and grants. 
In my first week I watched four of my colleagues disappear into the chief 
executive’s back office. One by one, my new colleagues were dismissed 
immediately with what seemed like no warning – another member of staff was even 
sent to get their coats and bags.

Alarm bells did ring, but I chose to ignore them. I had just joined and was 
enjoying my new job so far. The people I worked with were brilliant, and I 
loved my team – but it didn’t take long for stories of the chief executive’s 
bullying and petty rules to filter through.

Working for a charity has helped me to cope with anorexia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/25/working-charity-cope-anorexia>
For example, I wasn’t allowed to send out a letter or a trust application 
without him seeing it first – I reconciled myself to the fact that I was still 
learning, but it got to a stage where we would be on draft six of a letter. The 
content was not wrong – but it wasn’t the way he would write it. I told myself 
that he was my boss, and that he was paying me a lot of money, so I shouldn’t 
complain. However, after a year – and no longer a newbie – I started to 
question his decisions.

This is when things escalated. He had a knack of finding a person’s weak spot 
and exploiting it. Mine was that I didn’t have a university degree and wasn’t 
brilliant at maths. He decided that I needed maths tuition so I could produce 
my own spreadsheets, despite being as good as my colleagues at doing so. He 
hired a tutor who came in once a week and taught me in my lunch hour. I told 
myself not to complain and not to take it personally – at least I was learning 
something.

It did not stop there. One day he announced loudly in front of the entire 
office that he had received complaints that I was disruptive and talked too 
much in the office. When I built up the courage to confront him he conceded 
that no one had complained – but refused to apologise. I continued to hit my 
fundraising targets, but was pulled into the chief executive’s office to be 
given a verbal warning that the standard of my work was too low.

The staff were terrified of him, when he walked the length of the office 
everyone stopped talking and put their heads down. During the time I was there, 
two accountants came and went. My chief executive even threatened to report one 
accountant to his regulator, unless he resigned.

Confessions of a charity professional – we want your blogs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
I tried to stay positive and repeatedly told myself not to take it personally. 
However, my confidence was shattered and I found myself in the toilets fighting 
back the tears all too frequently. I reported the chief executive to the board 
of trustees, but they took his side so, I resigned. I outlined my reasons for 
leaving and the chief executive’s behaviour in my resignation letter and was 
immediately put on gardening leave.

Now I’m much happier at another charity, but three of my colleagues have also 
been bullied at other charities. Is bullying prevalent in the charity sector 
and if it is, why? Maybe it’s because many chief executives are founders who 
can’t let go, or maybe it’s the emotions associated with missing targets and 
letting beneficiaries down. I don’t know – but my advice to anyone who finds 
themselves in a similar situation is to get out and not put yourself through 
it. I’m just about to move to another charity and am terrified that history 
might repeat itself – but, at least, I know I have the courage and hindsight to 
walk away if it does.

Some identifying details have been changed.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series where 
charity workers tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our guidelineshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
 