
The treat was to be given a few 10 pence pieces, then still a relatively new 
addition to the nation's purses, and dispatched to see how long they would 
last. First, silver was exchanged into much smaller coin of the realm, grubby 
halfpennies and pennies, and then fed, with a seesawing mixture of excitement 
and desperation, into one of a dozen cascade machines; their rhythmic movement, 
pushing coppers to and fro a precipice that promised unfathomable riches, was 
simultaneously stupefying and tantalising.

The decision to move from a wobbly pile that appeared immune to the laws of 
gravity to another of apparently greater precariousness was perhaps the most 
suspense-laden moment of the holidays, and certainly the highlight of a visit 
to the pier's Blue Room, where its gaming machines were housed. Most of my 
childhood summers were spent in Eastbourne, with my mother and her father and 
step-mother. First thing one morning, she and I would lug cases across London 
and on to the train at Victoria and what felt like hours later arrive in the 
small, terraced house in Clarence Road, just behind the rec, where tea would be 
cold meat, squashy tomatoes, sliced bread and, to mark our prodigal return, 
fondant fancies.

In the week or fortnight before my dad joined us for a few days off and to 
fetch us home, we'd do our Eastbourne things: the pirate-themed pleasure park 
Treasure Island, with its paddling pools and mock Spanish galleon, crazy golf, 
a bus out to Drusilla's zoo (llamas, goats and peacocks, rather than lions and 
tigers), bags of chips eaten at Splash Point, the luxury of an eclair in the 
posh tearooms. But the pier, which last week suffered adevastating fire 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-sussex-28579265>, remained the focal 
point. Outings began and ended with a trip to its ornate, thickly carpeted Blue 
Room; health-giving walks to its end and back were undertaken in even the 
stiffest of breezes or the most relentless of downpours and, often, both; its 
entrance was where you had to head for if you were lost.

It stands almost in the middle of a seafront that has remained deliberately 
and resolutely free of gift shops and bars and was consequently old-fashioned 
enough to stand in for its coastal neighbour in the most recent remake of
Brighton Rock <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1233192/>. Its position, as my 
mother always maintained, had also turned it into a kind of social plimsoll 
line. Like the salt, you wanted to be above it rather than below (she had been 
born below, emigrated to Australia as a £10 Pom at the age of 18 and didn't 
return to live in the town until near the end of her life, at which point she 
was delighted to find herself above).

My sentimental attachment to the pier has persisted, as have my occasional 
trips to the Blue Room when I go to the south coast to visit my father, to the 
extent that I found myself in tears watching television pictures of it ablaze 
on Wednesday. That reaction, of course, is easily enough explained by the 
nostalgia that really takes hold in middle age, a blend of mournfulness for 
vanished childhood and the desire to hold on to its physical embodiments.

But perhaps it has a particular potency for those of us whose holidays were 
often dictated by our parents' need to visit their parents, a matter of both 
filial duty and economic necessity. Suffice to say that these were hardly 
staycations in the modern, lifestyle-approved sense of the word.

I'm writing this piece from rural Ireland, where I am staying with my 
partner's family; he is a second-generation Irishman who recalls six-week trips 
here every summer of his childhood, in a party so large its children were 
billeted with different relatives for the duration. It required a mammoth 
journey via train and ferry on one side, a trailer over rough track on the 
other, from a north London temporarily denuded of its Irish community. The 
track is now a nice, smooth road and when we swim in the river Barrow there's a 
fancy changing room, a set of steps and a pair of lifeguards to make sure we 
don't disappear over the weir, but judging by the conversations around the pub 
table in the evening, progress has not eradicated memory.

Had he or I been born to different families with different summertime 
arrangements, we might have grown up with a rather more cosmopolitan view of 
the world – but probably not one quite so firmly rooted in a single place. But 
back to the end of Eastbourne pier – or, I fervently hope and as early reports 
indicate, just another hiccup in the 144-year history that has seen it rise 
from the flames before, not to mention a wartime plan to blow it up. Eastbourne 
is a small town not awfully given to change and its inhabitants are likely to 
campaign vigorously for its repair and refurbishment.

If they succeed, they will also bring cheer not only to enthusiasts like me, 
but to everyone who's susceptible to the siren call of these strange Victorian 
structures, with all that they suggest – the newly democratic British seaside 
holiday, once the preserve of promenading toffs, gradually colonised by the 
working classes; our devotion to music-hall entertainments and variety shows; 
and, however fanciful this might sound, a subliminal manifestation of an island 
nation always on the lookout for invaders but, at the time of the piers' 
greatest flowering, confident in its naval supremacy. Not that these historical 
and psychogeographical nuances were much on my mind as I stood mesmerised 
before the cascades, waiting for the pennies to drop.
 