
The artist Willem de Kooning changed my life. Before De Kooning I had no real 
interest in art. Constable was for the top of cake tins and Warhol seemed no 
more than a competent graphic designer. I took a very literal view of art, 
whereas I found movies, music and books transformative – all of which would 
have been quite normal if I was 12-years-old, or even 17. But I wasn't: I was 
25. I had managed to live a quarter of a century without art making any notable 
impression on me. And, to be honest, the circumstances which started this late 
journey were only brought about through ulterior motives.

I had organised a weekend away in Amsterdam with my girlfriend and had drawn 
up what I thought was a pretty fun itinerary. I planned to sample the local 
speciality and nightlife, leaving the daytime as a recovery zone. It was a 
well-researched plan, one that I was hugely looking forward to implementing. 
Unbeknown to me, though, my girlfriend had other ideas. She wanted to visit 
Amsterdam's great museums, eat in good restaurants and – if time allowed – to 
go for a long walk … boring. This was a potential disaster that needed to be 
avoided. Cunningly, I suggested a compromise: one of her activities, followed 
by one of mine. I figured that once we had started on my itinerary there'd be 
no going back, and for the sake of a little goodwill, there wasn't any harm in 
a quick museum visit.

So, we went to the Stedelijk Museum <http://www.stedelijk.nl/>, Amsterdam's 
modern art gallery. As soon as I stepped over the threshold I got a nagging 
ache in my lower spine accompanied by uncontrollable yawning. By the time we 
had gone round the first gallery, I desperately needed a sit down. I sank 
heavy-legged on to a pine bench and wiped the tears of boredom from my cheeks. 
A frosty glare suggested that I was not making a very favourable impression 
with the girl. Feigning interest, I upped my game. We looked at a painting with 
yellow splodges that appeared to be a child's effort at a fried egg and I 
started to feel nauseous. My girlfriend liked it, though. She did that tilting 
your head thing you see art connoisseurs do.

I made a big deal of looking at it again for signs of poetic life. To be fair, 
it wasn't quite as bad as I had originally thought. There was a sumptuousness 
to the brushstrokes that was beguiling. The pink element was fabulously 
flesh-like and the white section in the middle had a roughness that hinted at 
sun shining through a broken cloud. It was also true that the more I looked at 
the painting, the more I saw in it. I continued to stare, but this time out of 
choice. It was actually very beautiful, and harmonious. I began to find it 
calming and a little sensual, warming, optimistic. The girlfriend had said it 
was like poetry. She was wrong: it was poetry.

I bent down to see who had painted this masterpiece. It was by Willem de 
Kooning and the work was calledRosy-Fingered Dawn at Louse Point 
<http://www.stedelijk.nl/content/WdeKooning_Rosyfingered.jpg>. We spent the 
next four hours in the Stedelijk playing spot-the-De Kooning. Then, after lunch 
and on my insistence, we went back. I was on a mission. I wanted to know about 
this painterly genius and what had provoked him to such sublime heights.

Willlem de Kooning was born in Rotterdam in 1904. At the age of 12 he went to 
study at the Rotterdam Academy of Arts. In 1926, after a brief stint as a store 
sign-writer and art director, he left for America and settled in New York. De 
Kooning loved the freedom and excitement of New York, but saw it through the 
eyes of a man steeped in the traditional painting techniques of the 
Renaissance. He was also heavily influenced by the European masters from the 
generation before: Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque and his fellow countryman, 
Vincent Van Gogh. And it was at this precise time, between the mid-20s and the 
late-60s, that the clash of cultures – between the flash, brash, America and 
the more earnest and genteel Europe – created the ingredients for one of the 
most important developments in the history of art. De Kooning was at the centre 
of it all.

To begin with, the main protagonist was a Russian exile called Arshile Gorky, 
who had also found refuge and artistic sustenance in New York. Like De Kooning, 
Gorky was heavily influenced by the surrealist movement that had been created 
by André Breton in Paris. And like almost all artists of the time he studied 
the pioneering work of Cézanne, which had led Picasso and Braque on to cubism. 
De Kooning and Gorky wanted to take the figurative form beyond impressionism, 
beyond cubism and into total abstraction: to create paintings that felt like 
the subject, although the subject wasn't discernible. This meant combining the 
surrealists' Freudian exploration into the unconscious with the painterly 
techniques of Monet, Cézanne, Picasso and Braque. The upshot of which was a 
starring role in the New York School.

The New York School was the avant garde of the world. Its members included the 
Beat poets, the composer John Cage, choreographer Merce Cunningham and 
musicians such as Miles Davies, Stan Getz and John Coltrane. And at the centre 
of all this were a group of artists who came under the banner abstract 
expressionists. This was a group of New York artists – among them were Jackson 
Pollock, Mark Rothko,Ad Reinhardt 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ArtistWorks?cgroupid=999999961&artistid=1826&page=1>
, Franz Kline and De Kooning - who had found a new way to paint that made no 
attempt to depict the subject, but aimed to communicate a feeling for a subject 
simply through the imaginative application of paint.

And it worked. De Kooning's painting, Rosy-Fingered Dawn at Louse Point is as 
beautiful, evocative a landscape painting as I have ever seen, but there's not 
a tree or hill in sight. It makes no attempt to represent a real scene, merely 
to capture the feelings you might have when looking at such a scene. And this 
discovery and the subsequent journey to find out how such a painting came 
about, truly did change my life. The girlfriend is now my wife and my interest 
in art – dormant for so long – is now so great that I work for an art gallery. 
And best of all, I still have my fabulous Amsterdam itinerary up my sleeve to 
enjoy on some future occasion.
 