
Nancy Pelosi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nancy-pelosi> has been 
re-elected as House minority leader on Wednesday, fending off an unexpected 
challenge from Ohio congressman Tim Ryan despite calls for new leadership 
following the Democrats’ crushing electoral defeat.


The party elected Pelosi, a progressive from San Francisco who has led her 
colleagues in the House since 2002, to another term in a closed-door vote on 
Wednesday. She earned 134 votes to Ryan’s 63.

In a tweet, Pelosi said she was “honored” to be re-elected and urged the party 
to get to work.
Nancy Pelosi (@NancyPelosi) 
Honored to be elected by my colleagues to serve as Democratic Leader. Let's 
get to work.pic.twitter.com/knAEqL8azt <https://t.co/knAEqL8azt>
 <https://twitter.com/NancyPelosi/status/804003059022123008> November 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NancyPelosi/status/804003059022123008> 
Pelosi emerged from her victory with a “special spring in my step”, she said, 
describing her excitement at the opportunity to provide voters with a clear 
contrast to a Trump administration.

“We know how to win elections,” Pelosi told reporters after her victory. 
“We’ve done it in the past. We will do it again.”


Pelosi, who became the first female speaker of the House in 2006, said her 
party was committed to working with Donald Trump where it can and opposing him 
when it must.

Pelosi had publicly predicted that she had support from two-thirds of the 
caucus, a threshold she surpassed in Wednesday’s vote. But the 63 votes for 
Ryan amounted to the biggest show of opposition against her during her 14-year 
reign.


Republicans said the final vote tally reveals Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> have “no unified vision” for 
the next two years in the minority.

“This year voters went to the polls and made a bold statement for change in 
Washington but House Democrats just doubled down on the status quo,” said 
Sharon Day, the co-chair of the Republican National Committee, in a statement.

“The American people have been trying to send the Democrat Party a message by 
selecting historic numbers of Republicans for office at nearly every level of 
government but Nancy Pelosi’s re-election shows Democrats aren’t listening.”

Addressing reporters, Pelosi dismissed concerns that her loss was a sign of 
brewing discontent within the party.

 “They weren’t defections; I had two-thirds of the vote,” Pelosi said, 
repeating “two-thirds, two-thirds” to a group of assembled reporters.


Pelosi retained support from many leading Democratic lawmakers ahead of the 
vote, who argued that her experience was necessary to steer the party through 
the turbulent and unprecedented period following Trump’s victory.

“Everything we care about [is] at risk,” Representative Adam Schiff of 
California said in a nominating speech for Pelosi, according to an aide in the 
room. “We need the very best to lead us … No one is a better tactician than 
Nancy Pelosi.”

Pelosi’s win came despite widespread calls for change after the party’s 
demoralizing losses on 8 November, when Republicans won the White House and 
retained control of both chambers of Congress. Democrats only picked up six 
seats in the House after Pelosi had predicted gains of more than 20.

Ryan, 43, who was elected to the House in 2002 and has only known Pelosi’s 
leadership, argued that the party needs fresh stewardship.

After the vote, the Ohio Democrat congratulated Pelosi in a statement, 
praising her for adopting minor reforms that would give newer members of 
Congress more leadership opportunities. He added that he was happy his 
leadership bid prompted “tough family discussions”.

“I ran for leader because I believe strongly in the promise of the Democratic 
party, but November taught us that changes were necessary,” Ryan said in a 
statement. “Our party’s losses showed our caucus that we needed to have a 
serious conversation about our path forward and open the door for new reforms 
and voices in Democratic leadership.”

Ryan’s challenge illustrated the growing discontent among Democrats, 
especially young ones who believe the party needs new leadership at the top 
after failing to reclaim the majority since 2010.

Ryan, whose district covers Youngstown, an old manufacturing town, urged 
Democrats to hone an economic message that would resonate with working class 
families in the Midwest and the South who broadly rejected Hillary Clinton in 
November.


“It is clear as we learn more about the outcome of our elections that we’re 
ignoring crucial voices that deserve to be heard,” Ryan said.

The 2016 election also opened a wide debate over who the Democratic party 
represents. The election results showed a party that is buoyed by support from 
coastal states and failed to appeal to the working class voters who were once 
central to its winning coalition.

Wednesday’s election ensures that the party will be lead by coastal Democrats, 
with Pelosi serving alongside Senator Chuck Schumer of New York.

Pelosi, 76, will lead House Democrats alongside Steny Hoyer, of Maryland, 
James Clyburn, of South Carolina. Hoyer, 77, was elected minority whip and 
Clyburn, 76, was elected assistant leader.

 Kyrsten Sinema, a congresswoman from Arizona who supported Ryan, said she was 
“deeply disappointed” by the result, accusing her fellow Democrats of doubling 
down on a “failed strategy”.


“It is obvious that the current strategy doesn’t work; millions of Americans 
don’t feel that our party represent them anymore and they’ve said so, loudly in 
multiple elections,” Sinema said in a statement. “This should be a time of 
reflection and clear-eyed change, not a time to rubber stamp the failed 
strategy of the past.”
 