 A once top-secret manuscript that is widely recognised as a milestone in the 
development of modern rockets is to go under the hammer in New York today.
Wernher von Braun, the Nazi physicist-turned-leading figure in US space 
exploration, created the 166-page document for his PhD dissertation in April 
1934. It contains the scientist's handwritten annotations as well as his charts 
and graphs.

Von Braun was awarded a doctorate in physics on the basis of the dissertation, 
but its contents were considered so pivotal to the future of rocket development 
that it was seized by the German military and remained classified until 1960.

Von Braun developed Nazi Germany's V2 combat rocket, which was known as the 
Vergeltungswaffen 2, or Vengeance Weapon 2, and was launched on London on 
September 7 1944.

He and his fellow scientists surrendered to US troops at the end of the war 
and were integrated into the American scientific community. Von Braun went on 
to become the director of Nasa's Marshall Space Flight Centre and the main 
architect of the Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo 8, which enabled the 
Americans to put a man on the moon.

But Von Braun remains controversial to this day, as does the decision to 
recruit a former top Nazi scientist.

Although von Braun always contested the charge that he was a willing 
card-carrying member of the National Socialist party, there is evidence to 
suggest he may have joined it voluntarily as early as 1932. He later became an 
officer in the Waffen-SS.

While initially viewed sceptically by many Americans, von Braun, who died in 
1977, soon endeared himself to them with his plans to conquer space, even 
collaborating with Walt Disney to make educational films.

Until now the manuscript, which is being auctioned at Bonhams in Manhattan, 
had been in the possession of a fellow scientist who worked with von Braun on 
the V2 project in Peenemunde, on Germany's Baltic coast.

"Von Braun's revolutionary dissertation changed the course of world history," 
said Catherine Williamson, director of Bonhams' books and manuscripts 
department. "It allows the reader a rare glimpse into the beginning of a great 
career."
 