
The views are barely believable: hundreds of miles of uninhabited landscape, 
unspoilt by humans, but home to an uneven terrain of sheer cliff faces, deep 
reservoirs and dense forests hiding rarely seen creatures. It’s as if 
everything as far as the eye can see has been created by set designers whose 
brief is to create an environment so otherworldly, vast and overwhelming that 
it couldn’t possibly exist in real life.

This is the Scottish Highlands, specifically the Cairngorms National Park 
where uncultivated country is in abundance, covering 4,500 sq km. These 
mountain wilds are also home to five out of six of the highest peaks in 
Scotland.

I’ve come to explore a tiny part of the Scottish wildernesses, largely 
undiscovered and certainly overlooked by thrill-seekers who take their 
curiosity across the world at vast expense when all the wild, unearthly 
landscape they could possibly wish for is, relatively speaking, on their 
doorsteps.

My adventure is to be on foot, and not long after I arrived at Inverness I 
realise two things: the wilds of Scotland are anything but bleak and you don’t 
have to go it completely alone.

My guide is Simon Coker of outdoor travel company, Wilderness Scotland. To say 
he’s an outdoorsy type would be an understatement. He kayaks around craggy 
coastlines, skis down icy precipices, builds snow holes then sleeps in the icy 
burrows overnight and is a volunteer for the Cairngorm Mountain Rescue Service. 
The good news was I won’t get marooned at the summit of a 3,000ft mountain, but 
the bad news was I have to pretend that it would be no problem at all to power 
up the side of a Munro for an hour so he won’t think me a weak city girl with a 
poor constitution.

We start our trek at Glen Feshie, through which the river of the same name 
runs. Everything is green or brown or pink – heather in June is as colourful as 
a cultivated garden of roses. Above the sprawling tundra, wheatears chirp as 
they circle looking for lunch.

Coker tells me that it was possible to walk for days here without encountering 
another soul, especially in the winter. All day we bump into only a couple of 
other walkers; one a lone trekker with enormous calf muscles, overburdened with 
a backpack from which water bottles, compasses and other survival paraphernalia 
were suspended, topped by a roll mat. Before long we come across where he might 
have stayed the previous night: a stone bothy with no electricity or running 
water. When this looks like the lap of luxury, you know you’re in the sticks.
 Red deer stag in the Scottish Highlands. Photograph: John Bracegirdle/Alamy 
“The wilderness does change people’s perspective,” says Coker. “It makes you 
think about what a big place this is. In urban environments we are so cosseted; 
wrapped up with streetlights and houses and TV. The space up here gives you a 
sense of your place as a human on earth.”

Often, I have to see proof of history in the form of man-made creations such 
as buildings or paintings in order to truly appreciate how life was in previous 
centuries. There are so few signs of modernity in the Highlands that I find 
there’s not much of a leap to be made between 2014 and a time when whisky 
smugglers and cattle drovers would travel the same routes.

“There are old settlements which have been abandoned but you can still see the 
ruins of the houses,” says Coker. “This [landscape] would have all looked the 
same 300 years ago when people lived in black houses, cooked over a fire and 
there was no electricity.”

We stop for a picnic lunch with views of Braemar and I wonder why the wilds of 
Scotland are overlooked. All I can come up with is that they’re considered 
inaccessible to a generation of people conditioned to think that exotic is 
synonymous with palm trees, that remote means French Polynesia, that wild means 
the depths of the Amazon or deserted means anywhere in Siberia. Either that or 
people simply don’t know that this sort of landscape exists in the UK.

The thing is, trekking through the Scottish boondocks is risky business. You 
have to be able to read a map properly and dress appropriately. The climate 
changes the entire time and when the clouds descend over a mountain top it can 
be disorienting for even seasoned mountaineers. But that’s the whole point of 
the wilds: the danger attached to exploring those untamed, uninhabited 
territories. You’re not going to feel as enriched by nature if you take a coach 
trip and admire the same panorama with 57 ice cream-eating tourists. To feel a 
sense of isolation you must literally put in the leg work. Otherwise you might 
as well browse Google images.

When we finish our descent from the cloudy apexes (in other parts of Scotland 
the hills go up and down whereas what’s unique about the Cairngorms is that 
continuous stretches of land rolls out before you at altitudes of 3000 ft) 
we’ve been walking six hours and there’s definitely a carbuncle the size of a 
quail’s egg forming beneath the ball of my right foot.

But it has been worth it. Not just because I saw deer jumping through the 
heather, or because I admired an almost aerial view of Coire Garblach. But 
because this wilderness is oddly tranquil. There are no telephones ringing or 
exhaust pipes roaring and at night the only light is from the moon and stars. 
It’s little more than a couple of hours away from north London. I’ll definitely 
be back.

Find out more about Wilderness Scotland here 
<http://www.wildernessscotland.com/>. 

Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month's Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

 