
New Zealand became the first team to book their place in the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> semi-finals after Martin 
Guptill’s big-hitting and more fine spin bowling proved key against Pakistan.

His 80 from 48 balls underpinned a total of 180 for five in Mohali, and then 
Mitchell Santner and Ish Sodhi recorded combined figures of 8-0-54-3 as 
Pakistan’s chase ran out of puff to finish 22 runs short.

New Zealand therefore have a perfect Group 2 record of three wins from three 
and are through to the knockout stage, irrespective of remaining Super 10 
results. Guptill took an instant liking to Mohammad Irfan after Kane Williamson 
won t

he toss, and the giant left-armer proved Pakistan’s most expensive bowler.

Afghanistan’s 13-year journey to cricket’s top table deserves greater reward | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/afghanistan-cricket-world-twenty20-the-spin>
There was just one close call for Guptill, escaping via a marginal lbw call 
against Shahid Afridi on 49. Otherwise, his hitting was clinical in stands of 
62 for the first wicket with Williamson and 52 for the third with Corey 
Anderson. The opener bagged 10 fours and three straight sixes before he chopped 
the impressive Mohammad Sami down on to his stumps.

Anderson and then Ross Taylor kept the Kiwis on the charge, and 16 came off 
Mohammad Amir’s final over.

Sharjeel Khan got Pakistan’s reply off to a blistering start with nine fours 
and a six in his 47 from just 25 balls. The left-hander took 15 off Santner in 
the first over of the chase, and then 18 from Mitchell McClenaghan’s first, too.

However, Sharjeel holed out to Guptill in the off-side ring, off Adam Milne, 
after dominating an opening stand of 65 inside the powerplay with Ahmed 
Shehzad, and then Santner returned to have Khalid Latif caught in the deep.

New Zealand began to haul back the run rate as Santner found some turn and 
conceded only 14 in his last three overs.

Shehzad cracked with a pull off Santner straight to Guptill, again at deep 
midwicket, and after Afridi escaped a sharp caught-behind chance first ball off 
the slow left-armer, the Pakistan captain was instead well-held by Anderson on 
the long-off boundary off the leg-spinner Sodhi.

The boundaries dried up completely in the last five overs, and Guptill capped 
his evening with a third catch of the innings as Umar Akmal miscued Milne to 
long-on.

Pakistan needed 39 off the last two overs, and unsurprisingly fell short as 
they finished on 158 for five.
 