
New Zealand completed a Twenty20 whitewash of Bangladesh with a 27-run win in 
the third and final international in Mount Maunganui.

The win was set up by a Corey Anderson’s 41-ball innings of 94 which helped 
New Zealand reach 194-4, and was underlined by a disciplined bowling effort 
headed by Ish Sodhi’s 2-22 off four overs.

Kevin Pietersen's quickfire 73 helps Stars to Melbourne derby win over 
Renegades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/kevin-pietersens-quickfire-73-helps-stars-to-melbourne-derby-win-over-renegades>
Anderson, who had posted scores of only 13 and four in the first two matches, 
and skipper Kane Williamson featured in a pivotal partnership, putting on 124 
runs from 72 balls for the fourth wicket.

Williamson was bowled for 60 by Rubel Hossain with 11 balls remaining, but 
Anderson went on to finish his innings with a flourish.

He belted 24 off nine balls, clearing the rope three times to set a New 
Zealand T20 record of 10 sixes, bettering Brendon McCullum’s eight, set seven 
years ago against Australia.

Williamson and Anderson came together early in the seventh over, with the 
Black Caps teetering at 41-3, building momentum slowly in reaching 55-3 after 
10 overs before finishing strongly.

Bangladesh’s chase started well despite the unexpected absence of an injured 
Imrul Kayes, with makeshift openers Tamim Iqbal and Soumya Sakar putting on 44 
off 4.4 overs for the opening wicket.

Trent Boult, who took 2-42, removed Tamim for 24 with a shorter ball, but 
Soumya kept the run rate ticking over at around 10 an over.

He went two balls into the eighth over for 42 off 28 balls, Sodhi taking a 
tricky caught-and-bowled in swirling wind, and it was all downhill for 
Bangladesh.

They were two batsmen short, Kayes pushed down the order after injuring his 
knee when he crashed into the advertising hoardings as he tried to haul in an 
Anderson six.

Skipper Mashrafe Mortaza was also doubtful after another Anderson drive 
crashed into his hand. In their absence, Bangladesh struggled for momentum, 
losing wickets regularly as they battled to 167-7 off their 20 overs.

New Zealand, who also went unbeaten last month in three one-day internationals 
against Bangladesh, begin a two-Test series on Thursday in Wellington.
 