
For the second successive global tournament it is New Zealand playing the 
cricket that has the cognoscenti purring but after finishing as the runners-up 
in last year’s 50-over World Cup, they are aware this brings no guarantees of 
silverware.

It is perhaps why their captain, Kane Williamson, chose to remind everyone of 
the unpredictable nature of cricket, especially theTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> format, when speaking before 
Wednesday’s semi-final with England in Dehli, where he focused on the process 
rather than the result.

“We’ve made one final and lost. We don’t really look at it too closely, 
though. At the moment the team is relaxed about how they’re going about their 
business,” said Williamson, who was part of the side who romped to the 2015 
World Cup final exactly a year ago under his predecessor Brendon McCullum, only 
to seethe trophy snatched by Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/australia-new-zealand-world-cup-final>
 in Melbourne.

Eoin Morgan cannot believe the progress his England side have made
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/29/eoin-morgan-england-world-twenty20-semi-final--cricket-new-zealand>
“We just want to keep taking small steps forward as a team and hopefully that 
breeds improvement. At the same time we respect the game. You can win or lose 
and Twenty20 is more fickle than any other format, so it’s important we go into 
the game and play with a fearless nature and freedom.”

As was the case last year, New Zealand entered the knockout stage unbeaten, 
with wins over India, Australia, Pakistan and Bangladesh in a campaign built on 
a combination of shrewd team selection and some smart cricket in the field when 
defending small totals.

They have racked up the air miles along the way too, playing all four group 
fixtures at different venues around India. Sincelosing to England in a warm-up 
in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-beat-new-zealand-world-t20-rashid>
 on 12 March – Eoin Morgan’s side successfully chased 170 with six wickets and 
four balls to spare – New Zealand have flown 3,315 miles.

England, on the other hand, stayed in Mumbai for their first two group matches 
before a single journey of 700 miles to Delhi, where they now play their third 
successive fixture.

Williamson, who like McCullum before him tends not to go down the whingeing 
route, shrugged off the contrasting itineraries, as well as the additional 
familiarity with conditions England have. “It’s great, we’ve been able to see 
more of India than most opposition sides,” he said, with tongue slightly in 
cheek. “It’s one of those things. I’m sure it’s happened by coincidence. The 
guys have embraced it, the flights and the variety of the hotels.

“I suppose England have been fortunate to play here a couple of times but in 
Twenty20 cricket anything can happen. We will look at the conditions before we 
decide on our XI and consider the track we are playing on, the ground size and 
the opposition.”

In this respect New Zealand have been faultless, with Williamson and the 
coach, Mike Hesson, adopting a horses-for-courses policy under which their 
regular new ball partners in limited overs cricket, Tim Southee and Trent 
Boult, are yet to feature. Their smiles from the sidelines, despite the 
ignominy of sitting in hi-vis vests as drinks waiters, also sums up New 
Zealand’s all-for-one approach to their cricket; there appears to be little ego 
to speak of in the camp.

Williamson said: “We’ve got some world-class bowlers that haven’t played a 
game and have still been brilliant in the group. They understand that, as best 
we can, we’re picking the side to give us the best chance of success. We’ve got 
all 15 players on board with that.”

One of Southee or Boult may yet feature in Delhi – England’s seamers offered 
greater control than the spinnersagainst Sri Lanka  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-sri-lanka-world-t20-match-report>
on Saturday – and yet it is clear New Zealand’s chief threat with the ball 
comes in the slightly unexpected form of their spinners.

The left-armer Mitchell Santner and leg-spinner Ish Sodhi have shared 17 
wickets and both have gone at under six runs per over, while the off-spinner 
Nathan McCullum, used in the wins over India and Bangladesh, is the thriftiest 
bowler in the tournament, going at 4.2 runs per over.

Aggression with the bat comes from the opener Martin Guptill, who since the 
start of 2015 has scored 518 runs in the format at a strike rate of 164 – the 
highest of any batsman to score more than 300 runs in this period – and will be 
the key wicket for England’s bowlers.

Much was made of Brendon McCullum’s absence from the New Zealand side leading 
into the tournament and yet they had been preparing for life without him for 
some time; the former captain played only three Twenty20s after the last 
tournament. His absence has scarcely been felt, with Williamson’s captaincy in 
the field – especially in the defence of 127 against India – drawing wide 
praise, even if it is something he is keen to share with his team-mates.

“As a group it’s been nice to see that, after a transition without Brendon, 
the team has continued to grow. That’s important,” Williamson said. “I’m trying 
to do the best job I can with many other leaders in the group that assist in 
the overall leadership of the side. It’s important to come up with sound game 
plans but overall it’s the players that are executing them well.”
 