
New Zealand maintained their 100% winning record at the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> with a dominant 75-run 
victory in Kolkata that sent Bangladesh home without a victory.

Already assured of a semi-final spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/new-zealand-pakistan-world-twenty20-match-report>
, the New Zealand bowlers produced another excellent display to defend 146 with 
ease and secure a fourth group two triumph.

Bangladesh soon slipped to 43 for six in reply and, after an 11-minute delay 
for floodlight failure, were dismissed for 70 inside 16 overs as Grant Elliott 
took three wickets for 12 runs from four overs and Ish Sodhi claimed 3-21.

The 20-year-old left-armer Mustafizur Rahman also excelled with the ball, 
outfoxing the New Zealand batsmen with his slower-ball cutters to return 
career-bestTwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> international 
figures of five for 22.

New Zealand struggled to build on some early eye-catching strokeplay from Kane 
Williamson on a slow pitch showing signs of uneven bounce but managed to post 
145 for eight.

Opening alongside Henry Nicholls after Martin Guptill was rested, Williamson 
took advantage of the new ball by striking four fours and a six during a 39-run 
powerplay.

Nicholls became the first victim for Mustafizur, missing a cutter, before a 
frustrated Williamson was bowled round his legs for 42 attempting a swipe off 
the left-armer.

Bangladesh then kept a lid on the scoring with Colin Munro and Ross Taylor 
struggling to get bat on ball until the former freed his arms in the 14th over. 
Having failed to hit a boundary in his first 25 balls, Munro blasted a four and 
two big sixes but was bowled attempting another off Al-Amin Hossain, while 
Corey Anderson and Taylor (28) also went.

Mustafizur, having had Grant Elliott caught off a leading edge, bowled 
Mitchell Santner and Nathan McCullum in consecutive deliveries. His hat-trick 
ball, the final delivery of the innings, was despatched for six by Mitchell 
McClenghan, who was among the wickets early.

McClenaghan bowled an advancing Mohammad Mithun, after Tamim Iqbal was run out 
by a brilliant Munro direct-hit from short third man, before Santner, McCullum, 
Sodhi and Elliott all struck to leave the Tigers reeling when the lights went 
out.

Mahmudullah became a T20I record ninth batsmen to be bowled in the match, 
failing to pick a Sodhi delivery, ahead of Elliott and Sodhi finishing the job.
 