
A cell-based diabetes treatment has been developed by scientists who say it 
could eliminate the need for those with the condition to inject insulin.

The therapy involves a capsule of genetically engineered cells implanted under 
the skin that automatically release insulin as required. Diabetic mice that 
were treated with the cells were found to have normal blood sugar levels for 
several weeks.

Scientists said they hope to obtain a clinical trial licence to test the 
technology in patients within two years. If successful, the treatment would be 
relevant for all type 1 diabetes patients, as well as those cases of type 2 
diabetes that require insulin injections.

Martin Fussenegger, who led the research at the ETH university in Basel, said: 
“By 2040, every tenth human on the planet will suffer fromsome kind of diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/growing-numbers-of-children-have-type-2-diabetes-figures-show>
, that’s dramatic. We should be able to do a lot better than people measuring 
their glucose.”

Fussenegger said that, if confirmed as safe and effective in humans, diabetes 
patients could be given an implant that would need to be replaced three times a 
year rather than injections, which do not perfectly control blood sugar levels, 
leading to long-term complications including eye, nerve and heart damage.

In Britain, about 400,000 people have type 1 diabetes and three million have 
type 2 diabetes, about 10% of whom need to inject insulin to control the 
condition.

Type 1 diabetes normally begins in childhood and is an autoimmune disease in 
which the body kills off all its pancreatic beta cells. The cells respond to 
the body’s fluctuating glucose levels by releasing insulin, which regulates 
blood sugar. Without beta cells, patients need to monitor glucose and inject 
insulin as required – typically several times each day.


Everything you wanted to know about diabetes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/everything-want-to-know-diabetes-technology-revolutionising>
Previously, scientists have attempted to artificially cultivate pancreatic 
cells from patients’ stem cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/06/scientists-closer-stem-cell-cure-type-1-diabetes>
. However, scientists have struggled to manufacture the cells at the scale 
necessary for clinical use, and the cells are naturally prone to dying off once 
introduced into the body, according to Fussenegger. “They are prima donnas in 
the cellular context,” he said.

His team took a different approach, choosing to re-engineer human kidney 
cells, known as HEK cells, to perform the function normally carried out by the 
pancreas. Two genes were introduced into the cells – one to make them sensitive 
to glucose levels and a second to instruct the cell to pump out insulin when 
glucose levels exceeded a threshold.

“We believed we needed a more robust cell type if you go for cell-based 
therapies,” he said.

In the study <http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf4006>, published in 
Science, the engineered HEK cells were found to outperform normal pancreatic 
cells in terms of their ability to regulate blood sugar in mice. They were 
healthy three weeks after the implant and performed normally on various tests 
designed to measure their ability to control blood sugar.

“It’s hard to understand why ours should be better than something that evolved 
for millions of years,” said . “It shows that as engineers, thinking 
rationally, we can also do a very good job.”

In the study, mice were treated such that they lost all their 
insulin-producing pancreatic cells. The cells were then implanted into the 
mice, enclosed in a teabag-like porous capsule that protected the human cells 
from the mouse immune system, but allowed insulin to diffuse out.

In humans, the same approach would mean cells would not need to be genetically 
matched to the patient, and frozen capsules could be manufactured on an 
industrial scale.

The team behind the work have created a start-up to commercialise the 
technique and hope it could reach the market within a decade.

Emily Burns, research communications manager at Diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/diabetes> UK, said: “We can already 
replace the cells in the pancreas that are damaged in type 1 diabetes by using 
cells taken from donated pancreases, but one of the issues with this approach 
is that there aren’t enough donors. That’s why research like this is so 
important: finding ways to produce an unlimited supply of pancreatic cells, or 
cells that act like them, in the lab.”
 