
Amnesty International has accused the first minister of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Arlene Foster, of delaying 
justice by blocking funds for a series of inquests into Troubles-related 
killings.

Foster, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup>, confirmed she had used her 
influence in the devolved power-sharing executive to hold back finance for a 
backlog of inquests connected to the conflict.

 Patrick Corrigan, Amnesty’s director in Northern Ireland, said: “Justice 
delayed is justice denied.”

The inquests are in the main connected to killings mostly involving the 
security forces rather than paramilitaries, including the Ballymurphy massacre 
of 1971, when British soldiers shot dead 11 civilians.

However, the delayed inquests do include the 1976 IRA massacre of 10 
Protestant civilians in South Armagh.

Northern Ireland’s lord chief justice, Declan Morgan, signed off a request for 
funding for the inquests, which cover about 80 deaths, but this request was 
blocked due to DUP opposition on the executive.


Corrigan criticised that decision. “Here we have scores of families who have 
been denied even inquests for decades now into the deaths of their loved ones,” 
he said.

“They deserve those inquests, have a right to them, and such rights shouldn’t 
become bargaining chips in some kind of political game and that seems to be 
what’s going on,” Corrigan added.

Speaking on Tuesday night on the last major television debate before 
Thursday’s Northern Ireland assembly elections, Foster defended the decision to 
block the cash for the inquests.


“Unfortunately a lot of innocent victims feel that their voice has not been 
heard recently and there has been an imbalance in relation to state killings as 
opposed to paramilitary killings,” the first minister said.

Foster said she was surprised that the business in the Northern Ireland 
executive was being discussed in the news.

“I wanted the opportunity to discuss further with the lord chief justice 
around the issues with innocent victims and how we can deal with their issues 
and I make no apologies for that. I think the rights of innocent victims are 
very key in this and I will not allow any process to rewrite the past.”
 