
Australian paceman Mitchell Starc says struggling batsman Nic Maddinson should 
be selected to play in the Boxing Day Test. Maddinson is under pressure to 
retain his place at No6 after selectors brought uncapped allrounder Hilton 
Cartwright into the 13-man Test squad to face Pakistan.

The 25-year-old has scored a duck, one and four in his first two matches in 
the baggy green. But Starc says his NSW teammate should be given another chance 
to prove himself, citing his own struggles early in his career.

Aboriginal cricket pioneer Faith Thomas: 'I'm still the fastest woman bowler 
ever'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/aboriginal-cricket-pioneer-faith-thomas-im-still-the-fastest-woman-bowler-ever>
“I definitely think Maddo should get another chance,” Starc said on Friday. 
“In the end, it’s up to the selectors but I think continued cricket, definitely 
at this level, can only help him, and it’d be a great opportunity for him at 
Boxing Day after we’ve had a couple of good wins.”

Their team-mate Khawaja has dismissed talk that Pakistan’s cricketers might 
have the momentum heading into the second Test. While Pakistan are 1-0 down in 
the series, they nearly pulled off a record run chase in the first Test in 
Brisbane, only falling short by 49 runs. It has set the scene for intriguing 
second Test, particularly given the tourists’ mercurial form.

“I don’t think that matters – it’s a different ground, different conditions, 
and you can’t really measure momentum, can you? I’m not sure if it exists,” 
Khawaja said of how the first Test ended.


Khawaja added that the Australians debriefed after Brisbane and acknowledged 
they could have played better in the closing stages of the Test, but added that 
a win is a win. “There are always things we can do better, no matter what game, 
but ... we still won,” he said. “It doesn’t matter what you win by - you don’t 
get any more points for winning earlier, later, even though it’s nicer to win 
earlier.

“We know we could have been better in a few spots and we hope to improve that 
in the next game, but a win’s a win. If you gave me the same result in this 
game, I’d take it.”

Khawaja also said credit should be given to Pakistan for how well they fought 
out the game. “We weren’t playing at our best and they were playing very well, 
that’s what it’s all about,” he said. While the end was tighter than Australia 
would have liked, Khawaja said it was pleasing that they took control in the 
first innings. “We led the game the whole way through, we sort of controlled it 
the whole way through,” he said.

The heavy workload for the Australian bowlers in Brisbane is the primary 
reason for the inclusion of all-rounder Hilton Cartwright being drafted in as 
cover. “I can see where they’re going with it,” Khawaja said of the selectors’ 
move. “I don’t know – there’s so much that goes into it in terms of how the 
bowlers are feeling, what’s happening, whether they are 100 per cent.”

“Fast bowlers never seem like they’re 100 per cent because their bodies go 
through so much. It will be up to the selectors, that’s why they get paid the 
big bucks.”

Sydney Thunder back out-of-form Big Bash League star Andre Russell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/sydney-thunder-back-out-of-form-big-bash-league-star-andre-russell>
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia is reviewing 
security levels for the summer of cricket following a foiled terrorist plot to 
attack Melbourne’s CBD on Christmas Day. But security arrangements for the 
Boxing Day Test, where up to 60,000 people are expected to attend on the first 
day, will remain as planned, with fans subject to hand-held security scans and 
bag checks.

“Our security team is in contact with the relevant authorities to ensure we 
have the appropriate level of security at the Boxing Day Test and other cricket 
matches being held around the country,” chief executive James Sutherland said 
on Friday. “The safety and security of our fans, players and officials 
attending any cricket match is our number one priority.”

“We applaud Victoria Police for their efforts this morning in neutralising the 
threat and we will continue to work with the relevant authorities to ensure the 
highest security standards and protocols are maintained.”


The Melbourne Cricket Club last month ruled out a return of the MCG’s 
so-called “ring of steel” temporary fence for the summer of cricket. The 
maligned security measure was introduced for cricket matches in response to 
last year’s Paris terror attacks but was dropped for the AFL season.

Australian paceman Starc on Friday said he had full confidence in team 
security manager Frank Dimasi to keep the side safe. “I think it’s his 100th 
Test match (coming up) so he wouldn’t be there if he wasn’t good at what he 
does,” Starc said. “I’m sure he’ll keep us thoroughly informed if we need to 
know about anything but, for us, it’s training as usual.”

“Obviously, we hear things on the news but it is what it is. We’ll focus on 
the cricket and let Frank and the security guys take care of that.”
 