
Johnny is wearing his unmissable electric-blue Lycra shorts and has a miner's 
lamp strapped to his forehead. He's packed four bananas, four water bottles and 
four spare inner tubes. He also claims not to be superstitious or to suffer 
from OCD, but I am not so sure. I have opted to wear a duplicate of the yellow 
jersey presented to the winner of the Tour de France. It's warm, waterproof and 
highly visible – ideal for a long ride. But Johnny, a veteran of many a 
sportive, warns me that serious cyclists won't appreciate the irony of a 
sweating middle-aged man wearing the maillot jaune.

No matter, it'll be dark, very dark. The event we have entered is an all-night 
ride and we will be joining an estimated 1,500 cyclists to ride the 100-odd 
miles from east London to the Suffolk coast in an event known as the Dunwich 
Dynamo.

Britain's crazily congested roads combined with our hectic daily lives mean it 
is very hard to find both the time and the space to enjoy a long, continuous 
ride. But cycling at night provides an instant solution: no office hours, no 
traffic, no delays, no endless stopping and starting … no sleep. Oh, yes, well 
it can't all be good. As a result night rides are becoming more popular, and 
during the summer's short warm nights you will find nocturnal events taking 
place all over the country. One of the biggest and longest-established is the 
Dunwich Dynamo, a free-wheeling turn-up-and-ride affair that has been held 
annually since 1993.

The DD started when a group of couriers, tired and emotional after a long week 
dodging traffic in the capital, decided that they could do with some sea air 
and were going to ride to the coast. They headed north-east out of London and 
kept going, and going, and going, until 114 miles later they hit the far edge 
of Suffolk just as dawn was breaking over Dunwich.

The couriers enjoyed their trip so much they decided to do it again the 
following year, choosing the Saturday nearest the full moon at the end of July. 
They stuck to their same slightly anarchic formula – no organisation, no 
support vehicles, no mechanical back-up, no entry fees, not even an official 
start time. You bring your own water, puncture kits and energy bars (flapjacks 
in my case, fairy cakes and bananas in Johnny's). It's not a race, it's a 
journey, there is no winner – and if you fancy it you just turn up and go.

Dunwich was the ancient capital of East Anglia more than 1,500 years ago, 
though coastal erosion means it is now little more than a pretty village on an 
endless shingle beach. There's little to see there, but there's something 
wonderfully portentous about linking the bustle of the modern metropolis with 
the ghostly quiet of a ruined harbour in a single, all-night ride. Though the 
original couriers set off without preparation, Johnny and I do nothing of the 
sort. We've been humming and hawing about doing the ride for years and have 
found excuses ranging from feeble ("It's raining, quite hard actually") to 
acceptable ("My bike has been stolen") for not doing it. But 2010 was going to 
be our year.

We meet at about 6pm on a dry and still evening on a busy corner between our 
homes in Dulwich, south London. In a rather tragic way, Johnny is strangely 
excited about the literary fluke that we will be riding from Dulwich to Dunwich 
and keeps going on about it. ("Just one letter's difference … Imagine!") I put 
it down to nerves. We start pedalling through the Saturday traffic towards the 
congregation point near the Pub on the Park in Hackney's London Fields.

The atmosphere there is exhilarating. There are hundreds of people milling 
about and the park itself is littered with bikes. There are all sorts – 
Bromptons, fixies, high-end racers and rusty old bikes that seem to have been 
dug out of the garage that afternoon. We see a guy on a butcher's bike with his 
dog sitting in the basket. We meet up with a few other mates, enjoy a last slow 
pint and a first quick pee, and finally start rolling slowly north-east at 
about 9pm. You leave when you feel like it, anytime between about 7pm and 
nightfall.
 Photograph: Alamy 
The first few miles snaking out of the city are chaotic and cheerful, in stark 
contrast to the grim industrial estates we travel through next, which border 
the outer reaches of suburbia like a coastal shelf surrounding the island of 
London. A few motorists feel overwhelmed by the number of bikes and lose their 
tempers, but mostly the faces we pass are smiling – or baffled.

The post-industrial wasteland soon gives way to the huge gated residences of 
Epping's footballing elite and then, finally, we are off and free in the great 
darkness that is the Essex countryside. Unlit lanes, sleepy villages, boozers 
on the road outside late-opening pubs.

Johnny and I wheel along happily for about an hour before we decide it's time 
to stop for a pint. One regular recommends Greene King IPA as it is only 3.6% 
abv. Stopping for a pint mid-event goes against all the years I have spent 
competing in one mindless event or another, and you have to remind yourself 
it's not a race. We end up pulling over at three pubs, though I move on to 
lemonade after the first.

By now it's 11pm, we still have 90 miles to go and it's utterly pitch black. 
Wouldn't I be better off in bed?

But we crack on, following the endless ribbon of flashing red lights dancing 
into the dark ahead of us. Finally the first crack of dawn breaks the sky at 
about 3.30. The dark gives way to grey. We see the man and the dog again. The 
dog looks a bit travel sick. And then the first signpost for Dunwich. The last 
mile or two is all downhill and suddenly we don't want it to end.

On the beach, the local cafe has opened early to cash in on the hordes of 
hungry cyclists. Johnny and I go for a traditional fry-up, but after all the 
bananas and fairy cakes I feel a bit sick too. We stagger down on to the 
shingle, which looks surreal. Hundreds of bikes are lying about like expensive 
flotsam. And people are swimming.

It's got to be done. We strip off and splash into the brown waves. Nauseous, 
sticky, cold, tired and naked, but laughing – in a slightly deranged way.

Getting home is the downside of all this upside. For the past few years 
Southwark Cyclists has organised a coach convoy back to London. Others take 
their chances with the train. But the best way home is to throw yourself on a 
friend's mercy and ask them to come and pick you up. Bob is our man.

He arrives at about 8am and straps our bikes on to the rack as we change 
clothes and climb in. "So how was it?" he asks as he points the car towards 
London. "Wonderful," I say looking round at Johnny, but he's already asleep, 
his miner's lamp flashing weakly on the seat beside him.

• This year's Dunwich Dynamo takes place on 16 July. Meet at the Pub on the 
Park, 19 Martello Street, London E8 (pubonthepark.com 
<http://www.pubonthepark.com>) at 8pm for a 9pm start. For details of the 
event, seesouthwarkcyclists.org.uk 
<http://southwarkcyclists.org.uk/content/dunwich-dynamo>
 