
Route information

Length 5-7 miles

Duration Two hours max, including a cake break

Start/finish Falmer pond, just outside Brighton

Classification Moderate

Terrain Off-road, farm tracks, cycle routes, hilly

Who's it good for? Families with older kids, an evening out with friends, or 
urban cyclists looking for
a challenge

Map n/a

A night-ride out of Brighton

Brighton's status as a cycling city makes it great for urban biking, but being 
bang next to the South Downs national park means access to miles of fun, 
off-road cycling. A new cycle path is being laid from Fiveways in north 
Brighton out to the Downs, or you can hop on a train to Falmer, nine minutes 
away, for numerous easy routes into the countryside.

This is what I plan to do, only my ride has a twist – it's at night. My guide 
is Nigel Greenwood of So Sussex, a local company offering events, educational 
programmes and festivals in the Sussex countryside. "We aim to get people back 
out there," explains Greenwood, as he fixes strong lights to the handlebars of 
our mountain bikes. "We reintroduce people to the stuff that's on their 
doorstep, at a pace they can manage. People come for the Pier and Pavilion, but 
some of the best experiences are beyond the city."

A learned guide
Born and bred in Sussex, Greenwood knows heaps about the landscape and tailors 
each ride to suit the ability and interests of the group.

As we cycle up from Falmer pond, along a newly laid track on the edge of a 
field, the light is fading and it's raining, but I feel exhilarated and the 
uphill climb warms me. At Woodingdean, we tack inland and the light from my 
helmet picks out hundreds of shiny discs. It's a flock of sheep, eyes glinting 
in the beam as they hop out of the way.

The cycling is surprisingly easy. You can see well – the lights work a treat – 
the tracks are clear and the darkness and quiet are cocooning. It's just you, 
the Downs and nature, yet you're only minutes from civilisation.

Through the murk we spot the streetlights of Newhaven and then, turning 
another corner, we see Lewes lurking over the hills.

I spot something by the track. "Is that a cow?" Greenwood says no, it's a 
bush, bent over by the wind. When a rabbit hops across our path, I'm ecstatic, 
but that's nothing, apparently. "I've seen badgers, foxes and even had deer 
skip alongside me as I ride," says Greenwood.

"Is that a cow?" I ask again. This time it is. A whole herd. They're not 
pleased to see us. It takes five minutes to pedal through the bemused bovines, 
who stare into our lights suspiciously. Then it's downhill on the track home, 
bobbing through potholes and puddles.

Over a pint in a nearby pub, Greenwood explains why he loves cycling at night. 
"It's a unique experience," he says. "You're in a dark, quiet space, but not 
far from the masses. When it's clear, the night sky is wonderful." Then he 
passes me some homemade cake, included in every So Sussex ride. "There's no 
point doing exercise outdoors if you can't have a bit of cake afterwards," he 
says.

Greenwood takes families with children from age eight upwards, depending on 
ability. He supplies all bicycles, helmets and lights.

Expect to pay around £90 for one person on a two-hour ride, dropping 
proportionally to £30-40 per person for groups of ten or more, with So Sussex 
(07739 050816, sosussex.co.uk)

Useful information

How to get there
Southern trains run every half an hour from London Victoria. First Capital 
Connect runs four services per hour from Bedford, through London to Brighton. 
Restrictions apply to non-folding cycles. There are also direct services east 
to Eastbourne and Hastings and west to Southampton.

Where to eat and drink
Big Beach Cafe <http://www.bigbeachcafe.com>, Hove Lagoon, owned by Fatboy 
Slim, has well-priced, hearty grub.Chilli Pickle <http://thechillipickle.com> 
on Jubilee Square serves tasty, regional Indian cuisine in buzzy surroundings.

Where to stay
Sea Spray <http://seaspraybrighton.co.uk> in Kemptown (family rooms from £120, 
doubles from £89)has 16 luxury themed rooms (Venice, New York, Morocco etc), 
including five family-friendly rooms, containing everything from fridges to 
cots and baby baths.Fab Guest <http://fabguest.co.uk> (singles from £75 per 
night) has 14 contemporary rooms in a Georgian townhouse on a quiet street near 
the seafront.Hotel Una <http://hotel-una.co.uk> (doubles from £115) is a 
family-run boutique hotel in central Brighton.

Bike hire and tours
Brighton Sports Co <http://brightonsports.co.uk> on Madeira Drive hires out 
Californian beach cruiser bikes, children's bikes, tagalongs and child seats. 
Prices start at £6 per hour, including helmets and locks.Amsterdammers' 
<http://brightoncyclehire.co.uk>, just below Brighton station, has the largest 
fleet of hire bikes in the city, including tandems, children's bikes and 
"mother" bikes with two child seats. Prices start at £7 for three hours.
Brighton Bike Tours <http://brightonbiketour.com> runs two-and-a-half-hour 
tours starting at the station (£19.50) or one hour twilight tours (£12.50). 
Private family tours are also available.

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 