
Police are investigating a video in which republican dissident terror group 
the New IRA displays what appears to be a rocket launcher on the streets of
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

The weapon was shown on a propaganda video the paramilitary organisation 
recorded in the Ardoyne district of north Belfast. The film appeared on social 
media on Monday evening.

The New IRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> has a presence in Ardoyne and 
has launched a number of home-made grenade launcher attacks in recent years 
against police patrols in the north and west of the city.

The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) confirmed on Tuesday that it was 
investigating the show of strength by the anti-peace process terror group. Supt 
Darrin Jones said: “Police are aware of a video having been posted on a social 
media site. Inquiries are ongoing.”

The 40-second video shows masked men patrolling the streets of Ardoyne. One 
man carries what appears to be a military-grade rocket launcher, while another 
holds an assault rifle.

It is the second time in two years the New IRA has released propaganda images 
of weapons it claims to have at its disposal.

In November 2014, the group released photographic stills to the Belfast media 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/sunday-life/video-shocking-footage-shows-dissidents-armed-with-rocket-launchers-roaming-belfast-streets-35271943.html>
 of masked men holding improvised grenade launchers, one of which was later 
used in an attack on a police Land Rover near Ardoyne. No officers were killed 
or injured in the attack, in which the PSNI later confirmed the New IRA had 
fired a new type of armour-piercing warhead.

The New IRA announced its existence in a communique to the Guardian three 
years ago. The terror group’s statement said it was formed out of an amalgam of 
former Real IRA activists, independent hardline armed republican units from 
East Tyrone and members of the Derry-based vigilante organisation, Republican 
Action Against Drugs.

Over the last three years, it has murdered prison officers David Black and 
Adrian Ismay as well as being responsible for the killings of at least two 
Catholic civilians it accused of being involved in the drug trade. It has bases 
in north and west Belfast, Derry, and North Armagh.

However, the overwhelming majority of nationalists and mainstream republicans 
in Northern Ireland continue to support the peace process and still vote for 
Sinn Féin rather than back the dissidents’ armed campaigns.

 