
A high court judge has ruled that Northern Ireland’s almost outright ban on 
abortion breaches the human rights of women and girls, including rape victims.

The historic judgment, delivered in Belfast on Monday, could lead to women and 
girls who are the victims of rape and incest as well those suffering from fatal 
foetal abnormalities having terminations in Northern Irish hospitals.

The Royal College of Midwives has welcomed the landmark judgement in Belfast 
High Court. Breedagh Hughes, the RCM’sNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Director, said it would give 
some legal protection for all health professionals faced with the possibility 
of carrying out terminations in local hospitals

Hughes said: “Today’s ruling is extremely welcome. It now gives midwives and 
other health professionals legal protection and a release from the fear of 
prosecution. This will enable midwives to offer women who have a diagnosis of 
fatal foetal anomaly the appropriate care, support and advice that they also 
have often been denied because of the Assembly’s inertia.”

 Hughes said that the failure of local politicians to legislate in favour of 
some limited forms of abortion had put her members and other medical staff at 
risk of arrest and prosecution

But Northern Ireland’s attorney general later said he was considering whether 
to appeal the ruling.

At present, under a 19th-century law, local medical teams could be jailed for 
life for carrying out abortions even in these circumstances. Unlike the rest of 
the UK, theAbortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act 1967 has 
never applied to Northern Ireland and since devolution was restored the 
Stormont assembly has resisted any attempt to relax the near-total ban on 
terminations in local hospitals.

Abortions are only permitted in the region’s health service if the life of a 
mother is directly under threat or in cases in which there would be lasting 
long-term negative effects on her health by continuing with the pregnancy.

Real reform of Northern Ireland's abortion laws is still a long way off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-abortion-laws-human-rights>
In his ground-breaking ruling and referring to cases of rape, incest and fatal 
foetal abnormality, Mr Justice Horner told the high court in Belfast: “In the 
circumstances, given this issue is unlikely to be grasped by the legislature in 
the foreseeable future, and the entitlement of citizens of Northern Ireland to 
have their convention rights protected by the courts, I conclude that the 
article eight rights of women in Northern Ireland who are pregnant with fatal 
foetal abnormalities or who are pregnant as a result of sexual crime are 
breached by the impugned provisions.”

Referring to political inaction at Stormont over the abortion question, Horner 
also suggested that a referendum might have to be held to enact his conclusions 
on reforming local abortion law.

The judge said that without a referendum it was impossible to know how the 
majority of people in Northern Ireland viewed abortion.

Welcoming the judgment, Les Allamby, the head of the Northern Ireland Human 
Rights Commission (NIHRC), said: “In taking this case we sought to change the 
law so that women and girls in Northern Ireland have the choice of accessing a 
termination of pregnancy locally in circumstances of fatal foetal 
abnormalities, rape or incest, without being criminalised for doing so.

“We are please that today that the high court has held that the current law is 
incompatible with human rights and has ruled in the commission’s favour.

“Today’s result is historic, and will be welcomed by many of the vulnerable 
women and girls who have been faced with these situations. It was important for 
the commission to take this challenge in its own name, in order to protect 
women and girls in Northern Ireland and we are delighted with the result.”

John Larkin QC, meanwhile, said he was “profoundly disappointed by this 
decision and I am considering grounds for appeal”.


The attorney general came under sustained criticism from pro-choice 
campaigners three years ago when he called for a Stormont investigation into 
the opening of the Marie Stopes Clinic. He even offered politicians advice on 
how to ensure no kind of termination was carried out by the clinic’s Belfast 
office.

 His intervention prompted claims that he was overstepping his role as a 
lawmaker in the province.

Back in June, a number of organisations and individuals made submissions to 
the Belfast high court. They included Sarah Ewart, who went public about having 
to travel to London to access termination services in 2013 after her first baby 
was diagnosed with anencephaly, a severe brain malformation.

In her case, the NIHRC had argued that forcing women like Ewart to leave the 
jurisdiction away from support networks amounted to cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment and that the current law was incompatible with the European 
convention on human rights, violating the human rights of women and girls.

Northern Ireland's abortion laws: share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/25/northern-irelands-abortion-laws-share-your-experiences>
Ewart welcomed the judge’s ruling on Monday and said she hoped other women 
would no longer have leave home for England in order to get a termination.

She said: “I, and many women like me, have been failed by our politicians. 
First, they left me with no option but to go to England for medical care. Then, 
by their refusal to change the law, they left me with no option but to go to 
the courts on my and other women’s behalf.

“I am an ordinary woman who suffered a very personal family tragedy, which the 
law in Northern Ireland turned into a living nightmare.”

Bernadette Smyth, who heads the anti-abortion group Precious Life, branded the 
high court judgment “undemocratic”.

She claimed the ruling could “open the floodgates” for abortion on demand not 
just in limited circumstances – a charge the NIHRC has rebutted, pointing out 
that its court case was not about extending the 1967 act to the province.

Northern Ireland’s Department of Justice, which the commission took to court 
over the abortion issue, has six weeks to decide whether to appeal.

At least 1,000 women and girls from Northern Ireland travel to hospitals in 
Britain for terminations every year. Official figures for 2013, for instance, 
suggest 800 Northern Irish females had abortions in Britain – although that 
number is regarded as an underestimate. Among the 800 was a 13-year-old who 
became pregnant through incest.

The only law applying to abortion in Northern Ireland is the Offences Against 
the Persons Act 1861, which contains a life sentence for anyone convicted of 
carrying out a termination even in cases of rape or incest.

Amnesty International said it was shameful that laws on abortion “date back to 
the 19th century and carry the harshest criminal penalties in Europe”.

Grainne Teggart, of Amnesty’s My Body, My Rights campaign, said: “Today’s 
court decision is a damning indictment of the Northern Ireland executive’s 
failure to prioritise women’s healthcare. It’s shameful that the courts have 
had to step in because politicians have repeatedly failed Northern Ireland’s 
women.” NEW
 