
Near to where Ronan Kerr grew up is the village of Beragh, home to one of the 
founding members of theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Civil Rights Association, set 
up hoping to reform politics but beaten off the streets by the 
unionist-controlled police prior to the onset of the Troubles in 1969.

Two years later, Paddy Joe McClean was tortured by the British army when the 
government introduced internment without trial in response to the security 
crisis. Yet, despite witnessing his peaceful movement repressed and enduring 
beatings at the hands of British troops, McClean always argued throughout 35 
years of conflict that violence was not the answer.

His son, Ciaran, has taken up that family tradition and is standing as an 
independent socialist candidate in the forthcoming assembly elections.

Just as his father before him, Ciaran McClean regards republican violence as 
immoral, futile and counter-productive. He, like the rest of Beragh and beyond, 
is experiencing the futility of that armed tradition in Ireland with the death 
of his neighbour Ronan Kerr. "Our little community is in a state of shock," 
McClean said as mourners started to arrive in the nearby town of Drumduff where 
the Kerr family lived.

McClean said the tragedy had been compounded by news that one of Constable 
Kerr's brothers learned of his death on route back to Ireland from Australia, 
having stopped over in Abu Dhabi and checked his Facebook page.That was the 
moment he discovered his brother had been murdered.

Addressing the congregation at mass in the Christ the King church in Beragh 
the parish priest, Father Kevin McElhennon, said the community was united 
against the killers. "We stand too in our opposition to the misguided, blind, 
morally wrong and sinful ideology of those who planned, executed and supported 
the brutal murder of young Ronan."

Worshippers who stopped afterwards were unanimous in this view, perhaps a sign 
of how, since the height of the conflict, public opinion has changed, with the 
influx of Catholic recruits into the police, and the peace process becoming an 
established fact of life.

Leo Crossey, 67, a retired education board worker, expressed his disgust. "It 
is not something anyone wants. People worry about everybody related to them who 
are in the police," he said. "What have they achieved by killing a policeman? 
They are going to destroy what has been built."

But a number of younger men outside the church were more concerned about the 
impact on recruitment to thePolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Service of Northern Ireland, the name given after reforms to what was the Royal 
Ulster Constabulary. Several admitted they would think twice about joining, 
given the targeting by republican dissidents against Catholic recruits; Kerr, 
aged 25, was a former pupil of the Catholic Christian Brothers' grammar school 
in Omagh.

Back at the murder scene a giant tent covered the car in which the young 
officer died, parked in the new housing development just outside the town of 
Omagh in Co Tyrone. Forensic officers in white boiler suits were carrying out a 
finger-tip search around where the bomb exploded. Constable Kerr had got in his 
car outside his home to drive to a shift at Enniskillen police station in 
County Fermanagh, 30 miles away; the bomb had been set to catch this moment.

The people of Omagh believed that terrorism would never return after the 1998 
massacre which killed 29 men, women and children, as well as two unborn twins. 
Michael Gallagher, whose son Aidan died that day, described the officer's 
killing as "yet another insult" to a town still recovering from the biggest 
single loss of life in the Troubles: "It has revived horrific memories for all 
of us."

The murder also revived memories of the first member of the new police service 
to die, Constable Stephen Carroll, shot dead by a Continuity IRA sniper in 
2009. His wife Kate Carroll invited the then first minister and deputy first 
minister, Peter Robinson and Martin McGuinness into the couple's home and urged 
them to press on with making political progress. Responding to news of Kerr's 
death, Carroll now said she feared for the future of Northern Ireland. Her 
dismay reflects the mood of Omagh and far beyond, of a society that believed 
they had reached the end to a conflict that has cost more than 3,500 lives.
 