
The former director of Boston College’s archive of IRA and loyalist 
paramilitary material has made a complaint to Northern Ireland’s police 
ombudsman over how tapes of testimonies were used in an attempt to launch an 
unsuccessful prosecution of the Sinn Féin leader,Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>.

The author and journalist Ed Moloney says the Police Service of Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> encouraged a member of 
murder victim Jean McConville’s family to support a case against Adams in 
return for the tapes, which would later be available for use in any civil 
action brought against Adams.

On Tuesday the Public Prosecution Service in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> confirmed there was insufficient 
evidence to prosecute Adams and six other people in relation to the killing of 
McConville, who had 10 children.

In response, some of the murdered widow’s children announced that they would 
try to pursue Adams in a civil action similar to the groundbreaking case that 
families of the Omagh bomb massacre victims brought against RealIRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> leaders.

The McConville family’s case will be taken up by London-based solicitors McCue 
& Partners, the same law firm that acted on behalf of the Omagh families.

The evidence that led to Adams’s arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/30/gerry-adams-held-jean-mconville-killing>
 last year, as well as the other six, was partly based on theBoston College 
tapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/27/northern-ireland-boston-college-tapes-winston-winkie-rea-psni-loyalist-troubles>
. These were a series of recorded testimonies from IRA and loyalist 
paramilitary veterans that were to form a historical archive about the armed 
campaigns of the Troubles. They were only to be released when each of the 
participants had died.

The PSNI pursued some of the taped interviews – which they claimed contained 
knowledge of McConville’s disappearance and murder – through the US courts 
system.

Moloney, who fought a campaign in the US to try to stop the handover of some 
of the Boston College tapes, has now complained formally to the police 
ombudsman.

In a statement, the author of The Secret History of the IRA said detectives 
had told a McConville family member “that if he agreed to make a formal 
complaint, outlining his belief that the Boston College archive held material 
relevant to the murder and disappearance of his mother, then the detectives 
would ensure that at the conclusion of their criminal investigation, the 
material would be made available to him and other members of his family to do 
with as they wished.

“In other words the family would be able to launch a civil claim against 
individuals they believed responsible for their mother’s death, using the 
interviews obtained from the Boston College archive. Without that complaint, 
the PSNI investigation would have been stillborn.”

Moloney said the alleged offer to pass on the relevant material about 
McConville’s abduction, murder and secret burial in December 1972 was a breach 
of article 7 (2) of the mutual legal assistance treaty between the US and UK.

It states: “The requesting party shall not use or disclose any information or 
evidence obtained under the treaty for any purposes other than for the 
proceedings stated in the request without the prior consent of the requested 
party.”

The former director of Boston College’s Belfast Project said: “At the time 
that the offer was made by PSNI detectives the disposition of the US government 
was a complete unknown and so they were in no position to make an offer to hand 
over any material to the McConville family. In effect, they misled the family 
member.

“I understand that this transaction is already the subject of a separate 
complaint to the ombudsman’s office lodged some time ago.”


The killing of McConville, a Protestant who became a Catholic convert, has 
haunted both Adams and the peace process.

In front of her children, at their home in the Divis flats complex, the west 
Belfast woman was dragged away by an IRA gang, driven across the border to the 
Irish Republic, shot in the head at a remote coastal spot in Co Louth, and then 
buried in secret.

Former IRA members, including Adams’s former friend, the hunger striker 
Brendan Hughes, alleged in the Boston College archive that theSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> president had given the order 
for the widow to be disappeared after she was shot as an informer.

Adams, a member of the Irish parliament for Louth and former Belfast West MP, 
has consistently denied claims of involvement in the McConville murder or of 
ever being in the IRA. He said the decision not to proceed with any criminal 
case against him and the six other people was “long overdue”.
 