
Northern Ireland’s gay community is mobilising to vote tactically against the 
Democratic Unionist party in next month’s assembly elections.

As the DUP has vetoed moves to bring in gay marriage equality five times over 
the term of the last devolved parliament, a new LGBT pressure group has been 
formed to organise a gay voting bloc in the region.

The Gay Say <http://thegaysay.com/> website, alongside the marriage equality 
campaignLoveProudly <https://loveproudly.org/>, wants voters in their 
communities to make use of the proportional representation system for the 
Stormont assembly and vote tactically to keep DUP candidates out.

They are also urging the gay electorate to vote against other unionist 
candidates who have blocked marriage equality.

Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> is the only 
part of the UK where gay couples cannot legally marry.

Over the lifetime of the last devolved parliament, the DUP – the single 
largest party in the chamber – persistently used a so-called petition of 
concern to veto gay marriage proposals.

The petition of concern has existed since devolution was fully restored to the 
province in 2007 and was designed to ensure that controversial legislation has 
sufficient support from both sides the religious/political divide.

Danny Toner, founder of the Gay Say, said: “Something about this election and 
this year in particular feels different. It feels as though people’s 
frustration has reached tipping point and the electorate want change. Stagnant 
politics has only bred anger. Collectively, we decided to tap into these 
emotions and controversial topics to mobilise people into action and to stand 
up for change.

Toner pointed that while a slim majority, ranging from Sinn Féin to other 
unionists, voted in favour of equal marriage last November the legislation fell 
because DUP members exercised their right to veto.

“The petition of concern is being used in a way it was never intended and that 
is fundamentally wrong and needs to be challenged locally and internationally,” 
Toner added.

Last year, two opinion polls – Ipsos Mori and a joint BBC/RTÉ survey – 
revealed 68% and 64% support for gay marriage respectively.

After the Irish Republic endorsed marriage equality in a referendum a year 
ago, the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, Martin McGuinness, 
suggested a similar plebiscite be held in the north to get over the constant 
use of the veto.

The DUP’s opposition to gay marriage is due to the powerful and influential 
evangelical Christian lobby within the party.

But a veteran Northern Irish gay rights campaigner has warned against branding 
all unionist candidates as anti-gay.

Jeffrey Dudgeon, who won a landmark ruling in 1981 at the European court of 
human rights that decriminalised homosexuality in Northern Ireland, is now an 
Ulster Unionist councillor at Belfast city hall.

“They [gay voters] should reward those whose voting records have advanced gay 
rights. It was [leader of the Ulster Unionists] Mike Nesbitt’s vote change in 
the last assembly that meant the parliament voted in favour of gay marriage, 
albeit it was shot down by the DUP’s petition of concern. Gay voters should 
remember Nesbitt’s stance last November,” Dudgeon said.
 