
There are certain places, perhaps only briefly visited, that can take on a 
disproportionate meaning in the narrative of our lives – places we can never 
forget, places where we made choices that would send our lives spiralling off 
in a whole new direction. For me, one of these places is an old bothy called 
Ruantallain, on the uninhabited west coast of the Scottish Isle of Jura.

I first came here in 1984. Having spent three years working with homeless 
people in London, I was relishing my freedom, travelling the length and breadth 
of Britain on a motorbike for the summer, with nothing but a girlfriend and a 
tent.

On Jura, my dilapidated old bike broke down, and I fell in love with the 
place. Five years later, when life in London began to go horribly wrong, it was 
Jura that called me back and I spent a week walking the deserted west coast of 
the island, sleeping wherever I found myself.

And here I was, a quarter of a century later, once again making the two-hour 
ferry crossing from Kennacraig on the mainland to Port Askaig on Islay, from 
where it’s a five-minute hop to Jura. I watched the gannets plunge-diving into 
the churning waters of our wake, then turned and fixed my eyes forward on our 
destination. As we crossed the sound and began to close on the islands, the 
hills began to gather together form and colour, and emerge from their blue haze.

Though so close, the two islands have their own utterly distinct character. 
Islay does have its wild places, but Jura looks bleak and desolate in 
comparison, and that is part of its attraction. It has just one single-track 
road (with a strip of grass down its middle), it has one small village, one 
hotel, one distillery. The west of the island is completely uninhabited; there 
are just a bare handful of bothies, abandoned for generations. This is an 
island almost the size of the Isle of Wight, yet with only a thousandth of the 
population.
 Glengarrisdale Bay on the north end of Jura. Photograph: David Lyons/Alamy 
After a night in the hotel in the village of Craighouse, tucked in a little 
sheltered bay protected by the Small Isles, I set off to the north, the sea to 
my right, the great granite domes of the Paps of Jura to my left. My goal was 
the island’s remote north-west coast, to revisit those places that had 
captivated me a generation ago – and would take a whole day of hard walking to 
reach.

The island is split almost perfectly in two by a sea loch, with the northern 
half housing perhaps fewer than 10 people. My aim was to follow the northern 
shore of Loch Tarbert, to walk into the wilds. It is not for the fainthearted, 
for the loch is convoluted in the extreme, ragged with bays and promontories, 
and there is no trace of any trail.

Sometimes I could follow the slippery foreshore, with bladderwrack seaweed 
crackling beneath my feet like distant gunfire, but sometimes rocky scarps 
forced me inland, through swathes of chest-high bracken and tussocky fields of 
bog cotton, studded with orchids but also with ankle-traps of sudden boggy 
hollows. As I mounted yet another ridge, I would surprise small herds of deer 
or wild goats, and they would freeze for a moment, as if they’d been caught 
doing something they shouldn’t.

Halfway along the shore of the loch, after two or three hours’ walking, I came 
upon a small croft tucked into a little bay. When I last came this way, Cruib 
was close to dereliction, but it has been taken in hand by theMountain Bothies 
Association <http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/> and is habitable again. The 
point about bothies is not that they are free, but that they are in places 
where there is nowhere else. There was a young woman standing in the door of 
the bothy with an antler in her hand, and I went to say hello. She and a friend 
had been here a week, she told me. I took a quick look at what had been made of 
the place, and reassured her that I was not planning to gatecrash their party, 
but was walking on.
 Neil on his recent return to Jura 
Closer to the mouth of the loch, the landscape became still wilder. Between 
tiny sandy coves, patterned with the footprints of oystercatcher and otter, was 
a crumbling world of broken cliffs, and I found myself bouldering as much as 
walking. There were raised stony beaches spread across the hills, and dozens of 
caves, facing out to sea like rows of empty eye-sockets.

It was evening when I reached my destination – the far west, and the solitary 
bothy where I could overnight in front of a driftwood fire. I had been walking 
the whole day and was exhausted – I am not in my 20s any more. I had wondered 
if I might have to share, but just like all those years ago I had the place to 
myself. In fact when I looked in the visitors’ book, I saw that no one had 
stayed here in over a month, even though this was peak season.

Ruantallain is basic even by bothy standards: a tin-roofed shack with two 
rooms, one kept locked by the estate for use during the deer-stalking season, 
the other left open to all-comers. There is a fireplace above which is an old 
picture of the laird and a couple of candles in bottles. There is a table and 
chair, a few old pots and pans, and three bedsteads with broken springs. One 
had been rebuilt using a washed-up fishing net, and this was the closest to 
usable. It looked completely unchanged in every respect. Yet its setting is 
spectacular, tucked in the lee of an escarpment, facing south over the mouth of 
the loch. Before it is a little freshwater tarn, where otters come to wash the 
sea salt from their fur. I sat outside through the gloaming, the long drawn-out 
half-light of the north, then settled for the night. It felt like a homecoming, 
of sorts.

• Travel was provided by Caledonian MacBrayne ferries (0800 066 5000, 
calmac.co.uk 
<http://www.calmac.co.uk/timetables/summer-timetables.htm?id=summer-islay--kennacraig-port-ellen-port-askaig-colonsay-oban.png>
), singles from Kennacraig to Port Ellen/Port Askaig cost £6.45 per passenger 
and £32 per car. For more on the Mountain Bothies Association, visit
mountainbothies.org.uk <http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/>

Neil Ansell’s latest book, Deer Island, is published by Little Toller Books, 
price £12. To order a copy from the Guardian Bookshop, with free UK p&p, call 
0330 333 6846 or visitguardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908213136>

 