 It has become fashionable to deride the Ulster border poll. As originally 
conceived, it was an attempt to take the divisive issue of nationality out of 
day-to-day politics and so - it was hoped- allow non-sectarian parties to 
develop in Northern Ireland. One of those non-sectarian parties, Alliance, 
which has a strong Catholic element in its still limited membership, said last 
night that the result of the poll showed that the people were overwhelmingly 
happy to stay with Britain, and added, somewhat optimistically, that the border 
should now be removed from party politics and the task of bringing the two 
sides together in Northern Ireland should be begun.
This is a lot to hope, but it is proper to note that the massive vote in 
favour of the union with Britain is not a simple mobilisation of the Unionist 
Party's traditional supporters. Both Alliance andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Labour Party - which had a 
large but inconveniently spread-out support in the last general election - were 
in favour of a pro-union vote. Nor is it clear that this is a wholly Protestant 
vote. The campaign in favour of abstention by the SDLP and other nationalist 
parties has made the figures difficult to interpret. With a register of a 
little over a million voters, and no accurate breakdown on religious lines, 
some assumptions must be made.

A very rough analysis of the electorate, based only on a projection of the 
general population figures, and allowing for the larger proportion of Catholic 
children, suggests 67 per cent Protestant and 33 per cent Catholic voters. So 
if every Protestant had voted, and voted for the union with Britain, the total 
might have been of the order of 670,000. The actual figure was 591,820. This 
represents more than 88 per cent of the estimated possible Protestant vote.

A large turnout was expected, but with some politicians on the Unionist Right 
arguing that the plebiscite gave too much of a carte blanche to Whitehall, it 
would be surprising if some of the abstainers and spoiled votes were not 
Protestant. That would mean that some of the 160,000 postal votes were used by 
Catholics wishing to vote for continuation of the union with Britain, but 
unwilling to face the hostility of those supporting boycott, and perhaps 
particularly of the Provisional Sinn Fein, which has been organising postal 
ballot paper burning in some places.

The figure is unlikely to have been large, however. Northern Ireland remains a 
deeply divided community, with the mass of Catholics unwilling to cast their 
vote in favour of the union, and nearly all the Protestants opposed to a united 
Ireland. The Catholic abstention does not represent unanimous hostility to 
Britain. In a recent Opinion Research Centre poll, published in the Belfast 
Telegraph, only 39 per cent of Catholics asked favoured a united Ireland, while 
23 per cent more wanted the SDLP proposal of joint control by London and 
Dublin. A sizeable minority of Catholics appeared prepared to continue the 
British connection: 21 per cent wanted either total integration of the 
continuation of direct rule, and another 12 per cent a coalition government at 
Stormont.

Whether these findings would have been confirmed if there had been no boycott 
yesterday cannot be known. It is a great pity that, because of Mr Heath's 
sensitivity about European referenda, this poll was not conducted while the 
honeymoon after direct rule continued and boycott was less likely. But at least 
the ballot boxes have opened again in Northern Ireland. The sooner new public 
representatives are elected the better. Compromise remains the only hope, and 
men and women with a fresh and unchallengeable mandate are needed to make that 
compromise. Mr Whitelaw's White Paper should call for a general election before 
the summer.

That election should give every voter in Northern Ireland the feeling that he 
has a say in his country's affairs again. One of the damaging effects of direct 
rule has been the inevitable potential emasculation of the community. The other 
principal cause of this, of course, is that democratic politicians never look 
so important while people using guns, bombs, and intimidation rule the areas 
the politicians are supposed to represent. In such circumstances any 
opportunity for people to vote, however unsatisfactory it may appear to some of 
them, is not to be sneezed at. Those who favour the union took their chance to 
vote on Thursday, in very large numbers. But it is a general election which 
should persuade nearly everyone in the community to take part in democratic 
politics. Anyone who boycotts such an election, for whatever reason, should 
think seriously whether he is going anywhere, or nowhere.
 