
Manuel Vázquez Montalbán has only half an hour to spare in the offices of his 
literary agent at the heart of Barcelona's uptown business district. He is hot 
property now, the most interviewed writer in Catalonia. A communist who had 
been tortured and imprisoned under the Franco dictatorship, he began to write 
detective novels in the 1970s. "We were so bored with what others and we 
ourselves were writing that we did what anyone in this situation would do: 
write what we'd like to read," he says, 25 years on.

His 15 crime novels featuring Pepe Carvalho have sold well over a million 
copies and are the most widely read record of Barcelona's transformation from 
seedy port to tourist metropolis. The latest to be translated into English is 
The Angst-ridden Executive , which actually dates from 1977, and is Vázquez 
Montalbán at his most radical.

Montalban was born in 1939, the year Franco's armies, followed by a vengeful 
Catalan bourgeoisie, marched into the city. He was brought up in the Old City, 
where many children had absent fathers, either imprisoned - as was his own 
father - in exile or dead in the war, and just a few streets up from the 
red-light district where thousands of impoverished women were forced to work. 
In The Pianist , one of his several excellent non-detective (or "open", as he 
says) novels, he wrote: "We carried the Civil War defeat on our backs like a 
dead body."

"After my father came out of prison, he refused to talk or hear anything about 
politics," he says, Nevertheless, Montalbán became active in the university 
underground at the end of the 1950s. Tortured and imprisoned by the 
dictatorship, he was granted an amnesty in 1963.

His fourth Carvalho novel, 1979's Southern Seas , won Spain's biggest literary 
prize, the Planeta, and became an international bestseller. As well as the 
Carvalho series, he has written opinion articles, political history, essays on 
popular culture, a cook-book and a number of novels. Yet he has been 
pigeon-holed as a genre writer. "It used to bother me, because it was a kind of 
racism, snobbery. Critics sniffed 'Carvalho, oh yes, very capable', whereas in 
fact several Carvalho novels, because of their tempo and linear development, 
were much more difficult to write than Galíndez , for example."

Despite his fame, Montalbán remains a dissident, faithful to his past and to 
the PSUC - the Catalan Communist Party - that he joined 40 years ago. He has 
consistently criticised the Socialist Party that has ruled Barcelona since 1979 
for its failure to use the 1992 Olympics-led economic bonanza to tackle 
poverty. "Behind the clean-up of old Barcelona, there is a speculative 
operation designed to expel the Indians to a new reservation on the outskirts . 
. . The city's shit is being swept under the carpet. No solutions are offered 
to the people living in this shit, so that they can get out of it for good."

Montalbán's detective novels are often likened to Raymond Chandler's. Carvalho 
is, like Marlowe, a "common man". Equipped with the wisecracks and pistol 
required to deal with an evil urban world, he is a moral man walking the mean 
streets. Montalbán does for Barcelona what Chandler did for Los Angeles - he 
exposes the criminal power relationships beneath the facade of democracy. But 
he himself rejects such comparisons: "I had read very few noir novels when I 
started the Carvalho series. My books are not Mediterranean derivatives or 
copies of Chandler. The real difference lies in Marlowe's lack of culture. His 
greatest interest is what Joe Dimaggio did in the baseball game, whereas 
Carvalho has a cultural and political background, a personal history..."

Montalban's serious purpose in the Carvalho novels is to chronicle the new 
Spanish democracy almost as it happens. "I try to examine themes that exist in 
real time. In each book I am looking at different stages: in The Angst-ridden 
Executive the illusions of the transition from dictatorship to parliamentary 
democracy; in Murder in the Central Committee the crisis in the Communist 
Party; in Offside sport and the fleeting nature of media fame; in An Olympic 
Death entrepreneurs whose athleticism consisted in lining their own pockets as 
quickly as possible."

Crime novels just cannot carry this sort of political weight unless they work 
as entertaining thrillers. Not all Montalbán's do; but in his energetic best, 
social and political purpose is very much part of the story, and the 
detective's cooking, sexual or book-burning quirks become more than frothy 
additions.

These tough-guy books are also gentle: much of their attractive, lyrical 
melancholy is based on Montalban's subtle appreciation of loneliness and time 
passing. He deals with loneliness tenderly, particularly with Carvalho himself 
and his "family", an odd, plebeian group of dependants from the old town - his 
call-girl girl-friend Charo, the boot-black Bromide, and the car-thief Biscuter.

It is noon. My half-hour is up. The author plods off next door to more boring 
questions. I look round the conference room, lined by thick red box-files of 
proof copies of books. On their spines are picked out in gilt the names of many 
of the most famous Spanish and Latin American novelists of the last 40 years: 
García Márquez, Cortázar, Onetti, Marsé...and Montalbán himself.

He is one of the elite, yet he is still very much with us, engaging with 
present realities. "Barcelona's not a bad place to live,"he says. "But there's 
been an enormous operation in these 20 years to instil disenchantment, to 
depoliticise people." His sardonic, sceptical eye is an antidote to 
disenchantment. He is the modern committed writer, entertaining his readers as 
he reveals what lies beneath Barcelona's glittering carpet.
 