
The National Security Agency is currently collecting the telephone records of 
millions of US customers of Verizon, one of America's largest telecoms 
providers, under a top secret court order issued in April.

The order, a copy of which has been obtained by the Guardian, requires Verizon 
on an "ongoing, daily basis" to give the NSA information on all telephone calls 
in its systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jun/06/verizon-telephone-data-court-order>
, both within the US and between the US and other countries.

The document shows for the first time that under the Obama administration the 
communication records of millions of US citizens are being collected 
indiscriminately and in bulk – regardless of whether they are suspected of any 
wrongdoing.

The secret Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (Fisa) granted the order to 
the FBI on April 25, giving the government unlimited authority to obtain the 
data for a specified three-month period ending on July 19.

Under the terms of the blanket order, the numbers of both parties on a call 
are handed over, as is location data, call duration, unique identifiers, and 
the time and duration of all calls. The contents of the conversation itself are 
not covered.

The disclosure is likely to reignite longstanding debates in the US over the 
proper extent of the government's domestic spying powers.

Under the Bush administration, officials in security agencies had disclosed to 
reporters the large-scale collection of call records data by theNSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa>, but this is the first time 
significant and top-secret documents have revealed the continuation of the 
practice on a massive scale under President Obama.

The unlimited nature of the records being handed over to the NSA is extremely 
unusual. Fisa court orders typically direct the production of records 
pertaining to a specific named target who is suspected of being an agent of a 
terrorist group or foreign state, or a finite set of individually named targets.

The Guardian approached the National Security Agency, the White House and the 
Department of Justice for comment in advance of publication on Wednesday. All 
declined. The agencies were also offered the opportunity to raise specific 
security concerns regarding the publication of the court order.

The court order expressly bars Verizon from disclosing to the public either 
the existence of the FBI's request for its customers' records, or the court 
order itself.

"We decline comment," said Ed McFadden, a Washington-based Verizon spokesman.

The order, signed by Judge Roger Vinson, compels Verizon to produce to the NSA 
electronic copies of "all call detail records or 'telephony metadata' created 
by Verizon for communications between the United States and abroad" or "wholly 
within the United States, including local telephone calls".

The order directs Verizon to "continue production on an ongoing daily basis 
thereafter for the duration of this order". It specifies that the records to be 
produced include "session identifying information", such as "originating and 
terminating number", the duration of each call, telephone calling card numbers, 
trunk identifiers, International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) number, and 
"comprehensive communication routing information".

The information is classed as "metadata", or transactional information, rather 
than communications, and so does not require individual warrants to access. The 
document also specifies that such "metadata" is not limited to the 
aforementioned items. A 2005 court ruling judged that cell site location data – 
the nearest cell tower a phone was connected to – was also transactional data, 
and so could potentially fall under the scope of the order.

While the order itself does not include either the contents of messages or the 
personal information of the subscriber of any particular cell number, its 
collection would allow the NSA to build easily a comprehensive picture of who 
any individual contacted, how and when, and possibly from where, 
retrospectively.

It is not known whether Verizon is the only cell-phone provider to be targeted 
with such an order, although previous reporting has suggested the NSA has 
collected cell records from all major mobile networks. It is also unclear from 
the leaked document whether the three-month order was a one-off, or the latest 
in a series of similar orders.

The court order appears to explain the numerous cryptic public warnings by two 
US senators, Ron Wyden and Mark Udall, about the scope of the Obama 
administration's surveillance activities.

For roughly two years, the two Democrats have been stridently advising the 
public that the US government is relying on "secret legal interpretations" to 
claim surveillance powers so broad that the American public would be "stunned" 
to learn of the kind of domestic spying being conducted.

Because those activities are classified, the senators, both members of the 
Senate intelligence committee, have been prevented from specifying which 
domestic surveillance programs they find so alarming. But the information they 
have been able to disclose in their public warnings perfectly tracks both the 
specific law cited by the April 25 court order as well as the vast scope of 
record-gathering it authorized.

Julian Sanchez, a surveillance expert with the Cato Institute, explained: 
"We've certainly seen the government increasingly strain the bounds of 
'relevance' to collect large numbers of records at once — everyone at one or 
two degrees of separation from a target — but vacuuming all metadata up 
indiscriminately would be an extraordinary repudiation of any pretence of 
constraint or particularized suspicion." The April order requested by the FBI 
and NSA does precisely that.

The law on which the order explicitly relies is the so-called "business 
records" provision of the Patriot Act, 50 USC section 1861. That is the 
provision which Wyden and Udall have repeatedly cited when warning the public 
of what they believe is the Obama administration's extreme interpretation of 
the law to engage in excessive domestic surveillance.

In a letter to attorney general Eric Holder last year, they argued that "there 
is now a significant gap between what most Americansthink the law allows and 
what the government secretlyclaims the law allows."

"We believe," they wrote, "that most Americans would be stunned to learn the 
details of how these secret court opinions have interpreted" the "business 
records" provision of the Patriot Act.

Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> advocates have long warned 
that allowing the government to collect and store unlimited "metadata" is a 
highly invasive form of surveillance of citizens' communications activities. 
Those records enable the government to know the identity of every person with 
whom an individual communicates electronically, how long they spoke, and their 
location at the time of the communication.

Such metadata is what the US government has long attempted to obtain in order 
to discover an individual's network of associations and communication patterns. 
The request for the bulk collection of all Verizon domestic telephone records 
indicates that the agency is continuing some version of the data-mining program 
begun by the Bush administration in the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attack.

The NSA, as part of a program secretly authorized by President Bush on 4 
October 2001, implemented a bulk collection program of domestic telephone, 
internet and email records. A furore erupted in 2006 when USA Today reported 
that the NSA had "been secretly collecting the phone call records of tens of 
millions of Americans, using data provided by AT&T, Verizon and BellSouth" and 
was "using the data to analyze calling patterns in an effort to detect 
terrorist activity." Until now, there has been no indication that the Obama 
administration implemented a similar program.

These recent events reflect how profoundly the NSA's mission has transformed 
from an agency exclusively devoted to foreign intelligence gathering, into one 
that focuses increasingly on domestic communications. A 30-year employee of the 
NSA, William Binney, resigned from the agency shortly after 9/11 in protest at 
the agency's focus on domestic activities.

In the mid-1970s, Congress, for the first time, investigated the surveillance 
activities of the US government. Back then, the mandate of the NSA was that it 
would never direct its surveillance apparatus domestically.

At the conclusion of that investigation, Frank Church, the Democratic senator 
from Idaho who chaired the investigative committee, warned: "The NSA's 
capability at any time could be turned around on the American people, and no 
American would have any privacy left, such is the capability to monitor 
everything: telephone conversations, telegrams, it doesn't matter."

Additional reporting by Ewen MacAskill and Spencer Ackerman
 