
Congress is calling on the National Security Agency to detail the 
effectiveness of its bulk data collection programmes and will outlaw certain 
types of domestic surveillance, using two little-noticed clauses included in 
its giant federal spending bill.

The $1.1tn budget bill passed the House of Representatives Wednesday afternoon 
by 359-67 votes and is expected to become law after clearing the Senate as soon 
as Friday.

But in a sign of pent-up reform pressure on Capitol Hill, two measures dealing 
with the NSA were quietly included in the1,600-page spending text 
<http://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20140113/CPRT-113-HPRT-RU00-h3547-hamdt2samdt_xml.pdf>
 with relatively little fanfare – or opposition from the White House – and are 
likely to pave the way for more binding legislative efforts once President 
Barack Obama outlines his own response to the surveillance scandal on Friday.

The first, and more unexpected, of the two NSA budget measures directs the 
agency to reveal “the number of records acquired by the NSA as part of its bulk 
telephone metadata program” over a five-year period, and to turn the data over 
to the House and Senate judiciary committees within 90 days.

“This report shall provide, to the greatest extent possible, an estimate of 
the number of records of United States citizens that have been acquired by NSA 
as part of the bulk telephone metadata program and the number of such records 
that have been reviewed by NSA personnel in response to a query,” it demands.

It is also calls for more information on the vexed question of how helpful 
such metadata has been in foiling terror plots, something that both NSA critics 
andObama's own review panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/14/nsa-review-panel-senate-phone-data-terrorism>
 say has been greatly exaggerated.

The report should be “unclassified to the greatest extent possible and with a 
classified annex if necessary, listing terrorist activities that were 
disrupted, in whole or in part, with the aid of information obtained through 
NSA's telephone metadata program and whether this information could have been 
promptly obtained by other means”, says the budget text.

However, the demand for fresh NSA disclosure is contained in an introduction 
to the budget bill 
<http://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20140113/113-HR3547-JSOM-C.pdf>rather than 
the main text of the legislation and, according to congressional staff, is 
thought likely to have an advisory effect rather than carry the full weight of 
law.

A separate NSA reform measure dealing with domestic surveillance is included 
in the main legislation text, and would carry more power to compel the NSA.

It bars the agency from using any of the funding it gets from Congress to 
target US citizens for surveillance under section 702 of the Foreign 
IntelligenceSurveillance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/surveillance> Act.

The measure was first introduced into a defence spending bill by congressman 
Mike Pompeo, a Kansas Republican, in June, as part of the initial response to 
the revelations of domestic data collection that came out of documents provided 
to the Guardian by Edward Snowden.

It was intended, however, as a response to more radical reforms proposed by 
congressman Justin Amash, a Republican from Michigan, and is likely to have 
relatively limited impact on the NSA's ability to collect data on US citizens 
through incidental means, the so-calledbackdoor provisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/nsa-loophole-warrantless-searches-email-calls>
, which was seen as a bigger threat as Snowden's revelations continued.

Some reformers in Congress were therefore concerned that inclusion of the 
clause in the spending bill could serve as a distraction, although one staffer 
involved in separate reform legislation said it was “helpful to keep the 
pressure up”.

Asked about the budget provisions on Tuesday, Obama spokesman Jay Carney said 
he was not aware of them, but the White House later issued a letter urging 
passage of the spending bill and said the president would sign it into law.
 