
Rioters trashed parts of Oakland, California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, today in protest against the 
verdict in a controversial court case in which a white policeman shot dead an 
unarmed African American.

At least 100 people were arrested after looting and confrontations with police 
in Oakland last night and early today. The protesters ignored a plea for calm 
by the governor of California, Arnold Schwarzenegger.

The policeman, Johannes Mehserle, 28, was found guilty yesterday of 
involuntary manslaughter. The jury rejected the prosecution case that it was 
murder.

YouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFNDK8PQGNw> showed footage of 
Mehserle's shooting of Oscar Grant, 22, who had been lying on the platform in a 
railway station on 1 January 2009, surrounded by police after a fight. Mehserle 
claimed he had thought he had reached for an electric Taser rather than his gun.

The case became a cause celebre in the US, with its echoes of the treatment of 
Rodney King, a black man whose severe beating by police in LA in 1991 was 
captured on video. The subsequent acquittals of four LAPD officers sparked the 
1992 Los Angeles riots.

Police deployed in Oakland in riot gear yesterdayand shops boarded up their 
windows in anticipation of a repeat of the rioting that took place in the 
immediate aftermath of Grant's shooting. Up to a thousand protesters took to 
the streets last nightand early today, some wearing masks with images of 
Grant's face. A banner was unfurled proclaiming "Oakland Says Guilty'.

Rioters, some dressed in black and wearing black masks, smashed shop and car 
windows, helped themselves to goods ranging from jewellery to groceries and 
trainers, and attacked police lines. Journalists were also attacked.

The Oakland police chief, Anthony Batts, told a press conference: "This city 
is not the wild, wild west. This city will not tolerate this activity." He 
blamed anarchists coming from outside Oakland. "We started taking a number of 
rocks and bottles. We then made a dispersal order."

Grant's family expressed disappointment with the verdict and said he should 
have been found guilty of murder. The verdict means the jury thought Mehserle 
had been criminally negligent but had not intended to kill Grant. "My son was 
murdered, and the law hasn't held the officer accountable the way he should 
be," Grant's mother, Wanda Johnson, said.

Mehserle, who is to be sentenced next month, could face anything from five to 
14 years in jail. John Burris, a lawyer representing the family, described it 
as a "compromise verdict". Burris said: "The system is rarely fair when a 
police officer shoots an African American male. No true justice has been 
given." The trial was held in Los Angeles because of the tension in Oakland and 
neighbouring San Francisco.

Benjamin Todd Jealous, president of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Coloured People, told Reuters: "We are outraged that the jury 
did not find guilty of murder in a case that is so egregiously excessive and 
mishandled."
 