
Eager to stop Republicans from destroying his signature healthcare law, Barack 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and Democratic 
lawmakers will meet next week to try to forge a common strategy. Obama also 
plans a major valedictory speech in Chicago, his hometown, shortly before his 
presidency ends.

Planned Parenthood sues to stop Texas cutting it from Medicaid program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/31/planned-parenthood-sues-texas-medicaid>
Obama will travel to the Capitol on Wednesday morning for the meeting with 
House and Senate Democrats, according to an invitation sent to lawmakers. The 
White House is casting it as an effort to unite Democrats behind a plan to 
protect the Affordable Care Act before Republicans have a chance to settle on a 
plan for repealing it.

Democrats are on edge over the future of the ACA, given the GOP’s disdain for 
Obamacare and Donald Trump’s vows to gut it. Though Republicans are united 
behind thenotion of repealing the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
, they are split over how best to replace it. Some want to strip out unpopular 
provisions while leaving others intact, while others prefer a 
start-from-scratch approach.

Obama and Democrats hope that lack of unity can be exploited. To that end, the 
president also planned to answer questions about the future of the healthcare 
law next Friday in a live-streamed event at Blair House, just across 
Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House.

Initially stunned by Trump’s defeat of Hillary Clinton, Democrats are now 
trying to organize a counterattack to preserve the ACA, among the most 
significant expansions of the social safety net since Medicare and Medicaid 
were created 50 years ago. The House Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi, has urged 
her lawmakers to make healthcare their focus at the start of the year.

Defenders of the law have also launched a political coalition called Protect 
Our Care, bringing together more than 20 groups, including the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Service Employees 
International Union.

One of their objectives is to try to prevent Republicans from repealing the 
ACA without also enacting a replacement. Another goal is to pre-empt bigger 
healthcare changes to Medicare and Medicaid long sought by Republicans.

Since the ACA passed, about 20 million people have gained coverage and the 
uninsured rate has dropped to a historic low of around 9%. Some of the coverage 
gains are due to employers offering jobs with healthcare in a stronger economy, 
but most experts mainly credit Obama’s law.

A recent poll suggests that defenders of the law may get a receptive hearing 
from the public. Only about one in four Americans want Trump and the GOP-led 
Congress to completely repeal the ACA, according to a post-election survey by 
the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation.

How Obamacare could be dismantled by Republicans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
“Republicans don’t fully appreciate the implications of even a partial repeal 
of the ACA,” said Rob Restuccia, executive director of Community Catalyst, one 
of the advocacy groups in the coalition trying to preserve the law.

“People use the analogy of the dog that caught the car.”

Obama’s speech in Chicago on 10 January is expected to serve as his closing 
words to the nation as president. His appearance will be open to the public and 
followed by a “family reunion” for alumni of Obama’s former campaigns, 
according to a save-the-date notice sent to Obama alumni.

The White House has not confirmed Obama’s speech or trip to Chicago.
 