
Barack Obama pointed a finger at Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> for hacking the US election, 
admitting he directly told his Russian adversary to “cut it out”.

Obama also used his final press conference of 2016 to criticize the media for 
its coverage of Hillary Clinton’s emails, insisting “I don’t think she was 
treated fairly during the election.”

Michelle Obama: Americans will miss 'having a grown-up in the White House'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/michelle-obama-oprah-winfrey-interview-donald-trump>
In a session which was also dominated by questions over Syria, the outgoing 
president said he had “great confidence” in the the intelligence agencies’ 
assessment “that the Russians carried out this hack”.

Blaming Moscow for hacking the Democratic National Committee and the email 
account of Clinton’s campaign chief, John Podesta, he said he wanted the report 
he has ordered into the affair out before he leaves office on 20 January.

He dodged whether Putin personally directed the operations but pointedly noted 
“not much happens inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> without 
Vladimir Putin”.

The president said that he had told his Russian counterpart in person in 
September “to cut it out” with regard to hacks to influence the election and 
added “there were going to be some serious consequences if he did not”.

Obama thought that this intervention was at least somewhat successful as “we 
did not see further tampering of the election process. But the leaks through 
WikiLeaks had already occurred”.

Obama repeatedly weighed in on what he saw as increased polarization in the 
United States. “Over a third of Republican voters approve of Vladimir Putin, 
the former head of the KGB. Ronald Reagan would roll over in his grave. How did 
that happen?”

Obama said he believed that unless events were viewed through a less partisan 
framework “we’re going to continue to be vulnerable to foreign influence 
because we’ve lost track of what it is that we’re about and what we stand for”.

He concluded that there was no evidence of wrongdoing in the way the election 
was tallied, adding that “the votes that were cast were counted, they were 
counted appropriately”.

Turning to his own relationship with President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, he said he had last spoken 
to him a few days ago in a “cordial” conversation. Obama said he gave Trump 
“specific suggestions about … maintaining the effectiveness, integrity, 
cohesion of the office, our various democratic institutions”.

However, turning to the political faultline in the US, he said: “What I worry 
about – more than anything – is the degree to which, because of the fierceness, 
because of the partisan battle, you start to see certain folks in the 
Republican party and Republican voters suddenly finding a government and 
individuals who stand contrary to everything that we stand for, as being OK, 
because ‘that’s how much we dislike Democrats’.”

He added that American vulnerability to cyber-attacks was “directly related to 
how divided, partisan and dysfunctional our political process is”. He added: 
“If fake news is being released by some foreign government that is almost 
identical to reports that are being issued through partisan news venues, then 
it’s not surprising that that foreign propaganda will have a greater effect, 
because it doesn’t seem so far-fetched.”

As Obama put it Russia “doesn’t produce anything that anybody wants to buy 
except oil and gas and arms. They don’t innovate.”

Barack Obama promises retaliation against Russia over hacking during US 
election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
However, he warned “they can impact us if we abandon our values. Mr Putin can 
weaken us just like he’s trying to weaken Europe if we start buying into 
notions that it’s OK to intimidate the press, or lock up dissidents, or 
discriminate against people because of their faith or what they look like.”

Obama also criticized media coverage of hacked emails from the DNC and 
Podesta. “This was an obsession that dominated the news coverage,” he said. He 
asked mournfully how the election “with so many big issues at stake and such a 
contrast between the candidates came to be dominated by a bunch of these leaks”.

Speaking before he set off for a family Christmas vacation in Hawaii, Obama 
also expressed the hope that hacks could be examined in a non-partisan manner 
and urged President-elect Trump to welcome “a bipartisan independent process” 
to investigate them.
 