
The first American president to attend India’s Republic Day celebrations was 
greeted by an array of Russian weaponry on Monday as the lengthy martial parade 
underscored how far the US has to go in its efforts to become Delhi’s preferred 
new military partner.

Just one day after agreeing an ambitious defence co-operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/obama-modi-limit-us-liability-nuclear-disaster>
 agreement with the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, Barack Obama arrived 
in the pouring rain as a fly-by of Russian-made Mil helicopters heralded a 
two-hour procession led by cold war-era tanks and armoured personnel carriers.

White House officials insisted the president was not offended by the overt 
reminder of India’s historic alliance with the Soviet Union and said the 
president’s trip to Delhi was a crucial part its security rebalancing towards 
Asia.

“The US is quickly moving toward surpassing Russia as a defence exporter to 
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>,” the deputy national security 
adviser, Ben Rhodes, told reporters. “The balance has shifted over years and 
our relationship is on the upswing even though we understand there is a legacy 
relationship. That cold war relationship has been a source of mistrust but we 
are moving beyond that.”
 Indian prime minister Narendra Modi with Barack Obama at the Republic Day 
parade in Delhi. Photograph: Stephen Crowley/AP 
Parade announcers made sure to stress the pedigree of the only US equipment on 
display – a C-17 and three C-130 transport planes. Many of the floats and 
equipment on show were also of domestic origin: from representatives of India’s 
booming space programme, through to a military band riding on camels.

American officials also denied it was inappropriate for Obama, a Nobel peace 
prize recipient, to be endorsing such a overt display of military muscle in a 
region known for growing security tensions.

“Lots of countries have military parades but what the president is comfortable 
with is this is a democracy,” said Rhodes.

Nonetheless, Obama’s attempt to cement close military links with Modi has not 
gone unnoticed in China, where state media on Monday sought to play down its 
significance.

“It’s noticeable that they should feel they have to go out of their way to 
comment on this visit,” added Rhodes. “No one is looking to confront or contain 
China, but the US and India are committed to a rules-based system, so, for 
example, if there are maritime disputes we want them resolved peacefully in 
line with the law.”
 Barack Obama waves to the crowd as he leaves the VIP seating area with first 
lady Michelle Obama amd Narendra Modi. Photograph: Roberto Schmidt/AFP/Getty 
Images 
The US is seeking to distinguish India from Russia and China by stressing its 
history as a democracy with similar values – something Obama’s presence at the 
Republic Day celebration was designed to underline.

Though Indian and international media focused on Obama’s presence, the primary 
audience was a domestic one. Tens of thousands braved weather that, by Delhi 
standards, was unseasonably cold. Streets were empty in much of the capital.

The Republic Day parade celebrates the introduction in 1950 of the country’s 
own constitution and thus its full independence from Britain. Its theme this 
year was described by officials as “women’s empowerment”. India has been hit by 
a surge of violence towards women in recent years, including several
high-profile sexual assaults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/10/delhi-gang-rape-india-women>. 
Selective abortion according to gender is a major issue and women face 
widespread discrimination.

“The parade was awesome as always but the lady soldiers were really good, and 
the jet planes at the end too. We are showing Mr Obama our culture and 
traditions,” said Shubhangi Tyagi, a 19-year-old student at Delhi University.

However, experts said the unprecedented role played by women in the parade may 
have been more symbolic than substantive.

“There’s been no move so far towards allowing women to hold permanent 
commissions [as officers] nor allow them into combat arms such as infantry or 
the armoured corps,” said Ajai Shukla, a former army officer and defence 
analyst.
 President Barack Obama in Delhi, India, Photograph: Xinhua News Agency/REX 
Also noticeable was the absence of intercontinental ballistic missiles, given 
pride of place in many previous parades.

“Whether the idea was to make the parade less militarised and focus more 
attention on floats with dancers and so on, or whether it was to cater to US 
sensibilities is unclear,” said Shukla.

Before the parade, gallantry medals were awarded posthumously to two soldiers 
killed last year in clashes with Islamist separatists in the Himalayan former 
princedom of Kashmir, disputed for more than six decades years by India and 
Pakistan.

After the tanks, weapons and marching contingents, with female officers in the 
foreground for the first time, came the carnivalesque floats representing 
Indian states and key government projects. These included elements bearing the 
stamp of Modi’s own vision.

A float from the 64-year-old’s home state of Gujarat, where he was chief 
minister between 2002 and 2014, showcased a project to raise a gigantic statue 
of Vallabhbhai Patel, the statesman who unified India’s patchwork of 
territories following independence from Britain.

Gujarat-born Patel is revered by many Indian nationalists, who often contrast 
him with Jawaharlal Nehru, the independence leader who is an icon of the 
centre-left Congress party, which has held power for most of the country’s 
history but is now in opposition.

“Patel is seen [by rightwingers] as a hard-headed realist, rather than the 
woolly-headed idealist Nehru. He was also disowned by Congress,” said 
Ramachandra Guha, one of India’s foremost political historians.

The 29,890m-rupee (£315m) statue will stand 182 metres tall, twice the height 
of the Statue of Liberty, and has beencriticised by environmentalists 
<http://www.outlookindia.com/article/Big-Man-Little-Folks/293123>.

Next came a float bearing a mechanised lion against “a background of a smart 
city”, according to the announcer. A screen on the float displaying the words 
“components, aviation, biotechnology” made it clear that this represented 
Modi’s vision of a powerful Indian economy based on manufacturing. Though 
picking up steadily, growth rates in the emerging power remain well below the 
previous peak of 9%, at about 5% for this year.

Then came a float showcasing a new ministry created to promote traditional 
India medicine and yoga. Other floats included one promoting the prime 
minister’s “Save your daughters, educate your daughters” campaign. Some time 
later came a high-speed bullet train, a pet project of Modi who hopes to 
modernise India’s creaking, over-crowded railway network.

Ashok Sinha, a 57-year-old teacher from west Bengal, was among tens of 
thousands of spectators. “It is the best time in India ever. Big powers are 
respecting us and we are respecting them,” Sinha said.

Though diplomats and commentators referred repeatedly to India and the US as 
natural allies, relations have never been straightforward between the world’s 
biggest democracies.

During the cold war, India tilted towards Moscow and the US towards Pakistan. 
More recently, the US placed India under sanctions following a nuclear test in 
1998. Modi himself was denied a visa to the US under a law barring entry to 
foreigners who have committed “particularly severe violations of religious 
freedom”.

The decision followed accusations that the former rightwing organiser had 
stood by during, or even encouraged, sectarian violence in the western state of 
Gujarat in 2002, when he was chief minister. More than 1,000 people, mostly 
Muslims, were killed by rioters.

Modi has denied all wrongdoing and India’s supreme court ruled that there was 
insufficient evidence to back the charges against him.

The relationship reached a nadir when the Indian deputy consul-general in the 
US was arrested for visa fraud in New York in December 2013. The affair 
prompted a vitriolic reaction in India to what was seen as disrespectful 
bullying. This in turn prompted US commentators to accuse India of 
oversensitivity and behaviour unbecoming of an aspirant future power.

Modi won the first outright majority in Indian politics for 30 years in the 
poll last May after pledging to boost flagging growth in the emerging power 
where red tape, corruption, poor infrastructure and restrictive laws remain 
major challenges to business. He swiftly accepted an invitation from Obama to 
visit following his win.

Sahil Khatrapal, 25, had been tasked with ensuring the supply of gas to the 
flame of the martyr’s memorial during the wreath-laying ceremony before the 
parade.

“I was very proud to be a citizen of India. Right from the time the national 
anthem played at the start, to when it plays at the end,” he said.
 