
The White House has stepped into the brewing controversy over the ban on women 
members at Augusta National golf club, the iconic home of the Masters 
tournament.

Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> believes that 
women should be allowed to join the club, press secretary Jay Carney said on 
Thursday when questioned by reporters at the daily White House briefing as the 
tournament teed off in Georgia.

"His personal opinion is that women should be admitted to the club," said 
Carney. "The president answered quite clearly to me that he believes Augusta 
should admit women. It's kind of long past the time when women should be 
excluded from anything."

The president himself would have been barred from joining Augusta a little 
over 20 years ago. The club barred African American members until 1990, just 
seven years before Tiger Woods scored his first victory there aged 21.

The issue is especially thorny this year because the tournament is being 
sponsored by IBM, whose new CEO, Virginia Rometty, is not a man. Traditionally, 
male holders of that position have been invited to join the club, but no 
invitation has been issued to Rometty so far.

Augusta chairman Billy Payne was asked about the disparity at a news 
conference on Wednesday.  

"As has been the case whenever that question is asked, all issues of 
membership have been and are subject to private deliberations of the members," 
Payne said. "That statement remains accurate and that remains my statement."

Asked to expand on that, Payne alluded to a "candidate" whose membership would 
require rewriting the club's rules.

"Number two, we don't talk about our private deliberations," Payne said. 
"Number two, we especially don't talk about them when a named candidate is part 
of the question." It was unclear whether Rometty was the candidate in question.

An avid golfer, the president has shown an eagerness to jump into sports 
debates.His comments on New York Knicks guard Jeremy Lin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VzV45dkk4dw&feature=results_main&playnext=1&list=PL9B022E796A77C8CB>
 in an interview with "Sports Guy" Bill Simmons have been viewed more than 
100,000 times on YouTube. Obama's picks in the March Madness college basketball 
tournament are closely followed each year. (His pick this year, the North 
Carolina Tar Heels, didn't make the finals.)
 