
The École d'économie de Paris (the Paris School of Economics) is actually 
situated in the most un-Parisian part of the city. It is on the boulevard 
Jourdan in the lower end of the 14th arrondissement, bordered on one side by 
the Parc Montsouris. Unlike most French parks, there is a distinct lack of 
Gallic order here; in fact, with lakes, open spaces, and its greedy and 
inquisitive ducks, you could very easily be in a park in any British city. The 
campus of the Paris School of Economics, however, looks unmistakably and 
reassuringly like nearly all French university campuses. That is to say, it is 
grey, dull and broken down, the corridors smelling vaguely of cabbage. This is 
where I have arranged an interview with ProfessorThomas Piketty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomas-piketty>, a modest young Frenchman 
(he is in his early 40s), who has spent most of his career in archives and 
collecting data, but is just about to emerge as the most important thinker of 
his generation – as the Yale academic Jacob Hacker put it, a free thinker and a 
democrat who is no less than "an Alexis de Tocqueville for the 21st century".

This is on account of his latest work, which is called Capital in the 
Twenty-First Century 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780674430006>
. This is a huge book, more than 700 pages long, dense with footnotes, graphs 
and mathematical formulae. At first sight it is unashamedly an academic tome 
and seems both daunting and incomprehensible. In recent weeks and months the 
book has however set off fierce debates in the United States about the dynamics 
of capitalism, and especially the apparently unstoppable rise of the tiny elite 
that controls more and more of the world's wealth. In non-specialist blogs and 
websites across America, it has ignited arguments about power and money, 
questioning the myth at the very heart of American life – that capitalism 
improves the quality of life for everyone. This is just not so, says Piketty, 
and he makes his case in a clear and rigorous manner that debunks everything 
that capitalists believe about the ethical status of making money.

The groundbreaking status of the book was recognised by a recent long essay in 
theNew Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2014/03/31/140331crbo_books_cassidy?currentPage=all>
 in which Branko Milanovic, a former senior economist at the World Bank, was 
quoted as describing Piketty's volume as "one of the watershed books in 
economic thinking". In the same vein, a writer in theEconomist reported that 
Piketty's work fundamentally rewrote 200 years of economic thinking on 
inequality. In short, the arguments have centred on two poles: the first is a 
tradition that begins with Karl Marx, who believed that capitalism would 
self-destruct in the endless pursuit of diminishing profit returns. At the 
opposite end of the spectrum is the work of Simon Kuznets, who won a Nobel 
prize in 1971 and who made the case that the inequality gap inevitably grows 
smaller as economies develop and become sophisticated.

Piketty says that neither of these arguments stand up to the evidence he has 
accumulated. More to the point, he demonstrates that there is no reason to 
believe that capitalism can ever solve the problem of inequality, which he 
insists is getting worse rather than better. From the banking crisis of 2008 to 
the Occupy movement of 2011, this much has been intuited by ordinary people. 
The singular significance of his book is that it proves "scientifically" that 
this intuition is correct. This is why his book has crossed over into the 
mainstream – it says what many people have already been thinking.

"I did deliberately aim the book at the general reader," says Piketty as we 
begin our conversation, "and although it is obviously a book which can be read 
by specialists too, I wanted the information here to be made clear to everyone 
who wants to read it.' And indeed it has to said thatCapital in the 
Twenty-First Century is surprisingly readable. It is packed with anecdotes and 
literary references that illuminate the narrative. It also helps that it is 
fluently translated by Arthur Goldhammer, a literary stylist who has tackled 
the work of the likes of Albert Camus. But even so, as I note that Piketty's 
bookshelves are lined with such headache-inducing titles asThe Principles of 
Microeconomics and The Political Influence of Keynesianism, simple folk like me 
still need some help here. So I asked him the most obvious question I could: 
what is the big idea behind this book?

"I began with a straightforward research problematic," he says in elegant 
French-accented English. "I began to wonder a few years ago where was the hard 
data behind all the theories about inequality, from Marx to David Ricardo (the 
19th-century English economist and advocate of free trade) and more 
contemporary thinkers. I started with Britain and America and I discovered that 
there wasn't much at all. And then I discovered that the data that did exist 
contradicted nearly all of the theories including Marx and Ricardo. And then I 
started to look at other countries and I saw a pattern beginning to emerge, 
which is that capital, and the money that it produces, accumulates faster than 
growth in capital societies. And this pattern, which we last saw in the 19th 
century, has become even more predominant since the 1980s when controls on 
capital were lifted in many rich countries."

So, Piketty's thesis, supported by his extensive research, is that financial 
inequality in the 21st century is on the rise, and accelerating at a very 
dangerous pace. For one thing, this changes the way we look at the past. We 
already knew that the end of capitalism predicted by Marx never happened – and 
that even by the time of the Russian revolution of 1917, wages across the rest 
of Europe were already on the rise. We also knew that Russia was anyway the 
most undeveloped country in Europe and it was for this reason that communism 
took root there. Piketty goes on to point out, however, that only the varying 
crises of the 20th century – mainly two world wars – prevented the steady 
growth of wealth by temporarily and artificially levelling out inequality. 
Contrary to our perceived perception of the 20th century as an age in which 
inequality was eroded, in real terms it was always on the rise.

In the 21st century, this is not only the case in the so-called "rich" 
countries – the US, the UK and western Europe – but also in Russia, China and 
other countries which are emerging from a phase of development. The real danger 
is that if this process is not arrested, poverty will increase at the same rate 
and, Piketty argues, we may well find that the 21st century will be a century 
of greater inequality, and therefore greater social discord, than the 19th 
century.

As he explains his ideas to me with formulae and theorems, it still sounds a 
little too technical (I am someone who struggled with O-level maths). But by 
listening carefully to Piketty (he is clearly a good and patient teacher) and 
by breaking it down into bite-sized chunks it does all start to make sense. For 
this beginner he explains that income is a flow – it moves and can grow and 
change according to output. Capital is a stock – its wealth comes from what has 
been accumulated "in all prior years combined". It's a bit like the difference 
between an overdraft and a mortgage, and if you don't ever get to own your 
house you'll never have any stock and always be poor.
 Student protests against tuition fee increases in 2010. Piketty says: 'It is 
a perfect example of how to inflict debt on the public sector.' Photograph: 
Dominic Lipinski/PA 
In other words, in global terms what he is saying is that those who have 
capital and assets that generate wealth (such as a Saudi prince) will always be 
richer than entrepreneurs who are trying to make capital. The tendency of 
capitalism in this model is to concentrate more and more wealth in the hands of 
fewer and fewer people. But didn't we already know this? The rich get rich and 
the poorer get poorer? And didn't the Clash and others sing about it in the 
1970s?

"Well actually, we didn't know this, although we might have guessed at it," 
says Piketty, warming to his theme. "For one thing this is the first time we 
have accumulated the data which proves that this is the case. Second, although 
I am not a politician, it is obvious that this movement, which is speeding up, 
will have political implications – we will all be poorer in the future in every 
way and that creates crisis. I have proved that under the present circumstances 
capitalism simply cannot work."

Interestingly, Piketty says that he is an anglophile and indeed began his 
research career with a study of the English system of income tax ("one of the 
most important political devices in history"). But he also says that the 
English have too much blind faith in markets which they do not always 
understand. We discuss the current crisis in British universities, which having 
imposed fees now find that they are short of cash because the government 
miscalculated what students would have to pay and is now unable to ensure that 
the loans handed out to cover the fees will ever be repaid. In other words, the 
government thought it was on to a sure money-maker by introducing fees; in 
fact, because it could not control all the variables of the market, it was 
gambling with the nation's money and looks set to lose spectacularly. He 
chuckles: "This is a perfect example of how to inflict debt on to the public 
sector. Quite extraordinary and quite impossible to imagine in France."

For all that he is keen on Britain and the United States, Piketty says that he 
only really feels at home in France.Capital in the Twenty-First Century is 
constructed out of a plethora of French references (the historian François 
Furet is key), and Piketty declares that he understands the French political 
landscape best of all. He was brought up in Clichy in a mainly working-class 
district and his parents were both militant members of Lutte Ouvrière (Workers' 
Struggle) – a hardcore Trotskyist party which still has a significant following 
in France. Like many of their generation, disappointed by the failure of 
near-revolution of May '68, they dropped out to raise goats in the Aude (this 
was a classic trajectory for manybabacools – leftist hippies – of that 
generation). The young Piketty worked hard at school, however, studying in 
Paris and finishing up with a PhD from the London School ofEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> at the age of 22.  He then 
moved on to Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he was a noted 
prodigy, before moving back to Paris to finally become director of the school 
where we are now sitting.
 Piketty advocates a wealth tax, but admits that making the rich pay more will 
be difficult, as François Hollande has found. Photograph: Philippe 
Wojazer/Reuters 
His own political itinerary began, he tells me, with the fall of the Berlin 
Wall in 1989. He set out to travel across eastern Europe and was fascinated by 
the wreckage of communism. It was this initial fascination that led him towards 
a career as an economist. The gulf war of 1991 also influenced him. "I could 
see then that so many bad decisions were taken by politicians because they did 
not understand economics. But I am not political. It is not my job. But I would 
be happy if politicians could read my work and draw some conclusions from it."

This is slightly disingenuous as Piketty did actually work as an adviser to 
Ségolène Royal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/02/segolene-royal-french-cabinet-reshuffle-manuel-valls>
 in 2007, when she was the socialist candidate in the presidential elections. 
This was not a happy period for him – his love affair with the politician and 
novelist Aurélie Filipetti, another Royal acolyte, ended around then with 
acrimonious accusations on both sides. Fair enough, after this murky business, 
that Piketty might want to distance himself from the everyday rough and tumble 
of real politics.

But no matter. What have we learned? Capitalism is bad. Hooray! What's the 
answer? Socialism? Hope so. "It is not quite so simple," he says, disappointing 
this former teenage Marxist. "What I argue for is a progressive tax, a global 
tax, based on the taxation of private property. This is the only civilised 
solution. The other solutions are, I think, much more barbaric – by that I mean 
the oligarch system of Russia, which I don't believe in, and inflation, which 
is really just a tax on the poor." He explains that oligarchy, particularly in 
the present Russian model, is quite simply the rule of the very rich over the 
majority. This is both tyrannical and not much more than a form of gangsterism. 
He adds that the very rich are not usually hurt by inflation – their wealth 
increases anyway – but the poor suffer worst of all with a rising cost of 
living. A progressive tax on wealth is the only sane solution.

But for all that he is talking sense, much of it common sense, I put to him 
that no political party in Britain or the United States, of left or right, 
would dare to go to the polls with such idealistic ideas. The present 
government of François Hollande is widely despised not because of the 
president's sexual peccadilloes (in contrast, these are pretty much widely 
admired) but because of the punitive tax regime he has been seeking to impose.

"This is true," he says. "Of course it is true. But it is also true, as I and 
my colleagues have demonstrated in this book, that the present situation cannot 
be sustained for much longer. This is not necessarily an apocalyptic vision. I 
have made a diagnosis of the past and present situations and I do think that 
there are solutions. But before we come to them we must understand the 
situation. When I began, simply collecting data, I was genuinely surprised by 
what I found, which was that inequality is growing so fast and that capitalism 
cannot apparently solve it. Many economists begin the other way around, by 
asking questions about poverty, but I wanted to understand how wealth, or 
super-wealth, is working to increase the inequality gap. And what I found, as I 
said before, is that the speed at which the inequality gap is growing is 
getting faster and faster. You have to ask what does this mean for ordinary 
people, who are not billionaires and who will never will be billionaires. Well, 
I think it means a deterioration in the first instance of the economic 
wellbeing of the collective, in other words the degradation of the public 
sector. You only have to look at what Obama's administration wants to do – 
which is to erode inequality in healthcare and so on – and how difficult it is 
to achieve that, to understand how important this is. There is a fundamentalist 
belief by capitalists that capital will save the world, and it just isn't so. 
Not because of what Marx said about the contradictions of capitalism, because, 
as I discovered, capital is an end in itself and no more."

Piketty delivers this speech, erudite and powerful, with a quiet passion. He 
is, one would guess, a relatively modest and self-effacing character, but he 
loves his subject and it is indeed a delight to find oneself in the midst of a 
private seminar on money and how it works. His book is indeed long and 
complicated but anyone who lives in the capitalist world, which is all of us, 
can understand the arguments he makes about the way it works. One of the most 
penetrating of these is what he has to say about the rise of managers, or 
"super-managers", who do not produce wealth but who derive a salary from it. 
This, he argues, is effectively a form of theft – but this is not the worst 
crime of the super-managers. Most damaging is the way that they have set 
themselves in competition with the billionaires whose wealth, accelerating 
beyond the economy, is always going to be out of reach. This creates a 
permanent game of catch-up, whose victims are the "losers", that is to say 
ordinary people who do not aspire to such status or riches but must be despised 
nonetheless by the chief executives, vice-presidents and other wolves of Wall 
Street. In this section, Piketty effectively rips apart one of the great lies 
of the 21st century – that super-managers deserve their money because, like 
footballers, they have specialised skills which belong to an almost superhuman 
elite.

"One of the great divisive forces at work today," he says, "is what I call 
meritocratic extremism. This is the conflict between billionaires, whose income 
comes from property and assets, such as a Saudi prince, and super-managers. 
Neither of these categories makes or produces anything but their wealth, which 
is really a super-wealth that has broken away from the everyday reality of the 
market, which determines how most ordinary people live. Worse still, they are 
competing with each other to increase their wealth, and the worst of all case 
scenarios is how super-managers, whose income is based effectively on greed, 
keep driving up their salaries regardless of the reality of the market. This is 
what happened to the banks in 2008, for example."

It is this kind of thinking that makes Piketty's work so attractive and so 
compelling. Unlike many economists he insists that economic thinking cannot be 
separated from history or politics; this is what gives his book the range the 
American Nobel laureatePaul Krugman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/paul-krugman> described as "epic" and a 
"sweeping vision". Piketty's influence indeed is growing well beyond the small 
enclosed micro-society of academic economists. In France he is becoming widely 
known as a commentator on public affairs, writing mainly forLe Monde and 
Libération, and his ideas are frequently discussed by politicians of all hues 
on current affairs programmes such asSoir 3. Perhaps most importantly, and 
unusually, his influence is growing in the world of mainstream Anglo-American 
politics (his book is apparently a favourite in the Miliband inner circle) – a 
place traditionally indifferent to French professors of economics. As poverty 
increases across the globe, everyone is being forced to listen to Piketty with 
great attention. But although his diagnosis is accurate and compelling, it is 
hard, almost impossible, to imagine that the cure he proposes – tax and more 
tax – will ever be implemented in a world where, from Beijing to Moscow to 
Washington, money, and those who have more of it than anyone else, still calls 
the shots.

Thomas Piketty will be talking about Capital at the IPPR, London WC2 
<http://www.ippr.org/events/54/11992/capital-in-the-twenty-first-century-with-thomas-piketty>
, on 30 April, and at theLSE, London WC2 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/publicEvents/events/2014/06/20140616t1830vOT.aspx>, on 16 
June
 