
Friday morning, 6am, Belfast’s historic St George’s Market 
<http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/stgeorgesmarket/stgeorgesmarket-about.aspx>
, winner of this year’s OFM Award for Best Market: Sinatra’s greatest hits ooze 
out of the sound system as the vast market is starting to come to life. Half 
food, half clothes, vinyl, bric-a-brac, memorabilia and hardware, the “variety 
market” mood is sleepy and mellow. The fish vans from Kilkeel and Portavogie 
have been parked outside for three hours waiting for the Lazy Goose cafe to 
serve a bacon, cheese and spring onion soda-bread sandwich and strong tea 
before the unloading starts. Just inside the door sits ex-stallholder and 
Friday regular Paddy Mulligan, cigarette in hand, cap on head, shopping already 
done and crammed into his trolley beside him.

He never sees chefs, he says, and points to a crate full of salmon heads, “but 
them fish heads are popular with the Chinese. They’re always here early, like 
me.”

Friday’s food clientele is mostly retired, low-income locals, coming as they 
have for decades, for the week’s vegetables (10% cheaper than Saturday from the 
larger Friday-only wholesalers) and “two pork chops and a bit of steak” as 
Paddy puts it. At 7am the place starts to feel more businesslike, the first 
tourists arrive and photograph the towers of soda farls on Stan Riley’s stall.

Stan’s is the only food stall at the top end of the market, he’s surrounded by 
knitwear and jewellery. Once, a few years ago, he moved down to the food 
section and it was a “disaster”.

“I lost 20% of my business,” he says. “When I came back all my customers 
thought I’d been on my holidays. I’m never budging again.”

On Saturdays and Sundays the atmosphere changes radically. Over the past five 
years, St George’s has been transformed into a food lover’s paradise. High-end 
meat and vegetable producers, including local stars Greenmount Farm, Mullan’s 
Organic Farm, Pheasants Hill Farm, Broughgammon Farm and Helen’s Bay Organic 
Gardens, sit happily next to takeaway stalls selling an array of international 
food. Hotlips Curries (which sells a mean Irish stew among its bubbling vats),
Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> Baps, Ann’s Pantry, El Toro 
Grill, La Creperie and Belfalafel to name just a few, feed visitors who come to 
eat as they stroll and shop or take a seat and listen to the live music.

Belfast broadcaster Kim Lenaghan, from BBC Radio Ulster’s popular radio show 
The Foodie, says St George’s is a real snapshot of the developing food story of 
the city. “For a long time it seemed that people here weren’t that bothered 
about what they ate, but that has changed totally.”

A few months ago, Lenaghan played host to thousands of visitors at St George’s 
packed-out evening markets. “The Twilight Markets have totally captured the 
public’s imagination,” she says. “This huge hall is transformed into a sea of 
twinkling lights that lend it an air of enchantment. It’s like being in a 
fairytale where getting to eat wonderful, local food is the happy ending. 
There’s so much passion and such a will to make this celebration of food 
succeed that it really is infectious.

“This is a city where we like to talk and laugh; we don’t do things quietly 
and that includes food. The market gives us the chance to be who we really are.”

Donegall Quay, Belfast BT1 3LA
 