
Cutting-edge British literary fiction risks being undermined by its growing 
reliance on a handful of powerful book prizes, a leading literary agent has 
warned. But the associated costs of entering the biggest awards mean 
independent publishers willing to take risks on “difficult” works without 
obvious marketing potential are being shut out of contention.

The warnings, from Jonny Geller of Curtis Brown, come as the Costa book of the 
year judges prepare to announce the shortlist for the £30,000 award. He said: 
“Literary fiction is under threat in this country due to a combination of 
factors – reluctance by major houses to take risks; a bottleneck in the 
distribution chain [and] diverse voices being ignored by a predominantly white, 
middle-class industry.”

Literary prize culture had exacerbated the situation, added Geller, whose 
clients include Man Booker winner Howard Jacobson and William Boyd, who won the 
Costa novel of the year in 2006. “Every major literary prize is under the same 
pressures – the balance between picking books that break new ground, challenge 
readers and those books that will be popular,” he said.

Some small publishers say the cost of entering the three top awards – the Man 
Booker, the Baileys prize for women’s fiction and the Costa books of the year – 
alongside pressure on juries to choose winners that have sponsor-pleasing 
commercial impact, rather than “difficult” books less appealing to general 
readers, mean they are wary of entering experimental work.

“It’s such a huge cost that most small publishers can’t do it,” said Adele 
Ward of the independent firmWard Wood <http://www.wardwoodpublishing.co.uk/>. 
“I can only cover the fee, but some of the awards also charge a lot for the 
awards ceremony.” Though her authors have had success with prestigious smaller 
prizes, including LGBTQ awards, she said the three top book prizes were the 
only ones that really affected sales

The biggest three prizes, including the Costas, require a £5,000 fee from 
publishers if a book is shortlisted. This is a contribution towards marketing 
and should, the organisers claim, be offset by increases in sales. However, one 
independent publisher whose books have fared well with the three awards said 
hard calculations had to be made about which authors cold recoup such 
investment.

“If the shortlisted publisher also has to fly their author over from, say, 
Australia and put them up in a hotel for a few days to take part in the events 
in the run-up to the awards dinner, it is possible that the costs exceed the 
financial benefits,” the publisher said.

The value of book prizes in propelling sales in a sector that has struggled 
against commercial genres was illustrated before Christmas when The Essex 
Serpent by Sarah Perry topped the bestselling fiction charts after being 
shortlisted for the Costa novel of the year and being chosen by Waterstones as 
its book of the year.

According to publisher Profile Books, its sales more than doubled, taking it 
ahead of established genre bestsellers by Ian Rankin and Lee Child. Perry 
acknowledged shortlisting was crucial for literary authors. “Prizes bring to 
readers’ attention books that might otherwise have passed them by, including 
books by writers from communities often marginalised in the arts – which of 
course can then transform writers’ careers,” she said.

Dan Franklin, associate publisher at Jonathan Cape – who has worked with 
authors including Salman Rushdie and Martin Amis – admitted that though 
prize-winning potential was not “a large factor” in his editors’ decisions to 
publish novels “I’m guessing it’s always at the back of an editor’s mind”. 
Prizes, he added, had become more significant as it had become harder to 
publicise literary novels, due to the decline in review coverage by mass-media 
outlets.

Novelist Jane Harris said that when her debut novel The Observations was 
shortlisted for the Orange prize, this propelled her sales and subsequent 
career. “Prizes sell books,” she said. Her second novel, Gillespie and I, was 
longlisted for the same prize, which has since changed its name to that of its 
new sponsor Baileys. She added: “The main difference in getting a book on to a 
prize list is in terms of sales. The Orange was a tremendous boost for both my 
books.”

Alex Wheatle, winner of the Guardian children’s fiction prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/18/alex-wheatle-interview-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-crongton-knights>
, said the impact on his career had been significant. “Even the longlisting of 
Crongton Knights for the prize brought me to the attention of critics and 
readers who had never read or considered my work before.”

The Sellout, Paul Beatty’s Man Booker-winning novel, had sold only a few 
thousand copies before the prize, but sales topped 23,000 in the week before 
Christmas, according to his publisher Oneworld. Beatty’s publisher Juliet Mabey 
said prizes were now essential in order for independent publishers of literary 
fiction to be heard above the noise of books by well-known names backed by 
conglomerates.

“The attention prize judges pay to books which might otherwise go under the 
literary radar is critical,” she said. “For literary fiction, a prize nod can 
make all the difference. A novel that might only sell 2,000 copies could sell 
500,000 if it wins the Baileys women’s prize for fiction or the Man Booker 
prize.”

The category winners of the Costas are announced on 3 January. The five 
finalists, covering children’s, poetry, debut fiction, novel and biography, 
will each receive £5,000 and go into contention for the overall award, which 
will be revealed on 31 January.
 