
Sometimes it is this simple: you spin, you win. It is how Pakistan laid the 
foundations for their six-wicket victory to level the five-match series at one 
apiece, a win made all the more meaningful for the tourists as it marked their 
first triumph of an otherwise dreadful trip.

For the briefest moment in their pursuit of Australia’s ropey 220, their chase 
stalled. On 140 Babar Azam picked out third man, before the man he shared a 
partnership of 72 with for the second wicket, stand-in skipper Mohommad Hafeez, 
was caught swinging wildly two runs later.

Related: Pakistan beat Australia to win second one-day international – as it 
happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/15/australia-v-pakistan-second-odi-live>

But after 17 years in the international game Shoaib Malik has a fair idea how 
to shut down a fightback from a fielding team: quick runs. Clobbering a slew of 
offside boundaries against the home quicks, then depositing Josh Hazlewood over 
the rope back over his head, the required rate reduced to a cruise. He was 
still there on 42 when the job was done with 14 balls to spare.

Earlier, Mitchell Starc gave Australia the chance to start their defence in 
perfect fashion when winning the edge of Hafeez with the fourth ball of the 
first over, but Smith was unable to pouch the straightforward chance at slip.

It continued the theme of their afternoon batting, Smith’s men suffocated by 
the trio of tweakers deployed by Hafeez after the top order was routed by his 
seam department. Imad Wasim (2-37) continued his tidy Brisbane form, pinning 
down successive Australian batsmen with crafty variations of pace and angle, 
then just enough spin.

Hafeez burned through his own 10 overs for 45, with Shoaib also turned to; 24 
of their 49 overs delivered by the slow men. Leaving out specialist legspinner 
Adam Zampa, by contrast, Smith was unable to fully benefit from a two-paced 
surface suited to turn, young all-rounder Travis Head given just the one over 
when the game there to be won (going for 11) before returning to Plan A.

Much of the scrutiny for Australia’s loss will fall on the shoulders of the 
man who had the most to celebrate this morning whennamed in the Test squad for 
India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/mitchell-swepson-the-bolter-in-australias-test-squad-for-india-tour>
, Mitchell Marsh. Shuffled to No4 after Chris Lynn missed out due to a neck 
injury, he shovelled his first ball into the hands of short cover, giving 
Mohommad Amir Pakistan’s third wicket in the space of 10 runs to reduce 
Australia to 41-3.

Not long before, Usman Khawaja threatened to capitalise on his return to the 
team, thrice clipping with ease. So it wasn’t surprising when David Warner (16) 
was first to go, scratchy from the outset, nicking Junaid Khan. It was, 
however, when Khawaja (17) met the same end to his next over, miscalculating a 
glide into the hands of the cordon before Marsh’s indiscretion.

Consolidation came in three parts, each less compelling than the one before 
it. Head’s tryst with Steve Smith showed promise. He drove off both feet and 
pulled with authority before against the flow of play becoming the third 
Australian to edge behind on 29 when Hashan Ali found an extra yard.

Glenn Maxwell latched onto an early cover drive, pinged a reverse sweep and 
lofted a six. Like Head, the signs were sound. That was until he ran down the 
wicket to Imad before missing the ball and losing his stumps on 23. It is the 
sort of dismissal that fuels his detractors.

Smith’s next partner was Matt Wade, Friday’s man of the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/matthew-wade-century-helps-australia-defeat-pakistan-in-first-odi>
. On the back of that, and Smith’s last month, it was right to expect an 
explosion at some point from the pair. But it never eventuated, neither able to 
get on top of Imad nor Hafeez in tandem.

After reaching his half century (in 91 balls) Smith tried to change gears, but 
only succeeded in chopping Imad on for 60. An over later, Wade was beaten for a 
lack of spin from Shoaib, sliding through his gate. Amir’s short ball did the 
final damage, beating Pat Cummins and then James Faulkner to end the innings 10 
balls early and well short of runs.

In reply, after Hafeez’s chance he batted with control alongside Sharjeel 
Khan, who defied his reputation to do likewise. Nothing outrageous was 
required; they just needed to bat overs. After 10 of them, they were 36 without 
loss, and in the box seat.

Putting the foot down, Hafeez pulled Cummins before sweeping and lofting Head 
in consecutive overs, reducing the required rate to below the current run rate 
for the first time after 14 overs. When Sharjeel (29) did fall, edging 
Faulkner, it gave Australia their incision. But Babar’s picture-perfect 
on-drive minutes reinforced that the job was going to getting no easier.

The seam quartet of Starc (2/45), Hazlewood (0/32) Cummins (0/48) and Faulkner 
(2/35) all bowled serviceably, and in the case of Starc and Cummins with 
serious pace, but it mattered little with so few runs to play with.

The series moves to Perth on Thursday and then to Sydney next Sunday before 
concluding in Adelaide on Australia Day.
 