
My former colleague Palmer Newbould, who has died aged 87, was a champion of 
scientific nature conservation, an innovative university teacher and a 
generous, warm-hearted man with broad interests.

His nature conservation work was based mainly in Northern Ireland, where 
wide-ranging conservation legislation was introduced only in 1965. Palmer 
served on two statutory committees in the 1970s – the Nature Reserves Committee 
and Ulster Countryside Committee – before becoming chairman of theCouncil for 
Nature Conservation and the Countryside 
<https://www.daera-ni.gov.uk/articles/council-nature-conservation-and-countryside>
 in 1989, for which he was appointed OBE. He was also a Northern Ireland 
representative on the UK’sJoint Nature Conservation Committee 
<http://jncc.defra.gov.uk> and served on Ireland’s Nuclear Energy Board.

Born in south-west London, he was the son of Dorothy (nee Pugh) and Alfred 
Newbould. His father played a significant role in the early cinema industry and 
was a Liberal MP between 1919 and 1922. Palmer was educated at Charterhouse 
school, Surrey, and Balliol College, Oxford. His academic career began as a 
plant ecology lecturer at University College London in 1955, where he had 
earlier met Jo, his wife, while they were both botany PhD students. They were 
married in 1954.

Respect for his research on peat bogs and ecosystem productivity led to 
involvement with the International Biological Programme and appointment as 
vice-president of theBritish Ecological Society 
<http://www.britishecologicalsociety.org>.

At UCL he was convener of Europe’s first MSc in conservation, which quickly 
became the model for similar courses elsewhere. In 1968 he was made a professor 
of biology at the NewUniversity of Ulster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofulster> (NUU), helping to 
introduce undergraduate courses in ecology and environmental science, among the 
first of their kind. His horticultural skills were invaluable in beginning the 
transformation of the exposed Coleraine campus into today’s wooded landscape.

At NUU his good humour, integrity, and interest in the arts as well as the 
sciences made him a successful, if reluctant, administrator. As acting 
vice-chancellor during the merger between NUU and the Ulster Polytechnic the 
trust he enjoyed among colleagues helped bring complex negotiations to a 
successful conclusion. The merged institution became the University of Ulster 
(UU) and Palmer became provost of UU’s Coleraine campus.

In retirement, in Cirencester, Gloucestershire, he became a trustee of the 
National Heritage Memorial Fund <http://www.nhmf.org.uk/Pages/home.aspx>, which 
distributes some of the National Lottery funds, and, with Jo, worked on a 
project monitoring biodiversity in Mallorca’s S’Albufera wetlands.

He is survived by Jo and their children, Elizabeth, Andrew and Susan.
 