
There is no one in the world who knows how to throw a party like Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> and his husband, David Furnish.

It was David’s 40th birthday, and I was invited to perform as Pam Ann to his 
party’s guests on Elton’s private chartered Boeing 737 from London to Venice.

I thought it was a big joke. When I realised it wasn’t, I had a small panic 
attack and threw up in my mouth. Just looking at the guest list threw me into a 
spin: my audience would include Victoria Beckham, Isabella Blow, Philip Treacy, 
Patrick Cox, Elizabeth Hurley and Damien Hirst. On the day of the flight I was 
so freaked out I wanted to die.

Instead, as the guests started boarding the plane, Pam Ann went into full 
bitch mode. When they asked for a drink, or for assistance with their bags, I 
told them to fuck off. They couldn’t work out if I was a real flight attendant; 
they were shocked, amused, but confused especially. I don’t think some of these 
stars have ever been spoken to like that – I think they thought it was 
refreshing. By the time we got in the air, I had them eating out of the palm of 
my hand.

Sydney Fringe Comedy: our picks of the festival make their own festival picks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/30/sydney-fringe-comedy-our-picks-of-the-festival-make-their-own-festival-picks>
When we touched down in Venice, we were ferried into beautiful wooden 
speedboats and sent to our hotel. One of the stars – she will remain nameless – 
threw a tantrum in the hotel lobby when she realised she wasn’t staying at the 
Cipriani. I love watching an entitled celebrity meltdown. This one worked: she 
was herded into a speedboat and sent to the Cipriani, where Donatella Versace 
was also staying.

I wasn’t originally invited to David’s actual birthday party – I was supposed 
to go back to London the next day with the real airline crew – but to my 
delight Elton decided to keep the plane the entire weekend. Yeah! A weekend in 
Venice!

But then my phone rang: Elton and David had heard great things from the guests 
about the flight, said their event organiser, and would love me to attend the 
party. I went into cardiac arrest.

Fuck. Fuck. Fuck. The only gown I had packed was a Pam Ann costume – a white 
gown with a pleated white overlay, like a 60s wedding dress. It was completely 
crushed, the hem had come undone and the hotel didn’t have an iron, so I had to 
steam it in the shower and ask room service for 20 sewing kits, so I could hem 
the dress myself.

And with that Cinderella was ready for the ball. 

I arrived very James Bond-like in a speedboat on my own, my white pleats 
flowing in the wind. Entering the party was like walking into a Woody Allen 
movie. Liz Hurley looked like a hologram, so beautiful in her Versace couture 
gown; and there was I, the ugly stepsister in my crushed polyester.

David and Elton were walking through the crowd, directly towards me. I kept 
looking behind me to see who they were aiming for, but they came up to me and 
gave me the biggest hugs. I felt like I was drowning. My life flashed in front 
of my eyes. I couldn’t believe I was there. I went to the bar for a cocktail. 
To my right was Sting; to my left was Donatella. Sting turned to me: “You look 
like Elizabeth Taylor from the Burton years,” he said. I died.

Tim Ferguson on Spin Out: 'Wait till America finds out that you can do 
doughnuts and win five grand'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/tim-ferguson-on-spin-out-wait-till-america-finds-out-that-you-can-do-doughnuts-and-win-five-grand>
The only people left on the dancefloor at the end of the night were Philip 
Treacy, David LaChapelle, the singer Skin, Patrick Cox, Isabella Blow, 
Donatella Versace and me. When the music stopped, Donatella went into a fit – 
she wanted one more song but it had to be her song, so she ushered to her 
minders to go back to her room at the Cipriani and grab her favourite CD.


I couldn’t wait to hear what she chose. When it came on, Philip and I howled: 
it wasVideo Killed the Radio Star. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W8r-tXRLazs>
 We danced around together, laughing and singing.

Philip Treacy and I still dine out on the Donatella story, and Elton and David 
continue to invite me to crew their private planes and join their extraordinary 
Oscars parties. But nothing will ever come close to this night, ever.

• Pam Ann’s 20th anniversary tour 
<http://premier.ticketek.com.au/shows/show.aspx?sh=PAMANN16> visits Perth, 
Brisbane and Sydney this week
 