
What do other people do? How do they write? Is there an easier way? No. 
I’m sorry, but there is no magic trick. You’ve just got to put your butt in the 
seat.

I have a small apartment in Manhattan, New York, with a desk in my bedroom, 
and that’s the best spot for writing. I think for New York it’s probably a good 
size apartment, and I’ve been working there for so long that I’m used to it. 
I’ve been there almost 25 years, which is too long really, but it’s hard to get 
me to change. It has no view at all. It’s on the street, there’s a fire 
station, and a big building across from it. It’s a thin room, cluttered, with 
nothing on the walls. I have a candle. No, I’m kidding about the candle. It’s 
all very simple; I don’t have any rituals.

I tend to write in the morning. Sometimes at night. Whenever my head calms 
down. If I’m working, I work every day, for five minutes or five hours, it 
depends where I’m at. If I’m stuck I tend to stop, take a walk, maybe go 
shopping. I might have half a thought that leads to a thought that I need to 
have, but it doesn’t happen all the time. Sometimes if I’m stuck I’ll put on 
some music, but not very often. I have some music that I’ve been listening to 
for a long time, but it’s private, sorry. I don’t want anyone laughing at my 
music tastes. Some of it is inThe Sellout.

I go back and edit bit by bit, by taking a chunk and going through it. I can’t 
go forward unless that chunk is pretty close to where I want it to be. It could 
be five pages, 10 pages – wherever I get to before I exhale. There’s nothing in 
particular that makes me get on a roll. Sometimes you surprise yourself. It’s 
like rolling dice: you just keep going and keep going and then one of those 
times it will just come. This is my fourth novel. Each book feels different as 
I’m  writing it.The Sellout felt heavier, somehow.

The thing that no one talks about is all the research, and for me that’s a big 
part of it. You’re looking for something, or trying to get the feel for 
something, and that takes a long time. I have to pretty much go in order, so 
the research doesn’t stop the process of writing; it’s part of the process. 
Sometimes I’m just looking for a word, and sometimes it’s a lot more extensive 
than I had expected and I end up opening a whole other door. But whatever it 
is, I can’t go on until I figure that part out.

I write about LA a lot but I’ve never really done any kind of writing in LA, 
so I don’t even know if I could do it; it might be a little too close. The 
place inThe Sellout is not a real place, but it’s based on places I know, like 
a street that people will find familiar, or a juxtaposition of neighbourhoods. 
The names of places are important in it, and if you know LA then they might 
conjure something up for the reader. But this is a certain, specific part of LA 
that I don’t think many people know.

I’ve got no idea how winning the Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> is going to affect my writing 
life, but I’m about to find out. I’m told that I might be invited to new 
places, that I might have to figure out how to write while I travel. I usually 
need to be somewhere for a long time before I get acclimatised. I’ve done a 
couple of little residencies, but I just sit there looking around me for a 
while.

Right now, though, the prize means a lot. It’s so nice to have someone 
appreciate what you’re doing. So I’m figuring it out and I’m excited to see 
what’s going to happen, or not. It’s an insane, insane honour.

• The Sellout is published by Oneworld. To order a copy for £10.65 (RRP 
£12.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-sellout.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 