
While charity chief executive pay is often under scrutiny, the growing gap 
between rich and poor means salaries at the bottom are now under the spotlight 
too.

About 200 (or 0.1%) of the UK's 200,000 charities have so far signed up to be 
living wage employers <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/employers>, according to 
the Living Wage Foundation.

Currently set at £8.80 in London and £7.65 for the rest of the UK 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/living-wage-2013.pdf>, the wage 
is calculated as the minimum needed for a basic standard of living – this 
covers "an adequate level of warmth and shelter, a healthy palatable diet, 
social integration and avoidance of chronic stress". 

To not pay it could easily be in conflict with most charitable objectives, let 
alone moral ones, say those who are taking the lead.

"We are very serious about it, to the extent that it's not just the people 
that work for us, but also sub-contractors who work in the building who receive 
it. We insist that our security and cleaning staff are paid a living wage," 
says Graham Salisbury, head of human resources at ActionAid UK.

"If you're an organisation that is making a point about poverty, fairness, 
equity, equality ... then it is important that you keep your own house in 
order," he adds.

Blue Cross, the animal hospital charity, also pays a living wage to its 650 
staff. "We don't believe that people should need two jobs to have quality of 
life," says Rachel Briggs, director of people and development. "We ought to be 
leading the way in demonstrating high levels of care and recognition for our 
people."

The People's Health Trust (PHT) goes a step further. As a grant maker it is 
funded through 51 society lotteries and is an independent charity employing 16 
full-time staff.

When recently choosing new offices it settled on Resource for London, an 
office hub specifically for the voluntary sector which pays the living wage to 
all its suppliers and contractors.

"Because our charitable objective is about addressing health inequalities, and 
a fundamental aspect of health inequalities is poverty, the concept of not 
walking that talk was ridiculous," declares John Hume, chief executive of PHT. 
"We must pay our staff a living wage."

Equality extra

This also goes for the grants PHT distributes, he says. Where grants include 
the creation of a new post, PHT insists it must be paid at a living wage. There 
can be complications to this approach. Typically small charities with two or 
three posts do not pay the living wage, and so a new post created at a higher 
salary can cause issues. In which case, "we say you can split the difference 
across all the posts and uplift everyone slightly", says Hume. "But to be 
honest it rarely comes up – most charities take it and run!"

Hume also acknowledges that higher wages can pose an issue to charities 
bidding for contracts and competing on cost. Here, PHT runs workshops with 
small charities on how to include the living wage in bids. The best approach, 
he says, is often to submit two bids – one at NMW, one at LW, with a covering 
letter explaining the benefits of the latter if chosen.

Living-wage apprenticeships

In what is possibly a first for the sector, a new apprenticeship scheme paying 
the London Living Wage launched this month.

A joint venture between the development charities Plan UK, Christian Aid and 
ActionAid UK 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/international-development-charities-launch-apprenticeship-scheme/management/article/1303103>
, it will recruit seven apprentices later this year in conjunction with City 
and Islington College in London.

At ActionAid UK, Salisbury says, "Because we no longer have unpaid interns, 
there are managers crying out for resource. So we thought, let's do something 
that benefits the manager and the individual."

A handful of charities are alternatively looking at wage differentials (a set 
ratio between the highest and lowest paid staff) as a way of addressing 
inequality.

This is favoured by Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) where the highest paid 
employee (the chief executive) earns no more than three times that of the 
lowest paid.

Reprieve, the civil rights charity, ensures the difference in salary between 
highest and lowest is no more than 30% – its chief executive, Clare Algar, 
receives £45,374 pro rata.

Many charities do not speak openly on issues of pay, but they are likely to 
find themselves increasingly watched when it come to making sure their own 
house is in order when it comes to fair pay in an unequal society.

Those that are doing it say the benefit to organisations far outweighs any 
extra costs. Research byLondon Economics 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/mayor/economic_unit/docs/living-wage-benefits-report.pdf>
 across multiple sectors (including a number of charities) found that five out 
of six employers saw an enhanced quality of work from staff after implementing 
the Living Wage.

And research by Queen Mary, University of London, 
<http://www.geog.qmul.ac.uk/livingwage/pdf/Livingwagecostsandbenefits.pdf> also 
identifies benefits including reduced absenteeism, greater motivation and 
morale, higher productivity and increased job quality.

Do you think more charities should pay the living wage? Does your charity pay 
the living wage? What's your concept of fair pay? Tell us your thoughts in the 
comments section, below. 

The charity money hub is funded by CAF. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 