
In what is being widely interpreted as a management climbdown, Penguin Random 
House <https://www.theguardian.com/books/random-house>, the world’s biggest 
publisher, has resumed talks with unions over a new collective agreement.

A meeting early on Wednesday morning had been “positive”, according to a joint 
statement issued by PRH and the unions Unite and the National Union of 
Journalists.

The statement signed by Tom Weldon, PRH chief executive, Fiona Swarbrick of 
the NUJ and Louisa Bull of Unite, said: “Penguin Random House UK, Unite and the 
NUJ held a positive meeting today at which all parties agreed to continue talks 
with the aim of securing a new collective agreement.”

Relations between the two sides broke down on Friday, after the publisher 
terminated its formal relationship with unions at its London sites after 
failing to agree over staff redundancy terms.

The move follows a high-profile campaign that included a petition signed by 
more than 140 authors, including David Almond, Meg Rosoff and Michael Rosen.

The outcry went international this week, with activist and writer Naomi Klein 
tweeting: “Penguin Random House publishes my books in the UK. I support the 
wonderful staff there and join the call to reverse this anti-union action,” 
while former finance minister of Greece, and Penguin author, Yanis Varoufakis 
said: “I am adding my voice toPenguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> authors protesting PRH going 
union-free.”

While it is believed that elements of the agreement remain under discussion, 
sources say the unions are optimistic that a satisfactory settlement will be 
reached in the new year. The unions had sought to extend Penguin staff’s 
enhanced redundancy terms across both sides of the business, which was created 
following the£2.4bn mega-merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/29/penguin-random-house-book-publisher>
 between Penguin and Random House, owned by German group Bertelsmann, four 
years ago.

It is believed the subject is now back on the table after the personal 
intervention of Weldon. “It feels like Tom has taken control,” one source said.

Staff greeted the news with a mixture of relief and suspicion. “This is an 
enormous climbdown,” one editor told the Guardian, adding that union membership 
had soared since last week. “However, I don’t think anyone is under any 
illusions. This may just be a temporary white flag.”

Sources claimed that the move to oust the unions had backfired at the 
publishing house, which also includes Transworld, publisher of Bill Bryson, 
Joanne Harris and Lee Child. Unions are not recognised in the Ealing-based 
division. “There is some unrest [at Transworld],” said one staffer. “They had 
no recognition there at all, and until Tom started emailing and the story hit 
the press they had no idea things were different here.”
 