
A Tunisian migrant-smuggler behind the worst maritime disaster in the 
Mediterranean in recent history has been found guilty of manslaughter by an 
Italian court and faces 18 years in jail.

About 700 people, including young children, were killed in April 2015 after 
Mohammed Ali Malek slammed an overcrowded fishing boat into a Portuguese 
merchant ship that was attempting a rescue of the passengers.

 The fishing boat capsized in the dark of night. Hundreds of people who were 
trapped in its hull were killed and dozens of others drowned in the open sea. 
Only 28 people, including Malek, who was 27 at the time and was quickly 
identified as the boat’s skipper, survived the disaster.

Malek’s second in command, a Syrian named Bikhit Mahmud, 25, was also 
convicted of abetting illegal immigration and faces five years in jail. Both 
have been fined €9m by the court.

The 2015 incident drew international concern and condemnation, and forced 
European leaders to face up to the migration crisis. At an emergency summit in 
Brussels that was called just days later, the UK and others pledged to send 
more support to the Mediterranean to try to prevent the growing number of 
casualties. But those efforts have proven inadequate to stem the tide of death. 
This year about 4,700 people have been killed in their attempt to cross the 
Mediterranean, making itthe deadliest year on record for migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/rising-death-toll-in-mediterranean-makes-2016-deadliest-year-yet>
 attempting to make it to Europe from Africa and the Middle East.

The doomed journey commandeered by Malek began in Libya on 18 April last year. 
Survivors later testified that they had been held at an illegal centre near the 
Libyan coast before they were rounded up and taken in small groups to the 
wooden fishing boat, where hundreds of people, mostly from sub-SaharanAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, were loaded on board and forced 
into the hull. Survivors also told prosecutors that Malek had operated one of 
the small dinghies that took them to the fishing boat and later commanded it, 
brandishing a stick to keep the passengers in line.

Once the fishing boat hit international waters, Malek called the Italian 
coastguard in Rome, which in turn sought the help of the King Jacob, a 
Portuguese container ship sailing nearby. While the container ship’s captain 
told prosecutors that he sought to avoid a collision, witnesses said that Malek 
began to steer his boat toward the enormous ship, slamming it into the side of 
the large vessel. Passengers began to panic and the fishing boat capsized. It 
then sank within minutes.

Malek was taken into Italian custody shortly after his arrival, having been 
identified by survivors. The Tunisian repeatedly denied that he was culpable, 
saying he was just a regular passenger on the ship. In correspondence with the 
BBC,he claimed that the shipwreck was caused by a wave  
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-38303694>that was created by the King 
Jacob’s propellers.

Hours before the verdict was read in a court in Catania, Sicily, Malek 
repeated his claim of innocence. “I have been inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> for two and a half years and I have a 
little son from an Italian [woman]. I want to marry her and [claim my son]. 
It’s the truth,” he told the court.

Prosecutors said in a statement released after the verdict was read that two 
important legal principles had been established in the aftermath of the case. 
First, that smugglers who were illegally trafficking people in international 
waters could be charged with a crime if they asked to be rescued. Second, that 
migrants who were rescued could be considered victims and not criminals guilty 
of illegal immigration.
 