
A few porcelain sunflower seeds caught in an escalator: this was the nearest 
Tate Modern had ever got to a problem. Otherwise, the abandoned power station’s 
transformation into an awesome art-and-tourism behemoth had been a tale of 
uninterrupted glory and triumph. But then it did the thing of dread –Tate Modern
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> pissed off the 
neighbours.

The new extension, Switch House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/23/first-look-inside-tate-moderns-power-pyramid>
, itself a giant celebration of the gallery’s unprecedented success, has a 
public viewing platform. From this platform, spectators are afforded a 
fantastic insight into life inside the multimillion-pound flats in the glass 
block across the way. Tenth-floor residents, understandably enough, find this 
particularly irksome.

Don’t let it be curtains for Tate’s neighbours | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/23/dont-let-it-be-curtains-for-tates-neighbours>
One minute you’re congratulating yourself on living the dream and moving into 
a swanky apartmentminutes away from one of the world’s great visitor attractions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2016/may/23/timelapse-tate-modern-switch-house-london-video>
. The next you discover that the visitors are quite attracted to your Ligne 
Roset Togo modular corner unit, and holding up big signs asking you if it comes 
in lavender, and whether there’s a payment plan.

There’s hardly a home in the capital that doesn’t have some strategically 
placed plant or wheelie bin

A colleague confesses that she has had a good look herself. We didn’t even 
know if the flats were real, she vouchsafed, or part of the show. They’re so 
perfect, so tidy, such faithful reproductions of the ultimate aspirational 
fantasy. Obviously, the solution is for Tate Modern to buy them, and reproduce 
Tracey Emin’s manky rooms in them, in order to extinguish all doubt.

But Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/09/nicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director>
, the outgoing demigod behind Tate Modern, has other ideas. He has proclaimed 
that residents should invest in net curtains. Which is a bit like telling the 
owners of white Range Rovers that youcannot believe they’re not farmers.

Residents have shown their appreciation by placing in one of the offended 
windows cardboard cutouts of figures in their underwear. Which, no doubt, will 
not help with the is-this-part-of-the-art-experience? problem.

Yet, setting aside the normal feelings of burning resentment one nurtures 
against people with actual luxury apartments in actual central London who 
imagine that they have housing problems, privacy in your own home is surely a 
human right. Sure, it’s a struggle empathising with the burdens of 
more-money-than-sense; but it can’t be easy, having every sneaky afternoon 
Netflix binge, every casual hoiking-up of your tights, observed by hundreds of 
enthusiastic sightseers, their gazes drifting from scrutiny of your dazzling 
collection of balsamic and other vinegars only to exchange passionate critiques 
of The Truman Show.

Oh, forget it. I agree with Nick.

Guys, you live in the middle of a highly dense city where blocks like yours 
spring up every other day, often on foundations made from the rubble of social 
housing. Not only did you know that a massive extension of Tate Modern was on 
the way when you bought your flats, some of you got a kick out of the idea that 
you’d be looking right at it.

The tables have been turned: now it’s looking at you – and people in 
glass houses shouldn’t throw tantrums. Make your own privacy. Get some 
curtains. Curtains are nice. Privacy is one of the reasons why they were 
invented. I love my curtains. They’re beautiful.

Residents overlooked by Tate Modern extension should 'get net curtains'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/21/net-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota>
Go for a walk. Look around you. Poor old Parliament View, along the Thames 
opposite Lambeth Palace, is literally a showroom for every kind of blind design 
and privacy strategy known to modern man. Before those residents caught on, I 
walked past one morning as some chap in his pants brushed his teeth.

Net curtains aren’t just there for sad normals to twitch. There’s hardly a 
home in the capital that doesn’t have some strategically placed plant or 
cunningly positioned wheelie bin affording the delusion that we’re not packed 
in here like sardines, with property prices to prove that people are prepared 
to put up with it all. That’s London. Aspects of it suck, including the aspect 
aspect.

I’ve been in my place for 20 years, and the floral curtain opposite me has 
been there, closed, for all that time. It even survived a fire, though it’s 
been slightly sooty ever since.

The residents of the building opposite the Tate have sought legal advice, and 
have asked for the museum’s balcony to be closed to the public. It’s 
unbelievable. Can’t they see what spoilt brats they’re being, by demanding that 
a massively popular institution should abandon a massively popular public 
service so that a few people can live without resorting to window dressing? 
Apparently not. There’s none so blind as a homeowner who won’t countenance the 
horror of a blind.
 