
Prior to laser eye surgery, Peter Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-robinson>, with his dark glasses, 
sharply cut suits and clipped Belfast accent, appeared to personify the 
hardline “no surrender” politics of the Democratic Unionist party.

Alongside the bellowing, fiery oratory of his mentor, the Rev Ian Paisley, 
Robinson built his political career on appearing to oppose every initiative 
aimed at ending theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Troubles and building a 
power-sharing government that would win the support of Protestants and 
Catholics alike.

He once talked about “kicking Margaret Thatcher” as an effigy of the prime 
minister was burned outside Belfast city hall in 1985, in front of tens of 
thousands of unionists angered over her decision to sign the Anglo-Irish 
agreement.

Peter Robinson to step down as Northern Ireland first minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
As unionism grew militant over that accord, which allowed Dublin a greater say 
on Northern Irish affairs, Robinson and Paisley briefly flirted with a new 
loyalist paramilitary force called Ulster Resistance, both men even wearing red 
berets during its formation ceremony at Belfast’s Ulster Hall.

Members of Ulster Resistance were later arrested by French intelligence trying 
to sell surface-to-air missile technology to agents of apartheid South Africa 
in return for Pretoria sending guns to loyalist groups in Northern Ireland.

Robinson, 68, has been a fixture at the top of the DUP’s high command 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
 ever since Paisley spotted the young estate agent from east Belfast as his 
potential deputy back in the turbulent and violent 1970s.

He won the East Belfast seat for the DUP in 1979 and held it until David 
Cameron came to power.

Regarded as a hardliner during the Troubles, Robinson was arrested in the 
Irish Republic during the 1980s for leading a mini-invasion of a village across 
the border, in a bid to highlight the lack of security along the frontier. When 
he paid a fine in Irish punts rather than spend time in an Irish jail, even 
more hardline loyalists dubbed him “Peter Punt” and accused him of “bottling 
the struggle”.

However, Robinson eventually followed Paisley into government, with their 
former enemies in Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/12/ian-paisley-northern-ireland-sinn-fein>
, almost a decade ago after the republican party signed up to support the 
police and justice system within Northern Ireland.

He has expressed his vision of a DUP that moves beyond its traditional base 
among evangelical Christians, especially those inside the Free Presbyterian 
church, and even to recruit pro-union Catholics into the party’s ranks. Unlike 
Paisley, Robinson never belonged to the Free Presbyterian church and over the 
past 15 years sought to broaden the DUP’s appeal into more secular minded, 
middle-class, unionist communities.

With a substantial Catholic minority preferring to remain in the UK according 
to successive opinion polls, Robinson has come round to the idea that moving 
away from the DUP’s old-style, anti-Catholic, kick-the-pope Protestant populism 
is essential to secure the union in the long run.

In a book last year by the University of Liverpool academic and expert on 
Northern Irish politics Jon Tonge, Robinson voiced his desire to expand the 
DUP’s membership beyond its traditional base.

Whoever follows Peter Robinson will need to be a strong leader | Peter Hain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-northern-ireland-first-minister-power-sharing>
“There is a distinction between our party membership base and our support 
base, which is much broader than the membership. As the party gets bigger, I 
expect the party to catch up with the support base.

“That is what happens as younger people come in. That has to be handled well, 
because people oppose change almost genetically and in politics things have to 
change. Religion doesn’t change, but politics has to change with conditions,” 
Robinson told him.

Yet under his leadership the party has maintained a very strong socially 
conservative position in the regional parliament and on several occasions have 
vetoed any moves in the assembly to legislate in favour of gay marriage.

He endured the very public humiliation of his wife Iris’s affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/jan/07/iris-robinson-fall-evangelical-christians>
 with a younger man – exposed on national television. She had a breakdown 
following the revelations in 2010, although the couple reunited and according 
to Robinson his wife “is engaged in a lot of activities and looking forward to 
my retirement and me spending more time at home”.

As for Paisley, there has been no reconciliation with his family before and 
after the DUP founder’s death. The anger of the Paisley family towards Robinson 
is proof that politics doesn’t always end in failure but often in rancour and 
internal party civil war.

Members of Paisley’s family including, his widow Eileen and eldest son Kyle – 
a Free Presbyterian minister – have been forthright in condemning Robinson for 
ousting his one-time political mentor from the office of first minister.

Eileen Paisley, who now sits in the House of Lords, accused Robinson of 
“verbally assassinating” her husband in the internal DUP coup d’etat of 2008 
that forced Paisley to stand down as first minister.


However, Robinson will point to the fact that he has presided over a regional 
government that remains umbilically tied to the UK and polling shows strong 
support for the union in the province. He will also take heart that another 
Robinson – Gavin, no relation – managed to recapture his old East Belfast seat 
in this year’s general election.
 