
The sight of Alexa Chung focusing her bright turquoise toy camera on the 
Chanel catwalk last year was proof, if any were needed, that the Diana+ is the 
cameradu jour. Lightweight, colourful and cheaper than a handbag, with limited 
editions designed by the likes of Paul Smith or the White Stripes, they have an 
obvious appeal to the teenagers you see cooing over the range at Urban 
Outfitters or at the Lomography shop in trendy Spitalfields Market. But they 
are also cool enough for Hoxton hipsters intent on exploring the low-fi 
aesthetic of analogue photography.

Serious photographers tend to prefer the Holga: it's a bit bigger than the 
35mm Diana+, but uses medium-format film, which is relatively hard to come by 
and expensive to process. Both have fixed lenses and only one shutter speed, 
but they can produce all sorts of startling effects.

Anything goes in the Lomo approach to film photography, the website 
Lomography.com <http://www.lomography.com/> assures us, even "boring, brou-ha, 
left toes, blurred nothings".

Hmmm. Some of us would rather not waste £1 a shot developing rubbish snaps, 
which is why we have come to Brighton for a half-day "Holga and Diana" workshop 
at Create Studios.

"Lomos are flaky cameras," says tutor James Kendall, cheerfully. "That's part 
of the appeal: they're like those friends who never show up at parties but when 
they do, the party's always a blast. When your Lomo pictures go right, you get 
incredible results."

And people all around the world are getting those great results: among the 
thousands of images posted on theLomography.com 
<http://www.lomography.com/photos> gallery are many dazzling results, from 
gorgeously saturated colour to faded images straight from a 1950s magazine. 
There are optical distortions, weird lighting, blurry silhouettes, superhero 
skin tones, and ghostly overprinting.
 Lomography portrait in Brighton 
Big-name "Lomo amigos" include actor Elijah Wood, musician Jack White and 
fantasy writer Neil Gaiman, attracted by a low-fi aesthetic and the 
possibilities of "happy accident".

First, a little history. The first Lomo camera, the LC-A, was a cheap 35mm 
compact with a rather good fixed lens. It was first made in Russia in the 
1980s, and introduced to the west by some enterprising Austrian students a 
decade or so later. Lomography.com still sells LC-As (now mostly made in China) 
but they're not cheap; it also has a range of more affordable and even more 
low-fi alternatives.

The Holga, which we are using, is all plastic and, although relatively large, 
weighs next to nothing. The Diana+ is based on a toy camera from the 1960s. 
Then there is the funkiest-looking of all, La Sardina, made, as the name 
suggests, from recycled tin. All are are prone to light leaks, which, in 
Lomography, is a good thing.

Now for the theory. There are only two modes, James tells us – sunny and 
cloudy – so you shouldn't even think of trying to take pictures indoors without 
a flash. Outside, look for shadows – if you can't see any, go read a book or 
something.

He produces little cards for us to use to calculate distances for accurate 
focusing, and demonstrates how to balance your camera on a folding wooden 
measure at exactly the right distance for close-ups. I make a mental note to 
concentrate on the middle distance instead. Make sure you wind the camera on 
after you've taken your shot, he tells us. You may want to consider throwing 
away the lens cap, too – so you won't forget to take it off.

Forewarned, we head out into Brighton. It's a drizzly Saturday – not much in 
the way of shadows – so there's a challenge to start with. But Create Studios 
is ideally placed for locations. The immediate vicinity is grungy urban: great 
graffiti, scruffy industrial buildings, lots of rubbish, odd patches of 
flowers. But it's only a few streets away from the warren of fiercely 
independent shops that is the Lanes. There's much to catch the eye here – 
mosaics in the pavement, windows full of hats, a knitted Brighton pavilion, 
transvestites in killer heels and men in tiger suits arguing at market stalls.

James, who edits Source <http://brightonsource.co.uk/>, a local listings 
magazine, is a good guide, offering a running commentary on the sights along 
with tips for good pictures. "Go for old-fashioned shots," he suggests, to go 
with the old-fashioned technology. Crowds are easy, dogs even better. "Do shoot 
into the sun – you get good effects that way." Not an option that afternoon, 
sadly.
 One of Anne-Marie's shots in the Pavilion gardens 
There is something hugely liberating about going out with a group of 
photographers. In the ordinary way, I'd never get down on my knees before a 
bunch of green plastic ducks. Or hold a piece of string to a girl's nose to 
make sure she is in shot (actually, I let James do that – I planned to capture 
the moment for posterity). In the gardens around the Pavilion, we poke our 
cameras into a bush to capture a man practising some yogic discipline in his 
shorts, and squat to focus as hen-partiers in top-to-toe union flags strike 
poses for us.

By the time we reach the beach, the rain has driven everyone away from the 
merry-go-rounds and damp deckchairs. Once we've used up our two free rolls of 
120 film (a couple of dozen pics in all), it's time to go our separate ways. I 
buy some more film, in hope that the weather will improve. If my borrowed 
camera hadn't jammed as I was on my way back to the Grand, I just know I'd have 
got some brilliant night images of the pier and the streams of traffic below my 
hotel room balcony. For the next couple of weeks, I see great Lomo shots 
everywhere. I don't want to give the Holga back. Maybe I'll splash out on an 
LC-A. Then I get my prints back. Almost every bloody shot is overexposed, 
fuzzy, and with lots of unintentional camera shake. Even the ducks. (I know – 
James did warn us. Yes, I should have taken up the offer of his folding rule.) 
Maybe I won't bother with an LC-A. I'm told there are lots of smartphone apps 
that can give you the same effects …

• The course was provided by Create Studios in Brighton (01273 601965, 
welovecreate.com <http://welovecreate.com>). Its next Holga and Diana course is 
on 28 October, £75pp. SeeLomography.com <http://www.lomography.com/> for events 
and workshops in London, Manchester and overseas. Zoingimage in Sydney Street, 
Brighton (zoingimage.com <http://www.zoingimage.com/>) sells lo-fi cameras and 
film. Urban Outfitters (urbanoutfitters.co.uk 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/l-brands/lomography/icat/lomography/>) also 
sells Lomo cameras online and in store. Travel from London was provided by 
Southern (southernrailway.com <http://www.southernrailway.com>, singles from 
£15.40), and accommodation by the Grand Hotel (0871 222 4684,devere-hotels.co.uk
 <http://www.devere-hotels.co.uk/hotel-lodges/locations/the-grand.html>, 
doubles from £85). For inspiration, check out the LomoWall at the Museum of 
London (museumoflondon.org.uk 
<http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/London-Wall/Whats-on/Exhibitions-Displays/LomoWall.htm>
), an exhibition of almost 30,000 lomo photographs from 32 countries, until 6 
January 2013
 