
Donald Trump’s plans to expand his Aberdeenshire golf resort by building 2,750 
new homes and holiday flats have suffered a significant blow.

In a major victory for the president-elect’s opponents in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, senior planning officials have 
rejected Trump’s bid to build a far less ambitious and cheaper version of the 
vast holiday and sports resort he originally fought for in 2008.

The officials appointed by Scottish government ministers to review 
Aberdeenshire’s development plan have decided Trump must stick to his original 
master plan for a major hotel, timeshare and sports complex – one he priced 
then at between £750m and £1bn.

They have recommended to Scottish ministers and the local council that Trump 
should also be told to build hundreds of affordable homes, a new primary 
school, other community facilities and a new roundabout on the main A90 road 
nearby at his own expense – as he had originally promised. Trump should also be 
forced to accept “robust” environmental checks on the site because of its 
proximity to legally protected dunes, they said.

Their report <http://www.dpea.scotland.gov.uk/CaseDetails.aspx?id=117135> has 
been released as lawyers acting for Trump were in court in Edinburgh on 
Thursday tooppose a civil action brought by an anti-Trump protester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/court-to-decide-whether-activist-can-sue-trump-golf-course>
 for breaching her right to privacy.


Related: Donald Trump faces wall of opposition as he returns to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/donald-trump-faces-wall-of-opposition-as-he-returns-to-scotland>

The rejection of Trump’s revised plans raises further questions about the fate 
of the resort, about 10 miles north of Aberdeen. Following his election as the 
next US president, Trump promised to divest himself of his vast property empire 
and investments.

He has yet to disclose who will take control over his businesses or when. His 
neighbours in Aberdeenshire believe his son Eric will run that resort and the 
family’s second resort, the Open championship course and hotel at Turnberry in 
Ayrshire.

Despite heavy opposition from Scotland’s environment agencies, Trump won 
planning approval in 2008 to build across rare legally protected coastal dunes 
in Aberdeenshire only because his resort would be an economic investment of 
national importance and would employ 1,200 people.

It would involve a multistorey five-star hotel with spa and conference centre, 
two 18-hole courses, a golf academy, riding stables, shops, and a sprawling 
housing development involving time-share apartments, private villas and homes 
for local people.

But after admitting that “the world had crashed” after the 2008 recession, 
Trump dropped those plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jun/20/donald-trump-golf-resort-scotland>, 
instead building just a single 18-hole golf course with a driving range and a 
small clubhouse, and converting the estate’s main house into a small 19-bedroom 
boutique hotel.

He also withdrew without agreement from a multi-agency environmental 
monitoring group which was set up as part of the 2008 planning approval. 
Company accounts suggest he has spent only £38.5m on the resort so far, with 95 
full-time equivalent jobs.


He repeatedly claimed he would not build anything more until plans for an 
offshore windfarm project several miles south of his resort were dropped, 
entering into abitter and public feud over renewables with the then first 
minister Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/mad-alex-donald-trump-letters-abuse-ex-scottish-first-minister>
.

Even so, after lodging plans for a second golf course and an extension to the 
boutique hotel, Trump then applied early last year for outline planning 
permission to build 850 private homes and 1,900 “leisure accommodation units”. 
Aberdeenshire council then included that proposal as a normal development in 
the belief it was covered by the 2008 planning approval.

The planning reporters have now ruled that this scheme should be dropped. They 
said: “The outline consent issued on 16 December 2008 was granted for 
exceptional reasons based on the predicted social and economic benefits of the 
proposed development.” The development plans should not “offer or imply” 
support for a different plan.

The Trump organisation said in a statement: “We remain committed to maximising 
economic benefits in the current economic and market conditions, locally and 
nationally. The report reaffirms our outline planning permission for 500 houses 
within the local development plan which has been endorsed by the reporters. Any 
future proposals that we may bring forward will go through due process.”

Martin Ford, a councillor whose casting vote on an Aberdeenshire local 
committee in 2008 forced Trump into a major battle to win approval for the 
site, said the reporters’ decision was “about as restrictive as it could be for 
planning policy pertaining to Mr Trump’s land.

“The reporters’ text is clearly intended to be a barrier to any attempt by Mr 
Trump to cherry pick from amongst the elements consented in 2008 or to use that 
consent as a Trojan horse to justify an alternative scheme.”

His colleague Debra Storr, a former councillor who was also heavily involved 
in opposing the original application in 2008, said: “The Trump organisation has 
attempted to subvert the planning system at every step and hitherto has been 
allowed to get away with this by local and national government. I am pleased 
that Aberdeenshire council’s attempt to simply include the land at Menie into 
the local plan as normal development land has failed.”
 