
Theocritus: A Villanelle

O singer of Persephone!
 In the dim meadows desolate
 Dost thou remember Sicily?

Still through the ivy flits the bee
 Where Amaryllis lies in state;
 O Singer of Persephone!

Simaetha calls on Hecate
 And hears the wild dogs at the gate;
 Dost thou remember Sicily?

Still by the light and laughing sea
 Poor Polypheme bemoans his fate;
 O Singer of Persephone!

And still in boyish rivalry
 Young Daphnis challenges his mate;
 Dost thou remember Sicily?

Slim Lacon keeps a goat for thee,
 For thee the jocund shepherds wait;
 O Singer of Persephone!
 Dost thou remember Sicily?

“All this love of curious French metres like the Ballade, the Villanelle, the 
Rondel; all this increased value laid on elaborate alliterations, and on 
curious words and refrains, such as you find in Dante Rossetti and Swinburne, 
is merely the attempt to perfect flute and viol and trumpet through which the 
spirit of the age and the lips of the poet may blow the music of their many 
messages.” So Oscar Wilde claimed in an essay collected inMiscellanies 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/14062>, emphasising the musicality of these 
“curious French metres” – like the villanelle of this week’s poem. He defines 
their appeal not, as we might have expected, primarily in relation to the 
aesthetics of art-as-artifice. Theocritus: A Villanelle seems to bear out this 
perspective: its first, and arguably most lasting, appeal is to the ear.

It appears in Flowers of Gold 
<http://www.hoboes.com/FireBlade/Fiction/Wilde/GoldFlowers/> (1890), a work 
imbued with Wilde’s intense Hellenistic feeling. He was a fine classical 
scholar, and might have had a distinguished career in that field: Greek 
literature influenced his dramatic works as well as his poetry. He approaches 
this classical past as a homosexual, of course, as well as a creative artist. 
It’s an alternative, if somewhat beatified, reality, a sexually and 
artistically liberating soul-scape.

 The Villanelle introduces tiny vignettes from the Idylls 
<http://www.theoi.com/Text/TheocritusIdylls1.html> of Theocritus 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Theocritus>, a poet who fashioned his 
bucolics with a certain realism. Wilde challenges the brevity of his chosen 
stanza: the shepherds and mythological figures he has plucked from the longer 
narratives of the Idylls are presented in extreme miniature but they remain 
urgently active. They are mostly lovers, seen at various stages of their 
vigorous passion, perhaps a little like those depicted on Keats’s Grecian Urn. 
The poet’s own feelings about them energise them with brief but telling 
epithets: “poor Polypheme”, “slim Lacon”.

Simaetha is the most dramatic figure we get to peep at. She is planning to 
entice back her unfaithful lover, Delphis, by invoking the help of Hecate (“at 
whom even the dogs tremble”, Theocritus warns). Hecate, among her various 
roles, was the companion of Persephone during her underworld sojourn. It’s the 
latter who shares the emphasis in Wilde’s poem, since Theocritus is repeatedly 
apostrophised “O Singer of Persephone!” The movement between levels of light 
and dark is captured in the two alternating refrain-lines, the first evoking 
the poet’s living song, the second his supposed longing for Sicily.

Poem of the week: The Ballad of Reading Gaol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/mar/23/oscar-wilde-ballad-reading-gaol-poem>
Wilde’s own yearnings predominate, and the poem might be offering a series of 
nudges to Theocritus to share the nostalgic love. Sicily was Theocritus’s 
birthplace, and so where the lost pastoral tradition originated. Was Theocritus 
banished or exiled? It’s simply, perhaps, that Wilde has invited him into 
modern Britain to join him in scorning an empire which “hath but feet of clay”.

 Pastoral might be associated with “the Great God Pan”, a figure of 
significance to Wilde and to Victorian poets of an earlier era, such as 
Elizabeth Barrett Browning. In his sonnet Santa Decca, Wilde’s speaker echoes 
the legendary cry heard by sailors on the night of Christ’s nativity, “Great 
Pan is dead…” But the sonnet ends with the possibility that, after all, Pan may 
be stirring under the leaves and that, rather than run away, the poet and his 
lover should stay and hopefully “watch awhile”. Wilde also wrote a 
double-villanelle addressed to Pan, concluding: “Ah, leave the hills of 
Arkady!/ This modern world hath need of thee!”

All good villanelles have a strong, simple message, usually asserted and 
focused by the two refrain-lines. Disguised as a rhetorical question, Wilde’s 
expression of desire is deeply persuasive. What’s special about the way the 
persuasion works is that the poem’s sounds embody its meaning. We hear voices, 
or perhaps flutes, sinuously winding through the outer lines of the tercets, 
and, in the second, middle line of each tercet, a more percussive sound, like 
that of the foot-clapper with which a Greek chorus-leader would beat time. The 
“e/y” rhyme-sound is accented, but it slips past barely noticed, compared with 
the “…ate” rhyme of the inner lines. The presence of three- and four-syllable 
Greek names makes for further melodic variety. There’s never a plodding moment 
in Wilde’s handling of the iambic tetrameter, but there are some lively skips 
and jumps. By repeating “still” in three stanzas, he insists that the 
narratives of the goatherds and the “jocund shepherds” are continuing to 
unfurl, but this would simply be wishful thinking without the music of the poem 
to rouse an affirmative from our own living pulses and senses.
 