
The Days That Forced Our Lives Apart

The days that forced our lives apart
Are shut up like a fan.
We shall not even speak of them,
Because at last we can.


There’s nothing in between us now,
Neither silk nor sheet.
Our lives have come so close tonight,
Even our graves meet.

I discovered Jill Furse’s poetry only recently, dipping into Anne Powell’s 
excellent 1999 anthology,Shadows of War: British Women’s Poetry of the Second 
World War <https://catalyst.library.jhu.edu/catalog/bib_2130176>. The three 
lyrics by Furse testify to a ratherHousman 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/a-e-housman>-like 
talent for succinctness and musicality. The Days That Forced Our Lives Apart, 
written a year into the war, is my favourite of the three.


Furse was a granddaughter of the poet Sir Henry Newbolt 
<http://www.firstworldwar.com/poetsandprose/newbolt.htm>, and enjoyed, for a 
short time, a promising West End acting career. In September 1939, the month 
and year that war began, she married the glass engraver and poetLaurence 
Whistler <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/06/guardianobituaries.books>
. Whistler was called up a year after the marriage, and spent the war years in 
army training camps. Furse suffered from what Powell describes as “intermittent 
illness, now thought to have been lupus erythematosus” and died shortly after 
the birth of the couple’s daughter. Laurence Whistler published an account of 
their lives together in a prose memoir, The Initials in the Heart.

The historical backdrop (war and a wartime marriage) adds a perspective to the 
poem, but the poem is not two-dimensional without it. Its eight lines contain 
every detail required to hold us attentive to the scene. The lovers have been 
separated: now they’re together. Their intimacy takes them beyond the necessity 
for words. They meet, unguardedly present to each other. And in the close 
connection of their bodies they seem to transcend, if not death itself, then 
the separation of death.

Bold rhythm accompanies an even bolder meaning: the lovers are stripped naked, 
unconcealed by glamorous nightwear

 The word “days” in the title and opening line suggests understatement, while 
illustrating how time slows and its divisions are meticulously peeled off and 
counted when one person awaits another’s return. The simile invests the “days” 
with the muscular power to “force” people physically apart, only to reduce them 
to that lightweight object, a fan, hardly a weapon of force beyond a frivolous 
or flirtatious scolding. The transformation reflects the joyous psychological 
effect when homecoming erases absence. But even a folded fan, though slim, has 
substance. So the image doesn’t tell us, as in a more sentimental poem it 
might, that the days have become nothing. They’ve dwindled in importance, and, 
in the moment of the poem, are almost nothing, “shut up” like a fan and not to 
be talked about, so both senses of “shut up” are evoked. The recognition of the 
fact of this silence hints, in the poem, at experiences it might be difficult 
and painful to speak of. But there’s no psychological necessity: if, at last, 
the lovers are close enough to talk about the days they were absent from each 
other, it’s precisely because they’re together that they no longer need to. The 
“fan/can” rhyme of this first stanza curiously seems to underline male/female 
complicity. It’s beautifully judged – almost, but not quite, startling. It 
could have been awkward. It’s handled so deftly it seems entirely natural.

 Rhythmically this is not a symmetrical poem. In the second stanza, certain 
small metrical shifts reflect the intensification of mood. The iambic rhythm of 
the second line of the first stanza (“Are shut up like a fan”) is exchanged for 
a trochaic metre in the second line of the second stanza (“Neither silk nor 
sheet”). The stress on the first syllable of “neither” gives the line its 
strong, almost archaic, negative emphasis, its echoes of border ballad and 
mediaeval carol. Bold rhythm accompanies an even bolder meaning: the lovers are 
stripped naked, unconcealed by glamorous nightwear (“silk”) or bedlinen 
(“sheet”), or any of the civilised trappings and structures which those two 
powerful nouns call distantly to mind (“silk” for instance might suggest the 
law: “sheet” evokes pages, sails and winding sheet).

 The last line begins with a dactyl and ends with a spondee: “Even our graves 
meet.” The rhythm is stark and faintly ceremonial. The obvious meaning of this 
curious and compelling idea, the meeting of two graves, might be that lovers so 
extraordinarily close in life can’t be separated by death, or by the changes 
created by death, but the meeting of graves could also be associated with 
mutual orgasm, if “graves” is read as a euphemism for the “little deaths” of 
sexual fulfilment. The picture that’s most immediately conjured, though, is of 
two plots of earth, side by side, soil and grass and flower-roots mixed up as 
the dust of bodies might be.

The Days That Forced Our Lives Apart is the most perfect of love poems. But, 
while I see Furse as one of the brightest stars in Powell’s cosmos, the 
anthology is richer and broader than a single poet or poem could suggest, and 
the selection reflects a wide range of women’s wartime experiences beside their 
non-combative or domestic responses.


 