
The dog itself

Memory rounds this up, breathless,
like the dog herding sheep
below the bedroom window:


dropped at my feet are smells –
wool in the rain, my aunt’s
cigarette smoked on the hoof,


gorse also, firs making green
(and what it all means,
that too has a smell).

Not forgetting the dog itself,
so pleased with its work,
I must pen it in quick.


Sheepdogs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herding_dog> are rarely treated as 
metaphorical beasts, and certainly not as bringers of poetic inspiration. In 
fact, I rather think that literary dogs, for all the instances of good and 
faithful service, are more likely to have malign than benignsymbolic 
connotations <http://www.metaphordogs.org/>. But the dog of Helen Farish’s new 
collectionThe Dog of Memory 
<http://www.bloodaxebooks.com/ecs/product/the-dog-of-memory-1126> is no rough 
cynic but a bringer of gifts and delight. In a collection much concerned with 
memory as the retrieval of sense impressions, the sheepdog in this poem feels 
like a protective if excitablegenius loci.


 The first question a reader might ask concerns the subject of the 
demonstrative pronoun in “Memory rounds this up” … Does “this” imply this poem 
or the work in general? I think that, by sourcing the collection’s title in The 
dog itself, Farish indicates that this poem has wider significance and that it 
embraces a general imaginative direction.

 At the same time, there’s an immediacy to the thought, “Memory rounds this 
up, breathless”, an invigorating sense of the poem in real time discovering its 
raw material. The rush to get everything down gains explicitness in the final 
stanza, but it begins here, with the implication that the poem itself has been 
retrieved alive at this very moment by an eager and “breathless” dog.

 Farish inhabits a variety of locations in her work, but frequently connects 
poetry and the finding of her own language with Cumbria (known in her childhood 
as “Cumberland”, as another poem explains). She would echo Wordsworth, perhaps, 
in saying: “Fair seed-time had my soul. <http://www.bartleby.com/145/ww287.html>
” However, the poetry is not backwards-facing. The presence of the “bedroom 
window”, for example, seems unaffected by the passage of time. It may belong to 
an earlier time, or to the present, but the memory-work of such poetry includes 
making everything accessible to the present tense.

The dog metaphor provides a strong, well-founded framing device, allowing the 
poem to resist sensory overload and focus on the sense of smell. The different 
odours the memory-dog drops at the speaker’s feet are a potent, 
nostril-tingling mix. “Wool in the rain” connects us with the jostle of warm 
sheep in pasture, as well as that inimitable smell of damp jersey. The ensuing 
reference to the aunt and her cigarette adds a time signal: now we’re more 
definitely transported to the speaker’s past. A colloquialism, “on the hoof”, 
amusingly puts the animal into the human, and hints at social context: there 
might be something rushed and perhaps guilty about this woman’s al fresco 
“smoke”. It’s not a judgment made by the speaker, though, as she catches the 
lingering whiff of adult freedom.

 “Gorse also” begins the third stanza, with a wonderfully rasping, scratchy 
sound. I’ve always thought of flowering gorse as having a coconut sort of 
smell, but we’re at liberty to make our own associations. There’s a brilliant, 
shorthand image of growth in the phrase “firs making green”. It reminded me of 
the modest little Christmas tree I planted a few years back, now aspiring to 
the splendid height of the adult sitka spruce, and ready to strike stars and 
lightning from the electricity supply lines.

 The firs’ accumulation of foliage, first seen in terms of colour, is 
translated to the primary dog-sense through the parenthesis: “gorse also, firs 
making green,/(and what it all means, /that too has a smell)”. Are we on the 
cusp of the metaphysical? Or does the finding and making of ultimate meaning 
(“what it all means” ) have a smell, a pungency of libraries or new paper, or 
some more personal aroma? Is there a pheromone associated particularly with the 
intellectual workout? Or with making poems? The dog, of course, would know.

Solemn poems have been written about being a poet and/or writing poetry, and, 
of course, jokey ones, oftenadvising against it 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/49051>. This one 
captures the sheer rush of elation it can be. The good dog memory is delighted 
with itself, and the recipient of its gifts (to raid the Wordsworth quote-kitty 
again) is “surprised by joy”. Only that neat conclusive pun announcing the need 
to “pen it in quick,” suggests that a harsher hand must intervene in fixing 
memory as art.

• The dog itself is taken from The Dog of Memory by Helen Farish 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dog-of-memory.html>, published by Bloodaxe 
Books, 2016.
 