
The Snake Goddess of Crete


I cannot grasp your high status apron
(your pretty little pinny) in my hands to
blow my nose and wipe my eyes as
of a child of yours and wash away this
here-now world and find a maybe
kinder variant. It’s like this you see —
I don’t much care for the 21st century.

The uproar of many peoples who roar
roaring seas rumbling of nations
rushing on rumble of waters roaring mighty
uproar of many peoples who roar seas
rumbling of nations grumbling mighty
roar of seas of nations of up roaring.

I need to touch your transfixed snakes.
Stroke the sejant cat perched on your crown
and suck your startling tits as of a babe
wash away this here-now world to find a
kinder crew. To sail our tabernacle divine
with fearless balance at your fingertips.

“He who saw the deep” is the incipit to the standard version of the Epic of 
Gilgamesh <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epic_of_Gilgamesh>, a work informing 
the major themes andthe title-sequence of Geraldine Monk’s latest collection 
<http://poetrywales.co.uk/wp/2885/poems-geraldine-monk/>, They Who Saw the Deep.
Monk invokes the epic’s ferocious flood narrative in her approach to more 
recent catastrophe in the Libyan Sea, and dedicates her book “to the memory of 
all those who have lost their lives at sea whilst searching for a better life 
and to Khaled-al-Asaad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/isis-beheads-archaeologist-syria>
 who lost his life while protecting the heritage of the world”. The “deep” of 
the title is of course not just the sea, but the most profound reaches of human 
knowledge.

 The poem I’ve chosen comes from a section titled The Abandoned. Here, 
freestanding but connected poems form a double-edged celebration of deposed 
love goddesses, fertility goddesses and goddesses of war – often, as is the 
case with Ishtar, all three being fused in one representation. In a different 
poem, United Female Animates, Monk sends a bunch of this “unholy crew” and 
their familiars out on a hen night. The concluding line in which they “partied 
until the dawn of time” indicates, roughly, the moment they became obsolete. 
Recorded history abandons them and they abandon history, leaving it motherless 
and unmotherly.

 The Snake Goddess of Crete addresses a Minoan goddess whose uncertain 
provenance perhaps contributes to what feels like a special, personal appeal to 
the poet’s imagination.

Like the goddess <http://arthistoryresources.net/snakegoddess/votary.html>, 
this three-stanza poem has a distinctive shape. In the two outer stanzas, a 
needy, childlike attachment to the goddess is emphasised. Each focuses on 
maternal aspects of the quietly impressive, creature-calming powers suggested 
by this small, elaborately clothed, bare-breasted image. But the speaker’s tone 
changes radically: at first intimate and wistful, at the end, it rises in an 
eloquent prayer. The location also seems to change: the speaker seems to be 
alone with the goddess in the first stanza, but, in the last, with the 
reference to “a kinder / crew” and “our tabernacle divine” the experience has 
become communal. The speaker has put to sea and is part of that crew voicing 
their hymn to the snake goddess asstella maris. In fact, both speaker and 
goddess are sharing captaincy of the ship.

 These outer verses encircle a powerfully impressionistic inner paragraph 
where nations and oceans mercilessly rage together. This segment is perhaps 
more prose poem than stanza: the line breaks almost vanish in the great swathe 
of sound created through the repetition of forms of the word,roar, and the 
ominous ground-bass of “rumbling” and “rushing”. This wonderful miniature 
symphony brings the “uproar” of peoples, nations and seas into its 
orchestration, all moving forward with the relentless non-humanity of waves.

 The first line of the third verse seems to halt this movement: “I need to 
touch your transfixed snakes.” The assonance of “transfixed snakes” transfixes 
the line, and magically calms the earlier rhythmic turmoil. This verse goes on 
to echo and torque phrases and words from the first, gradually bringing about a 
linguistic transformation far beyond mere repetition.

 Particularly noticeable is the grammatical construction “as of” – (“as / of a 
child of yours” in stanza one, “as of a babe” in stanza three). At first, the 
phrase introduces a slightly awkward touch of formality, intimating perhaps the 
wish of a humble worshipper to achieve the right hieratic tone for addressing a 
goddess, and respectfully distance her prayer-voice from the distressed child 
she feels she has become. We might take the first “as of” to mean that the 
speaker’s running nose and eyes are exactly like those of a child. If subjected 
to a similar grammatical yoking, the second “as of” might remind us of the 
baby’s possessiveness: the “startling tits” would, if that statue were a real 
woman, belong to the nursing baby, from the baby’s point of view. But it could 
also suggest the obvious comparison, to suck “like” a babe. There’s something 
both simple and complicated contained in that little twisting formulaic strand 
“as of a … ”. If it’s a remnant, in an hour of almost inexpressible crisis, of 
the formal courtesy a goddess might be owed, it also represents a 
dissatisfaction with that same formal language. The compound “here-now” 
manifests a similar impulse of impatience and linguistic reinvention.

 The poem’s variation of registers reinforces this. There are artful 
disconnections that might mirror the difficulties of reconstructing a lost 
language of goddess-worship: “high status apron” ,“your pretty little pinny”, 
“sejant cat”, “startling tits”. Overall, the favoured idiom is informal, and 
the voice is almost neighbourly as it confides: “I don’t much care for the 21st 
century.” While the goddess is addressed privately here, most readers will 
sense the invitation to nod and silently agree. But the poem is not pure 
despair, and ultimately relaunches the presence of some “kinder” power that 
might complete the erasure of the brutal “here-now”. The last image invokes 
reason and physical courage in terms of balance and steering, and the word 
“tabernacle” seals ideas of divinity and refuge into the metaphorical ship. 
It’s an idealised vision of womanly times, and, poetically, a well-earned one.

 * The Snake Goddess of Crete is from They Who Saw the Deep by Geraldine Monk 
<http://www.parlorpress.com/freeverse/monk>. © 2016 Parlor Press. Used by 
permission.
 