
Meeting Point


Time was away and somewhere else,
There were two glasses and two chairs
And two people with the one pulse
(Somebody stopped the moving stairs):
Time was away and somewhere else,

And they were neither up nor down;
The stream’s music did not stop,
Flowing through heather, limpid brown,
Although they sat in a coffee shop
And they were neither up nor down.

The bell was silent in the air
Holding its inverted poise –
Between the clang and clang a flower,
A brazen calyx of no noise:
The bell was silent in the air.

The camels crossed the miles of sand
That stretched around the cups and plates;
The desert was their own, they planned
To portion out the stars and dates:
The camels crossed the miles of sand.

Time was away and somewhere else.
The waiter did not come, the clock
Forgot them and the radio waltz
Came out like water from a rock:
Time was away and somewhere else.

Her fingers flicked away the ash
That bloomed again in tropic trees:
Not caring if the markets crash
When they had forests such as these,
Her fingers flicked away the ash.

God or whatever means the Good
Be praised that time can stop like this,
That what the heart has understood
Can verify in the body’s peace
God or whatever means the Good.

Time was away and she was here
And life no longer what it was,
The bell was silent in the air
And all the room a glow because
Time was away and she was here.

The 2007 edition of Louis MacNeice’s Collected Poems 
<https://www.faber.co.uk/shop/poetry/9780571331383-collected-poems.html>, 
marking the centenary of the poet’s birth, has just been reissued in paperback. 
Its editor, Peter McDonald, reshaped the previous Collected, edited by ER 
Dodds, particularly by restoring the ordering of the original books. Meeting 
Point, first printed by Yeats’s sisters atthe Cuala Press 
<http://www.yeatssociety.com/cuala-press.html> in 1940, takes its place among 
the poems of the original volume, The Last Ditch. McDonald presents the latter 
in full, complete with the engaging epigraph for Eleanor Clark – not the 
collection’s only muse, but probably its most important one:

 Without heroics, without belief,
I send you, as I am not rich,
Nothing but odds and ends a thief
Bundled up in the last ditch.


 Meeting Point is a love poem poised at a high pitch of communion and 
entrancement. It marries various literary devices – narrative and song, realism 
and fantasy. The form is unusual, making first and last lines each five-lined 
stanza’s refrain. This device completes a circle each time, and almost 
uncannily brings the reader into the physical experience of the story. Frequent 
comma splice and enjambment are offset by well-judged colons and halts: this is 
a complex dance of a poem, perhaps a polka rather than a waltz.

 Everything is orderly yet liminal, and even miraculous. “Time was away and 
somewhere else”, “And they were neither up nor down”, “The bell was silent in 
the air”, and so on. The first refrain-pair recurs in the fifth stanza, and 
comes back a third, final time with a new twist: “Time was away and she was 
here.” Designedly simple, almost artless, it’s the perfect climax of a poem 
that has all the while been gently spinning in accumulating narrative arcs to 
reach the still point where mimesis gives way to original presence.

 MacNeice made one revision when reprinting the poem in Eighty-Five Poems 
(1959): he changed the penultimate line from “And all the room a glow…” to “And 
all the room one glow…” Peter McDonald acknowledges the revision as an 
improvement, but scrupulously restores the earlier line, as printed in The Last 
Ditch. But the truth is, any impression of a flaw here is the reader’s problem, 
not the poet’s. We may need a quick rethink to avoid confusing “a glow” with 
“aglow” – which would certainly be dated and sentimental – but, when we read 
the line properly, the indefinite article works fine, and seems more 
appropriate to the evanescent mystery of it all than the emphatic “one”.

 This could almost be another of MacNeice’s travel poems, only the country 
travelled is rendered surreal (as in the super-real) by a sort of double 
exposure. There is the stream and the heather, transplanted from Ireland, 
perhaps, a desert made lustrous with “the stars and dates” of which the lovers 
(not, I think, the camels) have control, the miracles of “water from a rock” 
and cigarette ash reformed as blossom in forests of “tropic trees”. At the same 
time, the couple never leaves the coffee shop, and we are constantly reminded 
of the immediate and ordinary environment of cups and plates and waiters.

 WH Auden’s The Fall of Rome 
<http://genius.com/W-h-auden-the-fall-of-rome-annotated> seems mirrored in 
stanza four’s image of camels crossing “the miles of sand”. And there’s another 
Auden poem, less directly recalled but present in stanza seven,Lullaby 
<https://www.bl.uk/20th-century-literature/articles/an-introduction-to-w-h-audens-lullaby>
. Auden’s speaker reflects on the ethical nature of “the vision Venus sends” 
the post-coital lovers. MacNeice, more of a sceptic than his friend, 
nevertheless allows the erotic vision to impress a mystical gravity on his 
narrator with the realisation: “That what the heart has understood / Can verify 
in the body’s peace / God or whatever means the Good.” The refrain finds a 
solution to doubt; even while it owns the difficult honesty of agnosticism, it 
declares the centrality of sexual love to “verify” human constructions of “the 
good” – whether or not that construction is called God.

Poem of the week: Elegy by Sidney Keyes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jul/15/elegy-sidney-keyes-poem>
 Coexisting with this vision of wholeness, something dangerous has to be kept 
at bay. The lovers’ timeless circles are unreal and impossible to secure. Like 
much of the collection, Meeting Point is pervaded by eve-of-battle delirium, 
expressed in restless movement and return, and scenes that are intrinsically 
fluid despite the superb technical control. This is a love poem (and lullaby?) 
written in 1939. Its dance, in part, is the protest of the organic and 
organising imagination against the chaos of approaching war.
 