
The Ash Plant

He’ll never rise again but he is ready.
Entered like a mirror by the morning,
He stares out the big window, wondering,
Not caring if the day is bright or cloudy.


An upstairs outlook on the whole country.
First milk-lorries, first smoke, cattle, trees
In damp opulence above damp hedges –
He has it to himself, he is like a sentry


Forgotten and unable to remember
The whys and wherefores of his lofty station,
Wakening relieved yet in position,
Disencumbered as a breaking comber.


As his head goes light with light, his wasting hand
Gropes desperately and finds the phantom limb
Of an ash plant in his grasp, which steadies him.
Now he has found his touch he can stand his ground


Or wield the stick like a silver bough and come
Walking again among us: the quoted judge.
I could have cut a better man out of the hedge!
God might have said the same, remembering Adam.

 Seamus Heaney’s father, Patrick Heaney, represents a moral touchstone in the 
poet’s work. We meet him first in Digging (from Death of a Naturalist in 1966) 
as “his straining rump among the flower-beds / Bends low, comes up twenty years 
away…” This sets the tone of future recollection, a combination of gentle 
amusement and deep, even emulatory, respect. It continues even into the 
transcendent elegies and visionary speculations of his 1991 collection, Seeing 
Things.

 Nonetheless, a new strand of filial feeling now complicates the weave: the 
father acquires more than one kind of mythic status as he moves through the 
collection, sometimes as a shade, sometimes as a bright soul: a mediator 
between earth and heaven, Christianity and classicism.

The collection begins with a poem called The Golden Bough, translating lines 
98-148 of Book VI ofVirgil’s Aeneid 
<http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/VirgilAeneidVI.html>. (Faber 
has since publishedthe complete Book VI 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/shop/poetry/9780571327317-aeneid-book-vi.html>). Here, 
the Sibyl tells Aeneas, who wants to visit his father Anchises in Hades, that 
“To go down into earth’s hidden places,” the seeker must first find the sacred 
bough and pluck “this golden-fledged tree-branch out of its tree”. The branch 
will come away easily, provided Fate has given her consent.

 The “golden bough” image is grafted on to the last stanza of The Ash Plant, 
and a reverse journey ensues. Now it’s the dead father who will “wield the 
stick like a silver bough” and so be able to move among the living. 
Traditionally, the ashplant, a stick with a natural “handle” provided by the 
angle of the sapling’s root,had a number of practical uses 
<http://slowplayers.org/2015/05/04/the-ashplant-edor/>. For Patrick Heaney, 
cattle dealer and small farmer, it would have served to help him control his 
livestock. The poem seems to suggest the same ashplant also made a handy 
walking stick for Patrick in later life.

 Heaney was writing in 1986, two years after his father’s death, and four 
years after his mother’s. Later in the collection, in the first poem of the 
Lightenings section of the four-part sequence, Squarings, he imagines “a 
shivering beggar” trying to shelter in a ruined, roofless house. This is the 
condition of the adult child who, parentless, has nothing to stand between 
himself and cold infinity. The Ash Plant might be an accommodation with that 
existential loneliness. It recounts a process different from the retrievals of 
memory, although memory is certainly part of it. A mystical act of imagination 
heightens the remembering and so forms a new present. The poet is now “Seeing 
Things” that are not past but a continuation of existence on a different plane.

 Five solid quatrains, the wonderfully effortless ABBA half-rhyme, a firm 
pentameter beat, and the emphasised cadence of numerous feminine line-endings: 
these building blocks have and contain the density of the real world, but they 
signify more. The father in the poem is waking up after his death, “Entered 
like a mirror by the morning.” He is uncertain, a new shade, unmoored from life 
but not far beyond it, like a sentry “unable to remember / The whys and 
wherefores of his lofty station” (as a sentry’s ghost might be perplexed in a 
Northern Ireland of future ceasefire). Then “his wasting hand” finds “the 
phantom limb” of the ashplant and “… he has found his touch and can stand his 
ground”. It’s a lovely image that suggests a frail old man in his later years 
taking up his stick and, in that moment, finding his balance and becoming sure 
on his feet, as if recovering a younger body. The shade is transfigured, and, 
light-filled, he gains full authority. And once again the son gently smiles at 
the father and teases him as “the quoted judge” for his dry comment, “I could 
have cut a better man out of the hedge!”

 The comment may have originally signalled the father’s dismissal of the 
ash-cutting skills of a fellow dealer: it could also have been an old man’s 
criticism of the medically prescribed walking-stick. A bold shift of context 
raises the stakes. “God might have said the same, remembering Adam.” The poet 
not only gives the father further status as moral arbiter: he presents an idea 
of resurrection and judgment that might or might not guarantee redemption of 
the soul.

Seamus Heaney’s final work – ‘Death’s dark door stands open … ’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/27/seamus-heaneys-final-work-translation-aenied-book-vi-6>
 In the Crossings section of Squarings, Patrick will more firmly acquire an 
identity as guiding and guardian spirit. “‘Look for a man with an ashplant on 
the boat,’ / My father told his sister, setting out / For London, and stay near 
him all night // And you’ll be safe’.” In these poems written in memoriam, 
Heaney conjures human decency at its fullest weight and pitch, and invokes a 
continuous present where “dealing men with sticks” become mysterious mentors. 
Patrick might be seen as a kind of Virgil to his son’s Dante, but an important 
difference is that this man isn’t a poet. Heaney once told an interviewer that 
his father “regarded speech as a kind of affectation”. His duties in life were 
not to language but to the things of the earth – bricks and mortar, tools, 
horses, hedges, cattle. And the poet, although at a remove, has always known 
these same things, and known he won’t fail as an artist if he remains faithful 
to his respect for them. Because of its title, Seeing Things is sometimes 
considered dualistic, polarised between real and delusory acts of seeing. But 
in postulating a world other than the one immediately sensed, the poet is not 
doing anything essentially different from the reconstruction of the past in 
those hidden images we call memories. The sightings poetry unveils are not 
necessarily obedient to simplistic battle lines of fact versus fantasy, 
ashplants versus golden boughs.


• The Ash Plant is taken from Seeing Things © Estate of Seamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney> and reprinted with permission 
of Faber and Faber Ltd.
 