
Matsushima

O paradise of waters and of isles that gleam,
Dark pines on scarps that flame white in a mirrored sky,
A hundred isles that change like a dissolving dream
From shape to shape for them that with the wind glide by!
Many celestial palaces, gardens of scented song,
Have hearts of men imagined for lost happiness;
But merely around these isles, the live sea streams among
Salt with a pulsing tide, no languid lake’s caress,
To sail and ever sail, with not a sound to feel
In the clean blue, but silence vivid with delight,
A silence winged with rush of the dividing keel,
As if the world’s sorrow and folly had taken flight,
Suspended pale as that faint circle far-away
Of mountain, and remote as ocean’s murmuring miles,
This, only this, for me were paradise to-day,
O paradise of waters, paradise of isles.


“They shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old. 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/laurence-binyon#poet>
” Yes, almost anyone who has ever watched the London Remembrance Sunday 
commemorations can quote, or misquote, that line from Laurence Binyon’s stately,
Sapphic-haunted <https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/text/sapphic-poetic-form> 
quatrains,For the Fallen 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/57322>. And that 
may be all they know. Binyon wrote a number of war poems: these, and much of 
his other work, have been a casualty of one poem’s massive public success, and 
faded into occasionally anthologised obscurity. I’d read and admired The 
Burning of the Leaves, and little else.So I was pleased to find a trail leading 
east <http://themargins.net/anth/1930-1939/binyonmiyajima.html> and to discover 
an interesting little cache of “Japanese” poems by Binyon, Matsushima among 
them.

 The Japanese poems are included in a late work, the 1941 collection The North 
Star and Other Poems. Binyon wasn’t an Orientalist in the derogatory current 
sense of the term. His interest in Japan was grounded in professionalism, 
travel and study. He had a long, distinguished career at the British Museum, 
specialising in Japanese and Chinese art, and his 1908 monograph,Painting in 
the Far East <https://archive.org/details/paintinginthefar001804mbp>, was the 
first on the subject to have been written in a European language. His studies 
facilitated the discoveries of younger poets, including Ezra Pound.

 Matsushima is an exuberant celebration of place, 16 flowing hexameter lines 
inspired by the 280 or so pine-clad islands that constitute one of the famous “
three views of Japan. <http://www.japan-guide.com/e/e2250.html>” The poem puts 
the romantic Binyon at the helm, and leaves the sober scholar on the shore.

 The first quatrain’s itinerary begins with a stunningly contrasted visual 
first impression (“Dark pines on scarps that flame white in a mirrored sky”). 
As the apostrophe to the “paradise of waters and of isles that gleam” develops 
over the third and fourth lines, the syntax becomes a bit wayward. “For them 
that with the wind glide by” is a subordinate clause better said than read. It 
sounds fine, and the impersonality of “them” widens the impressionistic 
ripples. Their view of the islands may be from the vantage point of travellers 
on a leisurely boat-trip, or of birds or clouds. Float along with the gaze of 
the poem, and don’t worry – the syntax here is nowhere as complicated as it is 
to become.

 The next 12 lines bring the poem to its climax and conclusion in a single 
magnificent sentence. Binyon’s speaker wants simply to tell us that the isles 
of Matsushima are his idea of absolute paradise. No palaces or gardens imagined 
by “other’s men’s hearts” as reconstructions of “lost happiness” can compete. 
This is the romantic view in a nutshell: the rugged and natural bring us nearer 
to sublimity than the man-made, although “sublimity” is perhaps too big a word. 
Binyon is not pursuing intimations of the divine in nature. Yet he still seems 
to be gently arguing with the conventions of paradise as established by the 
major religions (Swedenborg <http://www.swedenborg.org.uk/emanuel_swedenborg>’s 
sometimes urban heavens might be implicated, too). Here is a poet in old age, 
celebrating the Earth and its gorgeousness, strangeness and energy. The sea is 
especially significant. These waters offer “no languid lake’s caress”. It’s the 
live, salt tides that thrill him, suggesting a sensibility in common with John 
Masefield. Above all, this is Binyon’s personal ideal of paradise: it’s how he 
imagines eternity, (“To sail and ever sail”).

 So the reader sets off on the leisurely, winding cruise of an island-dappled 
sentence, its qualifiers and inversions enough to induce mild seasickness. 
Hexameters benefit from long, involved sentences, though: such syntax minimises 
the effect of that distracting jolt, the mid-line caesura. Synaesthetic 
mismatch adds a sense of delirious abandon: there are those hearts that have 
imaginations, the “gardens of scented song”, the sounds that may be felt, and a 
silence almost made visual when described as “vivid”.

 Binyon rocks the grammatical boat in his excitement but keeps afloat and 
finally completes what at first sounds like a round trip, back to the first 
line. It’s not quite the same, though, and there’s a complication. The last 
line’s “paradise of isles” may be Matsushima itself, a paradise consisting of 
islands. It’s also possible that Binyon’s boat is now moored on a specific 
paradise island, the most paradisaical. Either way, the recapitulation works 
well.

Poem of the week: My Mother’s Language by Abdellatif Laâbi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/22/poem-of-the-week-my-mothers-language-by-abdellatif-laabi>
 Critical writing about Binyon’s poetry sometimes has a superior ring. Binyon 
is no Hopkins, true, but he’s more than a conservative Edwardian versifier. He 
can be odd and striking. The poems may be fluidly structured within formal 
limits, unusually sensuous, evocative in sound. Like the waters around the 
Matsushima islands, they are laced with currents of “live sea”.
 