
Poem

I let him come.
He sneaks on tiptoe
right up to my ear;

under its ribs my heart
quivers, quickens
as the excitement mounts:

first the forest appears,
then the woodland-sequel,
more mist than snow to the touch –

from the new poem’s
very first line the paper sucks up
every waif-word

and an ugliness steals in,
a cunning hungry thing
crouching there incognito,

pretending to be tame and yet so wolfish
that he’s the kernel of light
and then the noise of its cracking;

he’s lithe on the path,
doubling back on himself,
running with the pack, loping alone;

pussy-footing through the night
he trails moonlight behind him
like a mink coat.

I feel him when the hairs on my skin
lift, and in the delicious dizziness
of my private pulse –

in the midst of my writing, in my dream-life,
I slip all his clothes slowly off
and slide him down beside me.


The translation by Lesley Saunders 
<http://www.lesleysaunders.org.uk/index.php/site/C4/> of Poema, by the 
Portuguese writer and activistMaria Teresa Horta 
<https://www.guernicamag.com/interviews/the-third-maria/>, recently took first 
prize in the Open category of the Stephen Spender prize for poetry in 
translation. (Horta’s Portuguese language original is reproduced at the foot of 
this column and all the prize’s winning entriescan be seen here 
<http://www.stephen-spender.org/>.)

 Readers of a certain age may remember Horta from an admired, and sometimes 
maligned, radical feminist text of the early 1970s, New Portuguese Letters 
(Novas Cartas Portuguesas).With Maria Velho da Costa and Maria Isabel Barreno, 
Maria Teresa Horta formed the trio of writer friends who came to be dubbed “the 
Three Marias”. Their collaborative volume, known in English asThe Three Marias: 
New Portuguese Letters 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/7840555-the-three-marias?rating=4&utm_medium=api&utm_source=book_widget>
, was a multi-genre response to a 17th-century collection of letters allegedly 
written by a young nun, Mariana Alcoforado, to her absconding “chevalier” 
lover. Horta had already received adverse criticism for her poetry, and the New 
Letters were no sooner published than banned by the Portuguese government. A 
prosecution ensued, and the women faced jail sentences until, with the 1974 “
carnation revolution <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnation_Revolution>”, all 
charges were dropped.

Alcoforado had recovered her psychological independence through writing. The 
20th-century authors, with their collage of poems, fiction, letters and 
erotica, each work dated but unsigned, set out to assert their female 
authenticity through solidarity. Lesley Saunders traces the source of her 
interest in Portuguese poetry to her first acquaintance with the New Letters, 
noting that it renewed her sense of “what literature could accomplish, 
formally, as well as psychologically and politically”. Saunders was delighted 
to finally meet Horta in Lisbon in 2015.

 Her translation of Horta’s new poem, Poema, combines narrative clarity and an 
erotically charged, fairytale atmosphere. Saunders writes that she tried to 
reproduce the “abbreviated, even dislocated, diction that disguises itself as 
something direct and uncomplicated”. By introducing punctuation into the 
English version, she underlines Horta’s control of phrasing and tempo, and adds 
to the musical interest of our melody-resistant language.

 The lineation has an excited tension in the first two stanzas. The wolf’s 
presence is registered at once, but he quickly becomes elusive. It’s in the 
third that the mystery fully registers: “first the forest appears, / then the 
woodland-sequel, / more mist than snow to the touch –”. The word “sequel” 
contributes to the idea of the poem as storytelling, while the soft, crisp, 
tactile evocation of mist-damp forest and woodland suggests body hair in 
different thicknesses and distribution. With the next stanza we go deeper into 
metaphor land. The new poem has arrived, stealthy and “incognito”, and 
instantly “the paper / sucks up every waif-word”. It’s an unfamiliar, maternal 
kind of animation: few poets see the language of their emergent poem as a 
vulnerable orphan.

 Saunders finds similarities between Horta’s Poema and Ted Hughes’s The 
Thought Fox: the difference is that “Hughes’s fox turns out to be the poet’s 
poem; Horta’s wolf emerges as the poem’s poet”. Whoever “he” is, I like the 
shifts in his character, and the general craftiness of his approach, 
“pretending to be tame, and yet so wolfish”. It’s recognised that the 
intimately known body – of man, woman or poem – may fall short of the ideal and 
even reveal a sudden “ugliness” – a quality that, in the original poem, is a 
moral grossness, depravity (torpeza). To receive the muse, the artist may have 
to overcome revulsion. But perhaps what is most special about this wolf-muse is 
that he resists banal transformation. Saunders uses a wonderful, almost 
punning, feline metaphor, “pussy-footing”, in the eighth stanza, and darkens 
the trailed cape of moonlight, which is compared to ermine in the original, 
mink in the translation. This being is sometimes magical but he is always an 
animal.

Poem of the week: The dog itself by Helen Farish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/03/poem-of-the-week-the-dog-itself-by-helen-farish>
 The narrative rises to a sensuous and role-reversing climax when the speaker 
undresses the newly passive creature: “I slip all his clothes slowly off / and 
slide him down beside me”. At first seductive, finally seduced, the poem-wolf 
lies down with the poet-lamb. Saunders’s translation reveals Horta’s mature 
voice to have an easy, fearless, unapologetic authority. Poema seems an 
important culmination and assertion of her status as an artist and radical 
thinker.

Horta has continued to add to her output of poetry and novels and her work has 
gained some recognition. But the groundbreaking early achievement is often 
underestimated, or marginalised by what Saunders describes as “a general wish 
to forgetall of that”. It’s to be hoped that this prize will help more of 
Horta’s poems 
<http://puritan-magazine.com/seven-poems-from-poesia-reunida-collected-poetry-translated-by-dean-thomas-ellis/>
 and fiction, and those of the other Marias, to become visible to a new, 
international generation of readers.

Poema

Deixo que venha
se aproxime ao de leve
pé ante pé até ao meu ouvido


Enquanto no peito o coração
estremece
e se apressa no sangue enfebrecido


Primeiro a floresta e em seguida
o bosque
mais bruma do que neve no tecido


Do poema que cresce e o papel absorve
verso a verso primeiro
em cada desabrigo

Toca então a torpeza e agacha-se
sagaz
um lobo faminto e recolhido

Ele trepa de manso e logo tão voraz
que da luz é a noz
e depois o ruído

Toma ágil o caminho
e em seguida o atalho
corre em alcateia ou fugindo sozinho

Na calada da noite desloca-se e traz
consigo o luar
com vestido de arminho

Sinto-o quando chega no arrepio
da pele, na vertigem selada
do pulso recolhido

À medida que escrevo
e o entorno no sonho
o dispo sem pressa e o deito comigo

(Reproduced by permission of the poet)

 