
You, Lizard-like

expert at loss, loyal to none,
slip into unknown spaces, claws
digging quickly in, out. You disappear
between things and survive.

Can never go back yet alter course;
are a foreigner in your own company,
who can fade into the dimness of a room
and still be there. Dutiful to darkness.

You hear and seek, see and hide.
Light colours your inner world
as the outer one changes. How quickly
you can flee and shed your skin.

Innocently unfaithful to mate or nest.


****

An oblique character study, this week’s poem is attractively mimetic. Its 
syntax and rhythm are tailored to move in abrupt flickers and flashes, forming 
an experience of virtual lizard-reality for the reader. Lizards can be large, 
but the impression here is of smallness as well as swiftness.


 Quatrains typically inscribe symmetrical aspirations in a poem. When 
contemporary writers use them as a containing device, the disruption worrying 
at the containment becomes a significant factor. These stanzas assert a certain 
regularity: are all end-stopped, and two, the first and third, favour a 
third-line caesura. But the unexpected keeps happening: first, for instance, 
there’s the title, which turns into the subject of the opening sentence, and 
then there’s the shock of the second stanza’s shorthand, dropping the “you” to 
begin a sentence with “Can never”. The full stops themselves may behave more 
like commas. Finally, of course, there’s that odd, solo last line, which has a 
lingering quality, and seems to represent the shed skin as the lizard finally 
disappears.

 We’re never in doubt that the lizard “persona” hides a human being: the early 
descriptive phrase “expert at loss” tells us that. But the interest of the poem 
is that it withholds more detail than it confides about the elusive “you”. This 
person might be an unfaithful or transient lover, an obsessive traveller, some 
kind of immigrant or exile, or simply a typical urban human, playing different 
roles, exploring and discarding images. We are left guessing.

 Similarly, the speaker withholds the degree of connection felt with the 
addressee. At one moment we may fleetingly sense pity, disappointment, 
admiration or a mixture of such feelings: at another, coolness. The engagement 
is lizard-like: now we see it, now we don’t.

 In the third stanza, the lizard-person’s consciousness is investigated. The 
opening line – “You hear and seek, see and hide” – invites readers to hone 
their reflexes to reptilian sharpness. That simple reshuffle of two natural 
verb-pairings (“see and hear”, “hide and seek”) reproduces in miniature the 
alertness of a creature that is both predator and potential prey.

Poem of the week: The Dogs by Sam Buchan-Watts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/04/poem-of-the-week-the-dogs-by-sam-buchan-watts>
 The second stanza notes the lizard-persona to be “dutiful to darkness”. This 
notion of duty introduces an idea of loyalty beyond the self-protective. The 
third stanza continues the idea of camouflage but brightens the palette, moving 
away from nocturnal mystery and affiliation. Its references to colour change 
suggestthe chameleon <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chameleon>, although, for 
the poem’s creature, the colour-changes are more than skin-deep: “Light colours 
your inner world / as the outer one changes”. These are the lines that may 
attribute to the lizard-person an imaginative life beyond mere survival 
strategy. Perhaps its cagily elusive movement through the outer world is 
designed to nourish and protect this inner life. The writer or artist 
negotiates with crowded social spaces so material may be clandestinely 
absorbed. It’s possible that the poem holds up a mirror to the creative self.

 No real moral judgment is made. The behaviour is watched and noted and 
finally seen as inevitable, a complex of mechanisms over which the creature has 
no control. It exists beyond guilt, with no choice but to be “(I)innocently 
unfaithful to mate or nest”. The poem may or may not be a love poem. It 
certainly seems underwritten by a calm and graceful refusal to apportion blame.

 Lynne Hjelmgaard was born in New York City and has travelled widely: she now 
lives in London. She has published collections with Redbeck andShearsman presses
 <http://www.shearsman.com/browse-poetry-books-by-author-Lynne-Hjelmgaard>, and 
recently her third full collection,A Boat Called Annalise 
<https://www.serenbooks.com/productdisplay/boat-called-annalise>, a book-length 
sequence charting hersailing days 
<https://ukpoetgal.wordpress.com/2013/11/25/a-poem-by-lynne-hjelmgaard/> 
appeared from Seren.

You, Lizard-like was first published in the anthology Fanfare, edited by Wendy 
French and Dilys Wood, and published bySecond Light 
<http://www.secondlightlive.co.uk/news.shtml#Fanfare>.
 