
In a dream she meets him again


The trees shake their leaves
in this loveliest of springs
lit from within, like the face
of the boy whose fresh glance
finds her as he tilts a glass
at a book or film, at life itself,
where they sit by the river
in the red and gold of dusk
while bubbles rise to the rim,
o, o, she almost had his name.
Remember me? Maybe she does.

Spring is a season to which my current thoughts very willingly turn as 
September dims the lights. This week’s poem is by the Truro-born, London-based 
Irish poet Maura Dooley and is from her latest Bloodaxe collectionThe Silvering 
<http://www.bloodaxebooks.com/ecs/product/the-silvering-1108>: spring-published 
and often full of that season’s luminosity. Like many poems in the collection, 
In a dream she meets him again has a sense of natural, weather-y, precarious 
beauty.

 It’s a poem with a narrative, though, not a static lyric, and belongs to a 
trio which Dooley, wheninterviewed 
<http://poetrylondon.co.uk/playing-with-light-and-time-maura-dooley-talks-to-karen-mccarthy-woolf/>
 by Karen McCarthy Woolf for Poetry London, described as “that little run of 
dream poems”. In a dream she meets him again is the first of the three. It is 
like the opening bud of a short story that contains little seeds of the plot, 
and yet has a perfectly satisfying shape of its own. The other two are called 
In a dream she encounters a snag and In a dream he is still busy: you may guess 
there’s a certain decline of hope in the narrative (but for the full story, you 
will need to buy the book).

 I like the quick, film-like movement of this poem, the focus-shifts from the 
leaves to the face to the river to the sunset to the glass. Wind-shaken leaves 
catch the external light differently, but it’s “this loveliest of springs” 
which is the subject described as “lit from within”. Some transforming 
illumination has occurred inside the central character, the unnamed young woman 
whose narrative point of view the poem adopts.

 Whatever it is, the enchantment occupies both the characters, of course. 
Adolescence, champagne, the future? Or a dizzy combination, perhaps. The boy is 
tilting his glass “at a book or film, at life itself”. Perhaps he has just 
received a brilliant set of exam results?

 Yet something seems not quite settled between the couple. She may be 
enchanted by him: he is looking away. Although his glance “finds hers”, his 
glass (notice the tantalising “not-quite” of that glance/glass rhyme) is tilted 
in another direction: she’s not the object of the toast. And later on in the 
poem, we’re told (now in the past tense) that “she almost had his name”. She 
has forgotten it, then! Or is she teasing?

 Perhaps the radiance bathing the poem is purely the cinematic light of the 
dream. The title reminds us that this is not really happening. It may have 
happened once, only differently. Dreams can excavate memories, although they 
often revise them. Spring-memories revisited in a middle-aged, autumnal dream 
may be sharpened or blunted by the dreamer’s subliminal awareness of their 
unattainability.

 Opacity increases, even as typography extends the power of the visual. First, 
we imagine the bubbles; then, we actually see them: “O, o, she almost had his 
name.” Significant, too, is the auditory drama enacted by the not-fully 
contextualised exclamation. It’s not a sceptical “uh-oh”, but a gasp of 
pleasure, I think. And yet there’s a tiny, sardonic ring to it. Surprise and 
uncertainty are present, too. It’s a moment of revelation for the speaker – but 
of what? Are those circular marks little wounds in the dream fabric? Questions, 
questions …

 The poem’s only direct question, “Remember me?” is the boy’s. Wily, the 
narrator ducks away from it. “Maybe she does” could be a flirtatious “yes”, 
but, again, a great deal can be read into the hesitation, the narrator’s 
unwillingness to let us see into her character’s mind. “Maybe she does” but 
maybe she doesn’t. If she’s pretending not to remember, why is she? The woman 
in the poem seems to have two identities, as often happens to someone dreaming: 
you’re a past self but also, somehow, the same person who fell asleep a few 
hours ago. In the poem, it’s as if there’s a double-remove, two veils which 
shimmer faintly and differently.

Poem of the week: Ifs by Caroline Norton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/08/poem-of-the-week-ifs-by-caroline-norton>
 From being emotionally unguarded (we know how delighted and blessed the 
dreamer feels because of those phrases “loveliest of springs” and “fresh 
glance”) the narrative turns secretive. The woman is caught at a trembling, 
high-wire moment which leaves her oddly composed and, perhaps, enjoying the 
height of her power in this relationship.

 In the interview mentioned above, Dooley shares her dislike of being 
described, once, as a miniaturist. This is certainly inadequate, in view of her 
range and her political thrust. But the fact is that Dooley does possess an 
unusual boldness and artistry in the medium of the short lyric. Less is not 
always more: let’s be clear about that convenient cliché. But writing small is 
not necessarily about thinking narrowly or seeing too small a spot of time, and 
this poem could not be accused of either flaw. Many novels have encapsulated 
less.
 