
Neighbour


Build me a bridge over the stream
to my neighbour’s house
where he is standing in dungarees
in the fresh morning.


O ring of snowdrops
spread wherever you want
and you also blackbird
sing across the fences.


My neighbour, if the rain falls on you,
let it fall on me also
from the same black cloud
that does not recognise gates.


Iain Crichton Smith’s New Collected Poems 
<http://www.carcanet.co.uk/cgi-bin/indexer?product=9781857549607> is a 
career-spanning volume ranging from the poet’s first, The Long River (1955), to 
the work of his creative late-flowering in the 1990s. Neighbour is from A 
Country for Old Men (2000), a work whose title and life-affirming pragmatism 
complicate the voyage that WB Yeats, a poet he learned from and deeply valued, 
had envisaged in Sailing to Byzantium. “That is no country for old men 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43291>,” Yeats’s 
speaker declared, heart-torn between sensual abundance and inviolable aesthetic 
permanence. Crichton Smith’s matter-of-fact opening to the poem A Country for 
Old Men – “The old man does not think of himself as old” – heralds a graceful 
measure of ripostes to Yeatsian denial and transcendence.


 Crichton Smith was a writer of many parts (novelist, playwright, storyteller, 
essayist) and two tongues (Gaelic and English) born in Glasgow to Highlander 
parents. He grew up in Bayble on the Isle of Lewis, which may sound a perfect 
location for the loquacious, though it was described by his obituarist, Angus 
Calder, as “a drab village near Stornaway 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-iain-crichton-smith-1178496.html>
”. After national service and university, he became a schoolteacher, and spent 
much of his adult life in or near Oban. He made his final home with his wife 
Donalda, inTaynuilt <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taynuilt>, a village on the 
River Nant in Argyll, and this, I imagine, is the setting of Neighbour.

 It suggests nature gently gardened, not confined but set certain limits in an 
accommodation with the rural. There’s the stream, separating the house of the 
speaker and that of his neighbour, the ring of snowdrops, the fences, the 
gates. An elevated tone marries an almost imagistic focus. It’s a small poem 
that gives an impression of spaciousness.

 Almost immediately, it creates the bridge it demands, putting the neighbour 
squarely into the picture, the embodiment of a man readied for the day’s work 
and, no less than the poet, for new endeavours, “standing in dungarees / in the 
fresh morning”. The sound of small waters threading over pebbles is captured in 
the “r” and “ree” sounds of the first quatrain and then picked up in “ring of 
snowdrops”, “spread” and “blackbird” so that the assonance widens and in the 
second stanza includes birdsong.

 Of course, the flowers and birds don’t need to be told to ignore human 
limits: this is what they will do naturally, anyway, and the speaker rejoices 
in the fact. His moral imperative is underlined in the final stanza, where the 
imagined movement changes direction. The snowdrops and the birdsong seem to 
flow from the speaker’s ground to his neighbour’s across the stream, but the 
sorrows initially fall on the neighbour. The truly generous rejection of 
boundaries lies in the willingness of the speaker not merely to extend his 
benefits to his neighbour, but to share the misfortunes of the neighbour’s 
cloud and rain.

 Robert Frost’s poem Mending Wall 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/44266> comes to 
mind. There, the speaker, confessing that “spring is the mischief in me” meets 
his neighbour to set about repairing the winter damage to the wall dividing 
their land. He repeats his insight that “something there is that doesn’t love a 
wall” and asserts there’s really no logical argument for any barrier between 
his orchard and the neighbour’s pinewood. His proposal to leave the gaps in the 
wall unmended is ignored: “Good fences make good neighbors,” says the other 
man, adhering to the tradition enshrined, or perhaps ossified, in his father’s 
proverb.

Poem of the week: Tourists by Ruth Bidgood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/20/poem-of-the-week-tourists-by-ruth-bidgood>
Neighbour distils Frost’s poem and even stretches further in its resistance to 
the idea of a wall. No fences or gates have a significant part in the poem. 
They are shown, at a distance, simply as the useless defences they are – 
whether as retainers of privately treasured beauty and happiness, or as 
barriers against others’ troubles. As always, the poet resists insularity and 
the clear moral polarities of Calvinism. Black and white are mingled in the 
imagery of the blackbird, the snowdrops and the black cloud.

 Crichton Smith, who died in 1998, was one of the major postwar singers of the 
Highlands and Islands. But his inspiration was also nourished by Homer and 
Dante. This combination of a very personal experience of classical literature 
with the savouring of specific locations and their histories gives him a 
certain affinity with the Russian poet Osip Mandelstam. That he lived in less 
“interesting” times doesn’t make his work less fascinating. He is a poetic 
painter and storyteller central to the literary biography of 20th-century 
Scotland.
 