
Repeat This

You have lost it was my fault but there’s more
I live close to the tramlines the phrases heat up.
Too late in the journey a torch endues me with

shadows I have made up nothing all day
nothing has been changed
choosing between ferry ports at the last moment

not to mention this tonguing
which takes the bit between the teeth.
I am just going to put my head round the door

nothing like a change of thrills. There could be no doubt
this part was played by a separate instrument.
I await my turn which approaches fast

that’s what life used to be like
kneeling down to receive everything
in the first few seconds. Asleep under the horse chestnut

it is always a question of layers
there is a ravine I am waving
all at once you retract your claws

where the blood has turned. I love you systematically
but time is against me
write everything you know I am not coming back

From Mengham’s 2015 collection, Chance of a Storm 
<http://www.carcanet.co.uk/cgi-bin/indexer?product=9781784100834>, Repeat This 
is like a musical score, carefully notated but resistant to immediate 
translation into sound. The verbal notation, while evocative, is not 
prescriptive: it’s not denotation. We can sometimes follow a melody or glimpse 
how the harmony is layered, but there is no extended continuity of connection. 
This suits the theme of hasty exits, time running out.


 From the outset, Repeat This plays with grammatical shifts and ambiguity. 
“You have lost it was my fault” could be read as two statements, separate 
despite the lack of separating punctuation, but the embedded colloquialism for 
getting in a rage, “lost it”, registers before the mind can adjust the syntax 
to read “you have lost” (intransitive) and “it was my fault”. Again, in the 
second line, the question is – connection or separation or both? In the 
statement “I live close to the tramlines the phrases heat up” we can imagine a 
speaker contemplating escape while the row goes on getting more and more 
heated: but “the phrases heat up” could be an adjectival clause, with “heat up” 
transitively describing the tramlines rather than the phrases. The shift here 
is not so much of meaning as in mode of expression. Tramlines heated by angry 
phrases belong to a vividly symbolic poetic register; the description of words 
as “heated” belongs, like the expression “time is against me”, to the tired or 
buried metaphors of prose.

 The blurb for Mengham’s earlier collection, Unsung: New and Selected Poems 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Unsung.html?id=A8Kua4ekff0C> (Salt), 
quotes the artistKatarzyna Kobro <http://culture.pl/en/artist/katarzyna-kobro>: 
“Sculpture is a part of the space around it.” This statement, I find, sharpens 
in reversal: “The space around it is part of a sculpture.” Perhaps it’s a clue 
to Mengham’sars poetica in Repeat This, suggesting that not all the phrases or 
lines are necessarily in symbolic or narrative connection. Some may have 
infiltrated from outside the poem. The result, because the poem is structured 
by the first-person point of view, is an exchange between a central 
consciousness and a flow of images shapeshifting around it – whether these are 
from the speaker’s psyche or from an exterior verbal source.

 Another interestingly absorbed disjunction may be between un-thought-out 
“stream-of-consciousness” and verbal self-consciousness, as in the quick 
movement from “choosing between ferry ports at the last moment”, and the 
self-reflexive trope of “this tonguing / which takes the bit between the 
teeth.” Furthermore, the horse/bit metaphor is divided and the “tonguing”, 
which sets the will free – as a horse is set free from its rider’s will when it 
takes control of the bit – may be poetic or erotic, argumentative or merely 
conversational. “I am just going to put my head round the door” is a 
colloquialism sardonically rebuffed by “nothing like a change of thrills”. On 
the other hand, “that’s what life used to be like” is taken up a pitch by a 
comparison that suggests a eucharistic flow of instant blessings. The 
images/metaphors sometimes clash logically: the fleeing warhorse is replaced by 
the view from beneath the horse chestnut tree, a vision of “layers” as the 
lay-er (lover) gazes upwards. The dramatic episodes become more consistently 
connected in the last two stanzas, featuring a ravine, blood, and retracted 
claws as the fight ends in the speaker’s irrevocable departure.

 The poem’s mood and style seem at times eastern European, a reminder that 
Mengham co-edited and translated some of the poems in, the anthologyAltered 
State: The New Polish Poetry 
<https://www.arcpublications.co.uk/books/rod-mengham-tadeusz-piero-and-piotr-szymor-altered-state-the-new-polish-poetry-169>
. Repeat This shares with some of those Polish poems a subverted realism, where 
some ordinary image – rain, a tree or a fence – acts as an immediate instance 
of symbolic power without ceding any of its realist connotations. Mengham’s 
poem rushes like a train through glimpses of tramlines, ferry ports, embattled 
lovers, comings and goings, nothings and somethings, and a wild hinterland 
where the city peters out in wilderness, and where the torch of the opening 
stanza brings more shadow than light.

Poem of the week: Tourists by Ruth Bidgood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/20/poem-of-the-week-tourists-by-ruth-bidgood>
 All poems read slightly differently at different historical moments, of 
course, but I also wonder if some are specifically designed for the reflection 
of changing circumstance (meaning, in effect, “you can’t Repeat This”). My 
reading of Chance of a Storm straddled the EU referendum. Repeat This initially 
felt like a poem firmly located in Europe, while fully at ease in its sometimes 
playful possession of the English language. Then, after last Thursday’s vote, 
the tone seemed less jaunty, more wounded and valedictory. In allowing 
disjunctions and opening questions, it seems to be the kind of poem that, by 
doing interesting things with linguistic space, also lends itself to a flight 
through time.
 