
Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> will not be 
prosecuted for withholding information about his niece being sexually abused by 
his brother Liam, it has been confirmed.

Northern Ireland’s attorney general concluded on Tuesday that the Public 
Prosecution Service’s original decision not to prosecute theSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> leader over claims Adams knew 
about the abuse since 1987 was correct based on the evidence available.

But John Larkin QC said the PPS could have done more to get Gerry Adams 
questioned under caution by police about his knowledge of the abuse and incest.

On the back of Larkin’s recommendations, contained in a 49-page report, the 
PPS in the region added that there was now “insufficient evidence to meet the 
test of evidence” required for prosecuting Gerry Adams.

Larkin launched his report after it emerged during the trial of Liam Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/nov/27/liam-adams-brother-gerry-jailed-raping-daughter>
 that the Sinn Féin president did not inform police for nine years that his 
brother had confessed to him about the sexual abuse of his daughter Áine 
Dahlstrom.

Section 5 of the 1967 Criminal Law Act (Northern Ireland) places a duty on 
everyone to report to the police information they may have if a relevant 
offence – ie one with a maximum sentence of five years or more – has been 
committed.

The PPS examined whether Gerry Adams had been guilty of breaching section 5 of 
the act by failing to report the crime for which his brother was convicted in 
2013. Last monthLiam Adams failed in his appeal against his conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/05/liam-adams-brother-gerry-loses-appeal-sentence-abusing-daughter>
 and 16-year sentence for raping and abusing his daughter.

The region’s chief law officer was investigating the PPS’s original decision 
not to prosecute Gerry Adams for withholding information about a crime. The PPS 
is headed by the Sinn Féin chief’s former solicitor Barra McGrory. After 
criticism of that original decision, McGrory ordered an independent inquiry by 
the attorney general’s office in Belfast and resigned from all further 
decision-making in the case.

In his report, the attorney general does single out the PPS in Northern Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> for criticism over not acting 
to have Gerry Adams questioned under caution by police relating to his 
knowledge of the crime since 1987. In a television interview, Gerry Adams 
admitted his brother had informed him about the abuse that year. Gerry Adams 
later gave evidence against his brother in court.

In his report, Larkin concluded: “While the role of the PPS is not to 
investigate crime, I consider that there was sufficient information regarding 
Gerry Adams’s state of knowledge to at least merit obtaining a further 
statement from Áine Dahlstrom (née Adams) concerning the issue of what she told 
her uncle. I have little doubt that had the only offence under consideration 
been the section 5 offence a decision information request would have issued the 
police asking that this course be taken.

“Furthermore, if such a statement were to have confirmed that Áine Dahlstrom 
was robustly asserting that she had been raped, it seems to me unlikely that a 
decision in respect of the evidential sub-test could have been made in advance 
of Gerry Adams being interviewed under caution by the police.

“In short, while the PPS may have been correct in asserting that the 
evidential test for prosecution was not met on the basis of the evidence on the 
police file, there was certainly sufficient evidence to suggest that the 
evidential test might well ultimately be met and that any doubt ... could have 
been resolved, in particular, by taking clarificatory statements from Áine 
Dahlstrom and Sarah Campbell (her mother), and if necessary by asking the 
police to interview Gerry Adams under caution.”

In the light of Larkin’s main conclusions, the PPS’s deputy director in 
Northern Ireland, Pamela Atchison, said: “I can confirm that the PPS has 
completed its own review of that decision. This has included meeting with the 
principal witness, Mrs Dahlstrom, who has authorised the PPS to confirm that 
she has nothing further to add to her statements and that she does not wish to 
see this matter pursued any further.

 “Accordingly, we have concluded that there is insufficient evidence to meet 
the test for prosecution in this case.”

Gerry Adams has had to face down claims that he continued to promote his 
brother within Sinn Féin long after their meeting in Co Donegal in 1987 when 
Liam Adams confessed to sexually abusing Áine.

After the conviction of Liam Adams it emerged that he continued to be active 
within Sinn Féin after 1987, including being photographed with Gerry during an 
Irish general election campaign in the 1990s. This appeared to contradict Gerry 
Adams’s claims that he disowned his brother after the 1987 confession.
 