
One of two felony indictments against the former Texas governor Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> was tossed out on Friday, 
giving the Republican presidential candidate a potentially huge legal victory 
in the face of flagging polling numbers for the 2016 race.

Texas governor Rick Perry has mugshot taken after indictment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/20/texas-governor-rick-perry-mugshot-indictment-rosemary-lehmberg>
The third court of appeals in Austin sided with Perry’s high-powered legal 
team in ruling that the charge of coercion of a public servant essentially 
constituted a violation of Perry’s free speech rights.

Perry was indicted last August on the coercion charge and a separate charge of 
abuse of official power, which was not affected by the ruling. It is still 
likely he will have to face that charge.

The case stems from Perry publicly threatening, and then exercising, a veto of 
state funding for public corruption prosecutors. His move came in the wake of 
the Democrat who heads the investigative unit rebuffing his calls to resign 
after she was convicted and jailed for drunken driving.

Michael McCrum, the San Antonio-based special prosecutor leading the case, did 
not immediately return a call seeking comment. He will likely have the option 
of further appealing Friday’s decision.

Lead Perry counsel Tony Buzbee called the decision “a clear step towards 
victory for the rule of law”.

“The only remaining count we believe to be a misdemeanor, and the only issue 
is whether the governor’s veto – or any veto in the absence of bribery – can 
ever be illegal,” Buzbee said.

“The appeals court made clear that this case was questionable … and we are 
confident that once it is put before the court, it will be dismissed on its 
face.”

Perry left office in January and has spent most of his time campaigning in the 
early voting states Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina, but polls show him 
badly trailing the race’s frontrunners. He made a single court appearance in 
the matter, which so far has not affected his 2016 campaign schedule.

The former governor has for months called the case against him politically 
motivated, but the Republican trial judge repeatedly refused to toss it on 
constitutional grounds, which prompted the appeal. McCrum has said Perry 
deserves to go to trial based on the evidence, not politics.

Still, the court wrote, the coercion charge “violates the first amendment and, 
accordingly, cannot be enforced”.
 