
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> announced 
the annexation of Crimea on Tuesday, denouncing western hypocrisy in a searing 
speech to political elites in Moscow that is likely to go down as one of the 
defining moments of his long rule over Russia.

In an hour-long speech in the Kremlin, shot through with angry rhetoric, the 
Russian president said western politicians "call something white today and 
black tomorrow" and aired a long list of foreign policy grievances going back 
to 2000, saying "we were cheated again and again, with decisions being taken 
behind our back".

Putin ridiculed the idea that events in Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea> amounted to Russian aggression and 
said there had been no shots fired and no casualties during recent weeks. Yet 
hours after he spoke, a Ukrainian soldier was shot dead at an army base in the 
Crimean capital, Simferopol, the first military fatality on the peninsula since 
the crisis began.

Ukrainian military sources said that one junior officer had been killed and 
another injured by a sniper, after an assault on the base by "unknown forces, 
fully equipped and their faces covered".

Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Ukraine's prime minister, accused Moscow of committing a 
war crime and said the conflict withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was "moving from a political to a 
military one". After the incident Kiev issued a statement authorising its armed 
forces to use weapons to defend themselves.

The announcement came a day after the US and EU announced sanctions against 
several top Russian officials. Herman Van Rompuy, president of the European 
council, and José Manuel Barroso, head of the European commission, dismissed 
Putin's case for annexation and pledged a "unified European response" at the EU 
summit in Brussels on Thursday, following the EU's decision to impose travel 
bans and asset freezes on 21 Russian and Crimean figures. Van Rompuy is due to 
meet Putin in Moscow on Wednesday.

In Britain the foreign secretary, William Hague, announced the suspension of 
joint naval exercises with Russia and of export licences for military items to 
Moscow, saying Putin had chosen the "route of isolation".

The US vice-president, Joe Biden, speaking a visit to Poland and the Baltic 
states aimed at assuring Russia's EU neighbours about US and Nato security 
guarantees, declared that Putin and Russia now stood alone and "naked before 
the world" guilty of international aggression.

"Russia has offered a variety of arguments to justify what is nothing more 
than a land-grab," he said. Biden revealed that the US was considering 
deploying ground troops to the Baltic states on new military exercises as it 
seeks to reassure Nato allies in easternEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of its commitment to preventing 
further territorial aggression by Russia.

The White House spokesman, Jay Carney, on Tuesday foreshadowed a fresh round 
of sanctions. "More is coming," he said amid criticism that existing measures 
are too weak.

Carney suggested powerful and wealthy oligarchs with ties to Putin would be 
targeted. "I think anyone who understands how the Russian system of governance 
works and who has influence in that system understands the kind of person that 
we're talking about here, and the fact that they have substantial assets, not 
just in Russia but abroad," he said.

In Moscow, Putin was defiant in the face of western criticism. The Russian 
president summoned the federal assembly, which includes both houses of 
parliament and all key political leaders, for an extraordinary session in the 
Kremlin's St George Hall.

Putin referenced the recognition of Kosovo by the west as an independent 
country following its secession from Serbia, and said it was ludicrous to claim 
that the move did not set a precedent.

"How would our colleagues claim its uniqueness? It turns out because during 
the Kosovo conflict there were many human casualties. What, is that supposed to 
be a valid legal argument?" he asked.

"We are being told that we are breaking the norms of international law. Well 
at least it's good that they've remembered that international law exists. 
Better late than never."

"In the hearts and minds of people, Crimea has always been and remains an 
inseparable part of Russia," the president said, adding that ethnic Russians 
had found themselves isolated from the motherland when the Soviet Union 
collapsed, both in Crimea and elsewhere.

"Millions of Russians went to sleep in one country and woke up living abroad, 
as a national minority in former republics of the union. The Russian people 
became one of the biggest, if not the biggest, split-up nation in the world."

He was frequently interrupted by applause and at the end of the speech signed 
documents together with the de facto leader of Crimea, Sergei Aksyonov – who 
came to power after seizing the local parliament at gunpoint last month – to 
absorb the territory into Russia.

Putin recognised Crimea as an independent state on Monday night, making it 
easier to incorporate into the Russian Federation than if it were still 
Ukrainian territory. Kiev has said it will never give up its claim to Crimea, 
but is unable to respond to Russia militarily due to the huge disparity in 
their respective forces.

Ukrainian politician Vitali Klitschko, who will stand in presidential 
elections in May, called forUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> 
to sever diplomatic ties with Russia.

With the annexation of Crimea considered a fait accompli, Kiev and the west 
are now looking with anxiety to eastern Ukraine, where a number of protests by 
elements of the Russian-speaking population have ended in violence and led the 
Russian foreign ministry to speak about the possible necessity of "defending" 
Russian speakers there.

"Don't believe those who try to frighten you with Russia and who scream that 
other regions will follow after Crimea," said Putin, going some way to allaying 
those fears. "We do not want a partition of Ukraine. We do not need this."

However, he reiterated his belief that Moscow feels the Kiev government is 
illegitimate, and also referenced long-held Russian fears of encirclement by 
the west.

"I do not want to be welcomed in Sevastopol by Nato sailors," said Putin, 
speaking of the Crimean port where Russia's Black Sea fleet is based.

The city has special status within Crimea and Russia will officially welcome 
two new nations into its fold: Crimea, and the city of Sevastopol. Thousands 
gathered in the city to watch Putin's speech on a big screen in the main square 
and broke into the Russian national anthem when it was over. In Simferopol men 
on ladders removed the large gold Ukrainian-language lettering on the regional 
parliament.

It is expected that in the coming months Crimea will switch to the rouble and 
introduce Moscow time and the Russian visa system. Russia will begin 
ratification of the treaty to formalise Crimea's annexation within days.

Crimean authorities have said that all Ukrainian military installations on the 
peninsula, including several bases, are now illegal and the soldiers must 
leave. Many have done so, but some remain.

Ukrainian and Russian troops had agreed a ceasefire until Friday, and the 
circumstances of the shoot-out on Tuesday remain murky.

However, the death of a Ukrainian soldier was a reminder that there is 
potential for Russia's annexation to turn bloody. Russian soldiers have been 
active in Crimea in recent weeks, despite Kremlin claims to the contrary, and 
often act in consort with local informal militias. There were reports that a 
local militia member had also been shot dead in the clash and another injured.

The west was struggling to respond to Moscow's moves, with initial sanctions 
clearly having no real effect except to galvanise Moscow in its feeling of 
victimisation.Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
is to spend most of next week in Europe for a couple of international summits 
that will now turn into emergency meetings about Russia and Ukraine.

The White House called for an emergency meeting of the G7 countries on Ukraine 
to be held on the fringes of a summit in The Hague devoted to nuclear security. 
Russia is also invited to the summit, raising the possibility of a first 
face-to-face confrontation between Putin and western leaders in the crisis.

The Polish prime minister, Donald Tusk, warned of major and long-lasting 
consequences from Putin's actions, which had changed the "borders of 
states overnight".

"It changes the geopolitical situation in this part of the world," he said. 
"Before our eyes, the history of this region is changing."
 