
A quarter of the US prison population, about 364,000 inmates, could have been 
spared imprisonment without meaningfully threatening public safety or 
increasing crime, according to a new study.

Analyzing offender data on roughly 1.5 million US prisoners, researchers from 
the Brennan Center for Justice concluded that for one in four, drug treatment, 
community service, probation or a fine would have been a more effective 
sentence than incarceration.

Obama made progress on criminal justice reform. Will it survive the next 
president?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/barack-obama-criminal-justice-reform-prison-sentencing-police>
“The current sentencing regime was largely a knee-jerk reaction to crime, not 
grounded in any scientific rationale,” said Inimai Chettiar, director of the 
justice program. “While it may have seemed like a reasonable approach to 
protect the public, a comprehensive examination of the data proves it is 
ineffective at that task.”

The study also concluded that another 14% of incarcerated individuals had 
already served an appropriate sentence. These people could be released within 
the next year “with little risk to public safety”, the researchers said. 
Combined, these two populations represent 39% of the current incarcerated 
public.

“Very long lengths of stay in many many cases do not make people safer,” said 
Lauren-Brooke Eisen, the lead author of the report. “Incarceration is not the 
right place for so many lower-level offenders in our criminal justice system. “

The study drew on data from 2012 and took three years to complete. Researchers 
applied a four-factor test on the effectiveness of incarceration, relative to 
the different types of crimes prisoners had committed. Seriousness of the 
crime, impact on the victim, state of mind of the perpetrator and risk of 
recidivism were all examined as part of the analysis. Researchers determined 
that for most low-level crimes, especially nonviolent drug crimes, prison was 
ineffective or unwarranted.

“There are so many groups trying to work to end mass incarceration but without 
a blueprint for exactly how you would do that, it’s really hard to make 
changes,” Eisen said. “We wanted this report to jump-start a conversation.”

Beyond the fact that many inmates do not pose an immediate threat to public 
safety, an abundance of evidence suggests that prison itself likely has a 
criminogenic effect onthose who enter its walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/31/norman-brown-obama-clemency-us-prisons-drugs-mandatory-minimum-sentence-reform>
. When people involved in low-level, nonviolent crimes become incarcerated, 
they are often placed in an environment with more unstable and violent 
criminals; they can become more prone to crime upon release than they would 
otherwise have been. Alternative sentencing strategies, including drug 
treatment and community service, have been shown in several studies to have the 
opposite effect. Incarceration also damages family, workplace and community 
ties in ways that often make it more difficult for people to avoid crime after 
release.

Eisen’s team also considered the way offenders tend to age out of criminal 
behavior. “The research is incredibly compelling that after a certain age, it’s 
very unlikely that a person would commit a second offense,” Eisen said.

Last year, for instance, Marc Mauer, a researcher and the executive director 
of the Sentencing Project, testified to Congress: “A 20-year-old robber is much 
less of a risk to public safety by the time he turns 30, 35, or 40, and this is 
true more or less across the board.”

The Brennan Center calculates that this could equal a cost saving of $20bn a 
year, greater than the combined budgets of the US departments of commerce and 
labor.

Defining justice: why it's time to rethink our kneejerk response to crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/us-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison>
“Our resources are finite, and any opportunity we can have to realign those 
resources to find the truly dangerous people and put them behind bars, we 
should,” said Ronal Serpas, the former police chief of the New Orleans and 
Nashville departments.

Serpas noted that a slew of law enforcement organizations, including the Major 
Cities Police Chiefs Association and the National District Attorneys 
Association, had all come together to endorse the scaling back of mass 
incarceration. The organizations encompass 30,000 law enforcement professionals 
in all.

A young policing leader during the crime wave of the late 1980s and early 
1990s, Serpas said he understood why so many officials supported incarceration 
and draconian sentencing laws during that era. “I get it, I was there,” he said.

“But this is 20 years later,” Serpas added. “We don’t treat arthritis the same 
way we did 20 years ago, but unfortunately we’re still over-relying on 
incarceration the way we did back then.”
 