
New powers for prison governors, more independence for prisons and an overhaul 
of practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/18/prison-reform-not-solve-overcrowding-funding-problems-queens-speech>
 to reduce reoffending, including release with tags during the week and prison 
on weekends (prison and courts reform bill)

Rowena Mason analysis: 

This is the centrepiece of David Cameron’s agenda for social reform, which he 
kicked off with a series of speeches at the beginning of the year. He is trying 
to persuade voters to remember him for changing society, rather than austerity 
and divisions over Europe. The legislation is designed to give prison governors 
more autonomy to set the direction of prisons, and more control over their 
finances, in a move that looks to replicate the introduction of academy schools 
in the education system. However, it could draw criticism that it takes a step 
towards privatisation of prisons by the back door. The Howard League for Penal 
Reform welcomes most of the proposals but thinks there should be “more creative 
ways to ease people into the community safely” than weekend jail.

Academies expanded in the poorest local areas and setting the foundations for 
a system in which all schools are academies (education for all bill)

RM analysis:

This confirms the government’s U-turn on forcing all schools to become 
academies, following a revolt among backbench Conservatives and Tory-run 
councils. The bill will now only seek to convert schools in poor areas, while 
setting out a roadmap to all schools becoming academies at some point in the 
future – in effect kicking it into the long grass. It is part of the same 
agenda as the prison reform, which attempts to improve the life chances of 
children whatever their background. Critics say there is no evidence that 
attending an academy over a local authority school is any better for pupils.

New fair funding formula for schools to even out differences in urban and 
rural education (education for all bill)

RM analysis:

The new funding formula was a manifesto commitment designed to appeal to rural 
areas, which have long complained they lose out from the calculations about 
funding per pupil. It will please Conservative MPs with shire constituencies.

Stronger powers to disrupt extremists and protect the public, including a 
civil order regime, Ofcom regulation for internet-streamed television and 
intervention in unregulated religious schools (counter-extremism and 
safeguarding bill)

RM analysis:

This is another key piece of legislation in the programme, but the measures to 
crack down on extremism are quite vaguely worded. There is a consultation on a 
“civil order regime”, which could be controversial, introducing restrictions on 
people showing extremist behaviour similar to antisocial behaviour orders. 
Ministers will also consult on allowing the government to intervene where 
councils fail to tackle extremism, including in unregulated religious schools, 
which appears to be an extension of Cameron’s crackdown on madrassas that was 
announced at Conservative party conference.

Prioritising permanent adoption over short-term placements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/18/children-social-work-bill-queens-speech>
 (children and social work bill)

RM analysis:

Another plank of Cameron’s social justice agenda, this legislation is aimed at 
getting children out of the care system and permanently adopted. It will tip 
the balance in favour of this, instead of sending children to live with 
relatives for short periods.

New care leavers’ covenant to make sure children leaving care have better 
support (children and social work bill)


RM analysis:

This is a relatively uncontroversial measure that few could disagree with. The 
government has recognised it needs to sort out the system given statistics on 
the life chances of those who have been in care homes and foster care. It wants 
to give children leaving care a higher standard of support into their adult 
life.

Making it easier for new universities to open and reforming funding to link it 
to the quality of teaching rather than student numbers (higher education and 
research bill)

RM analysis:

The aim of the bill is to increase social mobility and the quality of teaching 
through allowing new challenger universities to set up. However, critics will 
say that competition is not the answer and it continues to load the cost of 
higher education on to students.

Bill of rights to replace Human Rights Act (consultation)

RM analysis:

Some in the Tory party had been hoping for a full-blown sovereignty bill to 
assert the primacy of the UK parliament over the European court of human rights 
– a move first floated by Boris Johnson. But this is only a consultation and 
the final proposals are only likely to become clear after the EU referendum as 
Cameron hopes to unite the Conservative party after the divisive poll.

Surveillance powers for the spy agencies and other government bodies to 
monitor people’s online communications when investigating crime or terrorism 
(investigatory powers bill)

RM analysis:

This is the government’s attempt to revive surveillance legislation from the 
last parliament that was blocked by the Lib Dems and known by critics as the 
snoopers’ charter. It has been worked on for months after Theresa May, the home 
secretary, published a draft bill in the autumn but there is still concern 
about the number of agencies that will get access to the communications data 
and other privacy issues.

Duty on police, ambulance and fire services to collaborate to improve 
efficiency (policing and crime bill)


RM analysis:

It has been a longstanding aim of the government to cut costs in the emergency 
services by greater integration but could lead to accusations that the 
government is paving the way to drastically shrink or abolish the fire service.

Police chiefs allowed to give policing powers to volunteers and backroom staff 
so that they can make best use of the workforce (policing and crime bill)


RM analysis:

This one is likely to prove controversial. It will enable police volunteers to 
detain suspects and issue on-the-spot fines. Labour is likely to accuse the 
government of seeking to replace frontline police officers with cheaper and 
unqualified alternatives at a cost to public safety.


The right to a broadband connection for every household and automatic 
compensation if the connection goes wrong (digital economy bill)

The government has long been promising highspeed broadband connection for all, 
although it will now only give them only to people who want to be connected. It 
has been heavily pushed by Conservative MPs representing people and businesses 
in rural areas who suffer from not having fast enough internet.

Protection of children from online pornography by requiring age verification 
on the internet for adult material (digital economy bill)

RM analysis:

It was a pledge in the Conservative manifesto to require all online adult 
sites to require age verification. Labour is unlikely to object and in fact 
campaigners may complain it does not go far enough to protect children.

Protection for consumers from spam email and nuisance calls by ensuring 
consent is obtained for direct marketing (digital economy bill)


RM analysis:

This is another of a series of measures that are very consumer-focused, 
echoing Ed Miliband’s attempts to woo people with promises to tackle “rip-off 
Britain” and the “cost of living crisis”.

Allowing driverless cars on to the roads and an operational spaceport (modern 
transport bill)


RM analysis:

Ministers want driverless cars to be on the roads within four years, starting 
with getting them insured to be roadworthy. There are already pilots in some 
cities but the government is pushing for the UK to be at the forefront of this 
transport technology revolution. The spaceport could help launch tourists into 
space but some experts have cast doubt on its viability so far from the equator.

Speeding up the planning process (neighbourhood planning and infrastructure 
bill)


RM analysis:

There is little detail but planning is always a controversial area with Tory 
backbenchers who are on high alert for anything that might encroach on the 
green belt or other protected areas.

Allowing councils to keep up to 100% of the business rates they collect (local 
growth and jobs bill)


RM analysis:

 This has already been announced at Tory party conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/06/business-rates-plan-may-widen-inequality-among-councils>
 and will come in tandem with extreme further local government cuts. Critics 
fear it will disadvantage poorer places that struggle to attract businesses, 
while its advocates argue that it enhances competition between towns for 
investment.


Laws enabling the new Help to Save scheme, which is designed to help those 
from low incomes to build up savings (lifetime savings bill)


RM analysis:

Again, Osborne has already announced this at the budget, which includes 
government top ups of up to £300 equal to 50% of the amount saved. Labour has 
called it a scheme thatsteals someone’s car and offers them a lift to the bus 
stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/budget-2016-labour-attacks-governments-help-to-save-scheme>
, pointing out it replaces previous Labour scheme and does not make up for cuts 
elsewhere. Critics have also pointed out that many cannot afford to save in the 
first place.


Expanding the national citizen service and duty on schools to promote the 
scheme to all young people (national citizen service bill)


RM analysis: 

The national citizen service is one of Cameron’s favourite projects and he is 
clearly trying to get greater recognition for something that he hopes will be a 
central plank of his legacy.

New criminal offence for corporations that fail to stop staff facilitating tax 
evasion and measures to allow the government to recoup more illicit income 
(criminal finances bill)


RM analysis:

Cameron has been promising crackdowns on tax evasion and avoidance for years 
but it has got even more politically urgent since his past investment in an 
offshore company was revealed during the Panama Papers leak. He trailed this in 
anarticle for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/david-cameron-corporate-money-laundering-offence-anti-corruption-summit>
 before his anticorruption summit last week in an attempt to show shedding 
London’s reputation as a centre of money-laundering was a top priority.

Local mayors to get power to improve bus services and London-style powers to 
franchise local services. Data on routes, fares and times to be made freely 
available (bus services bill)


RM analysis:

 There is an element of re-regulation to this as cities and towns will get 
greater powers to set standards for ticketing, branding and frequency of 
services. Those with elected mayors will also be able to award franchises 
according to local need and design their own fare structures. It is a radical 
shakeup of bus regulation but there will be questions over whether it is enough 
to halt or reverse the reduction of services as councils have had to cut back 
on subsidies under financial pressure.

Energy and utility companies to enable faster switching for consumers (better 
markets bill)


RM analysis:

 The measures in this bill seem to lack detail, promising to increase 
switching and enhance competition in regulated industries but only energy is 
mentioned. The government has also been promising to encourage more consumers 
to change utility providers for years, while Labour would like to see a more 
radical shakeup of the market to stop overcharging.

Measures to make sure the NHS recovers the cost of treating migrants more 
effectively (NHS overseas visitors charging bill)


RM analysis:


 The NHS is already meant to recover the cost of elective care for 
non-resident foreigners and the government alreadyupdated its guidance 
<http://chrome-extension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/496951/Overseas_visitor_hospital_charging_accs.pdf>
 on collection of payment earlier this year. However, the government claims its 
new bill will mean fewer people coming to the UK from Europe are eligible for 
free healthcare and extend the number of services for which the NHS can charge 
- possibly going into the cost of emergency measures such as diagnostic scans, 
prescriptions and ambulance trips.

Clamping down on excess exit charges and providing protections for people 
whose pensions are invested in master trusts (pensions bill)

RM analysis:


 George Osborne has done some big pension freedom reforms in previous years 
but backed away from the more radical plan to limit pension relief for higher 
earners before this year’s budget. This looks like he is continuing to avoid 
any more big shakeups. The plans to protect savers are likely to be welcomed by 
consumer bodies but ultimately the changes do not appear to be major.

Levy on the soft drinks industry starting in 2018 (finance bill 2017)


RM analysis:

 The sugar levy is opposed by the industry as well as a small number of 
backbench Tories and some of the rightwing press who think it is excessive 
government meddling. But Cameron and Osborne are pushing ahead with the plan, 
which was announced at the budget.

New offences to stop dealing in property looted from war zones (cultural 
property armed conflict bill)


RM analysis:

 This has become a bigger issue given the conflicts in Syria, Libya and 
elsewhere. There have been several recent scandals about London dealers 
displaying goods that appear to have been appropriated from warzones, known as
“blood antiquities” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/antiquities-looted-by-isis-end-up-in-london-shops>
.

Clarifying division of responsibility between the Welsh assembly and 
Westminster, and devolution of energy, transport and electoral powers (Wales 
bill)


RM analysis:

 This will rewrite the previous draft Wales bill that caused controversy over 
the fact it could actually have reduced the assembly’s powers. The government 
has promised significant changes but Plaid Cymru has already criticised the 
lack of detail in the proposals.
 