
A museum commemorating the canalside warehouses that once provided free 
education and entertainment for thousands of the poorest children in London has 
won a £4.3m grant for urgently needed restoration work.

Parts of the Ragged School Museum <http://www.raggedschoolmuseum.org.uk/> 
building in Limehouse – including badly leaking roofs – are in such a poor 
state that they are practically unusable.

In its heyday the school had more than 1,000 pupils on weekdays, and 2,400 
Sunday school attendees, and its team continued to organise events for the 
local community even after the school closed. An archive photograph shows 
hundreds of children holding their tickets for a Christmas event in 1909 in the 
nearby Edinburgh Castle, a former gin palace converted into a coffee shop and 
shelter.

The ragged school movement was championed by Dr Thomas Barnardo, who moved to 
London from his native Dublin intending to train as a doctor and become a 
missionary in China. He arrived in time to witness a cholera epidemic rip 
through the poorest parts of the capital, killing thousands. He then decided to 
devote the rest of his life to helping destitute children, and his charity 
survives to this day.

Barnardo's archives reveal early lives of UK's first fostered children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/26/barnardos-archives-reveal-early-lives-of-uks-first-fostered-children>
The school operated from 1877 to 1907, when it closed because new state 
schools started opening in the area.

Its buildings survived the blitz and the postwar redevelopment of the East 
End, and were saved from demolition in the 1980s through a campaign by the 
local community . The museum, which also recreates the living conditions of the 
Victorian era’s poor, is run by volunteers and had no public funding.

Erica Davies, director of the museum, said the grant from the Heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Lottery Fund would ensure a more 
secure future. “The Ragged School Museum is a witness to the movement for 
universal free education, and a tribute to the men and women who struggled to 
achieve it,” she said.

 