
WINNING TIP


Liverpool


Adam's Cafe
This tiny little cafe in Liverpool's studentville provides the ultimate Great 
British breakfast for £3.50. Grilled not fried, two of everything, pot of fresh 
coffee or tea, fresh orange juice and spankingly clean. Definitely worth the 
10-minute bus ride out of the city centre and the perfect New Year's morning 
solution – when venturing back into the centre of town is the last thing you'll 
want to do.
210a Smithdown Rd (0151-735 0717) 
• Open New Year's Day
Poppyleadbetter

Scottish Highlands

Kelly's takeaway, Ullapool
This is the best fry-up I've ever had in the UK. Having spent a week touring 
around the Highlands in lashing rain, tucking into the creamiest, tastiest 
black pudding was a treat. It was garnished with thick fat bacon and square 
sausage, accompanied by two fried eggs, fried mushrooms hash browns and beans. 
None of the reconstituted meat you get in most places, and all for less than £6.
West Terrace (01854 613344)
Redqueen28

Edinburgh

The Elephant House
A gourmet tea and coffee shop in the heart of Edinburgh. Treat yourself to 
every tea, coffee and hot milk blend imaginable, from regular espresso to the 
exotic Banana Bounty (milk chocolate, Bols banana liqueur and coconut syrup). 
There's a variety of cakes and bagels on offer too.
21 George IV Bridge (0131-220 5355, elephanthouse.biz 
<http://www.elephanthouse.biz/>)
• Open New Year's Day
Lucejane

Plymouth

St Elizabeth's House
This is a country house hotel, ideally situated if you have to catch a morning 
ferry from Plymouth. The highlight was the full English: tasty sausages, 
organic eggs and properly cured bacon are all sourced locally. Excellent bread, 
a plethora of cereals and pastries and friendly service. The small boutique 
hotel is set in pretty gardens close to the village of Plympton St Maurice. 
Apparently it was once a nunnery.
Doubles from £139 per night including breakfast (01752 344 840, 
stelizabeths.co.uk <http://www.stelizabeths.co.uk>)
sunnyannie

London

Hackney City Farm
It might be a bit much to expect "farm to fork" at a city farm, but with 
responsibly sourced, lovingly cooked food and a farmhouse setting, breakfast at 
Hackney City Farm isn't far off the mark. We love coming with friends, to enjoy 
a top quality full English, though it's great for families too. The animals 
(and the farmyard smell) make you feel one step closer to the countryside. 
Follow breakfast with a visit to Broadway Market on Saturdays and, on Sundays, 
Columbia Road flower market is always colourful.
1a Goldsmiths Row, E2 (020-7729 6381, hackneycityfarm.co.uk 
<http://www.hackneycityfarm.co.uk/docs/cafe/index.htm>)
Brybish

Café du Parc, Wimbledon
This small cafe, next door to Wimbledon Park tube station, serves very cheap 
and excellent food for breakfast, and indeed for the rest of the day too. It is 
well away from the over-priced and over-crowded Wimbledon village area. Sample 
a breakfast for less than a fiver consisting of two scrambled eggs, sausage, 
tomato, mushroom, and two slices of toasts, or what about two scrambled eggs, 
soft cheese and smoked salmon – all on two toasts and also less than a fiver.
122 Arthur Road, SW19 (020-8946 9014)
Ppcoleman

Brighton

Billie's Cafe
The jumbo breakfast is one of the cheapest in town, and the most generous. Two 
bits of bacon, two eggs, two sausages, whole button mushrooms, two slices of 
toast, beans, and a whole tomato. It's run by a local family and retains its 
charm – folding wooden chairs, blue gingham PVC tablecloths, fresh flowers on 
the tables and local artwork on the walls. And if you don't fancy the classic, 
there are a number of delicious hashes to choose from. Literally a pile of 
fried potatoes with various toppings from beans and sausages to bacon and 
avocado. Plenty of veggie options too. The best news is that it's open on New 
Year's Day – but get there early, this is a popular spot.
34 Hampton Place, 01273 774386
• Open New Year's Day
Hankw

Bath

Athole House B&B
At Athole House, just a few minutes walk from the centre of Bath, owner 
Wolfgang makes his own muesli to Maximilian Bircher-Benner's original Swiss 
recipe. The bread is homemade too, as are the fruit salad and the buttermilk 
pancakes. We stayed for three days and ate so well each morning we didn't eat 
again until 5pm.
Doubles from £70 per night, including breakfast (01225 320000, 
atholehouse.co.uk <http://www.atholehouse.co.uk/>)
Cooperteacher
 