
The votes are in for this month’s Reading group, and after a close contest 
featuring nominations for more than a dozen of HG Wells’s novels, not to 
mention a good number of short stories, Tono-Bungay has come out on top.

This is a decision that Wells himself might have liked. Tono-Bungay is an 
often funny book, but its author took it far more seriously than he did most of 
his output. “I have to admit that the larger part of my fiction was written 
lightly and with a certain haste,” he confessed in his autobiography, but he 
singled out Tono-Bungay as one of the exceptions.

It took him longer to write, for a start. Wells turned out classics such as 
The Time Machine and The War of the Worlds in a matter of months, but he worked 
on Tono-Bungay over a number of years. Admittedly, he also turned out quite a 
few other books at the same time, but the fact that he started it in 1906 and 
it was only serialised (by Ford Madox Ford in his English Review) in late 1908 
was fairly unusual.

Wells said that he saw Tono-Bungay as a book on “Dickens-Thackeray lines” and 
that “I shall never come as near to a deliberate attempt upon The Novel again 
as I did in Tono-Bungay”. He published his autobiography in 1934 (some of it 
anyway;an extra volume about his sex life came out posthumously 
<https://www.faber.co.uk/9780571247189-h-g-wells-in-love.html>). That was a 
good 12 years before his death, but he never did manage to produce a more 
complete and successful conventional novel.

Mind you, even for Tono-Bungay, “conventional” probably isn’t the right word. 
Wells also wrote:

Even Tono-Bungay was not much of a concession to Henry James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames> and his conception of an 
intensified rendering of feeling and characterisation as the proper business of 
the novelist. It was an indisputable Novel, but it was extensive rather than 
intensive. That is to say it presented characters only as part of a scene. It 
was planned as a social panorama in the vein of Balzac.

That reference to Henry James needs some explanation. An interesting thing 
aboutHG Wells <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hgwells> is that no matter how 
famous he became, no matter how successful and no matter how influential, he 
always carried a chip on his shoulder (one of several things he has in common 
with George, the hero of Tono-Bungay). Wells never felt entirely accepted as a 
man of letters, possibly because he came from a more humble background than 
most successful Edwardian writers. And partly because, even at the turn of the 
20th century, there was a certain snobbery about people who wrote about 
scientific ideas and philosophical and historical concepts rather than the 
higher emotional life of the mind. A snobbery it would be easy to suggest was 
embodied by Henry James.

Although, as often, Wells was being slightly unjust to James in that 
autobiographical quote. Certainly, if you look at one of James’s relatively 
early essays on the art of fiction, he’s more lenient than Wells suggests. He 
asks, for instance (with typical deliberation): “What is character but the 
determination of incident? What is incident but the illustration of character? 
What is a picture or a novel that is not of character?”

If you read the rest of that essay 
<http://public.wsu.edu/~campbelld/amlit/artfiction.html>, you’ll discover many 
more delicate, thoughtfully ambivalent ideas about the importance of character. 
And, if you’re anything like me, you’ll also discover you’ve got something of a 
headache: the James sentence is, as Wells famously described it, “a delicate 
creature swathed in relative clauses as an invalid in shawls”.

Wells’s prose was always more forceful and direct, his writing more fun to 
read. Which is possibly why James also stuck the knife into his one-time friend 
(and close neighbour while Wells was writing Tono-Bungay). The American wrote 
an article in the Times Literary Supplement in 1914 lumping Wells in with a 
generation of authors producing “affluents turbid and unrestrained”. Wells 
responded by dedicating a whole chunk of his experimental novel Boon to making 
fun of James and those relative clauses, and having a “complimentary” copy 
delivered to James at the Reform Club on Pall Mall. James was mortified. He 
wrote a stiff letter to Wells complaining about the fact that Wells had found 
him so “futile and void”. There followed a desperate and sad exchange in which 
Wells tried to claim that Boon was nothing more than “a waste-paper basket” and 
reasserted his admiration for James. But James pointed out that the contents of 
wastepaper baskets weren’t normally published, condemned Wells’s bad manners 
and drew a line under their friendship. James died soon after, leaving Wells 
smarting – and prickly ever after.

All of which explains why Wells was at once so keen to have Tono-Bungay 
measured against James’s yardstick – and so ambivalent about what that actually 
meant. I’m not entirely sure either. But at least that odd quote shows the 
special feeling Wells had for this book and proves his desire for it to be 
taken seriously. Hopefully, by the end of this month on the Reading group we’ll 
also have a clearer idea about those characters and how “intensively” they’ve 
been rendered, not to mention the social panorama into which Wells said he put 
them.

HG Wells’s prescient visions of the future remain unsurpassed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/13/hg-wells-visions-of-the-future-remain-unsurpassed>
Until then, of course, the thing to do is to take the advice of another of 
Wells’s famous friends (and later on his enemy, too) DH Lawrence: “Read, read 
Tono-Bungay, it is a great book.”

To further that end, we have five copies of the Penguin Classics edition 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/60368/tono-bungay/> to give away to the first 
five readers from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, 
constructive comment in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to 
be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (
laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). Be nice to 
her, too. And as usual, all suggestions and ideas for future discussions will 
be gratefully received.
 