
This month’s Reading group choice – for a book to give us hope – is Catch-22 
by Joseph Heller. That’s right.When asked to find a book to cheer us up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/02/reading-group-help-choose-a-book-to-give-us-hope-in-august>
, Guardian readers and fate have combined to bring us one of the most 
pessimistic and angry books in the history of literature. A book the New Yorker 
famously said “doesn’t even seem to be written; instead, it gives the 
impression of having been shouted onto paper”.

But as was pointed out when the book was proposed, the medicinal qualities of 
laughter should not be forgotten. What’s more, the cussedness of this choice in 
itself gives me hope. Far better to confront the idiocies of mankind head-on 
than to retreat into comforting banalities and warming platitudes. No New Age 
nonsense here. Instead, we’ve gone for eternal verities:

Just because you’re paranoid doesn’t mean they aren’t after you.

And:

He was going to live forever, or die in the attempt.

These quotes are so famous – and so right – that it’s surprising to realise 
that they come from a book published in living memory. They might as well have 
been around forever. Just like the novel’s title, that wonderful and 
confounding blast of illogic:

There was only one catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern 
for one’s safety in the face of dangers that were real and immediate was the 
process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be grounded. All he had to 
do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would have 
to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he 
didn’t, but if he was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and 
didn’t have to; but if he didn’t want to he was sane and had to.

While I’m quoting from Heller’s great novel, another apposite thought for us 
here on the books pages of the Guardian:

He knew everything there was to know about literature, except how to enjoy it.

I’m confident we’ll avoid that problem. It’s pretty hard not to enjoy this 
particular book, after all. It may have become firmly embedded in our cultural 
landscape, but it still feels fresh and funny. I remember roaring with laughter 
last time I read it. Yes, there’s indignation and tragedy – but there is also 
joy. In fact, the more I think about it, the better it seems that this book has 
been chosen to give us hope. I can’t wait to start reading it again. I hope 
you’ll join me.

To further that end, we have five copies to give away to the first five 
readers from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, 
constructive comment in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to 
be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (
laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). Be nice to 
her, too. And as usual, all suggestions and ideas for future discussions will 
be gratefully received.
 