
WINNING TIP: Chi Lin Vegetarian, Kowloon, Hong Kong

This beautiful wooden nunnery, nestled up against lush green hills and looked 
down on by Hong Kong's ubiquitous tower blocks, was – apparently – constructed 
without using a single nail. It also serves up a mean plate of veggie noodles. 
Saunter round the immaculate gardens, keeping your eyes peeled for the 
waterfall. Find your way behind the cascades of water for a delicious meat-free 
set meal.
60 Fung Tak Road, Diamond Hill, +852 2329 8811, nanliangarden.org 
<http://www.nanliangarden.org/home.php?eng>
Franny34

United Kingdom


David Bann, Edinburgh
Just off Edinburgh's Royal Mile, David Bann is a modern, adventurous veggie 
restaurant. It says on the menu there are no microwaves in the kitchen, and you 
can taste the results of that in the food. The combinations are delicious and 
you get such a large portion that I have never managed to get through the full 
three courses. It's very reasonably priced (mains are £10 to £13) and 
guaranteed to be full on a Saturday night. Inspiration for the menu comes from 
all round the world and the puddings in particular are top-notch.
56-58 St Mary's Street, 0131-556 5888, davidbann.com <http://www.davidbann.com>
Medphys
 Fellinis, Ambleside. 
Zeffirellis and Fellinis, Ambleside
Two vegetarian restaurants, a bar and cinema. Great vegetarian food, which is 
both well-presented and well-priced. Plus they have an offer of a cinema ticket 
and meal from £17.95. The bar serves vegetarian food, drinks and has live jazz. 
Great atmosphere.
Compston Road, 01539 433845, zeffirellis.com <http://www.zeffirellis.com>
Dieatbex

Waterside Wholefood Cafe, Kendal
Tucked away in one of the few riverside locations in Kendal, this is a 
longstanding favourite of many locals, but easily missed by visitors. It meets 
all the requirements of even the strictest veggies: there's a new menu every 
day, vegan and vegetarian meals are cooked on the premises with Fairtrade and 
organic ingredients, and served by friendly staff. If the weather's good 
enough, eat at the outside tables and watch the river flow by.
Kent View, Kendal, Cumbria, 01539 729743, watersidewholefood.co.uk 
<http://www.watersidewholefood.co.uk>
phildo

Topaz cafe, Ashton-under-Lyne
This foodie haven's aim is to provide healthy food using locally sourced, 
seasonal and ideally organic produce. Any profits are reinvested in the charity 
Tameside Mind. The menu is inventive, with spiced chickpeas, spinach and 
roasted peppers topped with grilled haloumi, or a Mexican stew with corn bread, 
and the prices are really low for the excellent quality of the food.
216-218 Katherine Street, 0161-330 9223, topaz-ashton.org 
<http://www.topaz-ashton.org>
felinegreen
 Malay laksa curry, Detoxretox, Manchester. 
Detoxretox, Manchester
Simon Rimmer's Greens has long been Manchester's go-to veggie venue, but it 
(finally) has competition from Detoxretox. Now open Wednesday to Sunday, it 
offers trad options like bangers and mash and a haloumi-based take on fish and 
chips, and interesting twists on meat-free standards like a cauliflower barley 
risotto.
58 Mosley Street, 0161-236 1811, detoxretox.co.uk <http://www.detoxretox.co.uk>
JoNightingale

Roots and fruits, Leeds
Roots and fruits is a vegetarian institution. This unpretentious cafe in 
central Leeds offers a warm and homely welcome and a menu full of fresh and 
delicious fare. My favourite starter has to be the goat's cheese fritters with 
onion marmalade, and the full breakfast is equal to the task of conquering any 
hangover you care to throw in its path. The drinks menu includes an unrivalled 
choice of teas and fresh juice, but if you fancy a glass of wine then you're 
welcome to take your own.
10-11 Grand Arcade, 0113-242 8313, rootsandfruits.net 
<http://rootsandfruits.net>
Troutiemcfish

Squeek, Nottingham
The menu here offers vegetarian and vegan variations of the kind of meals that 
could not be easily made at home – there are no vegetarian cannelloni or pasta 
bakes here. The prices are affordable – a three-course evening meal is about 
£17 – and there's a large choice of vegetarian, vegan and organic wines and 
beers. The atmosphere is relaxed and the clientele mixed; you feel comfortable 
whether you've dressed up or just rocked up as you are.
23-25 Heathcoat Street, 0115-955 5560
Jacquelina
 Photograph: Mark Wood/PR 
Demuths vegetarian restaurant, Bath
Step a mere 100m south from Bath Abbey <http://www.bathabbey.org> and the 
Roman baths <http://www.romanbaths.co.uk>, and enter the finest vegetarian 
restaurant in Britain. Try the potato bonda (a green chilli potato ball in a 
gram flour batter served in a spiced tomato soup with toasted cumin oil) or the 
beetroot arancini (beetroot risotto balls stuffed with Somerset brie, served 
with apple jelly, yellow beetroot, pickled fennel and rocket on a pink 
grapefruit and mint dressing). Sample the Italian bitter chocolate cake and you 
may hear angels singing.
2 North Parade Passage, 01225 446059, demuths.co.uk <http://www.demuths.co.uk>
Herbalwalks

Aloka, Brighton
Aloka is a unique and totally raw food restaurant in the evenings from 
6pm-9.30pm. Great for an alternative, healthy way of living if you're not a fan 
of the gym! During the day/lunchtime, it's vegan raw and cooked food. I have 
never tasted such different sensations in all my life.
14 East St, 01273 823178, aloka.aura-soma.net 
<http://www.aloka.aura-soma.net/Default.aspx?PageID=11>
SerenaSussex

Vegetarian Food Studio, Cardiff
This restaurant is simply excellent. It serves pure vegetarian Asian food (no 
fish or eggs are used) at affordable prices. The menu has over 100 dishes so 
you can keep going back again and again trying something new each time. My 
favourite dish is masala dosa, a huge pancake of spiced potato which arrives 
with a spicy soup and cooling coconut chutney on the side. It tastes just as 
good as in the bustling cafes of India I remember so fondly.
109 Penarth Road, 029-2023 8222, vegetarianfoodstudio.co.uk 
<http://www.vegetarianfoodstudio.co.uk>
welshtravellers 

France


La Zucca Magica, Nice
This is a quirky place, with every corner filled with pumpkins, fairy lights 
and newspaper clippings of the larger-than-life chef, Marco. It only offers a 
set meal of five courses – you don't see a menu, you just sit back and enjoy 
the ride! The selection changes daily, with favourites including delicious 
soups, homemade pasta and stuffed peppers, all full of flavour from the 
addition of local cheeses and fresh herbs. The meal isn't cheap and booking is 
essential as it's always full, but it's a real dining experience!
4 bis, quai Papacino, +33 4 9356 2527, lazuccamagica.com 
<http://www.lazuccamagica.com>
Jaynemoobs

Germany

 Zen sticks at Prinz Myshkin, Munich. 
Prinz Myshkin, Munich
Even non-vegetarians would be impressed with this restaurant. The place has a 
very contemporary feel with its high ceiling arches, tiled floor and trees 
growing in huge pots. There are rows and rows of busy tables served by staff 
that have a great knowledge of the menu and speak very good English. The food 
is always a little unusual but very tasty and hearty – and there's plenty of 
it. It's creative without being pretentious.
Hackenstrasse 2, +49 8926 55 96, prinzmyshkin.com 
<http://www.prinzmyshkin.com/en>
Irondownsouth

Yellow Sunshine, Berlin
The menu is extensive and has many veggie burger varieties such as cheese and 
"bacon", and Mexican (which comes with crunchy nachos and spicy peanut sauce). 
Most of the food here is organic or bio-certified – including the yummy chips. 
There's a good range of beers (or fruit shakes for non-drinkers!) But the 
funky, warm atmosphere is another great reason to check out Yellow Sunshine – 
helped by the fact it is located in happening Kreuzberg. And with burgers 
averaging around €4, you'll have some money left for going out later!
Wiener Strasse 19, +49 30 6959 8720, yellow-sunshine.com 
<http://www.yellow-sunshine.com/>
AndreaJane

Spain

El Vegetariano de la Alcazabilla, Malaga
After several months in Spain, any vegetarian restaurant is a marvellous find. 
We had the vegan plate: an appetising and generous selection of vegan finger 
food and salads. The restaurant decor is cheerful and quirky, with comments and 
quotes from previous customers written on the walls and mobiles of tin jugs and 
colourful mirrors. We were there in December and sat snugly inside; in summer 
you may want to use the shady terrace.
Calle Pozo del Rey 5, +39 952 21 48 58
happyyetpoor

Canada

Bodhi Choi Heung vegetarian restaurant, Vancouver
A great choice for Chinese vegetarian food – you'll see large families here 
and even some Buddhist monks and nuns, enjoying vegetarian versions of 
Cantonese classics, beautifully cooked vegetables and tofu, as well as 
mock-meat dishes. The decor may be plain, but this restaurant deserves its 
popularity among the local Chinese population.
3932 Fraser Street, +1 604-873-3848
Jeyko

US
 Millennium, San Francisco. 
Millennium restaurant, San Francisco
Down a very unassuming (and long) street hides Millennium. We went for the 
tasting menu and matching wine, and the chef must have been in a good mood as 
we ended up with six courses instead of the usual five. From blue corn tamale 
to sweet potato griddle cake, finishing with a variety of puddings, it was a 
delight from beginning to end. You'll leave purring and happy if not a little 
heavier!
580 Geary Street, +1 415 345 3900, millenniumrestaurant.com 
<http://www.millenniumrestaurant.com/restaurant/index.html>
Supertwitcher

Argentina

El Vegetariano, Bariloche
Amid the steakhouses and asados for ravenous carnivores of this meat-crazed 
nation hides a hidden gem of vegtastic proportions. Serving freshly squeezed 
juices, a truly mouthwatering seasonal menu and divine puddings, this place has 
caught the eye of even the most hardened meat-eater. On our visit we dined on a 
seasonal lunch platter of five different delights – the courgette fritters were 
particularly scrumptious.
20 De Febrero 720
Mattywill

China

Pure Lotus, Beijing
Pure Lotus is a wonderful vegetarian restaurant in central Beijing serving all 
sorts of delicious tofu dishes, including a vegetarian sausage called the 
"Buddha's Finger". There is a sense of occasion from the minute you arrive in 
the candlelit entrance area and the food is presented exquisitely. We had 
dumplings and chilli tofu, washed down with jasmine tea.
10 Nongzhanguan Nanlu, Chaoyang, +86 10 65 923 627 
Lucycaldicott
 