
If you’re an anarchistic racist with appalling taste in music and no concerns 
about global warming, I suppose you might be thinking that 2016 has brought 
some exciting changes. But for many of us, it’s been pretty miserable for a 
string of reasons.It’s even been a terrible year for butterflies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/2016-could-be-worst-year-on-record-for-british-butterflies-experts-warn>
.

To speak personally, I’ve felt so baffled and afraid and angry over the past 
month or so that I’ve wondered where to find hope. As a book critic, one of the 
first places I’ve looked for solace is in novels. I’ve found welcome 
distraction in listening to Len Deighton’s superb cold war series about the spy 
Bernard Samson. They’re intriguing enough to stop me fretting, and also a good 
reminder that there were plenty of ugly, destabilising events in the 1980s – 
and that we came through those OK. I’ve also found some relief inreading JD 
Salinger with the Reading group here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/19/is-jd-salingers-franny-and-zooey-posturing-or-profound>
. I’ve found consolation in trying to understand Salinger’s attempts to cope 
with the agonies of the second world war, and in realising that I have it 
comparatively lucky.

At the very least, such books can help us make a human connection – and that’s 
reason to be positive. Now, this month, I’m keen to hear about where else to 
find hope in literature.

This is at once one of the broadest, and most particular, topics we’ve 
tackled. Any good book can provide a good indication of the decency and 
potential of our fellow humans. On the other hand, I’m also assuming that the 
book that makes you feel optimistic and happy will be a very personal and 
possibly even irrational choice. Either way, I’ll be very pleased to hear 
recommendations. And if you just decide that what we really all need is a month 
bathing in the ambrosial prose of PG Wodehouse, that’s more than fine with me 
too.

All you have to do is to get your choice into contention is to post in the 
comments below. We’ll put the nominations into a hat and pull one out in a few 
days’ time. If you could also give a reason as to why the book gives you hope, 
I’d be very pleased to hear it. Onwards!
 