
Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> welcomed a 
record-breaking 1 million overseas visitors in 2015, according to the latest 
figures from the Office for National Statistics, with an increase of 163,000 
visitors (or 17.3%) on 2014 – the largest rise in visitor numbers for any UK 
city outside London, for the second year running.

The research reveals that the city is the fourth most visited place in the UK 
by international tourists after London, Edinburgh and Manchester.

These numbers are matched by a significant increase in consumer spending in 
the city. Last year, foreign visitors spent £386m, up £87m on the previous year.


Business travel to Birmingham rose by almost 20% in 2015, with 619,000 visits 
recorded. Again, this is the largest rise of any UK regional city.

More than £1bn has been invested in the region in the past year, with new 
developments including the New Street station transport hub, which is home to 
the new Grand Central shopping centre.

A string of high-profile art and sporting events also took place during 2015, 
such as the 25th anniversary of Birmingham Royal Ballet and 50 years of the 
contemporary art gallery Ikon, as well as matches during the Rugby World Cup 
and the Ashes Test series.

There are currently 14 hotels in either the planning or construction phase in 
Birmingham, including the refurbishment of the famous Grand Hotel, which will 
have 152 new bedrooms when it is finished, in 2018.

Birmingham continues to promote itself vigorously to international markets. In 
recent months the city has welcomed media delegations from countries including 
Japan, South Africa, India, Iceland and Belgium.

Put off by the cost of living in London, a growing number of people have moved 
to Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/22/birmingham-boom-londoners-move-in>
 in recent years, resulting in a growth in new businesses. The Digbeth area, 
once a centre for heavy industry, is now home to the Custard Factory, the 
creative industries hub which is also becoming a cultural destination. And the 
Jewellery Quarter has become a tourist attraction in its own right. The city 
also boasts several Michelin-star restaurants.

Television series Peaky Blinders, based in 1920s Birmingham, has also caused a 
spike in interest. In a recent interview withGuardian Travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/29/steven-knight-peaky-blinders-birmingham>
, its creator, Steven Knight, talked fondly about the city’s much-derided 
aesthetic. “Spaghetti Junction is the most beautiful thing you’ve ever seen at 
night,” he said. “It’s gorgeous, and shows that – when looked at in a certain 
way – something that’s considered to be conventionally ugly is actually 
beautiful. That’s Birmingham.”

Guardian writer Stuart Jeffries, who has lived and worked in Birmingham, said 
the city is definitely “having a moment”, and also mentioned the “Peaky 
Blinders effect”.

“You can’t move in Broad Street these days for promenading Beau Brummies in 
tweed caps with cunningly concealed razor blades, wishing they were Cillian 
Murphy as they head off for an evening of culture at Symphony Hall, a gig at 
the Custard Factory, or a private view at the Ikon Gallery, before heading off 
to one of the city’s several Michelin-star restaurants,” he said. “I’m 
exaggerating, but only slightly.”

He adds: “The great thing about Birmingham, and perhaps this is one reason 
it’s more of a destination for tourists, is that its hubristic leaders have a 
rage for reinventing the place. As a result, it’s not so much a city as a 
palimpsest of giddy, if failed, utopias. Why go to Birmingham? Why not go to 
Birmingham?”

Jon Bounds, the founder of Birmingham blog Paradise Circus,  
<http://paradisecircus.com/>said he wasn’t surprised the city was seeing the 
biggest increase of visitors after the capital, “as it is literally the next 
stop after London”.


“Birmingham has been getting a better class of publicity recently, in all 
things apart from the performance of the city council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/24/birmingham-childrens-services-run-trust-following-failures>
,” he said.

“Maybe people have even been attracted by the success of Peaky Blinders, which 
is odd, as Crossroads never brought many tourists: even though it advertised 
the fact we had a motel. The swarms of visitors must really like building 
works, and canals, and building works near canals. And self-deprecation.”
 