
“Lehmitz was the first thing I did seriously. It filled me up,” says Anders 
Petersen. “I really identified with these people and their situation, this 
group who were outside society. I respected them. I felt very strongly about 
them.”


Petersen’s photographs of Cafe Lehmitz and its customers – regulars in a 
Hamburg red-light-district dive at the fag end of the 60s – have long been 
among the most revered of photobooks. First published in 1978, Cafe Lehmitz 
became part of pop culture when Tom Waits used one as the cover of his1985 Rain 
Dogs album 
<http://static.stereogum.com/uploads/2013/09/rain-dogs-compressed.jpg>.

Almost five decades after the photos were shot, the Swedish photographer, now 
72, has revised his Lehmitz archive foran exhibition in Paris 
<http://www.circulation-projects.com/current> of previously unseen images.

The pictures were taken over three years in the late 1960s. Petersen had first 
visited the St Pauli district and its infamous Reeperbahn as a teenager 
studying German in 1962. He got to know some of the locals and forged 
friendships. Five years later Petersen, by then in his 20s and a photography 
student in Stockholm, could not resist the pull of St Pauli. “I went back there 
to find my friends and take pictures of their lives,” he says. “But people told 
me they were almost all dead.”
 Kleinchen and Rose with Mona, Café Lehmitz, 1970. Photograph: Anders Petersen 
Shocked and disorientated, he ended up in a bar where he ran into one former 
friend, Gertrud. She was initially reluctant to help him with his plan to 
photograph people in this rough neighbourhood, but “after three beers she 
changed her mind and said we could meet next evening at 1am at a place called 
Cafe Lehmitz”.


“So I was there at one o’clock exactly,” Petersen continues. “I found a seat 
on the corner of a table and I put my camera down.” Distracted by talking, 
drinking and dancing in the packed bar, at first he didn’t notice that his 
camera had been picked up by some drinkers who were tossing it around and 
taking pictures of each other.

“They threw the camera to me, I kept it, and started to shoot,” he says. “At 
that moment Gertrud came in, two hours late. ‘Look! It’s working!’ she said. 
‘So stay here and take some more pictures.’” Petersen did, staying for a month 
in a downmarket hotel before returning to Stockholm. But he kept going back to 
Hamburg – and to Cafe Lehmitz – taking photos every few months for the next two 
and a half years.

 Uschi with man, Café Lehmitz, 1970. Photograph: Anders Petersen 
 “It was nice to see all of the pictures together again because it was like a 
family album,” says Petersen. “But it’s not really the photographs that matter 
so much for me. It’s more the people.”

The great depth of the Lehmitz work is revealed by the surprising strength of 
the previously unseen photographs and their subjects, the cafe’s regulars who 
lived on the fringes of society, many of whom worked in Hamburg’s nearby 
red-light district. Petersen tells some of their stories as he looks at the 
photos: “Uschi. She was a very nice woman, very kind, very generous. She was 
raped when she was 14, she said by her cousin, and they blamed her. So she went 
out and started to earn money in the way, you know, that is very common.”


He remembers others: Cuxhaven teenager Mona and her striptease dancer friend 
Roxy; Ramona, who was once Karl-Heinz; a diseased man in his underwear, showing 
off his muscles. “In another there is a woman – I don’t remember her name – 
together with a man in a big hat. He was being very hard and rude to her. It 
was a horrible and upsetting situation. I was asking myself, should I really 
publish this? But I also have to show this side of life at the cafe. Not only 
the romantic things.”

Going back to his Lehmitz contact sheets also reveals how he has developed and 
changed as a photographer. “I don’t have the same taste today.” The older 
Petersen not only edits his pictures differently, the way he takes his 
photographs has also altered. “Then I was very much concerned about the 
atmosphere, the milieu,” he says. “I was very influenced byEd van der Elsken’s 
Love on the Left Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/feb/10/love-on-left-bank-in-pictures>
. But now I’m more into what I think I’m connected to, what I can identify 
with. I’m more direct.”
 The Gothenburg man, Café Lehmitz, 1970. Photograph: Anders Petersen 
This directness gives Petersen’s photographs a visceral intimacy, especially 
in his later work such asFrom Back Home 
<http://www.anderspetersen.se/from-back-home-3/> (shot in the rural part of 
Sweden he comes from) andCity Diary 
<http://aperture.org/blog/city-diary-anders-petersen/>, a three-book tour de 
force of raw encounters with people in different countries (a fourth volume is 
in the works). This ability to connect with his often marginalised subjects 
burns through Petersen’s pictures, making them art that transcends language and 
culture.

But this universal appeal has its downside. “Right now, I travel too much,” 
says Petersen on a flying visit home to Stockholm after exhibition-related 
trips to France and Russia, and just hours before he leaves to supervise the 
hanging ofa major retrospective in Germany 
<http://marta-herford.de/en/ausstellungen/anders-petersen/>. “I’m much more 
interested in shooting.”

“I’m interested in being close. I want my pictures to ask questions,” he says. 
“For me, it’s all about people, wherever you are. It doesn’t matter what kind 
of religion or tradition you belong to, or what kind of culture you have. When 
I go to Italy, or China, or Tokyo or Chile, wherever I go, it’s not a big 
problem to get close to people and have a good time, because they are 
relatives, all one big family.”

 * Café Lehmitz Revisited <http://www.circulation-projects.com/current/> is at 
Circulations in Paris until 22 December;Anders Petersen Retrospektive 
<http://marta-herford.de/en/ausstellungen/anders-petersen/> is at MARTa 
Herford, Germany, until 12 March.
 