
“Reading can be freefall,” runs the blurb on the back of Anne Carson’s new 
poetry collection, one of several recently published books to offer readers a 
more interactive way to engage with the printed word. Historically, 
fragmentation has been used as a troubling effect, or to indicate a subject 
under stress. These books, however, attempt to unleash the fragment’s 
liberating force. The effect can be exhilarating.


If the title of Carson’s collection, Float, suggests a lack of direction, so 
does its format: a transparent slipcase housing 22 chapbooks that we are 
invited to read in any order. Does that mean the collection doesn’t, then, 
possess an overall unity? Or is it possible for we readers to supply meaning 
ourselves?


In 2002, Carson published her translations of Sappho’s poetry, a body of work 
that, bar a single poem, only exists in fragments because the papyri on which 
they were written are so damaged. As Carson writes in Float of one work by 
Sappho: “Half the poem is empty space.” Her translations communicate this 
fragmentation to the reader, using brackets to convey where the source texts 
are torn or disintegrated. “Brackets,” she writes in her introduction to the 
poems, “are exciting. Even though you are approaching Sappho in translation, 
that is no reason you should miss the drama of trying to read a papyrus torn in 
half or riddled with holes or smaller than a postage stamp – brackets imply a 
free space of imaginal adventure”.

To present what is missing from a fragmentary text not as a lack, but as an 
opportunity to put the imagination to work, shows an uncommon adventurousness 
of thought, and helps explain why Carson should structure her latest book in a 
way that provides similar “free spaces”. It is more typical in literature that 
the fragmented narrative indicates something broken.

Frantumaglia, a memoir from Elena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/29/frantumaglia-a-writers-journey-elena-ferrante-review>
 (fictional or otherwise), is named for a word used by her mother “to describe 
how she felt when she was racked by contradictory sensations that were tearing 
her apart. She said that inside her she had a frantumaglia, a jumble of 
fragments.” This destabilising use of fragmentation is one of the primary 
features of modernism because writers were attempting to capture how the early 
20th-century world, be it James Joyce’s Dublin, Alfred Döblin’s Berlin or John 
Dos Passos’s Manhattan, overloaded the human mind. This mind was one that 
Freud’s psychological theories had only recently identified as being fragmented 
itself. Something like this perception is at work in a section of Float where 
Carson uses a series of bullet points to disconnectedly tell a story about a 
border crossing. In a postscript she writes:


There are many ways to tell a story. A guy told me what happened to him at the 
border. I put some points on file cards. Every time I tried to fill in what 
happens between the file cards, I lost the story. I didn’t really know him. It 
was like a winter sky, high, thin, restless, unfulfilled. That’s when I started 
to think about the word flotage.

There is also the kind of fragmentation that seems to want to actively repel 
the reader, like a wall topped with broken glass. In How to LikeIf I Told Him: 
A Completed Portrait of Picasso by Gertrude Stein 
<http://www.openculture.com/2012/09/gertrude_stein_recites_if_i_told_him_a_completed_portrait_of_picasso.html>
, Carson describes a section of Stein’s poem in which she discusses Picasso’s 
hair as compared with Napoleon’s hair, only to suddenly start talking about 
trains:


I don’t know why trains. Often when reading Gertrude Stein, I have the sense 
I’m getting the gist and I ride along a while in good faith, then all at once 
she switches tracks and there I’m left standing, as it were, at the station.

Here we have moved away from fragmentation as “imaginal adventure”; now it is 
a labyrinth, constructed to confound us. It is this sort of experience that 
most obviously marks out fragmented narratives as difficult texts, whether the 
book in question is JG Ballard’s The Atrocity Exhibition, David Foster 
Wallace’s Infinite Jest orDavid Markson’s Wittgenstein’s Mistress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/24/wittgensteins-mistress-by-david-markson-travels-with-a-solitary-soul>
.

However the reader orders the material is provisional, it will almost 
certainly differ the next time she engage

But in each of these cases, as in TS Eliot’s The Waste Land, where the poet 
refers to “These fragments I have shored against my ruins”, fragmentation is an 
effect applied to the text: thehow, as opposed to the what, that suggests the 
potential for the fragmented state to be made whole. In Float, fragmentation 
occupies a more central position: however the reader orders the material is 
provisional, it will almost certainly differ the next time she engages.


Awarding fragmentation a similar prominence, Emmanuelle Pagano’s Trysting 
<http://www.andotherstories.org/book/trysting/> (translated from the French by 
Jennifer Higgins and Sophie Lewis) uses polyphony to map the many different 
strains of love and sexuality. Each section, ranging in length from a sentence 
to a few pages, has a different subject. There is a possibility that some 
sections are linked, but given the lack of names or other identifying details 
it is almost impossible to tell. The narrative functions like a montage, 
letting us inhabit a host of minds and stay just long enough to realise the 
comedy, violence, or tenderness of a particular situation.


Reading the book is a kaleidoscopic experience, the fragmented structure 
letting Pagano focus solely on a specific experience at a specific time without 
needing to dilute her text with the distractions of characterisation, setting 
or chronology. Her experiment succeeds because of the range of her insight and 
the skill with which she shifts register: from wistfulness to blunt force, or 
from fantasy to naturalism.


Nocilla Experience  
<https://www.waterstones.com/book/nocilla-experience/agustin-fernandez-mallo/thomas-bunstead/9781910695258>
(translated from the Spanish by Thomas Bunstead) operates on a similarly large 
scale. The second volume of Agustín Fernández Mallo’s Nocilla trilogy, it 
divides itself between a disorientating array of narrative strands taking place 
across the world, from Madrid to Chicago to the Ukraine. It churns through 
cultural artefacts, quoting from film, New York Times book reviews and physics 
lectures. One reviewer compared it to channel hopping, but the multimedia 
sources of material the book draws on make it more like having multiple browser 
windows open, and compulsively tabbing between them.


Multiple Choice by Alejandro Zambra review – choose your own Chilean 
misadventure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/05/multiple-choice-by-alejandro-zambra-review>
The appearance of the Argentinian writer Julio Cortázar as a character in the 
Nocilla novel is Mallo’s way of paying tribute to one of the most celebrated 
fragmented narratives of all:Hopscotch 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/10760543/The-Alphabet-Library-H-is-for-Hopscotch-by-Julio-Cortazar.html>
. The 155 chapters of Cortázar’s book are split into two categories, essential 
and non-essential, and the reader is encouraged to hop between them according 
to their preference. “Cortázar,” writes the translator Ilan Stavans, “wants the 
reader to be active, engaged.” So does Mallo, as the incorporation of Hopscotch 
into his novel proves. Just as Cortázar’s book includes a chapter consisting of 
a transcription of a 19th-century Iberian novel, so Nocilla includes passages 
taken from the opening pages of Hopscotch.


“In its own way,” Cortázar writes alongside the “Table of Instructions” at the 
beginning of Hopscotch, “this book consists of many books”.Alejandro Zambra’s 
Multiple Choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/05/multiple-choice-by-alejandro-zambra-review>
 (translated from the Spanish by Megan McDowell) goes further: it consists of 
an almost infinite number of books. Adopting the format of an early 1990s 
Chilean secondary school exam, it sets the reader a series of questions with 
multiple-choice answers. The decisions the reader must make are mostly 
compositional: rearranging sentences into a preferred order, selecting words or 
lines to delete. The effect is a masterful act of transformation that turns 
reader into writer. Zambra gives us fragments, but he also gives us the 
autonomy to shore them up into something new: our very own book.


The line in Float that comes closest to Zambra’s project comes in Merry 
Christmas from Hegel, which begins with Carson trying to understand a point the 
philosopher makes in his writing about speculation. “Speculation,” she says, 
“being the effort to grasp reality in its interactive entirety”. The act of 
choosing our answers in Multiple Choice, or shuffling Float’s chapbooks into 
our favoured order, are interactive processes that have meaning as their 
ultimate goal. But as with any subjective material, such as literature, this 
search for meaning is necessarily a speculative one. Hegel, Carson tells us, 
considers speculation to be the proper business of philosophy, but she also 
implies that it is the proper business of art.


Through the fragmentary ... we can somehow arrive at a more profound 
understanding of the world

Later in the same piece, Carson stands in a snowbound wood: “Minus twenty 
degrees in the wind but inside the trees is no wind. The world,” she writes, as 
everyday noises fade into a deep peace, “subtracts itself in layers”. The 
moment seems to suggest that through the fragmentary – the chance associations 
triggered by reading Hegel before entering a wood, for example – we can somehow 
arrive at a more profound understanding of the world. In this way, Pagano’s 
snippets of stories can be seen not as partial glimpses of an unseen whole but 
the distillation of her subject, the fragment recast as kernel: not the 
incidental detail, but the essential part that must not be discarded.


In Nocilla Experience, Mallo quotes DJ Shadow (a musician who at the outset of 
his career built his tracks entirely from samples, ie fragments of other work) 
comparing his process to architecture: “for me the drums are the foundations. 
Once you’ve got the foundations, each floor you add to the building is harder 
and harder. To add parts that can help, that might form part of the whole, is 
harder still; it’s like making a building that gets smaller the higher it goes.”

The process is the same one of layering that Carson describes, but in reverse. 
That the process should become more difficult as each additional layer is added 
demonstrates that every fragment Mallo employs is intended to work in tandem 
with what has come before, and what will come after, to “form part of the 
whole”. This sequencing of apparently disconnected material carries a meaning 
for those attuned enough to hear it: the signal within the noise.

 