
From the Butts, above steep Danescoombe, the tidal Tamar appears as a silver 
ribbon winding seawards beneath the shadowy woods of Cotehele. Up on this site, 
100 metres above river level, winding house, water tower and loco shed were 
essential parts of the 19th-century incline station.

Before the viaduct across the river into Devon was completed in 1908 
<http://www.history.uk.com/history/building-calstock-viaduct/>, granite, ores, 
bricks and arsenic were brought along the East Cornwall mineral railway that 
curved around the flanks of Hingston Down and Kit Hill to this place. A 
stationary steam engine lowered the wagons down a 1-in-6 gradient over the last 
half-mile towards quaysides for eventual loading onto barges and schooners. 
Coal, grain and timber came up in the opposite direction.

Subsequently the mineral line was linked to the viaduct, and the incline 
became defunct. Passengers and goods continued to be carried towards the 
terminus at Kelly Bray until 1968. On clear days, like today, engine drivers 
could look across to the distant slopes and tors of Dartmoor and see puffs of 
smoke and steam from engines of their great western rivals as they progressed 
up the sinuous track towards Princetown.

Today’s winter sun emphasises the chasm-like nature of the deep and wooded 
valley below the old incline station, now used as a depot for a furniture 
removal firm. Beyond a level field of black cattle and fluttering rooks, on the 
precipitous sunny slopes, snowdrops and early daffodils will soon emerge among 
the ferns, ivy and brambles that have overtaken former cultivated plots. 
Packing sheds have collapsed and the fluffy seeds ofold man’s beard 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clematis_vitalba> festoon tops of trees growing 
from the tangle of hazel bushes, evergreen pittosporum, privet and laurel.

Down on the main river a paddling of ducks float outwards from the gloomy 
confluence to calm bright water. Upstream towards Calstock people stroll in the 
warm sunshine, past the boatyard and derelict lime kilns and beneath little 
stalactites on the underside of the bridge that carried the last part of the 
incline plane across the riverside track.
 