
DNA tests have confirmed the remains of two bodies found in an Irish bog are 
those of Séamus Wright and Kevin McKee, two of the IRA’s “disappeared”.

The men, who were members of the Provisional IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> in west Belfast, vanished in 1972. They 
were believed to have been kidnapped, interrogated, then shot dead by the PIRA. 
Their bodies were buried in secret across the border in the Irish Republic.

The organisation in charge of locating the remains of 17 people whom the IRA 
killed and then disappeared during theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Troubles said DNA examination 
of samples taken from the bog in County Meath proved they were Wright and McKee.

Sir Ken Bloomfield and Frank Murray, senior members of the independent 
commission for the location of victims’ remains, said: “The results positively 
indicate that the remains are those of Séamus Wright and Kevin McKee. Dr Brian 
Farrell, coroner for the city of Dublin, has accepted this as evidence of 
identification and will shortly authorise the release of the remains to the 
families. The thoughts of everyone in the commission are with the Wright and 
McKee families at this difficult time.”

The families had indicated that details of the funeral arrangements would be 
released in due course, the commission said.

The pair were accused by the PIRA’s Belfast brigade of working as agents for 
an undercover British Army unit carrying out covert attacks in the city aimed 
at republicans.

The Sinn Féin leader, Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, said the DNA identifications 
would bring an end to the uncertainty for the McKee and Wright families.

“I want to thank everyone who has helped in the search for the remains of 
those who were killed and secretly buried by the IRA,” Adams said. “Republicans 
have cooperated fully with the commission and we now need to continue to do our 
utmost to bring closure for the remaining families. Today’s confirmation is an 
important step toward achieving this.”

The most notorious case of the disappeared was that of Jean McConville, a 
widow and mother of 10 who was kidnapped, taken in a car from west Belfast 
across the border to the republic, shot dead and buried at a beach in County 
Louth. The former Belfast IRA commander and hunger striker Brendan Hughes 
claimed Adams had given the order for McConville to be killed and buried in 
secret to avoid political embarrassment for the republican movement. Adams has 
always denied any connection to the McConville murder or even being in the IRA.

Four people remain on the disappeared list, three of them believed to have 
been kidnapped and killed by the IRA. The missing presumed dead include SAS 
Captain Robert Nairac who vanished while on a covert mission in South Armagh.

The other person on the list is Séamus Ruddy, a County Down schoolteacher and 
member of the Irish Republican Socialist party. He was abducted, tortured and 
killed by a faction of the Irish National Liberation Army in Paris in the 
1980s. Despite searches in the French capital and in a forest in Normandy, 
Ruddy’s remains have never been found.
 