
The Melbourne Renegades are likely in the market for a new import after 
all-rounder Dwayne Bravo suffered a hamstring injury in their BBL loss to the 
Perth Scorchers. The West Indies star stumbled awkwardly as he moved at full 
pace while trying to field a Michael Klinger cut shot on Thursday night.

Bravo will undergo scans to determine the severity of the injury, which 
occurred when his left leg buckled beneath him, pitching him forward into the 
Etihad Stadium turf.

Steve Smith shines as Australia and Pakistan head towards soggy draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/steve-smith-shines-as-australia-and-pakistan-head-towards-soggy-draw>
“It doesn’t look great,” skipper Aaron Finch told reporters after the match. 
“He’ll have a scan on Friday and we’ll have a clearer idea of the damage. If he 
is ruled out for the tournament it’s an unbelievably damaging blow for us but 
also for him to miss the tournament – we know how much he loves coming here. It 
would be a huge blow ... he’s one of the best all-rounders in the world.”

Competition rules allow the Renegades to sign a replacement but finding 
someone of Bravo’s quality at such short notice would be a tall order. Bravo 
left the game on a stretcher in the 11th over, having bowled just one of his 
four overs, leaving the Renegades attack short-handed. Still, the home side did 
well to claw their way back into the contest.

Finch, a part-time spinner, bowled the last over with the visitors needing 
nine runs. He dismissed Mitch Marsh then Adam Voges but served up a last-ball 
full toss that Ashton Agar dispatched over the fence for six with three runs 
required for the win.

“I should have hit the pitch shouldn’t I?” Finch mused. “I tried to get a 
yorker in there but unfortunately I missed it and paid the price. We nearly 
pulled one out of the hat there, we didn’t really have many other options, but 
with Dwayne only bowling his one over it was pretty unfortunate.”

Agar, on the other hand, played out every youngster’s dream cricket scenario 
when he belted the winning blow. Agar, who hadn’t faced a ball, struck a pair 
of twos then smashed a full toss over the deep mid-wicket fence when three runs 
would have sufficed.

“It was the first time I’ve ever been put in that situation, to be honest, and 
I was just glad it came off,” Agar told the Ten Network. “You’ve got to try and 
keep your head somehow and just back yourself and it came off. He’s a part-time 
bowler but he’s very experienced, he’s cagey, he knew what he was doing. I had 
a rough idea of where he was trying to bowl with his field setting, but it went 
my way.”

The four-wicket win continued the Scorchers’ remarkable winning run against 
the Renegades. They’ve never lost to Melbourne’s red team in the BBL, even when 
the Renegades topped the league heading into the finals in BBL02 the only game 
they lost was to bogey side Perth.

Michael Klinger was again a thorn in the Renegades’ side. In the corresponding 
fixture last year, he blasted an unbeaten 90 in a 171-run partnership with 
Shaun Marsh in the first 10-wicket win in BBL history. His 72 from 55 balls on 
Thursday night was subdued in comparison, but no less important for the 
Scorchers, who are 2-1 after three games.

“I think it’s just a bit of a coincidence that it happened like that, but it 
is a great ground and a great atmosphere to play in,” Klinger said of his 
impressive recent record at the venue. “The last couple of years here have been 
ok ... hopefully this will keep going against some other teams in the 
tournament.”
 