
The Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, prepared on Sunday to become the 
latest powerful state official booked on felony charges. But unlike when 
GovernorRick Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> smiled for 
his mugshot last year, Republicans are not rushing to Paxton’s defense.

A day after news broke that a grand jury had indicted Paxton on felony 
securities fraud charges, Governor Greg Abbott, Perry’s successor who wasTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> attorney general for 12 years, 
remained silent. So did GOP presidential candidate and US senator Ted Cruz, who 
in 2014 praised Paxton, a like-minded Tea Party favourite.

Other Texas GOP leaders also kept to themselves about Paxton, who is expected 
to turn himself in on Monday near his home in suburban Dallas. Attorney Joe 
Kendall said in a brief statement late on Saturday that he and Paxton would 
honour a judge’s instructions to not publicly comment.

It offered a sharp contrast to how conservatives rallied around Perry last 
year when a grand jury in liberal-leaning Austinhanded up a two-count 
indictment against Texas’s longest-serving governor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/rick-perry-indicted-abuse-of-power>
, over a 2013 veto. A judge earlier this monthtossed out one of the indictments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/24/rick-perry-texas-felony-indictment-appeals-court>
, leaving only an abuse of power charge.

The cases against Paxton and Perry widely differ, including the fact that 
Paxton was investigated by the Texas Rangers.

“The Texas Rangers aren’t politically motivated in investigating the crimes 
they’re investigating,” said David Owens, a former Texas prosecutor who is now 
a criminal defense attorney. “If you’ve got the Texas Rangers bringing forth 
this case, it’s serious.”

Barely seven months after becoming Texas’s top law enforcement officer, Paxton 
faces accusations that he mislead investors in a McKinney-based tech startup 
before taking office, special prosecutor Kent Schaffer told the New York Times.

Schaffer did not return messages seeking comment on Sunday. He and a fellow 
special prosecutor, Brian Wice, only hinted at the indictment over the weekend 
in a broader statement, saying they were committed to ensuring that anyone 
accused of a crime was guaranteed a presumption of innocence and a fair trial.

The most serious of the allegations is that Paxton encouraged investment in 
Servergy, which is now under investigation by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission. The Associated Press reported last month the connections between 
the startup and Paxton, who listed himself as a shareholder and whose name is 
among search terms that Servergy attorneys used to satisfy a federal subpoena.

In the middle of last year’s heated Republican primary, Paxton admitted to 
violating state securities law for not disclosing to regulators that he was 
receiving commissions for referring law clients to a financial planner. He paid 
a $1,000 fine. Aides said it was administrative oversight and that the criminal 
investigation was a political hit job.

But fellow Republicans have not been so publicly dismissive, especially now 
that Schaffer has said an indictment will be unsealed on Monday in Collin 
County.

Abbott spokesman John Wittman declined comment on Sunday, as did 
representatives for both Cruz and US senator John Cornyn, who is also a former 
Texas attorney general.

Although indictments against attorneys general are not common, Paxton has 
company both in Texas and around the US.

In 1983, Texas Democrat Jim Mattox was indicted on charges of commercial 
bribery shortly after his election. He was later acquitted.

 More recently, a Pennsylvania grand jury in January recommended that state 
attorney general Kathleen Kane face charges over allegations that she engaged 
in a cover-up and lied about her role in a grand jury leak to a newspaper.

Kane, who took office in 2013, has not been charged and has consistently 
denied that she broke any laws.
 