
With Donald Trump’s campaign still reeling from his lascivious comments about 
groping women on an 11-year-old tape, a growing number of GOP mega-donors and 
outside groups are fretting about theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> losing their congressional 
majorities, and scrambling to pour tens of millions more into ads and voter 
mobilization drives in tight races to stave off Democratic challengers.

The release of Trump’s remarks about assaulting women on Friday and his 
slash-and-burn attacks on Hillary Clinton and her husband in the second 
presidential debate, have fueled growing Republican worries about the Democrats 
taking one or both houses, say GOP donors and former members. If Clinton wins, 
meaning Vice-President Tim Kaine would hold the casting vote in the Senate, 
meaning the Democrats would only need to pick up four seats to control the 
upper chamber. The Republicans currently have 54 Senate seats, and the 
Democrats 44, along with two independents who caucus with them.

Wisconsin lawmakers urge investigation of Scott Walker after 'John Doe' papers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/scott-walker-investigation-wisconsin-lawmakers-john-doe-papers>
In two tight Senate contests, Nevada and New Hampshire, GOP candidates on 
Saturday announced they could no longer stomach Trump, and called on him to 
withdraw. On Monday, the House speaker, Paul Ryan, fired another salvo at Trump 
by saying he would no longer campaign for him or defend him, and told members 
they should feel free to focus on their own survival.

“I think Republicans were feeling pretty good about the Congress a couple 
weeks ago, but this morning they’re very worried,” former representative Vin 
Weber told the Guardian on Monday. Weber has helped raise funds for a 
politically-active non-profit, the American Action Network, and an allied Super 
Pac, the Congressional Leadership Fund, that are trying to keep the GOP 
majority. The fund has received $20m from casino mogul Sheldon Adelson.

“Republicans are scared to death of what would happen if they lost the Senate 
and House, regardless of which candidate” wins the presidency, billionaire 
broadcaster Stan Hubbard told the Guardian. Hubbard, who has contributed over 
$100,000 to a pro-Trump Super Pac, added of Trump and Clinton: “They’re both 
disgusting.”

Hubbard, a major donor to a few conservative groups, said he got a call last 
week from the US Chamber of Commerce, which is strictly focused on 
congressional races. Although he had already given a six-figure check to the 
Chamber of Commerce, Hubbard said he pledged another, somewhat smaller, check 
after talking to the organization’s top executive, Tom Donohue, about the risks 
of losing the Senate.

Pence refuses to answer questions on political 'puppetry' and big donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/25/mike-pence-donald-trump-political-donations-koch-brothers>
The Chamber of Commerce is one of a few key outside groups spending big bucks 
to stave off Democratic Senate challengers in at least six crucial states. 
Besides Nevada and New Hampshire, the others are Indiana, North Carolina, 
Missouri and Pennsylvania. Last week the Chamber of Commerce began its fourth 
ad buy in Nevada, a $1m effort to help representative Joe Heck win the Senate 
seat of retiring Senator Harry Reid.

Several days after the first debate, the conservative big donor and advocacy 
network led by the billionaire Koch brothers – which has said it isn’t backing 
Trump due to strong concerns about his policies and rhetoric – hosted a 
conference call with donors, asking for at least $10m more for Senate ads and 
get-out-the-vote efforts which have been its major focus, a donor who was on 
the call told the Guardian.

The Koch network, which expects to spend about $42m this year on TV and 
digital ads in eight states, might spend a few million more on “strategic media 
buys” and voter mobilization drives, said James Davis of Freedom Partners 
Chamber of Commerce, the financial hub of the sprawling advocacy network. 
Koch-backed advocacy groups, Davis added, are now “focused on turning out 5 
million voters in the eight states”.

The Koch network’s concerns about the Senate were underscored for donors when 
they received an email, seen by the Guardian, with new poll results in key 
races, which painted a worrisome picture.

Two other cash-rich outside groups, a Super Pac dubbed the Senate Leadership 
Fund and an allied non-profit called One Nation, have stepped up their 
fundraising efforts.

As of 1 September the two groups had raised just under $100m this election 
cycle, including $42.4m in August. And the Leadership Fund expects to spend 
close to $75m in seven key states in September and October combined, according 
to a spokesman. Adelson and his wife have has given the Super Pac $20m and 
chipped in $10m to the allied non-profit, according to records and fundraising 
sources.

Other conservative groups and their big donors are worried about losing the 
Senate. “Victory for us is keeping the Senate and the latest disgusting episode 
doesn’t help us,” said Michael Epstein of the Republican Jewish Coalition, a 
staunchly pro-Israel group heavily backed by Adelson. “Trump is a destructive 
force … He’s hurting the country, the GOP and the Trump brand.”
 