
“Reduced budgets, reduced staff members, higher caseloads and more red tape 
... You are always struggling just to keep up.” That is one heartfelt comment 
from a survey by the Guardian that reveals the huge toll government cuts are 
taking on staff in public services and the voluntary sector.

The Clockoff survey, conducted last month, asked about the wellbeing of 
employees across the voluntary sector and public services. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals> More than 3,700 people, in 
jobs ranging from social work to police and probation, from social housing to 
the NHS, charities and NGOs, took part online via the Guardian’s professional 
networks.

Stress in public services: how do you unwind? Share your photos and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2015/jun/09/stress-in-public-services-how-do-you-unwind-share-your-photos-and-stories>
A clear picture emerges of staff working long hours, with few breaks, and a 
workforce that has become wearily resigned to this way of working. When asked, 
​do you think stress is a fact of life for employees in the public or voluntary 
sector, 85% of respondents say they agree. For respondents working in probation 
services the figure rises to 100%.

Some 93% of respondents say they are stressed at work either all, some, or a 
lot of the time. Of the 9% who say they are stressed all of the time at work, 
almost all report working beyond their contracted hours. On average, 
respondents put in an extra seven hours a week. Close on one in five say they 
don’t take any break during their working day, with less than a quarter (24%) 
enjoying a main break of at least 30 minutes.

It is clear that cuts are having a sustained impact on workloads. Social 
workers, for instance, report having more work to do, but not only are there 
fewer staff to deal with cases, cuts to voluntary bodies also mean there are 
fewer external support services for children and families. “The phrase ‘doing 
more with less’ is not only an offence against physics, it is the frontline 
workers who bear this ever-increasing load,” says one social worker. “When the 
captain says faster the oarsmen are the ones whose labour is increased.” She 
adds: “I suffer with insomnia caused by my employer and I am being treated for 
anxiety and depression.”

NHS staff are the most likely of all public sector workers to feel stressed 
because of their job, according to the survey results. More than 60% say they 
feel stressed all or most of the time, and 59% say they feel more stressed this 
year than last year.

The survey also reveals that NHS workers are the least likely to take a break 
during a working day. Just over a quarter (26%) don’t take a break at all, and 
only around one in 10 takes more than half an hour. And the large majority of 
NHS workers (96%) work beyond their contracted hours, doing an average of five 
extra hours per week.

The number of people working here has been slashed but the workload has not
Local government development officer 
It is not just those in clinical roles who are feeling the pressure. A ward 
clerk supervisor, who has had to take time off work because stress levels had 
exacerbated an existing mental health condition, says: “So-called efficiency 
savings have resulted in remaining staff being overloaded – particularly those 
who aren’t frontline like administrators and secretaries.” One senior manager 
admits: “I feel I can’t help my team or myself more to cope and adapt to change 
and pressure.”

The findings come as David Cameron, the prime minister, promises to transform 
the NHS into a seven day-a-week universal health service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/18/cameron-seven-day-health-service-nhs-pledge-conservatives>
.

Danny Mortimer, chief executive of NHS Employers, says: “Frontline work in the 
NHS is rewarding but it can be emotionally and physically challenging, so it’s 
vital those staff have the right support. The culture in the NHS has improved 
demonstrably and there is more specialist support. But we cannot be complacent 
as progress is uneven and the NHS must keep innovating to meet ever-growing 
demand on its services.”

While NHS staff are the most stressed, other sectors are not far behind: 58% 
of local government staff, including social workers, 51% of central government 
employees and 46% of charity workers report being stressed all or most of the 
time.

The public sector is being destroyed by ever-increasing cuts to funding
Social worker 
Jo Cleary, chair of the College of Social Work, says continuing funding 
reductions are taking an unbearable toll on social workers. “Our members report 
juggling highly complex workloads, with little time to reflect and plan their 
work. Putting this kind of pressure on social workers, while expecting them to 
do complex, delicate work with some of the most vulnerable people in our 
society, is dangerous. We also risk deterring people from staying in social 
work, or even entering the profession in the first place. We are very clear on 
this: social work needs greater investment from government as an immediate 
priority.”

On a more positive note, two-thirds of respondents believe the work they do in 
the public or voluntary sector is always or often worthwhile, and 40% think 
their contribution is always or often valued. Many staff working for 
campaigning NGOs, for example, who despite working an average of nine extra 
hours a week are among the least stressed in our survey, say that they actively 
choose to work long hours because it gives them a sense of purpose. But 
respondents warn that this sense of duty can be taken advantage of and many 
report being asked to do more and more work.

Sally Cupitt, head of the National Council for Voluntary Organisations’ 
charities evaluation services says: “We must do our best to make sure staff 
feel supported and valued in their work. A small amount of stress can be a good 
thing, but sustained or excessive stress can be damaging to health and 
wellbeing. Charities should adopt employee wellbeing policies wherever 
possible, such as employee assistance programmes and flexible working options.”

The survey shows that stress at work is taking its toll on people’s health and 
wellbeing. Poor sleep, headaches, stress-related mental health issues and even 
digestive problems are among a range of physical and psychological symptoms 
reported by respondents, 39% of whom have sought medical advice or counselling.

I was signed off work for two weeks in January after constantly bursting into 
tears and not sleeping
Social housing professional 
Asked how people try to reduce their stress levels outside of work, most say 
they relax by spending more time either alone or with friends and family; 
around45% exercise, catch up on sleep, or watch TV. Worryingly, 28% report 
drinking more.

Commenting on the survey findings, a Local Government Association spokesman 
says: “Councils are taking steps to adopt flexible working practices where 
possible because they know they help build a more engaged workforce, attract 
the best talent and increase productivity.”

The Cabinet Office says its own People Survey of more than 274,000 civil 
servants paints a very different picture. “Staff engagement continues to rise 
and 81% of respondents said their manager is considerate of their life outside 
work”, says a spokesman.Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, 
which represents many public sector workers, says spending cuts, attacks on pay 
and pensions and mass redundancies have had a huge effect on a demoralised 
public sector workforce. : “This survey lays bare the damage cuts have had on 
frontline services, with staff regularly overworked, stressed and unable to do 
their jobs as they would like.” Public servants have understandably had enough 
and many are rightly fearful of the new round of austerity the government is 
about to unleash in its July budget.” She warns that if the government 
continues to treat public servants as second-class citizens, it will struggle 
to hold on to and recruit the skilled, dedicated staff needed to deliver public 
services. “When that happens, we all pay the price.”

In their own words

“Excessive stress in child protection social work is commonplace. Over the 
past six years it has affected my physical and mental health at times, placed a 
strain on personal relationships, led me to question my choice of profession, 
and frequently leaves me tired, exhausted, emotionally drained and overwhelmed. 
I’m stressed a lot of the time and the stress has increased over the past year. 
I was seconded to a new post which lacked clarity and effective management 
oversight. I was given additional responsibilities without a reduction in my 
previous, already overwhelming day-to-day responsibilities. Senior management 
was poor and chaotic. I had to spend months fighting to be paid appropriately 
for my level of responsibility.

“The public sector is being destroyed by ever-increasing cuts to funding. 
Alongside this there is an ever-increasing demand for services from my 
department specifically (children and families), yet there is no money provided 
for more staff. We are also affected by funding cuts to services we rely on to 
assist in supporting the families we work with. What would help? Investment in 
social work, local authority social work receiving the appropriate funding to 
ensure there are adequate staffing levels, which are proportionate to the 
demand for service.”Social worker

“I’ve lost weight as I miss at least three meals a week. I suffer from 
constipation, piles, insomnia [and am] constantly exhausted. I constantly feel 
I haven’t done my best but it’s impossible to do it all.”Midwife

“The number of people working here has been slashed but the workload has not. 
There is a lack of trust of the workforce and flexibility from the management. 
It feels like they are expecting more and more but giving less and less. The 
government has contributed to the perception of the public sector workforce as 
being lazy and money-grabbing. There have been many changes in the organisation 
and no one has any certainty or job security despite permanent contracts.”Local 
government development officer

“I got very stressed around Christmas and new year, when I was working 
completely on my own with 14 young people to support, no one to offload on to 
and as a result my own mental health was suffering. I was signed off work for 
two weeks in January after constantly bursting into tears, not sleeping and 
just not feeling like my usual happy self.”Social housing professional

“A lot more strain has been put on the voluntary sector due to cuts in other 
areas. We have seen an increase in the amount of vulnerable people we see 
weekly. Because there are gaps in services, we are expected to fulfil a need, 
in fact lots of different needs. As cuts increase, these gaps will increase and 
I fear that we cannot adequately meet the needs of some of the most 
marginalised and vulnerable people in our society, which is hard to take.”
Charity project worker

“The public sector is the victim of large-scale cuts and austerity. While the 
cash impact of this might be significant, the combined low feeling of 
motivation and self-worth is stressful, as is making up for missing or 
stretched colleagues and the government continues to demand more.”Central 
government regional director
 