 The 10-year old Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland died at midnight as the 
bells were ushering in the New Year. It was brought to an end when the British 
Order in Council dissolving the Federal Constitution came into force.
At the stroke of 12 all Federal laws became null and void, the last remaining 
Ministries and Departments came to an end, and the three territories, Southern 
Rhodesia, Northern Rhodesia, and Nyasaland, broke their politically uneasy but 
economically successful association.

The last Federal Prime Minister, Sir Roy Welensky, spent the evening quietly 
at home with his family. The Federation's first Prime Minister, Lord Malvern, 
had a small tot of whisky and went to bed early.

 Queen's message 

Only Nyasaland celebrated the break-up - with cocks crowing, trumpets 
sounding, and the newMalawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi> national 
anthem being played over the radio. Mr Kenneth Kaunda, the Northern Rhodesian 
Prime Minister-to-be had ordered his party: "No celebrations, no wakes. Mark 
the end of the federation by working hard to rebuild." But Mr Harry Nkumbula, 
the leader of the rival African National Congress, is staging symbolic burial 
ceremonies.

The Queen, in a message to the acting Governor-General, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, 
said: "As your term of office as acting Governor-General of the Federation of 
Rhodesia and Nyasaland draws to its close I would be grateful if you could 
convey to all the peoples of Southern Rhodesia, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland 
my good wishes for their future."

Trade agreements between Southern Rhodesia and Northern Rhodesia and between 
Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland were announced yesterday. They allow for most 
Southern Rhodesian goods to enter the Northern territories free of duty, except 
in case, where Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland have established industries 
which they want to protect.

Trade between the territories will remain substantially undisturbed. Existing 
arrangements for the supply by Southern Rhodesia to the North of essential 
commodities like coal, sugar, and basic foodstuffs will continue.

Export marketing services in Southern Rhodesia for major agricultural produce 
will continue to be made available to Northern Rhodesia - for example, the 
tobacco auction floors in Salisbury will continue to handle the Northern 
Rhodesian crop.
 