
A remote coastal cliff top described by Dylan Thomas as "wild, bleak and 
barren" was today Britain's Best Picnic spot.

Rhossili Bay on the far end of the Gower Peninsula offers stunning views 
across north Devon in one direction and along three miles of Rhossili sands in 
the other.

Tennyson Down near Freshwater on the Isle of Wight was second. The view, which 
reaches out across the Solent from the downs, is said to have inspired many of 
Tennyson's poems.

In third place was Redpoint Beach at Wester Ross in the Scottish Highlands, 
which on a clear day provides views of the Outer Hebrides on the horizon.

A spokesman for the Red Tractor food assurance scheme, which organised the 
vote of the British Guild of Travel Writers members said: "The picnic spot at 
Rhossili Bay offers unparalleled views – turn one way and on a clear day you 
can see the north Devon coast, turn the other to look along the three-mile 
yellow sweep of Rhossili sands, where the surfers will be catching waves 
whatever the time of year."

Richmond Hill in Surrey came fourth. William Wordsworth, Sir Walter Scott, Sir 
Joshua Reynolds andJMW Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jmw-turner> are among those who have 
been inspired to immortalise the view of the Thames rolling by.

Malham Cove in the Yorkshire Dales, where a giant limestone curve stands 
proudly over a trickling stream, came fifth.

Other favourites include Linford Brook in the northern New Forest in Hampshire 
and the Giant's Causeway in Bushmills, Co Antrim, Northern Ireland.

Also making the top 10 were Wastwater in the Lake District, where grassy areas 
edge the water with tiny bays and islets; Devil's Dyke on the South Downs in 
West Sussex, where a patchwork of green fields, ancient hedgerows and tiny 
hamlets weave their way into the distance and Top Withens near Haworth in West 
Yorkshire, home to the abandoned farmhouse which featured in Emily Brontë's 
Wuthering Heights novel.

Tim Locke, a spokesman for the British Guild of Travel Writers said: "Our 
members know an extraordinary number of Britain's little nooks and crannies.

"There are some real hidden gems in this list, and they are all worth a visit 
for different reasons."
 