
Route information

Length: 32.23 miles

Duration: A slow ride with a family to Sandown or Shanklin takes approximately 
5 hours, including stops. Then it's a relaxed 5 or 6 hours back to East Cowes. 
The tourist board recommends staying at least a night in the area around 
Sandown or Shanklin halfway through the trail.

Start/Finish: East Cowes

Classification: Easy riding, little gradient, mainly off road. For little or 
tired legs, there is a chance to shorten the route by catching the train 
between Sandown and Shanklin

Who it's good for: Children, young people and families. Also suitable for 
those new to cycling or just wanting a day out on two wheels

Map: See see the Bicycle Island pages of visitisleofwight.co.uk 
<http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk/>

The Red Squirell Trail

The two children on their bikes next to me, Oliver and Esme, are whispering 
with excitement. "I never normally remember to bring my binoculars with me so 
I've only ever seen a red flash of the tail before," says Oliver, aged 10, on 
our quest to spot the elusive red squirrel. Esme, seven, staring up at the 
trees, murmurs: "I would love to see one."

The Isle of Wight is a stronghold for these tufty-eared endearing animals – 
spared the invasion of the larger, more aggressive grey squirrels by the Solent 
– and our group is on a cycle route called the Red Squirrel Trail, so we're on 
high alert.

Bikes and boats
Starting at East Cowes, you jump on a charmingly antiquated chain ferry with 
your bike to cross the water. Then you're quickly on a fecund avenue of green 
trees off-road. Following the Medina estuary along a wildlife-rich former 
railway track, everything is in bloom. But since reaching Newport, a comely 
town in the centre of the island, five miles from the start, our two-wheeler 
trail has entered a new landscape.

As we pedal towards Alverstone, past buttercup meadows, ancient woodlands and 
marshland, a sign appears by the gravel path: "Rookery overhead." We've paused, 
looked up and amazingly, there are the rooks chattering away. Now, distracted, 
we're peering for squirrels in other trees. Despite Oliver's binoculars, we 
can't see any of the coy auburn residents.

Another few hundred yards on looms another sign: "Teacher, teacher" it says. 
On cue, as if in an interactive theatre performance, a great tit starts a merry 
"teacher, teacher" call.

It's fast turning into a very English safari. We admire the red admiral larvae 
on nettles, listen to birds, and marvel at geese in the field, flapping away 
with chests puffed out like young gents in the pub.

The search goes on
Next, we ride past Merstone, a ghostly deserted station with grass growing 
over the platform, the rare cowslips making it otherworldly. "Stop, look, 
listen, split hazelnuts evidence of red squirrels," a sign instructs. It means 
we're getting close to the bushy-tailed epicentre. We're looking for dreys – 
squirrel nests – in tree forks or hollows, often constructed from twigs and 
lined with moss and hair.

Finally, on the horizon, we spot Alverstone Mead nature trail's hide, said to 
be the best place to see the little blighters up close. But as we near the 
log-style cabin, it rains. All creatures great and small hide now.

Apparently the garlic farm up the road has a little community of bushy-tailed 
ones living in the trees above the farm. They like to scamper down to the area 
outside the cafe, down a wall and along a rope to pick up food left for them. 
Esme and Ollie are pedalling fast now. But the heavens breathe out further and 
it's too wet for dainty squirrels.

As we eat deliciously moreish cake for commiseration, Esme says: "I love this 
ride but I'd prefer it to be sunny." So, languidly supping our hot chocolate, 
we decide to call it a day.

Rare sighting
We assume all is lost. But, as we head home, my husband suddenly shouts: 
"Look!" The red one we've been seeking so furiously nonchalantly scuttles into 
a hedgerow in front of us. Phew. The sun is out again and our dreams are 
replete.

Red squirrels: the facts

175,000 The estimated red squirrel population in the UK

3 The average life expectancy of a red squirrel, although they can live for up 
to six years

17km The length of the river Medina, the Isle of Wight's main river

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 