 Police in Dublin charged rioters with batons last night after cheering crowds 
had burned out the British Embassy. Hatred of Britain in the Republic reached 
fever pitch as the embassy's interior blazed fiercely, watched by several 
thousand.
"Burn, burn, burn," they shouted as chunks of masonry and woodwork fell 
blazing onto the street. They redoubled their cheering whenever they saw the 
fire breaking through into new parts of the building. They stopped fire engines 
from getting through, and hurled petrol bombs at the building to speed the fire.

Rioting broke out as the demonstrators hurled petrol bombs at the Irish police 
near the burnt-out hulk of the embassy. They attacked an estate agent's office 
with stones and petrol bombs, and later looted a confectioner's shop. The 
police baton-charged wave upon wave of demonstrators, who replied with a 
fusillade of stones, and later petrol bombs.

The violence broke out after an IRA march had reached Merrion Square, where 
the embassy is situated. There were estimated to be between one and two 
thousand people in the crowd facing fewer than 200 policemen.

Police later baton-charged a crowd which had gathered outside the British 
passport office near the embassy. Thirty people were injured. Stones and petrol 
bombs were thrown before the crowd dispersed.

The police apparently had been given an order that, after the destruction of 
the British Embassy, no further damage to property was to be permitted if it 
could be avoided. Their charges were tough and, demonstrators claimed, quite 
brutal.

The British ambassador, Sir John Peck, returned to Dublin from London last 
night. He is expected to meet a senior member of the Irish Government, possibly 
Mr Lynch, today, and will later inspect the ruins of the embassy. An embassy 
spokesman praised the Irish police for their "magnificent courage and 
determination, which would have been a credit to any police force in the 
world," but added "in the numbers they were sent they were not remotely capable 
of protecting the embassy."

The embassy had been evacuated yesterday morning, and as the fire got 
underway, people living in houses near by were asked to leave.

The top floor of the four storey building was still burning last night and 
firemen were dousing what remained of the embassy. Although no one has yet been 
inside it, flames have almost certainly destroyed the entire interior of the 
large Georgian terrace house.

The firemen managed to reach the embassy 21/2 hours after the attack began. 
They were hampered by demonstrators who cut the fire hoses.

An embassy spokesman said that all the staff would remain in their homes for 
the time being. "Sensitive" documents had been removed and the embassy's work 
would continue in another building the whereabouts of which are being kept 
secret. He added that staff had expected the attack since Sunday.

The British Government made a "vigorous protest" to the Irish Government last 
night about the attack on the embassy. The charge d'affaires of the Irish 
Embassy in London, Mr Charles Whelan, was summoned to the Foreign Office and 
told by Mr Joseph Godber, Minister of State, that the Irish Government had 
"manifestly failed" in its duty of protecting the embassy. He was told that 
full compensation for the damage caused would be expected.

A statement said that Mr Whelan expressed "genuine regret" and accepted full 
responsibility on behalf of his Government.

The fire began after about 20,000 people had converged on Merrion Square as 
part of a huge protest in Dublin. Business in the city was at a standstill all 
day and the streets were packed in spite of pouring rain. Dozens of the 
marchers carried black flags and tricolours: others had placards and banners 
with slogans attacking the British Army.

The procession was led by four men carrying black, furled flags, and a band, 
which played the "Dead March" as it reached the embassy. The crowd stayed put 
in spite of the lashing rain, and after a few minutes the first petrol bombs 
began to hit the building. They were lobbed over the heads of a force of about 
200 Irish policemen, some wearing white helmets, who would have been powerless 
against the crowd. Some of the petrol bombs landed in the road, causing minor 
injuries to police and onlookers.

Three coffins draped in black were placed on the embassy steps, two Union 
Jacks were burned, and an effigy of a British soldier was set on fire. Then, 
after about half an hour, three men managed to reach the first floor of the 
embassy by jumping from the balconies of buildings nearby. Some of them flew a 
tricolour at half mast from the embassy flagpole, and another, equipped with a 
small axe, hacked at the shutters on three of the first floor windows. After 
they descended to the street, police moved into the crowd to find them, but 
were forced back.

Then the rate of petrol bomb throwing doubled, and bombs began to land inside 
the building. Shortly after 5 o'clock, the embassy was well alight. It was the 
third time that crowds had tried to fire the building as anti-British feeling, 
and a sense of total shock and outrage, has grown steadily since the shootings 
in Derry on Sunday. There were protest marches throughout the country all 
yesterday and hundreds of thousands of people attended special services in 
Roman Catholic and Protestant churches, and in synagogues.

All shops, offices, banks, schools, hotels, and factories were closed in 
memory of the 13 killed on Sunday, and only a minimal bus service ran through 
Dublin. The day of mourning has been almost totally observed, at any rate to a 
much greater extent than was expected on Tuesday. Black flags were draped on 
buildings everywhere, many with the figure 13 in white.

Outside the Post Office in O'Connell Street, members of the Provisional wing 
of Sinn Fein collected money for the IRA, and three men in black berets stood 
at attention opposite a tricolour. British offices and airline headquarters 
were boarded up and protected by the police.
 