
Big rises in diagnoses of syphilis and gonorrhoea in England along with 
continuing high levels of other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) have 
alarmed sexual health campaigners.

Figures published by Public Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>
 England (PHE) on Tuesday suggested cases of syphilis had jumped by 76% between 
2012 and 2015 while cases of gonorrhoea rose by 53%. Between 2014 and 2015 
alone, there were 20% more syphilis cases and 11% more gonorrhoea cases.

These were among new statistics showing continuing very high rates of STIs 
among gay men and young adults. The data prompted renewed calls from a senior 
PHE official for people with new, or casual, sexual partners to have regular 
STI tests. The official also urged them to help reverse the high levels of 
“condomless sex”.

Charities fear cuts in sexual health services are undermining STI testing 
regimes and reversing improvements brought about by previous investment.

A 3% fall in all new STI diagnoses to 434,456 cases between 2014 and 2015 was 
mainly due to less testing – and therefore diagnoses – for chlamydia despite 
recommendations for young people to be tested every year or when they change 
partners. Only just over one in seven young men and about a third of young 
women were tested for the disease in 2015.

The report said there were fewer diagnoses of genital warts, a consequence of 
thenational HPV vaccination programme 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/pages/hpv-human-papillomavirus-vaccine.aspx>
 among girls aged 12-13.

The increasing prevalence of syphilis, an infection that, left untreated, can 
cause strokes, blindness, paralysis or death, is reflected in a rise from 3,001 
diagnoses in 2012 to 5,228 in 2015. It can be treated with antibiotics if 
caught early.

Over the same period, gonorrhoea cases rose to 41,193.

Gwenda Hughes, head of STI surveillance at PHE, said: “We need to do more to 
raise awareness about STIs and how they can be prevented, especially the 
effectiveness of using condoms.

“We recommend that anyone having sex with a new or causal partner uses condoms 
and tests regularly for HIV and STIs. It is also vital to ensure there is easy 
access to STI testing and treatment services that meet the needs of local 
populations.”


Government cuts are brewing a sexual health crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jun/27/government-cuts-are-brewing-a-sexual-health-crisis>
Genevieve Edwards, director of policy at Marie Stopes UK, said: “These 
statistics should set alarm bells ringing about the availability of sexual 
health services for young people and men who have sex with men.

“When a drop in chlamydia diagnosis is due to a lack of testing rather than 
falling incidence, we risk losing all the ground gained by years of investment 
in the chlamydia screening programme. This will be costly, upsetting for those 
affected, and a wholly preventable own-goal.”

Natika Halil, chief executive of the Family Planning Association, said: “As we 
continue to hear about sexual health services being moved, restricted or 
closed, we reiterate our common-sense call on the government to prioritise 
investment in sexual health services in this country.”

Local authorities must also pay close attention to what was happening in their 
area and invest in prevention and education services, Halil said.
 