
Robert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/robert-rauschenberg> (1925-2008) is 
America’s Leonardo – ceaselessly inventive, a mind in perpetual revolution. 
That is the revelation of this exhilarating show. If all you knew of him was 
the famous goat girdled in a tyre, or the collages of JFK raising a warning 
finger, then think again. Rauschenberg changed artists’ ideas of what painting, 
sculpture and even drawing might be. He turns out to be thefons et origo of 60 
years and more of art, Warhol to Hirst.

The first gallery at Tate Modern covers only two years – 1950-2 – and yet it 
feels like the big bang. How to make everything new? Use newspapers instead of 
pigment, create paintings out of latex, dirt and clay, make sculpture out of 
scrap metal andself-portraits 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/gavinblatchford/cyanotypes/> by lying on 
light-sensitive paper. Work with what you’ve got; work with your friends. 
Rauschenberg invites John Cage to drive a car across yards of white paper, 
making the elegant black print that surely sends up Barnett Newman’s zips. Cage 
is credited as both the printer and the press: typical of Rauschenberg’s 
collaborative heart.
 Gift for Apollo, 1959. Photograph: © Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, New York 
What can a painting contain? The stuff of life itself, not just its depiction: 
Rauschenberg’s early canvases incorporate postcards, umbrellas, ties, socks and 
lightbulbs. A shining, all-white canvas gives back reflections of the world 
around it. Wooden doors open in one canvas, revealing other substrates beyond. 
A gorgeous shrine-like work, dripping with red and ochre pigment, is formed 
from the paint cans as well as the paint.

If this sounds more like sculpture, then what’s the difference? Rauschenberg 
simply called these objects “combines”. It is wonderful to see his ladders 
clambering upwards to painted expanses; his cock-eyed canvases trailing 
deflated tubes; his high-chrome collages sprouting parasols as if ready for 
sunshine. His poor little trundling machine, tethered to a bucket like a beast 
to its owner, is assembled from bric-a-brac painted with abject drips and dabs. 
A thing fallen on hard times, it’s wryly titledGift for Apollo 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/artwork/gift-apollo>.

These creations have extraordinary force of personality, even when the source 
is entirely mysterious, partly because Rauschenberg finds life’s flotsam 
transcendent. The sacredgoat 
<http://www.modernamuseet.se/stockholm/en/2016/07/28/monogram-pa-turne/> – 
boxed in plexiglass as no artwork before at Tate Modern – is a stuffed 
secondhand critter. But standing on a painted pasture of urban decay, a grey 
creature in a shadowy world, its face tribally painted in Rauschenberg’s 
colours, it appears outlandish and haunting. Many interpretations have been 
advanced, not least because the title,Monogram, implies personal identity. But 
ringed in rubber, the goat is irreducibly tragicomic. Rauschenberg’s genius for 
combination surpasses immediate comprehension.
 ‘Irreducibly tragic-comic’: Monogram 1955-59 at Tate Modern. Photograph: 
Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
There are, however, clear sources for his work. Growing up in Depression 
Texas, Rauschenberg’s family was so poor his mother used to sew shirts out of 
scraps; she even made a skirt from the back of her dead brother’s burial suit 
rather than waste the fabric. Rauschenberg made much of cloth; sewing strips 
together to make paintings, stitching snippets into canvases. One room of this 
show is devoted to his marvellousmaterial sculptures 
<http://hyperallergic.com/115385/us-museums-acquire-nine-works-by-robert-rauschenberg/>
 – poles and sheets in different configurations implying jousting tournaments, 
ships and pavilions.

Swiping and flashing, jump-cutting through images and associations, they 
channel-hop and net-surf decades in advance

Bed <https://www.moma.org/collection/works/78712>, also enshrined in 
plexiglass, looks peculiarly medieval. A narrow thing, upended, the quilt 
covered in toothpaste, nail polish and scrawled paint, the sheet and pillow in 
pencil marks somewhat reminiscent of Rauschenberg’s lover, Cy Twombly, it feels 
both violent and richly intricate. Some people find it frightening – like a 
crime scene preserved – but the association he draws between quilt and paint, 
bed and canvas is intimate and somehow comic; as if there were very little 
distance between getting down to work and messing about in bed.
 Estate, 1963. Photograph: © Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, New York 
The idea that art could be made out of anything is not exclusively his; Joseph 
Cornell and Kurt Schwitters linger like ghosts in this show. But around 1958, 
Rauschenberg enormously enlarged the quantities of stuff that got into his art 
when he began to use printed pictures and photos. First, he produced the 
transfer drawings – soaking images in solvent, then transferring them to the 
page with pen or pencil, so that they appear in reverse, and surrounded by 
hatchings, as floating vignettes.

It would be hard to think of another artist who takes you so far from this 
world while remaining so completely within it

He put this technique to sensational use in the 34 illustrations to Dante’s 
Inferno <http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/series/dante-drawing>, here 
shown for the first time in Britain. Smoky, spacey, miasmic, drifting: each 
page perfectly conjures Dante’s circles of hell, figures seeming to loom quite 
suddenly out of the transfer mist. And skimmed from the press, these figures 
are superbly apt, from bureaucrats to politicians to US spooks. There are even 
two wigged British judges.

Rauschenberg made hundreds of transfer drawings (there are more on show at 
Offer Waterman Gallery <http://www.waterman.co.uk/exhibitions/>, including one 
not coincidentally owned by Warhol) before he applied the technique to canvas. 
These huge painted collages are rightly positioned at the centre of this show. 
Moon landings, night lorries, water towers, sinister in the gloaming; JFK in 
mid-speech, tomorrow’s weather, Liberty raising her torch, street signs 
pointing far into the distance; the American dream, the American flag, Vietnam, 
Titian. They feel like history paintings now, and yet they live in our time 
too. Swiping and flashing, jump-cutting through images and half-thought 
associations, they channel-hop and net-surf decades in advance.
 Canto XIV: Circle Seven, Round 3, The Violent Against God, Nature, and Art, 
from the series Thirty-Four Illustrations for Dante’s Inferno, 1959-60. 
Photograph: MoMA 
And that goes to the core of Rauschenberg’s art. It isn’t just made out of 
anything; it doesn’t just last a minute or for ever, fusing the stuff of life 
and art; it runs in parallel with life – everything is happening all at once. 
Which is why this first posthumous retrospective is so valuable, because it 
gives you Rauschenberg whole in just the same way. Other shows have focused on 
perhaps one or two of his inventions. Here, you can walk from his collages to 
his ballets to his own wild performances; from his seething soup of mud, 
burbling and bubbling at the whim of a time machine in fabulously gloopy music, 
to his beautifully disciplined vision of Venice in elegantly looped ropes 
fraying below as if underwater.
 Rauschenberg’s Signs, 1970. 
It would be hard to think of another artist who takes you so far from this 
world, while remaining so completely within it. Rauschenberg emphasised his 
dyslexia as a metaphysical advantage, possibly abetted by hyperactivity. He 
didn’t stop until the very last minute. This show opens up like the codex of 
his mind, constantly churning up new ideas, combinations, intuitive visions; 
celebrating our physical reality. Time may pass – clocks tick, buildings 
collapse, calendar pages count down in his art; there is even an x-ray of his 
own body in a late collage. But paint glues it all back together, like a 
novelist’s narrative. What is it like to be here, Rauschenberg asks, first to 
last, what is it like to be here and alive?

 * Robert Rauschenberg is at Tate Modern, London until 2 April 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/robert-rauschenberg>
 