
There cannot be a more Guardian thoroughfare in the UK than Bristol’s 
Gloucester Road, which winds and climbs north from the centre into Bishopston 
and claims to be Europe’s longest street of independent businesses. There’s a 
Tesco Express somewhere and a Subway, but otherwise it’s over a mile of small 
concerns: art galleries, jewellers, health food shops, a handmade kids’ 
clothing boutique, and more cafes, bars and restaurants than you could shake an 
organic focaccia at.

And just when I’m thinking this is one of those places where it’s easy to buy 
a handmade card but not a cauliflower, I spot two greengrocers, then a craft 
beer emporium, a fish shop (line-caught tuna, organic salmon), and a couple of 
bakeries and butchers (one selling fresh faggots).
 A butchers on Bristol’s Gloucester Road. Photograph: Colin Boulter 
Many would sneer at the right-on, organic lifestyles of the bearded dads 
pushing big-wheeled buggies around these stone-built terraced streets, but 
Gloucester Road certainly makes for a more interesting afternoon out than the 
same-old of most city high streets.

Related: Bristol ranked fourth in inspiring city list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/23/bristol-ranked-fourth-in-inspiring-city-list>

Perhaps typical of Bishopston businesses is Room 212, an art gallery owned by 
mixed media artist Sarah Thorp and run as collective by the people who show 
there. (One popular print,entitled Coffee and the Paper, by local artist Hannah 
Broadway 
<https://www.etsy.com/uk/listing/191997281/coffee-the-paper-signed-editioned?ref=shop_home_active_25>
 depicts an espresso pot, a coffee cup and a copy of guess which organ.) Behind 
it is a small, eco-friendly holiday let that would be laughably Gloucester Road 
(and laughably Guardian) if it wasn’t so damn cute.
 212 Eco house 
Thorp set up shop here over 20 years ago, when this was the scuzzier end of 
Gloucester Road (former student digs are now family houses with hilly views and 
prices approaching £1m). The derelict Victorian warehouse behind the shop was a 
bit of an eyesore, so eventually she had it demolished.

She hails originally from Tobago, which may explain her unorthodox attitude to 
building: she had wanted to replace the warehouse with a straw-bale 
construction, but that would not have allowed space for a garden.
 The ‘truth window’ shows the mud and straw walls. 
The lime-rendered one-up, one-down cottage we see when we park by a willow 
hedge on the lane behind the gallery is wood-framed (reusing timbers from the 
warehouse) with wood board exterior walls. Opened in May, it has interior walls 
of mud and straw, which can be seen in a “truth” window halfway up the stairs, 
insulation of sheep’s wool, and a living sedum roof – with solar panel.

Which is all fine and good, but importantly the kitchen/dining/living area we 
find inside is also welcoming and well-designed, with repurposed kitchen units 
in pretty duck-egg blue, an oak worktop made by a local carpenter, and a warm 
oak floor (made from offcuts). There are pans and crockery for longer stays 
(mostly local, handmade … you get the picture) and tea, coffee and milk are 
provided.

But it’s the upstairs I like best: the double bed is on a platform in an 
alcove (made from the chunky kingpins of the old warehouse roof) and feels 
excitingly like a ship’s bunk. There are interesting artworks and lamps from 
the shop, and a shower room with tiles in a pattern from the Stokes Croft China 
company down the road. (Stokes Croft – often referred to as the People’s 
Republic of – is probably the only place in Bristol, even Britain, that could 
claim to be hipper than Bishopston.)

The Eco-House sleeps five – with a fold-out single upstairs and sofabed 
downstairs, where there’s also another shower room – and it’s a short bus ride 
from central Bristol and Temple Meads station, making it an excellent 
alternative to a budget hotel.

It’s cool and rainy when we’re there (we’re glad of an electric radiator), but 
in warmer weather the yellow- and terracotta-painted courtyard garden would be 
a perfect place to kick back – and yes, the raised flower beds and seating 
areas are made from old bricks and railway sleepers.

The sheep’s wool keeps noise out as well as cold: we sleep well despite being 
metres from busy Gloucester Road, and next morning, after tea in our “bunk”, 
the only question on our minds is which of the myriad artisanal, handcrafted, 
freshly roasted, organic, ethical options nearby to choose for breakfast.
• Accommodation was provided by Room 212 (07702 598090, room212.co.uk 
<http://www.room212.co.uk/index.php/212-eco-house>, sleeps five, £90 a night, 
two-night minimum)

Ask a local

Laura Robertson, artist <http://www.laurarobertsonartist.co.uk/>
 Joe’s Bakery 
• Shops


One of my favourite places is Pearce’s Hardware at no 295. You can find 
anything you want in there, from kettles to wellies and garden tools, or even a 
belly dancing costume! I get a lot of my pictures framed atCraft Works (no 
355-357) and they are very helpful. It has a wide range of artists’ materials 
for professionals, as well as arts and crafts ideas for kids’ presents. We 
couldn’t survive withoutJoe’s Bakery <http://www.joesbakery.co.uk/>. While 
buying bread, we often end up with some of their delicious doughnuts to keep 
the children going on the walk home from school.

• Food 

For eating in and takeaways, Dev’s Kerala <http://www.devskeralabristol.com/> 
at no 180 offers amazing southern Indian cooking, including not-to-be-missed 
masala dosas.

• Drink

A lovely place for a craft beer is The Grace <http://thegracebristol.uk/> pub, 
which has prints by local artists on the wall.
 