
Stephen King, in his brutal novel Misery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jul/30/rereading-stephen-king-misery>
, about a writer first rescued from a car wreck by a crazed fan and then 
imprisoned and mutilated by her, has his protagonist pronounce that there 
is only one question which the writer of fiction keeps on asking: Can I? This 
question isn’t just about plot; it hides a more complex question about truth, 
namely: does my way forward from here feel truthful and real to the reader? 
And, in my view, every novelist’s working day turns around this necessary 
interrogation.

There are days when I am able to get nearer truthfulness than others. If I’m 
feeling tired or emotionally fragile, I know that my capacity to see with 
an unflinching eye is likely to be compromised. Thus, the success or failure of 
my day is set before it begins, according to how much sleep I’ve managed to 
get. I have always been an atrocious sleeper. At my boarding school I was the 
last girl awake in the dormitory, night after night. So I couldn’t say that any 
two days are exactly the same. Writing with a bad sleep deficit feels like 
sitting an exam for which I’ve done no revision.

Certain physical rituals help both the good days and the bad. A 
lettuce-enhanced cold lunch – taken with my beloved partner, Richard Holmes, in 
a warm kitchen, or on a cool terrace and followed by at least two large cups of 
coffee – usually makes the afternoon writing stint feel possible. Then it’s the 
face-to-face session with the computer screen and the accusatory cursor. 
The relentless winking of this tiny line often reminds me of those bossy 
US signs that flash the word WALK at pedestrian crossings, except that this one 
says WORK.

Sometimes, work does feel punishingly arduous, but let’s not be too 
self-pitying about it. If, along 40 years, I hadn’t found profound happiness 
and intellectual stimulation in the act of writing, then I would long ago have 
abandoned the whole adventure. The fact is that I love doing it and am never 
happier than when embedded with a complex narrative, slowly revealing itself 
over great gulps of time.

I note that some writers, as they get older, say they can’t write for long 
hours any more. Others say they write all the time, even in their sleep! The 
thing for the reader to remember about confessions like this is that writers 
can lie about everything. The habit of making stuff up is deeply ingrained 
in us. But trying to stay as near the truth as I can, I would say that, on a 
good day, I can write for six or seven hours, but never at one stretch. 
Displacement activities such as watering my geraniums or answering emails, or 
remembering little songs and jokes to tell my grandchildren, give my brain much 
needed intervals of rest. And the hardest moment arrives at about 5.30 in the 
afternoon, when my mind has a small chamber of itself open upon the possibility 
of a gin and tonic, yet knows it must hold off for at least another two hours. 
Sometimes, I go to sleep at this point. I lie on my bed and watch the sun go 
down and drift away for a blessed hour, comforted by the awareness that Richard 
is working in his study, that he’s a kind of guardian of this odd little moment 
of absence without leave.

The days few writers talk about are those in which they’ve got no writing to 
do. For me, these are pretty bad. One way of enduring them is to try to start 
something new. Another way is to close the computer, step right out of the 
study, get in the car and go somewhere. It might be expected that I would drive 
to the wild north Norfolk coast and shout at the sea, but actually, where I 
sometimes go is to John Lewis in Norwich. Mock on, if you like, but I find this 
consoling. In the cafe there, I order a cheese scone and a latte, and examine 
the other people taking tea in this genteel space. Many are elderly. Many, or 
so I always assume, have no novels to write, no desk to come home to. And this 
makes me feel lucky. My desk always waits. So, in time – after the scone and 
the latte, or on the following day – I’ll go back to it, refreshed. I’ll sit 
down on my ergonomically friendly blue chair for the hundred-thousandth time 
and once again ask the question: Can I, and try to answer it.
 