
Surrey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> feel like a team on an 
upward curve, as they did a year ago. The reasons for their early-season slump 
were many and varied but chief among them was an inability to get to grips with 
the rigours of Division One, and a host of absent bowlers, mainly through 
injury but also, less ordinarily, through A-Levels.

Sam Curran was the man worrying about coursework deadlines and exam times but 
his return at the start of July has given Surrey balance. The prevailing 
feeling is that the youngest Curran will end up as a silky middle-order batsman 
who bowls as a third or fourth seamer. Yet his left-arm swing continues to 
improve and evolve, as he showed here in taking four for 61 to help dismiss
Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> for 287.

County cricket: Surrey v Lancashire and much more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/23/county-cricket-live-blog-surrey-lancashire>
Curran took his trademark wicket with the new ball, Luke Procter trapped in 
front. But he looks ever more dangerous with the older ball too, such as when 
he returned and bowled Alviro Petersen, who played on trying to leave one that 
swung back. Soon afterwards a hint of inswing forced Steven Croft to edge 
behind to leave Lancashire 99 for five, while later Rob Jones, on debut, 
slashed at a wide one and was bowled off his inside edge.

Those who face Curran, whose run-up is short and small-stepped and whose 
action has no leap, say he is more devilish with a white ball but has a bouncer 
that is tricky to pick. His pace is unlikely to quicken but there is much to 
savour.

It was a good day for Curran to bowl with such zip, given the England selector 
Angus Fraser was in situ, chiefly with an eye on the Lancashire opener Haseeb 
Hameed. For only the fourth time in 12 Championship innings (in which time he 
has four centuries), Hameed failed to reach 50 but he had looked organised and 
elegant until feathering behind pulling Stuart Meaker. The ball was there for 
the stroke; the stroke was not played right.

Hameed had been joined by Liam Livingstone, promoted to No3 as injury forced 
Lancashire to rejig their lineup. Given they are both homegrown batting 
prospects of immense promise, and both of interest to Fraser, Hameed and 
Livingstone could barely be more different. While Hameed is impossibly 
undemonstrative, Livingstone has a swagger and an unhappy knack of getting 
under opponents’ skin; here, though, he accumulated patiently, as well as 
driving with class, for just shy of two hours before edging Tom Curran – an 
England Lions team-mate – behind.

The forgotten story of … Britain’s first floodlit cricket match | The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/the-spin-forgotten-story-first-floodlit-cricket-match>
Jones and Jordan Clark, who drove beautifully down the ground, shared 85 to 
wrestle Lancashire back into the game, while Aaron Lilley and the tail 
aggressively took them close to three batting points. Clark and Lilley, whose 
four sixes contained a pair of lofted off‑drives and a pair of uppercuts, both 
fell to Meaker, the former to a slip catch – a full length dive low to Kumar 
Sangakkara’s right – described by the bowler as “the best I’ve ever seen”. When 
Simon Kerrigan edged Mark Footitt behind to end a handy last‑wicket stand of 
48, Ben Foakes – on a day when he actually kept uncharacteristically untidily – 
had a fifth catch.

Surrey’s attack, with two left- and two right-arm quicks and a spinner, has 
been the key to their recent revival, according to Meaker, who bowled with 
ferocious pace once more. “We’ve got so much depth in our bowling that it 
allows people to have a break between spells,” he said.

Lancashire’s XI look less balanced; short on both batting and bowling, and 
Surrey’s openers’ easy ride to 50 without loss showed that 287 looks under par. 
The only alarm came when Rory Burns, so brutal off his pads, edged the 
penultimate ball of the day to second slip, where Jones shelled a simple chance.
 