
Sam Billings ensured England’s one-day tour of India began with a win, 
anchoring a successful pursuit of 305 against MS Dhoni’s India A in Mumbai.

Billings, fresh from a Big Bash stint with Sydney Sixers, may have owed his 
place in the side to the delayed arrival of new father Joe Root but he made a 
compelling case with a measured 93 as England squeezed home by three wickets at 
the Brabourne Stadium.

Related: Accidental captain MS Dhoni became the man who reshaped cricket | 
Andy Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/captain-ms-dhoni-cricket-ipl-t20>

Billings faced 85 balls and hit eight fours but fell before the job was done, 
Chris Woakes claiming the winning boundary with seven deliveries to spare to 
lay down a strong first marker before the series. For this was no ordinary 
warm-up outing, with Dhoni leading an India side for probably the final time 
following his resignation as ODI captain and joined for the occasion by a host 
of seasoned internationals and more than 20,000 adoring fans.

India A showed their calibre with the bat as Ambati Rayudu retired on 100, 
Shikhar Dhawan and Yuvraj Singh made half-centuries and Dhoni, inevitably, 
capped things with 68 unbeaten runs at the close.

But England showed calm heads to make their way past a challenging target, 
with Jason Roy (62), Jos Buttler (46) and Liam Dawson (41) backing up Billings’ 
centrepiece.

Roy kicked off the pursuit by driving Ashish Nehra’s first ball back down the 
ground for four, setting the tone for an explosive start to the chase. He 
contributed 34 of England’s 58 runs in the first 10 overs, picking on Nehra 
with disregard.

The arrival of Mohit Sharma brought Alex Hales into play, with four fours and 
a six off the seamer seeing him to 40 before Kuldeep Yadav struck with just his 
third delivery.

Roy reverse swept his way past 50 in just 49 balls then lifted Yuzvendra 
Chalal over the square-leg ropes for six. But his adventurous side cost him in 
the end, Yadav picking up a second wicket as a mighty heave resulted in a tame 
top edge.

England were well ahead of the rate but Eoin Morgan’s first England innings in 
four months, the captain having sat out the Bangladesh tour on safety grounds, 
was a brief one. Morgan was hardly to blame though after he was brilliantly 
caught by Dhawan at slip after reverse-sweeping.

That left a rebuilding job for Buttler and Billings, who performed diligently 
before some long straight hits from Buttler and Billings’ wristy reverse sweeps 
upped the tempo. Buttler had deposited Yuvraj for successive sixes but came 
undone seeking a third off Yadav and was easily held at long-off for 46.

Related: Eoin Morgan’s family ‘offended’ by criticism over his Bangladesh 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/eoin-morgan-family-offended-england-bangladesh-cricket>

Moeen Ali was lbw for a duck two balls later, giving Yadav four wickets, and 
once again Billings was left to steady things. He found a doughty ally in 
Dawson, with the pair running hard and often to keep ahead of the game as 
boundaries became scarce.

Dawson, then Billings, stumbled before the line. The latter lost his leg stump 
to Pandya, shuffling across the crease, and stared aghast at the night sky 
before trudging off. before some long straight hits from Buttler and Billings’ 
wristy reverse sweeps upped the ante.

Buttler had deposited Yuvraj for successive sixes but came undone seeking a 
third off Yadav and was easily held at long-off for 46.

Moeen Ali was lbw for a duck two balls later, giving Yadav four wickets, and 
once again Billings was left to steady things. He found a doughty ally in 
Dawson, with the pair running hard and often to keep ahead of the game as 
boundaries became scarce.

Billings looked in control and successive fours off Nehra in 40th over left 
England needing 59 from the final 10, just under one-per-ball.

The straightforward path was never likely and first Dawson, then Billings, 
stumbled before the line. The latter lost his leg stump to Pandya, shuffling 
across the crease, and stared aghast at the night sky before trudging off.

But Woakes ensured there were no further dramas and a well-earned win was 
England’s in the penultimate over.
 