
So you’ve been told you need an operation. Can you be sure that you really 
should go under the knife? What is the risk of having surgery? Or the risk of 
not having it? Is the timing of the operation ideal for you? Is your hospital 
any good? Is your smart and smooth-talking surgeon with an excellent bedside 
manner competent?

More than 30 years have passed since I stood as a mere medical student before 
an audience of distinguished surgeons and delivered a talk in which I examined 
the success rates of their operations. I did not expect to be ostracised for 
daring to bring this into the open and I would never have anticipated this 
early skirmish with the medical establishment would lead to a lifelong 
dedication to the evaluation and improvement of surgical outcomes.

The subsequent two decades brought about a revolution in medical care in the 
UK. For the first time, the quality of care became measurable and, as a direct 
consequence, my own speciality of heart surgery made a quantum leap towards 
better and safer outcomes for patients.


A day in the life of ... a consultant cardiac surgeon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/aug/17/consultant-cardiac-surgeon-day-life>
Why write a book about it? Well, the public has a right to know what happens 
behind the operating room door. The “patient” is evolving into a “healthcare 
consumer”. There are reams of data available about the myriad medical and 
surgical treatments and the people who dish them out. My book provides you with 
the tools to interpret this information. Also, the study of medical risk is a 
young science that is constantly breaking new ground – and it is fascinating.


Not so long ago, even the most eminent doctors treated patients with 
absolutely no evidence that their treatments did any good. In fact, many 
treatments did a lot of harm. Nowadays, doctors practise evidence-based 
medicine, meaning that the effectiveness and safety of the treatment is backed 
by solid, scientific facts. The next step on the ladder towards even better 
medicine is how well these treatments are administered. This covers everything 
from performance of an operation through to the preoperative and postoperative 
care. It also includes the safety and quality mechanisms integrated into the 
structure and the governance of the hospital providing the treatment. This 
medical “breakthrough” is recent and has only just begun, in the last 20 years 
or so, to receive the attention it deserves.


Many things contribute to your surviving an operation. Discoveries in this 
field have been true eye-openers. Good technical surgery is very important, but 
surprisingly human factors, including holidays, recent events, communications 
and surgeons’ personalities, play a part. In fact, the only factor that seems 
to make not a scintilla of difference to whether you survive an operation is 
your choice ofanaesthetist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/secret-life-anaesthetist-surgery-doctor>
.


What are your experiences of the NHS?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/what-are-your-experiences-of-the-nhs>
Data about surgical outcomes are now in the public domain in Britain. We are 
now beginning to have true transparency in healthcare and, in that regard, 
heart surgery leads the way. Transparency, although generally considered a good 
thing, also has unintended and nasty consequences that can cause patient harm. 
In The Naked Surgeon, I show the benefits of transparency, but also draw 
attention to the many pitfalls. In addition, I hope to give you insight into my 
world of heart surgery, one full of drama and humanity.


At one time or another we all have to make decisions about our health. 
Understanding the system, its mechanisms and thought processes, can help us 
make the right decisions about what can often be a matter of life or death. 
That’s why I wrote The Naked Surgeon.


Extract 

What is amazing about heart surgery is not that it exists and works, but that 
it took so long to appear. After all, the heart is a pump, pure and simple. 
When something goes wrong with a pump, it is a plumbing problem, needing 
plumbing solutions. How else do you fix a blockage in a pipe, or a leaky valve? 
Yet, for more than 2,000 years, the heart was exclusively the domain of the 
physician, not the surgeon, and woe betide the surgeon who dared touch it. The 
taboo on operating on the heart was so strong that Theodor Billroth, one of the 
great founding fathers of modern surgery, stated in 1889 that “a surgeon who 
tries to suture a heart wound deserves to lose the esteem of his colleagues”.


More about The Naked Surgeon

Doctors are supposed to have a bedside manner: Nashef has the authorial 
counterpart, a knack of even making you care, for instance, about the 
mechanical properties of the suture material Prolene (this isn’t a mere 
technicality but a life-and-death matter about which Nashef cares deeply). –
Peter Forbes 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-naked-surgeon-by-samefr-nashef-book-review-the-truth-about-the-operating-table-10314184.html>

Buy the book

The Naked Surgeon by Samer Nashef is published by Scribe Publications at £8.99 
. and isavailable from the Guardian Bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/naked-surgeon-441897.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.


 