
When I was a young writer, a powerful literary man took an interest in my 
work. This man, who had discovered authors who later became famous, was a 
notorious bully, but he fawned over the short stories I sent him. His attention 
was thrilling while it lasted, but he ultimately dismissed me. At 19, he said I 
was too young to be taken seriously, and more than that, he said I’d never be a 
successful writer until I stopped “holding back” in my work.


I stopped writing for several years after that, but his comment that I was 
holding back haunted me. While I forgot almost everything he’d said, I couldn’t 
forget that. I knew it was true.

 Almost a decade later, I attempted to write my novel Dietland, which had 
grown out of a new short story about a fat young woman who works at a magazine 
for teen girls in New York, and how she feels like an outcast, thanks to her 
body and her feminism. This story was inspired in part by my personal 
experiences, and I had never before written anything like it. At that time, I 
still felt incredible shame about my fatness.

The story was scary to write, but it was also exhilarating. For once, I 
stopped holding back, and my writing had a new energy. When I took the story to 
my writing workshop, I felt self-conscious, but I’d had a breakthrough that 
made the embarrassment worth it. I knew this story could be the beginning of a 
novel.

Dietland author Sarai Walker: 'London is the most fat-shaming place I’ve been'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/27/dietland-author-sarai-walker-london-is-the-most-fat-shaming-place-ive-been>
 I started working on Dietland, but within a year I abandoned it, lacking the 
courage to continue. My vision for the novel was radical, and writing it would 
require me to be completely uninhibited over hundreds of pages, which would 
send me to a dark place. What’s more, I knew that if the novel was published, 
my family would read it, and that people in the conservative, religious place 
where I grew up would read it – and this hindered me. I feared that almost 
everyone who read it, whether they knew me or not, would assume the heroine was 
me. Women’s fiction is often read as nothing more than thinly disguised 
autobiography, and since my heroine is fat, and I’m fat, we’d be viewed 
interchangeably. If I’d wanted the burden of personal exposure, I would have 
written a memoir, but I wanted the freedom of fiction, a freedom I knew I’d be 
denied. So I gave up the novel, and felt relieved.

 A few years later, I moved to Europe to begin a PhD, alternating between 
London and Paris. I became depressed for a variety of reasons, suffering a 
major life crisis that lasted for well over a year. I sunk to the lowest place 
I’ve ever been, and then, as I slowly began to emerge from this horrible 
period, I picked up Dietland again.

After what I’d been through, Dietland’s darkness no longer scared me. This 
newfound courage, combined with my status as an expat, proved to be an 
intoxicating mix. I floated around, living in different places, sometimes 
spending hours a day walking the city streets, stopping in cafes to write, 
surrounded by strangers. I could be anyone I wanted. Disconnected from home and 
who I had been there, I wrote without holding anything back.

Top 10 novels about women's political awakening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/top-10-novels-about-womens-political-awakening>
A new writer self emerged, one who was fearless. As I wrote, I pretended that 
no one would ever read my book, and so I didn’t worry about what anyone would 
think of me. I faced what it means to be a fat woman in a misogynist culture 
without flinching, and I wrote about it in the brutal way it deserves. The more 
uncomfortable I felt, the harder I pushed, and the more I pushed the more I 
began to like it. It was like the writer’s version of a runner’s high. The 
intensity of this period lasted for a couple years, and when I was done I had a 
mass of raw material that would take a few more years to shape into a novel.

Looking back, I sometimes think of the person who wrote Dietland as “she”, not 
me. I was able to channel a part of myself that I don’t have easy access to in 
my daily life. I am not fearless, far from it. Maybe my writer self is the 
ideal me. Or maybe she scares me and has to be locked away, the madwoman in my 
attic.

But the ordinary me is the one who has to face the reading public and the 
media. The reaction is what I had originally feared. I’m often made to feel as 
if I didn’t publish a novel, but my personal diary. In media interviews on 
three continents now, I’ve had to discuss my body, my vulnerabilities and 
painful memories, serving myself up on a platter for scrutiny and judgment.

Sometimes when I’m being interviewed, I want to say: ‘Wait! A different part 
of me wrote this novel, not the part of me you’re interviewing.’ But no one 
would understand that. I could blame my fearless writer self for putting me 
into these situations, but I can’t. She’s given me tremendous gifts, not only 
the gift of the novel I always wanted to write, but the gift of writing away 
the shame I felt about my body. She liberated me, and I’ll always be grateful 
to her for that.

Extract

Every day on page three of the Daily Sun there was a full-page color photo of 
a topless young woman. The British newspaper, which interviewed prime ministers 
and helped decide elections, had been printing photos of topless young women on 
page three for decades. These “Page Three girls,” as they were affectionately 
known, sometimes went on to achieve great things in modelling or reality TV. A 
couple of them ended up strangled by ex-boyfriends or jealous lovers, but that 
could happen to any girl. Over the years, there had been halfhearted campaigns 
to ban the photographs in the newspaper, but they were never successful.

The newly installed CEO of Empire Media, who oversaw the newspaper division, 
was only 40 years old and a woman. She represented a new generation in the 
company, but like her male predecessors, she carried on the page-three 
tradition in the Daily Sun and ignored any complaints she received. Empire 
Media owned newspapers and television stations in the United Kingdom, the 
United States, Hong Kong, and Australia. “The sun never sets on Empire Media,” 
their founder liked to say. The CEO was aware of what had happened in Los 
Angeles to Simmons and Green – Empire Media’s many publications and news 
channels had chronicled it all. “Who is Jennifer?” the front page of the Daily 
Sun had asked. In her own way, the CEO was fond of Jennifer, whatever she was. 
The mystery was good for business.

The CEO was fond of her until, one day, she wasn’t.

One morning she received news that her twin brother and his young son had been 
kidnapped on a trip to Scotland. It was several days before the kidnappers made 
contact and until then the CEO and her family didn’t know what they wanted. 
When their request finally came, it was laughable. The CEO laughed. The 
kidnappers didn’t want money. What they wanted was for the CEO to end the 
topless models on page three. “No more naked girls,” said the note, signed with 
the name Jennifer. “Show us some cock … ”

When the cocks started appearing on page three, there were immediate protests 
from media watchdog groups, from parents and government ministers, who claimed 
the photos were indecent. Many newsagents began to keep the Daily Sun behind 
the counter, lest anyone be offended. Some of them refused to sell it at all or 
even touch it. The circulation dropped by half during the first week. In media 
surveys, men said they were too embarrassed to read the paper. “I’m not gay,” 
said a man who was interviewed. The CEO knew cocks were bad for business. 
Breasts she could get away with.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> knew their place, but with men 
it wasn’t as simple.

More about the book

We are so mired in belittling speech and suggestive images of women’s bodies 
that it’s easy to be lulled into a sense of acclimation and normalcy. For 
people who aren’t familiar with the idea of rape culture and think the Blurred 
Lines music video is just a fun sexy time, this novel will feel hysterical, 
jumping as it does from a sad fat woman nervous about eating a scone in public, 
to a strangled porn king with his own penis in his mouth. But you never really 
acclimate, if your sense of your own value and worth has been irrevocably tied 
to these images. If you’ve lived in this culture – if you’ve ever been a young 
woman who is trying to eat so little or eat so much that she disappears – the 
jump won’t seem extreme. And you may take some cold comfort from Dietland, and 
its opportunities for vicarious revenge. –Lydia Kiesling
Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/11/dietland-sarai-walker-review-rape-culture>

Buy the book

Dietland by Sarai Walker is published by Atlantic Books at £8.99 and from the 
Guardian Bookshop for £7.37 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dietland.html>.
 