
At the start of The Master and Margarita, a mysterious stranger approaches two 
men called Bezdomny and Berlioz. This stranger is oddly dressed and has black 
and green eyes, leading to the obvious conclusion that he must be “a foreigner”.

 The mysterious stranger, who later claims to be called Woland, is soon 
explaining how Berlioz will die, after slipping on oil and having his head 
removed. Within minutes, Bezdomny is horrified to see the prediction come true: 
Berlioz loses his footing and a passing tram knocks his block off. Bezdomny 
decides that the foreigner is trouble. That he must, in fact, be hunted down 
and taken off the streets by the police.

At the start of the book, I held a similar opinion: I assumed that sinister 
Woland was responsible for the death. This impression was compounded by 
numerous hints that Woland was actually Satan – we’re all programmed to think 
the worst of Old Nick, after all.

As more characters began to disappear, and confusion and terror spread 
throughout Moscow, I thought that I was seeing confirmation of Woland’s ill 
intentions. Yet Bulgakov also skilfully allowed doubt to creep in. For 
instance, there’s a fine set piece where he has Woland pose as a conjuror 
promising to reveal the secrets behind his tricks in a sellout theatre show – 
and so makes us question the nature of the novel’s already precarious reality. 
Is there really a devil doing these things, or is it in the minds of 
spectators? Is it some kind of collective nervous breakdown? Is it all shade 
and mirrors?

Probably not. Woland has a giant talking cat as an assistant, and carries out 
a stage trick in which a man’s head is removed and carries on talking, which is 
likely not the trick of a mere illusionist.

Other elements are puzzling me: Bezdomny’s account of Berlioz’s death is 
questioned when the poor man ends up in psychiatric hospital. As we’re led 
through events again, we realise that Woland didn’t actually cause the death, 
even if he knew about it in advance. A pattern emerges of people asking for the 
punishments they receive: the women who find themselves almost naked on the 
streets do so because they show such avidity for new, free dresses; men who 
land in trouble for possessing foreign currency do so because they were so keen 
to make easy money. It’s also significant that the victims of Woland’s tricks 
also tend to be absurd bureaucrats who abuse their power and those around them.

In this world turned upside down, it starts to seem as if Woland might even be 
doing everyone a favour. “Heads is tails,” as Mick Jagger sings in Sympathy for 
the Devil. Observant readers may also recall that the novel opens with the 
following quotation from Goethe’s Faust:

Say at last – who art thou?
That Power I serve
Which wills forever evil
Yet does forever good.

There’s another facet to this feeling that Woland’s brand of devilry may not 
be all that bad – asReading group contributor Deadgod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/07/reading-group-the-master-and-margarita-is-our-book-for-june#comment-75926613>
 highlighted last week when he asked: “When you read The Master and Margarita, 
do you get a sense that there’s something really evil in its world?”

This question is interesting, not just because of the way Bulgakov leads us to 
wonder about Woland’s morality, but also because it highlights something else 
about the novel: its brightness and absurdity. In the early pages at least, 
there’s an absence of real malice or even – give or take the odd tram – danger. 
Woland’s victims are safely packed off to a warm asylum, or have their heads 
replaced for them, or find clothes eventually. It feels carnivalesque rather 
than hellish.

It’s also very funny. Some of the jokes are sly. One of the first things we 
are told about Berlioz is that he is “unaccustomed to unusual happenings”. Poor 
man.

Sometimes the jokes are blunt: “What is all this? Get him out of here, devil 
take me!” cries the chairman of the Commission on Spectacles and Light 
Entertainment when he is visited by one of Woland’s helpers. “Devil take you? 
That, in fact, can be done!” the helper replies, whisking the chairman away and 
leaving his empty suit behind, still working as if nothing had happened. And at 
other times, the jokes fly by so fast they are easily missed - as when 
Varenukha picks up the telephone and casually begins to “lie” into the 
mouthpiece.

This comedy in the early Moscow sections gives the book a light and airy feel. 
So too does the dreamlike progression of the narrative with its sudden 
surprises, logical twists and permanently baffled subjects. It’s also notable 
that Woland is first described as a “transparent citizen” and a “phantasm” – 
while his strange crew of helpers are forever disappearing into the mist.

So far, so insubstantial. It’s all very surreal. Except, of course, it isn’t. 
Bulgakov has created a mad version of Moscow, a chaotic place controlled by a 
wielder of unaccountable, unpredictable power. People have no agency or control 
over their fate. Many of them disappear suddenly, for reasons undiscoverable. 
There’s a barely mentioned secret police force that terrifies everyone, endless 
societies known by nonsensical acronyms, and men living with lavish privileges 
despite their supposedly classless society. And writers are not free: “I 
couldn’t help feeling,” says the Master in a telling complaint, “that the 
people writing those articles were not saying what they really wanted to say 
and that this was the cause of their fury.”

In other words, it’s just like Stalinist Russia. Much of The Master and 
Margarita would have felt all too familiar to contemporary Russians – if they 
had been able to read it. Even apparently random events can have chilling 
resonance. Think of the character Aiosy, who is found delirious, in his 
underwear and carrying a suitcase “for some reason”. That “some reason” is the 
same one that had real people all over Moscow keeping their own suitcases close 
at hand: you never knew when they police might appear to take you on a sudden 
trip, far from home. And that’s no laughing matter. Like most goodMenippean 
satires <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menippean_satire>, The Master and 
Margarita ends up feeling all too substantial. The exact nature of Woland’s 
game remains a puzzle. There might not be evil in the strange world Bulgakov 
has created, but he leaves us in no doubt about the place where he actually 
lived.
 