
Until recently, the only people you would find in the Brunswick Centre were 
lost tourists and film-goers trying to find the nearby Renoir cinema. Now look 
at it: there are people here! Neat clusters of them, scattered about the 
open-air plaza, eating lunch, sitting at cafes, shopping or just sitting around 
talking. Such activity would be unremarkable in your average shopping street, 
but in the Brunswick, it's miraculous. The building has always had its 
admirers, but for decades this corner of Bloomsbury has been one of the most 
miserable places in London - a rain-streaked, litter-strewn concrete bunker of 
empty shop units, whose ambitious, space-age design only accentuated its sense 
of failure.

So what's changed? Very little, actually. One of the most remarkable things 
about the Brunswick's renaissance is how straightforward it was. In essence, 
much of what they have been doing is what the architect intended to do in the 
first place. The shopfronts have been spruced up, and a Waitrose has been 
inserted - but, most importantly, the complex has been cleaned and painted. The 
fact that this has taken some 40 years is a sad illustration of how politics, 
business and neglect can ruin a utopian vision. But the Brunswick's revival 
also suggests that some of British architecture's radical experiments in the 
1960s and 1970s were condemned far too quickly.

By anyone's standards, the Brunswick is a radical building. It would be a 
great setting for a sci-fi movie, with its huge concrete frame, elevated 
walkways and stepped ranks of apartments with curious angled windows. It's such 
an odd building, variously called a "superblock" or a "megastructure". Its 
banked ramparts and soaring service towers bring to mind the fantasy designs of 
the Italian futurist Antonio Sant'Elia; but more commonly, the Brunswick's raw 
concrete and structural articulation put it firmly in the new brutalist school, 
alongside other ambitious structures of the time, such as Sheffield's Park Hill 
housing estate or London's Trellick Tower.

New brutalism is virtually a dirty term these days. It started out as an 
appropriately no-nonsense style for Britain's postwar, post-colonial identity - 
honest in its expression of materials, practical, populist and cheap, yet 
forward-looking. But rather than transforming Britain into a modernist utopia, 
new brutalism often helped generate the "crap towns" of the future, especially 
since it became the house style for welfare architecture.

To its architect, Patrick Hodgkinson, the building has no such affiliations: 
"I didn't hold with new brutalism, myself. I just prayed for the day we would 
be able to paint it." If Hodgkinson was influenced by anybody, he says, it was 
Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, in whose office he had worked as a student. The 
original intention was to build the Brunswick out of brick, just as Aalto would 
have done. "I didn't think we had any chance of using the same brick all along 
the scheme. But we did specify that the concrete would be painted. It was only 
after I left in 1970 that they decided not to paint it. I thought, 'That's 
damned stupid.' I knew that that concrete, which was very cheap, would never 
stay fair-faced. And of course, after a few years it started getting filthy."

Hodgkinson, now 75, started designing the Brunswick in 1959. The site was 
originally streets of run-down terraced housing. It was bought by a private 
developer, who intended to build two large tower blocks, and make a tidy 
profit. He subsequently discovered that the London County Council (LCC) would 
not permit buildings higher than 80ft on the site, so he turned to the LCC's 
former chief architect, Leslie Martin, designer of the Royal Festival Hall. 
Martin ran a modest atelier-style operation and would pass on excess work to 
his colleagues, which is how Hodgkinson ended up with the Brunswick.

The brief was to come up with a design that achieved the same density as two 
tower blocks, without exceeding the height limit. Hodgkinson's solution was to 
put the housing in two rows, leaving an open shopping street in the middle, 
with two basement levels of car parking. The stepped design, he says, opened up 
the shopping street to the sky. It also ensured that every apartment would 
receive at least two hours of direct sunlight a day.

Hodgkinson conceived the Brunswick as a modern London village, with family 
homes, a cinema, shops and even health facilities, but it was not to be. By 
1964, big changes were afoot. The new Labour government passed laws requiring 
compensation for evicted tenants, such as those making way for the Brunswick. 
Overnight, the whole scheme became unviable.

Hodgkinson brokered a solution: the newly formed borough of Camden would take 
over the housing and rehouse the evicted tenants, so the developers agreed to 
go ahead. "There were going to be 16 housing types, from ritzy penthouses to 
hostels for local student medics, but Camden only wanted bedsits, one-bedroom 
and two-bedroom apartments. So there would have been a much better mix of 
people, but it turned into a council housing ghetto." Around the same time, the 
developer sold the project to McAlpine, whose insistence on a cheap, rapid 
completion led to Hodgkinson's departure. Thus what opened in 1972 was heavily 
compromised. The retailers stayed away, the detailed design was unfinished - 
and nobody saw the point of spending money on a paint job.

Various attempts have been made to resurrect the Brunswick, but it was only in 
the late 1990s that someone succeeded. Part of the reason current owners Allied 
London managed it was that they invited Hodgkinson back. He brought in David 
Levitt and David Bernstein, who worked with him on the original.

Levitt now lives in the Brunswick. The apartments are a little small - you 
couldn't fit a full-size tub in the bathroom - but they are homely and 
extremely light, especially Levitt's, as he's knocked through many of the 
internal walls. About 100 of the 400 units are privately owned, he says, many 
by architects and designers. Flats that sold for £150,000 a few years ago are 
now closer to £300,000, and there's a long waiting list.

The building has leaked, and its services have been difficult to upgrade, but 
the refurbishment suggests that many of the Brunswick's flaws were simply 
cosmetic. The same could be said of many similar structures. Funky developers 
Urban Splash, who have transformed many Victorian warehouses into fashionable 
apartment complexes, are now spotting Brunswick-like potential in discarded 
1960s concrete structures around the country. Their Three Towers scheme in 
Manchester is a case in point.

"They were 1960s council blocks the council couldn't even let out," says Urban 
Splash's Tom Bloxham. "They didn't know what to do with them so put them up for 
sale. They were expecting them to be knocked down but we reclad them in a 
bright wood. We also made the balconies into interior spaces, and put some 
interesting corner glazing on them, so they look like new buildings. The layout 
of the apartments was fine, though. Ironically, some of the flats built for 
social housing are bigger than flats designed today for private housing."

Similarly, their transformation of Birmingham's Rotunda - basically a bland, 
circular tower - had buyers queuing over the weekend, and sold out within an 
hour, even though it's years from completion. Their latest challenge is to 
revamp Sheffield's Park Hill estate - one of the largest and least popular 
housing developments of the era. Park Hill, with its streets in the sky, has 
had a history as chequered as that of the Brunswick. "It will be a challenge," 
says Bloxham. "Like most of these buildings, its problems were definitely less 
to do with the architecture than the way they were managed." He adds that one 
big problem with these estates was that, once things started to go into 
decline, the people who were the most articulate and capable of putting up a 
fight voted with their feet and moved out, thus accelerating the problem. 
"That's not quite the case with Park Hill because a lot of people are very 
passionate about staying there. I think it's got a great future."

Hodgkinson, too, is looking to the future. Now that the retailing has been 
fixed, a new stage of work is about to start at the Brunswick: to repair and 
redecorate the windows and balconies. He also hopes to add a new restaurant and 
build another level of housing on top, which would broaden the mix of tenants. 
In short, the eventual Brunswick could be something along the lines of what was 
originally intended. "I spent the whole of my 30s doing it," says Hodgkinson. 
"And I turned down a lot of other work because I wanted to concentrate on this. 
Maybe I've mismanaged my life - but the Brunswick has become my major work."
 