
I don’t have time to write. There are too many emails to answer, too many tax 
and VAT issues to be sorted out and too many events at festivals, bookshops and 
conferences. There is cricket and tennis to be played, world wars to 
commemorate, friends to be met, plays and films to be seen, children to be 
encouraged and good causes to be supported.

Another good way of not writing is doing “research”. I spent two months in 
Paris earlier this year, wandering the streets and looking for people to have 
dinner with. You end up saying yes to everything. A nice woman at the American 
library asked if I would come and talk to her writing group on a houseboat. In 
English you think: “Dream on.” In French, you say: “Mais oui, volontiers.”

I was in Paris to look for “inspiration”, I told anyone who was kind enough to 
ask. Before I went, I tried to bring everything up to date in London. This 
included ringing the motor insurance people to renew the car cover. “Not a 
problem,” said the nice man. I gave him the details. “Not a problem,” he 
confirmed. I told him I was off to Paris to search for inspiration. 
“Inspiration?” he said. “Not a problem.”

Nor was it, really. Loneliness focuses the mind pretty well; it sharpens the 
receptors. Though nothing works as well as the greatest element in all human 
endeavour: luck. To be reading the right book at the right time; to remember 
something random from many years ago that connects two disparate ideas flying 
through your head … In theory, I came back from Paris with the outline of a 
novel called Paris Pygmy and three notebooks full of jottings. That was on 31 
March, but I just haven’t had a chance to open the notebooks yet.

Writing articles for newspapers about writing books – that also helpfully 
takes up writing time. Asking myself if I have a “routine” has become the only 
writing routine I still have. I wish I could remember otherwise, but answering 
the question so often has erased the memory of any regular procedure.

Do I have a room where I write? Search me. I think there was one once, but I 
could no longer say where. And where do I get my ideas from? That at least is 
an easy question. I get them from a well outside a small mining village in New 
South Wales. I have a cottage there now, but am not prepared to reveal the name 
of the village. You can probably find it on GoogleMaps, though, if you type in 
“well” and “ideas”.

Another excellent way of not writing is to update your website. There are so 
many parts of it that need attention now – the last three novels are lacking 
summaries, the audio-visual is out of date and so on. Going on Twitter is 
helpful, too, as I can then link into learned articles recommended by people I 
follow. I like to read about theSykes-Picot pact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/apr/08/lawrence-of-arabia-wouldnt-have-been-surprised-by-the-rise-of-isis>
. This often takes up more time than the compulsory Times crossword.

In summer the test matches demand commitment. If I leave the room before Joe 
Root <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joe-root> is established at the crease 
I feel it’s my fault if he’s out cheaply and a middle order collapse follows. 
Joe needs my active support. Regrettably, the aggressive style of modern 
cricket means the five-day matches seldom go the distance, so there is, 
hypothetically, a danger of doing some writing on a Monday. But the email 
backlog takes care of that.

Once I used to draw the curtains, put in earplugs, take the phone off the 
hook, and make tea in a Thermos so there was no excuse to leave the desk. Once, 
on a roll withHuman Traces, I even toyed with the idea of installing a catheter.

But, really. I ask you. What sort of existence is that? Drilling down 50 
fathoms into the internal lives of people who don’t exist? Not writing, by 
contrast, is more various and more challenging. It’s a life.

• Where My Heart Used to Beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/26/where-my-heart-used-to-beat-sebastian-faulks-review>
 is published by Vintage
 