
The revelation that supreme court justice Antonin Scalia died while 
vacationing with members of the exclusive and highly secretive International 
Order of St Hubertus, a hunting club with roots that go back to Austria in the 
1600s, was a shock to some – but in fact it is very common for the political 
and corporate elite to hold memberships in secret societies with odd 
traditions. Here are some of the stranger groups alive around the world today.

Bernie Sanders is a longtime member of the Clubber Victory Affiliation, a 
secretive group based out of Vermont that believes Clubber Lang should have 
prevailed over Rocky in classic Sylvester Stallone boxing epic Rocky III. The 
CVA has to date self-financed and produced four unlicensed sequels starring the 
Lang character, and rumor has it that Sanders’ performance as Mickey, who in 
this alternate series has abandoned Rocky to train Lang, is terrible.

Media magnate Sumner Redstone and Viacom CEO Philippe Dauman are founding 
members of ska-core tribute band Knock on Wood, a band known for performing 
covers of Mighty Mighty Bosstones songs for select, invitation-only audiences. 
To date, Redstone has handled lead vocals while Dauman has been relegated to 
dancing wildly downstage, but Redstone’s ailing health has some speculating 
that Dauman might be taking over as frontman in the near future.

Before they were failed Republican presidential candidates, Carly Fiorina and 
Rick Santorum were already keeping company as members of Rattenkönig, a club 
devoted to capturing wild rats and storing them en masse in empty paint cans, 
pillowcases, or buckets in an attempt to manufacture rat kings.

Since 1985, Senate majority Leader Mitch McConnell has spent every third 
Tuesday evening draped in a thick velvet robe in a heavily guarded secret 
location navigating the draconian bylaws of the Tickle Bugs, a group known for 
their thick velvet robes, draconian bylaws, and cool name.

When Russian president Vladimir Putin isn’t too busy running his country, he 
keeps himself busy as the founder of a select society of amateur sleuths who 
challenge themselves to reunite lost umbrellas with their owners. To date, the 
group has failed to find homes for any of the lost umbrellas and its activities 
have in fact led to the deaths of over a dozen Russian citizens suspected of 
lying about losing an umbrella.

Presidential hopeful and Texas senator Ted Cruz is the only member of the 
United States Senate who is not a member of theTed Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> Stinks Society, which makes 
lunchtime while the Senate is in session very, very lonely for Cruz and 
actually inspired his current campaign, because as president they’ll have no 
choice but to talk to him – at least once in a while.

The failings of Jeb Bush’s recent campaign for the same key government post 
were perhaps presaged by his long involvement with the Tamers, a group 
committed to endeavoring to domesticate wild tigers through thoughtful rhetoric 
and, if that fails, the plaintive command: “Please domesticate.”

In 2007, Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> founded the Orderus 
Latinatius, a group dedicated to coming up with phrases that sound like they 
might be in Latin, but are in fact total gibberish. After finding himself 
banned from Italy, the successor state to the Roman empire, Zuckerberg took the 
Orderus underground, retrained its key adherents in survival skills and 
hunkered down to plot his revenge. He still makes occasional forays into the 
tech world, for example personally designing the new Facebook like buttons this 
week.
 