
Well, this is weird. Twenty minutes ago, I was sat in rush-hour traffic, 
outside B&M Bargains in Preston. Now, I'm stood in a room where James I once 
tried to cure scrofula, or the "king's evil", back when it was thought a royal 
touch could heal the skin disease. Long before the landed gentry started 
opening their houses to oiks like us.

That is the dramatic disconnect you can expect at Hoghton Tower, a grand, 
16th-century castellated country house, home to the de Hoghton family, which, 
in one of its atmospheric courtyards, includes a self-catering apartment, the 
Irishman's Tower, where two people can secrete themselves away. It is a cosy 
nook: a compact, split-level space with both modern amenities (iPod dock, 
Wi-Fi) and oodles of charm.

Slick luxury you can get anywhere, at a price, and the tower has that. With 
its toasty underfloor heating, handsome Roca and Grohe fixtures and thick 
cotton towels, the bathroom is bang-on. But it is the small mullioned windows; 
the sections of rugged exposed stone wall; an open log fire; the heavy curtains 
across an ancient oak front door, that give this apartment that rarer quality: 
real character.

The elevated views, back down Hoghton's long drive, are magnificent. Squint 
and you might even spy the Irish Sea. But what to do for kicks in all that wet, 
vividly green Lancashire countryside? Eat well, walk lots, drink good beer, of 
course. It is just a short drive to the Ribble Valley, a genuine gastro hub. 
Stock up atHuntley's food hall <http://www.huntleys.co.uk/> in Samlesbury or 
eat at theFreemasons at Wiswell <http://www.freemasonsatwiswell.com/>. For such 
sharp cooking, its two-course £15.95 seasonal menu is a real steal.

Closer to home, in Pleasington, you'll find the Clog & Billycock 
<http://www.theclogandbillycock.com/>, one of Michelin-starred Northcote chef 
Nigel Haworth's excellent diffusion pubs. Of two walkable locals, I headed to 
the TV and music-free Thwaites house, the Royal Oak in Riley Green. Back at the 
tower, beneath a voluminous duvet, I slept the sleep of the just. And the 
slightly merry.
 Irishman's Tower, Hoghton Tower, Lancashire Photograph: Thomas de Hoghton 
Gripes? Well, I was presented with several pages of documents to sign, 
relating to use of the Wi-Fi. A first. Bread, even Waitrose bread, is not so 
much use if the welcome pack doesn't contain butter. Toiletries from an old 
family firm in Chorley, are a nice touch, but Droyts only makes traditional 
glycerine soaps, so no shampoo.

That tower guests also have to pay to enter the gardens and house (£2.20 
gardens/£8 house and gardens) – which have links to Shakespeare and Dickens – 
seems penny-pinching. Hoghton Tower is a charitable trust, but, even so, when 
paying more than £100 a night, that might rankle. But otherwise, this is a 
special occasion destination guaranteed to wow.

• For more on Lancashire, see visitlancashire.com 
<http://www.visitlancashire.com>. Travel from Manchester to Preston was 
provided by First TransPennine Express (tpexpress.co.uk 
<http://www.tpexpress.co.uk>)
 