
The story of the tragic death of 17-month-old Peter Connelly in 2007, and the 
reasons why professionals failed to prevent it, are well known. So what could 
justify a new book on the case by Ray Jones, The Story of Baby P, which claims 
to “set the record straight”, and yet another BBC documentary,Baby P: the 
Untold Story <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04n6sm0>? Why, given it had many 
features similar to other tragedies that have impacted on social work, is this 
case still making headlines, seven years on?

The answer lies in the new insights that are emerging about the case, the 
subsequent tribunals and the media coverage. This shows the true extent to 
which, through the media construction of “Baby Peter”, child protection became 
a deeply politicised issue. Indeed, as Jones argues, the death of Peter soon 
became secondary to the manner in which politicians and media barons at the 
highest levels used the case to meet their own ends. Another child, Victoria 
Climbie, died six years earlier while, like Peter, under the watch of Haringey 
council. Spurious connections between the deaths were made by politicians that 
had less to do with improving child protection services than undermining 
reputedly “loony left” local government.

Links are made between David Cameron and Rebekah Brooks and the manner in 
which it is argued the Sun newspaper owned and shaped the story. In particular, 
the Metropolitan police were let off the hook despite palpable failures in 
investigating and bringing the case to court. All the emphasis was placed on 
blaming the social work staff for Peter’s death. Cameron and other senior 
politicians such as Michael Gove, Brooks and the Met co-existed within a 
network of power and privilege that was highly personal – mixing at family 
meals, horse riding, commuting on trains. This must be seen in the context of 
what is now known via the Leveson inquiry about relationships between the 
police, corruption and illegal phone hacking practices at News International. 
The Met are held to have failed Peter, and to have broken ranks to leak 
material and brief the media against social workers. The Met blamed them in a 
manner that went against good inter-agency protocols surrounding public 
statements in such cases, all while minimising their own failures.

Ofsted are strongly criticised for the manner in which they changed their 
initial positive inspection of Haringey children’s social care to a negative 
one after the case hit the headlines, seeming to come under the political 
influence of Ed Balls to do so. Balls was at the time secretary of state for 
children, schools and families. Ormond Street hospital trust is said to have 
assessed staff performance in the Connolly case without taking into account 
information provided by two senior doctors about the effects of poor staffing 
levels.

This is a story of how power and networks of privilege operate to enhance 
their own interests by blaming, hurting and crushing the vulnerable. Jones’ 
book is worth reading alone for the account of how the social work staff – such 
as Gillie Christou, Maria Ward and Sharon Shoesmith – have been annihilated by 
the loss of their careers and the appalling abuse that has been perpetrated 
upon them, including death threats, fears for the safety of their children and 
being forced to move house several times. Even if we were to imagine that the 
social workers were in some crudely simplistic sense to “blame” for such a 
death, no one deserves such treatment. Balls should hang his head in shame. 
What he did at the time was bad enough but the fact that he still tries to 
defend his treatment of Shoesmith shows a shocking inhumanity.

The upshot is that the “Baby P effect” has been profound. There are positive 
aspects to this in that, as my own research has shown, it has helped to further 
sensitise social workers to parental deception and the need to get very close 
to children to ensure they are safe.Child protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/childprotection> social work has become 
more rigorous and authoritative.

The much more worrying side of this is it has increased social workers’ fear 
of making mistakes and being the next Sharon Shoesmith. This has increased 
stress levels and added to recruitment and retention problems in child 
protection. Confidence in social work has been undermined, helping deeply 
worrying measures like the privatisation of child protection gain approval.

The Baby P effect has also helped create a climate in which many more children 
are removed into care and attitudes toward vulnerable working class parents in 
need of support have hardened. AsJoanne Warner <https://twitter.com/JoWarner01> 
shows in a brilliant forthcoming book, The Emotional Politics of Social Work 
and Child Protection, the reaction to Peter’s death reflected deep anxieties 
about social class and the behaviours of an imagined dangerous, contaminating 
underclass. This is how Peter’s mother Tracey Connelly “and her like” were 
portrayed. This assertion of middle-class identity occurs through the 
manipulation of emotions by the media and politicians to create definitions of 
child abuse and what it means to be a respectable parent. The Baby Peter case 
continues to be a reference point for public debate because it takes us to the 
heart of what it means to live in a good society.

Harry Ferguson is the author of Child Protection Practice (Palgrave). You can 
follow him on Twitter@harr_ferguson <https://twitter.com/Harr_Ferguson>.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers.Sign up for free 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
 