
The verdict is in. Han Kang’s The Vegetarian has not only received glowing 
praise in British and American media; it was the first Korean novel to be 
shortlisted for –and eventually win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/16/man-booker-international-prize-serves-up-victory-to-the-vegetarian-han-kang-deborah-smith>
 – a Booker Prize. One reviewer found it “glorious,” a “ferocious, 
magnificently death-affirming novel,” another a “bracing, visceral, 
system-shocking addition to the Anglophone reader’s diet.”

Speaking for myself, coming late to the author and starting from the Korean 
version, what is “system-shocking” is not so much Han’s well-executed but 
hardly exceptional novel, but its Anglophone reception. Rather than affirm 
death,The Vegetarian offers the standard injunction that we think about how we 
live today and consider whether we might live otherwise. And ifThe Vegetarian 
might be said to shock the anglophone reader’s diet, it does so only in the way 
MSG assaults the unaccustomed palate.

Han Kang, winner of the Man Booker International 2016 - podcast interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/may/16/han-kang-winner-of-the-man-booker-international-2016-podcast-interview>
Just 188 pages in the English edition and divided into three parts—narrated by 
the husband, the brother-in-law, and the sister of the protagonist, Yeong-hye—
The Vegetarian will suit those with a short attention span. Indeed, the Korean 
edition ofThe Vegetarian is labeled a “serial novel” (연작소설), because it cobbles 
three short stories into a longer narrative. The second part, “Mongolian Mark,” 
was first published in 2005 to critical acclaim, winning a prestigious domestic 
literary award. Plucked out of the longer narrative arc, its stand-alone 
qualities, as well as its debts toA Streetcar Named Desire, become apparent.

The Vegetarian by Han Kang review – an extraordinary story of family fallout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/24/the-vegetarian-by-han-kang-review-family-fallout>
Though The Vegetarian is a quick read, it demands some tolerance for 
unstinting descriptions of bleeding, vomiting, and manic behavior. The drama 
begins when Yeong-hye refuses to eat animal products after waking from a series 
of nightmares (crimson barns full of dripping flesh, strangling of cats, et 
cetera.). FR Leavis’s complaint about Conrad’s “adjectival insistence” on 
horror might well be applied to these dreams, which are narrated with 
conscientious sensationalism. “That shuddering, sordid, gruesome, brutal 
feeling. Nothing else remains. Murderer or murdered, experience too vivid to 
not be real. Determined, disillusioned,” reads one characteristically florid 
excerpt.

Yeong-hye’s husband responds by recruiting his in-laws to a joint attempt to 
transform her back into a submissive omnivore. There are force feedings, 
parental and institutional; there is rape. Yeong-hye becomes psychotic, 
anorexic, and suicidal. Singularly unlucky with men, she is visited by her 
brother-in-law when her husband leaves. Though he claims to find his 
sister-in-law’s Mongolian mark (a congenital birthmark more commonly known as a 
“Mongolian spot”) “more vegetal than sexual,” he nevertheless pursues her 
sexually and paints flowers on her skin, until she takes on the appearance of a 
“huge, abstracted plant.”

Could anyone, having been introduced to the kind of people Yeong-hye has been 
living among, be surprised to hear that she ends up doing headstands in a 
mental asylum? The collaboration between patriarchal violence and meat 
consumption is not a new subject in anglophone fiction; in Ruth Ozeki’sMy Year 
of Meats (1998), a Japanese man similarly rapes and batters his helpless 
vegetarian housewife. Ozeki, though, leavens the domestic violence story with 
comparatively lighter side plots and ultimately grants the Japanese housewife a 
hale (American!) future. Han provides no such relief.

Neither the subject nor the violence, then, is of as much interest as the fact 
that such representations of violence have become so quotidian as to feel 
easily consumable. Given that Koreans enjoy a low rate of violent crime by 
international standards and may expect to survive for more than eight decades, 
how are we to comprehend the seeming ubiquity of abuse, madness, and premature 
death in Korean fiction? The fascination with violence runs from fiction to 
film to TV dramas and beyond; combat, rape, mutilation, kidnapping, and murder 
have long constituted basic building blocks for Korea’s most talented 
filmmakers.

Early film critic Siegfried Kracauer taught us to attend seriously to film 
fantasies, however hackneyed, because they constitute collective daydreams that 
reveal secret hopes. It has often been said that virtual violence performs the 
task of punishing the people we love to hate, thus preempting a toxic buildup 
of aggression in the social organism. This might explain, for instance, the 
success of two films released last year: in Choi Dong-hoon’sAssassination, which
attracted no less than a fourth of the Korean population to the theaters, 
resistance fighters mow down Japanese colonial officers and their local 
collaborators, while in Woo Min-ho’sInside Men, which set the record as highest 
grossing R-rated film in Korean cinema history, a thug sinks an axe into the 
wrist of a corrupt newspaper columnist.

Han, though, rarely mauls The Man, instead almost exclusively disfiguring the 
powerless. Because we rarely self-identify as aggressors, whatever our gender 
and wherever our place in the social ladder, Han’s victims thus function less 
like effigies of imagined enemies and more like avatars of ourselves: they body 
forth extreme versions of familiar feelings of hurt and outrage against various 
social injustices.

Han Kang: ‘Writing about a massacre was a struggle. I’m a person who feels 
pain when you throw meat on a fire’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/05/han-kang-interview-writing-massacre>
In a historical novel recently translated in the UK as Human Acts, Han 
recounts the horrific government violence perpetrated against civilians during 
the 1980 Gwangju Uprising. The ghost of a murdered boy hovers above a stack of 
corpses to articulate a sentiment that could easily belong to Yeong-hye: “Yes, 
from that moment I began to despise my body. Our bodies, tossed and stacked 
like hunks of meat.” But can the experience of those murdered and tortured 
during the Gwangju Uprising be likened so complacently to that of animals 
slaughtered for meat or to that of the abused housewife? Certainly, the ability 
to draw connections between seemingly unrelated situations can be important for 
empathy, and Han has said inan interview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZxOXwpB8iHo> (in Korean) that she was inspired 
to writeHuman Acts after the 2009 Yongsan tragedy, during which a brutal 
government crackdown on locals protesting eviction resulted in several deaths 
by fire. Han’s mission to attend to those who endure in silence certainly seems 
commendable today, when too many marginal groups—women, youth, and 
immigrants—remain invisible in domestic politics and culture.

But what can such fictional exclamations of pain really do, especially when 
they threaten to tip into melodrama or hyperbole? Spliced with the clinical 
language of psychopathology, representations of individual incidents of 
violence (self-harm, rape, murder) can distract from the structural, historical 
causes of such violence. Addressing structural causes requires not so much 
costless, short-lived feelings of sympathy as enduring efforts for social and 
political reform.

More skeptically: could The Vegetarian be a kind of Inside Men for liberals? 
If watching Woo Min-ho’s film helps one feel less shame about one’s impotence, 
reading a novel likeThe Vegetarian allows one to feel less guilt about the 
same, as if to say: “I identify with this woman who would rather go insane than 
continue as a cog in the mad establishment; though I have to keep my job in 
this hateful system, my loyalties lie with her; I am tormented, not a 
tormentor.” In reality, most, if not all of us, are tormented tormentors.The 
Vegetarian might thus be likened to Kracauer’s radical magazines, read by those 
bourgeois who need to suffer periodically from a bad conscience in order to get 
on with their lives with a good conscience. For all its excesses,The Vegetarian 
yields conclusions remarkably tame.

 * Seo Hee Im is a graduate student in English at Yale University.  