
Skipper Shane Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-watson> blasted 
Sydney Thunder to their second Big Bash win for the season with a six-wicket 
victory over Hobart Hurricanes.

Set 162 for victory at Bellerive Oval on Sunday night the visitors reached 
their target with 19 balls to spare in a result that gives them two wins from 
six matches this season.

Kevin Pietersen's quickfire 73 helps Stars to Melbourne derby win over 
Renegades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/kevin-pietersens-quickfire-73-helps-stars-to-melbourne-derby-win-over-renegades>
Watson (55) reached his half century with his fifth six of the innings, and 
was caught behind on the next delivery. His contribution, together with that of 
BBL debutant and new import James Vince (44) had Thunder set up for success.

Replacing countryman Eoin Morgan who has been recalled for duty by England, 
Vince on Sunday made an impressive 44 from 28 deliveries including six 
boundaries and a six.

Watson won the toss and told Hobart to bat first and the hosts made a shaky 
start finding themselves at 10-2. But a day after being dumped from Australia’s 
limited-overs squad George Bailey came in at No4 and top-scored for Hobart.

The former one-day captain was a notable omission from the 14-man squad named 
on Saturday to take on Pakistan in the upcoming series, with coach Darren 
Lehmann pointing to Bailey’s poor form with the bat.

But on a nice Hobart pitch Bailey reached his half-century from 43 balls, 
including five boundaries and a six, and pushed on to top up a wanting 
Hurricanes’ total. He was given a lifeline on 60 when dropped on the boundary 
by Chris Green.

In perhaps a nod to the future the Hurricanes dumped star international 
signing Kumar Sangakkara for Sunday’s match. Batting mostly at No3 for, the 
former Sri Lankan Test skipper’s top score this season is just 22 not out.

He was replaced by BBL debutant Ben McDermott (31) who took just 23 deliveries 
to surpass Sangakkara’s best. Batting with Bailey, the son of former Test 
paceman Craig McDermott was run out after being slow to move after playing a 
shot, the Hurricanes ultimately finishing at 161-8.

New Thunder international Carlos Brathwaite (2-31) and Pat Cummins (2-36) did 
most of the damage with the ball.
 