
Fit-again batsman Shaun Marsh insists he still has plenty to offer in Test and 
one-day cricket, but says he’s not going to put too much pressure on himself.

Marsh will make his return from a broken finger when he fronts up for the 
Perth Scorchers in Tuesday night’s BBL clash with the Sydney Sixers at the SCG.

The 33-year-old remains a long shot to earn a Test recall for the third Test 
against Pakistan at the SCG, starting on January 3.

Cricket commentator Mark Nicholas rushed to hospital from Boxing Day Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/cricket-commentator-mark-nicholas-hospital-boxing-day-test>
But he remains firmly in the frame for next year’s four-Test tour of India.

Former Australia captain Ian Chappell believes selectors should rule a 
permanent line through Marsh’s name, saying the left-hander is too injury prone 
and shouldn’t be considered for Test selection ever again.

But Marsh is adamant he’s not done with yet.

“I still feel fairly young in cricket terms. I still feel like I’ve got a lot 
to offer at the top level,” Marsh said.

“I’m just looking forward to getting out there tomorrow for the Scorchers, 
trying to score some runs in the next couple of games, and see where it takes 
me.

“I’m not going to put too much pressure on myself. I’m going to go out there 
and have a bit of fun.”

Marsh has been hampered by soft tissue injuries throughout his career.

But it’s been a finger injury that’s blighted him for the past four months.

Marsh first broke the little finger in his left hand while fielding in an ODI 
game against Sri Lanka in August.

And he broke it again while fielding in the first Test against South Africa at 
the WACA Ground in November

Marsh bravely batted on with the injury to post scores of 63 and 15 against 
South Africa.

But he’s no guarantee to regain his Test spot after selectors decided to 
overhaul the ageing squad, introducing a raft of new stars.

Melbourne’s last great independent cricket bat-maker closes up shop | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/25/melbournes-last-great-independent-cricket-bat-maker-closes-up-shop>
Newcomers Matt Renshaw and Peter Handscomb have flourished since earning 
call-ups, but Nic Maddinson is yet to fire and is under pressure to keep his 
spot.

Marsh initially aimed to be back in time for the Boxing Day Test, but said he 
was glad he gave his finger extra time to recover.

“Because it was a re-break, they thought they’d give it a bit longer this 
time,” Marsh said.

“I was pretty eager to try to get out there as early as possible. But the six 
weeks is probably a good idea. Touch wood it’s all behind me now.

“It’s feeling really good. I started facing bowlers last week and I caught a 
few balls. I had no issues.”

Marsh will be aiming to score bulk runs in Tuesday’s clash with the Sixers, 
and Thursday’s encounter against the Melbourne Renegades at Etihad Stadium.

The Scorchers started their summer with a thumping 48-run win over the 
Adelaide Strikers last week.

Former Test star Mitchell Johnson snared 3-33 in that match.

But the prized Scorchers recruit has been rested against the Sixers in order 
to manage his workload for the rest of the tournament.
 