
At the moment the debate over the future of T20 cricket at domestic level in 
England is civilised and reasoned, though it is not absolutely guaranteed that 
it will remain so.

ECB’s neutrality on city-based T20 competition queried by county officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ecb-city-based-t20-cricket-county-officials>
On Friday, Neil Snowball, the chief executive of Warwickshire, supported the 
leaked proposals of a city-based T20 franchise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ecb-city-based-t20-cricket-county-officials>
. Presumably, he does not believe that changing the name of his team – the 
Birmingham Bears now play at Edgbaston in the T20 rather than Warwickshire – is 
all that is required, but with two-thirds of his stadium empty for current T20 
fixtures he is eager for change. “If there is a way of doing both competitions 
[a new elite T20 city contest above and beyond the existing NatWest Blast] with 
one involving all 18 counties primarily on Friday nights and then something 
super-charged in the middle of the summer then that is a great solution,” he 
says.

With equal politeness, Guy Lavender, the chief executive of Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset>, a county that sold out all their 
home T20 matches (and engaged the services of Chris Gayle), expresses 
reservations that echo the views of the smaller counties who do not possess a 
Test match ground. His analysis also strikes a chord at one of the bigger 
clubs, namely Surrey, who also make the current system work well – they sold 
131,320 T20 tickets this year, more than anyone else. Hence, Surrey are secure 
enough to have a wider perspective on the future of the domestic game. They do 
not need a quick fix.

Lavender is wary of the introduction of a new competition, while acknowledging 
there are a number of potential options under consideration. “The rush to 
abandon the strong growth and recent success of T20 Blast would be misguided in 
our view,” he says. “Several clubs sell out their grounds and have a passionate 
and committed following and it would be terrible if that was destroyed by the 
introduction of city-based franchises.

“The city-based option could well damage many smaller counties. Members, fans, 
players and commercial partners will have less Championship cricket, fewer 
50-over matches and, for as long as it lasts, a second-rate T20 competition. 
Two T20 competitions are unlikely to be sustainable in the long-term.”

County Cricket restructure is a step in the right direction by the ECB | Mike 
Selvey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/09/county-cricket-restructure-ecb-big-bash>
Clearly, the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> strategists are 
seduced by the success of the Indian Premier League and the Big Bash in 
Australia. They would love to be able to emulate that, in which case it would 
be handy to reproduce balmy Adelaide evenings in Leeds as well.

Lavender has his doubts that this will work in England. “There is limited 
evidence to suggest that a city-based competition will be a roaring success 
outside of London. Few existing supporters are going to travel long distances 
to watch and generating a whole new audience is going to be tough. The only 
empirical evidence is in Welsh and Scottish club rugby, where attendances have 
fallen dramatically short of expectations.

“In stark contrast the success of English club rugby – not to mention soccer 
with Leicester City – shows how English fans crave original and genuine brands.”

The drive to maximise revenues is easily understood. The T20 figures are often 
frustrating, especially for those counties with Test grounds. At Lancashire and 
Yorkshire, the stands are filled for the Roses T20 match, yet disappointingly 
empty for the rest so that a small club such as Somerset is able to exceed the 
ticket sales at Headingley and Old Trafford, even though one Roses fixture 
attracts more than 15,000 spectators.

Moreover, the sight of empty seats does not create a good TV product, which, 
after all, is the prime goal of the ECB marketeers.

Lavender is aware that those opposed to the franchise proposals will be cast 
as reactionaries by some associated with the big clubs, who are seeking to 
extricate themselves from their financial worries.

“We are not luddites,” says Lavender, who runs a club that routinely makes a 
significant profit, “but we need to make sure we don’t destroy clubs if we want 
cricket to thrive in the shires as well as the cities.”
 