
My kitchen is … tiny, like most London kitchens, but it has great natural 
light from a big window that catches the sun in the afternoons. It looks out 
over all the neighbouring backyards and gardens – there’s a fig tree 
immediately behind our flat that I love. The space is painted white, with white 
tiles and grey grouting. Our counters are wooden laminate, and our floor 
parquet. We’ve lots of closed storage, so the surfaces are clear and there’s 
space to work. It’s functional, with a nice burst of green from a selection of 
architectural succulents.

My favourite kitchen tool is … a really sharp knife. I don’t have a particular 
one in mind – when I cook, I just need a large one that feels solid in the hand.

My storecupboard staple is … sourdough crisp bread. They’re very involved and 
time consuming to make yourself, so I always have some Peter’s Yard ones in the 
cupboard. They’re the simplest snack – I love them with butter, scrambled eggs, 
smoked salmon, charcuterie, goat’s cheese and herbs, pickles, or chocolate 
spread for something more indulgent …

When I’m starving I … have eggs – any which way. I try to eat some every day. 
I don’t have a favourite way to prepare them, but I do find myself scrambling 
them – very softly, with lots of butter - more than anything else.

My culinary inspiration is … the Barefoot Contessa, Ina Garten 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Barefoot+Contessa&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. I find many chefs inspiring, but she is definitely one of my favourites. 
She’s so warm and friendly, the exact opposite of a martyr in the kitchen. 
Entertaining should be fun and easy. She has an impossibly perfect life in the 
Hamptons – she had a memorable cameo in 30 Rock, one of my favourite comedies. 
When I’m cooking or working in the living room, if she’s on the Food Network 
I’ll have her on in the background. I love her gentle, convivial presence.

Merlin Labron-Johnson’s kitchen: ‘Trying to cook with a dull knife is 
practically impossible’ | Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/merlin-labron-johnson-portland-restaurant-clipstone-kitchen-encounters>
My best-kept kitchen secret is … batch cooking; stews, dals, bologneses … the 
amount of time that goes into preparing a dish for 4 or for 12 is the same, so 
it makes sense to maximise your time and always make much more than you need, 
then freeze it.

When I’m invited to dinner I always take … some Nordic homemade jam – plum or 
wild blueberry. I make a very punchy tart jam, not overly sweet, with a lot of 
flavour. People always love homemade jam.

Everything tastes better with … butter. It is generally my fat of choice when 
cooking. I make my own, but I also usually buy some too – both salted and 
unsalted. I go through so much of it.

When I go shopping I … try to keep a well-stocked storecupboard. I do an 
inventory each month, then do a major shop. During the week, I’ll do top-up 
shops, but not when I’m hungry – that’s never a good idea. I like to write a 
good list, and stick to it.

For dinner tonight … chilli con carne, using a batch of bolognese I made last 
month – I’ll add in kidney beans, cumin butter, spices, and serve it all with 
lime and coriander and rice, and greens in a salad.

 * Signe Johansen is a Norwegian-American writer and the author of the 
bestselling lifestyle book How to Hygge@SigneSJohansen 
<https://twitter.com/SigneSJohansen>  