
The Sinn Féin president, Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, has told activists to be 
ready for a second election with no calls coming from within his party for him 
to step down as leader following its best ever election to the Irish parliament.

The party once umbilically linked to the Provisional IRA will return to the 
Dáil next week with up to 24 seats, up from 14 in 2011 – a performance that for 
now at least has dampened down speculation that Adams might move aside from the 
centre of power he has held since 1983.

Adams performed relatively poorly in three main live television debates during 
the three-week general election campaign, which has ended in uncertainty and no 
prospect of any coalition securing a working majority.


Fianna Fáil truce will allow Kenny to continue as taoiseach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/fianna-fail-ceasefire-will-allow-kenny-to-continue-as-taoiseach>
On polling day, former Irish premier Bertie Ahern claimed Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> would have won 10 extra seats 
if it had had an alternative leader without the baggage of the IRA past as well 
as someone more able to deal with economic questions.

During one live debate, Adams stumbled and appeared to mix up taxation 
figures. He was dogged throughout the campaign by questions on allegations he 
had led the IRA during the Troubles, and also why he defended convicted tax 
fraudster and one time Provisionals’ chief of staff,Thomas “Slab” Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/ex-ira-commander-thomas-slab-murphy-jailed-tax-evasion>
.

But after winning 14% of the vote, Sinn Féin’s leading lights have been 
rallying around their leader.

Over the weekend, Adams’s closest ally and key partner during the peace 
process, the NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> deputy 
first minister, Martin McGuinness, was blunt about any prospect of him 
relinquishing the leadership.


“Some of the people who criticised Gerry Adams couldn’t lace his boots as a 
politician … He led us to a dramatic performance in 2011 from four to 14 seats, 
and is now leading us to another dramatic performance with a 50% rise in our 
seats. It is absolutely not the time for Adams to step aside,” McGuinness said.

As for Adams, the Sinn Féin president appeared to be focused on fighting a 
second election very soon – a distinct possibility if no government can be 
formed when the new Dáil meets on 10 March.

“We advised all of our candidates to stay on election footing. We advised our 
people to take down the posters and hide them away because we could be back 
again very, very soon. Now that might not happen, if a government is formed, 
but we are certainly staying on election footing,” he said.


Deaglán de Bréadún, the author of a new book on the rise of modern Sinn Féin, 
said that while Adams was a poor performer on television his position at the 
top was not under threat.

He said: “Adams is untouchable as leader but he could at some future stage 
decide, for personal reasons, to call it a day, although there is absolutely no 
sign of that at present. He clearly does not find the parliamentary scene at 
Leinster House very stimulating.


“The obvious successors would be Mary Lou McDonald, current deputy leader, and 
Pearse Doherty, who is finance spokesman. Neither of them has anything like the 
republican aura that Adams has acquired over the last 40 years and the prospect 
of a move against the current leader is well-nigh unthinkable.”


The central question facing Sinn Féin is whether the 14% achieved in this 
general election is the plateau in terms of potential support or whether it can 
reach the figures it was getting in last year’s opinion polls – about 26%. The 
Sinn Féin did fail in one of its strategic goals between the last election five 
years ago and last Friday’s poll: supplanting Fianna Fáil as the main 
opposition party in the Republic.

Fianna Fáil’s poll revival – at least doubling the 21 seats it won in 2011, 
its worst ever election result – means the party founded by Éamon de Valera has 
seen off – for now – what was once a serious existential threat from Sinn Féin.

Irish election results show Fine Gael misread public mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-results-show-fine-gael-misread-public-mood>
What Fianna Fáil does next that will determine Sinn Féin’s fortunes over the 
next few years. The author Ed Moloney, a veteran IRA and Sinn Féin watcher,has 
described the prospect of Fianna Fáil joining in a “grand coalition” with its 
old civil war rivals Fine Gael as a “wet dream” for Adams’ party.

Such a coalition, Moloney has claimed, would “allow Sinn Féin to present 
itself as the real opposition. Not only would the party’s Stalinist-like 
discipline compare favourably with the chaos and backbiting that would infect 
the coalition government, but the Shinners would play it all to their advantage 
in other ways.”

With senior Fianna Fáil personnel baulking at the prospect of a formal 
coalition government with Fine Gael and remaining on the opposition benches, it 
appears so far that they will not be gifting any “grand coalition wet dream” to 
Sinn Féin in the near future.


On Adams’s future, Moloney added: “This party was created out of the IRA by 
Gerry Adams and the small group of advisers and colleagues that surround him. 
They will decide whether he goes or not, not the membership. As long as he is 
leader of Sinn Féin he is also leader of the peace process project and as such 
he is protected from efforts to pursue him for IRA activity during the 
Troubles. As soon as he relinquishes leadership it would be seen as a sign that 
the peace process is now secure and in those circumstances he could well become 
vulnerable; one could almost foresee the calls for his prosecution that would 
soon follow. The precedent of Slab Murphy is not a happy one and so continuing 
as Sinn Féin leader provides him with a shield.”
 