
Sir Chris Woodhead, the former head of the Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> schools inspectorate, who has 
died aged 68 after suffering from motor neurone disease and liver cancer, was 
one of the most controversial and colourful figures in English education. He 
dominated and fuelled debate about schools policy during both Conservative and 
Labour administrations. As an outspoken opponent of “trendy” teaching methods 
and supporter of grammar schools, Woodhead was a scourge of the mostly leftwing 
education establishment and an deeply unpopular figure among teachers for many 
years.

He will be best remembered for his period as chief inspector of schools in 
England, and so the head of Ofsted, from 1994 to 2000, a tenure that was full 
of incident and drama. His claim, just months into the job, that 15,000 
teachers were incompetent and should be sacked set the future tone of his 
relationship with the profession. But he also incurred the wrath of education 
academics and chief education officers.

In 1999 it was alleged that Woodhead, a former English teacher, had had a 
relationship with one of his pupils. He said the affair did not start until he 
had ceased to teach at the school, but he never fully explained the situation. 
He kept his post but resigned the following year, much to the delight of the 
teaching unions.

Woodhead was born in London. His father was an accountant and his mother a 
school secretary who also doubled up as the “lollipop lady”. The young Chris, 
an only child, attended primary school in Croydon and thenWallington County 
grammar school <http://www.wcgs.org.uk/drupal/>, Surrey. He went on to gain an 
English degree at Bristol University, followed by a Postgraduate Certificate in 
Education (PGCE).

His classroom teaching career started at the Priory school, Shrewsbury, in 
Shropshire (1969-72). He then became deputy head of English at Newent school, 
Gloucester (1972-74), and head of English at Gordano school, Bristol (1974-76), 
before switching to teacher training, as a lecturer at Oxford University 
(1976-82). Local education posts followed: as an adviser in Shropshire 
(1982-88), and as a deputy chief education officer in Devon (1988-90) and in 
Cornwall (1990-91). From there he went to the National Curriculum Council as 
deputy chief executive (1991) and chief executive (1991-93), and then in the 
same role to the School Curriculum and Assessment Authority (1993-94).

In 1994 Woodhead was appointed head of Ofsted, which had been set up by John 
Major’s Conservative government to help drive up school standards. When Labour 
came to power in 1997 there was political pressure on Tony Blair to replace 
Woodhead, but the new prime minister ignored his advisers and kept Woodhead on 
– partly to persuade voters that New Labour was not “in hock” to the unions. 
The new education secretary,David Blunkett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett>, put on a brave face to 
work with the man he had criticised and ridiculed in opposition. But there were 
public rows between the two. Meanwhile, the annual teaching union conferences 
became dominated by the new sport of Woodhead-bashing.

In February 1999, Woodhead, addressing an audience of trainee teachers, was 
asked for his views on legislation to ban sexual relationships between pupils 
and teachers. His response was that such relationships, while regrettable, 
could be “experiential and educative on both sides”, a remark that was picked 
up by the national media and for which he later apologised. But the damage was 
done. His first wife, Cathy (they married in 1969 and divorced in 1977), 
sparked controversy by saying he had started a relationship with a pupil when 
he was a teacher.

After he left Ofsted, Woodhead became a columnist with the Daily Telegraph and 
Sunday Times newspapers, and wrote two books about education. In 2002, he was 
appointed a visiting professor at the University of Buckingham, Britain’s only 
private university, in an education department he helped to set up with Anthony 
O’Hear, one ofMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
’s gurus. Working closely with Professor Alan Smithers, he wanted it to be an 
“antidote” to the mainstream educational research establishment. Smithers said 
of him: “As the head of Ofsted he did not hold back in saying things as his 
inspectors saw them and he got up some people’s noses – not least because he 
was so often right. As a friend and colleague he was warm and generous, not at 
all how he was sometimes caricatured.”

In 2005, he again became the focus of controversy when it emerged that while 
at Ofsted he had on one occasionoverruled his own inspectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/feb/04/politics.freedomofinformation> to 
fail Islington Green school, north London, despite the inspectors saying that 
they were “of the unanimous view that the school was not failing”. The revised 
report had devastating consequences. The school was put into “special measures” 
and its reputation suffered. Woodhead’s response to the revelation was simply 
that it was within his powers to act as he did.

Colleagues and close colleagues said Woodhead had a talent for “cutting out 
the middle man” and heading straight for the top – hence his close friendship 
with Blair. He had other friends in high places, including the Prince of Wales, 
who referred to Woodhead as a “marvellous” man and often invited him to dinner 
at Highgrove. Since 2004 he had been chairman ofCognita 
<http://www.cognitaschools.com>, a chain of private schools, and he was a 
regular attender of private schools conferences.

Early in 2009 he revealed the diagnosis of motor neurone disease that he had 
known about for three years. In aninterview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/may/12/chris-woodhead-teaching> 
that June, he said: “I’ve come to terms with it in the sense that I’ve got it, 
it isn’t fair, but I’ve got it. But I’m not sure anyone could ever say they’ve 
come to terms with a disease like this. I think it would be pretending to have 
an acceptance and courage and stoicism that I haven’t got ... It is a bugger.”

To the end he never changed his belief that Labour, in its quest for equality, 
had betrayed children by denying what he saw as a given: that children are 
destined for different things. And he never lost the ability to make news, 
through carefully timed interviews, even when his illness had taken a serious 
grip. In October 2011 at the opening of the Conservative party conference in 
Liverpool, he grabbed headlines with an assertion that the national school 
leaving age should be reduced to 14.

In 2011 Woodhead was given a knighthood. This appeared to greatly cheer him at 
a time when his disease was advancing. A patron of the Dignity in Dying 
campaign, he considered ending his life at Dignitas, the Swiss clinic, but 
changed his mind and was cared for latterly by his second wife, Christine (nee 
Kensett), whom he had met while working at Ofsted. They married in 2006.

He is survived by Christine, his daughter, Tamsin, from his first marriage and 
three granddaughters.

• Christopher Anthony Woodhead, educationist, born 20 October 1946; died 23 
June 2015
 