 Six Irishmen who have each lived in England for more than 10 years, have been 
charged with the murder of one of the victims of the Birmingham bomb 
explosions. They will appear in court this morning.
Five were taken from the Heysham ferry on Thursday night, and the sixth 
detained in Birmingham. Mr Maurice Buck, the West Midlands assistant chief 
constable, said yesterday: "We are satisfied that we have found the men 
primarily responsible, but inquiries will continue very actively in respect of 
a lot of other matters." There was no immediate likelihood of more arrests.

The men all come from the Birmingham area. Mr Buck refused to give their 
address for security reasons. They have charged that "in the city of 
Birmingham, being concerned with each other, did murder Miss Jane Davis, aged 
17, on Thursday November 21, an offence contrary to common law." Miss Davis was 
killed in the explosion at the Tavern in the Town. My Buck said these were 
holding charges and there would most certainly be others in connection with the 
explosions.

The men charged are aged between 29 and 44. They are: Hugh Callaghan (44), 
unemployed, who came here in 1947; Patrick Joseph Hill (30), unemployed, who 
came here in 1960; Robert Gerrard Hunter (29), unemployed, who came here in 
1962; Noel Richard McIlkenny (31), a millwright's mate, who came here in 1956; 
William Power (29), unemployed, who came here in 1963; and John Walker (39), 
train driver, who came here in 1953. Mr Walker is from Londonderry. The other 
five were born in Belfast.

Mr Buck repeated the need for continued vigilance, and no reprisals. He said: 
"There have been incidents in this city and elsewhere which have been 
attributed as backlash or reprisals. From my point of view, these can only be 
of detriment to me and the investigating officers and take away police 
resources and I urgently need to continue the inquiries into the outrages at 
Birmingham on Thursday."

He thanked everyone who had helped West Midlands police in a "most difficult 
inquiry," including press, radio and television.

In Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, 15 
people who were detained as they accompanied the coffin of a Provisional IRA 
bomber James McDaid from the Republic of Ireland to Belfast were still being 
questioned by police last night.

In Birmingham general hospital three of the victims of the two explosions were 
still in a critical condition. One was giving cause for concern, and 12 were 
comfortable. The condition of the 24 people in Birmingham accident hospital was 
unchanged, ranging from very ill to much more comfortable. The death toll still 
stands at 19 with 184 injured.

About 200 people gathered for a short memorial service outside the remains of 
the Mulberry Bush public house yesterday, conducted by the Rector of 
Birmingham, Canon Peter Hall and the Reverend Michael Hubbard, a minister of 
the United Reform Church. Masses for those killed were held at Roman Catholic 
churches in the city.

The Lord Mayor, Councillor James Eames, broadcast an appeal for victims and 
dependants yesterday. He also called for action from Whitehall to protect the 
"ordinary citizens of this country," and paid tribute to the help the Irish 
community had given the city.

British Leyland, where workers walked out as a protest against the bombing, 
warned that any troublemakers would be sent home. Mr Brian Mathers, the 
chairman of the TUC regional council, which represents one million workers in 
the West Midlands, appealed to people to stay calm. In Birmingham city centre 
pubs were almost deserted at the weekend, and shops had fewer customers than 
normal.

British Airways flights to Ireland are expected to return to normal today 
after airport workers at Birmingham, Liverpool, and Manchester "blacked" 
Irish-bound planes because of the bombings.
 