
Andre Russell’s black and pink bat and Jason Roy’s sensational catch stole the 
show as Sydney Sixers skipper Moises Henriques guided his BBL side to a 
season-opening nine-wicket win over Sydney Thunder.


The Sixers dimissed their crosstown rivals for a modest 8-159 on Tuesday night 
before chasing down their target with ease to finish 1-160 at Spotless Stadium.


Big Bash League: Sydney Sixers beat Sydney Thunder – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/20/big-bash-league-2016-season-opener-sydney-thunder-v-sydney-sixers-live>
Henriques top-scored with 76 not out off 41 balls, including seven fours and 
four sixes, while Thunder youngster Ryan Gibson will be pleased with his 
half-century (53 from 43 balls) on debut.


And while Sixers import Roy struck a middling 27 with the bat the Englishman 
had the sold-out 21,798-strong crowd in raptures in the field for his blinder 
of a catch to dismiss Thunder captain Ben Rohrer.


Rohrer timed a late cut from Joe Mennie nicely but the big-hitting import 
launched himself sideways at backward point, in a stunning horizontal manoeuvre 
that will be a contender for a catch of the season.


If that was spectacular, Russell’s choice of bat was outrageous. The prized 
Jamaican star, who was caught and bowled for nine before removing Roy for 27, 
wielded a Spartan number in Sixers colours with a black blade and pink handle.

Sixers wicketkeeper Brad Haddin questioned whether the bat was legal. “With 
that black bat, the ball, if you have a close look at it, it has four black 
marks on it,” Haddin told commentators over his mic. “So if he had’ve batted 
for any time, it may have proven hard to see.”

But CA confirmed the bat was within the rules. “A player can use a coloured 
bat subject to CA approval. The bat may be the same colour as the club’s 
primary colour or black,” a CA spokesman said.

“CA retains the right to withdraw approval at its absolute discretion and the 
umpires can also request a player to change the bat if they believe it affects 
the integrity of the match.”


It’s not the first time a BBL batsman has used coloured willow, with Russell’s 
Thunder team-mate Aiden Blizzard swinging an electric green bat last season 
while former Melbourne Renegades power hitter Chris Gayle was approved to use a 
gold bat.


The Thunder got off to a flying start, racing to 71-1 after eight overs on 
Tuesday night in the absence of injured captain Shane Watson. But a 
double-wicket maiden from paceman Joe Mennie, who’d conceded 16 runs in his 
first over, kick-started a quickfire fightback.

Some late fireworks from quick Pat Cummins gave the Thunder a boost, the No8 
adding 30 from 20 deliveries including three sixes.

 