
England got themselves in a mess of their own temperamental making in Delhi, 
bailed out by the lower order and the bowlers. Maybe they saw demons where 
there were none. The pitch looked nothing like the turner that a glance at the 
scoreboard might suggest. Indeed, their reading of the surface seemed spot-on, 
with the paceman Reece Topley replaced by another, Liam Plunkett, rather than 
Dawson, a spinner. On another day, maybe when England play Sri Lanka, the venue 
will surely see the runs that the pitch merited.

The World Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> has found 
out more than a few batsmen. Slow, turning pitches at some – not all – grounds 
have flummoxed those who are used to hitting through the line secure in the 
knowledge that the ball will come on to the bat nicely and deviate little. 
Batsmen, after all, are the T20 cocks-of-the-walk. But these muscular denizens 
with their fast hands and forgiving blades have fumbled and groped as the ball 
has nipped this way and that, hard-handed simplistic techniques exposed. It has 
brought criticism, of course, but erroneously in my view, at least in part, 
about more of which in a moment.

But much as many would like to label them, these have not been bad pitches 
(those which are two-paced and give dangerously erratic bounce come into that 
category) just because they offer help to the spinners.

It has brought out the best in captaincy and selection, exemplified by the 
manner in which New Zealand, twice, have defended low scores with astute use of 
their resources, including leaving out their two most formidable pace bowlers, 
and Kane Williamson’s intelligence. The mantle of his predecessor as captain, 
Brendon McCullum, appears to have slipped nicely on to his shoulders.

It would not be stretching the imagination too far to suggest that in terms of 
some of the pitches the tournament has been set up to benefit the host nation 
and hinder others, and in this they have come a little unstuck. With the Black 
Caps already sure of a semi-final place, India’s match against Australia in 
Mohali on Sunday could decide whether it is the favourites, India, or the 
50-over World Cup holders, Australia, who are eliminated (it could be both). 
And the 2007 World Cup in the Caribbean, where a Super 8 match featured 
Bangladesh against Ireland rather than the blue-chip India against Pakistan, 
shows what a commercial disaster it can be when India do not reach the later 
stages of a global competition: advertisers evaporated like droplets on a 
hotplate.

Do they produce such surfaces for the Indian Premier League? It is hard to 
believe they would encourage low-scoring, tight contests when sixes are 
sponsored: the more what they still insist on calling “maximums” rain down, the 
financially merrier it is.

There are two competitions running simultaneously at the moment, though, with 
the Women’s World T20 being played on the same grounds and similar surfaces. In 
theory it is an excellent concept to run the men’s and women’s tournaments at 
the same time. But if the men’s game is being enhanced by some of the 
challenges being posed and the responses to them – a new perspective on how T20 
can be played – the women’s has been diminished somewhat at a time when it is 
being broadcast globally, and there is an imperative to make it as attractive 
as possible.

On Tuesday, in Dharamsala, England’s women got as bogged down as had India in 
their innings and came within a whisker of failing to make 91 to win. It was a 
desperate match in which, far from being enhanced and demonstrating women’s 
cricket at its best, the sluggish nature of the surface hamstrung them. The 
previous day, in Nagpur, Australia’s women, deemed the best side in the world 
before the tournament, found themselves four wickets down for four runs in four 
hapless overs against the New Zealand offspinner Leigh Kasperek, a situation 
from which they were unable to recover sufficiently, New Zealand making the 
target of 104 with plenty in hand.

Women’s cricket has progressed massively but, although boundaries have been 
brought in to try to promote the hitting of sixes, it is not essentially a 
power game like the men’s, relying as much on deftness of touch, deflection and 
use of angles as slugging. It has a different but still entertaining appeal. 
But to achieve this batsmen need pace on the ball, which is not possible on 
sluggish pitches against spinners, who are slow and loopy to begin with, and 
seamers without real velocity. It is no fault of the players that a match that 
ought to have been a shopwindow for these skills failed to provide one.

It was frustrating for anyone who believes that women’s cricket has a huge 
part to play in the expansion of the game and was articulated after the match 
by the India captain, Mithali Raj. “When you’re promoting women’s cricket 
around the globe,” she said, “it is imperative that you put up the best brand 
of it for the world to watch. And attract people that come to the stadium. A 
wicket like this, where the ball is keeping low and turning square, makes the 
job of the players very difficult. To market women’s cricket ideally, it’s not 
a good situation.” It is hard not to agree.
 