
With a kick of the flippers, the snorkel safari begins and the glorious 
seascape below unfolds like a flight over a lush, tropical jungle. Dark green 
Japanese seaweed stands tall from the seabed, among waving filaments of 
mermaid's tresses and the psychedelic glow of magic seaweed, bright blue and 
tinged with purple and lime.

Among the fluffy yellow shrubs of harpoon weed, the underwater plain is 
studded with the waving pink-tipped tentacles of the snakelocks anemone, which 
grasp at a poked finger, while large green ballan wrasse fish rest among the 
foliage.

Kimmeridge Bay 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/MCZ/broad-bench-to-kimmeridge-bay> in Dorset, 
with its rare lagoon sea snails and peacock's tail seaweed, is one of 127 
wildlife-rich sites which a two-year, £8m consultation recommended should gain 
protection as marine conservation zones (MCZs).

But, despite a 350,000-signature petition, ministers are only considering 31 
MCZs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/82713/mcz-i2-map-20121219.pdf>
 and, after another consultation that received 40,000 responses, they will name 
the first after the summer.

To reveal the beauty of marine life, the Wildlife Trusts are running snorkel 
safaris in places fromYorkshire 
<http://www.ywt.org.uk/what-we-do/conservation-projects/yorkshire-living-seas/snorkelling>
 to Cornwall to Northern Ireland this summer.

"The richly varied habitats in our seas support thousands of plants and 
animals, from sea horses to basking sharks," says Joan Edwards, theWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trusts' head of living seas. 
"We are frustrated by the lack of progress on MCZs: our seas are in urgent need 
of protection."

But the debate over how much of the coastline deserves protection has now 
turned into a full-blown row, with environment minister Richard Benyon saying: 
"If you are going to stop people doing things that impact on their livelihoods, 
you have to have a damn good reason to do it. I get frustrated by populist 
campaigns that say it is 127 or bust: that is ridiculous. It is banal to 
suggest that MCZs are the only show in town; there are many other forms of 
protection." Benyon said scientists arguing for 127 MCZs were the same ones 
advising him there was not enough evidence to designate them.

But Prof Callum Roberts of York University, one of 86 environmental academics 
who wrote in protest to Benyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/22/marine-scientists-government-marine-protection>
 in April, rejects that as "spin" and a "misleading excuse". Roberts said the 
scientific assessment Benyon is referring to was never meant to be a means 
of preventing progress.

"Science is being misrepresented and a political decision is being dressed up 
as a scientific one," Roberts says. "Ministers are quite willing to cave in to 
industry nonsense that it will cost millions and cost jobs, but such claims 
have rarely stood up in the past: often the establishment of protected zones 
has economic benefits."

Benyon's argument is "totally incoherent" according to Barry Gardiner, 
Labour's shadow fisheries minister. "The principle behind MCZs was that they 
should form an ecologically coherent network. By leaving out over half of the 
key reference areas the minister has positioned himself against the view of the 
country's leading marine scientists."

Back in Kimmeridge Bay, sailing over the underwater crags, blennies with their 
almost Elizabethan fin-ruffs poke their noses out from crevasses, along with 
the devil-red eyes of the aggressive velvet swimming crab. An expanse of sand 
glitters with dozens of silvery sand eels zig-zagging in unison, while dragonet 
fish hide in their speckled camouflage and crabs shake their claws at the sky.

"People are surprised at how colourful our marine life is," says Julie 
Hatcher, marine biologist at theDorset Wildlife Trust 
<http://www.dorsetwildlifetrust.org.uk/reserve_information.html>. "They think 
it will be grey and boring, but we have amazing marine life here."

Among her favourites are cuttlefish and slug-like sea hares. "The cuttlefish 
can change their colour instantly and they follow you on a dive, hoping you 
might dislodge a crab or a fish for them to attack, like seagulls following 
trawlers," she says. "The sea hares lay pink egg strings that look like silly 
string."

She has raised cuttlefish and lesser spotted cat sharks from eggs washed up in 
the bay and says the best discovery that day is a snake pipefish: "It's a 
straightened-out version of a sea horse."

Hatcher parts the huge wrinkled streamers of mahogany sugar kelp and oar weed 
to reveal the candy pink algae that coats the bedrock underneath. She points 
out the bright white spats – young barnacles – on a limpet-studded rock. "The 
limpets go for a walk around at night, grazing the algae off the rocks," she 
says, also pointing out their assassins – the dog whelk and the sting winkle – 
which rest nearby ready to drill into the limpets with their acid-toothed 
tongues.

The proposed Kimmeridge Bay MCZ is not one of the 31 under consideration for 
designation in 2013. Hatcher thinks it should be: "I hope it will get on to the 
next list – if there is a next list."
 