
The study Resilience and Burnout in Child Protection Social Work examined the 
experience of child protection practitioners in Northern Ireland but such 
issues – including staff retention and turnover among social workers – are 
major concerns for the social work profession as a whole.

The level of inexperience in staff teams due to high turnover of child 
protection social workers, and a lack of vacancies in other areas of social 
work practice, is a growing concern in social work with children and families. 
The study, funded by a Department of Education and Learning Studentship, began 
in October 2009. It crossed statutory and voluntary sector child protection 
social work throughout Northern Ireland and involved all of the country's five 
health and social care trusts.

There were 162 social workers involved, 140 female and 22 male. The response 
rate was 43%, with social workers who were older and in permanent jobs more 
likely to respond.

We measured resilience over two broad areas, attitude to life and the self and 
personal competence. The study asked social workers about size of workload, 
control they had over their work, reward or satisfaction, community, peer 
support and supervision. The three dimensions of burnout – emotional 
exhaustion, de-personalisation and reduced personal accomplishment – were also 
measured.

Resilience in social workers was assessed across five characteristics 
including meaning, self-reliance, equanimity, existential aloneness and 
perseverance, as well as related organisational factors such as workload, 
community, control, values, equity and reward. Demographic variables were also 
measured..

The findings suggest that emotional exhaustion and a lack of personal 
accomplishment leads to a lowering of resilience in social workers. Further 
analysis found a chain of events that begin with excessive workloads. Workload 
was found to be a predictor of emotional exhaustion. Emotional exhaustion was a 
predictor of de-personalisation, and this was then related to lower levels of 
personal accomplishment about the job.

On the other hand, those found to be resilient had low emotional exhaustion 
scores. Those who scored highly on personal accomplishment also have high 
resilience scores. The study suggests that female social workers demonstrated 
significantly more resilience than males. Length of experience was also a 
predictor of resilience, and younger social workers had lower resilience scores 
than older workers.

While the study showed that some social workers are inherently "committed 
survivors" – they appear resilient and able to withstand the pressures of child 
protection social work – other factors can influence burnout. Good management, 
cohesive working teams and peer support were identified as important factors 
for social workers wishing to stay in child protection. If they don't receive 
this, social workers often consider other employment.

Social workers reported a "24/7, 365" commitment to the job, regularly 
receiving work calls when off sick or on holiday. The study suggests that this 
is not sustainable in the long-term.

One newly qualified social worker said that the stress and pressure made them 
"willing to leave [the profession] with no job to go to". Others said that they 
loved the fast pace and "buzz" of the job. One social worker told the study 
that they are so busy they regularly go from 7am to 7pm without eating.

The Northern Ireland Association of Social Workers 
<http://www.basw.co.uk/northern-ireland/> (NIASW) has endorsed the study, which 
is about to be published. It commented that the evidence tells us that children 
want continuity with their social workers, but this must not override the need 
for social workers to get a proper rest from the job. Ultimately, if social 
workers sacrifice their own well-being it will be detrimental to the children 
they serve. Such commitment is not sustainable in the long run, and will only 
lead to more leaving the profession.

Social workers and their employers must recognise their personal limits and 
look after themselves first if they are to help others.

Dr Paula McFadden is a recent PhD graduate from the University of Ulster 
<http://www.ulster.ac.uk/>. She is a team leader within older people's services 
in theWestern Health and Social Care Trust <http://www.westerntrust.hscni.net/> 
and is also a committee member of the Northern Ireland Association of Social 
Workers

Why not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian social care 
network <https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network> means you get sent 
weekly email updates on policy and best practice in the sector, as well as 
exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free –online here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>. 
 