
Somerset defeated Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> by 31 runs to keep alive 
their hopes of a first County Championship title, and they did so because their 
captain, Chris Rogers, ignored a piece of advice from Marcus Trescothick.

The 40-year-old, a veteran of 202 international matches, advised Rogers to 
stick with the spinners when Warwickshire resumed on 131 for eight on Thursday 
morning, requiring another 53 for victory. For an hour, Rikki Clarke and Chris 
Wright chipped away at the target against the spin of Jack Leach (who took six 
for 42) and Roelof van der Merwe. But then, with the target down to 37 and the 
stand worth 86, Rogers had an idea. He brought on Lewis Gregory at the River 
end and with his fourth delivery the seamer had Wright caught behind for 45. 
The last man, Josh Poysden, followed, caught Trescothick off the bowling of 
Leach, five runs later to giveSomerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> a 19-point win and a push up the 
table.

County cricket: Yorkshire v Durham and Somerset v Warwickshire – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/08/county-cricket-yorkshire-durham-somerset-warwickshire-live>
“I just thought the batsmen had a bit of rhythm going with the spinners and 
sometimes a bit of a mix-up, with the ball coming down at a different pace, can 
create something,” Rogers said. “Marcus was telling me to keep with spin but I 
had a feeling. I thought Lewis bowled a very good spell with the new ball on 
Wednesday, as good as he’s bowled for us for a long time, and we just needed a 
touch more pace in those conditions. It was probably as much to do with luck as 
anything.”

Trescothick said: “We talked about it in a huddle this morning and Chris was 
very inclined to bowl Lewis from the bottom end. But I said: ‘No, you’ve got to 
go with two spinners today because I don’t think it will swing.’ Clearly he 
doesn’t listen to me, and it’s just as well.”

Trescothick had reasons to celebrate aside from the win. When he took the 
catch at leg gully to finish the match 40 minutes into the day it was his 394th 
for Somerset in first-class cricket, more than any other fielder in their 
history apart from wicketkeepers.

The indifferent pitch contributed to the early finish and Rogers said: “It 
wasn’t the sort of pitch I would want to spend my career batting on. Each ball 
behaved a bit differently and that creates questions in the minds of batsmen, 
which makes them tentative.

“In our first innings it was swinging and seaming as much as I’ve seen it for 
a long time. It was not what we’d hoped for, but sometimes the overhead 
conditions provide that. And the early start. And Keith Barker is one of the 
best bowlers in the country in those conditions. And the other bowlers are very 
good too.”

Warwickshire’s loss leaves them still concerned with the threat of relegation, 
with only one match to go, at home to Lancashire from 20 September. The 
captain, Ian Bell, who scored just one in the match, said: “We didn’t play well 
enough to win the game. There were some pretty poor shots. We’re right in the 
mix now at the wrong end of the table. At the end of this season, whatever 
happens, we really have to address where we’re going in four-day cricket. And 
how we want to go forward.”

Bell was not an admirer of the pitch either. “I don’t think it’s great for 
first-class cricket to see a wicket like that,” he said. “I don’t know what it 
gains English cricket to play on surfaces like that but it certainly worked for 
Somerset in this game. I wouldn’t say it was a bad pitch. It wasn’t dangerous. 
But it wasn’t a great pitch either. Having said that, you have to be able to 
adapt to all surfaces and we didn’t do that well enough.”
 