
I’ve almost completely forgotten the 14 years I lived in Bergen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/19/bergen-weekend-norway-mountains-frozen>
. I have no diary entries and only fragments of memory, yet astonishingly I 
have managed to stretch them out in painstaking detail to 663 pages. I know so 
little, except it started when I was hitching back to Norway fromAthens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/athens> after a man called Lars who was 
much richer than me failed to notice I had run out of cash or that I was too 
shy to ask to borrow some. Why, I wailed to myself as I slept on piss-stained 
nettles beside the road, was everyone so much more self-obsessed than me? After 
weeks without food I made it back to Bergen where I stayed with my brother 
Yngve.

“I’m madly in love with a girl named Ingvild whom I’ve only met once in 
passing,” I said, helping myself to one of his cigarettes and drinking his beer.

“That’s nice,” he said.

“I’ve also been accepted on the remedial writing course at the university.”

“Thank God for that. I’m not holding my breath, though.”

I didn’t much like any of the other students on my writing course. They were 
all much older than me and far too pretentious and self-obsessed. It also 
didn’t help that they didn’t much like my poetry.

Moonbeams dance across the sky
O where am I? O who am I?

“It’s too banal and cliched,” they said.

Engulfed with a towering rage and self-hatred, I went to the toilets where I 
tried to jerk myself off. My penis remained shabbily small and flaccid despite 
the images of Botticelli’s Venus that flashed across my brain. I went back to 
my bedsit to drink a lot and smoke some dope on my own, before I plucked up 
courage to phone Ingvild. She agreed to meet me and I asked her to be my 
girlfriend. She said she would think about it. I grabbed her breasts in 
gratitude and told her I was prone to premature ejaculation.

A week later I was inconsolable to find Ingvild was now going out with Yngve. 
I spent a week masturbating while readingKnut Hamsun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/sep/10/knut.hamsun.nazi> and 
James Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>, before going back 
to my writing class to show them my new haiku.

Months and years passed in which I dreamed of being a writer. Months and years 
in which some of my readers were dreaming I would dream of something else. I 
finished the course having achieved not very much and then enrolled on another 
at which I could achieve not very much. To make ends meet I worked in a 
hospital for disabled people, none of whom appreciated my efforts to improve 
their lives by reading extracts from my work in progress.

One evening I met a girl called Gunvor who didn’t seem to mind that I was 
hopelessly pissed and unable to maintain an erection. We started going out the 
next day and it was all quite nice except for the times when I was unfaithful 
to her. I felt quite guilty about this, a guilt exacerbated by the fact that 
each infidelity always climaxed in a premature ejaculation. Gunvor was not 
altogether happy when I ended the relationship, though looking back she should 
have been ecstatic.

At some point my grandmother and grandfather both died. I was a bit sad about 
the inconvenience this caused me as I had met another woman called Tonje who 
was very tolerant about my erectile dysfunction issues. On the plus side, my 
dad had also died which gave me a lot more material. The only thing the bastard 
ever gave me.

I was also beginning to make a name for myself as a book reviewer, though I 
didn’t find that very satisfactory as I would rather have been writing books. I 
started writing another book which I sent to a publisher. Strangely, he invited 
me to see him and told me it was quite good even though absolutely nothing 
happened and it was hopelessly derivative. On my way home, I met a complete 
stranger and fucked her. Happy, unhappy days.

To my surprise, the book got quite good reviews. “Look,” said Tonje. “It just 
goes to show that if you type for long enough you can beat people into 
submission. By the way, I’ve just slept with someone else because I am fed up 
with you being so miserable.”

We split up for a while but then got back together and I carried on writing 
and writing and writing and writing. (TBC)

Digested read digested: Some trees must fall.

 