
Rilee Rossouw has been criticised by the South Africa coach, Russell Domingo, 
after the top-order batsman joined the fast bowler Kyle Abbott in signing a 
Kolpak deal withHampshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hampshire>.

Rossouw, 27, and Abbott, 29, have effectively ended their international 
careers after signing respective three- and four-year deals with the County 
Championship club.

“We got an email off his [Rossouw] iPhone telling us he has signed Kolpak. He 
spelt my name wrong for starters – he put one ‘l’ instead of two. So that’s 
where we are. I’m very disappointed in him,” Domingo said.

“He toured Australia as the backup Test batsman, he was the next batsman in. 
He’s played in most of the one-dayers and a lot of T20s. He’s a guy we backed 
after five noughts [early in his international career]. We said this is a guy 
who can play the closest level to AB de Villiers in the one-day teams. We 
invested massively in him and we’re very disappointed in his decision.”

Last of the Kolpaks? Why South Africans are in a rush before Brexit bites | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/the-spin-kolpak-south-africa-cricket-brexit>
Haroon Lorgat, the Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South 
Africa (CSA) chief executive, described the decisions “a disappointing day not 
just for South African cricket but also for international cricket”.

Abbott, who played in 11 Tests, appeared for Hampshire in 2014 and also had 
spells with the Chennai Super Kings and Kings XI Punjab in the Indian Premier 
League, as well as the Dolphins and Warriors in South Africa. Rossouw played 
for the Knights and Royal Challengers Bangalore.

“Making the decision to commit my long-term future to Hampshire was 
undoubtedly the most difficult one I have ever had to make and I leave with 
more than a little sadness knowing I won’t represent the Proteas again,” Abbott 
said in a statement released by CSA.

“Representing my country was undoubtedly the biggest honour in my career and I 
am very thankful for the opportunity to have represented South Africa and the 
Proteas.”

The left-handed Rossouw said: “Deciding to leave South Africa is something I 
have thought long and hard about and moving to England will give me and my 
family the long-term career security I believe is important at this stage of my 
life.

“I have loved representing the Proteas and will watch from afar with great 
affection every time they take the field but I am hugely dedicated to making 
Hampshire cricket successful on the field.”

The CSA has terminated Abbott’s national contract by mutual agreement and with 
immediate effect and is in the process of doing the same for Rossouw. 
“Regrettably we have no option but to sever our ties with both Abbott and 
Rossouw as they are no longer available for South Africa,” Lorgat said. “These 
players have given up their opportunity to be seen in action on the 
international circuit.

“Both Rilee and Kyle have been given opportunities over the past year to play 
at the highest level and were firmly in our plans for the future. We have 
encouraged Rilee and Kyle to reconsider their decisions but both have indicated 
they wish to take up Kolpak contracts. Whilst this is a loss for South African 
cricket, we can only wish them well with their overseas careers.”

Several other South Africa Test players, Stiaan van Zyl, Hardus Viljoen and 
Simon Harmer among them, have recently taken up contracts with Sussex, Kent and 
Essex respectively. A player is eligible for a Kolpak when he gives up the 
right to play for his country, meaning he is not classed as an overseas-player 
signing.

The Kolpak ruling enables players from any nation with a trading relationship 
with the EU to freely play as a professional. The ruling, made by the European 
court of justice in May 2003, originally related to the Slovakia handball 
player Maros Kolpak who was released from his German club because of a quota on 
non-EU players. He claimed it was unfair and the court ruled in his favour.
 