
Thirty-seven people who allegedly took part in a kickbacks-for-contracts 
scheme involving businessmen and members of Spain’s ruling People’s party stood 
trial at the national court, where developments were likely to prove 
irresistible to even the most jaded observers of the country’s enduring 
political turmoil.

Billed as the trial of the year, the Gürtel case involves Swiss bank accounts, 
clowns, fake invoices and, most arrestingly of all, several former senior PP 
members.

The figure at the centre of the proceedings is Francisco Correa, a businessman 
with close ties to the PP who is accused of paying bribes to party officials 
between 1999 and 2006 in return for contracts to carry out public works and 
organise events. The investigation was codenamed Gürtel, the German translation 
ofcorrea (belt). 

Among the defendants are three former PP treasurers, including Luis Bárcenas, 
a former ally of Spain’s acting prime minister, Mariano Rajoy. The party itself 
is also alleged to have benefited from illegally obtained funds, though it is 
not facing criminal charges.

Along with his associates, Correa – who enjoyed being called Don Vito in 
reference to the Marlon Brando character in The Godfather – is accused of 
misusing public funds and setting up offshore accounts to keep millions of 
euros at a safe remove.


The scandal, which has dogged the PP since 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/06/spain-opposition-corruption-scandal>
, led to the resignation two years ago of the health minister, Ana Mato. Her 
ex-husband, Jesús Sepúlveda, is on trial for embezzlement, fraud and peddling 
influence while mayor of Pozuelo de Alarcón, west of Madrid.

The family is alleged to have accepted holidays, presents including Louis 
Vuitton products, a Jaguar and even children’s birthday parties at which clowns 
performed from Correa’s companies. The trial is expected to last several months.

Rajoy’s party has been plagued by corruption scandals in recent years. The 
former International Monetary Fund chief Rodrigo Rato, who was also a PP 
economy minister and deputy prime minister, is on trial at the national court 
forallegedly misusing corporate credit cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/09/former-caja-directors-accused-credit-card-misuse-bankia>
 while in charge of two leading Spanish banks.

Last month, Rita Barberá, a PP senator, resigned from the party after the 
supreme court announced an investigation into allegations of money-laundering 
during her two-and-a-half decades as mayor of Valencia.

An opinion poll in February ranked corruption as Spanish voters’ second 
biggest concern after unemployment, while the recently deposed leader of the 
country’s Socialist party repeatedly refused to do anything to facilitate 
Rajoy’s return to office following two inconclusive general elections on the 
grounds that his party was too corrupt.

However, despite the blizzard of allegations enveloping the PP, it was the 
only party to increase its seat count in June’s second general election.A poll 
conducted at the end of September 
<http://www.abc.es/espana/abci-cisma-psoe-deja-68-escanos-impulsa-pp-hasta-159-201610022229_noticia.html>
 suggested that the party would again take the most votes and pick up a further 
22 seats were a third election to be held, although an overall majority would 
once again elude it.


 <>
 