
Our Hubble Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Telescope image 
is of the most striking feature in the most recognisable constellation in the 
entire sky. The Orion Nebula, and the cloud of gas and dust of which it is a 
part, have also revealed to astronomers much of story of the birth of new stars 
and planets. Results from Nasa's Kepler observatory reported in January suggest 
that such processes are so efficient at constructing new worlds that our Galaxy 
alone may be home to some 17 billion Earth-sized planets.

The Orion Nebula lies 1,350 light years away and appears to the naked eye as a 
fuzzy glow in Orion's Sword, the line of fainter stars that spill southwards 
between 3° and 5° south of Alnilam, the middle star of the three that form 
Orion's Belt. If Orion were wearing Scottish Highland dress, then the nebula 
might represent his sporran. Binoculars make it obvious while telescopes show 
it to extend over a degree or more - twice the Moon's diameter.

It is strange that there appear to be no references to the nebula in popular 
culture or by astronomers until 1610. Even Galileo, who charted numerous stars 
in that part of Orion, seems to have ignored it, perhaps because his crude 
telescope had such a narrow field of view. Galileo, though, is credited with 
the discovery of what is now known as the Trapezium, the knot of stars that 
reside at the heart of the nebula near the brightest region in our image. 
Galileo spotted three of the Trapezium's four stars which, with fainter 
companions, make up the compact Trapezium Cluster.

The Trapezium stars are young, only some 300,000 years old, and up to 30 times 
more massive than our Sun. As such, they emit large amounts of radiation, 
particularly in the ultraviolet, and it is this that powers the nebula we see. 
Energetic UV photons ionise the surrounding gas, causing it to glow– the 
pinkish hues come largely from hydrogen while ionised oxygen yields the green 
colours so evident to the eye. More illumination is simply reflected light from 
the nebula's stars.

The expanding ionised gas has shaped the shell-like cocoon that we see. The 
shocks formed as this collides with the surrounding cold gas and dust triggers 
the formation of new stars, many of which are hidden to our optical view but 
visible at infrared wavelengths. Discs of material surrounding these new stars 
hold the promise of planets yet to be born.

For all its glory, the Orion Nebula is but a blister on the flank of a huge 
cold cloud of gas and dust that lurks largely unseen across southern Orion and 
eastwards into Monoceros.

As a footnote, anyone interested in spotting the 45-metre asteroid 2012 DA14 
as it sweeps very close to the Earth on Friday can find a chart of its path 
through your sky at heavens-above.
 