
Mitchell Starc roared with bat and ball on day three of the day-night Test at 
Adelaide Oval, putting Australia in the box seat for victory over South Africa.

The Proteas were 6-194 at stumps on Saturday, holding a 70-run lead after 
Starc removed opener Dean Elgar and first-innings centurion Faf du Plessis.

Hashim Amla should have been Starc’s third victim but failed to make the most 
of a dropped catch on 15, adding a further 30 runs before falling victim to 
Josh Hazlewood for the fifth time in the series.

Australia v South Africa: third Test, day three – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/australia-v-south-africa-third-test-day-three-live>
Offspinner Nathan Lyon returned to form with three wickets in the night 
session, including the dismissals of Temba Bavuma and nightwatchman Kyle Abbott 
in his final two overs of the day.

The late wickets left Australia, who can access the second new ball in 11 
overs, well placed to snap a five-Test losing streak and avoid their first 
whitewash in a home Test series since federation.

The hosts took control of the contest thanks to Usman Khawaja’s knock of 145. 
The classy left-hander, pitched into opening the batting, pushed Australia 
towards a first-innings lead of 124 runs while spending almost eight hours at 
the crease.

Starc, the most aggressive and productive member of a wagging tail on 
Saturday, also played a critical part in Australia posting 383 – their highest 
Test total since February.

Starc attacked with vigour following a glancing bouncer blow to his helmet, 
scoring 53 to register the first half-century by an Australian bowler since 
last year’s Ashes.

The spearhead fired out Elgar for a duck in the first over of South Africa’s 
second innings then later claimed the crucial scalp of du Plessis, who was 
averaging 306 at the venue before his dismissal on 12.

Du Plessis, booed when he entered and left the field following last week’s 
ball-tampering saga, was out driving when debutant Peter Handscomb snaffled a 
low catch at gully.

Starc continued to threaten but opener Stephen Cook, on 81 not out, did well 
to reach stumps alongside Quinton de Kock.

The left-armer had been relatively subdued for much of the three-Test series; 
a combination of inept collapses and a training accident in September that left 
him with 30 stitches in his leg and a lack of match fitness.

“This is as good as Mitchell Starc’s bowled in the series,” Mark Taylor said 
on the Nine Network.

“The rhythm is back. The direction is back and his pace is lifting.”

Australia made five changes for the dead rubber after losing the second Test, 
the series and almost all credibility in Hobart.
 