
The mother of one of the men accused of the Continuity IRA murder of a 
Northern Ireland police officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/09/trial-psni-officer-murder?INTCMP=SRCH>
 has pleaded guilty to obstructing the investigation into the killing.

Sharon Wootton admitted on Friday that she removed computer equipment from her 
home to another address after police raids on the house between 8 March and 11 
March 2009. However, Lord Justice Girvan acquitted her of perverting the course 
of justice after the Crown offered no further evidence on that charge.

Wootton's son, John Paul, from Collingdale, Lurgan, and former Sinn Féin 
councillor Brendan McConville, 40, of Glenholme Avenue, Craigavon, both deny 
murdering Constable Stephen Carroll on 9 March 2009.

Constable Carroll was the first officer from the Police Service of Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to be shot dead by 
paramilitaries. He was fatally wounded after responding to a 999 call at 
Lismore Manor in Craigavon.

Lord Justice Girvan adjourned passing sentence until a date to be fixed.

Meanwhile, Marian Price, who served a prison sentence for the IRA bombing of 
the Old Bailey in London in 1973, has been moved from Maghaberry top security 
prison to the women's jail at Hydebank outside Belfast, it emerged on Friday.

She is in prison facing charges under the Terrorism Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/22/old-bailey-bomber-marian-price> 
after holding a statement to be read by a masked Real IRA member last Easter in 
Derry city.

The republican veteran's continued incarceration has been described as a "form 
of internment" by human rights campaigner Raymond Murray.

The former chaplain to female IRA prisoners in Armagh Women's Prison said: "I 
am just shocked that the secretary of state wouldn't be aware of how seriously 
nationalist people look on internment. We thought it had all ended and here it 
is coming under a form of revocation, revoking a licence."

Murray added: "He would have to explain to us and explain the process of law 
as regards Marian Price. In any way has she broken the law? That would have to 
be provided but it is not provided by shoving her into prison on a pretence in 
an unjust way."

The Northern Ireland Prison Service said the decision to move Price out of 
Maghaberry was taken on clinical advice from healthcare staff at the South 
Eastern Trust of the NHS.

Marian Price gained a high profile during the 1970s after staging a series of 
hunger strikes in English prisons during which the authorities forcefed her and 
her sister Dolours.
 