
Steve O’Keefe views his recall as a potential window to finally play 
successive cricket Tests.

The 32-year-old NSW left arm orthodox spinner has played three Tests, all in 
different countries and separate series.

With a four-Test series in spin-friendly India looming in February and March, 
O’Keefe could finally get the chance to play a run of Tests, if he makes the 
final XI for the third Test against Pakistan ahead of another recalled left arm 
finger spinner, Ashton Agar.

Nic Maddinson dropped as Australia recall Agar and O'Keefe for SCG Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/nic-maddinson-dropped-as-australia-recall-agar-and-okeefe-for-scg-test>
“I’d love nothing more than to be able to play a full series and show my 
worth,” O’Keefe said on Saturday.

“I’m not getting any younger and there’s some great young talent out there, so 
I know this is probably my window where I’ve got to get it right.

“Keep the body fit and bowl well and this is my opportunity, so I’m excited 
about that and I know the challenges that are ahead of us, but that’s the thing 
that excites me the most.”

Keeping his body right has been a big issue for O’Keefe this year.

He has missed domestic and international games due to calf, hamstring and 
finger injuries.

“The body is going okay, I’ve done as much as I possibly could the last couple 
of weeks,” he said.

“I’ve worked really hard with the staff of Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> NSW ... I’ve given myself every 
chance to show that I’m up and capable to play the duration of the match.”

There was speculation he might have replaced Nathan Lyon in the the team for 
the final Test against South Africa had he not had a finger injury at the time.

However, O’Keefe wasn’t dwelling on that and said Lyon had deserved to be 
selected for each game this season.

“He’s a guy that I look up to, I think he’s been super impressive his whole 
career,” O’Keefe said.

“He’s a really humble guy who gives a lot of time to players like myself and a 
good all-round person to be around.

“I love playing cricket with him and I love bowling in tandem with him.”

Australia’s 13-man squad: Matt Renshaw, David Warner, Usman Khawaja, Steve 
Smith (capt), Peter Handscomb, Matthew Wade, Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood, 
Nathan Lyon, Jackson Bird, Hilton Cartwright, Ashton Agar, Steve O’Keefe.
 