
Stephen Bannon, the head of the Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> presidential campaign, faced 
domestic violence charges after a fight with a woman he was married to 20 years 
ago, in which she accused him of grabbing her by the neck “violently” and 
destroying a telephone when she tried to summon police.

Documents from the Santa Monica, California, police department relating to the 
case were firstpublished by Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000156-c3f8-dd14-abfe-fbfbbe310001> on 
Thursday, 25 August 2016. The case was eventually dismissed.

Related: Trump campaign chief is registered to vote in Florida at unoccupied 
home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>

“She complained of soreness to her neck,” wrote a police officer who responded 
to the incident. “I saw red marks on her left wrist and the right side of her 
neck. These were photographed.”

Police arrived at the home on New Year’s Day, 1996, after a call was made to 
911 and the line went dead, the police report says.

The report draws on an account by Bannon’s then wife, whom he had married 
eight months earlier, three days before she gave birth to their twins.

The couple’s decision to marry was described in a separate declaration filed 
by the woman in their divorce case,obtained 
<http://nypost.com/2016/08/25/trump-campaign-ceo-accused-in-divorce-papers-of-attacking-wife/>
 by the New York Post.

“Bannon made it clear that he would not marry me just because I was pregnant,” 
the Post quotes the document as saying. “I was scheduled for an amniocentesis 
and was told by the respondent that if the babies were normal we would get 
married … After the test showed that the babies were normal the respondent sent 
over a prenuptial agreement for me to review.”

The Trump campaign did not reply to a request for comment. Both Bannon’s 
ex-wife and his lawyer in the domestic case declined comment to Politico.

The police officer who filed the report in the domestic violence case noted 
that when he arrived on the scene, the woman “appeared as if she was very upset 
and had been crying”. The document continues:

I saw that her eyes were red and watery. She first said, ‘Oh, thank you, you 
are here. How did you know to come?’ As I started to tell her about the 911 
hang up call, she started to cry, and it took 3-4 minutes for her to calm down, 
so she could tell me what happened.

The domestic dispute developed after a night in which Bannon slept on the 
couch, according to police documents. “Early in the morning she got up to feed 
their twins, and Mr Bannon got upset at her for making some noise,” the 
document says.

She asked him for the credit card to buy groceries, and he said she should 
write a check, the police report says. “She asked him why he was playing those 
games with the money, and he said it was his money.”

She spit on him, the document says, and then “he reached up to her, from the 
driver’s seat of his car, and grabbed her left wrist. He pulled her down … Mr 
Bannon grabbed at her neck also pulling her into the car. She said that she 
started to fight back.”


In the divorce filing, the woman says that Bannon, who later remarried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
, then followed her back into the home and destroyed the phone.

“I took the phone to call the police and he grabbed the phone away from me 
throwing it across the room, and breaking it as he [was] screaming,” the Post 
quotes the document as saying.

The couple had gone to counseling earlier in their relationship after “three 
or four arguments that became physical”, according to the police report.


Bannon was charged with misdemeanor domestic violence, battery and dissuading 
a witness. The case was dismissed. The woman claims in the divorce filing that 
it was dismissed because Bannon convinced her to leave town, because “if I 
wasn’t in town they couldn’t serve me and I wouldn’t have to go to court”.

“He also told me that if I went to court he and his attorney would make sure 
that I would be the one who was guilty. I was told that I could go anywhere in 
the world.”

This article was originally published on 26 August 2016 and updated on 13 
November 2016 after Bannon was named chief strategist for Donald Trump’s White 
House.
 