
I spend time on my own with the blinds drawn and the world shut out.”

So answered a staff nurse, one of the 3,700 public and voluntary sector 
workers who responded to a Guardian survey on wellbeing in the workplace, when 
answering the question: when you feel stressed, what do you do to relax?

From playing heavy metal music on full blast to crocheting furiously in front 
of the TV, respondents had developed a wide range of ways to unwind. With 93% 
saying they suffer from stress at work, and more than half saying they are more 
stressed than this time last year, learning to clock off and manage stress has 
never been more important.

Alongside the positive and charming “I use adult colouring books”, we received 
frank responses that detailed the daily struggles some public service workers 
face. Many respondents described over-eating as a means to combat the pressure 
of work, while others – some 28% – said they tended to drink when stressed. 
Some said there’s often no time for relaxation, because with a massive workload 
it’s easier to just carry on doing as much as possible rather than let it pile 
up further.

So how do you relax? Are you no sooner through the door then you’re out with 
the dog to walk off the day? Do you fill up the tub for a long hot soak? A 
bottle of wine in front of the TV? Running before breakfast? Gardening or DIY? 
Do you have advice you think others who experience stress could benefit from? 
Or do you just want to share the work week pain with a selfie to sum up your 
Friday feeling?

We want the images and stories of how those working in public services and the 
voluntary sector try to find a balance between work and home. You can submit 
yours via GuardianWitness anonymously or with your name.

We will be using these to inform our project, called Clock off, which is 
examining work-life balance in the public and voluntary sectors. Our favourite 
submissions may appear in galleries, articles or interactives. You can also 
tweet us with your experiences on #ClockOff.

You can share your photos, videos and stories by clicking on the blue 
‘Contribute’ button on this article. You can also use theGuardianWitness 
smartphone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for “GuardianWitness assignments”.


 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site.*  