 Sudan is in danger of being overwhelmed, not only by the endless columns of 
starving people pouring across its borders from Ethiopia and Chad, but by 
increasing numbers of its own refugees, heading for the cities after a 
disastrous 1984 harvest.
The human tide from the country's western provinces is now lapping at the 
outskirts of the capital, and the Government's limited machinery for dealing 
with the crisis is buckling under the strain. The latest UN figures suggest 
that 4.5 million of Sudan's population is ' famine affected.'

Tens of thousands of these people can be found at the 'Souk Libya' (the 
so-called 'Libyan Market') a short drive from the city. Once it was an isolated 
desert bazaar, but now it is the point of convergence for the latest drought 
and famine-driven immigrants from the western provinces.

An army barrier stops them moving deeper into the urban area, where the 
impoverished already abound, and the Government has sent thousands of them back 
where they came from.

But others continue to trek in. They are drawn by the Nile, population 
centres, and the hope of work and aid. Muhammad al-Maula, who came here with 
500 of his clansmen, said that the Government had not asked them to go back to 
their native Darfur, but that they would not do so if it did. He was buying 
about 5 1/2 lb of low-grade sorghum, a coarse grain, for about pounds 1.70. 
That was about five times what it would have cost him a year ago. It was all he 
could afford, he said, for his family of nine.

It would yield far less than the 2,000 calories or so per person which relief 
workers consider the minimum for subsistence. That day, as his only regular 
income, he had earned just over pounds 1 in the back-breaking toil of fetching 
water for his camp. Yet it seems that, measured by the gradations of almost 
total destitution, his clan are significantly better off than others. In the 
three months that they have been in Souk Libya, only ten of their number have 
died.

The Souk Libya refugees are Sudanese. The Sudan, once hailed as the future 
granary of the Arab world, now has a famine of its own. In 1981 it had a record 
harvest, yielding 3.4 million tons of grain, mainly sorghum. That was thanks to 
perfect rainfall. Of the country's 9.5 million acres of arable land, 9 million 
are rain-fed.

The harvests of 1982 and 1983 were poor, but 1984's was disastrous. When, in 
November, the crop was finally in, it totalled a mere 1,471,000 tons, about 1.9 
million short of the 3.4 million needed, according to American calculations, to 
feed the population of 19 million.

The UN puts the number of people 'seriously affected' by the drought- famine 
at up to 4.5 million.

Hardest hit are 200,000 to 300,000 semi-nomadic tribesmen, the Bejar, from the 
hills around Port Sudan. They have lost almost everything - including even 
their precious dome trees, which, with their fan leaves, provide fodder, 
medicinal substances, fibre for matting, and shade in a fiercely hostile 
environment.

About 30,000 of them have clustered around the Port Sudan Kassala railway 
where, providential relic of the steam age, tanks still provide water. But in 
their natural habitat, conditions were said at one time to be at least as bad 
as in the Ethiopian refugee camps. Oxfam reported that in November, nine 
children were dying every day in one camp of only 1,500 people.

After these, the worst afflicted are about 2.5 million people of northern 
Kordofan and Darfur. They have been moving south in search of pasture, leaving 
whole regions deserted of man and beast. A witness reported that in November, 
people were dying at a rate of 200 a day in a gathering centre in south Darfur 
after a trek of 45 days.

About half a million people are said to be 'severely affected' in the deep 
south where, as in Ethiopia , natural calamity is aggravated by insurgency 
against the central Government.

Finally, there are more than a million refugees from neighbouring countries. 
Some of these, such as an estimated 250,000 from Uganda, are of long-standing.

Others, like 116,000 from Chad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad>, are 
recent. Of an estimated 650,000 Ethiopians, about 150,000 have arrived - in the 
last extremities of hunger and deprivation - in the past two or three months. 
The refugees place an ever-growing burden on the local population, and the 
number that are yet to come are forever being revised upwards.

In the Souk, Libya, a while ago, the single representative of Oxfam ran into a 
French diplomat distributing food by himself. And so was born the International
Famine <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/famine> Relief 
Association, with foreign nationals joining forces with the Sudanese in 
collecting and distributing charitable donations in an organised manner. It is 
one of the many voluntary efforts which have sprung up across the country.

The authorities have been taxed with incompetence and inertia. But foreign 
relief workers speak highly of the spontaneous generosity of the Sudanese 
people. 'They deserve credit for their hospitality,' said a Usaid official. 
'They have taken in the equivalent of what for us would be 12 million people. 
Do you remember the fuss over 30,000 Cubans coming to Florida?'

The crisis, however, is on such a scale that only a concentrated effort by 
governments and UN agencies, can contain it. With a national debt of $9bn, 
Sudan has a decrepit, and deteriorating infrastructure, a single congested 
port, drastic petrol shortages, and not a paved road west of Khartoum.

There is a short as well as a longer-term crisis, with the Ethiopian refugees 
the principal cause of the former. Here, the various UN agencies, governmental 
and private relief agencies are now engaged in a frenzy of stop-gap measures - 
buying up stocks from the local market, diverting ships bound elsewhere, and 
rushing in airlifts of less bulky, specialised foods.

If the US is well to the front in this emergency, it is almost out of sight in 
the longer-term operation of supplying basic food for the coming year. For all 
its deep misgivings about a stoutly pro-Western regime, it has embarked on the 
biggest-ever aid programme of the kind.

Of the anticipated 1.9 million-ton grain deficit, it has already pledged to 
supply 748,000 tons, most of it sorghum. 'I can get that from Texas to Geneina 
(on the Chad frontier) for two-thirds of the local price,' said the Usaid 
official. 'Our first shipment of 20,000 tons began unloading at Port Sudan on 
November 19 and reached Alobied (the capital of Kordofan) on November 28.'

Relief workers speak of the 'marvellous job' the Americans have done in 
speeding the unloading at Port Sudan by two to three times, hiring competent 
local contractors to deliver the food into outlying regions, and, with the help 
of Oxfam and Save the Children monitors, making sure that it reaches the right 
people.

The UN and other Western governments lag far behind. So far, the World Food 
Programme has firmly pledged a mere 25,000 tons of grain and the EEC 75,000 
tons at most. 'The European governments are just too bloody mean and the EEC 
too bureaucratic,' said an Oxfam official. 'And the British Farmers' Union, 
with their ' send a ton toAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>,' 
have contributed more food than Mrs Thatcher.'

US officials are privately critical. 'We expected to be contributing 33 to 40 
per cent of all the aid to Africa,' said one, 'but in Sudan we are so far 
contributing at least seven and a half times as much as the rest of the world 
together.'

Relief workers in the field, including those from the agencies directly 
involved, say that the UN High Commission for Refugees and the World Food 
Programme could have done much more to deal with the Eritrean and Tigre 
emergency.

It remains to be seen - if the short-term emergency is brought under control - 
whether the potential donors, especially Europe, rise to the longer term one.
 