
In the streets and cafes of Bury St Edmunds, in the bars of Beccles and 
Bungay, there will this weekend be one unavoidable question: have those fine 
folk in Ipswich taken leave of their senses? On the recommendation of a local 
agency with the curious name of Condiment, the Ipswich-based county council has 
decided that Suffolk would gain from rebranding itself as "the curious county 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-19959510>".

The word curious is usually construed in one of two ways, neither immediately 
flattering. It might mean the county is odd, a kind of East Anglian equivalent 
of an old curiosity shop; or it might indicate a profusion of inquisitive 
people. Perhaps there is a hint in this formula that Suffolk people are modest 
and mercifully self-effacing. Perhaps that will spread to its neighbours. 
"Cambridge people rarely smile,"wrote Rupert Brooke, 
<http://www.orchard-grantchester.com/poetry/> "being urban, squat 
and packed with guile." Maybe Condiment could find a Cambridgeshire slogan in 
that.

It's not that Suffolk hasn't plenty to boast about. Few English counties have 
a richer crop of small towns. Bury St Edmunds is all that every market town 
should aspire to. There are mighty castles at Orford and Framlingham, and 
reverenced churches like Blythburgh, together with others, more humble but no 
less appealing, such as sad, forgotten Ramsholt, down a lane that leads 
nowhere, above the Deben estuary. A few miles down the coast from spick and 
span Southwold is the remnant of once mighty Dunwich, now nearly all lost to 
the sea. Go a little further and you come to pleasantly batty Thorpeness, and 
beyond that, to the silent perfection of the first sight of Iken church, serene 
on its hill across the water from Snape.

Suffolk may lack a motorway or a city, but it offers historic excitements, 
from the archaeological finds at Sutton Hoo to the site in the Rendlesham 
Forest where a UFO may or may not have landed. It has given the nation an 
assortment of memorable people: Thomas Wolsey, son of an Ipswich butcher, Henry 
VIII's chief minister, more famous even than his successor Thomas Cromwell 
until Hilary Mantel started work; the poet George Crabbe; the painters 
Gainsborough and Constable; the composer Benjamin Britten. George Orwell chose 
his pseudonymous surname from one of its rivers.

Still, a county can suffer far worse than being called curious. In 1612 
Michael Drayton published an epic poem charting the English counties. Suffolk 
got away lightly, as a county of maids and milk. But what must they have said 
in the inns of Northampton, to whom he attached the description: "Love below 
the girdle, but little else above"? No agency, even one looking for something 
self-deprecatory, could have come up with that.
 