
Rural Suffolk is chocolate-box England made real, the English countryside as 
we imagine it to be. No other county resembles our romantic vision of England 
so closely; no other county remains so unchanged, so untouched by industry, so 
free of major roads. There is some small commotion perhaps at Lowestoft, 
England's most easterly point, or Ipswich, the county's capital, but otherwise 
Suffolk's idea of grime and bustle is Bury St Edmunds, founded after (perhaps) 
the last piece of unpleasantness to occur in Suffolk, in 869, when England's 
first patron saint, King Edmund the Martyr, was slain by the Danes at Hoxne.

Suffolk is a soft, sleepy, timeless place, grown rich on wool, that English 
staple, and still living off the proceeds. There's affluent Long Melford, with 
its wide street of antique shops, three great houses and glorious 15th-century 
Holy Trinity church: 80m long with more than 100 windows.

Picture-perfect Lavenham, described by the late archbishop of Canterbury 
Donald Coggan, as the "prettiest village in England", is where Jane Taylor 
wrote The Star, better known as the nursery rhymeTwinkle, Twinkle, Little Star 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavenham>.
 Lavenham market place. Photograph: Bethany Clarke/Getty 
Kersey, its cloth immortalised in Shakespeare (Love's Labour's Lost, Measure 
for Measure and The Taming of the Shrew), tumbles down the hillside towards the 
water-splash of its ford, a star of the opening episode of TV'sLovejoy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lovejoy>.

These lustrous jewels adorn a county strewn with picturesque villages, gaily 
painted, steeply gabled, rose-embowered cottages, thatched and timber-framed, 
clustering around medieval stone churches like chicks around a mother hen.

The landscape is unthreatening: there are no bleak and empty moors, no dark, 
lowering mountains. The highest point in Suffolk, Great Wood Hill near Rede, is 
a mere 128m (420ft) high. But Suffolk is not flat; it undulates seductively.

That Suffolk appears so quintessentially English is in large part due to two 
of England's finest painters, both Suffolk-born: Thomas Gainsborough (1727-88) 
andJohn Constable <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/constable> 
(1776-1837).

Gainsborough, regarded by many as the father of modern English landscape, was 
born in peaceful Sudbury, set in a loop of the river Stour and surrounded by 
the oldest continuously grazed fields in England. A statue of the painter, 
holding a palette and brush, stands in front of St Peter's church, gazing down 
the street towards the house where he was born.

Gainsborough's House (46 Gainsborough Street, Sudbury, 01787 372958, 
gainsborough.org <http://www.gainsborough.org/>; Mon-Sat 10am-5pm, adults 
£5.50, children/students £2) is now a museum. The building has been refashioned 
but the lovely walled garden at the back is much as it was when featured in his 
earliest known work.

Aged 12, Gainsborough was drawing a pear tree in the garden when he spotted a 
fellow leaning over the wall and gazing hungrily at the fruit. He added a quick 
sketch of the ruffian to the picture and so good was the likeness that the 
drawing was used in court to convict the man of pilfering. Gainsborough later 
turned the sketch into a life-size portrait in oils on wood, which he calledTom 
Peartree <http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/paintings/tom-pear-tree-12137>
 and placed on a wall outside his home in Ipswich to advertise his work. Fooled 
into thinking the figure was real, passers-by would bid the man good day.
 View on the Stour near Dedham by John Constable. Photograph: The Huntingdon 
Library Art Collections 
Although Gainsborough is renowned as a portrait painter, his first love was 
landscape and he would often use a Suffolk-inspired scene as a backdrop for his 
subjects. "Suffolk made me a painter," he said, and the sketches he made as a 
boy provided material for his work throughout the rest of his life.

John Constable, the leading English landscape painter of the 19th century, was 
also born by the river Stour, in East Bergholt. He was happiest painting 
Suffolk's "gentle declivities, its luxuriant meadow flats sprinkled with flocks 
and herds, its well-cultivated uplands, its woods and rivers".

Echoing the words of Gainsborough, he wrote: "These scenes made me a painter. 
The sound of water escaping from mill dams, willows, old rotten planks, slimy 
posts and brickwork. I love such things."

Constable's affection for the Suffolk countryside was kindled by the paintings 
of Gainsborough – he spoke of being moved to tears by the latter's depictions 
of "the stillness of noon, the depths of twilight and the dews and pearls of 
the morning".

Gainsborough rarely portrayed real scenes, infusing imaginary landscapes with 
a Suffolk-like aura. Constable painted real Suffolk places. The genius of them 
both ensures that when we think of England, we think of Suffolk.

• Christopher Winn is a writer and a collector of trivia for more than 20 
years. He is the author of I Never Knew That About England
 