
David Warner led Sunrisers Hyderabad to a maiden Indian Premier League title 
on Sunday after the bowlers derailed Royal Challengers Bangalore’s chase to 
fashion an eight-run victory.

Warner (69) led from the front, top-scoring for his side to steer Hyderabad to 
208 for seven after opting to bat at Bangalore’s M Chinnaswamy Stadium. The 
Australian then returned to marshal his bowlers, who staged a stunning comeback 
after Chris Gayle (76) and Virat Kohli (54) had threatened to take the game 
away.

Bhuvneshwar Kumar, the highest wicket-taker in this year’s competition, 
conceded only nine runs in the final over to dash Bangalore’s hopes of being 
third time lucky in the final of theTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> competition.

Warner and Shikhar Dhawan (28) added 63 runs to give Hyderabad a decent start. 
They lost Moises Henriques cheaply but Warner joined up with Yuvraj Singh (38) 
to consolidate the innings. Warner fell in the 14th over and Yuvraj in the 17th 
but Ben Cutting’s 15-ball blitz ensured they had enough on the board for their 
bowlers.

Cutting (39 not out) smacked his fellow Australian Shane Watson for three 
sixes in the final over of the innings as Hyderabad plundered 52 runs off the 
last three overs to top 200.

Watson endured a terrible outing with the ball, conceding 61 runs in his four 
wicketless overs. The target was difficult but not beyond a Bangalore team with 
a top order that would send shivers down the spine of any team in the world.

Gayle looked ominous, too, as he smacked eight sixes in his two-runs-a-ball 
blitz, dominating his 114-run opening partnership with Kohli. The match seemed 
to be slipping away when Cutting (two for 35), whose all-round display earned 
him the man-of-the-match award, dismissed Gayle to bring much-needed relief to 
Hyderabad.

The captain Kohli’s form, however, meant Bangalore were still very much in the 
contest. Four of the seven centuries in this year’sIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> had come from Kohli’s bat and the 
tournament’s top scorer needed only 32 balls to race to his fifty.

Barinder Sran bowled the Indian Test captain to bring Hyderabad back into the 
match and Bipul Sharma dismissed the talismanic AB de Villiers (five) cheaply 
to choke Bangalore, who fell short at 200 for seven in their 20 overs.
 