
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> struck 
down 48-year-old protections for minority voters in states with a history of 
racial discrimination on Tuesday, in a decision lamented by campaigners who 
argued that it gutted the most important civil rights law ever passed by 
Congress.

President Obama said the ruling, which invalidated a key provision of 1965 
Voting Rights Act, was "deeply disappointing" and overturned decades of 
bipartisan agreement on measures to prevent voting discrimination.

The conservative-dominated court argued the act had largely served its purpose 
in encouraging equal access to the ballot box and said it was unconstitutional 
to continue singling out southern states for extra scrutiny without new 
legislation to determine signs of ongoing discrimination.

For nearly 50 years, the law forced certain, mostly southern states to seek 
permission from federal authorities in Washington for any changes to electoral 
rules, such as introducing literacy tests to reduce voter registration among 
minority groups.

However, chief justice John Roberts ruled on Tuesday that although there were 
some signs of continued racial discrimination, it was no longer sufficient to 
justify legal discrimination against the southern states caught up by the rules.

"Voting discrimination still exists; no one doubts that," Roberts wrote, in 
the majority opinion. "The question is whether the act's extraordinary 
measures, including its disparate treatment of the states, continue to satisfy 
constitutional requirements."

The logic was rejected by four of the nine justices who split along the 
ideological lines that increasingly divide the supreme court. Justice Ruth 
Bader Ginsburg, writing for the minority, read out a stinging dissent from the 
bench: "The sad irony of today's decision lies in its utter failure to grasp 
why the VRA has proven effective," she said.

"Throwing out preclearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to 
stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm 
because you are not getting wet."

The court did not strike down the core of the act, the advance approval 
requirement itself, in section five. But it invalidated section four, which 
sets the conditions under which parts of the US must submit voting changes to 
federal monitoring. Unless Congress comes up with a new formula, which it has 
repeatedly failed to do in the past, section five cannot be enforced.

The five justices in the majority pointed to evidence showing that voter 
registration among African Americans was now higher than white voters in four 
of the five original states targeted by the legislation.

"Nearly 50 years later, things have changed dramatically. Largely because of 
the Voting Rights Act, voter turnout and registration rates in covered 
jurisdictions now approach parity," the majority opinion said. "Blatantly 
discriminatory evasions of federal decrees are rare and minority candidates 
hold office at unprecedented levels."

Roberts said Congress could pass new legislation to modernise tests 
determining which states should abide by the pre-clearance rules. But previous 
attempts to do this have failed despite a far less polarised political climate.

Barack Obama and other leading Democrats sounded a gloomy note. Obama said: "I 
am deeply disappointed with the supreme court's decision today. For nearly 50 
years, the Voting Rights Act – enacted and repeatedly renewed by wide 
bipartisan majorities in Congress – has helped secure the right to vote for 
millions of Americans. Today's decision invalidating one of its core provisions 
upsets decades of well-established practices that help make sure voting is 
fair, especially in places where voting discrimination has been historically 
prevalent.

"As a nation, we've made a great deal of progress towards guaranteeing every 
American the right to vote. But, as the supreme court recognised, voting 
discrimination still exists." He called on Congress to pass new protections for 
minorities.

Speaking soon after the ruling, attorney general Eric Holder also said he was 
"deeply disappointed" by the decision and joined president Obama in calling on 
Congress to act quickly to fix the legislation.

"As Congress correctly recognised in the hearings held in 2006 – racial and 
language minorities face significant voting discrimination in some parts of our 
country," said Holder. "Given the successful decisions in the department's 
Voting Rights Act cases over the last 18 months, the need for a vital – and 
intact – Voting Rights Act remains clear."

Senator Pat Leahy, the Democratic chair of the Senate judiciary 
committee, promised "immediate" action. He said in a statement: "section five 
of the Voting Rights Act has protected minorities of all races from 
discriminatory practices in voting for nearly 50 years, yet the supreme court's 
decision to overturn the coverage formula effectively guts the ability of 
section five to protect voters from discriminatory practices. I could not 
disagree more with this result or the majority's rationale."

Jon Greenbaum, chief counsel for the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under 
Law, which represented a black resident of the Alabama county that challenged 
the law, said: "The supreme court has effectively gutted one of the nation's 
most important and effective civil rights laws. Minority voters in places with 
a record of discrimination are now at greater risk of being disenfranchised 
than they have been in decades.

"Today's decision is a blow to democracy. Jurisdictions will be able to enact 
policies which prevent minorities from voting, and the only recourse these 
citizens will have will be expensive and time-consuming litigation."

But it was welcomed by Frank Ellis, the attorney for Shelby County, which 
brought the challenge. He said that areas covered by the act had changed in the 
past 50 years. He said that Alabama in 1965 "was a different time, a different 
place. It didn't resemble what it is now. I know there was discrimination in 
1965, but I also know that what we were doing then is not a relevant barometer 
of what we are doing now in 2013. It's not fair to over-ride our sovereign 
jurisdiction based on a formula that is almost 50 years old."
 