
As Surrey head into the second half of their season, with relegation a 
distinct possibility, they could do without rain, even when facing the 
champions. But just six balls after lunch following a funereal morning session 
the players left the field, improbably never to return, with nagging – if never 
too powerful – rain hanging over south London.

That one over was Surrey’s most productive of the match; Azeem Rafiq – his 
off-breaks complementing Adil Rashid’s leg-spin inYorkshire’s side – was hit 
for four twice by Zafar Ansari, with a loosener flick to midwicket and an 
elegant cut, and once by Aaron Finch, who took an agricultural leg-side swipe 
to end the day 34 from 30 balls.

The morning session had not been quite as dashing. After Rory Burns was 
trapped in front by David Willey playing across the line, Ansari joined Dominic 
Sibley – replacing the unfortunate Arun Harinath, who paid the price for 
Surrey’s innings defeat toWarwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> last week despite being the 
club’s second-top scorer this season, to share 23 in 15.4 overs, before Sibley 
was brilliantly caught down the leg side off Steve Patterson by Andrew Hodd.

Finch was immediately into his work, twice straight-driving Patterson 
beautifully as well as cutting and driving Willey. Ansari, on a pitch home to 
no obvious demons, was more watchful, only truly settling shortly before lunch.
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> are not just without 
Gary Ballance but Kane Williamson, who was rested for his final game before 
joining up with New Zealand. Williamson’s replacement, the Australian Travis 
Head, arrives on Tuesday.

Surrey’s need for a positive result was heightened by a strong showing from 
Hampshire – the only club below them, who they meet next week – against 
Warwickshire at Edgbaston. Despite contriving to lose their final five wickets 
for just nine runs, after Jeetan Patel dismissed Sean Ervine for 75,Hampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hampshire> still made 531, thanks largely to 
an unbeaten double century – the first of his career – for Adam Wheater, who 
had shared 144 with Ervine. Josh Poysden took the final three wickets to finish 
with career-best figures of four for 85.

In response, Hampshire swiftly dismissed Andrew Umeed and Ian Bell. Varun 
Chopra – who is leaving the club at the end of the season – and Jonathan Trott 
put on 67 to steady the ship, before Chopra became the third Warwickshire 
batsman to be bowled. Warwickshire, with Trott on 59, were still 400 in arrears 
at stumps.

The table-toppers Middlesex take a valuable lead of 125 into the second half 
of their match withSomerset on a staggeringly green Taunton wicket, thanks 
largely to an extraordinary ninth-wicket stand of 149 between James Harris 
(69*) and James Fuller (84*). The pair, only in the side because Steven Finn, 
Tim Murtagh and Toby Roland-Jones are all on international duty, had taken 
three wickets each as Somerset were bowled out for 236 on the first day. They 
came together with Middlesex still 22 behind, but saw off the new ball to each 
record unbeaten half-centuries. Earlier, Jim Allenby had claimed four wickets 
as Nick Gubbins and George Bailey had scored steady half-centuries asMiddlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> sought parity.

In Division Two, Worcestershire’s push for promotion enjoyed a boost as they 
pushed for a win againstNorthamptonshire. They polished them off for 148 – with 
Joe Leach completing his third five-wicket haul of the season after scoring 51 
in the first innings – for a lead of 129. By the day’s end that had swelled to 
310 as Brett D’Oliveira (81) shared 104 with Daryl Mitchell (47), then 73 with 
Tom Fell (36*) to close for three. Late in the day, Rob Keogh’s dismissed 
D’Oliveira and Joe Clarke with consecutive balls and Seekkuge Prasanna trapped 
Tom Kohler-Cadmore, but it was barely a dint in Worcestershire’s dominance.
 