
Sylvia Townsend Warner <http://www.townsendwarner.com/>’s 1926 novel Lolly 
Willowes is an act of defiance that gladdens the soul. Put simply, it’s the 
story of a woman who becomes a witch – but it will subvert any expectations 
prompted by that synopsis as gleefully as it subverts every theme it touches 
on: gender roles, family love, social convention, religious propriety.


Born into a stuffy, self-satisfied family who are content to stay in the 
Victorian era while the world changes around them, Laura Willowes is a dreamy 
young woman with no interest in marriage. On the death of her father, it seems 
quite natural that she be “absorbed into the household” of her brother Henry 
and his wife Caroline “like a piece of family property forgotten in the will”. 
In their London home, she becomes indispensable “Aunt Lolly”, forever obliged 
and obliging to others, the only sign of her self-will the extravagant hothouse 
flowers she sneaks into the mean territory of her small bedroom each winter.

Until the day Lolly’s inchoate longing for solitude and rural seclusion – the 
urge to be “standing alone in a darkening orchard” – crystallises in the snap 
decision to move to a small village in the Chilterns, Great Mop. “‘I’ve never 
even heard of the place!’ said Henry conclusively.” But for once Lolly comes to 
her own conclusions and in the face of her family’s amazed disapproval off she 
goes: to escape her obligations, to gain that all-important Room of One’s Own – 
and to attend bacchanalian witches’ sabbaths and conduct matter-of-fact chats 
on hillsides with Satan. Lolly characterises him as “a kind of black knight, 
wandering about and succouring decayed gentlewomen”, seducing a spinster’s soul 
“when no one else would give a look at her body even!” As Sarah Waters puts it 
inher excellent essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/02/sylvia-townsend-warner>, he 
“pays [women] the compliment of pursuing them and then, having bagged them, 
performs the even more valuable service of leaving them alone”.

The novel, Townsend Warner’s first, was a hit, but she was dismayed to see 
many take its aura of genteel whimsy and oh-so-English fantasy at face value. 
Admirers, she complained to a friend, “told me that it was charming, that it 
was distinguished, and my mother said it was almost as good as Galsworthy. And 
my heart sank lower and lower; I felt as though I had tried to make a sword, 
only to be told what a pretty pattern there was on the blade.”

For there is steel in Lolly Willows, though much of its bite and danger is 
hidden, even from Lolly herself. There is the ancient power of myth and 
landscape, the dark woods and lanes through which Lolly blithely strolls and 
which feel as though they could swallow her up at any moment. Satan is an 
understatedly ambiguous figure; a “loving huntsman” he may be, as the subtitle 
has it, but has Lolly simply passed from the possession of one male to another? 
And almost entirely off the page we sense the seismic social upheaval of war 
and economic turmoil, the slaughter of a generation of young men, the 
long-standing systematic repression of women that is only slowly beginning to 
lift, and seemingly too late for Lolly. Only once does she cast her plight in 
terms of political anger: “If she were to start forgiving she must needs 
forgive Society, the Law, the Church, the History of Europe, the Old Testament 
… the Bank of England, Prostitution … ”

Lolly doesn’t forgive the unforgivable; she simply walks away. Henry and 
Caroline, she realised in London, “were half hidden under their accumulations – 
accumulations of prosperity, authority, daily experience”. As Townsend Warner 
puts it in what is one of my favourite passages, for its sure-footed mix of 
mundanity and exaggeration:

They were carpeted with experience. No new event could set jarring foot on 
them but they would absorb and muffle the impact. If the boiler burst, if a 
policeman climbed in at the window waving a sword, Henry and Caroline would 
bring the situation to heel by their massive experience of normal boilers and 
normal policemen.

Stripped of convention, of safety and habit, Lolly opens herself up to a 
different reality. She defies society as well as everything society has raised 
her to be. Her future is uncertain, but it is free, and the novel that houses 
her is a great shout of life and individuality.
 