
When we speak, listen, read, or write, almost all of the language processing 
that happens in our brains goes on below the level of conscious awareness. We 
might be aware of grasping for a particular forgotten word, but we don’t 
actively think about linguistic concepts like morphemes (the building blocks of 
words, like the past tense morpheme “-ed”).

Psycholinguists try to delve under the surface to figure out what’s actually 
going on in the brain, and how well this matches up with our theoretical ideas 
of how languages fit together. For instance, linguists talk about morphemes 
like “-ed”, but do our brains actually work with morphemes when we’re producing 
or interpreting language? That is, do theoretical linguistic concepts have any 
psychological reality? Anupcoming paper 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010027716300075> in the 
journal Cognition suggests an unusual way to investigate this: by testing 
synaesthetes.

Synaesthesia comes in many forms. Some synaesthetes associate musical tones or 
notes with particular colours; others attach personalities to letters or 
numbers. A huge number of synaesthetes have associations that are in some way 
linguistic, and one of the most common forms of all is grapheme-colour (GC) 
synaesthesia, which is the association of colours with particular letters or 
numbers. For instance, a GC synaesthete might have a consistent perception of 
the letter “A” being red. This association often extends to a whole word, so 
“ant” might be red, too.

Because synaesthesia is so often language-related, it should be possible for 
researchers to explore the associations that synaesthetes make, and use this to 
work out how bits of language are being handled by the brain. For instance, the 
Cognition paper describes a study, led by Jennifer Mankin at the University of 
Sussex, that looked at compound words like “rainbow” or “blackbird”.

Compound words are interesting because they can give us insight into how we 
store and retrieve word meanings in the mind. We don’t currently know whether 
we process these as single units, or whether we process the component words 
(like “black” and “bird”) and then join them up. It’s also possible that we use 
some combination of these two strategies, like remembering the more common 
compound words as single units, but breaking down the less common words into 
their composite meanings to figure them out.

To test this, Mankin and her co-researchers looked at what colours GC 
synaesthetes associated with various compound words. Some of the words were 
very frequent, while others were less so. The words also varied in semantic 
transparency, which is a measure of how obvious the meaning of a compound word 
is based on its constituents. For instance, it’s easy to work out that a 
birdhouse can be split up into the words “bird” and “house”, and means “a house 
for birds”. Working out that “hogwash” means “nonsense” can’t be done just from 
looking at the constituent words.

For each word in the list, the 19 synaesthetes were asked if they had an 
associated colour. If they did, they could choose the colour from a colour 
chart. They were also able to add a second colour for each word. The 
researchers predicted that the more frequent compound words would be more 
likely to have only one colour attached to them (because they would be 
processed as whole units), while the less frequent words would have two 
colours. They also thought the more semantically transparent words would be 
split up and processed as their constituent parts, making them more likely to 
have two colours.

They found that most of the words – nearly three-quarters – were given two 
colours by the participants, but that more frequent compound words were more 
likely to have just one colour associated with them. This, according to the 
authors, suggests that very common compound words seem to be processed as 
single word units, whereas less common compound words are processed as two 
units – just as they predicted. However, they didn’t find what they expected 
with semantic transparency: both more and less semantically transparent words 
were about equally likely to have one or two colours associated with them.

This study is very small, and on its own, it edges us only a little further 
towards a complete understanding of how we process compound words. The results 
match up with a “mixed” model of compound word processing that suggests we 
process some words as units, and others as constituents; but this isn’t 
conclusive, and at the very least, the finding needs to be replicated in other 
languages, with other synaesthetes, before we rest too much on it. However, 
it’s a fascinating proof-of-concept: it suggests that we can tap into 
synaesthetic experience to explore bigger psychological questions.

How we all could benefit from synaesthesia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/apr/27/benefit-synaesthesia-brain-injury-mental-decline>
So far, there’s been very little work done in this particular niche. There’s 
already quite a lot of research on synaesthesia in its own right, but it’s an 
unusual idea to study people whose brains are inarguably atypical in order to 
draw conclusions about human cognition in general. There’s a risk that 
synaesthetes’ brains are different in ways other than their synaesthetic 
associations, which could mean that we can’t really extrapolate from them to 
the general population.

That said, there isn’t currently much reason to think that synaesthetes have 
important cognitive differences from non-synaesthetes, other than their 
particular associations.An earlier paper 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661307000484> that 
explores the potential usefulness of synaesthesia for cognitive science points 
out that most people seem to have some degree of synaesthetic association going 
on in their heads, but that synaesthetes are just unusually aware of the 
experience. For example, cognitive scientists who study the brain’s processing 
of numbers posit a “mental number line” that people all use when dealing with 
numbers – it’s just that only synaesthetes are aware of having spatial 
associations with numbers.

If this is true, it might be that synaesthetes provide us with an unusual 
amount of conscious access to what are usually unconscious processes. And that, 
undoubtedly, is a psycholinguist’s dream come true. There’s a lot of work to be 
done assessing the usefulness of the idea and working out ways to implement it, 
but given how useful it could turn out to be, it’s definitely worth that 
exploration.
 