
Five times more people were diagnosed with syphilis in London last year than 
in any other English region, according to a report that says cases of the 
infection have more than doubled in the capital since 2010.

Nearly 60% of syphilis cases in England were diagnosed in London, according to 
research 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/546287/london_syphilis_report.pdf>
 published on Wednesday by Public Health England, with rates increasing in 32 
of the capital’s 33 boroughs in the five years to 2015.

Gay men were disproportionately affected, experiencing 90% of new diagnoses in 
2015, despite comprising just 2% of the adult population. But experts are 
warning of a rise among heterosexuals as well.

Dr Patrick French, genitourinary medicine consultant at Central and North West 
London NHS Foundation Trust, said: “The increase we are seeing in syphilis and 
other sexually transmitted infections is a marker of a more general problem 
within sexual health, and tackling this must be a priority across London.

“More awareness is needed about STIs, how they can be prevented and why it is 
important to have a checkup if you think you are at risk. Anyone having sex 
with new or casual partners should always use condoms and have regular sexual 
health checks.”

Last year, there were 2,811 cases of syphilis in London, representing a rate 
of new infections of 32.9 per 100,000 people – more than five times higher than 
that of any other region in England, and three times higher than the rate for 
the country overall.

That figure represents a 163.4% rise in cases since 2010, when there were 
1,067 diagnoses in the capital, and an increase of 21.9% on 2014, when there 
were 2,306 cases.

The overwhelming majority of cases in 2015 were among gay men, with 2,406 
infections compared with 196 among heterosexual men and 70 among heterosexual 
women. Gay men have long been overrepresented, but the gap has widened 
significantly since 2010, when there were 724 infections compared with 130 
among heterosexual males.

Syphilis infection is a marker of high-risk sexual activity, PHE’s report 
says, and comes amid evidence that Londoners, particularly gay men, are having 
more sex than ever.

Drug-fuelled “chemsex” parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/nov/05/chemsex-how-dangerous-is-it>
, app-facilitated sexual networking and so-called “sero-sorting”, where people 
choose sexual partners based on their HIV status, are all associated with 
reduced use of condoms, the report says.

Give young people and gay men free condoms to reduce STIs, watchdog says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/05/free-condoms-young-people-gay-men-hiv-gonorrhoea-nice>
The recent rise in cases of syphilis comes after a historical decline in the 
late 1980s and early 90s, when the spectre of the HIV pandemic encouraged many 
people to change their sexual habits.

The first symptom of syphilis is a painless ulcer at the site of infection, 
lasting from three to six weeks. That is followed by general symptoms of 
illness including fever, headache, swollen glands and night sweats. If 
untreated it can lead to central nervous system disease, cardiovascular 
complications and death, but the widespread use of antibiotics means it rarely 
progresses that far.

Dr Yvonne Doyle, regional director for PHE London, said: “In London, we have 
excellent open-access sexual health services providing free STI testing and 
treatment, notification for the sexual partners of those diagnosed with an STI 
and free provision of contraception. With these services available across the 
capital, there is no reason for people to be taking unnecessary risks with 
their sexual health.

“I hope today’s report will further raise awareness of sexually transmitted 
infections including syphilis and drive home the messages about the importance 
of practising safe sex, which include using condoms, regularly being tested and 
avoiding overlapping sexual relationships. All of these will reduce the risk of 
STIs.”
 