
One of my favourite recent cricket stories is the ballad of Atul Sharma 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/india/content/player/399763.html>, a hulking 
teenage javelin thrower plucked from obscurity and transformed briefly into a 
kind of slingy, right-arm Frankenstein’s monster by the maverick fast-bowling 
coach Ian Pont. You can still seeSharma in YouTube videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Bts9zUZeXc>, in between lifting tyres and 
pumping weights, pounding in with his arm held out behind him and javelining it 
down in the nets at what appears to be alarming speeds. On a whim he even 
earned a short-term IPL contract with the Rajasthan Royals in 2009 before 
abruptly disappearing, a sensitive soul for whom this was all apparently just a 
little too much.

There were shades of the Sharma Identity about the news this week that a 
26-year-old baseball player from Dallas calledBoomer Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/10/boomer-collins-mlb-cricket-india>
 is currently trawling the fringes of the global T20 leagues angling for a 
franchise gig. And why not? Hitting a ball between toe and waist height for six 
– base unit of Twenty20, the G-spot of the crowds – isn’t so far removed from 
the one-shot skill set of baseball hitting. Kevin Pietersen effectively won a
Ram Slam match for the Dolphins 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ram-slam-t20-2015-16/content/squad/922439.html> 
this week by hitting 27 runs off 10 balls. Who’s to say Boomer couldn’t do the 
same on a flat track with a following wind?

The MLB prospect chasing a T20 dream: 'I'm going all in with cricket'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/10/boomer-collins-mlb-cricket-india>
New forms, new patterns: these are vital elements in any in sport, not least 
one as ragingly priapic and expansionist as Twenty20 cricket. And not least at 
a moment of near-complete saturation we might call peakTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20>. Because let’s face it, it is 
frankly everywhere right now.

This Saturday Titans will play Dolphins in the final of the South African Ram 
Slam. Don’t despair, though. The Slam, and New Zealand’s simultaneous Georgie 
Pie Super Smash, are just curtain-raisers for the most densely plotted period 
of T20 yet devised. From Ram Slam/Pie Smash (Nov-Dec) we head to the Big Bash 
(Dec-Jan), Pakistan Super League (Feb), World T20 (Mar-Apr), Indian Premier 
League (Apr-May), Caribbean Premier League (Jun-Jul) and finally in August the 
late stages of the dear old Blast. So there it is. Ten months of Twenty20, the 
slightly disappointing magic realist novel Gabriel García Márquez never got 
round to writing, and above all proof – if it were required – that T20 has now 
won. It is the dominant music, the most visible, rampantly booming incarnation 
of its founding sport.

It is quite hard to talk about this. Even now there is an ideological edge to 
holding any kind of opinion on T20 cricket, tied into the sport’s past and its 
shifting present. Whereas to find fault, for example, with the IPL is to out 
yourself as a liver-spotted xenophobe and general postcolonial grudge-merchant. 
And yet even for a fan who genuinely enjoys this form, who has been to watch the
IPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> in India and loved it, T20 
increasingly looks a little haggard beneath its baseball cap. In part it is the 
dominant mood that grates.

This is a sport still played out at that same founding pitch of astonishment, 
outrage, face-slapping bewilderment, still sticking it to the bourgeoisie, 
forever asserting and justifying its difference, like a middle-aged man at a 
rave very pointedly having more fun than anyone else in the room.

Of course, you can simply enjoy the skill and daring of the players. Not only 
is the ball flogged and lofted more effectively and more often, the best 
batsmen now play a range of flicks and ramps over the wicketkeeper’s head. 
Albeit the response to this from the sport’s TV marketeers, the apparently 
genuine shock – no! What? Again? – that such a thing could happen often seems a 
little automatic, a little forced, like the host at slightly awkward dinner 
party constantly fiddling with the music and laughing a little too loudly in 
the silences.

The fact is, after some rapid early gains, there has been an understandable 
plateauing out in the basic sporting content of T20. As might be expected of a 
single component part stretched out on a whim and now, years later, still 
performing its unaccompanied three-hour jazz flute solos every night at Madison 
Square Garden. You get the feeling some kind of outer limit has been reached in 
terms of more and faster and better.

Perhaps, from the playing side, we have already had the golden age of T20, 
that moment where a generation of meticulously schooled, genuinely top-drawer 
Test players were allowed to expand into unorthodoxy, like the classically 
trained modernists who produced the great experimental art of the 20th century, 
before everybody forgot how to draw and just made a pile of Lego bricks or a 
video instead.

Where exactly are the new stars of the new form? AB de Villiers, the one‑man 
state of the art, is about to turn 32; Chris Gayle, the T20 Bradman with 14 
hundreds in the last four years, is 36 years old and played 50 Tests before he 
first swung a T20 bat.

England’s exiting new T20 players are, it is often said, “kids who’ve grown up 
playing this game”. But Jos Buttler, Sam Billings, Alex Hales, Eoin Morgan and 
Moeen Ali are all in their mid to late 20s, already teenagers when this game 
got going. To this day nobody has ever really hit a T20 ball more venomously 
than, say, Matthew Hayden, whose horrible little stroll down the pitch, bat 
raised like a man about to shatter a car windscreen with a polo mallet, remains 
a market leader, for all the froth, in orthodox, muscular malevolence.

Right now the average age of the world’s top 10-ranked T20 batsmen is 31. The 
top 10 T20 bowlers is blocked out by a rump of jobbing spin bowlers, among them 
a 36-year-old, two 35-year‑olds, a 34-year-old and no one under the age of 25. 
T20 may insist, constantly, on its own disco-ish vitality. But there is plenty 
of dad dancing going on out there.

In the end, the most profound innovation on show right now is revenue-related, 
a triumph of marketing, albeit with that same bafflingly gaudy staging, the 
podium-gyrating periphery that really does have to go some time soon. Beyond 
that the only most obvious benefit has been T20’s effect on 50-overs cricket, 
which was supposed to die or find itself squeezed to the fringes, but has 
instead been energised by the freedoms of the shorter game. And which is, oddly 
enough, the one form of international cricket currently being played as well as 
it ever has been.

So here we are. T20 came in a rush. Small variations side, it has remained in 
pretty much the same rush ever since. The real challenge is to produce 
something genuinely new – my Atul, my Boomer – a conviction that this really is 
a distinct and evolving form, not simply a gold rush that feeds only on itself, 
picking over the bones of what went before.

This is what I want from the next nine block-booked months. Not simply more 
and louder. But new forms, new modes, new rhythms.
 