
The backlash against Colin Kaepernick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-kaepernick> – and all of his 
colleagues who are refusing to stand for the national anthem – is growing. His 
protest against racism and police brutality is being widely panned as 
unpatriotic, and some have gone as far as to call him a traitor. I would say 
the backlash is puzzling, except it’s not. I have long recognized that this is 
a common response to black protest – one I witnessed as far back as the civil 
rights movement.

Colin Kaepernick's national anthem protest is fundamentally American | Ijeoma 
Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest-fundamentally-american>
Within the context of sports protest, the raised black-gloved fists of protest 
by John Carlos and Tommie Smith at the 1968 Mexico Olympics comes immediately 
to mind. Less noticed than their dramatically raised fists was the fact that 
both athletes wore black socks and no shoes when they accepted their medals. 
This was to represent the poverty of African Americans in the United States. 
They suffered insult and abuse when they returned home. Time magazine wrote: 
“Faster, Higher, Stronger” is the motto of the Olympic Games. “‘Angrier, 
nastier, uglier’ better describes the scene in Mexico City last week”.

Most Americans opposed the sit-ins when they erupted in 1960; and opposed the 
Freedom Rides when they took place in 1961. Young black people were pushing too 
hard, demanding too much too soon was the typical charge. The country was 
changing; give it time. Most black people it should be said here were not 
engaged in sit-ins or Freedom Rides for there was risk, sometimes great risk, 
involved in public protest. But it also must be said that the country changed 
because of aggressive pushing against segregation and white supremacy and the 
silence that supported it.

Protest will always make someone uncomfortable, or governments uncomfortable. 
It is, however, the American way – a liberty for which blood has been shed at 
home and overseas. The civil rights movement of the 1960s, for example, was not 
only a struggle for civil rights, but for civil liberties – the right to speak 
and to engage in public protest.

And yet, to this day, some forms of protest are more criticized than others. I 
cannot help but notice that the public rage being directed at Kaepernick and 
those emulating him is disproportionate. Compare Kaepernick’s “crime” with that 
of the Bundy brothers and their group, which orchestrated an armed takeover of 
a federal wildlife refuge in Oregon. While Kaepernick has been called 
unpatriotic, the Bundy brothers and the rest of the so-called Citizens for 
Constitutional Freedom were never labeled that way.

Those behind the takeover of the wildlife refuge felt that they were acting to 
assert an American way of life they felt was under assault. Yet Kaepernick and 
his colleagues feel that their lives are under assault too, that they do not 
matter, to borrow from a slogan currently rising in prominence politically. As 
these football field protests have grown from a single act to actions by a 
growing number, so too has the backlash.

And, while I draw the line at violent protest such as the armed Malheur 
national wildlife refuge protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/12/oregon-militia-standoff-final-holdouts-plead-not-guilty-surrender-malheur-national-wildlife-refuge>
 or Ku Klux Klan terrorism that plagued the country for a century after the 
civil war, I do not make a distinction between good protest and bad protest.

There are protests that reflect what I agree with or what I believe in and 
those that do not. But that issue is not fundamental to their legitimacy. The 
protesting athletes are simply trying to push the country to live up to its 
professed ideals. To accuse them of being unpatriotic – now that is what seems 
un-American to me.

 