
Next month, just ahead of ITV’s new drama about the discovery of the tomb of 
Tutankhamun, the British Library will publishLost in a Pyramid 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lost-in-a-pyramid.html>, a brilliant new 
collection of classic mummy stories.

Of the 12 included, only one was familiar to me: Arthur Conan Doyle’s Lot No 
249, in which an Oxford student reanimates a mummy and sends it to attack those 
against whom he has a grudge. Most of the others – Eva M Henry’s The Curse of 
Vasartas (the removal of a sarcophagus brings tragedy on all involved); WG 
Peasgood’s The Necklace of Dreams (those who wear it will suffer first visions, 
and then death); Hester White’s The Dead Hand (until restored to its rightful 
owner, it brings only misfortune to the story’s narrator) – have not been in 
print since their publication. Either way, it’s a major treat, its editor 
Andrew Smith, an academic with a special interest in the gothic, having made 
his selection primarily on grounds of their (to me, extreme) readability.

The mummy story had its heyday between 1869 and 1910, encouraged by British 
military and political involvement in Egypt, and the ongoing excavation of key 
archaeological sites. A few were romances; others were vaguely erotic. The 
majority, however, revealed their authors’ ambivalence towards contemporary 
events by being, as Smith points out in his introduction, curse narratives. 
Amazingly, one of the first of these – if notthe first – was written by Louisa 
May Alcott, the author ofLittle Women, who in 1869 published the story to which 
this collection owes its title, Lost in a Pyramid, or The Mummy’s Curse.

It concerns a young couple, Paul and Evelyn. From Egypt Paul has brought home 
a handful of scarlet seeds he stole from a tomb, one of which Evelyn, ignoring 
his instructions, now secretly plants. Will it germinate? And if it does, what 
effect will the bloom have on her? A narrative in which the protagonists are 
literally made ill – condemned to suffer a living death – by the alien and 
exotic, Alcott’s short but haunting tale reads like a warning. Larceny on 
foreign soil, it suggests, is no different from that carried out at home. 
Commit it, and you must bear the consequences.

Tutankhamun will be shown on ITV later in the autumn 
 