 In the emotional atmosphere after Sunday's tragedy it is probably inevitable 
that Irish political initiatives can make little progress. Certainly little was 
made yesterday in the House of Commons, at Stormont, or in Dublin.
In the House of Commons some relevant ideas were offered - on control of 
security, on all-party government inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, on Westminster's system of 
political control, and on the relationship between the two parts of Ireland.

But between the UK government and opposition something of a procedural 
deadlock seems to have been reached. A way forward can surely still be found 
through private meetings between senior members of the parties at Westminster, 
permitting free, informal, and wide-ranging talks on Ireland. Nobody need be 
frightened of this.

Mr Faulkner yesterday, speaking for the government of Northern Ireland, 
offered both an olive branch and a barrier. He is ready to talk about "how the 
institutions of Northern Ireland may be framed on a renewed basis of general 
consent." He is also ready to talk with the Dublin government on the 
development of "the most friendly and cooperative relationship."

But he erects one firm barrier. If anyone thinks that a campaign to "achieve a 
united Ireland without our consent" will get anywhere, he says that it will 
not. The Unionists will tolerate no such proposition.

Thus far, one may accept what Mr Faulkner says as a fair statement of his 
government's position. But to get serious talks going something more will have 
to be offered. By itself his statement cannot begin to bridge the gap between 
the two communities. At this stage, he may feel that there is not much point in 
trying to do so.

Whether tempers will cool sufficiently - and soon enough - remains to be seen. 
Meanwhile in the UK the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Widgery, is to inquire into 
the deaths in Londonderry. Both sides in the House yesterday had hoped that his 
task would be formed expeditiously. Both hoped that everyone with evidence to 
give will help him.

Mr Thorpe wisely points out that if a large section of the population boycotts 
the inquiry, all of Lord Widgery's powers of subpoena and of committal for 
contempt will avail nothing. Ulster is no longer in a state where the legal 
niceties of the Denning trial are relevant. It is, however, to be hoped that 
the people will cooperate.

Lord Widgery's inquiry is important, though there must be a reservation as to 
whether its findings, whatever they may be, will have much effect on events in 
the streets. The House of Commons has done its duty by setting up the inquiry. 
What the House of Commons has not been able to do is to have much influence on 
events that lie in the immediate future.

Mr Thorpe, whose record as a libertarian is not open to challenge, thought it 
wise to say yesterday that in the present situation in Northern Ireland he 
could not believe that the right to march was one of the fundamental rights to 
be demanded at all costs, with all the risks that this involved. It was one 
aspect of Ulster's political life which could threaten temporarily be done 
without. That surely is true whether the marchers be Orange or Green.

This weekend, as Miss Devin reminded the House, there is to be another civil 
rights march in Newry. In a powerfully emotional speech she made clear that 
nothing would deter her from going ahead with that march.

Newry is only a few miles across the border from Dundalk, a centre of 
provisional IRA activity. Can there be any reasonable doubt that if there is a 
march in Newry this weekend, and if the army attempts to enforce the ban there, 
the Provisional army will shoot?

Everyone in the streets in Newry that day, soldier or civilian, Catholic or 
Protestant, innocent or on the army's wanted list, will be in peril. However 
tight the army discipline, however sane the civil rights stewards, that is a 
fact of life.

Is it too late - or too soon - to suggest that the organisers of this parade 
ought to think again, in spite of their understandable emotion about events 
last weekend, and call it off? If there is ever to be reconciliation in 
Northern Ireland the march in Newry is unlikely to contribute to it. Talk 
remains more hopeful than bullets.
 