
India will not fear England spinners

Watching Tamim Iqbal tuck into England’s spinners in the morning session, it 
was difficult not to fear for them in India. India have not lost a home Test 
sincelosing to England in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/27/ian-bell-england-india>, winning 
every match bar one – and that was a washout. In Chittagong, the ball turned 
from the first over but in Dhaka, the pitch offered only intermittent help so 
Alastair Cook needed his spinners to give him control – and they could not. 
Though they improved in the afternoon session, the feeling persists that Virat 
Kohli, Ajinkya Rahane and chums will not afford them that opportunity, unlikely 
to be fazed by whichever of Adil Rashid, Gareth Batty and Zafar Ansari England 
select. So perhaps they might find variety by way of four seamers, relying on 
Moeen Ali and Joe Root for spin – at least they are already in the team as 
batsmen. Batsmen who have to face Ravichandran Ashwin in helpful conditions.DH

Alastair Cook gets rumbled

At the toss, Alastair Cook was asked about his XI and, referring to the 
omission of Stuart Broad in particular, he explained that he was sure the team 
selected was capable of winning the game. The impression he gave, though, was 
of a man trying to convince himself, and in the television studio his old mate 
Matt Prior rumbled him immediately. The thing is, England, one up with one to 
play, had no choice – they need Broad fit and firing in India, particularly 
given the injury to Jimmy Anderson. But the fact remains that the best players 
should not have to miss series deciders in order to be protected from potential 
injury – it is not good for them and, more importantly, it is not good for the 
game. This is yet another reason why a Test championship is essential: central 
control of fixtures would facilitate more sensible and sensitive scheduling.DH

Moeen Ali fails to spin his words but turns up with five Bangladesh wickets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/moeen-ali-fail-spin-words-five-bangladesh-wickets>
Why Tamim Iqbal loves England

Tamim Iqbal does enjoy playing England. With his 104 here, three of his eight 
Test centuries have come against the current opponents, his average of 63.27 
against them some 23 runs higher than his overall career mark. Only five men 
who have played a minimum of 10 innings against England have a higher average, 
and one of them is Don Bradman. It took him 19 balls to get off the mark here, 
but after that he played an innings of precise and controlled aggression, 
expertly locating the holes in England’s attack then punching through them with 
gusto. The disappointment and frustration about Tamim was that he got out so 
quickly afterwards, bafflingly leaving a ball on off stump by Moeen Ali, lbw 
for 104: that is the fifth of those eight tons that have not gone beyond 109. 
Perhaps he needs a pep talk from Graham Gooch about daddy hundreds.NM

Gary Ballance needs time out

Gary Ballance’s recent Test numbers make ugly reading: since returning to the 
side in July, he has recorded scores of 6, 43, 23, 70, 28, 8, 17, 1, 9 and 9. 
Ballance actually played a couple of confident shots and was dismissed by a 
superb delivery from Mehedi Hasan, but the decision to keep him in the side 
after an indifferent summer looks more and more generous. He was pretty lucky 
to be selected for this tour, never mind this Test, having not scored a century 
since April 2015, in which time he has played 12 Tests and averaged just over 
26. It does not help that as a batsman he is, shall we say, a “tough watch”, 
and when you start to pine for James Vince scoring an attractive 24 before 
nicking off, it is probably time to accept that Ballance needs a little time 
away from the Test team.NM

Bangladesh need to play more Tests

Moeen and Ben Stokes did bowl superbly in that spell just before tea, but a 
few of Bangladesh’s wickets were donated rather limply. At 171-1 the collapse 
was sudden but perhaps not unexpected: in the first Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
 they went from 221-4 to 248 all out in the first innings, then 227-5 to 263 
all out in the second. A weak tail is one explanation, but it is also easy to 
forget that before the last game they had not played a Test in 15 months, and 
the diary ahead is not exactly full either. They have another two against New 
Zealand in January, one more in India shortly afterwards and that is it until 
after the Champions Trophy. Pickings remain slim, and they are not currently 
scheduled to play a series of more than two Tests until January 2019. There is 
talent in this team, but to improve they need to play more.NM
 