
Ted Cruz unveiled former business executive Carly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> as his running mate on 
Wednesday.

Cruz told a crowd of hundreds of supporters: “After a great deal of time and 
thought, after a great deal of consideration and prayer, I have come to the 
conclusion that if I am nominated, I will run on a ticket with my 
vice-presidential nominee Carly Fiorina.”

The move comes as an attempt to shift the national conversation the day after 
Trump’soverwhelming win in the Republican primary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-primaries-results-general-election-sanders-delegates>
 in five east coast states and only six days before Indiana’s crucial primary, 
which awards thestatewide winner 30 delegates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/indiana-donald-trump-delegates-republican-nomination-cruz-kasich>
, the largest single pot available until June.

Fiorina took the stage to loud cheers and country music, telling the crowd: 
“Today I am very proud and very humbled and honored to announce that I have 
accepted Senator Ted Cruz’s offer.”

She went on to describe the Republican nominating process as “a fight for the 
soul of our party and the future of our nomination” and pledged that she is “ 
prepared to stand by [Ted Cruz’s] side and give this everything that I have to 
defeat Donald Trump, restore the soul of this party and take our country back”.

The newly minted vice-presidential candidate has been an active surrogate for 
Cruzsince endorsing him in early March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/09/carly-fiorina-endorses-ted-cruz-video>
. The former Hewlett-Packard CEO has barnstormed across the country on behalf 
of the Texas senator since then. Cruz has often praised Fiorina on the stump 
and saying that the former CEO gives “Hillary Clinton nightmares. I can just 
picture Hillary thinking about Carly and tossing and turning and tossing and 
turning in her jail cell.” Fiorina has since grown close to the Cruz family and 
even sang a song for Cruz’s young daughters from the stage on Wednesday.

Although it was widely reported that the Cruz campaign was vetting potential 
vice-presidential candidates, and a Fiorina aide confirmed to the Guardian that 
she was participating in the vetting process, the announcement of a running 
mate by a candidate who still has yet to clinch the nomination is historic. The 
last candidate to do so was Ronald Reagan on the eve of the 1976 Republican 
national convention. Reagan tapped Pennsylvania senator Richard Schweiker in an 
unsuccessful attempt to oust the incumbent president, Gerald Ford.

While it’s widely considered that Reagan made a mistake in naming the liberal 
Republican to be his running mate, Cruz refused to condemn the move in a 
December interview with the Guardian. “Oh, look, one could go back and 
second-guess decisions that are difficult decisions to make,” said Cruz of 
Reagan’s failed attempt to unite the Republican party.

Cruz acknowledged that announcing a vice-presidential selection this early was 
“unusual”, but he pointed out that “this race is, if anything, unusual.” The 
Texas senator said the announcement was so the voters will know what you will 
get and give the American people “a clear choice”. He contrasted this with 
Trump, whom he described as “a New York liberal” who constantly shifted 
positions.

Fiorina, who dropped out of the presidential race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/10/carly-fiorina-exits-republican-presidential-election>
 in February after poor results in Iowa and New Hampshire, would be the first 
vice-president in history to have not held public office. A former CEO of 
Hewlett-Packard whose reign was marked by controversy after the printer 
company’s failed acquisition of Compaq, Fiorina previously mounted a losing 
Senate campaign in California in 2010 against Democrat Barbara Boxer.

Fiorina’s selection could help boast Cruz’s appeal among female voters in the 
remaining Republican primaries. Trump has consistently done better with men 
than women in exit polls and Fiorina could help reinforce this gender gap.

In a rally in Indianapolis, Trump dismissed Cruz’s announcement as 
inconsequential. “Cruz can’t win. What’s he doing picking a vice-president?” 
Trump asked. The frontrunner went on to claim that the Texas senator was the 
“first presidential candidate in history of this country who is mathematically 
eliminated from becoming president who has chosen a vice-president. I wish him 
well but they are not going to do it for you.”


Vice-presidential nominees have traditionally been attack dogs to allow 
presidential candidates to keep their hands clean. However, that script was 
reversed on Wednesday as Fiorina repeatedly referenced God, the constitution 
and the founding fathers while Cruz bashed Trump as “a no-good scoundrel” and 
“a big government New York liberal, who is a Washington insider, who agrees 
with Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama”.

Trump and Fiorina have a long history of conflict. The Republican frontrunner 
mocked her appearance in a 2015 interview with Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/trump-seriously-20150909>, saying: 
“Look at that face. Would anyone vote for that?”

Cruz though praised Fiorina’s response to these attacks on Wednesday. “At one 
of the earliest debates, Carly confronted Donald Trump, a man who in his 
characteristic understatement said of her, ‘look at that face’ and every one of 
us remembers the grace, the class, the elan with which Carly responded. 
Responded to Donald Trump that she knew exactly was saying and every woman in 
america knew exactly what Donald was saying.”

Trump was slightly more charitable 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-gop-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/04/trump-carly-fiorina-vice-president-222521>
 to Fiorina in a phone interview with Good Morning America on Wednesday, 
describing her as “a nice person – but she never resonated”.

He added: “By the end she was an insignificant player.”

In a statement to the Guardian on Fiorina’s selection, Trump did not mention 
her by name, and he dismissed choosing her as a desperate move by the Cruz 
campaign.

“After massive defeats in Arizona, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
Delaware, Connecticut and Maryland (in addition to 20 other contests), and 
given the fact that Senator Cruz has millions of votes less than me and is 
being clobbered on the delegate front, this is a pure waste of time,” said 
Trump.

He added in a reference to a pact between Cruz and Ohio governor John Kasich 
to divide up the forthcoming Indiana, New Mexico and Oregon primaries: “It 
reminds me very much of the already failed Kasich ‘collusion’ – a desperate 
attempt to save a failing campaign by an all talk, no action politician.

“The people of Indiana are very smart – they will see through this just like 
they saw through the already failed Kasich alliance. Cruz has no path to 
victory – he is only trying to stay relevant.”

Trump’s policy adviser Stephen Miller was more direct about Fiorina at a rally 
just five miles away and two hours after she was announced as Cruz’s running 
mate. Miller described Cruz’s selection as “one of the weirder events that 
we’ve ever seen in American political history” and said Fiorina is “the 
outsourcer-in-chief”. After saying Cruz sided with China over the US, the Trump 
aide said Cruz and Fiorina “are now officially the outsourcing ticket”.
 