
Nardini, Largs, Ayrshire

Probably one of the two finest ice-cream parlours in the British Isles. 
Completely rebuilt to the original plans from the 1930s, it has a restaurant, 
cafe and ice-cream parlour. Double cream vanilla is about the best you can buy, 
but they sell a complete range of ice-creams and sorbets as well as a vast 
range of sundaes, knickerbocker glories and plain scoops. The tour de force is 
the Clyde Coast Extravaganza – it'll set you back a whopping £ 14.95, but you 
probably won't want to eat for about three days afterwards. You can watch all 
the ices being made through a glass window at the side of the counter.
• 2 Grennock Road (01475 675000, nardinis.co.uk <http://www.nardinis.co.uk/>) 
Robin Weir, co-author of Ice Creams, Sorbets and Gelati: the Definitive Guide 
(published byGrub Street 
<http://www.grubstreet.co.uk/products/view/12/ice-creams-sorbets-and-gelati/>, 
£25)

Bill Jackson's van/Minghella's ice-cream, Isle of Wight

Neatly suited, with a folded, gravy-brown tie, Bill Jackson has been serving 
Minghella's ice-cream cornets for the past 30 years from his 1960s ice-cream 
van at the top of Brading Down, which has panoramic views of the island .

When I was a cook I once catered a June wedding in the Isle of White and was 
impressed by the bride's low-key pudding request of lemon tarts and Minghella's 
strawberry ice-cream. Their ice-cream is wholesome and clean-tasting, and made 
using milk and cream from local farms. I sought it out again when they opened a 
fantasticparlour at Fortnum & Mason's 
<http://www.fortnumandmason.com/the-parlour.aspx> in London. Here you can find 
flavours that use Fortnum's own produce for ingredients; like stem ginger and 
borage honey. Bill's van has the edge though on a warm day, with its view 
across the chalk grassland to the sea.
• Minghella's (minghella.co.uk) is sold all over the island  
<http://www.minghella.co.uk/icecream/sorbet/news.jsp> 
Kitty Travers. During the summer Kitty sells her La Grotta 
<http://lagrottaices.tumblr.com/> ice-creams at London's Maltby Street market 
<http://www.maltbystreet.com/>. She has also created a range of ice-creams for 
Zizzi restaurants

Queens Cafe and The University Cafe, Glasgow

I was grateful to be tipped off about these Glasgow institutions during a 
research trip around remaining Italo-Scottish ice-cream parlours. Both dazzle 
with their retro furnishings and nostalgic menus. They are classic greasy 
spoons but they continue to make their own excellent versions of "white" 
ice-cream – the Scottish cousin to Italy's fior di latte, I'm guessing. Enjoy 
one perfect scoop on a pink melamine saucer.
• Queens Cafe (515-517 Victoria Road, 0141-423 2409). The University Cafe (87 
Byres Road, Hillhead, 0141-339 5217)
Kitty Travers

Towpath Cafe, Regent's Canal, London
 Photograph: Jason Lowe 
This is the kind of cafe you might count yourself lucky to come across on 
holiday – except it's in Dalston, east London. Original, charming and serving 
delicious plates of hot food all day long, it has got even better thanks to the 
recent acquisition of a brand new Electro Freeze soft serve machine. Their 
inspired chef Laura Jackson now makes daily batches of lemon- and 
orange-peel-flavoured Mister Whippy-style ice-cream. All are made from natural 
ingredients and modestly priced, too (£1.50 for a small cone) You can also buy 
one in a glass with a shot of espresso poured over the top. Last time I was 
there I had three.
• Between Whitmore Bridge and Kingsland Road Bridge (no phone) 
Kitty Travers

Tall Ships Creamery, Charlestown, Cornwall

I was not good at hiding my disappointment after eating too many slimy, gungey 
and over-sweet ice-creams over a recent weekend in Cornwall. Then we discovered 
that the quaint and rather odd sweet shop in the middle of the harbour in the 
seaside village where we were camping actually stocked the real deal – 
bright-tasting, homemade jersey ice-creams, obviously made with love and skill. 
Ices are made in small batches just a mile away, and sold uniquely here. You 
can find a delicious, natural soft-serve from rich creamy milk. A cup of this 
alongside their dewdrop-fresh strawberry sorbet, after a day on the beach under 
a Cornish blue sky, equals complete happiness.
• 01726 65444 
Kitty Travers

Pelosi's, Ramsgate

While the admittedly wonderful Morelli's 
<http://www.morellisgelato.com/Broadstairs> in Broadstairs basks in the 
limelight, Pelosi's hovers in the background like a shy little sister. But 
don't overlook its less brash charms: Pelosi's is, in its understated way, a 
stunner: green vitrolite walls with curved mirrors, Germolene-pink chairs and 
ice-cream a go-go. For me, the quality of that ice-cream can outshine its 
flashier Broadstairs neighbour. It's somehow lighter, with brighter flavours: 
the pink grapefruit could wake up the doziest palate. And there's exotica like 
pomegranate or pistachio – a duo designed to match the pastel colour scheme. 
"Established 1945" it says on the sign. Long may they continue.
• 76 Harbour Parade, Ramsgate (01843 593 585) 
Marina O'Loughlin (this review appears in Discover Thanet guide book, 
discoverthanet.co.uk <http://www.discoverthanet.co.uk/>)

Taywell farm shop, Goudhurst, Kent

As a family, we love visiting and gorging ourselves on the delicious 
ice-creams at this shop, housed in a rustic building in an area of outstanding 
natural beauty. The ice-creams are textured and wholesome, using local fruits 
from founder Alastair's acres of raspberries, blueberries and cherries, as well 
as Belgian chocolate and other good-quality ingredients. I have a particular 
penchant for the "naughty" ones – pecan and maple syrup, plum crumble and rocky 
road, that sort of thing – whereas my wife usually goes for something healthier 
like the sea buckthorn and pear juice cocktail (the sea buckthorn is one of the 
UK's greatest superfruits – each tiny berry has the same vitamin C content as 
eight oranges). The shop also stocks some great local produce – there are 
always nice cheeses and jams, as well as a few interesting bottles of wine.
• Cranbrook Road, Goudhurst (01580 211881, taywellfarmshop.co.uk 
<http://www.taywellfarmshop.co.uk/>). Taywell ice-creams are on sale at Mount 
Street Deli <http://www.mountstreetmayfair.co.uk/>, Mayfair, London 
Tim Hughes, group chef director, Caprice Holdings

Heavenly, Llandeilo, Carmarthenshire
 Heavenly 
Heavenly was opened by Paul and Tracey Kindred back in 2005 in this pretty 
Carmarthenshire market town. Come summer the queues can be seen down the high 
street as visitors flock to sample the ice-cream which is made from Welsh 
organic milk. Personally I like to stick with the old favourites but Heavenly 
has developed a reputation for wild and wonderful flavours such as bubble gum, 
pink grapefruit, Turkish delight, simnel cake (an Easter special) and peanut 
butter. They also sell equally tempting confectionery, chocolates and desserts. 
If you have some strange whim for a particular flavour they'll conjure 
something up in their ice-cream lab at the rear of the shop, given 48 hours' 
notice – the more absurd the request the better they like it. Somewhat 
bizarrely, they even cater for the dogs – their latest creation is made from a 
soya base and designed to keep even the hairiest pooch cool this summer.
• London House, Rhosmaen Street (01558 822800, heavenlychoc.co.uk 
<http://www.heavenlychoc.co.uk/>) 
Simon Wright, partner of Y Polyn restaurant 
<http://www.ypolynrestaurant.co.uk/>, Carmarthenshire

Henley Ice Cream, Henley-in-Arden, Warwickshire

The much-loved half-timbered ice-cream shop on Henley-in-Arden's 
architecturally rich high street refrains from parading its heritage 
credentials. Mercifully there is no plaque claiming that "Shakespeare Ate Ice 
Cream Here". The grannies with their pre-school charges, the children in school 
uniform and even the droves of summer tourists at the outside tables come not 
because of the 16th-century low-beamed ceiling or the long and colourful 
history of the dairy on this site. They come, summer and winter, for an 
old-fashioned smooth- textured treat. Henley ice-cream used to be made behind 
the shop but now it is made on farms in Staffordshire and Worcestershire. All 
the traditional flavours feature (vanilla, rum and raisin, and mint choc chip) 
among the 20 or more on offer, with a few experimental ones such as kirsch 
cherry or lime and ginger. No better testimonial to the superiority of the 
ice-cream is needed than the hand-written letters displayed on the wall from a 
class of junior school children from Birmingham. Hassan Iqbal enthuses: "Dear 
all the ladies of the Ice Cream Shop, It was delicious, lovely and tastey, It 
was biggiest ice cream I ever had".
• 152 High Street (01564 795172, henleyicecream.co.uk 
<http://www.henleyicecream.co.uk/>)
Simon Heptinstall, author of Taste Britain 
<http://www.tasteguides.co.uk/#/about-taste-britain/4539644994> (Punk 
Publishing, £19.95)

Alder Carr Farm Shop, Needham Market, Suffolk

The onsite Alder Tree dairy on the Hardingham family's farm makes outstanding 
ice-cream. The list of contents is a joy to read: fruit (comprising at least a 
third and mostly grown on the farm), cream and sugar (but not too much). 
Irresistible flavour combinations such as rhubarb with stem ginger and 
gooseberry with elderflower have been praised variously by Nigel Slater and 
Nigella Lawson. The label "prize-winning" can be used indiscriminately, but the 
Alder Tree gooseberry and elderflower ice-cream is truly deserving – last year 
it earned a rare three stars at the Guild of Fine Foods Great Taste Awards, the 
food industry's Oscars. Buy a small tub in the shop to enjoy in the courtyard.
• Creeting St Mary, Needham Market, Ipswich (01449 720820, aldercarrfarm.co.uk 
<http://www.aldercarrfarm.co.uk/>) 
Simon Heptinstall

• This article was amended on 29 April 2011. A subheading in the original 
referred to the Isle of White. This has been corrected.
 