
White Cliffs of Dover
Kent

Land recently acquired by the National Trust has made accessible a previously 
hidden view over postcard-perfect cliffs. The blue water of the English Channel 
stretches to France, while erosion from its waves maintains the iconic rock's 
startling whiteness. From the Gateway to the White Cliffs visitor centre, walk 
along the coastal path toward South Foreland lighthouse. A circular walk over 
four miles. Allow three hours.

Nearest station: Dover Priory. By car: from A2 and M20, follow signs for Dover 
castle.

OS Map: Explorer 138: Dover, Folkestone & Hythe

Keswick to Friar's Crag 
Cumbria
 Catbells and Causey Pike reflected in the Derwent Water from Friar's Crag, 
Lake District. Photograph: Guardian 
The lookout from the summit, taking in the Jaws of Borrowdale and still waters 
of Derwent Isle, was immortalised in the classic book Swallows and Amazons. The 
path from Keswick to the Crag is wheelchair- and pushchair-friendly. A 
straightforward, gentle walk at 0.75 miles – but allow 90 minutes for full 
appreciation.

Nearest station: Penrith. By car, leave the M6 at junction 36, head west on 
A66 to Keswick.

OS Map: Explorer OL4: The Lake District: north-western area

Janet's Foss & Malham Cove
Yorkshire Dales
 Janet's Foss waterfall at Malham, North Yorkshire. Photograph: Alamy 
Limestone canyons and glacial lakes make Yorkshire Dales national park 
stunning at every turn. The jewel in the crown is the waterfall at Janet's Foss 
and its secret cave, which local legend claims is home to the Fairy Queen. This 
circular walk begins at Malham national park centre car park. The path off the 
Pennine Way leading to Janet's Foss is signposted off the Pennine Way, and at 
Malham Cove a clear path leads back to the village. 3.9 miles. Allow at least 
90 minutes.

The park prefers visitors to use public transport – nearest stations are 
Gargrave and Skipton, or Settle on the beautiful Leeds-Settle-Carlisle line.

OS Map: Explorer OL2: Yorkshire Dales: southern & western areas

Coleridge's cottage to Wordsworth's house 
Somerset
 Quantock Hills at Coleridge Way nature walk, Nether Stowey, Somerset. 
Photograph: Exmoor Tourism Partnership (ETP) 
The Quantock Hills are a sumptuous mix of woods and heathland, and the 
birthplace of Romantic poetry. Both poets found inspiration in the landscape, 
and this circular walk takes in most of the direct route between their homes. 
The restored Coleridge cottage is particularly worth spending time in. Walk to 
it from Nether Stowey library car park, then follow Coleridge Way/Quantock 
Greenway to Alfoxton House, via Holford. It's a four-mile walk, of moderate 
difficulty. Allow three to four hours.

Nearest station to Nether Stowey is Bridgwater – take the bus to Williton and 
Minehead.

OS Map: Explorer 140: Quantock Hills & Bridgwater

Boscastle to Port Isaa
North Cornwall
 The legendary birthplace of King Arthur, Tintagel Castle, Cornwall. 
Photograph: Alamy 
This stretch of south-west coastal path is the longest national trail in the 
country, and perhaps the most rugged. The route between the fishing villages of 
Boscastle and Port Isaac is steeped in mystery. Cliff clamberers are rewarded 
with a stunning view of Tintagel Head, possible birthplace of King Arthur.

Allow a day to tackle these 14 increasingly challenging miles. From Boscastle, 
head to Tintagel and follow the coastal path.

The nearest stations to Boscastle are Bodmin parkway or Exeter St David's, 
with regular buses from both.

OS Map: Explorer 111: Bude, Boscastle & Tintagel

Yewbarrow ascent
Lake District
 Scafell Pike Above Wastwater, Lake District. Photograph: Jon Sparks/ Jon 
Sparks/CORBIS 
High above the deep lake of Wastwater, which reflects the heights of nearby 
Great Gable and Scafell, the four-and-a-half-mile Yewbarrow ascent is only 
moderately difficult, but with awesome sights throughout.

The circular route begins at Overbeck bridge in Wasdale, which has a free car 
park.

By car, Wasdale is off the A595. From the south, turn right at Holmrook for 
Santon bridge. From the north, turn left at Gosforth.

OS Map: Explorer OL6 – Lake District: south-western area

Henley-on-Thames to Maidenhead
Chilterns
 Cliveden estate along the Thames Path national trail, Buckinghamshire. 
Photograph: National Trust/PA 
For the genteel rambler, this stretch of Thames Path national trail is a 
lazily unfolding delight of riverside reflection, taking in charming English 
towns including Marlow, and the imposing Cliveden Estate. Just over 16 miles of 
looping riverwalk, best taken at a stroll.

Nearest station: Henley-on-Thames. Head toward Marlow, following the water.

OS Map: Explorer 171 Chiltern Hills West and Explorer 172 Chiltern Hills East

Arthur's Seat 
Edinburgh
 Salisbury Crags and Edinburgh's skyline from Arthur's Seat. Photograph: Alamy 
Time-pressed Edinburghers don't even need to leave the city for a hill fix. 
Formed from the remains of a volcano, the panoramic splendour of Arthur's Seat 
is worth the climb, with views of Edinburgh, Leith and the Firth of Forth to 
Fife. It's found in Holyrood Park, a few minutes' walk from Edinburgh's Old 
Town. If coming from the city centre, walk down the high street, past the 
palace. It takes 30 mins from the Queen's drive, an inner ring around the park, 
to mount the 251m summit.

OS Map: Explorer 350 – Edinburgh: Musselburgh & Queensferry

The Hermitage
Perthshire
 The river Braan and Hermitage folly near Dunkeld, Perthshire. Photograph: 
David Robertson 
The lush woodlands of the Hermitage inspired Wordsworth, Mendelssohn and 
Turner to rapture. The splendour is added to by the extraordinary Ossian Hall – 
a Georgian folly overlooking the Black Linn waterfall over the river Braan, 
which uses mirrors and sliding panels to astonishing effect.

Hermitage to Inver is a little over four miles, walking through ancient 
woodland. Allow two hours. When you reach Inver, it's only a short walk back to 
the start point at the Hermitage carpark, just off the A9, after Dunkeld.

By rail, Dunkeld-Birnam station is one mile away.

OS MAP: Explorer 379 – Dunkeld, Aberfeldy & Glen Almond

Crofty to Bishopston 
Gower Peninsular
 Whiteford lighthouse at North Gower, South Wales. Photograph: Neil Collier / 
Alamy/Alamy 
For the adventurous, a two-day walk on Gower takes in beaches and woody 
smuggler's coves, and finishes with a wade up a riverbed. Look out for a 
cast-iron lighthouse, 6,000-year-old burial chambers, and Worms Head island. In 
Guzzle Hole cave, the sharp-eared will catch the sound of an underground river. 
Day one begins in the centre of Crofty and ends in Rhossili; day two tracks the 
coast path before heading up the valley to Bishopston. A difficult walk, 39 
miles over two days, around 18 hours.

Nearest station: Swansea or Gowerton, then take a bus (115, 116 or 119) to 
Crofty.

OS Map: Explorer 164 – Gower
 