
The Good Immigrant starts, appropriately, with an essay titled Namaste. “It 
just means hello,” says a bewildered Nikesh Shukla to a woman who repeats the 
Hindi word to him while offering him her henna stained hands. He’s outside an 
arts space that’s “part bar/club, part sustainable restaurant, part hot-desking 
for freelance artists and part dance studio”; tellingly, namaste is defined by 
Urban Dictionary as: “a word thrown around by Trustafarians and hippies as they 
shop in Whole Foods while wearing their eco-green Birkenstocks”. Namaste is 
thrown at Shukla again, this time as a defiant retort from two young neighbours 
when he asks them to turn down their music at 2am. Language matters. A lot.

Cultural misappropriation is one of the many themes of this book of essays, 
edited by Shukla himself. The book is made up of pieces by 21 emerging writers 
exploring what it means to be black, Asian or minority ethnic in Britain today. 
It was crowfunded directly by readers, reaching its goal in three days (after 
JK Rowling inspired a surge via a tweet andpledged £5,000 herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/03/jk-rowling-david-nicholls-among-sponsors-crowdfunding-book-on-uk-race-and-immigration>
). It was originally inspired by a Guardian comment, of all things: below a 
piece where an Asian journalist had interviewed several authors who happened to 
be people of colour, a commenter wondered if they were all perhaps friends. 
“This constant anxiety we feel as people of colour to justify our space … 
continues to hound us,” writes Shukla. Because, while these 21 writers don’t 
only write about race, or want to, they need to, “because we’re done justifying 
our place at the table”.

The book has been an unquestionable success. It was recently chosen as UK 
readers’ favourite book of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/24/essay-collection-about-race-in-britain-named-readers-book-of-2016>
, over Harry Potter and the Cursed Child and The Girl on the Train. Thank 
goodness. After the year we’ve had, The Good Immigrant feels urgent. If recent 
events have proved anything, it’s that any liberal delusion that we live in a 
post-racial, multicultural country is – pardon my French – utter bullshit. It 
is time for absolutely everyone to check their privilege, learn about each 
others’ experiences, and start actively working to include those who aren’t 
lucky enough to live in blissful ignorance. It is also time for popular culture 
to depict a diversity of characters – nuanced, complicated characters, who 
don’t need to represent a whole collective.

This book is about names. It’s about hair. It’s about shades and bodies. It’s 
about always having to tick “Other”. And it’s about the systemic racism and 
backwards attitudes towards immigration that prevail in the UK and the western 
world. The title references the discussion of why society seems to deem people 
of colour as bad immigrants: job stealers, benefit scroungers, etc. Unless, 
that is, they bake great cakes or win Olympic races and cross over into popular 
culture – when society can then pat itself on the back for its tolerance.

In The Ungrateful Country, poet and author Musa Okwonga explores how he 
discovered that being utterly excellent – the son of two Ugandan refugees, he 
was a brilliant student and ended up going to Eton – working twice as hard as 
his white counterparts and “being as hardworking and as agreeable as possible” 
would never be enough to change his peers’ perceptions of black people. He 
writes: “I approached my studies with a furious sense of mission: believing 
that, if I made a good impression here, I could help to erode some of our 
society’s firmest prejudices.” That sense of feeling like an ambassador – 
voluntary or not – for an entire race or group appears throughout the book.

In Yellow, actor Vera Chok writes about how Asian women are simultaneously 
fetishised and silenced. In A Guide to Being Black, Varaidzo describes her 
coming of age as a mixed-race woman in a white environment. InAirports and 
Auditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/riz-ahmed-typecast-as-a-terrorist>
, actor Riz Ahmed talks about the parallels between auditions and airport 
security. In both contexts, he is typecast as a terrorist.

It feels ridiculous to emphasise that these essays are essential reading. The 
Good Immigrant is a book about how stereotypes divide us, about surviving and 
thriving (or trying to) in a society that loves talking about diversity, but 
remains threatened by it. It is depressing to realise that people of colour 
still have to justify getting a space on our screens and in our institutions. 
As we wish for a world in which it wasn’t necessary, the book is an act of 
peaceful defiance; as a document of the now, and as an opportunity to educate 
ourselves about the lives and experiences of others.
 