
Wealthy aristocrats and a Saudi landowning prince are continuing to reap 
hundreds of thousands of pounds from the European Union’s common agricultural 
policy (CAP).


At least one in five of the top 100 recipients of CAP subsidies in the UK last 
year were farm businesses owned or controlled by members of aristocratic 
families,an investigation by environmental campaign group Greenpeace found 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/09/29/common-agricultural-policy-millions-eu-subsidies-go-richest-landowners/>
.

They include the Queen, the Duke of Westminster, the Duke of Northumberland, 
Sir Richard Sutton, the Earl of Moray, Baron Phillimore and family, and the 
Earl of Plymouth.

Household goods billionaire Sir James Dyson, who campaigned for Brexit, is 
also in the top 100.

Greenpeace analysed the top recipients of CAP subsidies in the UK for the 
first time.

Some 16 of the top 100 are owned or controlled by individuals or families who 
feature on the 2016 Sunday Times rich list, receiving a total of £10.6m last 
year in “single payment scheme” subsidies alone, and £13.4m in total farm 
subsidies, Greenpeace said.

Aberdeenshire farmer Frank Smart topped the list, receiving nearly £3m in 
grants for his Banchory business, Frank A Smart & Son Ltd.

The farmer has been subject to complaints that he has been “slipper farming” - 
a technique in which farmers buy up land principally for the grants attached to 
it. While not illegal, the practice has been heavily criticised.

Also on the list were organisations such as the National Trust, which 
Greenpeace said had used their subsidies for important conservation work like 
managing habitats.

The government has promised to maintain CAP subsidies post-Brexit until 2020 
while a domestic system is put in place.

Prince Khalid Abdullah al Saud, who owns champion racehorse Frankel, has 
reportedly described his farming interest as a hobby. Juddmonte Farms, which he 
owns through an offshore holding company in Guernsey, received £406,826 in farm 
subsidies last year, of which £378,856 came from the single payment scheme.

The two large estates owned by Sir James under Beeswax Farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> (Rainbow) Ltd received almost 
£1.5m. The billionaire rubbished claims that British international trade would 
suffer outside the EU as he backed the campaign to leave Europe.

Hannah Martin, of Greenpeace UK’s Brexit response team, said: “It is untenable 
for the government to justify keeping a farming policy which allows a 
billionaire to breed racehorses on land subsidised by taxpayers. It’s clear 
that there cannot be a business-as-usual approach to farm subsidies after we 
leave the EU.

“Some of the recipients of these subsidies are doing great work which benefits 
our environment - but others are not - and it makes no sense that the CAP’s 
largest subsidy payments don’t distinguish between the two.”

Christopher Price, from the Country Land Association, told the BBC Radio 4 
Today programme: “He is not getting it because he’s a racehorse owner, he’s 
getting it because he’s a farmer and all developed countries support farming in 
one way or another.”

But he agreed that Britain’s departure from the EU could create an opportunity 
to reform the system, for which there was “certainly” a need.

Sandringham Farms, the estate owned by the Queen, received £557,707, while 
Grosvenor Farms Limited, which farms the Duke of Westminster’s estate, raked in 
£437,434. The billionaire landowner died in August and left his fortune to his 
25-year-old son.

Percy Farms, described by Greenpeace as the “in-hand farming operation” of the 
Duke of Northumberland, was given £475,031. The National Trust, Natural England 
and the RSPB were all in the top 20.

The top 100 received £87.9m in agricultural subsidies last year, of which 
£61.2m came from the single payment scheme, where the size of the land owned 
largely determines the grant amount.

Greenpeace said this was more than what was paid to the bottom 55,119 
recipients in the single payment scheme combined.

A spokeswoman for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
(Defra) said: “The secretary of state has underlined the need for continuity 
for farmers and together with her ministerial team is looking forward to 
working with industry, rural communities and the wider public to shape our 
plans for food, farming and the environment outside the EU.”

Conservative ministers Lord Gardiner and Eurosceptic George Eustice, who work 
in Defra,also receive subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/04/environment-minister-accused-of-conflict-of-interest-over-farm-subsidies>
. The department said the pair had declared any potential conflicts of 
interest, complied with the ministerial code and were cleared to discuss the 
future of the grants post-Brexit.
 