 An inquiry is to be held into Sunday's events in Londonderry. This is right: 
the facts ought to be known. But the inquiry and its findings will bring no 
improvement in Northern Ireland. The two communities there are farther apart 
than ever. The Catholics in the North hate and detest Stormont and all who 
defend it. The Protestants, no less, hate the Catholic commitment to the South 
and fear for their own future. The Dublin Government in spite of Mr Lynch's 
wish to exercise a moderating influence now feels that it must campaign for the 
Northern Catholic cause. A significant section of the Labour Party in the UK is 
sympathetic to the Republicans. The British attempt to prevent disruption. 
Violence and lawlessness is increasingly criticised and resented. So where will 
Northern Ireland end? Unless moderation and good sense reassert themselves, and 
unless some means can be found to bring about a dialogue between the Ulster 
Unionists and the Ulster Opposition Northern Ireland will end in civil war. As 
in a classical Greek tragedy events are moving steadily that way.
Against this background even the horror and tragedy of Sunday's shooting pale. 
The inquiry may establish the facts so far as they can be established. Neither 
side can escape condemnation. The organisers of the demonstration Miss 
Bernadette Devlin among them deliberately challenged the ban on marches. They 
knew that stone throwing and sniping could not be prevented and that the IRA 
might use the crowd as a shield. That may prove to have been what happened: but 
no one man's testimony is conclusive there seems little doubt that random shots 
were fired into the crowd that aim was taken at individuals who were neither 
bombers nor weapons carriers and that excessive force was used. It may well be 
true that the first high velocity shots came from the Rossville flats. It is 
certainly true that the army cordons had endured a wanton barrage of stones, 
steel bars, and other missiles. That still does not justify opening fire so 
freely.

Would events have been different under direct British rule? The demand for 
direct rule was repeated in the House of Commons yesterday and Mr Wilson 
himself seemed to be moving towards support for it. But would it have made any 
difference on Sunday? The ban on processions would have been imposed whoever 
was now in charge ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. It is a ban on Orange marches 
no less than on civil rights or Catholic processions. Marches by either side at 
present are provocative and dangerous. As to the army's tactics the orders and 
directives already came from London rather than Stormont. There is no reason to 
suppose that the 1st Parachute Battalion would have been given a different role 
even if the whole responsibility lay in London. Mr Maudling yesterday said as 
much. Against a repetition of Sunday's disaster, direct rule by itself gives no 
guarantee.

The one marginal gain from direct rule is that it takes some of the hatred and 
blame away from Stormont. Mr Heath and Mr Maudling not Mr Faulkner will become 
the scapegoats. They not the Ulster Unionists will become responsible for 
internment orders. Perhaps a little of the heat might be taken out of the 
situation in this way. But they will still be seen by the Catholics as ruling 
on behalf of the Unionists as the men continuing internment and as the gain is 
likely to be negligible.

Proposals put from other quarters yesterday are no more hopeful. Mr Lynch 
wants the army withdrawn from the Catholic areas, internment ended and a "final 
settlement" of the Irish question through a political conference. While his 
proposals ought not to be dismissed they look more like the basis for a 
solution to be imposed on Northern Ireland than for any voluntary agreement. 
Yet the Unionist fear of an imposed settlement - of being sold out by the 
British and forced into a sectarian state - is one of the obstacles to peace. 
The Unionists will fight to prevent it. Unless assured that nobody is going to 
coerce them they will not readily take park in talks.

The Ulster Opposition proposals are still less attractive if Mr John Hume is 
representative. Yesterday he summed them up as "united Ireland or nothing" Has 
he reckoned what "nothing" really means ? It can only imply no talks, a 
prolonging or the crisis, further bloody confrontation or conceivably (in his 
terms) a British withdrawal. The sequel to a British withdrawal is not pleasant 
to contemplate: immediate burning of the Falls Road, most probably, to destroy 
any secure bases for the IRA in Belfast. It is not a formula for peace nor 
would it lead to unity.

Bitter words after Sunday are understandable. They should not be treated as 
irrevocable. The Londonderry shootings are a severe setback to the hope of 
talks. But the choice is talks or civil war. Perhaps the situation can be held 
for a time at its present level, tense and unresolved. Eventually it must come 
to negotiations or worse fighting. To bring the Catholic Opposition to 
negotiations they must be assured that internment will soon end. That Irish 
unity is not ruled out for ever and that they will have a guaranteed role in 
Ulster's government. To bring the Protestants to negotiations they have to be 
assured that nobody will try to force them into a united Ireland. A formula for 
trying to start talks was outlined here yesterday. It offers one possible way 
ahead. Unless some such way is found the future prospect for all Ireland is 
intolerably bleak.
 