
The view expressed in your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/the-guardian-view-on-free-speech-not-just-the-icing-on-the-cake>
 (25 October), defending the right of the Belfast bakers to refuse to make a 
cake supporting gay marriage, simply does not hold water. Icing a cake for an 
Arsenal supporter does not make the baker an Arsenal supporter. Similarly, 
icing a cake supporting gay marriage is not an endorsement of those comments by 
the baker.

The equalities act was drafted for good reason. In a free and open democracy 
it is essential that there is one law for all and that religion can’t be used 
as a cloak for discrimination of any kind.

The judge stated the law quite simply: “In the present case the appellants 
might elect not to provide a service that involves any religious or political 
message. What they may not do is provide a service that only reflects their own 
political or religious message in relation to sexual orientation.”

To go against this simple summary of the law would put us back to a time when 
landlords had signs in their windows saying “no blacks, no Irish, no dogs”.

I am disappointed that a Guardian leader writer can seek to defend the 
indefensible with such a convoluted non-argument.
Dorothy Smith
Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire

• I am disappointed that the Guardian cannot see the difference between 
“Support gay marriage” and “Save Ulster from sodomy”. The first is a positive 
message which, whether you agree with it or not, oppresses no one. The second 
asserts falsely that the existence of a sexual minority threatens “Ulster”, 
implying that they must be discriminated against or suppressed. It was the 
slogan of a campaign to keep homosexuality illegal in Ulster and gave 
legitimacy to all sorts of attacks on gay people.

Secondly, the cake bakers were not having their freedom of expression 
infringed. No one was stopping them baking a cake with the message “Don’t 
support gay marriage”. Also, no one would have thought that the bakers 
supported gay marriage, any more than the message “Man U for the cup” would 
have meant that they supported Manchester United.

The gay couple had the right to express their views and the cake bakers 
offered a forum for this – until someone came along with a message they 
disagreed with.Freedom of speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/freedom-of-speech> means freedom for speech 
you disagree with, as long as it is not illegal.
Les Hearn
London

• Terence Glover (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/fans-are-turned-off-by-footballs-fat-cats>
, 26 October) asks on what grounds sexual minorities should be protected over 
religious ones. Because religious belief is a choice; you do not choose your 
sexuality.
Mandy Lane
Ulverston, Cumbria 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 