
After the first world war, the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 was the next great 
event of the 20th century to capture the literary imagination. Russia, for so 
long an enigma, became the focus of every kind of fantastic speculation that, 
in the long term, would morph into many shelves of biography and history, 
novels of espionage, and finally, George Orwell’sAnimal Farm.

At first, however, the Russian Revolution was simply a sensational item of 
world news. What could be more thrilling than the fall of the tsar, or more 
arresting than the triumph of the proletariat (a word now fallen into disuse)? 
The revolution was all the more intoxicating, because its leaders, especially 
Lenin and Trotsky, were brilliant newspaper copy – passionate intellectuals and 
articulate middle-class revolutionaries who seemed to be men of action 
committed to translating communist theory into their vision of a new society.

British and American journalists flocked to Petrograd (now St Petersburg), the 
epicentre of the earthquake that was toppling the old autocracy, among them a 
young socialist from Portland, Oregon, named John (“Jack”) Reed, who had 
recently graduated from Harvard with a passion for socialism.

The story of the Russian revolution: from the archive, 16 March 1917
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/16/russian-revolution-uprising-archive-1917>
Reed later wrote that Harvard had made him, and many others, “realise that 
there was something going on in the dull outside world more thrilling than 
college activities”, whereupon he and his fellows turned their attention to the 
writings of innovative minds such as HG Wells.

From Harvard, Reed had moved to New York to try his luck as a journalist. In 
1913, he joined the staff of theMasses, edited by Max Eastman, becoming part of 
a journalistic milieu that included Lincoln Steffens, Ida Tarbell,John Dos 
Passos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/27/100-best-novels-john-dos-passos-nineteen-nineteen-1919-usa-trilogy>
, Emma Goldman, and the radical playwrightEugene O’Neill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eugene-o-neill>, as well as the feminist and 
journalist Louise Bryant, whom he married in 1916.

On the Masses, Reed’s modus operandi, as a reporter, was to get arrested, 
which he regularly did, while looking for trouble. Soon, weary of provoking the 
US authorities, he broadened his horizons to take in the ferment in the old 
world as well as the new. In 1917, appalled by Woodrow Wilson’s declaration of 
war against Germany, the newlyweds set off for Europe, and wound up in St 
Petersburg at the beginning of the revolution. Reed saw at once that this was 
his great opportunity. Where previously he had written and published poetry and 
flirted with the Mexican revolution, now his prose caught fire at the prospect 
of a worldwide socialist catharsis. Reed was exhilarated by what he was 
witnessing:

The last month of the Kerensky regime was marked first by the falling off of 
the bread supply from two pounds a day to one pound, to half a pound, to a 
quarter of a pound, and, in the final week, no bread at all. Hold-ups and crime 
increased to such an extent that you could hardly walk down the streets. Not 
only had the government broken down, but the municipal government had 
absolutely broken down.

After this first, thrilling encounter with revolution (Reed also met both 
Lenin and Trotsky), Reed and Bryant returned to the US, and became trapped in a 
succession of bruising lawsuits inspired by the American authorities’ fear of 
Bolshevism. Reed’s life at this time was every bit as dramatic as the world 
from which he had just returned. All his papers from his Russian trip were 
confiscated, and would not be returned for seven months. At this juncture, Reed 
seized his moment, not least because his wife (Louise Bryant) was about to 
publish her own version,Six Red Months in Russia 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/six-red-months-in-russia-illustrated-edition-dodo-press.html>
. His editor, Max Eastman, recalls a meeting with his correspondent during the 
period of time when Reed shut himself away to write his account of the 
revolution in, he claimed, 10 days:

“He was gaunt, unshaven, greasy skinned, a stark, sleepless, half-crazy look 
on his slightly potato-like face. He had come down after a night’s work for a 
cup of coffee.

“‘Max, don’t tell anybody where I am. I’m writing the Russian revolution in a 
book. I’ve got all the placards and papers up there in a little room and a 
Russian dictionary, and I’m working all day and all night. I haven’t shut my 
eyes for 36 hours. I’ll finish the whole thing in two weeks. And I’ve got a 
name for it too –Ten Days That Shook the World. Good-bye, I’ve got to go get 
some coffee. Don’t, for God’s sake, tell anybody where I am!’

“Do you wonder why I emphasise his brains? Not so many feats can be found in 
American literature to surpass what he did there in those two or three weeks in 
that little room with those piled-up papers in a half-known tongue, piled clear 
up to the ceiling, and a small dog-eared dictionary, and a memory, and a 
determination to get it right, and a gorgeous imagination to paint it when he 
got it. But what I want to comment on now was the unqualified, concentrated joy 
in his mad eyes that morning. He was doing what he was made to do, writing a 
great book. And he had a name for it too—Ten Days That Shook the World.”

Eastman was right. From its opening page, Ten Days has a tempo and a voice 
that sets it apart, in an era when reportage as a genre was still in its 
infancy.

Reed’s account of what he saw continues to shape many subsequent versions of 
the Russian revolution

Since March 1917, when the roaring torrents of workmen and soldiers beating 
upon the Tauride Palace compelled the reluctant imperial duma to assume the 
supreme power in Russia, it was the masses of the people, workers, soldiers and 
peasants that forced every change in the course of the revolution. They hurled 
the Miliukov ministry down; it was their soviet that proclaimed to the world 
the Russian peace terms–“No annexations, no indemnities, and the right of 
self-determination of peoples”; and again, in July, it was the spontaneous 
rising of the unorganised proletariat who once more stormed the Tauride Palace, 
to demand that the soviets take over the government of Russia.

Reed never made much effort to conceal his sympathies. While he was reporting 
from Russia, his articles in theMasses, and especially the headline “Knit a 
strait-jacket for your soldier boy”, had inspired an indictment for sedition 
against the magazine. His account of the Bolshevik leadership is frankly 
partisan:

“The Bolsheviks, then a small political sect, put themselves at the head of 
the movement. As a result of the disastrous failure of the rising, public 
opinion turned against them, and their leaderless hordes slunk back into the 
Viborg Quarter, which is Petrograd’s St Antoine. Then followed a savage hunt of 
the Bolsheviks; hundreds were imprisoned, among them Trotsky, Madame Kollontai 
and Kamenev; Lenin and Zinoviev went into hiding, fugitives from justice; the 
Bolshevik papers were suppressed.

“Provocateurs and reactionaries raised the cry that the Bolsheviki were German 
agents, until people all over the world believed it. But the provisional 
government found itself unable to substantiate its accusations; the documents 
proving pro-German conspiracy were discovered to be forgeries; and one by one, 
the Bolsheviki were released from prison without trial, on nominal or no bail, 
until only six remained. The impotence and indecision of the ever-changing 
provisional government was an argument nobody could refute. The Bolsheviks 
raised again the slogan so dear to the masses, ‘All power to the soviets!’– and 
they were not merely self-seeking, for at that time the majority of the soviets 
was ‘moderate’ socialist, their bitter enemy.”

Reed’s account of what he saw continues to shape many subsequent versions of 
the Russian Revolution. The great film director Sergei Eisenstein based his film
October (Ten Days That Shook the World) on the American reporter’s work. Reed’s 
account was romantic, partisan and intensely personal:

“More potent still, [the Bolsheviks] took the crude, simple desires of the 
workers, soldiers and peasants, and from them built their immediate programme. 
And so, while the Mensheviks and socialist revolutionaries involved themselves 
in compromise with the bourgeoisie, the Bolsheviks rapidly captured the Russian 
masses. In July they were hunted and despised; by September the metropolitan 
workmen, the sailors of the Baltic fleet, and the soldiers, had been won almost 
entirely to their cause. The September municipal elections in the large cities 
were significant; only 18% of the returns were Menshevik and socialist 
revolutionary, against more than 70% in June…”

The power of Reed’s account comes from its character as an “eye-witness 
account”. Reed was present at almost every scene he describes. He was in the 
room; he heard the debates; and he saw the chaos of revolution.

By night, armed patrols went through the silent streets, and on the corners 
soldiers and Red Guards squatted around little fires laughing and singing; in 
the daytime great crowds gathered on the sidewalks listening to interminable 
hot debates between students and soldiers, businessmen and workmen.

Reed’s work is edged with tragedy, too. On his first return to America after 
the October revolution, he got bogged down in a debilitating series of trials 
for sedition as a communist. His penchant for trouble-seeking told on his 
mental and physical health, and he began to suffer from insomnia and 
depression. By the time he set off back to Russia to participate in the second 
congress of the Comintern, he was visibly deteriorating from scurvy and 
malnutrition.

Already the revolution was disintegrating into faction fighting. Reed, always 
prey to the appeal of a good story, allowed himself to be seconded, on behalf 
of the Comintern, to another congress in Baku. The journey wrecked his health 
and, by the time he returned to Moscow, he was suffering from typhus. He died 
on 17 October 1920, was given a hero’s funeral, and buried in the Kremlin Wall, 
a unique honour.

It is part of the myth of Ten Days that Reed should die so soon after 
publication, as a martyr to a great cause. In 1922, his book was republished 
with an encomium from Lenin himself.

“With the greatest interest and with never slackening attention I read John 
Reed’s book,Ten Days That Shook the World. Unreservedly do I recommend it to 
the workers of the world. Here is a book which I should like to see published 
in millions of copies and translated into all languages. It gives a truthful 
and most vivid exposition of the events so significant to the comprehension of 
what really is the Proletarian Revolution.” – VI Lenin

Ten Days That Shook the World is neither history nor polemic, but a bit of 
both – a rhetorical act of witness that is both authentic and unputdownable. It 
remains one of the great texts of American journalism: ironically, it gains an 
extra and paradoxical credibility from being un-fact-checked and unmediated. 
With all its many flaws, both ideological and literary, it remains a 
masterpiece of reportage.

A signature sentence

“From the farthest corners of great Russia, whereupon desperate 
street-fighting burst like a wave, news of Kerensky’s defeat came echoing back 
the immense roar of proletarian victory; Kazan, Saratov, Novgorod, Vinnitza – 
where the streets had run with blood; Moscow, where the Bolsheviks had turned 
their artillery against the last stronghold of the bourgeoisie – the Kremlin.”

Three to compare

Louise Bryant: Six Red Months in Russia 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/six-red-months-in-russia-illustrated-edition-dodo-press.html>
 (1918)
Arthur Ransome: Six Weeks in Russia (1919)
George Orwell: Animal Farm 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/animal-farm-16.html> (1945)
 