
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> chose a 
bitterly ironic party location to thank her massive donor network last week: 
the grand ballroom of The Plaza, once owned by Donald Trump.


The people gathered for the glum get-together, including hedge fund managers 
and media titans, had built the most formidable fundraising network ever seen 
in American politics. Theypumped 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/clinton-money/> more than 
$4bn into various Clinton campaigns and related political and charitable groups 
over four decades. Many of them have been cutting huge checks since Bill 
Clinton’s first presidential campaign in 1992.

In 2016, they expected their $1.2bn infusion 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/graphics/2016-presidential-campaign-fundraising/>
 to catapult Hillary Clinton back into the White House and were astonished, 
like the rest of the country’s elite, to see all that money go down the tubes.

I was not invited to the Plaza. (As usual for Clinton, press was banned). But 
the Plaza gathering was a personal milestone for me, too, and the coda to a 
long career reporting on Clinton Inc.

Democrats once represented the working class. Not any more | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
Back in 1991, I was one of the only reporters with Bill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> at one of his early Hollywood 
shakedowns. I saw how he loved schmoozing with rich people, how his body 
language literally changed as he mixed with the ultra-rich. We were in the 
Beverly Hills mansion of movie producer Mike Medavoy, whose home actually had a 
chandelier hanging in the outdoor patio.

I was told later by campaign aides that Hillary Clinton had particularly hated 
the piece I wrote, on the front page of the Wall Street Journal, pointing out 
how the couple stitched every station of their lives, from Yale Law School to 
the once-famous Renaissance Weekends they attended on New Year’s Eve, into a 
fundraising juggernaut. She said the story made them look like “we were using 
our friends”.

But Bill and Hillary Clinton are the people responsible for turning the 
Democratic party into the party of Wall Street and their glitzy friends. During 
his time in office, Bill Clinton did little to change a campaign finance system 
that has always been fundamentally at odds with the party’s egalitarian message.

The likes of Anna Wintour and hedge fund titan R Donald Sussman, are certainly 
part of the reason why so much of middle America turned against theDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> in this election. (Though 
Trump, meanwhile, has surrounded himself with billionaires, including three 
Goldman Sachs alums.)

Still, if not with the Plaza crowd, where will the Democratic party go?

While all eyes are focused on Trump, this is one of the most pressing 
questions in American politics. While the pundit class all said the Republican 
party was being torn apart by this election, it is the Democratic party that is 
in tatters. It has to be rebuilt from the ground up for the new, post-Clinton 
future. But the foundation for such a massive undertaking is shaky.

It isn’t just that Democrats are the minority party in Washington, it’s that 
they’ve lost state governments at all levels, from governorships to the state 
legislatures. While the Democrats have focused on gaining and holding the White 
House since 2008, the Koch brothers and their billionaire, rightwing allies 
have been showering money on local candidates, too, and the payoff has been 
huge.

One has only to look at the fracas in North Carolina, where the outgoing 
Republican governor and his Republican legislature are undermining the powers 
of the new governor, to see how effective the Koch network has been.

The Democratic party lost its soul. It's time to win it back | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/democratic-party-dnc-leadership-trump-clinton-sanders>
State governors, like Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, have always been where 
the parties go looking for new talent but with so few blue states, the pickings 
are slim for the Democrats. The only real bright spot for them are the mayors 
of big cities, where their party is in control. But even there, big-city 
problems are tarnishing potential younger stars like Rahm Emmanuel of Chicago 
and Bill de Blasio of New York.

But talent is not even the party’s biggest problem. It is the ideas that 
animate the party. Somehow, Trump’s promise to “Make America Great Again” 
managed to win over the Republican coalition of religious conservatives, 
non-college-educated whites and suburban voters needed to win the electoral 
college.


Hillary Clinton did not have a cogent economic message. This was the most 
serious failing of her campaign. It is also the biggest challenge facing the 
Democratic party as it tries to rebuild with an alliance of Bernie Sanders and 
Elizabeth Warren liberals and the financiers who have funded the party since 
Bill Clinton’s victory in 1992.

Of course, the Sanders-Warren economic message is at war with Wall Street 
interests. So who owns the economic ideas that must rejuvenate the Democrats as 
Trump and his new cabinet try to rip apart the social programs that are the 
signature accomplishments of Democratic presidents from Johnson to Obama?

How will the Democrats approach trade, another issue that deeply divides Wall 
Street donors from the Democratic rank and file. Perhaps most important, who 
are the best thinkers and activists who can begin to answer these questions?

Everyone I have talked to in the party is still too stunned and angry over 
Trump’s upset win to really get their heads around the daunting work ahead. 
Democrats are still obsessed with Russian interference in the election and with 
blaming the FBI director, James Comey, for defeating Clinton. These, too, are 
important subjects, but don’t help shape the future.

In politics, as in life, Democrats should take comfort in the fact that there 
can always be sharp and surprising reversals of fortune. On 2 November 1992, 
Donald Trump lost control of his cherished Plaza Hotel and had to file for 
bankruptcy. The very next day, Bill Clinton was elected president.
 