
Capacity: 21,000


Who plays there: It's the biggest pop arena in Europe, so the venue lends 
itself to artists providing visual spectaculars with lots of hydraulics and 
pyrotechnics. From the Rolling Stones, Madonna and U2 downwards, pretty much 
every massive live act has played here at one time or another. This year has 
already seen sold-out shows by Michael Bublé (five nights), Beyoncé (two 
nights) and Drake (two nights). In September, Kylie Minogue will make her 30th 
appearance at the arena: she'll have performed there more than anyone else, and 
also more than anywhere else.

Cloakroom: Yes

Admission: Arena-level prices – most pop and rock tickets here cost £30 and 
above, with notable exceptions (such as Barry Manilow’s May appearance, which 
start at £15). The cheapest tickets for Miley Cyrus’s show in May are £47.50, 
although for a relatively economical £29.50 and £30 you can shortly see the 
Backstreet Boys and Elbow respectively. The most expensive upcoming concert is 
Robbie Williams, starting at a wallet-bothering £55.

Bar: Speed, not quality, is the aim, with a small array of generic draught 
beers (at £4.50 a pint), red and white wines in plastic bottles, and soft 
drinks, all which can be dispensed very quickly to avoid queues building up. 
Should the prospect of expensive warm lager in a plastic glass prove too 
disheartening, the pub inside Victoria station provides a wide selection of 
bottled beers, hand-pulled real ales and various spirits at very affordable 
prices for your pre-gig refreshment.

Food: You can get the typical range of arena fast food – burgers, chips and 
hot dogs, and so on. However, stalls around the building also provide a 
selection of affordable and amenable Indian delicacies such as vegetarian 
samosas.

Toilets: On every level. 

Wheelchair access: Throughout the venue. The arena prides itself on being 
accessible to everyone and has special areas for disabled gig-goers. The Hunts 
Bank entrance has a lift.

Sound: Like the arena itself, big, brash and very, very loud. So loud that 
within 30 metres of the speakers, earplugs may be needed. However, such a huge 
space is always going to require a big sound system to fill it. There's no 
in-house soundsystem and touring artists bring their own, which can make for a 
variable experience – Morrissey's 2012 appearance was unusually muffled. 
However, the kind of acts that play here are usually more than used to the 
sonic requirements of playing a big arena and rarely disappoint.

Where to stand: The venue is divided into a floor area, which is usually 
standing (though occasionally seated) and two enormous circular banks of seats. 
It is a truly vast space. If you want to see the whites of your favourite 
artist’s eyes you are likely to be disappointed. However, the visuals are 
usually effective enough to entertain those at the very back, whether through 
video screens, production effects or a secondary stage – Drake had one 
suspended near the roof that descended into the venue. The lower tier in the 
half of the venue nearest the stage is optimal, unless you’re lucky or brave 
enough to have a floor ticket and be willing to brave the moshpit. Once you’re 
in place, though, you’re in place for the duration: floor standers cannot move 
into the seating areas or vice versa.

Overall: A place this size is never going to provide an intimate or 
particularly personal experience (unless you’re lucky enough to be whisked 
onstage by Drake or Bono), and Manchester doesn’t try. But it does present a 
huge arena experience very well. The venue’s vast size may mean the occasional 
bar queue and the odd slower-selling gig at which curtains shroud rows of 
unsold seats, but Manchester’s ace card is its atmosphere. When an artist yells 
“Make some noise, Manchester” and 20,000 voices scream, or when thousands of 
pairs of arms start a venue-wide Mexican wave, you know you’re in for a bona 
fide arena experience.

Address: Victoria Station, Trinity Way, Manchester M3 1AR

Telephone: 0161-950 5000

Website: phones4uarena.co.uk <http://www.phones4uarena.co.uk/>

Public transport: It adjoins Manchester Victoria station (national rail). 
Trains run from nearby Piccadilly and other Manchester stations and the area is 
well-served by bus. There's a taxi rank adjacent to the venue outside Victoria 
station.
 