
Capacity: 280


Who plays there: Given its compactness, it doesn’t do too badly in booking 
critics’-choice acts like Nathaniel Rateliff, as well as small bands who are on 
the verge of bigger things, such as Eagulls and White Lung. It’s a draw for 
local groups (and, bearing in mind Brighton’s status as one of Britain’s most 
bohemian cities, there’s no shortage of those). There’s also an eclectic 
cluster of free events and it’s one of the host venues for Brighton’s annual 
Great Escape festival, as well as for December’s Drill festival.

Cloakroom: Only during club nights.


Admission: Club events are usually free, and some gigs are, too. Otherwise, 
you won’t spend much more than £10.


Bar: Standard selection of beers, wine and soft drinks, at pub prices. A pint 
of San Miguel is £4, Tuborg/Gaymers cans are £3 and a small wine is £3.80. Half 
a pint of a soft drink is £1.40. There’s also a range of Badger Brewery ales. 
One of the bestsellers, quirkily enough, is Iron Maiden’s own beer, Trooper.


Food: Bar snacks.


Toilets: On ground level. 


Wheelchair access: Yes.


Sound: Remarkably crisp, for such a tiny room.


Where to stand: There’s not much in it. The place is so small that any square 
foot of floor space you choose will offer equally good sightlines and sound. Or 
equally poor if you are particularly short.


Overall: Literally a hidden delight – it’s tucked into a railway arch, with 
nothing outside to indicate that it’s there. Inside, it’s all smoke-blackened 
brickwork and Victorian dereliction (DJs have to set up their decks on old ash 
cans). The bar opens at 5pm for after-work drinks, staying free to all 
regardless of whether there’s a gig in the music room. A great, handily located 
place to hear music.


Address: Trafalgar Arches, Lower Goods Yard, Brighton Station, Brighton BN1 4FQ

Telephone: 07944 693214


Website: thegreendoorstore.co.uk <http://www.thegreendoorstore.co.uk/>


Public transport: Underneath Brighton station. Many buses stop at the station 
forecourt, including the 6, 7, 14, 27, 50 and 77.

 