
The man who drove a truck into the crowd – Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/bastille-day-truck-driver-was-known-to-police-reports-say>
– was a Tunisian resident in France. This bald fact will provoke plenty of 
discussion and analysis since it is hardly the first attack on France from one 
of its immigrants.

In January 2015, 12 people died in an attack on the French newspaper Charlie 
Hebdoby the Algerian Kouachi brothers. In April 2015, an Algerian jihadi 
planned to attack churches and killed one person in Villejuif. Some of those 
responsible for the Paris attacks of last November were French and Belgian 
nationals of north African origin.

France’s immigrants – or its natives of North African heritage – seem to be 
more susceptible to indoctrination by radical groups. (There are around 600,000 
Tunisians inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.)

There is also the related question of whether the French assimilation project 
has failed. It’s certainly true that a difficult assimilation, to say the 
least, can be seen in the socioeconomic condition of France’s immigrants, who 
suffer from a low standard of living and poor health conditions, work in 
precarious jobs and are often victims of discrimination. Unemployment is high 
among Maghrebi immigrants who are concentrated in the least affluent urban 
areas of Paris, Dijon, Marseille and Nice, reinforcing the divide between 
France and its immigrants.

Although the French assimilation project seems to be bent on creating a 
homogenous identity, French Muslims are still aware of their double identity. 
And while diaspora communities have grown exponentially over the last decades, 
the French discourse on assimilation changed very little.

For countries of origin, immigrants represent an influx of foreign currency, 
hence they work hard to maintain links with their nationals living elsewhere.
Tunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> has established the Office 
of Tunisians Abroad, a portal for Tunisian immigrants to make sure this 
connection with the motherland is not severed; one of the services it offers to 
this community is free Arabic language lessons to the offspring of immigrants 
who receive a western education.

For a country such as Tunisia, whose economy is largely based on seasonal 
touristic activity, it is no surprise that the state would invest efforts to 
make French Tunisians feel welcome in the land of its ancestors. For its part, 
the Tunisian community abroad still observes religious rituals, follows local 
media, preserves culinary traditions and native dressing styles.

But these connections can have negative consequences. Despite its secularised 
appearance and a recent history of fostering civic rights and pluralism, some 
reports estimate that the largest number of Isis’s foreign fighters come from 
Tunisia, which could be attributed to economic marginalisation and regional 
inequity, but also to a conservative strain that runs deep in Tunisian society, 
absorbed equally in the belief system of the diaspora.

Islamic radicalism has invested heavily in reviving the past, a luring 
prospect for some young members of this Muslim diaspora that sees itself as 
marginalised and might perversely see the promises of radical Islam as 
glamorous. Most of them have limited education and low-skilled jobs and might 
be enraged by xenophobic behaviour in France. With the spread of affordable 
digital technology, the lure of radical groups offering an irresistible 
narrative has become even stronger.

Little effort is dedicated to understanding radical groups, the way they 
interpret the religious texts and their links with Islamic currents in the 
Muslim world. There is even less effort dedicated to religious reform.

There were no initial indicators that the Nice attacker had links with 
extremist groups. In a statement to a Tunisian radio station, 
Lahouaiej-Bouhlel’s brother has denied that he had Islamic tendencies, and so 
did some of his neighbours, although he was in jail for minor crimes .

So, if this is a war, it is not only a war against masterminds whose record in 
radical Islam could be tracked by intelligence, but also against individuals 
acting after short-term cycles of indoctrination and little training, using 
available means. (The fake rifles and grenades found in the truck could 
possibly intend to convey a coded message about the ability of terrorists to 
outsmart security measures when traditional weapons become obsolete.)

The Nice attacker was a delivery driver and was familiar with the city, 
aspects that make him a tempting target for radical groups, though it is not 
clear where and when he might have received any radical indoctrination. Perhaps 
his motives might become clearer over the next days.

Beyond Lahouaiej-Bouhlel, arguments over the causes of Islamist terrorism in 
France are heated. They are most neatly embodied in the public disagreements 
between the academicsOlivier Roy and Gilles Kepel 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/13/world/europe/france-radical-islam.html?_r=0>
. The former places greater emphasis on individuals caught up in jihadism; for 
the latter, the explanation is found in France and its dysfunctional suburbs. 
Either way, the North African connection is key.

Imen Yacoubi is a Tunisian writer and commentator

• Comments will be opened later
 