
Amy James was seven months pregnant when she decided to quit a well-paid job 
(and generous maternity package) at a major professional services company to 
work for a national charity. Changing careers so close to the due date is a 
brave decision that many expectant mothers would shy away from, but staying at 
the firm where she had worked for more than seven years simply wasn’t an option 
for the Australian.

For James, the pregnancy presented an opportunity to re-evaluate her life and 
career. She had moved from Melbourne to join the company’s London office. But 
she noticed that many of her colleagues who were already parents had very 
little work-life balance, despite her employer offering attractive working 
practices and incentives to staff with children. She couldn’t imagine working 
at the pace expected of her by the company while at the same time trying to 
raise a child.

She says: “There was lots of talk about flexible working – there were options 
to work from home, to work part-time and to change your hours – but I never saw 
that happen in practice. You might work three days a week but actually you will 
still be doing work on your days off or during holiday time. So it was all 
talk, no action.”


From flexible working to away days: how can charities boost staff wellbeing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/16/flexible-working-how-charities-boost-staff-wellbeing>
Despite her pregnancy bump clearly showing during the interview, Citizens 
Advice <https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/> took her on as its new business 
change manager and, according to James, the organisation did not see her having 
a baby as a drawback. Instead, she says, it was understanding and recognised 
that she had joined the charity because it was a role she really wanted and was 
genuinely interested in, and was going to work hard at it after maternity leave.


Citizens Advice further supported her childcare needs by allowing her to work 
four instead of five days when she returned in April. A workplace culture that 
values a healthy work-life balance also means James has more time to spend with 
her family.


“Because I am working four days, I know I have that extra day that I am 
spending with my baby. That means I can focus better on the days I am in the 
office,” she explains.


“Colleagues are always asking me how my baby is, so if I want to spend time 
working from home they are really supportive of that. They are also respectful 
of days off – they are not trying to contact you out of work hours – and you 
don’t have people staying behind late regularly without being noticed.”


With women making up 67% of the third sector 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/generic/tsrc/documents/tsrc/working-papers/briefing-paper-40.pdf>
 workforce, a higher percentage than in either the public or the private 
sectors, it’s no surprise that voluntary organisations are keen to support 
female staff during and after pregnancy.


However, financial constraints make it difficult for most charities to offer 
anything more than the statutory minimum maternity, paternity and parental 
leave pay.

Rosalind Bragg, director of Maternity Action 
<http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/>, says although all women are entitled to 
52 weeks of maternity leave, with fathers and partners able to take two weeks 
of paternity leave if they meet the eligibility requirements, voluntary 
organisations struggle to offer full pay for the whole period of absence.


She explains: “The vast majority of people working in the charitable sector 
are women and a significant proportion of these have care responsibilities for 
young children. There is no doubt that many in the charity sector are working 
towards a higher level of practical and financial support for their staff. One 
of the challenges is how to achieve this in a very difficult financial 
environment.”


Returning from maternity leave: our top tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/jul/24/returning-from-maternity-leave-top-tips>
There are, however, simple inexpensive ways smaller charities with limited 
budgets and resources can support new parents, Bragg claims. Flexible working 
is an incentive that costs nothing and is something Karen Butcher, chief 
operating office ofCMT UK <http://cmt.org.uk/>, offers her staff.


The charity, which supports people with the genetic condition Charcot Marie 
Tooth, employs four part-time staff. So when a key member of the team had to 
take maternity leave during the busy annual conference season, Butcher admits 
she was “tearing her hair out” wondering how they would cope. With careful 
forward-planning and by hiring two more part-time workers, however, the charity 
was able to rise to the challenge.


The member of staff returned to work in January after nine months off and 
although the charity was only able to offer the statutory minimum pay, Butcher 
made every effort to offer her the flexibility needed to accommodate her 
childcare needs – whether that was working from home if the child was sick or 
bringing the baby into the office.

How working for charity can make you happier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jun/15/how-working-for-charity-can-make-you-happier>
Butcher reveals she even bought a changing table especially for those 
occasions. She says as long as the work is being done, she doesn’t mind what 
hours her staff work. “For me, replacing and changing staff, particularly 
because of the range of things she does for us, would be far more of a pain in 
the arse than letting her have time off whenever she needs it,” she says.

“At the end of the day, she works for us very hard and it behoves us to be 
flexible to her. Consequently she loves working for us has no intention of 
leaving. It is no skin off my nose at all if she works from home or here in the 
office.”


Butcher explains that offering flexible working to all staff, whether parents 
or not, is important to ensuring the workplace culture reflects the beliefs and 
values of the charity.


She adds: “The loyalty of staff and commitment to us is the main advantage. To 
me that is worth its weight in gold – to be confident that they are in it for 
the long term.”


For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 