
I know a married man with two children who bought a 21-room motel near Denver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/denver> many years ago in order to become 
its resident voyeur. I first became aware of this individual in 1980 when my 
valet handed me a letter that had been sent to my $5m home in New York.

Dear Mr Talese, as the author of Thy Neighbor’s Wife 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/kvpa/talese/books/neighbor.html>, the brilliantly 
written exploration of American sexual mores that has now been in the 
bestseller lists for over six months, I thought you might like to know about my 
adventures as a Peeping Tom.Yours, Anonymous.

For several days, I left this letter to one side as I had more important 
matters to attend to, namely designing the monogram for my blazer. Since my 
correspondent refused to be named, I felt there was little to be gained from 
meeting him as my deservedly award-winning non-fiction had always been 
predicated on full disclosure. And yet I had to concede that his letter was not 
without merit as it did acknowledge me as the finest living writer of my 
generation. So I replied, using myMontblanc fountain pen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yk3rIKN3mVk>, that I would meet him at baggage 
reclaim 4 at Phoenix airport, at some point in the future when I had finished 
my nationwide tour promoting yet another of my brilliant books.

Gay Talese: ‘Most journalists are voyeurs. Of course they are’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/10/gay-talese-voyeurs-motel-interview>
He was sat on a pale tangerine banquette near baggage reclaim 5 when I arrived 
in Phoenix shortly after four in the afternoon of 23rd January. After I rebuked 
him for his impertinence in waiting in the wrong place, thereby delaying me for 
at least 12 seconds, he lead me out to his highly polished black Cadillac 
sedan. “Good day,” he said, as the sun beat down from what I recall was a 
deep-azure sky. “My name is Gerald Foos.”

Gerald, as he preferred to be called, introduced me to his wife Donna, whom he 
assured me was highly approving of his voyeurism, which he insisted was an 
important social history of the sexual activities of his motel guests. Gerald 
and Donna took me up to the secret attic from which they could spy on their 
guests though the vents. “Look down there,” he said. I leant forward to observe 
a white male of about 195lb having intercourse with a slight woman of Spanish 
descent with thick black pubic hair. As I leant further forward, my silkRalph 
Lauren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/02/its-not-about-fabric-its-about-dreams-how-ralph-lauren-created-an-empire>
 tie slipped through the vent: Gerald pulled me back, lest our voyeurism became 
public, before continuing to masturbate. I made a note that Gerald had 
ejaculated at precisely 7.51pm.

On my return to my New York home that had appreciated in value by $145 in my 
absence, Gerald began to send me weekly instalments from his meticulously 
observed notes.

“A short fat man urinates in the sink while his wife is out. On her return, 
she performs fellatio on his below-average-size penis. He then mounts her in 
the male superior position and thrusts forcefully for about five minutes before 
climaxing. The woman does not appear to climax.Conclusion: this couple have a 
serviceable, if not particularly joyful, union. The rather small amount of 
semen the man ejaculates suggests he is a frequent masturbator.”

To my surprise, I sense there is some nobility in Gerald’s enterprise and I 
recall a book written by a professor who is not quite so brilliant as me, in 
which Victorian sexual activity was explored through the prism of voyeurism. I 
ask Gerald to send further extracts of his diary.

“There is no moral problem with voyeurism because the people being watched 
don’t know they are being watched so they can’t be hurt. I find this immensely 
reassuring when some of my own semen slips through the vent on to the face of a 
well-built brunette woman who has just swallowed the semen of a slight 
Caucasian man of about 157lb. I also observe a man strangling a woman and feel 
a bit guilty about not reporting it, though am aware that doing so would 
compromise my objectivity.”

At some point, it becomes clear to me that Gerald’s diary actually begins 
three years before he bought the motel, but I am inclined to treat this as an 
administrational error on Gerald’s part. In 2013, Gerald, who is now in his 
80s, rings up to say that the motel has been knocked down and he is now happy 
for me to publish a book about him using his real name.

I agree, though the extract about the killing still bothers me. I ring up the 
Denver police department, who inform me they have no record of any homicide at 
the motel. The incompetence of the Denver police, in not responding to a crime 
that definitely took place, is breathtaking. At some point I might write an 
award-winning book about them. For now, though, satisfied that my own extensive 
research is complete, I decide to publish the most important work of 
non-fictional fictional bollocks ever in the history of non-fictional fictional 
bollocks.

Digested read, digested: Foos’ gold.
 