
According to Robert Byron’s Oxford contemporary Evelyn Waugh – never the most 
reliable witness – the future author ofThe Road to Oxiana used to delight in 
shouting “Down with abroad”. Typical in striking a pose, Byron was an 
aggressive Oxford aesthete of the “Brideshead generation”, a homosexual 
wanderer whose precocious career as a travel writer and art historian can be 
traced through a succession of prewar gems. (Robert Byron by James Knox, 
published by John Murray in 2003, remains the principal biographical source.)

Byron wrote The Station, aged 22, after a visit to Mount Athos on a mule, 
Fortnum & Mason saddlebags bursting with a soda siphon and chicken in aspic. 
This was followed byThe Byzantine Achievement 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/byzantine-achievement.html> (1929) and The 
Birth of Western Painting (1930). In 1933, the publication of First Russia, 
Then Tibet <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/first-russia-then-tibet.html> 
confirmed Byron’s reputation as a traveller and connoisseur. In the same year, 
accompanied by his friend Christopher Sykes, but tormented by his unrequited 
love for Desmond Parsons, Byron set out on a journey to Persia and Afghanistan, 
by way of Jerusalem, Damascus and Baghdad, in search of the origins of Islamic 
architecture. After many vicissitudes,The Road to Oxiana (the remote northern 
borderland of Afghanistan) became the record of his 11-month journey, a 
fabulous and intoxicating weave of surreal vignettes, journal entries and odd 
playlets. In these gorgeous pages, poetry, gossip and scholarship become 
braided into an exotic tapestry that dazzles as much today as it did on 
publication. As many critics have noted, unlike his contemporaries, such as 
Peter Fleming and Norman Douglas, Byron has not dated.

An enthusiastic literary critical response ranged from Graham Greene, who 
admired Byron’s demotic, conversational brilliance, to the rivalrous Evelyn 
Waugh, who had to concede the book’s high spirits, via theSunday Times, which 
linked Byron to his namesake (no relation) and declared him “the last and 
finest fruit of the insolent humanism of the 18th century”. Today, widely 
considered to be Byron’s masterpiece,The Road to Oxiana stands as perhaps the 
greatest travel book of the 20th century.

His best passages are strikingly joyous and carefree, in prose that’s lambent, 
simple and brilliantly observed

It’s a title that continues to inspire hyberbole. The American critic Paul 
Fussell, writing inAbroad, his important 1982 study of interwar literary 
travelling, has judged that “whatUlysses is to the novel between the wars, and 
whatThe Waste Land is to poetry, The Road to Oxiana is to the travel book”.

This extravagant claim is supported by writers as varied as Bruce Chatwin, 
Colin Thubron and William Dalrymple. In their different ways, each shares a 
veneration forThe Road to Oxiana. Chatwin, whose debt to Byron was profound, 
declared it to be “a sacred text”, and campaigned to get the book back into 
print with Picador in 1981, after almost 50 years of obscurity.

Byron starts his quest, in medias res, with himself as a “joy-hog” in Venice, 
immersed in the sea at Lido. The bathing, on a calm day, must be the worst in 
Europe: water like hot saliva, cigar ends floating into one’s mouth, and shoals 
of jellyfish. Once he is joined by Christopher Sykes, Byron begins to hit his 
stride as as an aphorist: “The King David hotel is the only good hotel in Asia 
this side of Shanghai.” Lines such as these will remind Byron’s readers that 
when, on a visit to Soviet Russia, he had encountered an Intouristguide, a 
Shakespeare-denier who insisted that the plays could never have been written by 
a grocer from Stratford, Byron had cheerfully replied: “They are exactly the 
sort of plays I would expect a grocer to write.”

In the same spirit, Byron was untroubled by the perils of his trip. Crossing 
into Persia, his companion Sykes nervously rebukes him for disrespecting the 
shah out loud. He suggests: “Call him Mr Smith.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
“I always call Mussolini Mr Smith in Italy.”

“Well, Mr Brown.”

“No, that’s Stalin’s name in Russia.”

Further debate establishes that “Jones” is no good either. That’s what Byron 
calls Hitler in Germany. (In 1938, together with Unity Mitford, Byron would 
attend the last Nuremberg rally.) Eventually, the two travellers settle on 
“Marjoribanks” for the shah (“Marjoribanks” will recur throughout the 
subsequent pages of Byron’s journey).

Quotation from Byron hardly begins to do justice to the pleasures of his 
writing. The Wildean mix of scholarship and irreverence becomes addictive, as 
in this typical passage about the Lutfullah mosque from Byron’s visit to 
Isfahan:

“I have never encountered splendour of this kind before. Other interiors came 
into my mind as I stood there, to compare it with: Versailles, or the porcelain 
rooms at Schönbrunn, or the Doge’s palace, or St Peter’s… . All are rich; but 
none so rich. Their richness is three-dimensional; it is attended by all the 
effort of shadow: in the mosque of Sheikh Lutfullah, it is a richness of light 
and surface, of pattern and colour only. The architectural form is unimportant. 
It is not smothered, as in rococo; it is simply the instrument of a spectacle, 
as earth is the instrument of a garden.”

Byron was often as daring as he was witty. To enter the forbidden mosque of 
Goharshad, he disguised himself by blackening his face with charcoal. From 
Herat to Mazar-i-Sharif, he and Sykes were the first Englishmen to undertake 
what was, and remains, a highly dangerous route.

Byron was insouciant towards the risks he took. Many of his best passages are 
strikingly joyous and carefree, in prose that’s lambent, simple and brilliantly 
observed, as in this conclusion to a sunset at the shrine of Niamatullah:

“While the cadent sun throws lurid copper streaks across the sand-blown sky, 
all the birds in Persia have gathered for a last chorus. Slowly, the darkness 
brings silence, and they settle themselves to sleep with diminishing 
flutterings, as of a child arranging its bedclothes.”

Jan Morris at 90: she has shown us the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/02/jan-morris-life-in-motion> 
Byron’s grand journey plans were frustrated. He would never get further east 
than Afghanistan. The dividend, for his readers, is that he plunges himself 
into his Afghan adventures with infectious brio: in April, he’s arrested for an 
“incident”; in May, we find him as a guest at the consul’s ball; various kinds 
of transport break down or fail. Somehow, and very entertainingly, Byron ends 
up in Kabul.

“A winding hill road brought us down from the Charikar plateau to a smaller 
plain inside a ring of mountains; running water and corrugated iron glinted 
among its trees. At the entrance to the capital the police deprived the vicar 
and the curate of their rifles, to their great distress; but being in turbans, 
no one would believe they were government servants.”

There were still a few bizarre, comic encounters to record:

“This morning at the Legation I met a Colonel Porter, who asked what my share 
in the world’s work was. I said I had been looking at Mohammadan architecture.

‘Mind you,’ he replied. ‘I can tell you the key to the problem, if you like.’

‘Really. What is it?’

‘The whole thing’s phallic,’ he uttered in a ghoulish whisper.

I was surprised at first to note the influence of Freud on the north-west 
frontier, but soon discovered that for Colonel Porter the universe itself was 
phallic.”

After the thrills of Kabul and the Khyber Pass, England looked – as it always 
looks upon that inevitable return home – “drab and ugly from the train”. 
Suddenly deflated, Byron confesses to feeling “dazed at the prospect of coming 
to a stop, at the impending collision between 11 months’ momentum and the 
immobility of a beloved home”. Laconic, he writes: “The collision happened. Our 
dogs ran up. And then my mother – to whom, now it is finished, I deliver the 
whole record.”

Finally, Byron’s journey of heart and mind reverts, poignantly, to its source, 
where no artifice or extravagance will seduce that all-consuming first reader. 
“What I have seen she taught me to see,” he writes, “and will tell me if I have 
honoured it.”

Byron was lost at sea on 24 February 1941, aged 35, when the Egypt-bound ship 
on which he was sailing was torpedoed by a German U-boat off Cape Wrath.

A signature sentence

“Below the gleaming silver crags and stunted green-feathered pines, the 
mountain fell 3,000 feet to the coastal plain, an endless panorama of rusty red 
speckled with myriads of little trees and their shadows, beyond which, 60 miles 
away across the blue sea, appeared the line of Asia Minor and the Taurus 
Mountains.”

Three to compare

Eric Newby: A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/short-walk-in-the-hindu-kush.html> (1958)
Bruce Chatwin: In Patagonia 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-patagonia.html> (1977)
Rory Stewart: The Places in Between 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/places-in-between.html> (2004)

The Road to Oxiana is published by Vintage (£8.99). Click here to buy it for 
£8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-oxiana.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 