
Capacity: 300


Who plays there: If it’s hipster indie you’re after, this is the place in 
Manchester to find it. The name and the Grade II-listed building (built in 
1877) have history. Formerly anactual institute for deaf and dumb people 
<http://manchesterhistory.net/manchester/outside/deafdumb.html>, it returned in 
2008, as a music venue run by the people behind the Northern Quarter’sTrof bar 
<http://www.trofnq.co.uk/>. With a growing reputation as one of the best and 
hippest small venues in the country, the Deaf Institute’s shabbily chic, 
dome-shaped music hall hosts rising stars such as Drenge, Lindi Ortega, 
Alvvays, 2:54, Peace, Marmozets and Kate Tempest, along with the occasional 
more venerable name, such as Chuck Prophet or Roddy Frame. The venue also holds 
club nights.

Cloakroom: Yes

Admission: £7-20.

Bar: The Deaf Institute’s main, ground-level bar boasts a wide selection of 
draught ales (such as Longhammer IPA at £4 a pint), craft beers, cocktails and 
coffees at reasonably competitive prices, with Wi-Fi throughout. The venue say 
there is something happening most nights, including open mics, quizzes, DJs and 
“a massive party”. There’s a special after-work drinking deal between 4-6pm 
where you can get a pint for £2.50 or a bottle of wine for a tenner. In the 
music hall itself, a much smaller bar is generally limited to pricier bottled 
beers, wines and spirits; a cheapskate Yorkshireman such as myself can 
sometimes settle for an orange juice for 60p.

Food: Situated a floor below the music hall, the bar and kitchen is open from 
4pm for “dinner and late-night feasts”, serving food until 10pm, with “concise 
menus from around the world” and Sunday roasts. It now has a pop-up burger 
joint, providing carnivores and veggies with burgers in a brioche bun.

Toilets: Yes, downstairs 

Wheelchair access: Sadly, no. 

Sound: Usually very good. For a small room, the Deaf Institute has excellent 
acoustics.

Where to stand: Wherever you can, really, especially if it’s anything like 
full. The Deaf Institute isn’t the biggest of venues, so get there early and 
aim for either standing somewhere near the front or, if you’re really lucky, 
grabbing a place in the rising bank of seats at the back (which are usually 
like gold dust). If you can get a seat in the tiny, left-side balcony – which 
gives a great view of the stage – you’re doing very well.

Overall: Despite one or two quibbles over drinks and sight-lines, the Deaf 
Institute has a special feel that justifies its reputation as one of 
Manchester’s hippest, hottest venues. From the vast array of decorative 
loudspeakers on the walls behind the bar to the ever-impressive lists of new, 
breaking and occasionally revered artists in the schedules, it’s a venue that 
gives the impression that it cares about new and good, usually independent 
music. Presumably, this is what attracted Johnny Marr to hold a short residency 
here in 2011.

Address: 135 Grosvenor Street, Manchester, M1 7HE 

Telephone: 0161-276 9350

Website: thedeafinstitute.co.uk <http://www.thedeafinstitute.co.uk>

Public transport: Situated at the edge of the town centre and near the 
university, the Deaf Institute is particularly well served by the numerous 
buses that run up and down the adjoining Oxford Road. Oxford Road railway 
station is a shortish walk.
 