
“I am seeking to rescue the poor stockinger, the luddite cropper, the 
‘obsolete’ hand-loom weaver, the ‘utopian’ artisan… from the enormous 
condescension of posterity.” With these stirring words, a virtually unknown 
provincial historian launched a revolution in social and cultural history that 
would influence the minds and attitudes of a college generation in a way almost 
unparalleled in late 20th-century Britain. AfterThompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/06/ep-thompson-unconventional-historian>
, “popular culture” would become a settled touchstone of progressive 
intellectual concern.

Thompson was a northerner who had both served with a tank regiment in north 
Africa during the second world war, and also been active in the Communist party 
throughout the 1940s and 50s. Indeed, in 1946, he had joined the Communist 
Party Historians Group. Like many in the CP, he left the movement in the late 
50s, disillusioned by the Soviet response to theHungarian Uprising of 1956 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/oct/21/politics.past>, and the 
direction of the USSR after Stalin. When he came to writeThe Making of the 
English Working Class (first commissioned as “Working Class Politics 
1790-1921”), he wrote as a patriot and a political radical wanting to express a 
passionate engagement with the dissenting cultural traditions of his country 
whose proto-working-class protagonists he venerated.

As Thompson writes in one stirring passage: “Their crafts and traditions may 
have been dying. Their hostility to the new industrialism may have been 
backward-looking. Their communitarian ideals may have been fantasies. Their 
insurrectionary conspiracies may have been foolhardy. But they lived through 
these times of acute social disturbance, and we did not. Their aspirations were 
valid in terms of their own experience; and, if they were casualties of 
history, they remain, condemned in their own lives, as casualties.”

Thompson’s profound and addictive sympathy for his subject was almost 
novelistic. As a student of rural ritual, he owed a debt to the William Cobbett 
ofRural Rides (1822). As a historian, he was an outsider, a maverick and a 
lifelong idealist. Where previous historians of English labour had for decades 
focused on unemployment figures, wage differentials and urban population 
statistics, on Chartism and the rise of theIndependent Labour Party 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independent_Labour_Party>, Thompson approached a 
democratic theme with an appropriate humility, researching and writing about 
his subject bottom-up not top-down. For Thompson, class was an expression of 
“community”, not – as Marx had instructed – one component of a mechanistic 
structure. What mattered to Thompson were the numerous, semi-articulate 
expressions of English working men’s fraternity – among the countless artisans, 
weavers, printers, blacksmiths, and domestic servants – that labour historians 
had ignored, patronised, or glossed over. For Thompson, a shared consciousness 
among working people was to be identified much sooner than had hitherto been 
understood. In an oft-quoted passage, he wrote his own passionate definition of 
this consciousness, urging his belief that “class happens when some men, as a 
result of common experiences (inherited or shared), feel and articulate the 
identity of their interests as between themselves, and as against other men 
whose interests are different from (and usually opposed to) theirs. The class 
experience is largely determined by the productive relations into which men are 
born – or enter involuntarily. Class-consciousness is the way in which these 
experiences are handled in cultural terms: embodied in traditions, 
value-systems, ideas and institutional forms. If the experience appears as 
determined, class-consciousness does not. We can see a logic in the responses 
of similar occupational groups undergoing similar experiences, but we cannot 
predicate any law. Consciousness of class arises in the same way in different 
times and places, but never in just the same way.”

In part, Thompson's book was an unconscious elegy for a way of life that – we 
can now see – has been lost for ever

For Thompson, it was the mundane, half-forgotten details of everyday working 
life that told the all-important story of working-class aspirations. He was 
among the first to refer extensively to small-town customs, parish-pump 
traditions, squibs and broadsheets, semi-literate letters and diaries, and 
faded, repressed pamphlets, even to cite the evidence of popular ditties or 
quote from the ink-stained minutes of working men’s clubs.

In hindsight, Thompson was painstakingly compiling an anatomy of preindustrial 
Britain. He was also describing, in a very English way, the lost experience of 
the common man (his critics would complain that he had largely overlooked the 
story of working-class women), a theme traceable to Anglo-Saxon England. In 
part, too, as the white heat of technological change in the 1960s engulfed many 
ancient English communities,The Making of the English Working Class was an 
unconscious elegy for a way of life that – we can now see – has been lost for 
ever.

Edward Thompson was a trailblazer and a pioneer who deeply influenced a 
generation of English and American historiography. But he was, unwittingly, on 
the wrong side of history. Although he was writing in a golden age of Marxist 
history, around him more than a century of sociopolitical egalitarian struggle 
was drawing to close. Today, a generation after 1989, and the comprehensive 
dismantling of a once-proud intellectual tradition, it’s easy to place Thompson 
in Trotsky’s “dustbin of history”, but that would be wrong. His book is, in its 
understated way, a revolutionary rhetorical document, showing how a dynamic 
culture and political consciousness of astonishing vitality were forged in the 
teeth of official opposition, and the dehumanising blight of mass 
industrialisation. As he put it in his closing pages:

“Enriched by the experiences of the 17th century, carrying through the 18th 
century the intellectual and libertarian traditions which we have described, 
forming their own traditions of mutuality in the friendly society and trades 
club, these men did not pass, in one generation, from the peasantry to the new 
industrial town. They suffered the experience of the Industrial Revolution as 
articulate freeborn Englishmen… This was, perhaps, the most distinguished 
popular culture England had known.”

Summarising Thompson’s achievement, the distinguished professor of political 
thought Michael Kenny has said thatThe Making of the English Working Class is 
one of the most influential and widely read works of English history published 
after 1945. To theObserver, it was, and remains, “a masterpiece”.

A signature sentence 

“In the event, the scene on the hustings turned into a riot, where Oastler and 
the 10 Hour Men ‘rang matins on the thick skulls of the flying oranges’. When 
Sadler was defeated at the poll, Marshall and Macaulay were burned in effigy in 
the same city centre where Paine had been burnt by the loyalists in 1792.”

Three to compare 

Christopher Hill: The World Turned Upside Down – Radical Ideas During the 
English Revolution (1972)
Eric Hobsbawm: The Age of Revolution (1962)
Angus Calder: The People’s War (1969)

The Making of the English Working Class is available in Penguin Modern 
Classics (£20).Click here to order it for £16 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/making-of-the-english-working-class.html> 
 