
America's use of animated propaganda during the second world war is fairly 
well known, but propaganda made after the iron curtain went up is rarely seen 
or discussed. By the late 1940s, the CIA was spending tax dollars creating 
culture as a secret weapon to combat communism around the world. When Frances 
Stonor Saunders published Who Paid the Piper? TheCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> and the Cultural Cold War, she 
mentioned a single animated film, John Halas and Joy Batchelor's Animal Farm, 
which was made in 1954.

The CIA's choice of George Orwell's Animal Farm to produce as an animated film 
almost makes sense. Almost, but not quite, because the book's ending shows both 
the pigs and humans joined together as corrupt and evil powers. To use Animal 
Farm for its purpose, as Stonor Saunders reveals, the CIA's Office of Policy 
Coordination, which directed covert government operations, had two members of 
their Psychological Warfare Workshop staff obtain the screen rights to the 
novel. Howard Hunt, who became infamous as a member of the Watergate break-in 
team, is identified as head of the operation. His contact in Hollywood was 
Carleton Alsop, brother of writer Joseph Alsop, who was working undercover at 
Paramount. Working with Alsop was Finis Farr, a writer living in Los Angeles.

It was Alsop and Farr who went to England to negotiate the rights to the 
property from Sonia Orwell. Mrs Orwell probably knew Farr as she moved in 
literary and artistic circles as an assistant to the editor of Horizon 
magazine. This is well documented in The Girl from the Fiction Department by 
Hilary Spurling. Mrs Orwell signed after Alsop and Farr agreed to arrange for 
her to meet her hero, Clark Gable. "As a measure of thanks", a CIA official 
named Joe Bryan made the arrangements for the meeting, according to The Paper 
Trail, edited by Jon Elliston.

Hunt selected Louis De Rochemont to be the film's producer at Paramount. 
Before the war, in 1935, De Rochemont had created The March of Time, a new form 
of screen journalism that combined the newsreel and documentary film into a 15- 
to 20-minute entertaining short that went behind the news to explain the 
significance of an event. The March of Time, sponsored by the Time-Life 
Company, was a popular monthly series for over a decade before ending in 1951.

Hunt probably chose De Rochemont because he had once worked for him on The 
March of Time series. De Rochemont had also worked on socially and politically 
sensitive films for many years. He produced the anti-Nazi spy film The House on 
92nd Street (1945) and Lost Boundaries (1949), one of the first racially aware 
films (it is about a black doctor who passes for white until he is unmasked by 
the black community).

A recently published book, British Cinema and the Cold War: the State, 
Propaganda and the Consensus by Tony Shaw, suggests De Rochemont chose Halas 
and Batchelor to animate the film as production costs were lower in England and 
because he questioned the loyalty of some American animators. The House 
Un-American Activities Committee hearings on communists in the film industry 
began in earnest in 1951 (Disney testified at short-lived hearings that were 
held in 1947) and several people in the animation industry were blacklisted, 
careers were ruined or disrupted.

On the other hand, Vivien Halas, daughter of the film's co-directors John 
Halas and Joy Batchelor, suggests the real reason they got the contract is that 
Louis De Rochemont was a Navy buddy and good friend of screenwriters-producers 
Philip Stapp and Lothar Wolff. De Rochemont had worked with them in the Navy's 
film unit and Vivien's mother had worked closely with Stapp in 1949 on a 
Marshall Plan film produced by Halas and Batchelor, The Shoemaker and the 
Hatter. Eventually Stapp and Wolff would be hired to work on Animal Farm's 
script.

Although the decision on what firm to hire came at a bleak moment for some 
American animation companies (the film could have been produced in Los Angeles 
by a studio whose reputation was beyond reproach), I suspect Halas and 
Batchelor's reputation, personal friendships and budgetary restraints were 
important factors in the decision to award them the contract.

Animal Farm was the first animated feature produced in England. John Halas 
(1912-1995) was born in Budapest and had worked as an animator before moving to 
Paris. He moved to England and in 1940 formed Halas and Batchelor with Joy 
Batchelor (1914-1991), a British animator and scriptwriter. They were married a 
year later. During the war they were kept busy with training, propaganda and 
other forms of government-sponsored films.

The animation firm was awarded the contract to make the feature in November 
1951 and it was completed in April 1954. It is logical to assume that before 
the contract was signed De Rochemont made it quite clear that the film would 
not be identical to the book and he may have had a rough script or other 
guidelines. Vivien says that during the production, the script went through 
several changes before it was finalised.

The production employed about 80 animators. In Halas's book The Technique of 
Film Animation, 1959, he states that the film's target audience was adults 
rather than children and that they needed to simplify the plot. Vivien Halas 
adds that the film wasn't shown in Paris until the 1990s as it was considered 
too anti-communist. When it finally premiered in Paris about 1993, the mayor of 
Aubervilliers (a suburb of Paris) "introduced it as a tribute to communism! My 
father said no, this is not communist or anti-communist. It is a fable for all 
time. It is anti-totalitarian and it has a humanist message." In a letter to 
the animation historian Giannalberto Bendazzi in 1981, Joy Batchelor told him 
they wanted to make a film about freedom.

Besides having Philip Stapp and Lothar Wolff working on the script with Joy 
Batchelor, De Rochemont had another friend from their days in the Navy's film 
unit working on the project. Borden Mace became president of the company set up 
to produce Animal Farm by De Rochemont, his mentor. Mace told Vivien in an 
interview in 2002 that De Rochemont had the ultimate say about script changes. 
While it isn't clear who suggested the ending used, it was certainly what the 
CIA needed. To meet the CIA's objectives, the ending was changed to show that 
only the pigs had become totally corrupt. The film ends with other animals 
mounting a successful revolt against their rulers. There is no mention of the 
humans in the film's conclusion.

Vivien recalls, "The changes came about as the film evolved. There were at 
least nine versions of the script and heated discussions about the end. My 
mother especially felt it was wrong to change the ending." She has a tape 
recording of her father saying that the ending they used offers a glimmer of 
hope for the future. In an interview on British television in 1980, he defended 
the ending as being necessary to give the audience hope for the future. "You 
can not send home millions in the audience being puzzled."

While the film was in production, Fredric Warburg, the book's publisher, 
visited the studio several times and viewed the work-in-progress. Saunders 
thinks he may have suggested that old Major, "the prophet of the Revolution, 
should be given the voice and appearance of Winston Churchill". More 
importantly, she reveals earlier in her book that Warburg had dealings with the 
British intelligence group MI6. He fronted for them by taking their cheques, 
depositing them and then writing personal checks that he gave to Encounter, an 
anti-communist liberal literary publication. He may or may not have been a 
"consultant", helping to ensure that the film would be a successful propaganda 
tool.

Howard Beckerman (animator and author of Animation, the Complete Story) 
comments: "Halas and Batchelor had to compete in the world market with Disney, 
so a few cartoon gags were introduced into the film to lighten its heaviness, 
and I believe that whatever the CIA's influence might have been, the choice for 
an upbeat ending came out of the animator's wish to succeed with the audience. 
There were movies of the period like the live film, My Son John (1952), which 
attacked the menace of communism head-on in a contrived and obvious fashion, so 
I guess anything is possible. If Orwell had lived longer, I suspect he would 
have vetoed any effort to translate his work into such a film."

The film did well at the box office and the reviews were favourable, but some 
critics suggested people should read the book to learn what was left out. The 
film was later distributed around the world by the United States Information 
Agency (USIA) through its overseas libraries. It has also been suggested that 
the film and book were excellent propaganda in Arab nations "in view of the 
fact that both pigs and dogs are unclean animals to Muslims" - according to an 
Egyptian embassy official quoted in the Guardian.

When asked if Vivien's parents were aware of the CIA's involvement with the 
project she said, "I don't believe that my parents were aware of any CIA 
involvement at the time. Frances reminded me that, in the early 1950s, the CIA 
was not regarded with the same scorn as today." By the 1980s her parents had 
heard rumours concerning the CIA's involvement. She says, "My father dismissed 
the idea, but my mother felt annoyed."

Thanks to Saunders's research we now know that Orwell's 1984 was made into a 
live-action feature with funds from the CIA. Work on the British production 
began in 1954, and, as with the animated Animal Farm, the ending was changed. 
We also know that the British government saw Orwell's work as useful for 
propaganda purposes: in March 1998 the Public Record Office declassified 
documents revealing that the government funded a newspaper comic strip in the 
early 1950s based on Animal Farm. It ran in several countries including Brazil, 
Burma, Eritrea, India, Mexico, Thailand and Venezuela.

On a few occasions the CIA's failures have been disclosed to us by the news 
media, but their successes are almost never made public. No matter how you feel 
about their meddling with feature films, it appears their involvement in the 
making of Animal Farm was a successful covert operation and it was kept a 
secret from the public for almost 50 years.

· This is an edited version of an article that originally appeared in 
Animation World Magazine. © AWN Inc, 2003. A collectors edition DVD of Animal 
Farm will be released in June by Universal Pictures Video.
 