
“The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.” When Isaiah 
Berlin <http://berlin.wolf.ox.ac.uk/>, as a young Oxford don in the late 1930s, 
first encountered this tantalising fragment of verse by the 7th-century BC 
Greek poet Archilochus, it became an entertaining way by which Berlin and his 
circle could categorise their friends: as hedgehogs or foxes. However, this 
mysterious shard of wisdom stuck in Berlin’s mind and eventually became the 
animating principle for an extraordinary essay on Tolstoy, dictated in the 
course of two days, and originally entitled Lev Tolstoy’s Historical 
Scepticism. (It was the publisher George Weidenfeld who suggested the 
substitution.) As well as interrogating the text ofWar and Peace, Berlin 
explored the fundamental distinction that exists between those who are 
fascinated by the infinite variety of things (foxes) and those who relate 
everything to a central, all-embracing system (hedgehogs).

By then, and in subsequent critical discourse, the division of humanity into 
hedgehogs and foxes had become not only a witty means of classification, but 
also an existential way of confronting reality. Foxes, for instance, will come 
to understand that they know many things, that a coherent worldview is probably 
beyond them and that they must be reconciled to the limits of what they know. 
In hislife of Isaiah Berlin 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v20/n23/christopher-hitchens/moderation-or-death>, the 
biographer Michael Ignatieff quotes Berlin thus: “We are part of a larger 
scheme of things than we can understand; we ourselves live in this whole and by 
it, and are wise only in the measure to which we make our peace with it.”

The distinction between the pluralistic fox and the single-minded hedgehog has 
become a staple of cultural analysis

Berlin’s hedgehog, by contrast, never makes peace with the world and remains 
unreconciled. His or her purpose is to know one big thing and, in Ignatieff’s 
words, “strive without ceasing to give reality a unifying shape. Foxes settle 
for what they know and may live happy lives. Hedgehogs will not settle and 
their lives may not be happy.”

Berlin’s famous essay, however, is not about wildlife. Addressing the supreme 
creative artist’s intellectual personality, he begins with an act of division, 
describing Dante, Pascal, Ibsen and Proust (inter alia) as hedgehogs and 
Shakespeare, Herodotus, Aristotle, Montaigne, Balzac, Goethe and Joyce as foxes.

From here, passing through a catalogue of great Russian writers – Pushkin, 
Dostoevsky, Turgenev, Chekhov and Gogol – Berlin arrives at the curious case of 
Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy and confesses himself to be baffled. Ask whether 
Tolstoy’s ”vision is of one or of many, whether he is of a single substance or 
compounded of heterogenous elements” and, he admits, “there is no clear or 
immediate answer”.

Here, The Hedgehog and the Fox becomes an essay about Tolstoy’s philosophy of 
art and history (as expressed inWar and Peace), a dazzling tour de force of 
fewer than a hundred pages. It was acclaimed from the first. “This little 
book,”wrote theObserver, “is so entertaining as well as acute that the reader 
hardly notices that it is learned too.” Across the Atlantic,the New York Times 
declared <https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/11/29/specials/berlin-hedgehog.html>
: “Not only does Mr Berlin command all the materials of erudition, literary and 
philosophical, for his task, but he has a deep and subtle feeling for the 
puzzle of Tolstoy’s personality, and he writes throughout with a wonderful 
eloquence.”

Affirming: Letters 1975-1997 by Isaiah Berlin review – the ultimate insider 
who loved to talk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/03/affirming-letters-isaiah-berlin-edited-henry-hardy-review>
In correspondence with the great American critic Edmund Wilson, Berlin 
summarised his essay quite simply thus: “Tolstoy I maintain was by nature and 
gifts a fox who terribly believed in hedgehogs and wished to vivisect himself 
into one. Hence the crack inside him which everyone knows.” This “crack” is 
universal: humanity will always be reconciled to life as it is while, at the 
same time, longing for a simple, unitary truth, underlying existence, that 
provides a deep and consoling explanation.

The heroism of the hedgehog is that he or she rejects limitations and will 
probably never be reconciled to quotidian restriction. As Ignatieff has 
written, Tolstoy was contemptuous of all kinds of doctrine, both religious and 
secular, yet could never quite give up on the possibility of an ultimate 
explanation. “Tolstoy’s sense of reality,” writes Berlin, “was until the end 
too devastating to be compatible with any moral ideal which he was able to 
construct out of the fragments into which his intellect shivered the world, and 
he dedicated all of his vast strength of mind and will to the lifelong denial 
of this fact.”

The distinction between the pluralistic fox and the single-minded hedgehog has 
become a staple of modern cultural analysis. The ultimate accolade: Berlin’s 
brilliant exploitation of the concept has also inspired parody. InPunch (24 
February 1954), John Bowle, with apologies to Edward Lear, divided the world 
into “owls” and “pussycats”, the former “wise, ghostly and detached”, the 
latter “round, fluffy and predacious”.

Berlin’s great essay endures because it is a rhetorical masterpiece, an 
intellectual firework display by a modern master, a brilliant investigation of 
a great writer and his work and perhaps because almost everyone is divided 
between living like foxes or hedgehogs. Berlin, who later said: “I am very 
sorry to have called my own bookThe Hedgehog and the Fox. I wish I hadn’t now”, 
ultimately accepted that he was “probably a fox”.

A signature sentence

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
“There exists a great chasm between those, on one side, who relate everything 
to a single central vision, one system, less or more coherent or articulate, in 
terms of which they understand, think and feel – a single, universal, 
organising principle in terms of which alone all that they are and say has 
significance – and, on the other side, those who pursue many ends, often 
unrelated and even contradictory, connected, if at all, only in some de facto 
way, for some psychological or physiological cause, related to no moral or 
aesthetic principle.”

Three to compare

George Steiner: Tolstoy or Dostoevsky, An Essay in Contrast (1960)
Isaiah Berlin: Against The Current, Essays in the History of Ideas (1979)
Edmund Wilson: The Fifties: From Notebooks and Diaries of the Period, ed Leon 
Edel (1986)

The Hedgehog and the Fox is available from W&N (£8.99). Click here to order a 
copy for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hedgehog-and-the-fox.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 