
Does the state of your email inbox fill you with dread? Then there is no time 
like the present to take the matters into your own hands and bring some order 
to the chaos. 

It's easy for any inbox to become overrun: that email from mom about dinner 
next week, one from a friend or two about drinks or a birthday, another about a 
sale at your favorite store – and let's face it, you could use a new bag. And 
lost in the shuffle are all those emails containing online order confirmations 
and bank statements. 

It's the last part that especially highlights the need for an organized inbox: 
you don't want to lose track of correspondence that actually matters – like 
bills or payment notifications, which, if overlooked, could lead to a missed 
payments and fees.
 Meet your new friends: folder and label icons. Photograph: Jana 
Kasperkevic/The Guardian 
Here are six simple steps to decluttering your mailbox:

1. Delete. Delete. Delete. Don't be afraid to get rid of unnecessary emails. 
Not every event invitation is important enough to be filed away. Those rant 
emails I sometimes send to my friends? Definitely trash material. 

As for more serious emails, like receipts, there are some questions you have 
to ask yourself first. Will you need this receipt later on? Is there a 
possibility that you'll need to return the item and require the receipt? Will 
you be expensing the purchase come tax time? In those cases, keep it. A receipt 
for that bag you really wanted? Not really a splurge I want to be reminded of, 
nor one that I can legitimately write off come tax time.

2. Befriend the unsubscribe button. Once you find that you're no longer 
reading a particular email, or that you no longer find emails from a certain 
organization helpful, unsubscribe from their mailing list. Usually, you'll know 
that the time to unsubscribe has come when you no longer open the emails in 
question. Or if youdo open them, but don't click on anything within, then it's 
probably time to let go.

3. Set up a routine. Most of my newsletters land in my mailbox between the 
hours of 7-11am. I try to read and file each one away as they come in. On days 
when that doesn't happen, I try to catch up by the end of the day, and end the 
day with no unread emails in my mailbox. 

If an email requires action, eg a response or a payment if it's a bill, then I 
will keep it in my mailbox until I have dealt with it. I maintain similar 
routines for work and personal emails. 

It also helps to impose limits on your inbox. My personal limit is that there 
should be no more than 30 emails in my inbox at any given time.

4. Make – and use – labels. Labels are your best friend. Email providers like 
Gmail <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gmail> and Yahoo allow their 
users to create labels and/or folders to keep track of their correspondence. 
You filter your inbox by labels: Charlie in "Friends", Politico in "Morning 
Newsletters", and add colors to the labels so that you can visually see whether 
the email is friend or foe. Suggested labels: friends, family, recipes, bank 
information, receipts, event invitations, various newsletters, discounts and 
travel like Groupon, Orbitz and the Gap.

After you read your email, you should always label it. You can do so by 
checking the box next to the email, which in Gmail will cause several icons to 
appear on top of the mailbox window. By selecting the tag icon (to the right of 
the folder icon) and then choosing a topic from the drop down menu, you label 
the email within your mailbox without actually moving it. 
 Most of my labels are self-explanatory, though some focus on particular 
topics, such as taxes and defense. Photograph: Jana Kasperkevic/The Guardian 
5. File your emails. When you no longer want or need a particular email in 
your inbox – where it can confront you, visually, for hours or days – you can 
file it away into an appropriately labeled folder. You can do that by 
selecting the folder icon instead of the label. By selecting the topic, you 
will automatically move the email into the specified folder. 

For example, all of my bank statements are filed into the "Bank" folder. All 
the email receipts and order confirmations for my online shopping are filed 
into the "Receipts" folder. 

Transitioning from paper bills to online bills can be confusing at first, but 
after a while you will appreciate not having to search all over your apartment 
for that bill that needs to be paidright now. Online bill payments allow for 
scheduling of automatic payments, which could mean never missing a payment 
again, and eliminate the stacks of papers that need to be filed away every 
month. Now the only thing you will have to do is decide whether you want to 
have one email folder for all bills or separate folders for phone, electricity, 
loans and other financial commitments.
 You can file or label an email by checking the box next to its subject. To 
star an email, select the star. Photograph: Jana Kasperkevic/The Guardian 
6. Star important emails. From time to time, there will be an email or two 
that you'll want to find again. To make these emails easier to find, you can 
mark them with a star. In Gmail, this will automatically file them away into 
the "Starred" folder, while keeping them in the labelled folder originally 
assigned them. 

This helps in two ways: I can either scroll down within the label folder and 
keep an eye out for the golden star, or I can go into the "Starred" folder and 
find the email in question there. 
 This is how labeled emails appear in your 'Starred' folder. Photograph: Jana 
Kasperkevic/The Guardian 
An important thing to remember is to un-star the email once you no longer need 
to come back to it. If you don't un-star emails that are no longer 
important/relevant, your "Starred" folder will become cluttered itself and will 
no longer serve its purpose. 

How do you keep your inbox organized? Share one or two of your suggestions 
with us in the comment section below and we'll add more smart techniques.
 