 M C C have never made a sadder, more dramatic, or potentially more damaging 
decision than in omitting d'Oliveira from their team to tour South Africa. 
Fifteen players have been named. The sixteenth will be a bowler; Jeff Jones of 
Glamorgan, if he is demonstrably fit after an operation on an elbow. If he is 
not, Higgs will probably be offered the place.
 There is no case for leaving out d'Oliveira on cricketing grounds. Since the 
last M C C tour in South Africa, Test pitches have become grassy, ideal for 
seam bowlers, of whom South Africa deploy five. So England's tactical need is 
for a Test class batsman who is a reliable bowler at medium-pace, or above, to 
make the fourth seam bowler: only d'Oliveira, of our current players, meets 
that demand. He was top of the English batting averages in the series against 
Australia just completed, and second in the bowling. The latter may seem a 
statistical quibble, but when he bowled Jarman on Tuesday he made the 
break-through which brought England their close win in the fifth Test.

 He is a useful, if not great, fieldsman at slip or in the deep. Decisively, 
to the objective observer, he has the temperament to rise to the challenge of 
an occasion, as he proved against the West Indian fast bowlers, and in both his 
matches against Australia this summer. His behaviour in what might have been 
difficult situations has always been impeccably dignified and courteous. If 
politics, in their fullest sense, now transcend cricket in importance, it might 
have been wiser to take d'Oliveira to South Africa though he were not good 
enough, than to leave him at home when he is not merely good enough but 
eminently suited for the tactical situation the side will face.

 In the first place, no one of open mind will believe that he was left out for 
valid cricket reasons: there are figures and performances less than a week old 
- including a century yesterday - to refute such an argument. This may prove, 
perhaps to the surprise of M C C, far more than a sporting matter. It could 
have such repercussions on British relations with the coloured races of the 
world that the cancellation of a cricket tour would seem a trifling matter 
compared with an apparent British acceptance of apartheid. This was a case 
where justice had to be seen to be done.

 Secondly, within a few years, the British-born children of West Indian, 
Indian, Pakistani and African immigrants will be worth places in English county 
and national teams. It seems hard to discourage them now, for, however the M C 
C's case may be argued, the club's ultimate decision must be a complete 
deterrent to any young coloured cricketer in this country. The final thought on 
it, however, must be one of sadness and that in the selection the M C C have 
stirred forces - for both good and evil - whose powers they do not truly 
comprehend.
 