
Not so long ago it seemed that Prince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles>, architecture guru and scourge 
of modernists, was safely shut up in his box. He seemed finally to have 
listened to shadowy advisers telling him that it would be inappropriate to get 
involved in public wrangles. The public and political mood had shifted in 
favour of the new. Contemporary buildings – the Gherkin, for example – were 
popular. The Prince's old adversary Lord (Richard) Rogers had the ear first of 
Tony Blair and then of Ken Livingstone, and some version of his theories 
influenced the planning system.

Furious letters would still spew from the prince's desk, urging developers to 
sack architects he did not like, or ministers to save an old building that he 
did, but these were private, and often ignored. The days when he could have 
multi-million pound developments ripped up and redesigned were seemingly 
consigned to the era of Wham! andBrideshead Revisited.

Now, however, he is enjoying his greatest influence in two decades. Last week 
Westminster city council approved prince-backed plans forredeveloping Chelsea 
Barracks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jun/21/chelsea-barracks-redevelopment-plans>
 in London, two years after his intervention led to a previous plan, by Rogers, 
being abandoned. The classicist architects the prince favours are quietly busy 
producing new country houses for the rich, "urban extensions" to country towns, 
and rural and suburban housing developments. The government is paying the
Prince's Foundation for the Built Environment 
<http://www.princes-foundation.org/> to advise local groups on planning their 
neighbourhoods. The government's localism bill, currently winding through 
parliament, is supposed to empower villages and small communities to draw up 
their own development plans. If it works as intended, the future built 
environment of Britain, outside the big cities, could be prince-flavoured.

The first version of the architectural prince was launched in 1984 when, 
invited to mouth platitudes to a dinner celebrating the 150th anniversary of 
the Royal Institute of British Architects, he shocked his hosts bydenouncing 
them 
<http://www.princeofwales.gov.uk/speechesandarticles/a_speech_by_hrh_the_prince_of_wales_at_the_150th_anniversary_1876801621.html>
. He famously called a proposed extension to the National Gallery a "monstrous 
carbuncle", though its architects Ahrends Burton and Koralek were then 
up-and-coming and, as it happened, noted for their skill with building in 
historic settings such as Keble College, Oxford. The prince's words dealt them 
a blow from which they never fully recovered. In further speeches he attacked 
other projects, and jumpy developers would then install architects, regardless 
of their ability or experience, blessed by the prince for their use of a 
classical style.

These architects would not always last the distance, being themselves replaced 
in due course by practices better able to deliver commercial projects. Often 
the effect of the Prince's actions was to delay development by many years, 
while developers worked the planning system to get the most they could out of 
the site. At Paternoster Square, next to St Paul's Cathedral, he had objected 
to an initial scheme partly on the grounds that it was too big and greedy. What 
was eventually built, much later, had a classical look but was even bigger. At 
London Bridge City, next to Tower Bridge, a prince-friendly, mock-Venetian 
proposal transmogrified into Norman Foster-designed grey glass blocks around 
what is now City Hall.

With the National Gallery, however, and some other sites, he got his way, 
while the mere thought of him could drive developers into a pre-emptive cringe, 
dressing up their blocks in columns and pediments in case they attracted his 
displeasure. Not that they were unhappy to do this – the prince captured a 
common mood, in the Thatcher years, of yearning for past glories and returning 
to supposedly traditional values. Architects, meanwhile, were still widely 
reviled for their actual and alleged failures in the 1960s, so their complaints 
at the prince's highhandedness got short shrift from the press. They objected 
that his actions were an abuse of his position, that he was ignorant and 
petulant, and that, while he was only too happy to launch attacks on others, he 
resolutely refused to engage in any kind of debate himself. But these 
objections did not get very far.

The prince had an exhibition at the Victoria and Albert museum, a book, a TV 
programme. He founded an architecture school based on the premise that there 
was an untapped hunger for learning architecture in the traditional way, and in 
1994 he launched a magazine,Perspectives, promoting his views. In 1988 he 
commissioned the visionary urban theorist Leon Krier to produce a plan for 
developing Poundbury, an area of land outside Dorchester, Dorset, belonging to 
the Duchy of Cornwall. Krier had famously declared ,"I am an architect, 
therefore I do not build", meaning that the modern world was too benighted to 
produce good architecture. The prince managed to persuade him otherwise.

There were separate strands to his philosophy, not wholly intertwining. One 
was populist, arguing that most people liked old-looking buildings, so experts 
should not impose modernism against their wishes. Another was nostalgic, with a 
preference for English classical architecture of about 300 years ago. Another 
was mystical, arguing that there are deep harmonies in the universe which are 
reflected in the sort of buildings he liked.

Perspectives did not thrill the masses, and closed. Nor did students flock to 
the architecture school, which was restructured as the Prince's Foundation for 
the Built Environment, with a reduced emphasis on education. Meanwhile the 
prince's architectural court was subject to intrigues that would have delighted 
the Borgias. Fashion changed, architects became less hated, and a few more 
people than embittered professionals began to see that there was something 
wrong with the prince using his fame and status to intervene in debates which 
he possibly did not understand. Apart from Poundbury, the prince's influence 
seemed to shrink to the area around Buckingham Palace, where one of his pet 
architects, John Simpson, rebuilt the Queen's Gallery, and another, Liam 
O'Connor, designed the Commonwealth Memorial Gates as a reduced-scale version 
of Lutyens's monuments in New Delhi.

But Poundbury was his lifeline, and his biggest success. Here he was doing 
what he wanted with his own land rather than meddling in the affairs of others. 
Although Poundbury got the look – it is a medley of Georgian, Dorset cottage 
and pointy, Gothicky bits – it also embodied principles which went beyond his 
stylistic taste, and which were not so different from those of adversaries like
Richard Rogers <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers>. It 
mixes uses, putting offices and workshops in among houses, rather than in 
separate zones. It mixes affordable housing with market housing, such that it 
is hard to tell the difference. It is built at higher density than typical 
suburbs, so that it consumes less land and encourages neighbourliness. It 
promotes pedestrian movement over driving.

Buyers liked it. It achieved above-average values, and properties appreciated. 
Its periphery is now a whirr of construction, as more and more homes are built 
to meet the demand to live there. Personally, it makes my flesh creep, with its 
winsome, confected quality, and with its paranoid insistence on conjuring a 
bygone world that never existed, which illusion is painfully punctured by the 
appearance of modern steel frames in the half-built buildings. As even one of 
the Prince's allies says: "You can't claim it is traditionally Dorset by any 
stretch of the imagination."

But I wouldn't live in Dorchester anyway, and I can see that it works, and 
that it is much better than the average housebuilders' wares. I can even see 
some charm in the winding lanes, now softened by well-established planting.

Similar ideas were applied on other Duchy of Cornwall properties, in places 
like Shepton Mallet and Midsomer Norton in Somerset. Meanwhile the foundation, 
repurposed as an advisory, thinktank sort of body, made itself more credible. 
Its chief executive, Hank Dittmar, was formerly a leading light of the American 
New Urbanism movement, which has been pumping out walkable, compact residential 
developments for some time. Its most famous work is Seaside, the holiday town 
in Florida whereThe Truman Show was shot. Under Labour the foundation talked 
the government-approved talk of sustainability, regeneration and public 
participation. It developed something called Enquiry by Design, where local 
residents and experts come together in workshops before plans for new 
development are completed: the idea is that local knowledge and wishes are 
incorporated into the final designs. The foundation won the attention of John 
Prescott, and advised on the planning ofUpton 
<http://www.princeofwales.gov.uk/newsandgallery/news/the_prince_of_wales_visits_upton_northampton_872673578.html>
, an extension of Northampton, on Poundbury-esque principles. Now, in 
Sunderland, Ayrshire, Swansea, Burnley and elsewhere, there are foundation-led 
plans in various stages of completion. The foundation has even been hired by 
the developers First Base, usually known for their use of contemporary design, 
to advise on a classical-looking development in a conservation area in 
Highbury, north London.

It has published a book called Tradition and Sustainability, and is building a 
prototype, called theNatural House 
<http://www.princes-foundation.org/content/princes-house-ideal-home-show-2011>, 
which aims to demonstrate that energy efficiency does not require 
modern-looking gadgets but can be achieved with something that looks like an 
approximation of an 1840s villa. The foundation has goneinternational 
<http://www.princes-foundation.org/our-work/projects/international>, with 
projects in China, the Galapagos, and Haiti, the latter a plan in the heart of 
Port au Prince, which looks wildly optimistic in its serene orderliness.

The foundation apart, architects from the princely fold are doing well. Robert 
Adam, of AdamArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, has long been the most 
business-like of traditionalist architects and, having designed some projects 
for the Duchy of Cornwall, is now masterplanning an extension to Dover with a 
whopping 5,750 homes, and residential developments in Waterlooville and 
Aldershot. He also has a nice line in huge, brand new country houses, which he 
says reflects the fact that "London is a global city". His clients are 
"Russians, Indians, Middle Eastern: they want the English dream but they want 
to be able to do what they like with their house, which they can't do if it's 
old". Adam recently lost a planning inquiry into his enormous £20m Athlone 
House proposal in Hampstead, but has plenty more opportunities of a similar 
kind.

At Chelsea Barracks the prince had written a personal letter to the ruler of 
Qatar, as his family's property company Qatari Diar were owners of the site, 
urging him to abandon Richard Rogers's plans. His "heart sank" at the sight of 
what he called "a gigantic experiment with the very soul of our capital city". 
He punted an alternative scheme by Quinlan Terry, the doyen of modern 
classicists, and his son Francis. Ultimately the Terrys did not get the job, 
but Rogers was fired and a collaboration of Squire and Partners, Dixon Jones 
and the landscape architect Kim Wilkie, produced designs which aim to reproduce 
the virtues of Georgian and Victorian terraces and squares. This was a turning 
point, a moment of regime change. Lord Rogers's project would, if built, have 
been the fulfilment of years of campaigning and building influence with the 
likes of Ken Livingstone in order to realise his vision of the city. Its 
dumping, supported by Tories like the deputy mayor Kit Malthouse, marked the 
end of that particular era.

The Chelsea Barracks Action Group, made up of local residents, were vociferous 
opponents of the Rogers scheme, and were delighted with the prince's actions. 
Now, however, they are disappointed that a change of style has not changed the 
fact that the proposed housing blocks are up to 100 feet high. "They will be 
regarded in history as the beginning of the end of our gracious English city," 
says the chair of the group, Georgine Thorburn, using prince-like language. She 
also says that the Qataris have "duped" the council. Alas for the group, unless 
Boris Johnson can be persuaded to intervene, her words come too late. In the 
latest version of prince-ism, the pragmatists have won over the mystics and 
true believers, which means that, as the prince himself inclines to the latter 
camp, his own input is diluted. His recent contribution to the mystic cause, a 
book calledHarmony 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007348039>
, failed to set the world on fire. Quinlan Terry, always the purest of the 
classicists, is doing perfectly well with country houses, buildings for Downing 
College, Cambridge, and occasional commercial work, but he is not shaping whole 
towns.

The Prince's Foundation, according to Elliot Lipton of developers First Base, 
"is very flexible. It has no preconceptions, which isn't what you might expect 
if you listened to their leader. They're very good at understanding real world 
trade-offs."

The foundation gets into bed with developers such as Wimpey in Westoe, South 
Shields, with the result that they achieve an arguably better version of usual 
Wimpey fare, rather than a radical alternative. Upton, the extension to 
Northampton, as Hank Dittmar acknowledges, is a partly compromised version of 
the original intentions. By being more pragmatic, the foundation gets less 
distinctive: plenty of others have put forward energy-efficient houses, and 
public consultation, and walkable, high-density communities. These ideas are 
"sort of the norm, mainstream", says Robert Adam. Works outside the princely 
sphere, like the Greenwich Millennium Village, and the Accordia development in 
Cambridge, put them into practice.

What remains distinctive is the look, the preference for a randomised variety 
of traditional styles, with Georgian and Country Cottage foremost among them. 
This is a source of strength, as a lot of people like this – according to 
Robert Adam, 70% prefer old-looking buildings to new. The competition, in the 
form of volume housebuilders' standard product, is largely poor. In 
combination, these factors are effective when it comes to reducing outrage at 
controversial plans, which, with continuous pressure of development in town and 
country, will continue to appear. Poundbury itself is the expansion of 
Dorchester into green fields, and many locals still object to it on those 
grounds. The Dover expansion, as Adam recognises, met strong opposition on the 
grounds of its size. The switch of styles got Chelsea Barracks through the 
planning system, to Georgine Thorburn's dismay.

Under the localism bill, communities and villages will have the power to draw 
up their own plans for development, in ways that benefit them. There is 
scepticism as to whether this will really happen, but if it does, communities 
will face the central problem of rural planning: how to reconcile the pressures 
for new development, the high values that housing can yield, the need for 
affordable new homes, and the preservation of villages. The models offered by 
the Prince's Foundation, with a combination of public consultation, and a style 
that tries to disguise that change has happened, will be attractive. Even if 
localised planning does not work, the palliative effect of traditionalist 
design will still be in demand.

I have long believed that the prince should keep his mouth shut rather than 
use his inherited status to give weight to views greater than his wisdom alone 
would merit. He should not change policies, lives and careers with the force of 
his name. Sometimes he might be right, sometimes wrong, but that is not the 
point. In 2009 the RIBA, ever masochists, invited him back for their 175th 
birthday. Sitting throughhis talk 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/daily-news/prince-charles-riba-speech-full-text/5201937.article>
 I felt growing rage at his tendentious nonsense – the demonstrably untrue 
statement that modernist architects were nature-haters, for example – and at 
the fact that no one was allowed to challenge him directly. He sallies forth to 
attack others then immediately takes shelter behind the dignity of his 
position. I also find depressing the idea that a modern house can be no better 
than a half-convincing photocopy of an old one, or that, as we live in a time 
when large windows are easy to achieve, we should build small, mean ones, as in 
Poundbury, just because they look old.

Yet he is entitled to do what he likes, within the constraints applied to any 
landowner, with his own property, and he and his associates have come up with 
ways of building new rural developments that have a certain logic. The range of 
alternative models is not abundant, and architects and developers who would do 
better should study the reasons for the appeal of the prince's way. As things 
stand, Poundbury is a glimpse of the future.
 