
Capacity: 800 for club nights, 650-700 for gigs.


Who plays there: A mixture of small- to medium- sized touring bands, lots of 
local stuff and DJs. The Liquid Room offers a roughly 50-50 split between live 
shows and clubs. It takes bookings from all of Scotland’s major promoters – DF, 
Regular, PCL and Synergy – and encourages small and local bands to self-promote 
shows there. Names to have played in the last year include Everything 
Everything, Bombay Bicycle Club, Swans, Camera Obscura, Shellac and Loop.

Cloakroom: Yes, on the far side of the main room as you enter.

Admission: Usually in the range of £7-18, occasionally more.

Bar: Tennent's on draught and cans of Red Stripe are the beer mainstays. The 
may have stolen a march on other Scottish gig venues by becoming one of the 
first to start selling two-pint cups of beer, which brings a whole new meaning 
to Liquid Room.

Toilets: Through a door to your right as you exit from the bar, then up some 
stairs. They can be a little hard to locate, especially after you’ve had a few. 
Bear this in mind before ordering one of those two-pint cups.

Wheelchair access: Yes – staff will guide wheelchair users down an alleyway to 
the side of the venue and in the production entrance, and find you a good spot 
by the side of the stage.

Sound: A brand-new, million-pound light-and-sound system was installed during 
the venue’s refurbishment in 2010. The quality is consistently excellent.

Where to stand: The Liquid Room is an awkwardly shaped space – accessed via a 
narrow stairway, which opens out on to the bar area at the back of the room, 
which can cause a bit of a bottleneck – and it feels extremely snug when full. 
If you don’t get in early enough to find a space near the front and centre of 
the room, the sides are usually a good bet, though be aware that with the door 
to the smoking area lying to the right of the stage as you look at it, there’s 
a near-constant flow of people moving up and down that side, which can be 
annoying. Better still, if the balcony is open – and it’s accessible as you 
enter via a door on the left of the staircase – try there. Avoid standing by 
the bar if you can – the crowd can be chatty further back, and the din of staff 
at work can be a distraction during quieter songs.

Overall: Since reopening in 2010, following a fire that closed the venue for 
18 months, The Liquid Room is on its way to becoming Edinburgh’s key music 
venue, in a city that seems to lose music venues at the rate of about one a 
year. When full, the atmosphere is electric, with the crowd packed tightly 
around and above the stage. Touring band bookings aren’t as frequent as they 
maybe once were, with the post-fire recovery still ongoing and nearby Glasgow 
dominating the gig scene more and more. But The Liquid Rooms still does around 
100 shows a year, and you can count on at least one or two things a month to 
catch your eye. Around half of those shows are by local bands, usually 
self-booked jobs (the venue doesn’t promote any of its own gigs). Heady nights 
out here are pretty much a rite of passage for any young person living in 
Edinburgh.

Address: 9c Victoria Street, EH1 2HE, Edinburgh.

Telephone: 0131-225 2564.

Website: liquidroom.com <http://liquidroom.com>

Public transport: 10 minutes’ walk from Waverley train station. The 2, 23, 27, 
41, 42 and 67 buses all stop nearby, either on Grassmarket or George IV Bridge.
 