
The voters don’t do gratitude, self-pitying politicians are wont to moan. For 
technocratic admirers of Dublin’s outgoing Fine Gael/Labour coalition, the 
Irish election of 2016 has proved the point. In 2011, a near-bankrupt and 
recently bailed-out republic turned to Enda Kenny as a new broom, and his 
government enjoyed a record majority. Five years on, the economy is growing at 
quite a pelt, anunemployment rate 
<http://www.cso.ie/indicators/default.aspx?id=2MUM01> which had been at 15% is 
back down in single figures, and after years of retrenchment the government has 
– finally – gotits own debt 
<http://www.cso.ie/indicators/default.aspx?id=4GFQ12> back down below 100% of 
GDP. Europe’s economic authorities, who have had precious few austerity success 
stories to point to, have clung on to Ireland as a case that shows the medicine 
can work.

But by routing Mr Kenny with unexpected ferocity, the voters have revealed 
that they do not see things this way at all – and don’t assume that they are 
wrong. For several years into the technical recovery,living standards 
<http://www.cso.ie/indicators/default.aspx?id=5NQQ27A> continued to slide. 
While protesters against stiff new water charges werebriefly locked up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/water-charges-ireland-cause-protests>
, the bankers who led Ireland into the mire still walk free. Wages remain 
insecure, and public services – which were always patchier in Ireland than the 
UK – have become less adequate. The bill for the crisis was passed to citizens 
who had nothing to do with its cause, and now the people are justly seething.

Many of the same things might have been said in the context of the British 
general election last year, and Fine Gael took such heart from David Cameron’s 
shock win after five years of cuts that they hired some of his advisers. But in 
the event, things played out very differently. There was, it is true, one close 
parallel, between the fate of the smaller coalition partner this weekend and 
that of the Liberal Democrats in 2015. Both could claim to have contributed 
worthwhile social reforms around the edges – indeed, most notably the very same 
social reform: gay marriage. But, like the Irish Greens before them, who were 
virtually extinguished for their part in the last coalition, Ireland’s Labour 
party has demonstrated afresh that parties which pose as the progressive wing 
of an administration defined by austerity emerge looking pointless, not 
principled.

But whereas the Tories could oversee a five-year squeeze on public expenditure 
and come out with a slightly higher vote share than before, Fine Gael has seen 
the whole of its historic advance in 2011 reversed in one swoop. Its historic 
rival Fianna Fáil, traditionally the dominant party of the republic, was not 
merely in charge when the crash happened, but up to its neck in the banking and 
property scandals which aggravated the slump. So extreme was its collapse to a 
poor third place in 2011 that some asked whether it could ever recover. But 
drawing on deep loyalties that trace back to the civil war, and strong 
connections in rural communities, it has shown itself to be more robust, and 
has now recovered to run its old enemy to within a percentage point of the 
first-preference vote. The Fianna Fáil identity may be all about history, but – 
as a folksy party of the pragmatic right – it has none of the ideological 
baggage that weighs Labour down in the UK. Leader Micheál Martin took note of 
exhaustion with service cuts, and deftly tacked slightly left in response to Mr 
Kenny’s promise of tax cuts.

If Fianna Fáil’s refusal to die is one part of the story, another is the 
continuing fragmentation of the old party system. The combined first-preference 
vote of the two great civil war factions has fallen below 50% for the first 
time, with the other half of all votes splintering betweenSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, which emerges stronger, a 
shrivelled Labour party, independents, radical leftists and other groupings. 
Unlike in Britain, where the slump was not as severe, and much more like in 
Spain and Portugal, similarly stricken peripheries of the eurozone, the latest 
election has not necessarily settled who governs. A rerun may be required. 
Irish voters have revealed what they are against, not what they are for. And 
Ireland’s rulers have learned that if you preside over enough suffering for 
long enough, the people will make you suffer in turn.
 