
The decision of the court of appeal in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/24/born-again-christian-ashers-bakery-lose-court-appeal-in-gay-cake-row>
 in the case of Ashers bakery cannot be welcomed by anyone who cares about free 
speech.Briefly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/what-is-belfasts-gay-cake-case>
, a gay couple asked a Christian bakery to make them a cake showing Bert and 
Ernie from Sesame Street with a message praising equal marriage. The bakery 
refused, saying the message was contrary to the clear teaching of the Bible. 
The couple sued, claiming they had been discriminated against on the grounds of 
their sexual orientation. The bakers, in turn, felt discriminated against for 
their religious beliefs. If the case is understood as one that sets religious 
rights against sexual orientation then the decision against the bakers is 
understandable. There cannot be a blanket exemption against discrimination law 
because some people feel their conscience compels them to act unjustly. 
Although it is invidious to have to choose between religious and sexual 
identity, the law should, when in doubt, protect sexual minorities over 
religious ones.

But that is not the only way in which this question can be examined. We may 
well think that Ashers bakery are bigots or fundamentalists but the other 
principle at issue is one of free speech. The law against discrimination says 
that they may not refuse service to anyone because of their sexual orientation. 
That’s entirely right. It is further arguable that they should not be able to 
discriminate against anyone because of their political views. But what is at 
stake here – asPeter Tatchell has pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/gay-cake-row-i-changed-my-mind-ashers-bakery-freedom-of-conscience-religion>
 – is also a principle of free speech. They were being asked to make a 
statement in favour of gay marriage with which they profoundly disagreed. And 
here they ought to have had the right to disagree.

It may seem that writing in icing on a cake is a trivial form of expression 
compared to, say, writing in a national newspaper. But it is still the clear 
expression of an opinion, and that is something that should not be compelled 
any more than it should be suppressed. The medium does not here affect the 
message. Suppose the bakery had been approached to produce a cake iced with the 
old Paisleyite slogan “Save Ulster from Sodomy”. Most decent people would 
applaud a refusal to reproduce such bigotry. Yet from the perspective of free 
speech, the principle is exactly the same. If free speech is not the right to 
be wrong it means nothing at all. Everyone has the right to their opinion but 
there is no right to compel other people to amplify or even reproduce it.

As a matter of law, the situation in Northern Ireland is more complicated. For 
historical reasons there are very tight restrictions on the exercise of speech 
there if it might be used to whip up hatred. It’s possible that in the fevered 
atmosphere around equal rights in which the cake was commissioned, the bakers’ 
rejection of the commission did strike the couple involved as an attack on 
their own integrity. There ought to be a right not to be bullied, even if there 
isn’t, and there shouldn’t be anyright not to be offended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/feb/13/mondaymediasection7>. Free 
speech absolutism too often extends to a defence of bullying even when it is 
not defending direct incitement to hatred or violence, as many women who have 
ventured an opinion online have discovered. What makes this case importantly 
different is that it involved an attempt to compel someone to express – even in 
sugar paste – an opinion they rejected with all their hearts. That’s wrong even 
when the opinion is right.
 