
Capacity: 1,500 (The Institute), 600 (The Library), 300 (The Temple).
Who plays there: This is a venue that is well balanced between rockin’ and 
dancin’, adopting no clear bias towards guitars, turntables or electronics. One 
week,Pissed Jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/jul/06/pissedjeansarethetrueheir>
 are playing, then the next it’ll be Freddie Gibbs. In the old days, there were 
standout gigs by the likes of the Fall, PJ Harvey, Zion Train, Lamb, 
Squarepusher and the Youngblood Brass Band. In past days, Digbeth Civic Hall, 
as it was then called, resounded to the sounds of the B-52s, Bauhaus, the 
Rezillos, Magazine, Crass andNusrat Fateh Ali Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/16/nusrat-fateh-ali-khan-musstt-musstt>
. Later this year, there’ll be visits from St Vincent, Banks, Little Dragon, 
Buzzcocks and Basement Jaxx.
Cloakroom: Yes.
Admission: Between £15 and £25 for name acts, but still not going much below 
£10-15 for relative unknowns.
Bars: There’s no shortage of bars in all three spaces, with a pair on each 
floor of the main room not getting too crowded even when the house is full. The 
only disadvantage is that the brews are predictable: Becks, Bud, Stella, 
Guinness and Gaymers, all at well over £4 per pint. One of Birmingham’s best 
real ale pubs, The Anchor, is about two minutes walk away, though.

Food: None, but there are plenty of fast food joints, curry houses and pubs 
nearby, as well as a couple of food outlets in the arty Custard Factory 
complex, just a few strides up Digbeth High Street.
Toilets: Those in the main Institute space are large and in fairly good 
condition, but the smaller Library space boasts a rather broken-down latrine.

Wheelchair access: Numbers are limited, but there are a few good vantage 
points up in the balcony. The Institute asks customers with accessibility 
requirements to call the venue before buying tickets, on 0121 643 0428. It’s 
advisable to check prior to purchasing tickets. Free carer tickets are 
available, but need to be booked in advance.

Sound: The sonics can sometimes be challenging, with a tendency to blow up the 
bass so that it frequently obscures details, rattling around the side walls. 
The ceiling is very high, so a central standing position is advisable. Perhaps 
sound engineers should try occasionally removing their earplugs. The music 
would probably have greater attack if the volume was brought down a touch. 
Meanwhile, a few months ago, Kelis lacked bite in The Library, although with a 
bit of moving around, a good vantage point was found on the handy mini-riser to 
the rear of the room. Once again, a central position is usually desirable.
Where to sit or stand: In a venue that combines club trappings with a 
traditional theatre arrangement, the usual choices have to be made. Sightlines 
are far superior on the balcony, and the atmosphere is generally better for 
relaxing and hanging out, with even a few comfortable sofas scattered around 
the edges. Downstairs offers no shining spot in which to stand. The earlier you 
arrive, the better place you can stake. It’s best to make the 
upstairs-or-downstairs choice based on the kind of act you’re seeing.

Overall: The Institute manages to project elements of corporate chain 
standardisation – it’s owned by the Mama Group – within a quaint old building. 
Built as a chapel, and opened in 1908, its exterior remains the same, as well 
as the main space having no shortage of (now gold-painted) arches, up in the 
rafters and around the walls. Even the large, matching mirrors on the walls are 
curved. The pillars have ornate, gold-painted curlicues, and the old-style 
stage is flanked by statuettes. The building was bought up by the city council 
in 1955, and transformed into a civic hall. The space received a makeover in 
the mid-1980s, re-christening itself as The Sanctuary, before being forced to 
close in 2008. It was reborn two years later. Considering the renovation and 
redecoration, it hasn’t taken many years for the interior to lose its shine. 
Perhaps the clubbing nights have taken their toll, because The Institute was 
the home of residencies by Godskitchen, Atomic Jam and Sundissential. The 
balcony has an appealing horseshoe shape, and is quite low, now having had its 
original seats removed in favour of backless cushions. There are signs 
discouraging standing on the balcony, even with the comparatively short drop to 
the floorboards below. The medium-sized Library (formerly The Barfly) is a bit 
of a featureless shell, with matching bars running along each side, and toilets 
that are now looking particularly distressed. The club-sized Temple (formerly 
The Sanctuary) adopts a brutalist industrial chic.

Address: 78 Digbeth High Street, Birmingham B5 6DY

Telephone: 0121 643 0428

Website: mamacolive.com/theinstitute <http://mamacolive.com/theinstitute>
Public transport: The Institute 
<http://mamacolive.com/theinstitute/venue-info/getting-here/> is a short walk 
away from the New Street and Moor Street railway stations, and the coach 
station is just across the street. Digbeth is a major route out of the city, 
and there are two bus stops right outside the venue.
 