
Capacity: 15,700.

Who plays there: The Genting Arena? “Where’s that?” most folks will ask, as 
Birmingham’s ultra-massive LG Arena has only just been renamed in January 2015. 
For most of its history, this aircraft hangar-sized venue was known as the NEC 
Arena, part of the National Exhibition Centre. The Queen opened the complex in 
1976, with Queen themselves being the first band to play, at the peak of their 
powers, in 1979. The arena officially opened the following year. Less than a 
decade later, Frank Zappa took his final bow on his final tour and Prince 
strutted in the round on his Lovesexy tour. In the 1990s, Neil Young & Crazy 
Horse played to a largely standing crowd, which was not the norm in this hall. 
The Beastie Boys didn’t take over the entire space, but were a prime example of 
how the cavern could be curtained off to make a more intimate space. The arena 
has also hosted David Bowie, Diana Ross and Black Sabbath. Last year, Prince 
returned triumphantly and Beyoncé almost matched his preening. This year, we 
can expect Paul Simon, Fleetwood Mac, Mark Knopfler and The Black Keys. In 
short, every big tour that stops in the Midlands plays here.


Cloakroom: None.

Admission: As most gigs feature megastars, around £50 and upwards is the norm, 
bumped up by sizeable booking fees. There is also a sub-category in the 
pricing, called a “fulfillment fee”, which relates to ticket delivery, via 
whichever means decided by the punter. A personal appearance at the box office 
avoids that, but given the venue’s out-of-town location, that’s not as simple 
as it sounds. If the punter wants to splash the cash for the entire hog, for 
this summer’s Fleetwod Mac shows, for instance, £200, a “freestyle package”, 
offers parking, drinks, a meal and access to a VIP lounge.

Bars: There are a multitude of bars in the entrance hall, and all the way 
around the perimeter of the arena, proffering the usual Guinness, Boddingtons, 
Stella and Kingstone Press cider, at the expected inflated prices. Drinks can 
be taken into the seated areas.

Food: There are several entrance hall concessions, including Perfect Pizza and 
the Old El Paso Kitchen, but not all will necessarily be open, depending on the 
scale of the show.

Toilets: As long as the obvious visiting times are avoided (ie straight after 
the support act), the multiple modernised toilets can handle the flow.

Wheelchair access: Wheelchairs, as well as guide dogs, crutches and walking 
sticks, are all welcome. There’s a dedicated ticket telephone line, 0844 581 
0700, for customers with access requirements. You need to inform the venue at 
the time of booking if you need a wheelchair space or have special 
requirementes. The venue also promises to help vision-impaired music fans get 
the best possible seats. There are 11 accessible toilets around the venue, with 
some requiring a Radar key.

Sound: As long as it’s understood that the sound quality is never going to be 
perfect in such a big space, the experience can be fairly reasonable, 
particularly if you are positioned in a relatively expensive, centrally-placed 
seat.
Where to sit or stand: You get what you pay for, so if you pay less and book 
the far rear and side seats (some of these are so far to the side that they can 
count as obstructed viewing), then buyer beware. If a performer elects to have 
a frontal standing area, that is good news indeed. The centre block is 
unsurprisingly the most coveted zone, depending on available funds and speed of 
booking.

Overall: The arena underwent a major refurbishment in 2009, when it reopened 
under the LG banner. The megagig has become a special occasion for many, set up 
on the basis of its customers possibly stepping out only once or twice a year. 
That said, the operation is largely very efficient, apart from some lengthy 
waiting at the box office. But there’s a price to pay for success. An 
increasing element of corporate flash is observable, with a recent show by 
Pakistani qawwali singer Rahat Fateh Ali Khan featuring a near-brainwashing 
level of big-screen advertising in the long run-up to the performance.

Address: National Exhibition Centre, B40 1NT.

Telephone: 0844 338 8000.

Website: http://www.gentingarena.co.uk <http://www.gentingarena.co.uk>

Public transport: The Genting Arena isn’t anywhere near the centre of 
Birmingham, which is eight miles away, but it’s very close to the central 
transport hub of Birmingham International railway station and Birmingham 
Airport. However a person arrives at the venue, there will be sluggish 
progress. Cars will get jammed, and then there’s the high parking price. Train 
travellers have a 15-minute walk from the station, following a ride from 
wherever they started (it’s 10 minutes or so from Birmingham city centre). 
Heading to this venue usually involves some element of pilgrimage. Given that 
many visitors will be coming from much further afield, the Genting Arena is 
well-situated for train travel.
 