
October 1915. They came for her at five in the morning. Mata Hari was fast 
asleep in her prison bed. Sleep is only ever given to the innocent. “Is it time 
for my execution?” she asked. They nodded. “I am not a spy,” she said. “All I 
ever did, I did for love. But kill me if you must.” So they did.

* * *

Dear M Clunet, I hope you never receive his letter. If you don’t receive it, I 
will have been reprieved. Yet I fear the worst, for you have been a terrible 
defence lawyer. So now I choose to set the record straight that I am not a spy 
and all I ever did was for love. Memories are full of caprice and bring with 
them a devil called melancholy – oh, cruel demon that I cannot escape – yet I 
shall try to set the record straight that I am not a spy and all I ever did, I 
did for love.

Mata Hari: the partially naked truth about the spook hoofer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/reel-history-mata-hari-greta-garbo>
On one of my trips to Vienna I met a man called Freud. I cannot remember his 
first name, though I did get the feeling his ideas would become popular because 
I was not a spy and all I ever did, I did for love. Yes, I was a prostitute. 
Yes, I was a liar. But I can promise you I am not lying now. What can I tell 
you of my life? I was bornMargaretha Zelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/reel-history-mata-hari-greta-garbo>
 to parents whose lives did not amount to much. I longed to leave Holland and 
when an older man seduced me into becoming his wife and moving to Java, I leapt 
at the opportunity. Here is a list of some of the things I took with me: one 
hairbrush, one pair of spurs, two gold watches.

Once there, I could reinvent myself inside my loveless marriage. For 
everything I did, I did for love. I had a daughter whose name I forget, but 
hopefully someone has been looking after her these past 15 years. I also had a 
son who was brutally murdered – which was probably just as well, because he 
cramped my style of doing everything for love.

In Indonesia, I learned the sacred dances that I performed to large audiences. 
Unfortunately, every time I did so, all my clothes would invariably fall off 
and I would end up being seduced by a man who wanted to give me some money. “I 
couldn’t possibly accept your cash,” I would say before pocketing the money, 
“because all I ever do, I do for love.”

After a woman killed herself in front of me, because her husband tried to 
seduce me when I happened to be wearing no clothes, I persuaded my husband to 
return to Amsterdam. We separated soon after and I began to get paid a lot of 
money for taking my clothes off and being seduced by rich men. An artist called 
Picasso – I forget his first name – was keen to see me with no clothes on, but 
I refused because he had very dirty hands.

Why the Eiffel Tower delivers a message of hope to French people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/eiffel-tower-paris-french-iron-lady-solidarity>
Before long, I felt constricted in Holland and yearned to go to Paris. 
Luckily, I met a rich man who gave me a lot of money when I was naked, which 
allowed me to fulfil my dreams of moving to Paris, which is the capital of 
France. How I admired themetal tower put up by M Eiffel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/eiffel-tower-paris-french-iron-lady-solidarity>
. To me, that tower had the aura of a tower that existed only for love. In 
Paris, I met a lot of people, some of whom didn’t try to seduce me, but always 
my clothes seemed to fall off.

When the war started, I went to Germany. There I was paid a lot of money to 
keep my clothes on, which should possibly have alerted me that something was 
wrong, but love can make you blind. The Germans did ask me to tell them if I 
saw anything interesting, but I only ever told them what I am telling you. That 
love conquers all. I also went back to France and promised I would tell them 
everything I had told the Germans. So you see, I couldn’t have been a spy.

Yours, Mata Hari

* * *

Dear Mme Mata Hari, I am writing this more for my own benefit than yours as 
you are already dead. I want you to know I wasn’t quite so hopeless a defence 
lawyer as you thought, though, sadly, not good enough to get you acquitted. But 
let me say that I never did think you were a spy. Rather, you were the goddess 
Psyche enthralled by the god Eros. I quite understand that everything you did, 
you did for love. Yours, M Clunet

PS: I hope the firing squad wasn’t too painful.

Digested read, digested: Anti-Mata
 