
Capacity: 900 standing or 666 seated (a pretty cool number for a converted 
church).
Who plays there: The Queen’s Hall hosts around 200 gigs a year, with a 
tendency towards folk, world, jazz, classical and the rootsier end of rock. 
It’s the performance home for theScottish Chamber Orchestra 
<http://www.sco.org.uk/> and has been a key venue for the Edinburgh Jazz and 
Blues festival <http://www.edinburghjazzfestival.com>. Notable visitors include 
Mumford & Sons, Billy Bragg and Ravi Shankar, while 2014 features gigs by Lloyd 
Cole, Michael Nyman, Eddi Reader, Ralph McTell and Matt Cardle.
Cloakroom: Yes.
Admission: £10-£25
Bar: The Queen’s Hall is a classy joint, with a long, well-appointed, brightly 
lit bar away from the performance space. The focus is on fine wines and bottled 
beers – in the fridge you’ll find up to nine different Williams Bros craft 
ales, with whimsical names such as March of the Penguins, each from around 
£3.50. On draught, there’s Williams Bros 4% lager and potent Thistly Cross 
cider.
Food: No.
Toilets: On the ground floor only, but so much cleaner and nicer than your 
usual indie-rock grunge-pit.
Wheelchair access: Yes: advise the box office when you’re booking and they’ll 
reserve a wheelchair space.
Sound: The high-ceilinged room seems particularly sympathetic to acoustic or 
semi-acoustic performances. The standard in-house PA is pretty good and is 
often augmented with additional speakers when the artist requires a bit more 
oomph.
Where to stand/sit: The permanent pews are a beautiful original feature of the 
Queen’s Hall but can be a little restrictive for an entire gig, and the balcony 
support pillars can cause sightline problems. Standing by the mixing desk often 
provides the best sound – and you’re still less than 20 feet from the stage. 
Sitting in the upstairs balcony, you might feel a little removed from the 
action – but if it’s a gig with unassigned seating, you can get a whole new 
perspective on a beloved artist by standing on the part of the balcony that’s 
directly over the stage. (This is also useful for sneaking a glance at the 
scrawled setlist taped by their feet).
Overall: The former Newington and St Leonard’s Church opened as the Queen’s 
Hall in 1979 and has become Edinburgh’s most storied venue almost by default – 
everywhere else with a decent musical hinterland has been redeveloped or shut 
down. You’re more likely to be listening to a Mojo-approved artist in hushed 
silence than throwing yourself about in a moshpit – although there was a 
memorably chaotic EMF gig here in 1992 – but for punters of a certain age going 
to see performers of a certain age, it cannot be beaten: it’s atmospheric, 
eclectic and intimate.
Address: 85 Clerk Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9JG
Telephone: 0131-668 2019 
Website: thequeenshall.net <http://www.thequeenshall.net/>
Public Transport: It’s a 15-minute walk due south from Waverley Station, but 
from nearby North Bridge you can catch the 3, 7, 8, 29, 37 or 47 buses to the 
venue.
 