
Capacity: 400 downstairs in the main room, 100 upstairs in the small bar.


Who plays there: Small-to-medium-sized indie bands and alternative acts come 
to Bristol to play on this moored boat, plus lots of local musicians and 
up-and-comers, often veering towards the eclectic; visitors in past months have 
included the Dismemberment Plan, Roachford, Jagwar Ma, 65daysofstatic, Laura 
Veirs, Poliça and Pere Ubu. The likes of Caribou, Patrick Wolf, Squarepusher 
and Beth Orton have played there over the years, as well as Ash on one of their 
low-key tours.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: £6-£13

Bar: There’s a full bar downstairs, but it’s quite studenty; Carlsberg and 
Thatchers on tap, and Bristol favourite Red Stripe by the can, but there’s a 
selection of excellent Bath Ales and ciders in bottles, too, as well as the 
usual spirits and mixers, and a great selection of rum. Because it’s a boat, 
you see? Upstairs is smaller and feels a little more sophisticated, with an 
open terrace on the deck. Prices are standard for the area and clientele: 
around £3.50 for a bottle/pint.

Food: Upstairs during the day.

Toilets: Upstairs. It can be a bit of a maze so try not to get lost on your 
way back.

Wheelchair access: No.

Sound: Very decent, considering that the main room is basically in the bilges, 
so you’re essentially underwater in a tin can. Because of that it can get very 
hot and sweaty on crowded nights; guitars have been known to de-tune themselves 
mid-gig pwing to the humidity. It can also be very loud, so earplugs are 
sensible if you don’t want a ringing head the next day, but it’s a clean sound 
from a proper nightclub set-up.

Where to stand: Don’t bother with upstairs for a gig because although you’ll 
have more space you won’t see much. Front and centre is probably best, but the 
bar is at the back on the right-hand side. Pre-gig on summer evenings why not 
sit up top and enjoy the balmy Bristol weather and great views over the quay?

Overall: As venues go Thekla is pretty special, due in no small part to the 
novelty of going to a gig on a boat. Set up by Viv Stanshall and his wife Ki in 
the early 80s as a waterborne theatre called the Old Profanity Showboat, it was 
described as a “floating toilet” in NME several years ago, but has 
spectacularly upped its game since being refurbished in 2006, and was named 
Best Small Venue in the South West by the NME in 2011 and 2012. You can see 
why; it regularly attracts highly acclaimed acts and the atmosphere is 
fantastic. In daylight, from the other side of the harbour, you can see a 
rowing skeleton painted on the side of the boat by local native Banksy. As well 
as live music, Thekla runs several regular club nights when students are 
around, including a hip-hop night on Wednesdays, indie/alternative on 
Thursdays, and house, garage, techno and bass music on Fridays. These evenings 
normally run in addition to bands, which can mean early stage times and a 10pm 
curfew.

Address: The Grove, East Mud Dock, Bristol BS1 4RB


Telephone: 0117 929 3301


Website: theklabristol.co.uk <http://www.theklabristol.co.uk/>


Public transport: Bristol Temple Meads train station is a 10-minute walk away. 
Bus routes 24, 25, 50, 52, 75, 76, 90, 121, 902, 903 and 904 stop on The Grove, 
right by the venue. There’s also a good-size, council-run car park literally 
right outside; £2.50 to park all evening after 6pm. Theoretically you could row 
or sail, too, as Thekla is moored at Bristol’s East Mud Dock.
 