 Precisely at 10.45am yesterday, the Queen stepped from a scarlet painted 
Wessex helicopter of the Queen's Flight on to the quietest patch of the most 
troubled corner of her realm.
Hillsborough Castle, once the seat of the governors of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, is at the top end of the 
village of Hillsborough, a prosperous and almost entirely Protestant place that 
yesterday was quivering with red, white and blue.

Hillsborough Castle's 100 acres of grounds include a quiet corner by a lake 
that in summer is heavy with the scent of bracken and conifers.

The RUC men and their alsatian dogs patrolled tactfully in the background 
yesterday, mostly keeping behind the rhododendron bushes - including the 
biggest rhododendron in Britain (mentioned in the Guinness Book of Records) - 
and the soldiers were unseen among the undergrowth.

It was the first time for 11 years that the Queen has visited Northern Ireland 
and the first time that she had flown in a helicopter; a half-hour trip from 
HMS-Fife, anchored in Belfast Lough, to which she had transferred in a brief 
boat journey from the Royal Yacht Britannia.

The Queen looked strained but not nervous as she walked along a line of 
schoolchildren, carefully accepting all the flowers they held out.

The Queen was wearing an outfit of bright green Republican coloured silk and a 
brooch of emeralds. When she had reached the end of the line of schoolchildren, 
an open landau slid out from behind the bushes and the Queen was driven about 
half a mile through the castle grounds to the castle itself, where she held an 
investiture for Northern Ireland people who had been recognised in the Birthday 
and Jubilee honours lists.

On her way to the investiture inside the castle, after inspecting a guard of 
honour, she delighted the small crowd of Hillsborough residents pressed against 
the outside of the castle gates by waving to them from an open window. Only 
Hillsborough people were at the gates for the simple reason that Hillsborough 
yesterday was completely closed to all but residents, recipients of honours and 
garden party guests - and the press. The movements of all of them were 
carefully controlled at dozens of checkpoints and by handfuls of different 
sorts of passes.

The honours recipients all had to suffer long delays at roadblocks on their 
way to meet the Queen as passes were checked and rechecked and queues of 
vehicles about 400 yards long formed. Most of the cars contained men in morning 
suits and women in large summery hats.

In the afternoon more summery hats had to negotiate their way past the 
checkpoints as about 2,000 more people arrived for the garden party at the 
castle. By this time, the Queen had been joined by the Duke of Edinburgh who 
had spent part of the morning touring the Harland and Wolff shipyard in the 
Protestant stronghold of East Belfast. For about an hour they walked among 
their guests , stopping frequently to chat. Then the Queen planted a 
commemorative silver pear tree before they returned to the helicopter pad by 
the lake for the return journey to the Britannia. The Queen had spent 5 3/4 
hours on Irish soil, all of them inside Hillsborough Castle or its grounds.

As the Queen was mingling with her guests at the garden party, a Republican 
protest march that ended in a riot was beginning its journey down the Falls 
Road.
 