
For all the lazy comparisons being made to 2008, after New Hampshire it should 
be crystal clear that this is no replay of the last contested Democratic 
nomination campaign or even the Republican race.

Eight years ago, an upstart candidate running with grassroots spirit arrived 
in New Hampshire expecting the best. After a strong result in Iowa, the 
insurgent senator believed he was heading for a resounding victory.

Instead, Obama suffered a dismal defeat but delivered an inspirational speech 
that kept hope alive through a long slog to the nomination: Yes We Can.

On Tuesday night in New Hampshire, the trappings of the insurgent campaign – 
embraced by so many young supporters – looked familiar. The white and blue 
signs read and looked alike: A Future to Believe In, echoing the 2008 signs, 
Change We Can Believe In.

But otherwise, Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> bears no similarity to 
Barack Obama.

There was no uplifting sweep though the history of people power in Sanders’ 
victory speech; there was a diatribe against the state of today’s economy, 
national security and politics. There was no outreach to unite red and blue 
America; there was a rallying cry to keepRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> out of office.

Sí, se puede?

And in the exceptional 2016 political cycle, Hillary Clinton is not even the 
sameHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. Not 
only are her results in Iowa and New Hampshire the opposite of her results 
eight years ago, but the candidate herself is behaving and performing in a 
strikingly different way.

Clinton recognizes the dire situation she faces in her quest to win the 
nomination several states earlier than she did in 2008. Back then, she lacked 
an early state plan beyond Iowa; on Tuesday she promised a national war of 
attrition. “Now we take this campaign to the entire country,” she said. “We’re 
going to fight for every vote in every state.”

The exit polls suggested both encouraging and devastating news for Clinton in 
trying to get all those votes. She won the minority vote in New Hampshire by 12 
points, which bodes well for her in the upcoming states of South Carolina and 
Nevada – but she lost the women’s vote by the same margin, despite running on 
the promise of becoming the first woman president.

Clinton won older voters (the over-65s) by 18 points and pretty much tied 
Sanders among those aged between 44 and 65 years, two crucial groups in the 
low-voting states ahead. But she was crushed by voters in their 20s and 30s, 
underscoring a core weakness she also suffered in 2008.

On the opposite side of the aisle, the self-styled maverick of 2008 had to 
fight his way through the early state contests, coming in just enough ahead to 
enter Super Tuesday in a strong position. But John McCain was practically 
domesticated compared to the current Republican frontrunner,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

Where McCain prided himself on his national security expertise, Donald Trump 
simply promises to beat China and Isis, with a strategy to be determined later. 
Where McCain corrected the excesses of his supporters at campaign events, Trump 
celebrates them. Where McCain had endured and opposed continuing the use of 
torture, Trump promises Republicans a return to waterboarding.


Eight years ago, the GOP establishment had two candidates to choose from; in 
2016 the Republican mainstream has formed a circular firing squad as one 
greying governor tried to beat another into third or fourth place in New 
Hampshire. At some point, the single-digit differences between the middle-tier 
Republican candidates only reinforced their bland similarity.

Further down the field, there were enough straws to clutch for several 
candidates to delude themselves into campaigning in several more states. After 
a TV debate in which Chris Christie destroyed Marco Rubio, the New Jersey 
governor clawed his way into clear space ... in sixth position.

Yet he did manage to drive Rubio, the candidate formerly known as Democrats’ 
greatest fear, down from a third place in Iowa to fifth place in New Hampshire. 
(Let the record show that Marcomentum hit a brick wall in the Granite State.)

Back in 2008, the early states winnowed the field. This time around, the 
Republican establishment is so divided that their collective nightmare – a 
Trump victory – might become reality with barely one-third of a state’s votes.

It feels like the country is still stuck in 2010, when Tea Party anger tore 
through the primaries and general election.

And with such different candidates in both fields – and in such a different 
political environment – there is no reason to believe this cycle will follow 
the path of 2008.

On the Democratic side, South Carolina is unlikely to deliver confirmation of 
the insurgent’s potential, especially since the party’s super-delegates of 
elected officials are unlikely to start splitting towards Sanders as the race 
continues.

On the Republican side, Super Tuesday tilts towards the southern states – 
including Texas, the home state of the Iowa winner, Ted Cruz. Far from ending 
early, the Republican race could continue to be contested through the 
California primary in June.

The voters of New Hampshire, who delivered their verdict on Tuesday, are 
famously independent and contrarian: they love to overturn the judgment of the 
voters of Iowa; they like to switch their voting intentions late in the primary 
campaign; and, yes, they live in a state with the slogan “Live Free or Die”.

But on Tuesday night they delivered what might just be the most independent 
verdict in the history of the first-in-the-nation primary: by picking Trump and 
Sanders as their nominees, New Hampshire told the political establishment they 
need to change or die.

The danger for both parties is that a long campaign might just do both: change 
anddie. As the candidates adapt to the times and one another, they may well 
drive up each other’s negatives and drive down their own positive numbers. Just 
ask Marco Rubio and Chris Christie what that feels like.
 