
“A didactic inquiry into the problem of how to write a book which lasts 10 
years”, this interwar masterpiece of cultural criticism transformed the English 
literary conversation almost overnight, establishing phrases such as “the pram 
in the hall” at the heart of contemporary creative consciousness.

In the age of book blogs and digital publishing, Connolly’s elevated 
dissection of the republic of letters might seem more redolent of another 
world, and different criteria. And yet, rarely in the beaten ways of Grub 
Street, has one writer so comprehensively nailed his subject. Connolly’s 
observations about the habit and practice of literature remain excruciatingly 
accurate. At the point at which he sat down at a table under a plane tree in 
the south of France (with “a gramophone playing in the next room”), in the 
summer of 1937, he had spent all his professional life in various literary 
milieux, and knew in his marrow what made books and writers tick. From the 
outset, Connolly nurtured a deep fear for the influence of the press, an 
anxiety which remains as real today as it was in 1938: “Nothing dates like a 
sense of actuality than which there is nothing in journalism more valuable. A 
writer who takes up journalism abandons the slow tempo of literature for a 
faster one and the change will do him harm.”

Connolly’s anatomy of his trade is never less than inspired, and memorable: 
“In this verbal exchange Fleet Street is a kind of Bucket Shop which unloads 
words on the public for less than they are worth and in consequence the more 
honest literary bankers, who try to use their words to mean what they say, who 
are always “good for” the expressions they employ, find their currency 
constantly depreciating.”

Almost as damaging, Connolly observes, are the hazards of success: “Success is 
a kind of moving staircase, from which the artist, once on, has great 
difficulty in getting off, for whether he goes on writing well or not, he is 
carried upwards, encouraged by publicity, by fan mail, by the tributes of 
critics and publishers and by the friendly clubmanship of his new companions … 
Popular success is like a palace built for a writer by publishers, journalists, 
admirers, and professional reputation makers, in which a silent army of 
termites, rats, dry rot, and death watch beetles are tunnelling away till, at 
the very moment of completion, it is ready to fall down.”

But Enemies of Promise 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/enemies-of-promise.html> was more than just a 
highly quotable essay on the threats to literary accomplishment of drink, 
conversation, politics, domesticity, journalism and worldly success. Connolly’s 
purpose was to make a lasting and decisive evaluation of his gifted 
contemporaries, writers such as Auden, Joyce, Proust, Firbank, Woolf, Huxley, 
Hemingway, Faulkner and Waugh. Our contemporary understanding of Anglo-American 
literary modernism, fromThe Waste Land 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/waste-land.html> forwards, is shaped by 
Connolly’s quotable and brilliant sentences about the books and writers of his 
time. His verdicts, moreover, remain freshly minted and remarkably perceptive, 
however much he crams them into the Procrustean bed of his analytical framework.

The sweets of his gilded youth were not bestowed on Connolly’s mature career. 
He would be eclipsed by his friend Orwell

And then, just at the point when Connolly-as-critic is on the point of 
becoming insufferably show-off and omniscient, he undercuts his own lapidary 
self-confidence with the closing section of the book, eight chapters of A 
Georgian Boyhood in which he strips away the veil. “I have always disliked 
myself at any given moment,” he writes, “the total of such moments is my life.”

In this powerful climax, Connolly’s mandarin criticism morphs into a kind of 
scintillating but abstract reportage that gives the book its timeless staying 
power. He and a boy named Eric Blair had attended the same south coast prep 
school, St Cyprian’s. It’s the measure of their inequality that Connolly’s 
account of “St Wulfric’s” is not half as lacerating as George Orwell’s famous 
essay Such, Such Were the Joys, in which the young Eric Blair suffered a “world 
of force and fraud and secrecy”, where a shy, sickly and unattractive boy 
surrounded by pupils from families much richer than his own, became “like a 
goldfish” thrown “into a tank full of pike”. For Connolly, by contrast, St 
Cyprian’s was “a well run and vigorous example [of an English prep school] 
which did me a world of good”.

Finally, by connecting his analytical brilliance to his painfully candid 
account of his schooling at Eton college, Connolly ensured that his ebullient 
celebration of some remarkable writers was edged with a poignant sense of 
personal failure. As a young man, he had known some golden moments of acclaim, 
and knew all about “power and popularity, success and failure, beauty and 
time”. In fact, he was “as promising as the Emperor Tiberius retiring to 
Capri”. The sweets of his gilded youth were not bestowed on Connolly’s mature 
career, and in the end he would be eclipsed by his school friend and rival, 
Blair/Orwell, who established himself, in 1937, with another book that combines 
ideas and autobiography in an equally intoxicating combination,The Road to 
Wigan Pier <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-wigan-pier-2.html>.

A signature sentence 

“The quality of mind of a writer may be improved the more he feels or thinks 
or, without effort, the more he reads and as he grows surer of this quality so 
is he better able to make experiments in technique or towards a simplification 
of it even to its apparent abandonment and the expression of strong emotion or 
deep thought in ordinary language.”

Three to compare 

EM Forster: Aspects of the Novel 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/aspects-of-the-novel.html> (1927) 
TS Eliot: Selected Essays 1917-32 (1932) 
FR Leavis: The Common Pursuit (1952)

Enemies of Promise is published by University of Chicago Press (£17). Click 
here to buy it 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/enemies-of-promise.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 