 Aldo van Eyck, who has died aged 80, was a complex and combative figure who 
wrestled harder than many architects of his generation to reconcile with his 
own discipline new ideas and adventures in fine art, science and anthropology. 
His best known and most influential buildings - the Amsterdam Orphanage 
(1955-60) and the Hubortus House, Amsterdam, for single mothers and their 
children (1978-81) - were complex structures representing his fundamental 
belief that 'a house must be like a small city if it's to be a real home; a 
city like a large house if it's to be a real home'.
The results are buildings that match and mirror the complexities of urban 
life; they are fascinating and highly useable, but far from being 
conventionally beautiful. Perhaps van Eyck's major contribution to modern 
architecture as it emerged in the great construction boom of the fifties and 
sixties was to remind his peers that architecture need not, and probably should 
not, be a product of simplistic functional demands, but a form of dialogue with 
all the forces, cultural and intellectual, that might imbue it with the same 
depth of meaning as that of ancient Greece.

He was an intellectual and a doer, a man who liked nothing better than a very 
fierce argument over drinks and dinner. Many people found him frightening, but 
that was their problem. He could be funny and charming too. Dutch by birth, he 
was educated in Britain at the King Alfred School, Hampstead, and Sidcot 
School, Somerset, and was to retain strong links with Britain and British 
architects throughout his productive life. (His daughter, Tess, is an architect 
in practice in London with her husband, Julyan Wickham).

While he was making his name as an angry young architect in the mid-fifties 
with the group Team Ten, his greatest intellectual sparring partners and 
colleagues were the radical British architects Peter and Alison Smithson. He 
was particularly proud of being awarded the Royal Gold Medal for Architecture 
by the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1990. He did not, however, 
build in this country.

Van Eyck trained as an architect in the Hague from 1935 to 1938 and at the ETH 
Polytechnic, Zurich, from 1938-42. His studies were a mix of classical 
Beaux-Arts and Modern functionalist theory and design. Throughout his career, 
and despite the sometimes Brutalist look of some of his buildings, he was never 
to divorce contemporary architecture from ancient precedents although - unlike 
the Post-Modernists he reviled, and whose whimsical 
pop-classical-meets-witty-Modern style was spooned across European cities in 
the 1980s - he never played with classical styles or motifs in his designs.

In Zurich, the young van Eyck was introduced by the art historian Carola 
Giedion-Welcker to a gaggle of avant-garde artists, among them Arp, Giacometti, 
Ernst and Brancusi. In 1943 he married a fellow student, Hannie van Roojen, who 
survives him with his daughter and son. He returned to Amsterdam in 1945 where, 
from 1946 to 1951, he worked for Cor van Eesteren at the internationally 
acclaimed Municipal Office of Public Works. Public architecture was at that 
time far from being the dirty word it is in Britain at the end of the 1990s. He 
designed 'public playgrounds' for Van Eesteren and exhibitions for the Cobra 
group of Dutch artists.

In 1947 he became a member of CIAM (Congres International d'Architecture 
Moderne), the international brigade of the Modern movement, and was its Dutch 
representative. Typically he found himself arguing fiercely with such leading 
lights of CIAM as Walter Gropius, founder of the Bauhaus. Van Eyck found 
Gropius's belief in modernity in everything and at all costs wrong-headed, and 
in 1954 founded a breakaway group, Team Ten, with among others, Peter and 
Alison Smithson.

His concerns were to encourage his fellow architects to think of their subject 
in what, today, we might call a holistic manner. His talks and writings in 
Forum, the Dutch architectural journal he edited from 1959 to 1963, show how he 
was fascinated not solely with structural and formal concerns but with the 
transcendent (and yet practical) role of architecture in primitive cultures, by 
the way light flickers on surfaces, by the ambiguity of the in-between worlds 
that architecture creates as if unknowingly, and the way humans respond to 
different physical environments. He believed strongly that immaterial things 
play an important role in making the substance of buildings: our sense of 
threshold, our sensitivity to shadows, the ways in which we understand a 
building intuitively and sensually rather than purely intellectually and 
rationally.

The Amsterdam Orphanage was truly a city for lost children. The building (now 
the Berlage School of Architecture) is a low, one- and two- storey beehive-like 
structure, a sequence of clusters in which children can invent by way of play 
and exploration a sense of community in the absence of a family, a place of 
chance encounters and of the imagination. Much publicised and debated when 
built, it was allowed to fall into a state of disrepair until taken over by the 
Berlage School in recent years.

The Pastoor van Arskerk Catholic church in the Hague (1963-69) is a mysterious 
space, calling to mind the catacombs of ancient Rome. Despite being made of 
cheap concrete, it is imbued with a profundity of feeling that many more lavish 
churches are unable to capture. In a similar spirit is the Sonsbeck sculpture 
pavilion built in Arnhem in 1966 (and demolished the same year). Here 
sculptures by Brancusi, Arp, Noguchi, Marini and others were placed amid 
free-standing rectilinear and curvilinear walls covered by a translucent roof 
with trees as a backdrop. The structure may yet be rebuilt.

His urban design work was important. Van Eyck believed from early on that the 
city should never be approached as a kind of relic bequeathed from the past, 
but as a gathering of artefacts in a state of continual evolution into which 
fresh energy had to be injected by each new generation. Even so, as a fierce 
individualist, he did not fare well with the Dutch bureaucracy responsible for 
carrying out his housing and other urban schemes for Zwolle, Amsterdam and 
Dordrecht.

His late triumph was the Hubortus House for single mothers and their children. 
This is a delicate composition of many small spaces flowing one into the other. 
It makes much use of glass to create cross-views through the building and yet 
also provides spaces of seclusion and initimacy. Here van Eyck made much and 
surprising use of colour: the building has a rainbow feel that offsets its 
basic concrete structure.

Later buildings became increasingly organic and idiosyncratic in form, such as 
the European Space Agency complex at Noordwijk. The older he got, the more 
complex and personal van Eyck's language of architecture became. He will be 
remembered for taking risks, for never toadying, for leaving behind a number of 
intriguing jewels that encourage architects and their public to see and feel 
that to discover a personal language of architecture is not the same thing as 
following fads and fashions.
 