
The TV station ident - the short, jolly piece of graphics between the 
programmes that reminds you which channel you're on - ought to be fairly easy 
to get right. But it has developed into a whole new creative art form, one that 
BBC1 and ITV1, heading for major rebrands soon, have yet to master.

Now, station idents are expected to do many things. They have to perform a 
basic continuity role - be a visual device over which an announcer can tell you 
that Corrie is up next. They are also expected to perform a more sophisticated 
continuity role - putting you in the mood for the next programme: a thoughtful 
ident will set you up for a thoughtful programme, a funny ident preceding a 
comedy.

But idents are also expected to brand the station. Ever since 1955, when ITV 
was born and we had broadcast competition for the first time, idents have been 
there to remind you which station you're on and why - mini-ads for the channel, 
if you like. And as branding becomes more sophisticated, this pressure on 
idents has been growing.

In 1987, MTV arrived in the UK, and turned the world of TV idents upside down. 
Instead of five or six, the channel had hundreds, and they were farmed out to 
anyone clever and creative who wanted to have a go. The idents were cheap, 
cheeky and disposable - perfect for MTV's noisy, creative brand.

The next leap came in 1991 when BBC2 produced their 2s. The 2s were splashed 
in paint or draped in silk or were driven around like toy cars, and were 
effortlessly playful and clever. They were the perfect foil for continuity 
voiceover, they mood-managed beautifully and defined an "alternative 
television" proposition perfectly. A friend of mine who is an ident designer 
points out that the 2s are still the ones to beat. "When I tell people that I 
make television station idents, they don't know what I mean. When I say I do 
things like the 2s their eyes light up."

Recently, Channel 4 has upped the stakes again with a set of idents where 
hedges and skyscrapers form the number four - but only when seen from certain 
angles. Unusual and mesmeric, they not only confirm C4 as intelligently 
engaging, but their budget and ambition are off the scale. Like BBC2, C4 has 
shown that idents can become talking points.

And now all eyes are on the TV big boys. Neither BBC1 nor ITV1 has ever had 
unqualified ident success like BBC2 or C4. ITV's "heart" idents from a few 
years ago were crass. The last thing that will make you love a TV station is a 
set of idents telling you you ought to. The subsequent celebrity idents were a 
reasonable recovery. The idents featuring Ant and Dec and Davina McCall 
showcased ITV as a home for populist entertainers, and were nicely in touch 
with the country's celebrity obsession, but lacked executional imagination.

BBC1's recent track record is similarly patchy. Since 1961, the channel has 
used a globe, presumably to express its world perspective and to suggest the 
station is world class. The globes were always graphical until in 1998 the 
globe got real, imprinted onto a hot air balloon and floating peacefully above 
British townscapes and countryside. Very beautiful, yes, but not quite perfect 
because slightly too ambient, cool and cerebral - a good fit in front of a 
documentary about Thomas Telford but a misfit before an episode of My Family.

Then in 2002 BBC1 dropped the ball spectacularly. Their "rhythm and dance" 
idents featuring Maori warriors and disabled basketball players were 
unbelievably difficult to like. In the attempts to be dynamic, cool and diverse 
they tried too hard in every respect. You could feel them puffing like a dad at 
a disco. Peter Fincham was right to dump them.

So BBC1 and ITV1 are overdue some ident glory. The holy grail for both of 
these mainstream giants is to find an idea that's both iconic and populist. 
Pixar performs this trick with every film - think Monsters, Inc., think The 
Incredibles. Director Garth Jennings does it with almost every pop promo he 
makes - think of the dancing milk carton for Blur's Coffee and TV. Let's see if 
the biggest names in British broadcasting can rise to the occasion.
 