
Nothing says “you’re going to have a good time” like walking into a cocktail 
bar. Reception desks are boring – all forms and faffing. Why not start with the 
fun bit? The Pig at Combe does this with aplomb. Guests open a heavy wooden 
door into a glowing wood-panelled room (pictured) lit by a candelabra, with 
shelves of coloured glasses stacked against mullioned windows and an open fire, 
blazing even on a sunny August afternoon.

If we hadn’t been with our six-year-old, we might well have headed straight 
for the sofas and not made it to our room for a good few hours.

This newly opened rural retreat is the fifth in the Pig litter, and though not 
the biggest, it is the grandest: a gorgeous Elizabethan manor on a 3,500-acre 
estate near Honiton in east Devon. The setting, amid fields of grazing Arab 
horses, huge cedar trees and lawns stretching away to rolling countryside, is 
the same as it was when this was the Combe House Hotel, but inside the style 
and feel are very different. Where Combe House was rather dark, hushed and 
formal, the interior is now signature Pig – glamorous but relaxed. Original 
panelling and stucco sit above bare wood and stone floors; there are vintage 
framed insect collections, lampshades made from saris, and stuffed animals, 
including a rather slimline pig above the main fireplace.

Of the 27 bedrooms, the 10 – including our family room – in the old stables 
across a cobbled yard have a more rustic vibe. One even has the original horse 
stalls and cobbled floor. But all the rooms bear the boutique hotel tropes: 
Roberts radio, factory lights, Smeg fridge, rolltop bath, Belfast sink, shower 
that feels like a waterfall, and a mini larder of posh popcorn, chocolate, and 
local ale. In short, it’s on trend and faultlessly tasteful. In a mark of the 
Pig’s laid-back approach, the coffee machines are in antique cabinets – not 
cheap vintage but impressive pieces of 17th century furniture.

It’s a short walk through the walled herb garden to the main house but it took 
us longer than it should as we stopped to try some of the 12 kinds of mint (I 
recommend the apple, not so sure about the banana) and the peculiar 
mushroomy-tasting oyster leaf. In one corner of the garden is a quail house – 
for eggs, not meat – and in another the smokehouse.

As with all the Pigs, the herb and vegetable gardens are more than just a 
pretty feature – they’re an extension of the kitchen. There’s a section on the 
menu headed “Literally picked this morning”, and what is not grown in the 
grounds is mostly sourced within 25 miles.
 The Folly bar and restaurant 
The restaurant was filled with evening sun, the tables laden with coloured 
glass and vintage plates. I had to stop myself scoffing too much of the three 
types of bread that came with olive oil and smoked salt, before my starter of 
crispy lamb. After a decent-sized fillet of brill with sea vegetables for me, 
and a large sirloin with small mountain of fries and crispy tobacco onions for 
my partner, we were too full to tackle pudding, though the smoked sugar 
chocolate tart looked very tempting.

The restaurant prices aren’t much higher than in a standard gastro pub, but 
the detail and service are way above. The staff are genuinely friendly and 
enthusiastic. The sommelier’s wine recommendation was spot on, going into great 
detail not just about the grape but the barrels it was oaked in, too.

On the way back to our room we peered into the Folly, a former orangery that’s 
now a bar and casual restaurant popular with locals: giant wicker-and 
mud-lampshades hang from exposed beams above a wood-burning oven.

Unsurprisingly, breakfast was fantastic – a huge spread of granolas, poached 
pears, strawberries, seeds, nuts, dried fruit, cheeses, pastries and cooked 
options – but it should be. As a colleague complained in her review of thePig 
Near Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/28/the-pig-near-bath-somerset-hotel-review>
, charging for breakfast is a bit hard to swallow. Better to push the room 
rates up a little than ask guests to choose between the £20 cooked option or 
equally extravagant £8 for coffee and pastries.

That aside, the room rates are reasonable given the setting, style and 
service. Everything about our stay felt indulgent, and I’d definitely return 
for a treat or special occasion. As we headed for breakfast just before 9am, we 
saw one guest sitting outside his room in a bathrobe drinking champagne. 
Nothing says “good time” louder than that.

• Accommodation was provided by The Pig at Combe (doubles from £145 room-only, 
0345 225 9494,pighotel.com 
<https://www.thepighotel.com/at-combe/?gclid=CKOcjPCBy84CFUIq0wod0zkIyQ>

Ask a local


 Angela Blackwell, curator, Thelma Hulbert Gallery <http://thelmahulbert.com/>
, Honiton
 Walking at Blackbury Camp 
• Eat 
My favourite lunch spot in Honiton is the walled garden of Toast 
<http://cafetoast.co.uk/index.html> cafe. It does superb fish finger sandwiches 
and massive meringues.

• Shop
Hop over the road from Toast to Fountain Antiques (the town is famed for its 
antique shops). This Tardis-like emporium houses 42 traders selling vintage and 
antique collectables from traditional Honiton lace to maps and gardening 
equipment.

• Do
Try your hand at mackerel fishing in Beer. Hire a wooden motor boat with 
mackerel lines and catch your own lunch to barbecue on the beach.Simply add 
chips and some mugs of tea from one of the three beach cafes. From £18 for half 
an hour for up to six (summer only) atbeerselfdrive-boats.co.uk 
<http://beerselfdriveboats.co.uk/about/4579245414>.

• Walk
Visit Blackbury Camp 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/blackbury-camp/>, an Iron Age 
hill fort with ancient oaks, great for strolls and picnics. Or walk or cycle at
Seaton Wetlands <http://seatonbay.com/marshes/> nature reserve: nearly 4km of 
level trails and boardwalk through marshland and reed beds.
 