
Tonke Dragt's The Letter for the King has sold more than a million copies 
throughout the world. First published in 1962 in the Netherlands, this tale of 
a teenager's knightly quest has now been translated into English by Laura 
Watkinson.  

A deep sense of Christian faith pervades the book, though it is set 
in a fantasy feudal world of three kingdoms – two beautiful, idealised and well 
ordered, and one that threatens the peace and plenty of the other two. The 
hero, a 16-year-old squire named Tiuri, often thinks of his journey as a 
pilgrimage. He begins his quest in ragged clothes, with no weapons, money or 
horse: at one point he even takes on the robes of a monk as a disguise. It is 
important to understand this aspect of the novel, because the challenges Tiuri 
encounters have a spiritual quality to them: the whole is a test of his virtue 
as well as his valour. 

At the beginning, Tiuri is sitting vigil in a church with his friends – 
the night-long prayer and fast before he gains knighthood. His thoughts wander: 
"Sometimes he found that he wasn't thinking about anything at all," writes 
Dragt, expertly evoking a slightly bored, embarrassed teenager's state of mind. 
He looks at the others, wondering if they aren't concentrating either. They 
must not leave the chapel until dawn.

So what is Tiuri to do when a mysterious man taps on the door and asks for 
help with "a matter of life and death"? He reluctantly accepts, and is given a 
mission to deliver a letter to the  Black Knight with the White Shield. It 
contains information of the utmost importance – he can do it, and be back by 
dawn to explain himself. But the Black Knight is slain: so Tiuri must complete 
the Black Knight's task himself and take the letter to the neighbouring King, 
travelling through forests, down rivers, over mountains. Things beyond his 
knowledge are at stake.

The book is beautifully constructed, and has passages of urgent writing that 
take their inspiration from fairytales as well as the Arthurian legend. Tiuri 
is chased by various groups of knights; dogged by rumour; captured more than 
once; and hindered more than he is helped. What is perhaps most interesting 
about his predicament is that he must not tell anyone about the letter: a 
situation that captures that bewildering sense of a teenager's interaction with 
the adult world. You burn with things of the utmost importance, but your 
growing self is constricted by things you don't quite understand.

There are one or two problems with the book. Tiuri's trials tend towards 
the bureaucratic – how he can tell his parents he's not coming home; how he can 
cross a river without paying a toll. There are a couple of supernatural 
elements (a hostile pond and a glowing ring), but they seem almost incidental, 
and Slither, the man set on Tiuri's trail to kill him, makes only rare 
appearances, which means that a sense of true menace never really develops.

Tiuri's spiritual travails are translated and enlarged into reality. He must 
undergo these trials in order to become not just a knight, but an adult, with 
the qualities of honour, courage and resilience. At the end of the book, a 
jester tells Tiuri a story about a man who chased a rainbow: "he realised that 
what mattered was not the rainbow itself but the search". And Tiuri's search is 
gripping, delightful and true.
 