
First published in South Korea in 2007 and translated into English in 2015, 
The Vegetarian by Han Kang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/24/the-vegetarian-by-han-kang-review-family-fallout>
 remains urgently relevant, almost 10 years after it was first picked up by 
readers. Constant relevance is perhaps both a mark of great literature and a 
demonstration of why it matters so much; our societies, our norms, our 
expectations change at such a glacial pace that we need books to keep us aware 
and to foment change, however slowly.

Yeong-hye is the subject of The Vegetarian, but not its protagonist or even 
quite its main character. Her voice is so rarely heard, her speech so rarely 
present, it would be more accurate to call her the object of the book if it 
weren’t for the fact that her actions speak louder than words. After a 
frightening dream involving intense violence, she becomes a vegetarian (really, 
she is a vegan as she refuses to eat any animal products). This infuriates her 
husband, Mr Cheong, the narrator of the first portion of the book. He thinks 
that Yeong-hye is being ridiculous, whimsical rather than determined. When he 
finds her clearing out all the meat products from their fridge, including 
expensive seafood, he is incredulous. How is it possible that his docile, dull, 
quiet wife has turned into someone like this? During this section, italicised 
portions give us a glimpse into Yeong-hye’s dreams, and they imply that while 
her behaviour may be new, the thoughts behind them are not: “Intolerable 
loathing, so long suppressed. Loathing I’ve always tried to mask with 
affection. But now the mask is coming off.”

The mask is her compliance, her habit of adjusting to the desires and 
expectations of those around her. By becoming vegan, losing weight, and 
shedding the fat that is necessary for human existence (her diet isn’t healthy 
or balanced), Yeong-hye is defying those expectations and desires, refusing to 
continue living as a wife whose sole purpose is to cook for her husband and 
sleep with him. Her final act of defiance is not the moment early on when she 
cuts herself after her father tries to force her to eat meat; no, it is her 
sitting by a fountain outside the hospital with her breasts bared to the sun 
and, by extension, everyone else as well.

Whether it is the suicide attempt or the public display of nudity that causes 
her to be admitted into a psychiatric ward, we don’t know. Regardless, 
Yeong-hye’s husband divorces her afterwards and the novel’s second section 
focuses on her brother-in-law Yeong-ho, a video artist. For a project – and 
because he lusts after her – he paints Yeong-hye’s body with flowering plants 
and films it. It is the first time we see her happy, giddy even, and feeling at 
home in her skin: when it becomes not her skin, in fact, but something else. 
Her brother-in-law recognises this in a stirring moment: “This was the body of 
a beautiful young woman, conventionally an object of desire, and yet it was a 
body from which all desire had been eliminated … what she had renounced was the 
very life that her body represented.”

But Yeong-hye isn’t only defying desire. She is defying humanity. The novel’s 
final section focuses on her sister, In-hye, as she cares for Yeong-hye, who 
has been diagnosed with anorexia and schizophrenia and is staying at another 
psychiatric hospital. Here, we can see Yeong-hye’s defiance as twofold. On the 
one hand, it seems as if she simply wants to die, to leave her physical body 
behind – death does, after all, have a long history of being used as defiance, 
whether through hunger strikes, religious and political martyrdom, or suicide.

But on the other hand, Yeong-hye’s desires seem to be not to die so much as to 
live differently. All signs point to her wanting to become something that isn’t 
nourished through violence towards other living beings; sitting by the fountain 
soaking in the sun, shedding her clothing and walking around naked as often as 
she can, her glee and arousal when her body is painted with flowers, and her 
escape from the psychiatric hospital, only to stand still among the trees as if 
trying to join them. She wants to stop being human. Humanity is harmful, 
rageful, murderous, violent, grasping, jealous, greedy – all things she doesn’t 
want to be. And so she defies us humans not only by becoming vegetarian, but by 
trying to become vegetation itself. She doesn’t want to stop living. She wants 
to stop living like us.
 