
Capacity: 2, 262.


Who plays there?: The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra resides here, 
operating a seasonal programme, so there's a heavy commitment to classical 
music. The general genre policy is very wide-ranging, embracing pop, rock, easy 
listening, jazz, folk, and global roots, as well as comedy and spoken word. 
Frequently, an artist might choose to perform here even though they could fill 
a larger hall, just because they enjoy the venue's comparatively intimate 
environment and pristine acoustics. Symphony Hall also has a commitment to free 
admission gigs in its Café Bar area, presenting the weekly Jazzlines sets at 
5pm most Fridays. Because of the success of this series, they've expanded the 
concept to include commuter folk, lunchtime jazz and family friendly Saturday 
morning events. Over the years since the hall opened in 1991, notable visitors 
have included Lou Reed, BB King, Ravi Shankar, David Byrne, Wynton Marsalis, 
Bryan Ferry, Richard Thompson, Lionel Hampton, Jeff Beck, Oscar Peterson, 
Björk, Dave Brubeck, Grace Jones and Tony Bennett.
Cloakroom: The cloakroom opens an hour before showtime, with items charged at 
£1 each.
Admission: Ranges from free up to around £65 for top-price seats for the 
biggest names. There is a £3 booking fee, which is waived if tickets are 
purchased in person at the box office.

Bars: The main bar is on the ground floor, offering only Becks and Bass on 
tap, at £4 per pint. Bottles are also stocked, including Marston's Pedigree and 
the local Purity brewery's Ubu. A limited selection of sandwiches and cakes are 
available from the bar. For £17.50, it's possible to book a champagne hamper. 
It's advisable to order interval drinks before the gig begins, as the interval 
crush can be challenging. Nowadays, though, it's possible to take 
plastic-cupped drinks inside the hall, which used to be completely forbidden. 
The closest pub is just around the back of the hall, and it's one of 
Birmingham's best haunts, The Prince of Wales, lined up with real ale pumps.

Food: Inside the ICC (International Convention Centre) where Symphony Hall is 
housed, the main eaterie is The Oak Kitchen, which has a small range of 
sandwiches and cookies, as well as a selection of hot dishes. Less than five 
minutes walk, and there are endless eating possibilities on Broad Street and in 
Paradise Place. The nearby Rep theatre and Library also have their own cafes.

Toilets: There are plenty of toilets, although queues can still develop at 
intervals, even in the gents'.

Wheelchair access: There are wheelchair spaces on all tiers of the hall, and 
free tickets are available for paying customers who need the assistance of a 
companion. The dedicated booking telephone line is 0121 780 4949. There are 
blue badge parking spaces close by, accessible toilets, and lowered sections at 
the bars and box office.

Sound: Famed for its acoustics, Symphony Hall can compete on an international 
level, offering an excellent listening experience for unamplified classical 
music. In its early years, rock bands would sometimes expose problems, 
particularly with the bounce-back clatter of massive drum-kits. But long 
experience, plus improving mixing desk and speaker technologies, have combined 
to solve the problem. There are also movable wall and ceiling sonic baffles to 
tweak the acoustics according to the demands of an artist's line-up. A recent 
Jeff Beck gig found his guitar sound to be lovingly sculpted, with beautifully 
textured distortion, his band members equally audible, the volume levels 
refreshingly high, and his crisp fusion crunch perfectly targeted.

Where to sit or stand: There are four levels, but the ground floor is 
confusingly called Level 3. The hall generally feels quite intimate wherever 
you sit, both visually and sonically, although the highest tier of seats 
ranging along the top balconies can produce a cliff-hanging sensation. For 
visual proximity at rock or pop gigs, the stalls are desirable, of course, but 
for an orchestral experience, it's just as satisfying to be higher up or 
further back, gaining a wider perspective. Most performances have reserved 
seating, so premeditation is essential. The free bar-area gigs are informal, 
mixing seating and standing, usually overlapping with the arrival of the 
evening concert crowd.

Overall: Although approaching its 25th anniversary, the pale wood-and-steel 
look of Symphony Hall's interior hasn't really dated, dominated by the massive 
organ which was eventually installed a decade after its opening. This hall 
prioritised its acoustics, designed by New York's Artec Consultants, then 
worked outwards from there, its architecture serving the innate acoustic needs. 
The hall built a reputation on musical equality, although ultimately garnering 
most of its early accolades within the classical sphere. Nowadays, the rock and 
popular music fields contribute equally to the hall's prestige. It's the ideal 
venue to witness some of the globe's most significant artists in a theatre 
environment, managing to maximise the advantages of sonic intimacy, but on a 
necessarily large scale. A significant development over the last few years has 
been to increase the hall's reach to external venues around the city and its 
suburbs, with their in-house Jazzlines team promoting smaller gigs, workshops 
and seminars in arts centres, pubs, clubs, and just a few streets away at the 
CBSO Centre. Symphony Hall is not the place to come for a rugged rock party, 
although stage invasions have been numerous over the years, but amplified acts 
are heard at their best, particularly if they have complex set-ups involving 
expanded line-ups.
Address: Broad Street, Birmingham B1 2EA.
Telephone: 0121 780 3333/0121 345 0600.

Website: thsh.co.uk <http://www.thsh.co.uk>


Public transport: Symphony Hall is very close to Birmingham town centre, 
facing Centenary Square, where the Rep theatre and the Library of Birmingham 
can also be found. It's no more than 10 minutes walk from most central bus 
stops, and around the same distance from the New Street, Snow Hill and Five 
Ways train stations. The Wolverhampton and Black Country metro line also serves 
Snow Hill.

 