
It is one of life’s ironies that hotel rooms don’t often encourage you to 
linger. You sleep and shower there. But laze around? Rarely. At the budget end, 
bedrooms are frequently stark, alienating shells with furniture seemingly 
designed to keep you moving. At luxury level, rooms can feel like pristine 
stage-sets – admirably chic but where do you flop down and put your feet up 
without worrying you might break something?

That the solution to this might be a B&B in York may sound absurd. The old 
image of a claustrophobic B&B, with cramped rooms and tyrannical owners beadily 
watching your every move, is a hard one to shake. The Bloomsbury, thankfully, 
is worlds away from that cliche.

A three-storey Victorian terrace 10 minutes’ walk from York Minster (along a 
road on which WH Auden was born and Guy Fawkes educated), the Bloomsbury was 
taken on, late last year, by Matthew Townsley (son of the previous owners) and 
his partner Paul Johnson. Their welcome is warm and chatty and, if you need 
insight, they are experts on York’s attractions. Otherwise, they maintain a 
discrete – and discreet – presence. The house is calm and quiet of an evening. 
There is little road noise, no blaring TVs and a conspicuous lack of the 
clanking pipes and slamming doors that tend to disturb your sleep in larger 
properties.

The beautifully lit hallway is dressed with interesting antique pieces, but 
the eight bedrooms won’t win any design awards. They are a (not unpleasant) 
mishmash of furnishing styles and unfashionable textured wall coverings, which 
Matthew and Paul are gradually modernising (splashes of designer wallpaper and 
contemporary art; Freesia is one of the newer rooms). That homely style and the 
thorough heating, however, give the Bloomsbury an unusually cosy feel and there 
is no stinting on detail (iPod docks, safes, mist-free mirrors, UK-made Ebony 
toiletries). The rooms are well-maintained, too. My brass and enamelled iron 
bed is no rickety bone-shaker. The mattress is thick and firm. That these 
rooms, in pricy York, cost £80 or £90 a night further aid a restful night.

This does sound a bit Alan Bennett, but sitting in my room, Wisteria, in a 
(yes, granny-ish) armchair, with the Guardian, a pot of Yorkshire tea and a 
slice of Paul’s excellent lemon drizzle cake to hand, I was, for once, 
reluctant to go out. But York was calling.

Despite its popularity – with endless dawdling tourists – York always feels 
magical. Way beyond the Minster and the Shambles, beyond the city walls even, 
it is a 360-degree architectural marvel, a riot of medieval and Georgian design 
whose every ginnel and gate reveals creeper-clad courtyards and buildings 
redolent with history.

It is also known for its pubs. I made a beeline to a newish one, Walmgate Ale 
House <http://www.walmgateale.co.uk/ale-house/>. A spin-off from classy 
restaurant Melton’s, this was, in the 17th century, a workshop producing nooses 
for York’s hangman (hence the ropes looped over beams). Now it focuses on 
Yorkshire cask ales (from £3.60 a pint), homemade pub snacks (good scotch eggs) 
and bar meals.

Walmgate’s burger – washed down with a pint of Mardy Merchant, a zesty session 
pale from Ainsty Ales – was a curious beast. Served in a toasted brioche with 
creditable skin-on chips, it was less a patty than a clod of mince, so loosely 
packed it fell out of the sides as I ate. Was it a clumsy attempt at a 
“smashed” burger? Who knows. The flavour was OK; the mushy consistency was not.

Thankfully, the Bloomsbury’s breakfast shone. There are homemade preserves and 
fruits, and the full English is distinguished by serious bacon and sausages 
from nearby butcher Neary’s. The breakfast room is defiantly old-fashioned 
(check the cream and maroon table linens) but as I sat at one of its generously 
spaced tables, looking out into the courtyard garden and listening to 1950s 
vocal jazz, it felt, like the Bloomsbury itself, a soothing space. If they did 
evening meals, you would never leave.

• Accommodation was provided by The Bloomsbury (doubles from £80 B&B, 01904 
634031,thebloomsburyguesthouse.com <http://www.thebloomsburyguesthouse.com/>). 
Travel between Manchester and York was provided by TransPennineExpress (
tpexpress.co.uk <https://www.tpexpress.co.uk/>), advance singles £12.50

Ask a local
Josh Overington chef-owner, Le Cochon Aveugle  <http://lecochonaveugle.uk/>
restaurant
 The Phoenix Inn 
• Eat 
Chef Neil Bentinck’s Skosh <http://www.skoshyork.co.uk/> is fresh and great 
fun. Its small plates menu is very creative and it’s a great addition to the 
York scene.

• Drink
The best places in York are the small locals’ pubs. The Phoenix Inn 
<https://www.facebook.com/ThePhoenixInn/> is a personal favourite. There’s no 
jukebox, TV or pool table, just great local ales, an open fire and regular live 
jazz. For a more sophisticated night out,Sotano  <http://sotano.co.uk/>cocktail 
bar is York’s best.

• Shopping
The Hairy Fig  <http://www.thehairyfig.co.uk/>deli on Fossgate does a grand 
selection of artisan products. The Imaginarium 
<https://yorkshiresoap.co.uk/imaginarium> is fantastic for gifts, with many 
weird, wonderful items.

• Walk
The best way to get a feel for York is to walk the walls. It takes two hours 
and the views are amazing. Or take a stroll along the river: to the Millennium 
Bridge and back throughRowntree Park is lovely.
 