
Capacity: 300 standing (the Cluny) or 180 part-seated (Cluny 2).

Who plays there: A mix of well-known and unknown, folk and rock, locals stars, 
upcoming bands and a few old lags on the way back down. Forthcoming shows 
include Hookworms, Gravenhurst, J Mascis, 1971 Dutch prog legends Focus and 
Whitley Bay’s trusty new wave of British heavy metal, Tygers of Pan Tang.


Cloakroom: No.

Admission: £5-£20.

Bar: The Cluny’s labyrinthine structure means that drinking and watching the 
band don’t always go hand in hand, although there is a small bar (a window 
selling drinks, really) in the larger Cluny 1. Gigs at Cluny 2 require 
struggling up two flights of stairs to a bottle bar if you get thirsty. 
However, there is an excellent large bar with an array of affordable real ales 
elsewhere in the building.

Food: The Cluny kitchen is almost as famous as the venue, and serves from noon 
until 9pm, including Sunday lunches and plenty of veggie options. When 
reviewing gigs at the Cluny, I look forward to the mostly homemade, reasonably 
priced grub (especially the pie of the day) as well as the music.

Toilets: Yes, all perfectly clean and functional. 


Wheelchair access: Access from outside needs assistance thanks to the heavy 
doors and lack of level access, but there is level access inside the venue, a 
disabled-only toilet and lift to avoid the stairs.Plan your visit here 
<http://www.disabledgo.com/access-guide/newcastle-city-council/cluny-2-2>. 

Sound: Usually excellent in Cluny 2. The larger room is L-shaped with the 
stage bit of the L lower and down a few stairs, so you need to be in that 
section for the best audio experience.

Where to stand: See above. If the main Cluny is really busy, it can be a 
painif you’re in the bar area of the L and have to keep craning your neck or 
edging down the stairs to see the stage. The Cluny 2 is a small amphitheatre, 
with a standing area and rising seats.

Overall: A characterful mix of old and new, slick and rough and ready, the 
Cluny offers a very different experience to city-centre venues. From the 
posters on the walls to Sid the doorman, it’s a homely place where music, 
drinking and food feel important. Artists also respond to the feeling that the 
Cluny is a special place: I’ve seen some really memorable performances here 
from everyone from Daniel Johnston to Peace. My favourite of the dozens of gigs 
I’ve seen there, though, is probably stillTitus Andronicus in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/24/titus-andronicus-review>, when 
the band broke the curfew and crowd and musicians ended up together as one 
indistinguishable, raucous mass of frenetic dancing, noise and hair.


Address: 36 Lime Street, Ouseburn, Newcastle upon Tyne.

Telephone: 0191-230 4474.

Website: thecluny.com <http://cluny.com/>

Public transport: It’s a mile and a half outside the city centre and somewhat 
off the beaten track. However, bus services 12, 22, 39, 40, 62 & 63 stop nearby 
and the Q2 Quaylink bus also now serves the area, while Byker and Manors metro 
stations are both within walking distance.
 