
Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> often deal with risk 
by preparing a register of all the things that could go wrong. But a long list, 
ranked for probability and impact, does not necessarily mean that you are 
managing risk.

A better approach is to start by having a conversation among trustees and 
senior managers about what the risk policy of your charity ought to be. This is 
about setting the tone from the top. But it is not about avoiding or minimising 
all risk: a charity’s risk policy needs to state where the charity is prepared 
to take risks as well.

A simple risk policy for a hypothetical children’s charity might state: “ABC 
Charity is committed to improving life outcomes for children. The charity is 
completely intolerant of all risks to children and young people. But to fulfil 
the charity’s objectives, it has to raise funds and will therefore accept some 
risk in undertaking new fundraising activities.”

Social media essentials for boards and trustees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jul/04/social-media-essentials-charity-boards-trustees>
Setting the initial framework allows the board to see the risk register in a 
context. The trustees of ABC Charity might question whether enough risk is 
being taken in fundraising. This changes the tone of the conversation at board 
level, which is too often focused on avoiding risk.

Board members are also much more likely to engage with high-level analysis of 
the strategic risks if they are small in number. This approach does away with 
number-based ranking and relies instead on descriptions of the risks and 
regular monitoring. It can be helpful to think in terms of the big five risks:

Impact 

ABC Charity runs a number of programmes to improve children’s lives. While it 
believes that the programmes are well run and are well received, it needs 
evidence of outcomes. Unless the charity is able to demonstrate impact, it will 
not be achieving its objects and is unlikely to receive future funding.

Reputation 

A charity’s reputation is everything, but it can be a slippery concept. Boards 
and senior managers need to understand how reputation weaves through everything 
a charity does. Inadvertently, you could be giving out contradictory messages 
that jeopardise your reputation. In fundraising, for example, you might adopt 
an ethical fundraising policy, but then give the fundraising team aggressive 
targets; which will matter most to the team?

Compliance

While not a high-level strategic issue, boards do need assurance that this is 
being dealt with properly. Compliance is not simply a box-ticking exercise. For 
ABC Charity, the inspection of a children’s nursery school by Ofsted will be 
crucial to its reputation and will help the board understand whether quality 
standards are being maintained, providing assurance that the operational team 
is delivering planned services.

What the sugar, horsemeat and doping scandals can teach charities about PR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/03/sugar-horsemeat-doping-scandals-teach-charities-pr>
Financial sustainability 

This relies heavily on other strategic risk areas. A charity that is failing 
to demonstrate impact may find it difficult to source funding, for example. And 
non-compliance may damage reputation and jeopardises funding. But financial 
sustainability also has other aspects: does the charity have a viable business 
model, or can funders see the value to them in what the charity does and are 
they prepared to continue paying for it?

If a charity delivers fantastic services, but the costs are so high that no 
one is prepared to pay the price, then it is not viable. And with scaling down, 
some charities are finding that their management and overhead costs are now too 
high in proportion to their size. So financial sustainability risks are not 
simply about future funding, but also about the structure of the charity’s 
finances.

Specific risk 

Finally, the board needs to consider whether there is a risk area that is 
specific to the charity. This may well link back to the risk policy and amplify 
a particular area of concern that needs to be managed well. The charity may be 
part of a federation, for example, with risks arising from the actions of 
others who share your name. Or the charity may be a membership organisation, 
with risks that the members and management team fall out of step and conflict 
ensues.

These are the big picture issues often missed off a conventional risk 
register, because the process tends to focus on the detailed listing of risks 
in various categories. To manage risk well, your charity’s board needs to 
engage in regular discussions with senior managers about the big five.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 