
Distance 85 miles (136km)
Classification Easy–moderate (unless you're doing it all at once) 
Start Bath, Beckford Road 
Finish Reading railway station
Duration 2-3 days
Route NCN route 4
Map Severn and Thames cycle map <http://www.bit.ly/JMhS9o>, Thames Valley 
Cycle map <http://www.bit.ly/IgTNId>, OS Explorer 154–9, OS Landranger 17–5


Route notes

The Kennet and Avon canal is Britain's most popular long-distance waterside 
cycle route. It links the river Avon near Bath to the river Thames at Reading 
and features imposing classical-style bridges, aqueducts, tunnels and buildings.

The route can easily be broken up into three sections. The first is Bath to 
Devizes; from there to Newbury you will leave the towpath and follow quiet 
country lanes through the Vale of Pewsey.

The final stage from Newbury is on an upgraded path through the Berkshire 
countryside and into the centre of Reading. You will pass through the north 
Wessex Downs and the southern tip of the Cotswolds, both areas of outstanding 
natural beauty. To extend the route, begin at Bristol and cycle the 16-mile 
Bristol and Bath path first.

Terrain and gradients

Canal towpath (compacted stone and some earth/grass) and quiet country roads 
(tarmac).

How to get there/away

Well served by the railway, with major stations along the route, from Bath Spa 
to Reading.

What to see

The Georgian city of Bath has tremendous Roman heritage. As you set off from 
there on the first section, there are two stunning aqueducts at Dundas and 
Avoncliff. Devizes is a small market town, but boasts nearly 500 listed 
buildings and a castle – and perhaps the most impressive flight of locks in the 
country at Caen Hill, with 16 situated in a straight line. Not far off the 
route here, near Marlborough, is Avebury stone circle.

If you like your ale, visit the nearby Wadworth brewery for a tour. The Kennet 
and Avon Canal Museum at Devizes Wharf is worth a look too. The Nature 
Discovery Centre at Thatcham is a tranquil RSPB nature reserve.

Watering holes

British Waterways has a new cafe at Caen Hill Locks in Devizes, and the Kennet 
and Avon canal shop has a tearoom too. There is also a picnic area (and 
tearoom at Thatcham's Nature Discovery Centre.

For accommodation, try Grove Lodge <http://www.grovelodgebath.co.uk> at Bath or
Southdown B&B <http://www.bit.ly/I5Aukb> in Devizes .
 