
Looking back at it now, The Carhullan Army seems even more timely, more urgent 
than when it wasfirst published 10 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/30/news.johnllewellynrhysprize>. 
The casual brutality of Sarah Hall’s faceless Authority, the grey despair of 
the browbeaten citizens seemed reassuringly remote in 2007. But in the world of 
Brexit and Donald Trump, the novel’s bleak near-future setting seems 
dangerously close.

Life after “the collapse” is hemmed in by restrictions and regulations, with 
curfew at home and conflict abroad. Confined to the town where they first 
registered, billeted two or three to a room in run-down terraces, people 
stumble through meaningless factory jobs and numb themselves with cheap 
narcotics. Food and power are rationed, the 10-year recovery plan is becoming a 
hopeless myth. The state has seized control of women’s bodies as well, with 
contraception compulsory and the right to bear children assigned via lottery. 
“This was not England, everyone said. This was some nightmarish version that we 
would wake from soon.”

The novel opens as the nameless narrator finds the strength to rouse herself, 
striking out on foot for the Cumbrian hills, where a group of women is rumoured 
to be living outside the Authority’s control. As she trudges up the fells in 
the rain, Hall offers a portrait of the landscape of her birth. But it’s a 
landscape emptied of purpose, a landscape gone wrong:

There were brambles everywhere, but the fruit looked black and tiny, as if it 
had ripened too soon and too small and then shrivelled away. Rhododendron was 
slowly taking over the lower fields. And there was a plant I didn’t recognise, 
a thick green creeper that had wound its way up the telephone poles and round 
the trunks of trees.

A mixture of exhaustion and elation fills the narrator as she climbs the brant 
slopes towards Carhullan farm, but the welcome she receives is sterner than she 
had fondly imagined. She emerges from a brutal spell in solitary confinement to 
find a kind of Eden – women working together to carve a rugged life out of the 
harsh surroundings. There is joy in the simple food and hard labour, the cold 
showers and wild spaces. But as the charismatic, mercurial leader Jackie Nixon 
takes the narrator under her wing, it becomes clear this refuge is more fragile 
than it seems. Like every earthly paradise, Carhullan cannot last.

There’s more sex in The Carhullan Army than I had remembered – a raw, painful 
bout the narrator’s husband cajoles her into after the harrowing insertion of 
her legally mandated contraceptive coil; a tender encounter with one of the 
women in her work unit. But this intimate concern with the physical is of a 
piece with the sensual collection of short stories Hall published in 2011,The 
Beautiful Indifference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/24/beautiful-indifference-sarah-hall-review>
. From the sore shoulders and blistered feet of her first escape to the lean 
limbs and shaven head of her new calling, the narrator’s journey from hopeful 
traveller to freedom fighter is written on her body.

There’s also a little more hope. Presented as transcripts of a female 
prisoner’s statement recovered from a Lancaster jail, disaster looms over the 
novel from the start. But as the story shifts from anxious flight to defiant 
confrontation and the narrative fractures into brief vignettes of the 
inevitable fall, hints of a future forged from stubborn resistance can be 
glimpsed through the gaps. For 2017, perhaps that’s enough.
 