
There are many reasons to love The Code of the Woosters by PG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>. It’s a novel by one of the 
finest exponents of the English language at the very top of his game. It’s one 
of Bertie Wooster’s funniest, silliest and most perfectly rendered adventures. 
It’s a book where perfect quotes fly off the page as frequently as the 
incomparable Aunt Dahlia smashes up mantelpiece ornaments. In fact, before I 
hit you with the serious political material, let’s just enjoy a few:

“I could see that, if not actually disgruntled, he was far from being 
gruntled.”

“It’s an extraordinary thing – every time I see you, you appear to be 
recovering from some debauch. Don’t you ever stop drinking? How about when you 
are asleep?”

“She laughed – a bit louder than I could have wished in my frail state of 
health, but then she is always a woman who tends to bring plaster falling from 
the ceiling when amused.”

The book would be worth treasuring for such writing alone. But here in 2016, 
it seems more vital than ever. Or at least more vital than it has done since 
round about 1945. Because this is the book in which Bertie Wooster teaches us 
one of the best and most effective ways of beating fascists: you stand up to 
them and you point out exactly how ridiculous they are.

The crucial scene comes just over halfway through, after Bertie and his friend 
Gussie Fink-Nottle have endured 100 or so pages of intolerable bullying from 
the would-be fascist dictator Roderick Spode.

Spode is a man whom Wooster describes as appearing “as if Nature had intended 
to make a gorilla, and had changed its mind at the last moment”.

Spode, who is clearly based on Oswald Mosley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oswald_Mosley>, is the leader of a militaristic 
fascist group called the Blackshorts (shorts because all the shirt colours had 
already been taken) and is inordinately fond of throwing his considerable 
weight around:

“Here he laid a hand on my shoulder, and I can’t remember when I have 
experienced anything more unpleasant. Apart from what Jeeves would have called 
the symbolism of the action, he had a grip like the bite of a horse.”

Such menacing is brought to an end thanks to a typically clever intervention 
from Jeeves and in one of the most satisfying speeches in the western canon, 
when Bertie declares:

“The trouble with you, Spode, is that just because you have succeeded in 
inducing a handful of half-wits to disfigure the London scene by going about in 
black shorts, you think you’re someone. You hear them shouting ‘Heil, Spode!’ 
and you imagine it is the Voice of the People. That is where you make your 
bloomer. What the Voice of the People is saying is: ‘Look at that frightful ass 
Spode swanking about in footer bags! Did you ever in your puff see such a 
perfect perisher?’”

Confronted with evil, Wodehouse made a ghastly error | Robert McCrum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/28/wodehouse-nazis-story-persists>
And isn’t it beautiful to see fascists being treated with exactly the contempt 
they deserve? This isn’t the time or the place to go into the tragedy of
Wodehouse’s war record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/28/wodehouse-nazis-story-persists>
, but let’s at least grant that he showed a good way forward against home-grown 
fascists and Hitler alike: you send them up as the rotters they are.

One of the many tragedies of our times is that we have taken so many perfect 
perishers so seriously instead of laughing them off the stage. As well as a 
moral failure, the ascendency of cruel rightwing demagogues is a sense of 
humour failure. Our problem isn’t just post-truth, it’s post-irony. The pity is 
that people can’t see that Nigel Farage is a spivvy egg-burp despotmanqué. That 
Putin is so clearly overcompensating. That Donald Trump is Donald Trump. That 
the people calling themselves the alt-right are twerps. That these are all 
mirthless, absurd nincompoops.

Perhaps our bigger problem is that all laughter dries in the throat. That 
meanness and cruelty so often accompany an inability to understand comedy. That 
innocent people are being attacked on our streets and our politicians have been 
threatened and murdered. That perfect perishers are once again disfiguring the 
London scene.

But the Code of the Woosters has a message for us here, too. It’s fortifying 
and inspiring that Bertie stands up to Spode and so thoroughly trounces him. 
Just as important is the fact that Spode has so outraged Bertie’s fundamental 
sense of decency. He has crossed a line that has to be held.

Under normal circumstances, people like the stately-home hopping Bertie 
Wooster may not be the most natural political allies for most Guardianistas. 
But we should be proud to stand alongside them when it comes to the really 
important stuff. We could argue all day about the shades of grey, but when the 
question is as black and white as the fight against fascism, I would be mighty 
glad to link arms with someone with such a strong sense of fair play, such 
generous kindness, and so much warm feeling for his fellow humans. What unites 
us, after all, is far greater than what divides us.

 * The Code of the Woosters is published by Arrow, priced £8.99. It is 
available from the Guardian bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/code-of-the-woosters-315062.html>.  