
Capacity: 12,000 seated or up to 13,000 standing


Who plays there: The Hydro has been built to attract the biggest names in live 
music across the genres – Bruno Mars, Fleetwood Mac and Arctic Monkeys appeared 
there within the first few months of the venue opening in September 2013, and 
Beyoncé, Miley Cyrus and the Eagles have been on the 2014 schedule, alongside 
such other assorted events as the MTV Europe music awards and Commonwealth 
Games sports. It’s a dynamic space, and the potential for screening off areas 
of seating allow the space to be tailored for slightly smaller artists, too, 
such as Queens of the Stone Age and Vampire Weekend, with adjusted capacities 
of 5,000, 7,000 or 9,000.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: Anything from £20 for smaller shows up to £75 for the big names.

Bar: Heineken is one of the Hydro’s major sponsorship partners, so its drinks 
stock all the bars. Fosters is the principal draft lager (there are other 
bottled beers such as Tiger, Sol, Deuchars IPA and Birra Moretti in the fridges 
sometimes ,too), while Bulmers is the cider. A pint will set you back about big 
venue prices – up to a fiver. There are bars on every level and they’re 
well-staffed, so queues usually aren’t too bad.

Food: Lots of unusually decent takeaway options – fish and chips and other 
fried seafood at RockSalt, wok-fried Asian dishes at Hot Wok, burgers and fries 
and the like from the Big Grill and pizza at PizzaLove. To coincide with the 
Hydro’s arrival, the SECC across the way opened a bar-kitchen restaurant called 
Clyde Built in its foyer, which isn’t a bad option for a pre-gig sit-down meal 
(advance booking essential). Kettle Chips are another major sponsor of the 
Hydro, and they sell them all over the place – good news if you like crisps.

Toilets: Lots, on every level.

Wheelchair access: Yes, with lifts to all but the top levels of the venue. 
Accessible seating is available at the front of the level 0 retractable 
seating, or on level2. Those wishing to buy accessible tickets should call 0844 
395 4000 or visit the box office in person.

Sound: About as good as you could hope for such an enormous space. The Hydro 
has made a lot of noise about how it’s optimised for sight and sound like no 
other venue of its size, and largely lives up to the bill. Volume levels are 
powerful without being overbearing. The sound clarity is better in the seated 
areas than the standing, however, and smaller artists can sound muddy when 
large areas of seating are empty and closed off. But hey, it’s an arena, what 
did you expect?

Where to stand: The bulk of capacity is seated – the Greek/Roman 
amphitheatre-style sloping elliptical shape means sightlines are good from 
almost every angle; the view naturally diminishes the further you are up in the 
heavens, but big screens tend to that. Standing-wise, it’s all much of a 
muchness – though the positioning of the stage can sometimes obscure views from 
the flanks. Be aware that if you try standing in the seated areas during shows, 
officious stewards may insist that you sit down.

Overall: Glasgow and Scotland’s newest and largest major music venue is 
projected to become one of the busiest in the world within a few years, and is 
by all accounts already exceeding expectations in the financial stakes. But is 
its rise and rise actually good news for music fans? On balance, yes. 
Certainly, the Hydro is a welcome replacement for the dismal SECC Hall 4. If 
seeing bands in arenas is to continue becoming more and more so part and parcel 
of a music business increasingly geared towards the live sphere, it’s good to 
know Glasgow has a custom-built facility that makes the best of this reality – 
better sight and sound, better seating and an altogether more comfortable and 
satisfying experience all round. The Hydro is already bringing in all kinds of 
top-tier touring artists that Glasgow might otherwise have missed out on, which 
you have to agree is good for the local economy, even if watching Beyoncé from 
up near the rafters while stuffing your face with Foster’s and Kettle Chips 
doesn’t sound like your idea of a good night out.

Address: Exhibition Way, Glasgow, G3 8YW


Telephone: 0141 248 3000

Website: thehydro.com <http://thehydro.com>

Public transport: Five minutes’ walk from Exhibition Centre train station. The 
1, 1A, 1B, 1C and 1E buses all stop nearby.
 