
Alan Thomas 
<http://www.aba.org.uk/About-the-ABA/More-About-the-ABA/Past-Presidents/ABA-Past-Presidents-1950-1960/Alan-G-Thomas>
, one of the great English booksellers, once said that “bookselling was perhaps 
the last profession where a man could control his destiny”. After nearly 50 
years at the job, I find this statement absolutely true.


Booksellers are a fascinating and sometimes eccentric lot of individuals, most 
of whom have fallen into the trade from an extremely wide variety of 
backgrounds: some from teaching at the highest levels of academia, others from 
peddling books at flea markets.

My start came in the mid-1960s, shortly after I returned to Canada from an 
adventurous decade hitchhiking through Europe. While I couldn’t find work 
applying the bookbinding skills I learned in Spain, the craft did introduce me 
to Toronto’s used and rare bookselling community. Seeing how interesting their 
trade was, I undertook an apprenticeship before founding my own store, David 
Mason Books, in 1967. A lifetime of reading turned out to be the perfect 
background for the job.


Being a bookseller has allowed me to own books – at least temporarily – that 
only the rich can afford. I once held theKelmscott Chaucer 
<http://www.bl.uk/collection-items/the-kelmscott-chaucer> (valued at around 
$100,000), and a presentation copy of Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, which 
today might bring $250,000 in the market. In retrospect, though, these figures 
matter far less than the interactions I’ve had with buyers, sellers, and 
collectors from around the world, most of whom are learned and charming 
characters.

Despite decades immersed in the used and rare book trade, I never imagined 
writing a book of my own. This changed, however, when my friend and editor,John 
Metcalf <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Metcalf_%28writer%29>, suggested I 
write a memoir on my career. I was sceptical but flattered, especially since he 
offered to edit the work. I didn’t believe I could fill a book, but in the end 
I would have filled two if it weren’t for Metcalf. Working with him was an 
amazing experience.

Since the first edition of The Pope’s Bookbinder 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/arts/books/book-reviews/book-review-the-popes-bookbinder-by-david-mason>
 was published in 2013, I had a profound change of view in regards to an 
incident I had left out of the original: the story of the great Hemingway 
Heist, which took place at my store in 1993.

The Heist involved the theft of books by Hemingway, plus letters between him, 
F Scott Fitzgerald, and the Canadian writerMorley Callaghan 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Morley-Callaghan>, all relating to the 
famous boxing match between Hemingway and Callaghan, with Fitzgerald as the 
timekeeper.The match took place in Paris during the summer of 1929 
<http://fightland.vice.com/blog/hemingway-vs-callaghan-the-greatest-literary-boxing-feud-of-all-time>
, and resulted in Callaghan knocking Hemingway down. The subsequent furore 
caused a huge literary scandal and fractured the friendships of the three 
writers.

After receiving the books and letters, I locked them in a store safe. When I 
opened my shop the next day, I was shocked to discover the safe had been 
cracked. Except for the letters, very little else of value was taken; it seems 
clear the thieves were after those artefacts specifically. The case grew 
stranger when a street criminal was arrested with one of the stolen postcards 
from the lot in his possession. Soon after confessing that he was part of the 
crew who robbed the store, he was found dead in his cell – a puzzling suicide. 
Upon his death, the case went cold.

The original price I asked for the archive of books and letters was $250,000 
Canadian dollars (£146,000); they could easily realise $1m (£590,000) in 
today’s market. But what continues to haunt me is not their monetary value, but 
their historical value. After reading both Norman Mailer’s early pieces on 
Hemingway and the brilliant analysis of Hemingway’s psychology in Paul Johnson’s
Intellectuals 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/03/12/books/the-great-unwashed.html?pagewanted=all>
, I realised that, after 25 years, the theft had passed from being a simple 
(though major) robbery to a blight on the history of two of the most 
significant writers in 20th century American literature.

Unless or until these major artefacts are found, the theft will continue to 
mark one of the most tantalising literary losses of the 20th century, alongside 
an early unfinished draft of TE Lawrence’s Seven Pillars of Wisdom and, back to 
Hemingway, the early manuscripts of his that his first wife misplaced on a 
train.

I purposely omitted relating the story of the theft because, in spite of the 
bizarre details, it had no resolution. Today the stolen items remain missing – 
a tantalising and romantic challenge in antiquarian bookselling. Booksellers, 
who think of themselves as “scouts”, are on a perpetual quest for such literary 
treasures. I continue to hope that someday, some knowledgable seeker will 
happen upon these letters that I – and many passionate scholars – have waited 
25 years to reclaim for the literary record.

Extract

There have been quite a few different versions given of that famous fight 
between Morley Callaghan and Hemingway, most of them composed by Hemingway 
himself, his varied accounts becoming increasingly bizarre over time. I think 
it’s safe to say that the most accurate one is that given in Callaghan’s 
memoir, That Summer in Paris. A close reading of it shows that Callaghan had no 
axe to grind. He was a man singularly lacking in vanity and pretension. I never 
saw any signs in my many conversations with him of any bitterness or spite at 
Hemingway’s grotesque behaviour and manipulations of the truth.


I can picture Morley again saying such things to me in his living room. “He 
couldn’t help doing these things, don’t you know,” he’d say, sadly shaking his 
head.


Morley ended many sentences with that earnest “don’t you know,” or “don’t you 
see.”

And we usually did see. What we also saw was the warmth and generosity of 
spirit of that wonderful old man. I often got the impression that he felt he 
had to excuse and forgive Hemingway out of admiration for his great gifts.


But again we are faced with the importance of these missing letters. It was 
Morley’s sympathy for Mary Hemingway’s feelings which caused him to leave out 
the parts that literary history needs. Which we are now deprived of.

From The Pope’s Bookbinder: A Memoir by David Mason, published by Biblioasis 
<http://www.biblioasis.com> and used by permission of the publisher. All rights 
reserved.
 