
Capacity: 1,300 in ABC; 350 in ABC2.

Who plays there: The former ABC cinema reopened as a music venue in 2005, 
putting on pop acts on their way up, rock acts finding their groove and 
heritage acts who haven’t messed up their comeback. In the past year, the ABC 
has hosted gigs by Haim, Imagine Dragons, the 1975, MKS, the Game, Metronomy 
and Chas & Dave; forthcoming visitors include Clean Bandit and Drive By 
Truckers. One of two Glasgow venues that are part of the nationwide O2 network 
of venues, there’s an ABC gig on practically every night – sometimes even two, 
thanks to the cosier, self-contained ABC2.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: £15-£25

Bar: The ABC proper is served by four bars: the enormous main bar, a smaller 
balcony bar, the tiny Blue Room for O2 customers off to one side and the 
totally separate Polar Bar, named for the polar bears that hung out there in 
the venue’s pre-cinema life as Hengler’s Circus in the early 1900s. A pint of 
Carlsberg will set you back £3.80, and spirits with a dash are about the same. 
The ABC does have a better range of single malt whiskies than most venues 
though. (ABC2 has one small bar.)

Food: Nothing permanent, though last year the ABC experimented with street 
food pop-ups at appropriate gigs – the No Mean City festival of Americana shows 
were certainly enhanced by the smoky aromas coming from a BBQ cart.

Toilets: Large toilets geared toward high turnover, with access tucked behind 
the main bar.

Wheelchair access: Yes. After buying a ticket, call the box office on 0141 332 
2232 to confirm you have done so, and you'll also get a free carer's ticket.

Sound: The ABC is an enormous square box, but one equipped with a PA powerful 
enough to handle both menace and nuance. It can get very loud, though: earplugs 
are recommended. ABC2 is a bit muddier, but in an exciting Cavern Club kind of 
way.

Where to stand: The raised ramps directly in front of the bar provide good 
sightlines, a shelf to put down your drink and quick access for another round, 
but the trade-off is being fairly removed from the action. If proximity is your 
thing, you can usually find some space right in front of the stage even at 
sold-out shows by threading your way past the merch stand.

Overall: The spaciousness of the ABC is a real selling point – sweaty delirium 
is all well and good but you can get all the excitement and communal hysteria 
of a cracking gig without feeling like a damp, crumpled-up dishrag afterwards. 
If the band are a bit dull, you can always gaze up at the largest rotating 
mirrorball in Europe. And unlike its O2 sister venue the Academy – a lonely 
outpost in a desolate part of the south side of Glasgow – you can spill out of 
the ABC and burn that post-gig adrenaline in the pubs, clubs and kebab shops of 
Sauchiehall Street.

Address: 300 Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow, G2 3JA

Telephone: 0141 332 2232

Website: O2abcglasgow.co.uk <http://www.O2abcglasgow.co.uk>

Public transport: The ABC is a short walk from Cowcaddens subway, although 
you’d be as well aiming for Buchanan bus station or Queen Street rail station 
and walking up Sauchiehall Street. As a city centre venue, it's well served by 
multiple bus routes.
 