
Capacity: 100


Who plays there: A tiny, vibrant sweatbox that’s as much a club as a gig 
venue, Sneaky Pete’s takes its name from the American slang for a bottle of 
booze in a brown paper bag, and sells stylish T-shirts advertising the same. It 
regularly hosts artists from the UK and beyond, usually young bands paying 
their touring dues who perhaps fancy a pitstop in Scotland’s most picturesque 
city. A signed-up member ofIndependent Venue Week 
<http://www.independentvenueweek.com>, Sneaky Pete’s staged memorably 
rollicking shows by the Amazing Snakeheads, Eagulls and Ezra Furman in 2014.


Cloakroom: No, but there is a lockbox system.


Admission: £7-£12.


Bar: Nothing on tap, but some bottled beers are on offer for £2 during the 
week, although something a little more high-end like a Sierra Nevada or 
Beavertown will set you back around £4. Recently, punters have apparently been 
tempted by the hip, eye-catching design of cans of Fountain of Youth coconut 
water, though they’re not buying it to take advantage of any claimed health 
benefits, preferring to mix it with vodka or gin.


Food: No.


Toilets: Grungy and small, in keeping with the rest of the venue.


Wheelchair access: Yes.


Sound: Generally pretty good, although it seems to favour loud, scuzzy bands 
where the experience of being pummelled by waves of sonic chaos in a cramped 
space is a large part of the appeal.


Where to stand: Sneaky Pete’s is a one-room venue and so can feel like a bit 
of a squeeze. The bar, perpendicular to the stage, often gets crowded, and is 
the first thing you encounter when you literally step in off the street. But 
there’s usually more space down the front than is immediately obvious. Thread 
your way past the initial logjam and you can often find yourself with a bit 
more elbow room and a better view. The barely raised stage means acts are 
practically within touching distance, although this is obviously not 
recommended.


Overall: Tucked away in the legendary Cowgate, Edinburgh’s dark, dank, 
practically subterranean strip of hostels and stag- and hen-friendly pubs that 
leads to the Grassmarket, Sneaky Pete’s has a chequered history stretching back 
to the 1970s. Over the decades, it’s operated under various names and guises – 
notably as a disco bar and a vodka club – but the current incarnation reclaimed 
the original name six years ago, reinventing itself from a rough-looking dive 
into a hip destination where any scuzziness is intentional. In a city that has 
a disappointing lack of non-classical music venues, Sneaky Pete’s feels 
increasingly vital, staging often raucous shows for a predominantly young, 
in-the-know crowd and helping Edinburgh put up at least a semblance of a fight 
against Glasgow’s long-standing live music dominance.


Address: 73 Cowgate, Edinburgh, EH1 1JW.


Telephone: 0131-225 1757. Tickets: 0844 847 2487. 


Website: sneakypetes.co.uk <http://www.sneakypetes.co.uk>


Public transport: The Cowgate isn’t served by buses but Sneaky Pete’s is only 
10 minutes’ walk due south of Waverley station.

 