
For about half of the 20th century, the English literary tradition was 
arbitrated by a critic whose ideas transformed the intellectual landscape of 
his time, and whose influence lingers still. I write this from personal 
experience: as a student, I was lucky enough to see FR Leavis in action. It’s 
hard now to convey the peculiar fervour and excitement – the frisson – that 
surrounded this Cambridge don with his open white shirt and intense, bird-like 
demeanour, in front of his acolytes and disciples. And it’s perhaps even harder 
to recognise how completely Leavis, and the literary critical consensus 
associated with his name, has been swept aside since his death in 1978.

To understand the hold Leavis had over the minds of students who came of age 
in the 60s and 70s, I want to quote from an interview given toThe Paris Review 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/6286/the-art-of-nonfiction-no-7-adam-phillips>
 by the writer and psychoanalyst, Adam Phillips, in which he describes the 
impact of Leavisite teaching on his adolescence:

“It was contagious and inspiring. My teacher had been taught by FR Leavis at 
Cambridge. Leavis was a literary critic who treated English literature as a 
secular religion, a kind of answer to what he thought was a post-Christian 
society. He had a fanatical assurance about literature… And my teacher at 
school felt something comparably zealous… It was conveyed to us that certain 
books really did matter and that you were involved in some rearguard action for 
the profound human values in these books. This was conveyed very powerfully – 
that the way to learn how to live and to live properly was to read English 
literature – and it worked for me. I was taught close, attentive reading, and 
to ironize the ambitions of grand theory.”

The Man Who Invented Fiction review – what we owe to Cervantes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/23/the-man-who-invented-fiction-miguel-de-cervantes-william-egginton-review>
As zealot-in-chief, FR (Frank Raymond) Leavis, born in Cambridge in 1895, was 
shaped by the non-conformism of an East Anglian upbringing. In his prime, his 
criticism was distinctive for its uncompromising association of literature and 
morality. Having served in the ambulance corps during the first world war, he 
went on to pioneer a new literary critical aesthetic from the early 1930s when, 
as a young don, he founded the quarterly review,Scrutiny. Leavis would edit 
this extraordinarily influential journal from 1932 to 1953. At the same time, 
he published the works that established his reputation,New Bearings in English 
Poetry (1932), Revaluation (1936), the immensely important essays from The 
Common Pursuit (1952) and, before that, perhaps his best-known critical 
statement,The Great Tradition.

In this polemical tour de force, Leavis expounded his belief in an inalienable 
connection between literature and morality, with special reference to the work 
of just five great novelists, his chosen representatives of “the great 
tradition” – Jane Austen, George Eliot, Henry James, Joseph Conrad and DH 
Lawrence.

Not everyone accepted the moral ferocity of Leavis’s judgement. To some in the 
academic critical establishment, Leavis was anathema. He, however, never 
wavered in his opposition to what he saw as the frivolous and dilettante ways 
of Bloomsbury, always insisting that “form” was the novelist’s first 
responsibility, and that novels that expressed an indifference to “form” would 
always be less important.

In the broader evaluation of the English literary tradition, Leavis never took 
prisoners. He pronounced Milton as “negligible”, dismissed “the Romantics”, and 
believed that, after John Donne, there is “no poet we need bother about except 
Hopkins and Eliot”.

Leavis offered the serious reader of fiction a moment of exemplary clarity – 
something that's missing today

And when it came to English fiction, Leavis believed that “some challenging 
discriminations are very much called for”. Nevertheless, he claimed it would be 
a misrepresentation of his views to suggest that, apart from Austen, Eliot, 
James and Conrad, “there are no novelists in English worth reading”.

The knockabout opening chapter of The Great Tradition is still an 
entertaining, sometimes shocking, read:

“Fielding hasn’t the kind of classical distinction we are invited to credit 
him with. He is important not because he leads to Mr JB Priestley but because 
he leads to Jane Austen, to appreciate whose distinction is to feel that life 
isn’t long enough to permit of one’s giving much time to Fielding or any to Mr 
Priestley.”

Having, so to speak, cleared his throat, Leavis goes on to swat Laurence 
Sterne as “irresponsible, nasty and trifling”, exclude Dickens (finally 
reprieved in a later chapter onHard Times), declare Wuthering Heights to be “a 
kind of sport”, belatedly admit DH Lawrence (“the great genius of our time”) to 
his pantheon, and set the scene for the majestic essays (on Eliot, James and 
Conrad) that follow. These giants, says Leavis, “are distinguished by a vital 
capacity for experience, a kind of reverent openness before life, and a marked 
moral intensity”.

The impact of Leavis on the literary imaginations of some late 20th century 
writers is possibly exemplified by the response of his former student, the Man 
Booker prizewinning novelist Howard Jacobson, who confesses, in a
self-lacerating account 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/8466388/Howard-Jacobson-on-being-taught-by-FRLeavis.html>
 of his tutorials with Leavis, the agony he suffered at the feet of the master 
critic.

“The work that strained my capacity for reverence most,” writes Jacobson, “was 
The Great Tradition, especially the opening essay with its footnote dismissive 
of Laurence Sterne. Not because I admireTristram Shandy; although I am what is 
sometimes called a comic novelist I never did findTristram Shandy anything but 
as ‘trifling’ as Leavis found it, ditto the tradition of laborious jocosity it 
continues to spawn. But the other adjectives employed in Leavis’s dismissal – 
‘irresponsible’ and ‘nasty’ – made me uncomfortable. ‘Irresponsible’ can point 
to virtues (think of Henry James’s praise for ‘irresponsible plasticity’) no 
less than vices. And ‘nasty’ is not a convincing critical term, just as 
‘pornographer’ was never a convincing description of Kingsley Amis.”

Jacobson goes on: “That challenge had not been thrown when I first read The 
Great Tradition, but there was a less affronting version of it, cited 
approvingly by Leavis himself, in George Eliot’s lament for Casaubon. How 
terrible to ‘be what we call highly taught and yet not to enjoy: to be present 
at this great spectacle of life… but always to be scholarly and uninspired, 
ambitious and timid, scrupulous and dim-sighted’.

“I didn’t think there was anything there that should have given Leavis pause 
about himself. Were not timid scholarship and dim-sighted scrupulosity 
precisely the shortcomings he found in the Cambridge of which, in the early 
days, he was the scourge? But what about us, Johnny-come-latelies to the wars 
he’d fought in? ‘That great spectacle of life’, which it is Casaubon’s tragedy 
to miss out on: how possessed of it were we? And in the final count, how 
possessed of it was Leavis himself when again he shrank from the “nastiness” he 
found inThe Golden Bowl, a novel which, he said, outraged our ‘moral sense’?

“The question has sometimes been asked of me whether I didn’t find Leavis’s 
teaching, and the whole atmosphere in which we were taught, discouraging – I 
hesitate to say of creativity, but I can at least say of productivity. I came 
late to the writing of novels, though it was the only thing I had ever wanted 
to do. But I don’t hold Leavis responsible for that. To be intimidated by the 
literature you have been taught to love is no bad thing: the proof of a good 
education is not the unembarrassed production of tosh.”

There are, in conclusion, many things to be said against Leavis: he exercised 
a kind of cultural tyranny; half his nominations for his “great tradition” 
weren’t English; he was a better critic of poetry than fiction, and so on. 
That’s all true, no doubt. But in the end, we must concede that he offered, to 
the serious reader of fiction, a moment of exemplary clarity – something that’s 
missing today. As Jacobson puts it, so well, at the end of his appreciation, 
“Leavis told a particular story about English literature. It’s not the only 
one. But we owe it to him to show that, so far, nobody has told a better one, 
or told it with a braver conviction of why it matters to tell it at all.”

A signature sentence

“What I think and judge I have stated as responsibly and clearly as I can; 
Jane Austen, George Eliot, Henry James, Conrad, and DH Lawrence: the great 
tradition of the English novel is there.”

Three to Compare

QDLeavis: Fiction and the Reading Public (1932)

Raymond Williams: Culture & Society (1958)

Lionel Trilling: Sincerity and Authenticity(1972)
 