
A Book of Mediterranean Food, written and published in an age of postwar 
rationing, when food coupons were still in force and the national diet was 
dominated by bread and gristle rissoles, dehydrated onions and carrots, and 
toad in the hole made with corned beef, was a cri de coeur by a sensual British 
woman on behalf of those places where wild garlic is intrinsic to every recipe 
and where, in the words ofMarcel Boulestin <http://boulestin.com/about/>, 
“peace and happiness reign”.

Mediterranean Food is one woman’s response to the new challenges of peacetime, 
a macedoine of elegy, joie de vivre, requiem and manifesto. Elizabeth David, 
returning to Britain after the war, became a food writer onHarper’s Bazaar 
initially to make money, to remind herself of the sunnier world she had left 
behind – she had spent much of the war in the Mediterranean – and finally to 
mount a one-woman challenge to the bleakness of austerity Britain.

From the first pages of Mediterranean Food, however, it was not merely the 
exotic cuisine of those alluring southern climes that Elizabeth David was 
celebrating, but the English language itself. Mrs David (as she was known) 
never over-egged her prose, but her recipes were rich with loving evocations of 
rare and spicy ingredients. “There are,” she writes, “endless varieties of 
currants and raisins, figs from Smyrna on long strings, dates, almonds, 
pistachios and pine kernel nuts, dried melon seeds and sheets of apricot paste 
which is dissolved in water to make a cooling drink.”

Mediterranean Food, which was swiftly followed, in the same style, by French 
Country Cooking (1951), Italian Food (1954) and Summer Cooking (1955), was a 
surreptitiously literary experience, replete with anecdotes about Gertrude 
Stein’s cook, and long quotations from the likes ofOsbert Sitwell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osbert_Sitwell>, DH Lawrence, Henry James, and 
her friendsNorman Douglas <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Douglas> and 
Lawrence Durrell. As well as indulging the reader in some discrete treasures of 
English prose, David wanted her readers to escape from “the frustration of 
buying the weekly rations” and “to read about real food cooked with wine and 
oil, eggs and butter and cream, and dishes richly flavoured with onions, 
garlic, herbs and brightly coloured southern vegetables”. This, she conceded, 
might be “over-picturesque for every day; but then who wants to eat the same 
food every day?”

In 1950, this was a call to arms, fuelled by her indignation at the horrors of 
the national diet. With mouthwatering recipes for moules marinières and
kokkoretsi, bocconcini, bouillabaisse and bourride, lièvre à la royale, paella 
Valenciana andboeuf en daube, she challenged her readers to break out of the 
Home Front straitjacket and sally forth into Soho. In words that seem as quaint 
as Beatrix Potter’s, she wrote, “Those who make an occasional marketing 
expedition to the region of Tottenham Court Road can buy Greek cheese and 
Calamata olives, Tahina paste from the Middle East, little birds preserved in 
oil from Cyprus, stuffed vine leaves from Turkey, Spanish sausages, Egyptian 
brown beans, even occasionally Neapolitan Mozzarella cheese, and honey from 
Mount Hymettus.”

Britain had just won the war, and was entering the twilight of Empire. In all 
her books, starting withMediterranean Food, Elizabeth David would invite her 
readers to suck the marrow of British rule before it was too late, to explore 
the world through their stoves and pantries, and turn their backs on kitchen 
insularity.

Mrs David was never an ordinary cookery writer. Overnight, it seems, she 
became a household name, a liberator, a kitchen goddess, and a provocation. “I 
remember whenA Book of Mediterranean Food came out,” writes Jane Grigson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/15/jane-grigson-her-life-and-legacy>
, another fine cookery writer, looking back. “Basil then was no more than the 
name of bachelor uncles, courgette was printed in italics as an alien word, and 
few of us knew how to eat spaghetti or pick a globe artichoke to pieces.” In a 
world where tiny bottles of olive oil could only be bought in Boots the chemist 
(for aural hygiene), where BBC television could famously conduct anApril Fool’s 
day report on the “spaghetti harvest” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tVo_wkxH9dU>, and where food meant “marge, 
evaporated milk and Woolton Pie”, Mrs David burst in “like sunshine”.

Classic Elizabeth David recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/08/classic-elizabeth-david-recipes>
From the outset, the quality of David’s writing, and the radicalism of her 
attitude, attracted good reviews. TheTLS wrote, of Mediterranean Food: “More 
than a collection of recipes, this book is in effect a readable and discerning 
dissertation on Italian food and regional dishes, and their preparation in the 
English kitchen.” TheObserver, rhapsodising, declared that “Mrs David… may be 
counted among the benefactors of humanity.” Her fans includedJohn Arlott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/dec/13/john-arlott-cricket-frank-keating>
 and Evelyn Waugh.

Elizabeth David’s later work, once published in paperback, became an essential 
feature in millions of British kitchens.French Provincial Cooking (1960), her 
most enduringly popular title, was eventually joined by a collection of her 
journalism,An Omelette and a Glass of Wine (1984), which became a bestseller.

Mediterranean Food earns its place on this list for three reasons. First, it 
has profoundly influenced generations of food writers, from Julia Child to 
Nigella Lawson. Second, it inspired a revolution whose happy aftermath can be 
seen in the food aisles of Waitrose, Sainsbury and Tesco, and perhaps even in 
the popularity ofMasterChef and The Great British Bake Off. Finally, all her 
work expresses a credo about cooking that, with equal justice, might apply to 
English prose at its finest and most natural: “Good cooking is honest, sincere 
and simple, and by this I do not mean to imply that you will find in this, or 
indeed in any other book, the secret of turning out first-class food in a few 
minutes with no trouble. Good food is always a trouble and its preparation 
should be regarded as a labour of love, and this book is intended for those who 
actually and positively enjoy the labour involved in entertaining their 
friends.”

A signature sentence

“The ever-recurring elements in the food throughout these countries are the 
oil, the saffron, the garlic, the pungent local wines; the aromatic perfume of 
rosemary, wild marjoram and basil drying in the kitchens; the brilliance of the 
market stalls piled high with pimentos, aubergines, tomatoes, olives, melons, 
figs and limes; the great heaps of shiny fish, silver, vermilion or 
tiger-striped, and those long needle fish whose bones so mysteriously turn out 
to be green.”

Three to compare


Elizabeth David: French Country Cooking (1951)
Julia Child: Mastering the Art of French Cooking (1961)
Nigella Lawson: How to Be a Domestic Goddess: Baking and the Art of Comfort 
Cooking (2000)

A Book of Mediterranean Food is available in Penguin Modern Classics (£9.99). 
Click here to order a copy for £8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-mediterranean-food.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 