
Capacity: 180-200.


Who plays there: The Shipping Forecast has gained a reputation for securing 
some of the best musical talent out there, luring big-name acts to play in what 
is essentially a tiny, but brilliant basement. It also hosts a variety of 
excellent club nights – dance, hip-hop, soul, garage and indie. Previous gigs 
have included Ghostpoet, Four Tet, Skream and guest DJs including Calvin Harris 
and Mark Ronson. Acts tend towards the cool end of the spectrum (or 
“pretentious-hipster” as some detractors have grumbled), but the standard is 
always high – definitely a mix of style and substance.


Cloakroom: No.


Admission: Free for certain DJ nights (the excellent After Work Social Club), 
a few pounds for others (hip-hop night Juicy is £3) to £20 for big bands.


Bar: There’s a main bar in the restaurant area (Top Deck) and a smaller one 
downstairs in the basement gig spot, known as The Hold. The Shipping Forecast 
doesn’t serve generic lagers, tending towards nice craft beers, including Goose 
Island, the cheapest of which comes in at £3.15. There’s a good selection of 
wines, with a nice house white at £4.10 for a large glass. There’s a huge 
choice of gin, rum and whisky. Wonderful cocktails. Basically they don’t serve 
stuff that goes in a plastic cup and gets chucked foam-first into the air, 
because that doesn’t happen here.


Food: Excellent if you’re a fan of Americana. The kitchen is part of Ruby 
Jeans Diner, a company specialising in things like customised burgers (fried 
egg and peanut butter topping anyone?), and mac’n’cheese for a tenner. 
Essentially, dishes that people photograph and put on Instagram. Served daily 
until 10pm.


Toilet: The loos here used to be pretty special, due to the fact that the 
actual shipping forecast was piped into them, along with the gentle sounds of 
rolling waves and seagulls. However, someone stole the equipment and the 
shipping forecast is no more, just the sad, cavernous echo of you peeing.


Wheelchair access: No.


Sound: In The Hold; very good indeed. The ceilings are low and the space 
small, so the room acts like a great, natural amplifier, like putting an iPhone 
in a glass. Upstairs, loud, raucous.


Where to stand: Bands and DJs can play either in the main venue upstairs, or 
in the The Hold. The Hold has a rough and ready appearance with an exciting 
sense of history, the brickwork is exposed (and crumbling), the wooden beams 
are low, and there are original iron bars and gates. The “green room” is a 
dusty cubbyhole leaking mortar that you almost have to climb into. There are 
pillars, so obviously don’t stand behind those. Some people tend to lurk 
towards the back which, given that The Hold is basically a small cave, makes 
them look very creepy indeed. The stage is very low so getting right to the 
front makes for a great experience, next to the speaker stacks. Upstairs in the 
main room, the DJ plays barside. The decor is shabby chic, and there is an 
expanse of perfectly laid parquet flooring to dance across. There are plenty of 
booths, sofas and seating to collapse into with a martini, admiring the vintage 
radios on the walls.

Overall: The Shipping Forecast has become one of the best venues in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> for music, food and drink. It has 
replaced the cheese-fest 70s glitter-regurgitation that was Flares, and gone to 
the other extreme, with some locals grumbling that it’s a bit too hipster, with 
its craft beers, bespoke menu and fringed granny lamps. It is true that the 
lighting is so moody that you can barely see the plastic-lensed glasses on the 
end of your nose, and people here tend to wear their top button on their Adam’s 
apple, but it’s truly a great place. It consistently books brilliant acts and 
the Hold is really special as a venue, given that its main vibe is “charming 
dungeon”. It is a bit like combining a history trip with a great gig. The only 
downside is that if the bar in the basement isn’t open, you have to trek all 
the way upstairs for a drink.

Address: 15 Slater Street, Liverpool, L1 4WB.


Telephone: 0151 709 6901.

Website: theshippingforecastliverpool.com 
<http://www.theshippingforecastliverpool.com/>
 <http://www.glasgow-barrowland.com/ballroom.htm>

Public transport: In the centre of town, Slater Street is 10 minutes’ walk 
away from Liverpool Central station (national rail), and five minutes away from 
the bus stop on Leece Street opposite St Luke’s Church. The 86, 75, 86A, 86C, 
80A – basically every bus ever – stops here.
 