
Things we don’t write about: The Prophet. The Quran. The mosque. The hijab. 
Indeed, anything to do with Islam that might offend anyone willing to kill. The 
problem is that we can never be certain what will offend them. The killing 
types are no longer visible, wizened old men who regularly announce where the 
red line lays. The mantle has passed onto teenagers wielding machetes, 
belonging to secret cliques, guided by international ideologies with vicious 
local consequences.

In a bewildering new trend, it is young rationalist bloggers in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> who have emerged as the primary 
target of Islamic extremists. How peculiar indeed, that killers espousing a 
retrograde vision of the world should be so obsessed with the most twenty-first 
century of media: the blog. Four bloggers have been hacked to death since the 
beginning of this year, and dozens more live in fear of becoming the next 
victim.

There is a specific history at play here. The secular bloggers of Bangladesh 
led a mass secular movement in 2013 demanding the death penalty for war crimes 
committed during Bangladesh’s 1971 war of independence. What’s unfolding now is 
in great part payback for the “insolence” of those seeking belated justice for 
a long-ignored genocide.

The first blogger was killed in 2013, at the height of the movement. Spring 
2014 and Spring 2015 both saw an upsurge in political violence that targeted 
general civilians. At the same time, there was a renewal of blogger killings 
with the hacking of Avijit Roy just outside the Ekushey Book Fair. The Fair 
commemorates the 1952 Language Movement, which triggered Bangladesh’s eventual 
bid for full independence, and remains one of the most cherished symbols of the 
country’s cultural identity. To kill a free-thinker at the site of that 
cherished event was a deliberate attack on not just the victim, but on all 
those who shared his vision of Bangladesh as a bastion of secular, progressive 
ideals.

Four bloggers have been hacked to death this year, and dozens more live in 
fear of becoming the next victim

What then does it mean to be a writer today in this, Bangladesh’s “new 
normal”? When I wrote my first complete story back on Thanksgiving Day in 1989, 
I did not imagine this future for my country. Like any young writer, I was 
consumed with putting the story together, making it cohere, making it 
interesting. Like others of my age, I also cultivated an appropriate amount of 
existential angst – having just recently discovered Camus, Sartre, Kafka and 
Kundera, that seemed like a prerequisite for becoming a writer of any worth.

But 1989 was a signal year in two opposed ways: it was the year that the 
Iranian regime passed its fatwa on Salman Rushdie forThe Satanic Verses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/11/salman-rushdie-satanic-verses>. 
It was also the year that Bangladesh’s nearly decade-long pro-democracy 
movement hurtled into a final phase, with an accompanying upswing in 
progressive cultural expressions.

The first of the two events, the Rushdie Affair, left an indelible mark on me 
as an apprentice writer. Even back then, a creeping realization came over me: 
the theocrats had found a viciously efficient way to extend their grasp 
internationally. I took the Rushdie affair as counsel to steer clear of the 
subject of religion. Apart from one early work, a novella (Forty Steps 
<http://www.bengallights.com/forty.php>), I have rarely referred to any Islamic 
tenets in my fiction, and then too never in a critical manner. But to avoid the 
topic entirely is frankly impossible.

All writers are bound to mine the culture in which they were brought up, but 
in Muslim societies alone, there are classes of fanatics who have arrogated to 
themselves the power both to regularly denounce people for blasphemy, and to 
carry out their death sentences with horrific impunity. So while a high risk 
can attach to any author who dares speak of Islam, writers who count Muslim 
culture as a part of their personal heritage face the pain of having to treat 
the most natural of materials as one filled with toxic risk.

When Forty Steps was published in Bangla at the Ekushey Book Fair in 2006, a 
small troupe of self-styled Islamic guardians with their towering head-dress 
and long, flapping outfits marched over to the stall and demanded the book. It 
was an obscure literary work that used the popular lore of the angels Munkar 
and Nakir to frame the story. Hearing the incident, I was struck that even such 
an obscure, literary work should catch the attention of the self-appointed 
custodians of religious rectitude. In that instance, thankfully, the vigilantes 
left satisfied: stall, book, and my safety intact.

Even after that incident, though, some of my stories have turned to Islamic 
literary tradition as an integral part of the context of the narrative or a 
character. After all, no writer should have to shy away from material that is 
genuinely compulsive and important. But because there is no guarantee that the 
pathologically intolerant will agree, Muslim writers—and also others who find 
Islam or Muslim cultures to be a compelling topic—are thus finding themselves 
forced to contend with a heightened pressure of self-censorship, and mortal 
risk.

The condition for anyone wishing to write about Islam is thus comparable to 
dissidents of another era who lived under dictatorial regimes. In a twisted 
irony of globalization though, the risk is no longer confined by territory; it 
is outsourced to lethal effect. There was a time when political dissidents 
could escape their own country, mainly to the First World, and find a safe 
haven. For anyone tangling with Islam, however, there is no refuge on earth.

The space for freedom is rapidly reaching a level of constriction not seen 
since the days of the harshest military rule

While the Rushdie Affair inaugurated a new era of Islamic intolerance, and 
even as it made a strong impression on me as an aspiring writer, I was however 
not worried about the atmosphere of my country at the time. As the 
pro-democracy movement came forward and eventually ousted the dictator Ershad, 
a spate of feisty new weeklies –Jai Jai Din <http://www.jjdin.com/>, Bichinta 
andKhoborer Kagoj <http://www.bhorerkagoj.net/online/> – became vocal against 
not only the military regime but also social orthodoxies. Life in Dhaka felt 
abuzz with creativity and defiance.

Khoborer Kagoj was owned by my family. Leading poets like Shamsur Rahman and 
Syed Shamsul Huq wrote weekly columns there. Authors like Rafiqul Islam, M. R. 
Akhter Mukul and Bhasha Matin provided witness to the country’s history of 
progressive struggles from the Language Movement of 1952 to the Liberation War 
of 1971. Self-proclaimed atheists such as Ahmed Sharif and Humayun Azad 
commented freely against dogma. One of the most sadly famous of Bangladeshi 
authors today, Taslima Nasreen, made her debut as a columnist.

It was hard to imagine in those heady and hopeful days that the roster of Kagoj
columnists would come to comprise a wretched honor roll of victims, as 
anti-liberation forces gained power by attaching themselves to a mainstream 
party: Nasreen was hounded into exile in the early 90s. A decade later, Rahman, 
by then an aged laureate, suffered knife wounds from an attack by fanatics in 
his own home. In 2004, Azad, an outspoken critic of Islamism in politics, was 
struck outside the Ekushey Book Fair – like the blogger Avijit Roy this year – 
and died later that year in Germany.

There is of course a deeper history here. Bangladeshi authors have faced 
Islamist reprisals long before the era of petro-dollar-fueled Islamism. Like 
the poet Daud Haider who was imprisoned “for his own protection” in 1973 after 
coming under attack by Islamic clerics of entirely indigenous make. He later 
escaped into exile and to this day lives in Germany.
 Clockwise from top left, Daud Haider, Avijit Roy, Taslima Nasreen Humayun 
Azad, and Shamsur Rahman. 
Much closer to home, quite literally, my grandfather was also taken into 
“protective custody” a year after Haider’s troubles, for similar offenses. An 
eccentric autodidact, he had penned a book about language and literacy, but 
clerics took an exception to a particular chapter in the book that touched on 
religion. Thanks to the ill-fated intellectual adventure of my grandfather, my 
earliest memories include the warden’s room in Dhaka Central Jail: high 
ceilings, a large black desk and glass-cabinets full of moldy files.

Given that I was initiated into the dangers presented by the most 
narrow-minded custodians of Islam at an early age, I should not be entirely 
surprised at the vicious new bloom of bigotry. But at the same time, the 
spirited free-thinking days of the early ’90s is also an equally authentic part 
of our heritage and who we are. Our war of independence was in fact fought over 
these divergent ideas of who we wanted to be: a country that believed in 
freedom and dignity, or one that prized prejudice and proscriptions.

The Blogger Killings mark the most brutal new assault by the forces of 
prejudice. Indeed, not since the Liberation War of 1971 have we seen such 
concerted violence against free thought and free speech. At the peak of the 
Shahbagh Movement, a section of Islamic clerics presented the government with a 
list of 84 bloggers they accused of blasphemy. All the bloggers killed this 
year are names that had appeared on that list. A few, like the latest victim 
Niladri Niloy, could not save himself even after he changed his job and his 
residence. Everyone on that list thus remains utterly vulnerable to an attack 
at any moment.

As the bodies pile up, and society reacts with no sympathy, we are reminded 
that freedom is not something we inherit

It would be comforting to frame this Islamism only as an outside influence, 
but that would be a sad self-deception in a culture where a majority of the 
people, according to some recent polls, now believes that blasphemers should be 
hanged. Bangladesh’s Blogger Killings are thus not caused by sudden upsurge of 
Islamism, but related to a long-running political contest between two visions 
of the country: secular and progressive versus Islamist.

Two decades of economic progress has made us soft. We no longer have any 
appetite for political or idealistic fights. The good are lacking conviction, 
even clarity, while the worst are bristling with passionate intensity.

Now they say, if only bloggers would simply show some restraint, then there 
would not be so much commotion. But recent history has taught us, feeding the 
tiger only gives it greater appetite. Recently, new hit lists have been issued 
naming a much wider range of people – politicians, academics, activists. All 
the persons named so far are leading figures in their respective fields, with 
no record of criticism of Islam, but invariably with a progressive bent.

The net effect of issuing lists and the actual killings is a systematic 
silencing of progressive voices. What’s more, the state, too, has been passing 
laws that are inimical to free speech. When young men and seasoned journalists 
get jailed for posting thoughts on Facebook, it is hardly a shining moment for 
freedom of speech. The space for freedom is rapidly reaching a level of 
constriction not seen since the days of the harshest military rule.

The deteriorating situation in Bangladesh increasingly presents me with an 
artistic dilemma too. A climate of interdictions, and worse, not only limits 
one’s ability to draw upon one’s natural cultural resources, but also it 
effectively calls on us to take up an oppositional role. I resent letting the 
forces of evil set the agenda of my writing. At the same time, not to respond 
to changes in my environment would also be forced and unnatural.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Oh what a long way we have come from the courageous and conscientious 
standards of men and women who went to war for our independence! What a long 
and tawdry length we have fallen indeed even from the spirited days of our 
pro-democracy movement.

Do I wish I lived in a place where I would be free, in my fictional works, to 
roam territories that the most violent claimants of the earth know nothing 
about? Perhaps that question is self-indulgent. From Ovid’s Baltic exile to 
Nasreen’s homelessness today, from the execution of countless heretics and 
dissidents across cultures and centuries, to the young bloggers hacked to death 
in Dhaka today, to be under serious threat has been the more common condition 
for writers.

I don’t believe that one can say vital truths only by courting the worst of 
known dangers. That is not the role I aspired to as a writer. That is still not 
the kind of role I invite with any eagerness. Yet, as the bodies pile up, and 
society reacts with a distinct lack of sympathy, we are reminded that freedom 
is not something we inherit. It is something for which we may have to fight, 
again and again.

 