
Cricket Pitch: Ashes Special, London

These events were conceived to whet appetites for what could potentially have 
been a decisive final Ashes Test. As it is, from an English perspective, things 
have gone better than could reasonably have been expected. With the urn 
regained with a game to spare, there will be a celebratory air around these two 
evenings. Both nights are hosted by the Observer’s Emma John. At the first one, 
she’s joined by comedian and cricket nut Andy Zaltzman, along with former Ashes 
heroes Matt Prior and Simon Jones, broadcaster Bob Harris and one-time stalwart 
of the England women’s team Ebony Rainford-Brent. The second features a game 
Australian, Adam Hills, who will be taking his licks alongside Ashes vets 
Gladstone Small and Charlotte Edwards, and McBusted’s Harry Judd. Expect 
anecdotes, quizzes and a certain amount of English triumphalism.

Kia Oval, SE11, Mon & Tue

PH

Talking Comedy, Edinburgh

Clearly, stand-up can be considered a rather self-indulgent act in itself; the 
worst gigs can make you feel as if you’ve been taken hostage by somebody else’s 
inner monologue. So some might balk at the opportunity to hear a selection of 
comics droning on about themselves – and this time without any jokes. Yet 
hearing comedians talking earnestly and honestly about their work and the 
industry they operate in can prove a highlight of the fringe. This series of 
conversations sees some of the most well-established names on the circuit 
consider their careers thus far with Olly Double of the University of Kent’s 
British Stand-Up Comedy Archive. Comic and campaigner Mark Thomas kicks things 
off, withStephen K Amos <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stephen-k-amos>, 
Susan Calman, Jo Brand, alternative comedy veteran Alexei Sayle and 
ventriloquist Nina Conti appearing on subsequent days.

Assembly Rooms, Sun to Fri

RA

Jesse Jackson, London

Since his early days working alongside Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king>, civil rights giant 
the Rev Jesse Jackson has dedicated his life to campaigning for equality. A 
two-time presidential candidate, next to Obama he’s arguably America’s most 
significant black political figure, and one of the most intriguing characters 
to enter that stage. Although his organisation Rainbow/PUSH fights on issues 
including universal healthcare, decent housing and a living wage, for some he’s 
a hothead given to overblown pronouncements and a disquieting ability to 
exploit the cameras during a crisis (or vice versa). Be that as it may, he’s a 
famously magnetic figure, whose performance, whether on the public stage or in 
the pulpit, is an experience not to be missed. For this talk, with BBC World 
News Today’s Philippa Thomas, he’ll focus on equality in America and the world. 
With the recent Charleston shootings, his message could scarcely be more 
pressing.

The British Library, NW1, Fri

SS
 