
No Test match in England has gone to such a dramatic close finish since Hirst 
and Rhodes won Jessop's match of 1902 on the same Oval pitch where England 
yesterday beat Australia by 228 runs with a bare five minutes to spare. So the 
rubber is tied: Australia have retained the Ashes, but England have found some 
compensation for the frustrations of Lord's and Edgbaston.

Only a little earlier, though, it had seemed that, for the third time in the 
series, rain which wiped out the afternoon's play had destroyed England's 
winning position and, even half an hour from the end, Australia looked safe. 
Colin Cowdrey, however, drove on into the extra half hour and amazingly - for 
there was nothing in the pitch to account for it - the last five Australian 
wickets fell in 31 minutes before a small but intent, tense, easily irritated, 
but eventually delighted crowd.

Inverarity, rising above anything else he has done on the tour, was the core 
of the Australian resistance. First in - last out, he was cool and steady to 
the end. For England, Underwood - sympathetically captained by Cowdrey. - took 
seven wickets for 50 in his best Test bowling performance in strategy and 
effect as well as statistically.

The pitch, before the storm, was generally as gentle on the four preceding 
days: but the spinners could turn, though only slowly; there was no pace 
movement for the faster bowlers.

At the pavilion end, however, there were a few worn spots about Underwood's 
normal length from which the ball would both lift and turn unnaturally. After 
the rain, which bound up the earlier spots, it was even easier - mild in pace 
and giving no observable turn.

The morning play broke rapidly into action. Inverarity played Snow coolly and, 
surprisingly for one with such a pronounced onside bias, cut him perfectly for 
four. With Lawry and Redpath out overnight, the English players must have seen 
Chappell as the other obstacle to their progress. He had failed in the first 
innings, but never twice in any previous test of the series. He had made only 
one scoring stroke, however, when he played back to Underwood instead of 
forward, as is his defensive habit, and was lbw.

Walters, playing "off the pitch" as they say, made some rapid adjustments, but 
few batsmen would have survived the ball from Underwood which pitched on a spot 
on line with the stumps and spat up and across him, took the outside edge and 
gave Knott a sharp chest-high catch.

Twenty-nine for four read like the beginning of collapse but Inverarity - 
playing studiously straight, bat against pad and with an air of calm purpose - 
and Sheahan - less at ease, but correct and careful - applied themselves to 
occupation of the crease.

For Underwood, Cowdrey set a quite remarkable field of two slips, gully, silly 
point, silly mid-off and, on the leg side, two, sometimes three, short legs all 
within four yards of the bat; all bravemen, likely to have an intimidating 
effect on the batsmen but perhaps a little too close to be reliable in 
catching. Illingworth was content with two short legs, silly mid-on, slip and 
gulley as he wheeled away for less than one run an over.

Inverarity, intent on guarding the line of his stumps, kept neatly out of 
trouble from the ball which, once in most overs from Underwood, turned and 
leapt; while Sheahan played some bold strokes in an attempt to break up the 
close field. They had endured almost an hour - and Inverarity had surveyed a 
sharp chance to Dexter, perilously close at silly point - when Sheahan, 
attempting to break away from Illingworth's tight rein, pulled him and was well 
caught, low down on the run at mid-wicket, by Snow.

Jarman, quick in footwork and determined, played back hazardly but effectively 
to Illingworth and stayed with Inverarity until, two minutes before lunch, the 
thunderstorm broke. At that point Australia, 86 for five, were 285 behind and 
210 minutes remained for play.

When, after a remarkable mass effort by the groundstaff and some 50 
volunteers, the ground was fit for play, it was a quarter to five and the only 
possibility of a finish seemed to lie in freakish behaviour of the wet pitch. 
It was, however, deeply soaked and there was sun to form a top crust that the 
spin bowlers might use.

No one bowled two consecutive overs of the first five form the pavilion end. 
For Underwood at the other, the entire team except the bowler stood virtually 
shoulder to shoulder in the close-catching positions; for Illingworth there was 
a single man saving the one. Inverarity played with admirable aplomb, Jarman a 
little more anxiously, once or twice one of the close fieldsmen dived forward 
in the attempt to snatch up the ball lofted a few inches from the bat before it 
touched the ground. But gradually England's hopes of winning were fading; only 
Cowdrey went questingly on, unable to believe that the weather could thwart him 
again. D'Oliveira was the fifth bowler and the sixth change in 40 minutes; he 
floated a ball gently away from Jarman's forward stroke to hit the off bail and 
at once Cowdrey brought back Underwood in his place.

Underwood could not turn the ball as he had done in the morning but he worked 
away, varying pace, length and line. His second ball to Mallett topped and flew 
to brown at forward short leg. In gradually mounting tension, McKenzie pushed 
forward and brown, diving at short leg, caught a ball which was never more than 
a couple of inches from the ground.

Twice Illingworth found the edge of Inverarity's bat with the ball which went 
wit his arm, but each time it flew untouched between wicket keeper and slip, 
and now - with 25 minutes left - he and Gleeson set out sensibly to save the 
game, occasionally forcing through the close field, contriving that Inverarity 
had most of the bowling. Eventually, however, Underwood - bowling round the 
wicket - pinned down Gleeson, who proceeded to play him with his pads; 
Underwood switched to over the wicket, but Cowdrey waved him back to the other 
side and with the next ball he bowled Gleeson off stump. Ten minutes remained 
when the last man, Connolly, came out to Inverarity. Five minutes passed: still 
the fieldsmen stood in two unbroken ranks and at last Underwood made one 
straighten and Inverarity, for once picking the wrong line, was lbw.

The game was won and lost: the crowd swarmed happily around the pavilion, 
players came out and waved and went, and another England-Australia rubber with 
its unique quality of cricket history was over.

The Horlicks awards made after match were: Man of the series - John Edrich; 
Australian batsman of the match - Bill Lawry; English bowler of the match - 
Derek Underwood; special award - the outstanding fieldsman of an outstanding 
fielding side - Paul Sheahan.
 