
Thousands of Catalan separatists gathered in Barcelona on Sunday to protest 
against a series of legal challenges made by Spain’s government against 
pro-independence Catalan politicians.

Several of Catalonia’s lawmakers are facing court cases sought by the Spanish 
government for having staged a secession referendum in 2014 in disobedience of 
a court order, and over other regional laws designed to prepare a path toward 
secession.

Those politicians include Catalonia’s former regional president Artur Mas and 
the current speaker of the regional parliament, Carme Forcadell, who both 
attended Sunday’s protest.


Grassroots groups said they organised a fleet of about 150 buses to bring 
protesters in from the countryside and smaller towns to participate in the 
rally held near the Plaza de España in Barcelona.

Jordi Cuixart, the president of Omnium, a separatist group, told the crowd 
teeming with pro-independence flags that he had a message for the Spanish state.

“If you attack our democratically elected representatives, you attack our 
institutions, all our people and our sovereignty, and we will never allow 
that,” Cuixart said. “Our cause is democracy and we will never let our elected 
representatives down.”

Separatist sentiment has been on the rise in recent years in the wealthy 
north-eastern region where Catalan is spoken along with Spanish. Separatists 
complain thatCatalonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catalonia> pays more 
taxes to the central government than it should.

In 2014, then-president Mas ignored an order by Spain’s constitutional court 
to suspend a mock referendum on Catalan secession. Mas’s regional government 
went ahead with the informal poll anyway, staffing voting stations with 
volunteers.

Nearly 90% of the ballots were in favour of independence, but only 2 million 
of the 5.4 million eligible voters cast ballots.

Polls consistently show that Catalonia’s 7.5 million residents are equally 
divided on breaking century-old ties with the rest ofSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>.

Catalonia’s current regional president, Carles Puigdemont, plans to call 
another referendum on independence by September.

“These are situations that can only be solved politically,” Puigdemont said at 
a separate rally in his home village on Sunday.

Spain’s government has consistently said that regions don’t have the 
constitutional right to hold a referendum concerning the integrity of the 
country.
 