
The logic behind Steven Croft’s decision to invite Middlesex to bat first was 
sound enough. It is September, the floodlights were on and even though Old 
Trafford has been full of runs in recent weeks and the pitch was pale enough to 
please batsmen it felt like a bowling morning. Croft’sMiddlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> counterpart, James Franklin, in 
asking for a toss, evidently did not agree.

There was another catch. The Championship, suddenly, is awash with impressive 
young top-order batsmen. In Division Two, seemingly beyond the sights of the 
selectors, are Ben Duckett and Essex’s Tom Westley and Nick Browne. Then,in an 
interview in Tuesday for the Guardian, the England batting coach, Mark 
Ramprakash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/mark-ramprakash-england-bangladesh-tour>
namechecks four: Lancashire’s Haseeb Hameed, who looks certain to tour the 
subcontinent this winter, and Durham’s Keaton Jennings, who spent Monday 
scoring an unbeaten 200 against Surrey, his seventh Championship century of the 
season.

The other two were the Middlesex openers, Sam Robson and Nick Gubbins, which 
makes Croft’s decision curious. The ball did hoop around early on, as Kyle 
Jarvis and Tom Bailey bowled an impressive opening spell, but the pair 
weathered the storm – surviving lbw shouts and playing and missing plenty – to 
carve a fine position for their side.

Croft, by stumps, which arrived seven overs prematurely due to bad light, 
surely regretted his decision to field.

“There was a bit of debate in our dressing room,” said Robson, when asked 
about the toss. “We are very happy and have set a good platform. It was very 
difficult this morning, we had a bit of luck, played and missed a lot. But then 
the weather improved and we got our eyes in and things became easier. We need 
to push on now.”

Gubbins looked the more fluent, driving beautifully through the covers and 
down the ground, but leaving plenty, too. He reached his half-century before 
lunch, but fell pulling tamely to midwicket not long after.

From there, Robson looked more authoritative, pulling Simon Kerrigan through 
midwicket when he dropped short – which was often – and flicking and cutting 
the seamers with disdain, although he was lucky that a flick to fine-leg just 
evaded the wicketkeeper, Jos Buttler, playing a Championship game for the first 
time since September 2014. Just like Gubbins, Robson fell with a century 
calling, failing to get to the pitch of Kerrigan and driving into the sole 
slip’s hands.

The return of a batsman of Nick Compton’s knowhow and quality has bolstered 
Middlesex’s push for the title, and in the company of Dawid Malan, with whom he 
shared 97, he picked up where the openers left off, even imitating their 
dismissal when looking totally comfortable.

Compton pulled his first ball violently through square-leg for four, but then 
faced 29 deliveries without scoring, and later became tangled against Kerrigan 
– who found some turn – a couple of times.

After tea, he settled, swatting Kerrigan down the ground for six and finding 
midwicket a productive area, until he was bowled through the gate by Jarvis, 
armed with the new ball.

Malan had raced out of the blocks, cutting hard in front and behind point, but 
dug in to survive to stumps, with Stevie Eskinazi, whose bat was beaten plenty, 
a run shy of Middlesex’s fourth half-century.

They have extended their lead to three points over Yorkshire, who had a 
horrible day against Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/yorkshire-somerset-county-championship-division-one-report-day-one>
; a Malan century would not only go a long way to winning this game, but 
fortifying that final push for a first title in 23 years, too. Fortunately for 
them, the skies that clouded Croft’s decision are not set to return on Tuesday.
 