
Pebbles, Winchelsea Beach, East Sussex

Good for design-lovers 
Sleeps five (two doubles and a fold-out bed)
Cost £950 a week (small increase for public and school holidays) 

As alarm clocks go, the sound of Brent geese honking across the saltmarsh in 
front of a blood-orange sunrise takes some beating. Pebbles faces east – 
perfect for flinging open its double doors and greeting the morning sun; and 
its position – by a shingle beach next to Rye Harbour nature reserve – 
guarantees bird sightings aplenty. This is one of the reasons it attracts 
artists and musicians looking for a comfortable, back-to-nature retreat. 
Another is its semi-remoteness: it's one of a row of wooden cottages and 
converted railway carriages down an unmade road, behind a sea wall. It feels 
out of the way but Rye, with its antique shops and restaurants, is a couple of 
miles down the road. AndThe Ship <http://www.shipwinchelseabeach.com> round the 
corner is a restaurant and shop selling good-quality local produce.

Inside, Pebbles is light, airy and lofty, with bleached muslin curtains that 
flit prettily on the sea breeze. Battered leather armchairs and a sofa are 
grouped in front of the log fire and the dining table seats eight comfortably. 
From the front gate, a timber path runs through shingle planted with grasses 
and euphorbia to the white weatherboard house; the good-sized back garden is 
equipped with sun loungers and a decoratively rusty roll-top bath. Views are 
obscured by the sea wall but the owners have remedied this by adding a roof 
terrace. Here sundowners, and goose-enhanced sunrises, can be enjoyed with 
uninterrupted sea vistas.
• no phone, pebblesbeachhouse.co.uk <http://www.pebblesbeachhouse.co.uk/>

The Lighthouse, Ventnor, Isle of Wight
 Lighthouse, Ventnor 
Good for traditional seaside funseekers 
Sleeps 6 
Cost from £630 a week

Steephill Cove, tucked between rocky cliffs below Ventnor's botanical gardens 
and reached only on foot, feels like the setting for an Enid Blyton adventure. 
The safe, sandy beach is peppered with children intent on sandcastle-building, 
paddling and eating crab pasties. The Wheeler family, who own the Lighthouse, 
have fished here for centuries – their freshly caught crab and lobster are 
served in their two restaurants. This is the newest and most handsome of their 
three properties and offers wall-to-wall sea views from its octagonal tower. 
There's a deck inches from the shoreline, and an outdoor shower for washing off 
the sand post-adventures.
• 07801 899747, theboathouse-steephillcove.co.uk 
<http://www.theboathouse-steephillcove.co.uk>

Little Cottage, Praa Sands, Cornwall

 Little Cottage, Praa Sands Cornwall 
Good for eco-savvy design lovers 
Sleeps 8-10 (four bedrooms plus cot)
Cost from £2,995 a week 

No humble beach chalet this. Sitting on a cliff above the honey-coloured sweep 
of Praa Sands, this crisp, architecturally splendid new holiday home has been 
designed by eco-aware architect Alex Michaelis. As well as all its top-end, 
family-friendly amenities (games room, wet room, trampoline, Weber barbecue, 
Fatboy hammock), it has a ground source heat pump, green roofs and solar 
panels. Giant windows frame expansive ocean views, and the crash of the waves 
(excellent for surfing), is a constant soundtrack.
• 01209 832848, forevercornwall.co.uk <http://www.forevercornwall.co.uk>

Gearrannan Blackhouse Village, Isle of Lewis
 Gearrannan Blackhouses, Isle of Lewis 
Good for experiencing life in a crofting village
Sleeps 2 (Taigh Thormoid); 5 (Taigh Glass and Taigh an t-Seòladair), 16 (Taigh 
Lata)
Cost from £350 a week

This village of traditional stone houses, once occupied by a crofting 
community, has been restored as self-catering accommodation (the four rental 
houses are named after former occupants) just a few steps from a pebbly beach 
and the mighty Atlantic. With double drystone walls and roofed with turf 
thatch, they were built to withstand the Scottish weather and make a 
historically interesting and comfortable, rather than luxurious, place to stay.
• 01851 643416, gearrannan.com <http://www.gearrannan.com/>

Dunster Village, Minehead, Somerset
 Dunster Village, Minehead 
Good for old-fashioned family fun
Sleeps 2-12
Cost from £340 a week

This well-behaved holiday park comprises two rows of chalets – one right 
beside Dunster beach, which starts with pebbles but has generous stretches of 
sand at low tide. The other looks over a lake and nature reserve. The 230 
chalets differ in size, layout and decor, but each comes with its own picket 
fence and garden. Activities here are gentle: a tennis court and a putting 
green, and the only traffic noise is from a passing steam train.
• 01643 821296, dunsterbeachholidays.com <http://dunsterbeachholidays.com>

Monkey Beach Cottage, Mersea, Essex 
 Monkey Beach Cottage, Mersea Island 
Good for oyster-lovers
Sleeps 7 (including sofabed) 
Cost from £575 a week

West Mersea has become a popular day trip destination for foodies, thanks to 
theCompany Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/23/foodanddrink.restaurants>
, its famous seafood shack. Even more pleasurable, though, is to spend a few 
days at this 300-year-old, grade II-listed house, a two-minute hop from the 
beach. With its white weatherboard front and comfortable interior – brass 
bedsteads, butler's sink, old leather trunks, oil paintings by local artist 
David Britton – it's the perfect base for exploring or simply ordering in a 
seafood platter to eat in the garden as the daylight fades.
• 07973 741148, monkeybeachcottage.co.uk

Coast Guard's Cottage, Camber Sands, East Sussex
 Coast Guard's Cottage, Camber Sands 
Good for groups fond of barbecues and shrimping
Sleeps 9 (including sofa bed) 
Cost from £1,100 a week 

Interior architect Marta Nowicka rescued this end-of-terrace house on the 
shingle near Camber from dereliction three years ago. Furnished with inherited 
furniture and antique shop finds, it has a personal vibe that's rare in holiday 
rentals. The sea and shore can be seen from most windows. Other pleasures 
include shrimping, barbecues in the garden, swimming in the sea, collecting 
driftwood, and sourcing local produce such as saltmarsh lamb and samphire.
• no phone, book through holidaylettings.co.uk 
<http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/rye/313820>

The Shingle House, Dungeness, Kent
 The Shingle House, Kent 
Good for design-aware holidaymakers
Sleeps 8 
 Cost from £1370 a week 

Alain de Botton's Living Architecture project aims to educate about the 
emotional power of buildings. This, the project's second holiday rental, 
certainly lifts the spirits. Clad with tarred shingles and resembling a group 
of sheds, it sits among railway carriages and fishermen's huts on the vast 
beach at Dungeness. Designed by Glasgow-based Nord Architecture, it is roomy, 
with floor-to-ceiling windows, and furnished with carefully chosen modern 
pieces.
• no phone, living-architecture.co.uk 
<http://living-architecture.co.uk/the-houses/shingle-house/overview/>

The Beach Hut, near Bude, Cornwall
 The Beach Hut, near Bude, Cornwall 
Good for couples, particularly honeymooners
Sleeps 2
Cost from £1,770 a week

Sitting in romantic seclusion, this is the surf shack of dreams, and has 
featured in magazine shoots and films. Roger Barker bought the former tearoom 
17 years ago and converted it into a comfortable, well-appointed hideaway with 
one large room, a separate wet room and a deck – the place to fire up the 
barbie, watch the stars and wake to the sound of waves on the sand.
• 01637 881183, thebeachhut.uniquehomestays.com 
<http://www.uniquehomestays.com/unique/details.asp?id=640>

Artists' Beach House, Whitstable, Kent
 Artists' Beach House, Whitstable 
Good for family and group celebrations
Sleeps eight
Cost from £2,250 a week

The best thing about this 1906 weatherboard house overlooking Tankerton Beach 
in Whitstable is its veranda. Running the length of the house, with 
unrestricted views of the sea, it is the place to settle down with a glass of 
wine, close family and a plate of Whitstable natives. Inside, dark wooden 
beams, floors and furniture reference the Arts and Crafts movement, and the 
paintings, soft furnishings and tiled fireplace give it a pleasant, homely feel.
• 01637 881183, artistsbeachhouse.uniquehomestays.com 
<http://www.uniquehomestays.com/unique/details.asp?id=534> 

Pen-y-Parrog, Pembrokeshire

Good for walkers and wild swimmers
Sleeps 6 
Cost from £466 a week 
 Pen Y Parrog, Pembrokeshire 
Walk out of the front door of this cottage and you are on your own sandy shale 
beach. Built in typical Pembrokeshire style – whitewashed with thick stone 
walls and low-beamed ceilings – it was chosen as home to Rosie Probert (played 
by Elizabeth Taylor) in the film of Under Milk Wood. Modern introductions 
include a hot tub in a cabin with sea views, and a woodburning stove. Situated 
just off the Pembrokeshire coastal path, it is ideal for walkers or anyone keen 
on rockpooling, swimming and feasting on locally grown mussels.
• 0844 5005 101, underthethatch.co.uk/penyparrog 
<http://www.underthethatch.co.uk/penyparrog>

12 Sandcastle, West Wittering, West Sussex
 Sandcastle, West Wittering 
Good for families with small children
Sleeps 4
Cost from £700 a week

Built in the 1920s, this bungalow has been restored sensitively, retaining 
many original features such as its glazed timber veranda, which looks out over 
a private garden to shingly East Wittering beach and the sea. (Sandy West 
Wittering beach, which has Blue Flag status, is nearby.) The interior is 
decorated in non-twee coastal style: predominantly white with bursts of navy, 
and accessorised with beach-themed artefacts. There's a wooden wraparound deck 
for barbecues and sunbathing.
• 01243 672217, baileys.uk.com/holiday-lettings/sandcastle-west-wittering 
<http://baileys.uk.com/holiday-lettings/sandcastle-west-wittering>

Ropehawn, near Fowey, Cornwall
 Photograph: Adam Gibbard 
Good for family getaways
Sleeps 8 plus cot 
Cost from £1,995 

Some say that secluded Ropehawn, tucked into a sheltered bay and accessible by 
boat or on foot down narrow steps, was the inspiration for Manderley in Daphne 
du Maurier's Rebecca. It certainly feels far from modern life. Decorated in 
neutral tones that don't distract from the views, it is furnished luxuriously 
without being precious: it will take the rough and tumble of dogs and children 
in its stride. The owners have converted the boathouse into the Sea Room, 
sleeping two and also available to rent.
• 01872 553 491, boutique-retreats.co.uk 
<http://www.boutique-retreats.co.uk/luxury-cottages-cornwall/fowey/ropehawn-22.html>

Seabank Cottage, Isle of Mull
 Seabank Cottage, Isle of Mull 
Good for Birdwatchers and wildlife lovers
Sleeps 3 (one double, one single)
Cost from £650 a week

With sea otters nesting in the river beside it, and white-tailed sea eagles 
flying overhead, there is wildlife all around this Victorian stone cottage. On 
the shore of Loch Scridian (the Ross of Mull is on its other side), it's in the 
grounds of (and is run by) Tiroran House Hotel, a 10-minute walk away and handy 
for evening meals. It also shares the hotel's 17 acres of garden and private 
beach. Small but comfy, it has a woodburning stove and a range cooker.
• 01681 705232, selfcateringisleofmull.co.uk 
<http://selfcateringisleofmull.co.uk/>

Northbeach Apartments, Tenby, Pembrokeshire
 Northbeach Apartments, Tenby 
Good for sea view-loving urbanites 
Sleep 4
Cost from £700 a week

Two apartments, Lux and Loft, occupy the top floors of a Regency house smack 
on Tenby's sandy North Beach. Visitors can gaze at Camarthen Bay, or explore it 
in the apartments' kayak. Billed as self-catering equivalents to a boutique 
hotel, both apartments are slickly finished and decorated in white with bright 
splashes of colour. Woodburning stoves and off-street parking are included; 
there's no Wi-Fi, though.
• no phone, northbeachtenby.com <http://www.northbeachtenby.com>

Shore Cottages, Berriedale, Caithness
 Shore Cottages, Caithness 
Good for a remote getaway 
Sleep 2 (cottage one), 6 (cottage two) 
Cost from £179/£471 a week

Built in the 1840s to house four fishermen and their families, this terrace of 
cottages was abandoned when fishing went into decline. The Landmark Trust has 
since reconfigured the row into two cottages: one the original size, sleeping 
two, and the other three combined into one for six. Reached by a footbridge, 
the front doors open directly on to the beach known as The Shore. Both have 
tongue-and-groove panelling and plump armchairs to sink into.
• landmarktrust.org.uk 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/Search-and-book/landmark-groups/shore-cottages/>
; 01628 825925

Manor Beach Cottages, Osea Island, Essex
 Manor Cottage Beach Houses, Osea Island 
Good for comfort-loving would-be islanders
Sleep 7 (cottage one), 4 (cottage two)
Cost from £810/£720 a week

Osea Island lies just off the coast of Essex and the causeway can only be used 
at low tide, so just getting there feels like an adventure. All the buildings 
on the island are part of a resort that attracts privacy-hungry celebs for 
weekend parties, and families seeking traditional holiday pursuits. The two 
Manor Beach Cottages, the nearest accommodation to the sands, are handsomely 
furnished with four-poster beds and leather sofas.
• 01621 788593, oseaisland.co.uk  <http://oseaisland.co.uk/beach-cottages.php>

Old Coastguard Station, Robin Hood's Bay, North Yorkshire
 Photograph: Joe Cornish/ NTPL 
Good for hikers and rock poolers
Sleeps 2
Cost from £380 a week 

Perched on a sea wall in one of Yorkshire's prettiest seaside villages, the 
Old Coastguard Station is surrounded by lapping waves at high tide. When the 
tide recedes, however, the perfect beach is revealed. The National Trust bought 
the building in 1998, turning the lower floors into an educational centre. 
Upstairs, tucked into the eaves, is a one-bedroom apartment with an open-plan 
living and dining area that would suit walkers travelling the Cleveland Way.
• 0844 800 2070, nationaltrustcottages.co.uk 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/cottage/old-coastguard-station-020018/>

Martello Tower, Aldeburgh, Suffolk
 Photograph: D Kirkham 
Good for history buffs
Sleeps 4 
Cost from £939 a week

Rising from shingle on the outskirts of Aldeburgh, this is the most northerly 
of a chain of towers built to defend the coast in the 19th century. It's a 
tribute to its construction (a million bricks were used) that it's the only 
surviving building of the village of Slaughden – washed away by the sea in 
1936. The Landmark Trust rescued it and turned it into an idiosyncratic place 
to stay. Reached by a bridge and surrounded by sea, it has cavernous rooms and 
a colourful past – the Mitford family used to come for camping holidays.
• 01628 825925, landmarktrust.org.uk 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/search-and-book/properties/martello-tower-9317#tabs=0>

Ferryside, East Portlemouth, Devon
 Ferryside, East Portlemouth 
Good for yachties and boat fans 
Sleeps 7
 Cost from £867 a week

Across the estuary from the popular sailing community of Salcombe, the village 
of East Portlemouth is quieter and less visited. Ferryside is one of four 
holiday cottages on its sandy beach, which slopes gently and safely into the 
sea. It sits beside the slipway (where passenger ferries depart for Salcombe) 
and has moorings for boats, making it ideal for those who love messing about on 
the water. Most rooms face south over the estuary.
• 01548 843773, coastandcountry.co.uk 
<http://www.coastandcountry.co.uk/cottage-details/FERSID/>
 