
Dosa World

It's a distinctly no-frills deal, this. The chair I was sitting on needed 
repairing and Dosa's vivid green colour scheme may well give you a migraine. 
But, blimey, the food was good and cheap (cash only, of course). South Indian 
and Sri Lankan dishes are the speciality, not least the eponymous dosa, which, 
with its crepe-like consistency and lacy edges, they've got off pat. The masala 
potato filling, with nutty lentils, had been properly spiced for depth of 
flavour not heat, and the mint-green coconut chutney was good, too. The 
accompanying sambar, however, was fantastic. It had the heft, both literally 
and flavour-wise, of a chunky winter soup, but one as spiced as it is warmly 
savoury, a little tamarind sourness giving each mouthful a twist.
• Starters £1.75-£4.95, dosas and mains, £3.75-£7.50. 280 Old Christchurch 
Road, 01202 318535,dosaworld.net <http://www.dosaworld.net/>

Chez Fred
 Chez Fred 
No, not a French bistro, but a quaint fish-and-chip restaurant whose lunchtime 
queues speak for themselves. Located in Westbourne, a short bus ride or an 
appetite-sharpening walk of a mile or two from Bournemouth centre, Chez Fred is 
clearly something of a pilgrimage for fish-loving locals. Line-caught haddock, 
MSC-approved cod and an emphasis on frying the fish to order, are good 
indications that this is a quality operation. In most respects, it delivers. 
The bronzed, rustling, fluffy chips were excellent, and the crisp batter had a 
real richness and savoury depth to it. Homemade mushy peas were, likewise, 
fresh and velvety. The tartar sauce, however, lacked that rugged texture of 
chopped gherkins and capers. It was more like a thick, sharp mayonnaise.
• Takeaway fish and chips from £5.15; eat in special from £7.25, including 
bread roll, mushy peas and a drink. 10 Seamoor Road, Westbourne, 01202 761023,
chezfred.co.uk <http://www.chezfred.co.uk/>

Genève
 Genève 
You wouldn't guess from looking at it, but sedate Westbourne is also home to 
arguably Bournemouth's coolest restaurant. "Dirty" burgers and slow'n'low US 
barbecue are the hip order of the day at this small diner. Ingredients are 
free-range and local: they have their own smoker out the back – using cherry 
and apple wood to bring a tang to pastrami or Jamaican jerk wings. A notice 
announces proudly: "Everything we serve is from-scratch and homemade."

Genève's classic burger certainly lives up to that billing. So loosely packed 
it's almost spilling out of the sides of the brilliant ciabatta bun (firm and 
durable; able to soak up all the juices), it's a sweet, juicy beef bomb, 
expertly seasoned and laced with a little onion. Luxurious mayo and watercress 
are the simple and effective garnish. The fries – long triple-cooked skin-on 
fingers – were less successful. A significant minority were almost limp with 
grease. This wasn't what Heston Blumenthal intended when he got scientific on 
the spud.
• Lunch soup/sandwiches from £4.45, burgers and mains £6.95-£10.95. 128 Poole 
Road, Westbourne, 01202 768864,on Twitter <https://twitter.com/GeneveEatery> 

South Coast Roast
 South Coast Roast 
Isn't Bournemouth supposed to be God's waiting room? What's the deal, then, 
with all these trendy venues? A spin-off from Boscombe veteranCafe Boscanova 
<http://www.cafeboscanova.com/>, South Coast Roast is part third-wave coffee 
shop 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2009/mar/16/best-barista-britain-coffee>
, part bright-eyed cult (everything's "awesome"; the beef sandwich will, 
apparently, change your life). It certainly justifies its self-confidence on 
the coffee front. A flat white (£2.50) was superb. The milk was silky; it was 
served at the correct, drinkable, not madly hot, temperature; and the properly 
dosed espresso shot shone through, as it should, a little liquorice flickering 
at its edges.

The food is good, too. Beyond brownies and Anzac biscuits, it includes posh 
sandwiches and salads (marinated chickpea and preserved lemon; green bean, 
lemon and almond salad), sourdough toast topped with, for instance, avocado, 
chilli and lime, and a few hot dishes, such as aubergine parmigiana. I could 
pick tiny holes in the Vietnamesebánh mì (the pickled veg lacked serious poke; 
the bread was light, fine, but inauthentic). However, it fizzed with flavour, 
the chicken and pork filling was alive with herbs, lime and a smooth chilli 
heat.
• Sandwiches and meals £2.40-£8. 24 Richmond Hill, facebook.com/SouthCoastRoast
 <https://www.facebook.com/SouthCoastRoast>

Bournemouth Pizza Co
 Bournemouth Pizza Co 
Bournemouth is blessed with two wood-fired oven pizzerias, both of which 
locals rave about. Da Mario is on the way out of town towards Westbourne (12 
Queen's Road, 01202 766988), but I tried Bournemouth Pizza Co, near the train 
station. The young buck of the two, it's a minimalist space with big communal 
tables, quirky art on the walls and Blondie on the stereo. The dough for its 
14in bases is made daily, of course, and has that tell-tale bounce and chew.

There are a few exotic toppings on the menu, such as wild boar and venison, 
but the better testament to BPC's greatness is that its margherita hit the 
mark. The tomato sauce was clear and fresh in its flavour and the mozzarella 
delivered a heavenly hit of sweet creaminess. That base could have done with a 
little more char, perhaps, but overall this was first-rate pizza. It's BYO 
(£1pp), and two of you could share a pizza and a couple of salads here for 
under £20. In fact, if you're walking back into town, spend the money you've 
saved atGiggi Gelateria <http://www.giggigelateria.co.uk/> (from £1.80). It's 
tucked away in a dull little shopping arcade, but its traditional Italian 
gelato is very good.
• Pizzas £8-£11. 44 St Swithuns Road, 01202 555125, bournemouthpizza.co.uk 
<http://www.bournemouthpizza.co.uk/>

Flirt Café Bar
 Flirt 
This is a big, busy space, with kitsch walls decorated with everything from 
vintage lamps to disembodied dolls' heads smoking cigarettes. Its massive menu 
is a little bewildering but essentially breaks down into a canteen-style 
counter of hot and cold dishes, and the usual cafe fare of soups, jacket spuds, 
sandwiches and, a Flirt speciality, topped waffles. My samples from the hot 
food were, like Flirt itself, a bit odd. I've certainly never seen kidney beans 
and sweetcorn in chicken curry before – it's the kind of thing a housewife 
might have come up with in the 1970s. Nonetheless, Flirt's food is tasty. A 
vegetable salad dressed in lime, chilli and ginger was interesting, if a little 
worthy. The jambalaya certainly wouldn't worry any Creole chef, but it was 
carried by a nice, lightly tangy tomato sauce. On a sunny day, the terrace 
seating outside is clearly in hot demand.
• Snacks and light meals £1.75-£4.80, counter food, small/big plates 
£4.95/£6.95. 21 The Triangle, 01202 553999,flirtcafebar.com 
<http://www.flirtcafebar.com/>

Kino Lounge
 Kino 
There is an arthouse cinema downstairs, hence the name. But this bleached wood 
space is perhaps better-known for its menus of soups, salads, meze and hot 
tapas, popular square 11" pizza and pasta dishes. My tabbouleh could have done 
more lemon juice, but it had enough clean flavour to pass muster and, as it was 
my first visit, the owner threw in one of the great Kino flatbreads, that puff 
up like footballs. Sharing a salad and a couple of meze or a pizza, would make 
this an affordable light lunch for two.
• Nibbles, salads and tapas £2-£4.50, mains £4.80-£9.80. 39 Bourne Avenue, 
01202 552588,kinolougebournemouth.tumblr.com 
<http://kinolougebournemouth.tumblr.com/>

Deli Rocks
 Deli Rocks 
Stupidly, I walked to Southbourne from the town centre, in light rain that 
turned into a monsoon (hop on the bus if you're not staying locally). I was 
soaked to the skin and grumpy, but within minutes of arriving I'd stopped 
caring. I had one of this Italian deli-cafe's stuffed rustic loaf sandwiches in 
my mitt, a double espresso (£1.90) on the go, and the world suddenly seemed a 
far better place. Olive bread had been hollowed out and filled with numerous 
items – preserved artichoke, pesto, blue cheese, aubergine, rocket – every one 
absolutely hollering its flavour at me. From gourmet sandwiches and bagels to 
pizza slices and frittata, everything else on display looked brilliant, too. 
The space itself was large and relaxed, the bare brick walls lined with packing 
cases stacked with deli products, old gramophones and the odd pair of cowboy 
boots.
• Sandwiches £3.90-£4.90, meals £6.50-£7.90. 23 Southbourne Grove, Southbourne,
delirocks.com <http://delirocks.com/>

Little Pickle Deli Cafe
 Little Pickle 
From something as simple as tea (a pot served with a miniature bottle of milk, 
for £1.30), to its energetic emphasis on seasonal Dorset produce and scratch 
cooking, Little Pickle is one of those rare places that does everything 
properly. Others might cut corners on a breakfast sandwich, but here the 
buttered bread is Dorset Bakehouse and the excellent sausages, from a nearby 
Boscombe butcher, had been patiently fried and caramelised. Such details make a 
huge difference. Later in the day, LP dispenses burgers, pies, rarebits, deli 
boards and sandwiches – from Blue Vinney cheese and chutney to gussied-up steak 
ciabatta and fish finger sarnies. Such is the place's popularity I overheard 
one customer ordering her crab sandwiches up front, for the weekend.
• Takeaway sandwiches and pies from £3; eat-in breakfast £1.60-£6.50, 
sandwiches and meals £5-£7.50. 737 Christchurch Road, Boscombe, 01202 900899,
littlepickledelicafe.co.uk <http://www.littlepickledelicafe.co.uk/>

Goat & Tricycle

If you're looking for highly satisfactory pub grub, this polished old boozer 
is the place. They do a sunny egg and chips with home-cooked ham, wintry dishes 
such as homemade chilli, and liver and bacon casserole, as well as cut-above 
baguettes and burgers. Cash-strapped travellers should keep an eye on the 
specials board, where smaller versions of pub favourites like fish and chips 
(£6.50) pop up. On the beer-front, however, despite its 10 pumps, the Goat & 
Tricycle was a disappointment.

It's a matter of personal taste but this being a Wadworth pub (whose 
traditional beers are fairly dull), I'd expected the guest pumps to provide a 
bit of spice and excitement. This is clearly a house that keeps its beer in 
good order but, in a country undergoing a craft beer revolution, are guest 
beers from big regional brewers, like Thwaites and Everards, going to set 
anyone's pulse racing? No. The prices on the other hand - £3.70 for a pint of 
Adnam's Ghost Ship – nearly gave this northerner a heart attack.
• Baguettes and baked potatoes £4.95-£5.95, mains £7.75-£10.95. 27-29 Westhill 
Road, 01202 314220,goatandtricycle.co.uk <http://www.goatandtricycle.co.uk/>

Travel between Manchester and Bournemouth was provided by Cross Country Trains 
(crosscountrytrains.co.uk <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>). 
Accommodation was provided by the Norfolk Hotel (01202 551521,
thenorfolkhotel.co.uk <http://thenorfolkhotel.co.uk/en/home>). Until 21 
September 2013, its double rooms start at £83 a night B&B, or £113 a night 
half-board. For more visitor information on Bournemouth, seebournemouth.co.uk 
<http://www.bournemouth.co.uk/>
 