
The North Laine

A big old barn of a place, this former nightclub – now modishly decked out in 
chunky communal tables, industrial lighting and eyecatching sculptural pieces – 
still goes late each weekend with live bands and DJs. It is also home to Laine 
Brewery, whose gleaming, steel tuns dominate the bar, and so good beer comes as 
standard. Nigel Dallas, Laine's brewer, earned his stripes at Thornbridge and 
judging by his satisfyingly complex IPA, brews in a similar hop-forward vein. 
Lingering bitterness aside, every mouthful brought a new revelation: gusts of 
spice, floral, Parma Violet notes, toffee, lemons. There are eight cask beers 
to choose from, all (except Laine's Best) brewed on-site, plus a short list of 
craft bottles from Brooklyn, Sierra Nevada and more. True, North Laine does 
whiff a bit of brewing but, to beer fans, that mashed malt will smell like 
Chanel No 5.
• Each day, one pint is £3.20, otherwise from £3.85. 27 Gloucester Place, 
01273 683666,facebook.com/NorthLainePub <http://www.facebook.com/NorthLainePub>

The Southover (and other Indigo pubs)
 Southover pub, Brighton 
Indigo owns a lot of Brighton pubs, all of which sell some cask ale from 
Sussex breweries such as Hepworth, Kissingate and Langham. Its best pubs go 
much further in their celebration of great ale. With its Brewdog, Brooklyn and 
Flying Dog keg beers, Belgian/US imports and bottles from edgier UK breweries 
such as Wild Beer and Harbour,the Cow <http://www.thecowbrighton.co.uk> is 
billed as the group's craft beer flagship (95-97 Dyke Road). Meanwhile,the Hare 
& Hounds <http://www.hareandhoundsbrighton.com> (75 London Road), sells 
Meantime's unpasteurised, unfiltered "brewery fresh" lager which – held in two 
huge tanks, by the door - is maturing until the moment it is poured. It is a 
creditable drop: slightly yeasty, with a sharp hop edge and a twisting citric 
tale, but far from revelatory – particularly if you have tried similar 
unfiltered Czech beers, from brewers such as Bernard. It is also £5 a pint, 
which is typical of the crazy draught beer prices in these two rather 
overdesigned, self-consciously trendy boozers. In the Cow, even its cask ales 
start at a toppy £3.70 a pint.

All told, that is why I prefer the Southover. Located in residential Hanover, 
it is a bit off-piste but walkable from town. Not only does it still have the 
feel of a genuine lively local (be prepared: people will talk to you), but 
across its six keg lines, four cask pumps and bottled fridge it is somewhat 
cheaper than its sister venues and more adventurous in what it offers. Its 
Brewdog et al beers will still cost you a pretty penny, but its cask ales start 
at £3.09 and include, as well as beers from Sussex, brewing stars such as 
Burning Sky and 360° (its #49 Pacific pale was terrific), one guest beer from 
far-flung creatives such as Salford's First Chop or Huddersfield Magic Rock. 
The bottled selection is equally geographically wide-ranging. Summer Wine, 
Northern Monk and William Bros are all names you wouldn't necessarily expect to 
encounter on the south coast.
• Pint from £3.09. 58 Southover Street, 01273 601419, 
thesouthoverbrighton.co.uk <http://www.thesouthoverbrighton.co.uk>

Curry Leaf Café & The Hop & Vine
 Curry Leaf Cafe, Brighton 
Ordinarily, I wouldn't mention a restaurant in this series, but I have to make 
an exception for Curry Leaf Café. Yes, you must eat something to drink here, 
but, if you like, you can simply nibble on masala nuts or poppadums with 
chutneys (both £3) in an area of picnic table-style seating nominally set aside 
for drinkers. Crucially, its bottled beer selection is fantastic. Hip London 
craft brewers such as Partizan, Kernel and Beavertown, feature prominently, the 
22-strong list rounded out by a small but high-quality selection of Belgian 
beers (Verhaeghe, Rodenbach). The Curry Leaf also serves Meantime pils on 
draught and has a second pump devoted to Sussex's excellent Burning Sky brewery.

On the subject of restaurants, should you find yourself up in leafy Fiveways, 
Hop & Vine <http://www.thehopandvine.co.uk> (pint from £3.40, 300 Ditchling 
Road, 01273 549625), is a useful address to have in your mental Rolodex. It is 
both bar and bistro (so you don't have to eat), and its commitment to good beer 
is as rare as it is refreshing. Meantime and Freedom lagers occupy three keg 
pumps, while the two cask pumps serve beers from Sussex brewery Long Man. It is 
a traditional style that craft snobs may deem a bit passé, but Long Man's best 
bitter (clean and fresh, nice full mouthful, interesting sherbet/citrus 
flavours), was rather good. That is, after I had got over the hillock of 
ordering a Golden Tipple which had clearly gone past its best. It happens. And 
the beer was changed with good grace. The fridges, meanwhile, contain a compact 
selection of around 10 craft, Belgian and credible European beers from, for 
example, Brewdog, Redwell, Chimay.
• Beers from £3.80. 60 Ship Street, 01273 207070, curryleafcafe.com 
<http://www.curryleafcafe.com>

The Evening Star 
 Photograph: Pete Webb 
Twenty years ago, Dark Star Brewing was born in the Evening Star's cellar. One 
of the first UK breweries to start producing big, hoppy, US-style beers, it 
helped kick-start the current craft boom. That would be reason enough to pay 
homage at the Evening Star, which Dark Star now owns. But there is nothing 
nostalgic about this place. Its bottled menu is a global roll call of brewing 
innovation (Brew By Numbers, Mikkeller, Wild Beer, Crooked Stave), while its 11 
cask and keg lines start out with a selection of Dark Star beers, but then 
spiral off into the starry ether with stronger, wilder ales from the likes of 
Brodies, Marble or Magic Rock. The prices may make you wince: £3 a half is not 
uncommon. However, the Star seems to cap them as best it can. For instance, Axe 
Edge, a beautifully complex, aggressively bitter 6.8% IPA from Buxton Brewery, 
was a fairly reasonable £4.20 a pint. Money certainly hasn't been frittered 
away on fancy decor. The Star is basic and to the point: all utilitarian bare 
brick and wood fixtures, with almost nothing to distract you (bar a background 
soundtrack of vapid, Radio 2 indie schmaltz), from the business in hand: 
sensational beer.
• Pint from £3.30. 55/56 Surrey Street, 01273 328931, darkstarpubs.co.uk 
<http://www.darkstarpubs.co.uk>

The Prince Albert
 Prince Albert, Brighton Photograph: Alamy 
Next door to Brighton Station, this friendly, grungy boozer and live music 
venue prides itself on the quality of its six cask ales. Traditional beers 
(Harvey's Best) are served alongside more radical, full-flavoured craft beers 
from Sussex scene leaders such as Burning Sky, Dark Star and Hasting's 
Handmade. The latter's unfined Citra Cascade (its multi-award winning porter 
was another option) was exactly the kind of hop-loaded, lemony fresh, 
lychee-tinged reviver that the craft beer revolution has – thankfully - made 
commonplace. The Albert also sells Meantime pale ale on draught (pint £4.20), 
Pilsner Urquell and bottled beers from US brewery Point. Historically, the 
exterior of the Albert was home to a Banksy original, Kissing Coppers, but its 
extensive murals, graffiti and quirky decorations still reassure you that you 
are in safe hands. How can you not love a pub whose icons include both Che 
Guevara and Frank Sidebottom?
• Pint from £3.30. 48 Trafalgar Street, 01273 730499, 
facebook.com/ThePrinceAlbert <http://www.facebook.com/ThePrinceAlbert>

Brighton Beer Dispensary
 The Dispensary pub, Brighton 
A joint venture between London brewery Late Knights and Brighton Bier Co, this 
ruggedly handsome bar is, as you might expect, a fulcrum of everything new and 
exciting in beer. Its cask and keg selection includes some interesting touches, 
not least four gravity-dispense, from-barrel beers and two "mystery" light and 
dark beers, which are left unnamed on the pumps. The intention is that people 
will try the beers on the staff's recommendation (they're super-friendly and 
eager to talk beer), rather than because it's from a trendy brewery or has a 
pretty pump-clip. It is a noble project, if one slightly undermined by the 
litany of brewers (they're listed in a book, after they go off sale), that have 
occupied those pumps: Beavertown, Kernel, Tiny Rebel, Redwell, Bad Seed. These 
are some of the best and best-known breweries in craft beer. Get some George 
Wright or Oakham beers on, and the Dispensary will genuinely be opening up 
drinkers to some great, lesser-known breweries. That said, an extensive bottled 
beer menu goes beyond the obvious names with welcome inclusions from, for 
instance, Red Willow, Liverpool Craft Beer and Summer Wine. Naturally, Late 
Knights and Brighton Bier's own brews feature prominently at the bar. The 
former's unfined Crack of Dawn was, for 3.9%, very tasty beer: cleanly bitter, 
citrussy, with a pleasant background graininess.
• Pint from £3.40. 38 Dean Street, 01273 710624, facebook.com/BRTNDispensary 
<http://www.facebook.com/BRTNDispensary>

Hand In Hand
 The Hand in Hand pub, Brighton 
Brighton Bier Co, which co-owns the Dispensary, is a so-called "gypsy brew" – 
that is it moves around brewing beer on other people's kit. However, it is 
based at the Hand In Hand, a Kemptown brewpub, where it brews a range of 
Kemptown Brewery beers exclusively for the pub, and its own ales. As bad luck 
would have it, on this visit none of the Kemptown beers was on among the pub's 
four cask ales. In lieu, Brighton Bier's new-wave best bitter (all toffee, 
caramel and spice, with a crisply modulated bitterness), slipped down easily. 
Elsewhere at the bar you will find a small selection of reliable bottles 
(Brooklyn, Einstock, Bristol Beer), as well as, on draught, Brugse Zot, 
Meantime's ubiquitous pils and fruit beers from Floris and Liefmans. Not that 
it is all about the beer at this quirkiest of old, street-corner boozers. It's 
packed full of bric-a-brac and curious objects (ties, beer steins, tame 
Victorian pornography), which means half the fun at the Hand is drinking in the 
decor.
• Pint from £3.20. 33 Upper St James's Street, 01273 699595

Brighton Rocks
 Brighton Rocks, Brighton Photograph: Justin Paget Photography Ltd 
This easygoing Kemptown cocktail bar recently broke free of its beer tie 
(hurrah!), and is now exploring the foothills of craft and real ale. Its small 
but growing list of bottles includes, among others, Hepworth's organic pale 
ale, Anchor Steam, Goose Island's Honkers, Chapel Down's Curious Brew lager and 
Hitachino Nest's Japanese red rice ale. There is also one cask pump that pours 
Brighton Bier Co ales. The star of the show, however, is a keg beer, 
Hibernation, from new London brewery Bear Hug. A wheat beer/IPA hybrid, this 
hazy, softly carbonated beer is full of lemon, lime and tropical fruit 
flavours, yet vigorously bitter. "Like drinking Um Bongo while chewing 
paracetamol," as I wrote in my notes. Warning: it is however a whopping £5.60 a 
pint. After a shock like that, you may need some air. Which you can get on 
Brighton Rocks' little terrace, which looks out down Rock Place to the sea. 
Personally, on a sunny day, I sat inside, listening to James Blake breaking his 
heart. Who needs vitamin D?
• Pint from £3.70. 6 Rock Place, 01273 600550, brightonrocksbar.co.uk 
<http://www.brightonrocksbar.co.uk>

Craft Beer Co.
 Craft Beer Co, Brighton 
Fans of the London Craft Beer Co venues will know what to expect: light-touch 
renovation of an old building (a vintage Whitbread mirror is about as jazzy as 
it gets), and lots and lots of exceptionally good beer. You could lose days in 
the Belgian or barrel-aged sections of the bottle menu alone, where some of the 
prices, it must be said, are stratospheric. You would have to be celebrating 
something momentous (40th? divorce?) to spend £25 on a 750ml bottle of 
Mikkeller and Three Floyd's collaborative barley wine, Hvede Goop. Or £6 on a 
half-pint of Italian brewery Toccalmatto's Kilowatt, for that matter. That 
Craft Beer Co stocks such things, however, tells you everything you need to 
know about it. This is beer geek paradise, even if you stick to the sub-£5 
beers offered across its 27 (count em!) draught pumps. The staff are 
knowledgeable, approachable guides through all this, whether turning a novice 
on to Thornbridge's Tzara kolsch lager or recommending the latest creations 
from Evil Twin.
• Pint from £3.30. 22-23 Upper North Street, 01273 723736, thecraftbeerco.com 
<http://www.thecraftbeerco.com>

The Black Dove
 Back Dove, Brighton 
This eccentric Kemptown joint (its walls lined with artsy, boho and flea 
market clutter), is perhaps best known as a late-night cocktail bar. But the 
Black Dove is also serious about beer. Six keg lines – don't miss the two 
Kernel taps tucked underneath – dispense fairly standard stuff (Brooklyn, 
Harviestoun's Bitter & Twisted, Dark Star's enduring Hophead), but look in the 
fridges and you will find a startlingly good, constantly changing collection of 
around 60 bottled ales. A reasonably tight rein is kept on the prices, with 
most bottles £4 -£5.50. The bar staff were enthusing to me about a new beer 
they had in from Mikkeller's protégées, To ØL. Being a Danish beer, it might be 
something you'd run scared of, but at £4.90 it was a relative bargain. Not that 
you will necessarily stray into the imports. From something as simple as Sam 
Smith's superior lager to beers from pioneering craft outfits such as Wild Beer 
or Pressure Drop, the Dove's fridges are full of great UK beers.
• Pint from £3.70. 74 St James's Street, 01273 671119, blackdovebrighton.com 
<http://www.blackdovebrighton.com>

• Travel between Manchester and London was provided by Virgin Trains 
<http://www.virgintrains.co.uk>. Follow Tony Naylor on Twitter @naylor_tony 
<https://twitter.com/naylor_tony>
 