
The Tobacco Factory

This huge industrial, redbrick building is home not only to the Mayor 
(property developer George Ferguson, the one with the red trousers), but to a 
fine selection of local beers, too. The "Baccy Factory" encapsulates everything 
great about Bristol's creative, community-based culture – hosting, among other 
things, a theatre, life-drawing classes, a popular Sunday market, and the annual
Upfest <> graffiti festival. And then there's the beer. Locally grown malt and 
hops, brewed in the Bristol Beer Factory (situated over the road), can be drunk 
from both bottle and cask - ranging from the dark spiced Bristletoe Christmas 
ale to the creamy Milk Stout (a recentSociety of Independent Brewers <> gold 
award winner). Bristol Beer Factory's third pub, theBarley Mow <>, near Bristol 
Temple Meads railway station, is also well worth a visit.
• Raleigh Rd, tobaccofactory.com <http://tobaccofactory.com>

The Beer Emporium
 The Beer Emporium, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
The unassuming frontage of this bar, opened in early 2013, masks an 
underground gem in the stone-walled caverns beneath. As you might expect from 
the name, the Beer Emporium bar and bottle shop is home to a vast array of 
craft beers sourced from across the globe – from Phnom Penh (try the refreshing 
Cambodian Kingdom Pilsner) to Penryn (Cornish Rebel Brewery's Mexi-Cocoa 
chocolate vanilla stout is a bestseller). With 32 beers on tap, and hundreds 
more in bottles, selecting which one to try can be a daunting prospect, but the 
self-confessed "beer geeks" behind the bar are happy to guide you through the 
extensive and, in some cases, expensive, ever-changing list of options.
• 15 King St, thebeeremporium.net <http://thebeeremporium.net>

Small Bar
 Small Bar, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
Across the road from the Emporium, Small Bar is so called not because of its 
size but for its ambition to showcase the best small, independent breweries 
from the south-west (Cornwall'sHarbour Brewing <http://www.harbourbrewing.com>, 
Somerset'sMoor Beer <http://moorbeer.co.uk/>, and Wild Beer 
<http://wildbeerco.com> to name but a few) and beyond. Each of the 25 beers on 
tap is poured according to the measurement deemed appropriate, whether that be 
a half (Wild Beer's raspberry-flavoured Rubus Maximus sour beer is £3.95 a 
half) or a two-thirds (the keg of ultra-pale Moor Nor'Hop golden ale is a 
cheaper option at £2.90). Small Bar manages to walk the line between being 
unique and pretentious - its website has a list of "things you won't find" 
here, including pint glasses, TVs and Stella Artois - because of its passion 
for quality beer and sociable atmosphere (you can unwind with a book in the 
cosy sofa area upstairs). The emergence of three quality craft beer pubs in 
this area (Small Bar, the Beer Emporium and the recently refurbishedFamous 
Royal Navy Volunteer <>) has led to this end of King Street being dubbed 
Bristol's "Beermuda Triangle".
• 31 King St, smallbarbristol.com <http://smallbarbristol.com>

The Three Tuns
 The Three Tuns, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
Away from the more contemporary craft beer pubs in the city centre, the Three 
Tuns in Hotwells – with its stunted bar, decorative dried hops, rickety chairs, 
impromptu musical jams, and steamed-up sash windows – is refreshingly 
old-fashioned. Beneath the chalkboard declaration that "good people drink good 
beer" above the bar, are the half-dozenArbor Ales <http://arborales.co.uk> 
pumps that make the Tuns such a welcoming drinking hole for a true lover of 
craft brews. From the golden hues and citrus hints of the Arbor Single Hop 
Motueka, to the dark, nutty character of the Arbor Mild West, this pub has a 
beer for everyone and the timeworn charm to match.
• 78 St George's Rd, threetunsbristol.co.uk <http://www.threetunsbristol.co.uk>

Grain Barge
 Grain Barge, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
Moored in the historic and picturesque Bristol Harbour, the Grain Barge is a 
lively converted barge, once used to transport wheat across the Severn river. 
Exceptionally popular in the summer months and owned and supplied by the 
award-winningBristol Beer Factory <> brewery, the Grain Barge serves an 
impressive variety of reasonably priced, local craft beers as well as a 
selection from Devon and Cornwall (enjoy the Beer Factory's own Sunrise golden 
ale at £3.20 a pint), not to mention a healthy dose of the staple Somerset 
cider. With panoramic views stretching from the nearby SS Great Britain right 
down to Ashton Court, there aren't many better locations for a well-deserved 
drink than the top deck of this vessel. Sunshine preferable.
• Hotwell Rd, grainbarge.co.uk <http://www.grainbarge.co.uk>

The Steam Crane
 The Steam Crane, Bristol Photograph: Jake Graham/BristolMNC 
Situated at the eastern end of vibrant North Street in Bedminster, the Steam 
Crane (named after the renowned Fairbairn crane in Bristol Docks) is a newly 
opened alehouse and kitchen which offers more than just beer. The pub currently 
has around eight craft beers (including Greene King's hoppy Noble craft lager 
at £3.70 a pint), six real ales, and a range of ciders and cocktails in 
addition to a well thought-out food menu with lots of light bites and some more 
hearty main dishes - the tasty house ale-battered haddock and chips is 
available as a small or large portion for £5 or £9. The Steam Crane is a great 
addition to an area that already boasts a sterling traditional tavern (The Hare 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/New-pub-Hare-races-shadow-fallen-Moon/story-15761563-detail/story.html>
) and the trendiest local in Bristol (The Old Bookshop 
<http://www.theoldbookshop.co.uk>). Look out for the upcoming independent beer 
events planned by the three pubs.
• 4-6 North St, thesteamcrane.co.uk <http://thesteamcrane.co.uk>

Copper Jacks Crafthouse
 Copper Jack's, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
An evening in the city centre's club-heavy Corn Street area would not usually 
be an opportunity to appreciate anything other than drunken dancing in the 
company of stag and hen parties. But the recently openedCopper Jacks Crafthouse 
<http://www.bristol-culture.com/2013/10/02/copper-jacks-crafthouse-bristol/> – 
in a building once occupied by a bank, and later a strip club - may offer a 
classier alternative. With a great selection of local beers including Hefe 
(from the Bristol Beer Factory), Copper Jacks has a warm and lively atmosphere 
where you can relax on the leather sofas under dim lighting or get toe-tapping, 
or even dancing, on the live jazz music nights.
• 30 Clare St

Zerodegrees
 Zerodegrees, Bristol Photograph: Jake Graham/BristolMNC 
Visible from the outside as well as in, the mechanical construction of 
Zerodegrees' microbrewery is perfect for any visitor with a yearning for a 
drink out in the sun. The microbrewery/restaurant's central location and 
futuristic appearance aren't its only appeal. The selection of beer offers a 
satisfying deviation in taste from your traditional bitter. Particularly 
palatable are the Zerodegrees Pilsner, with its fresh lime flavour, and the 
American Wheat with Mango, both £3.95. A commitment to seasonal and speciality 
ales, consistent with innovation and authentic rarities, increases Zerodegrees' 
allure and places it among Bristol's uppermost craft breweries.
• 53 Colston St, zerodegrees.co.uk <http://zerodegrees.co.uk>

Aviator Bar, Redland
 Aviator Bar, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
As you enter the newly opened Aviator Bar, you're struck by the stylish decor 
- the place is adorned with plane memorabilia and, though petite, it has a 
warm, welcoming atmosphere. The array of craft ales on offer protrude from the 
tiled wall behind the counter, with a brief description of the beers scrawled 
around the taps. They offer an eclectic choice of cask ales, craft lagers and 
bottled beauties from around the world. A favourite of the staff here is 
Marston's citrus-infused Revisionist Craft Lager (£3.50 a pint). If you're 
winging it around Bristol, it's a great place to stop for a pint and to cool 
your jets.
• 2B Chandos Rd, aviatorbar.co.uk <http://aviatorbar.co.uk>

The Urban Standard
 The Urban Standard, Bristol Photograph: James Proyer/BristolMNC 
The stripped-back, raw and industrial design of The Urban Standard would 
provide an intriguing backdrop to any social occasion. Tiles that have survived 
from a 1930s convenience store sit alongside graffiti, a hallmark of Bristolian 
culture, in a complementary blend of old and new. Despite this chic design 
however, there is great warmth to the bar, with a friendly and informal 
atmosphere. The draught beers are from across the UK, Europe and North America, 
including some traditional crowd-pleasers - Chimay Gold Belgian pale ale-style 
beer at £4 a pint - and a few "outside the box" selections such as Wisteria 
Wheat, a Hefeweizen-style beer brewed by Fordham Brewing Company in the US, at 
£4.20 a pint. The array of reasonably priced craft drinks (and great-quality 
food) makes this the best independent bar on Gloucester Road.
• 35 Gloucester Rd, theurbanstandard.co.uk <http://theurbanstandard.co.uk>

• Bristol Monday Night Club is a group of residents that rate local pubs based 
on atmosphere, appearance and price. Follow them on Twitter @BristolMNC. 
Contributors: James Proyer, Anna Wooles, Danny Graham, Sam Brown, Claudia 
Collins, Ben Brooks, Jake Graham, David Hastings, Tim Richardson, Alex Thomas
 