
Applications have opened on 29 September for the 2017 civil service fast stream
 <http://www.faststream.gov.uk/>, one of the most popular graduate schemes in 
the country.

This year, about 1,000 new fast streamers will be recruited and there have 
been changes to the assessment process from previous years, but as ever there 
will be fierce competition for places.

With that in mind, we asked Guardian readers who have made it through the 
process in previous years to give us the benefit of their experience. One thing 
emerges loud and clear: do the prep! Here are readers’ top tips on that and 
other ways to ace the application process. (Some names have been changed).

Prepare

“Prep, prep and prep again. Look at the difficult long-lasting issues that 
face the government and think carefully how you would argue for and against. 
For example, should marijuana be legalised? How should the government tackle 
reforming prisoners? Important note: be diplomatic without sitting on the 
fence. Answer the question and as long as you make a strong case, based on some 
evidence, you should be okay.” Andrew, 39.

“Preparation is key to succeeding and the best preparation you can do is 
looking at the competency framework and thinking about how you can display 
those competencies at each stage of the process.” John, 24.

“Preparation is key. Know your strengths and weaknesses when you apply and 
work on them. I hadn’t done numerical reasoning tests for a while so I knew I 
needed to practise. I also knew I needed to become more confident in 
interviews, so I incorporated the role of being an interviewer into my paid and 
unpaid work, to be able to see interviews from a different perspective. They 
aren’t looking for the perfect individual, as the civil service fast stream is 
a programme in which you grow and develop – but if you can show that you’ve 
taken the initiative to start this process yourself, that helps.” Anna, 23.

What is it like to apply for the civil service fast stream? Here's what you 
said
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/19/applying-civil-service-fast-stream-reader-views>
Persist

“It’s a long, hard slog but perfectly achievable so long as you follow the 
instructions carefully and practise thoroughly. The key to getting through the 
assessment itself is to read the guidance carefully, plan for the interview 
section (lots of good examples) and when you complete the other tasks, think 
about what sort of person the civil service wants to have working for them.” 
Nicola, 36.

“As with any job application, be yourself. If you are yourself and don’t get 
in then chances are that if you had then you would not have enjoyed it and 
ended up unhappy. More specifically:

 * Don’t talk over people in group exercises: you can be assertive without 
being difficult. 
 * Practise the ‘star’ interview technique as it is used throughout the 
service. 
 * Ensure spelling and grammar on written applications is correct. If one day 
you end up briefing a minister, they need to be able to pick it up and read 
through it without issue. 
 *  Don’t try to double guess what they are looking for in role plays or 
interviews; go with instinct.” Elizabeth, 26. 
“Keep at it! It is a long process and it takes months to complete and find out 
if you have been successful. A lot can happen in that time, but if you want a 
career in the civil service it is worth finding the motivation and positivity 
to follow through with the whole process. I am certainly excited to begin this 
new journey!” George, 24.


“Relax, focus, and, above all, enjoy the assessment experience. Even if you 
are unsuccessful the experience alone is a fantastic learning and personal 
development opportunity.” Jonathan, 23.



Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 