
 Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a short story collection produces all 
sorts of flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this 
detritus can provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the 
practice of writing. Blunderbuss is excited to runthis series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing. In this installment, Lincoln Michel shares the time theft 
techniques that allowed him to steal enough minutes to writeUpright Beasts 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/upright-beasts/>, published this autumn in 
the US by Coffee House Press.

Upright Beasts takes us to a world “similar to our own, yet twisted just 
enough to feel strange” (Publishers Weekly 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-1-56689-418-0>). Children go to school 
long after all the teachers have disappeared, a man manages an apartment 
complex of attempted suicides, and a couple navigates their relationship in the 
midst of a zombie attack. From this often surreal material, Michel spins tales 
that are “sometimes hysterically funny and sometimes quietly disturbing” 
(Booklist), and that ultimately coalesce into a collection that establishes him 
as “one of contemporary literary culture’s greatest natural resources” (Justin 
Taylor, Vice 
<https://www.vice.com/read/reading-2013-fiction-poetry-nonfiction-older-books-some-not-books-and-the-best-book-of-the-year>
).

–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

The coffee is cold, the trees are shriveling, and I played Candy Crush on my 
phone for an hour before getting out of bed

I would like to begin by telling you about my rigid yet always productive 
writing routine that I follow each day without fail while seated at my 
beautiful oak desk – overlooking, no doubt, a sea of lush trees covered in 
flowering vines – and surrounded by detailed story notes, poignant quotes from 
my favorite thinkers, and a cup of still steaming coffee. However, I’ve been 
told that this is a non-fiction essay. The coffee is cold, the trees are 
shriveling for winter, and I played Candy Crush on my phone for an hour before 
getting out of bed.

When I was asked to write this essay, my first thought was that there was 
nothing to write because my “routine” and “process” are completely chaotic and 
scattered. But perhaps that chaos is interesting. My book,Upright Beasts 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/upright-beasts/>, was written on stalled 
subway cars, noisy cafes, and park benches. My physical drafts have either been 
shredded in some recycling plant or else wrinkled and stained in an obscure 
corner of my bedroom. My computer docs are located alternatively in my 
documents folder, my downloads folder, and my desktop, with minimal 
organization. Sometimes I write by hand in a notebook and revise on the 
computer. Other times I write a draft on my laptop, then print out and revise 
by hand.
 ‘Sometimes revision is easy [see picture above] ... Other times revision is 
hard.’ Photograph: Lincoln Michel 
As a writer not rich enough to not have a job or antisocial enough to not want 
friends, you have to be a master thief

Perhaps another way to put it is that as a writer who isn’t rich enough to not 
have a job or antisocial enough to not want friends, you have to be a master 
thief. You have to steal every ounce of time you can. Scribble notes on 
receipts; revise when the boss turns his back. Grab every speck of time you can 
until you have enough for a book to bloom in. That might take a year or a 
decade, but the little stolen moments will eventually add up.

My process has always been dependent on the story at hand. Some stories sit in 
my brain for a while, then come out mostly fully formed. Others start as just a 
single sentence and may undergo many drafts and radical changes. The 
anti-process process has its benefits though. It adds a bit of chaos and a bit 
of life to the work. Revision is important, but so is making sure your work is 
alive. Too much polish dulls everything to same shine.

(At one point, I even worked a typo into a cosmic horror story 
<http://granta.com/dark-air/> about mutating hippies:

“We’ll sneak down that slope and make our way back to the road,” Iris said. 
“Then we’ll come back with police and guns and fucking rapid dogs.”

“Do you mean rabid dogs?”

“Both!”

“Sure,” I said. “Okay. That’s a plan.”)

Revision is important, but so is making sure your work is alive. Too much 
polish dulls everything to same shine

It helps that my book, Upright Beasts, is a story collection. Stories thrive, 
I think, on chaos. Stories need to grow in different ways and into different 
shapes. I like collections that are eclectic, a little ecosystem of different 
critters and fauna that interact with each other to form a whole. (Critics tend 
to like monochromatic collections, as they are much easier to talk about if 
more boring to read.) Novels are different beasts, requiring a skeletal 
structure that will hold up the characters, plot, and voice for several hundred 
pages.

Despite my erratic writing process, I was very diligent about submitting my 
work. Submitting has to be thought of as a job for young writers. I made a list 
of about thirty magazines I respected and would have been thrilled to be 
published in. Then I submitted a story to each of those—although only sending 
one story to five or so journals at a time—and forgot about it. (Fretting over 
rejection or response time never helps.) When I got the inevitable rejection, I 
waited a couple weeks and sent a new story. Eventually almost all my stories 
found homes.
 ‘A spread from my submission log. Yes, my handwriting is that bad.’ 
Photograph: Lincoln Michel 
Here I should acknowledge several essential partners-in-crime. The Millay 
Colony <http://www.millaycolony.org/>, the Virginia Center for the Creative Arts
 <http://www.vcca.com/main/index.php>, and Lower Manhattan Cultural Council 
<http://lmcc.net/> all helped me transform my writing time from weekends at 
crowded cafes to weeks or months with little else to do but write. During those 
times of excess time, I was able to keep a stricter schedule. Huge chunks of my 
book were written with these as my offices views:
 ‘Manhattan as seen from Governor’s Island.’ Photograph: Lincoln Michel  ‘A 
table at the Millay Colony.’ Photograph: Lincoln Michel 
As my first collection, the stories were culled from all the stories I’ve 
written between 2006 and 2014. Despite the variety, the collection wasn’t 
slapped together. I spent a long amount of time figuring out the order and what 
to add or cut. Glancing at my old blog, I think I published a little over 50 
stories in that time (I write a lot of flash fiction), and only 18 of those 
made the cut. (The final collection has 26 stories, so there were another 8 
at-the-time-unpublished stories included in the final draft.)

Submitting [stories to magazines] has to be thought of as a job for young 
writers

Upright Beasts contains a fairly diverse set of stories that range from 
realism to surrealism, love stories to body horror, flash fiction to 
mini-novellas. I read and take inspiration from many different styles, genres, 
and forms, and it seemed right to have that reflected in the book. Figuring out 
which stories to include from the 60+ I had finished was both harder and easier 
than it might seem. Easier, because I was able to eliminate about half the 
stories off the bat for either beingtoo different or not up to my current 
standards. But figuring out what to do with the other half was a long slog. 
Because of the variety, I tried a lot of different organizations and each 
organizational structure required different stories. For example, when I 
ordered the collection like a mixtape, a couple similar stories spaced out in 
the text added resonance. When I finally decided on organizing the book into 
four different mini-books, a lot of those similar stories felt redundant when 
side by side and had to be cut.

The final section-based organization was actually my original plan for the 
collection way back before I had an agent. My long organizational odyssey was 
perhaps just a way to bring me back to where I’d started. So it goes with 
writing and revision much of the time.

Anyway, that’s how you create a story collection. You steal time whenever you 
can, steal story ideas wherever you can, steal inspiration, steal office 
supplies to mail out submissions, steal and rob and gather all these parts 
together on the slab and stitch them together until your own little 
Frankenstein monster is ready to be born.

 * Lincoln Michel is the editor-in-chief of electricliterature.com 
<http://electricliterature.com/> and a founding editor of Gigantic 
<http://thegiganticmag.com/magazine/>. His work has appeared in Granta, Oxford 
American, Tin House, Pushcart Prize anthology, and elsewhere. He is the 
co-editor ofGigantic Worlds <http://giganticbooks.com/>, an anthology of 
science flash fiction, and the author ofUpright Beasts 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/upright-beasts/>, a collection of short 
stories on Coffee House Press. He was born in Virginia and lives in Brooklyn. 
You can find him online atlincolnmichel.com <http://lincolnmichel.com/> and 
@thelincoln <https://twitter.com/thelincoln>.
 