
Backbench Conservative MPs unhappy with the government’s refusal to take in 
more unaccompanied child refugees from Europe are negotiating with ministers to 
find a compromise to stave off a possible government defeat next month.

Ministers are under growing pressure over the plight of unaccompanied child 
refugees from Europe, after it emerged that the Democratic Unionist party has 
signalled it may instruct its eight MPs to vote against the government in a 
crucial vote on an amendment to the immigration bill.

At least seven Conservative MPs are expected to rebel in addition, and will 
back a new amendment tabled by Labour peer Alf Dubs calling on the government 
to offer sanctuary to children fleeing conflict without their parents. Around a 
dozen more are wavering, raising the possibility of a government defeat.

Westminster’s DUP MPs and 35 Conservative MPs abstained in Monday’s vote on an 
earlier amendment by Lord Dubs that stipulated the government should offer 
homes to 3,000 unaccompanied child refugees. The government narrowly avoided 
defeat in that instance, by just 18 votes.

Immigration bill 'treats devolved governments as second class'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/21/immigration-bill-treats-devolved-governments-second-class>
The Daily Mail on Thursday took the unusual step of printing a full page 
editorial on the topic, 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3562690/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Mail-s-robust-migration-lost-children-sanctuary.html>
 headlined: “We must give these lost children sanctuary”. The article said: 
“Nobody has been more robust that this paper in giving voice to public concerns 
over the impact of mass, unrestricted immigration. But ... we believe that the 
plight of these unaccompanied children now in Europe – hundreds of them on our 
very doorstep in the Channel ports of France – has become so harrowing that we 
simply cannot turn our backs.”

Dubs was saved from the Nazis as a child refugee, and brought to Britain. He 
has argued that the children fleeing violence in Syria and other 
conflict-ridden areas deserve the same welcome that he and the children of the
Kindertransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/refugees-immigration-kindertransport-child>
 were given.

His revised amendment removes the reference to 3,000 children, and simply 
states that the government should make arrangements to relocate to the UK a 
“specified number of unaccompanied refugee children from other countries in 
Europe”. That number should be determined in consultation with local 
authorities, and MPs close to negotiations are confident that the “specified” 
figure would run to several thousand.

As public concern for the plight of lone refugee children grows, Home Office 
ministers are consulting a handful of Conservative MPs who are expected to 
rebel on the vote, to seek out a compromise so defeat can be avoided.

Conservative MP Heidi Allen, who abstained in the last vote, said she would 
rebel and back the Dubs amendment, which is expected to return to the House of 
Commons on 9 May. But she said she and colleagues would be talking to James 
Brokenshire, the immigration minister, to see if the government could be 
persuaded to support the amendment. “We are working on amendments; small tweaks 
of language making it more palatable to the government,” she said. “We want to 
get it through by hook or by crook.”

 The DUP said it wanted a “humane and practical solution to this crisis”.


Yvette Cooper, chair of Labour’s refugee taskforce, said: “It is clear that 
MPs of all parties are feeling increasingly uneasy about the idea of standing 
by while child refugees are sleeping rough, alone on the streets of Europe at 
risk of trafficking and abuse. In just three days, nearly 60,000 people have 
signeda petition <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/128833> calling on 
Britain not to turn its back on child refugees in Europe. David Cameron should 
realise he is wrong on this and agree to support the Dubs amendment when MPs 
vote on 9 May.”

Tanya Steele, Save the Children <https://www.savethechildren.net/> CEO, said: 
“Last year an estimated 10,000 lone children went missing in Europe. Lone 
refugees as young as nine, fleeing war, have arrived with high hopes of Europe 
being a place of sanctuary. They are now sleeping on roadsides, in police cells 
and in informal camps. In Calais,children are forced to gamble with their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/29/they-are-falling-apart-the-fate-of-lone-children-in-calais-refugee-camp>
 as they try to reach their relatives in the UK. Some are dying trying to reach 
their family. The power of the Dubs amendment is felt by children that are 
waiting to hear their fate. If MPs vote for this, they will be protecting lone 
children from the gravest forms of abuse and exploitation.”

The organisation Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, which is 
supporting children in Calais and elsewhere, said: “The conditions for lone 
child refugees in Europe are grim. They are reliant on organisations like Help 
Refugees for shelter and handouts but have to fend entirely for themselves, 
cook for themselves, cope with scabies and other illnesses and risk brutality 
and exploitation on a daily basis. We urge MPs not to turn the lives of 
children into a political football and instead vote with their hearts and their 
conscience to offer sanctuary to these vulnerable youngsters.”


In a statement, Brokenshire said the government would consider its response to 
the Lords’ vote, ahead of the immigration bill returning to the House of 
Commons. The government has defended its opposition to the Dubs amendment, 
arguing that it does not want to inadvertently create a situation in which 
families “see an advantage in sending children alone, ahead and in the hands of 
traffickers”.
 