
Part of me wishes it were easy to describe my typical writing day. I have 
heard about them, those smug productive hours when a writer – usually male, it 
has to be said – sits down each day at 9am with an espresso, writes till 1, 
makes bouillabaisse, writes from 2 till 5, plays tennis, and after supper sits 
with a glass of single malt whisky reading over what he’s written that day. 
That is a scenario I both crave and detest. It will never be that controlled 
and disciplined for me.

Much of the joy of writing historical novels comes from doing the research: 
holed up at the library reading about 19th-century techniques for grafting 
apple trees, or medieval plant symbolism, or the journals of gold rush miners. 
Or, better yet, being out on the road, standing next to giant sequoias in 
California, or fossil hunting on the beach at Lyme Regis, or walking from Soho 
to Spitalfields imagining it is 1792. Research is what gives me ideas, what 
helps me make up characters and plots.

Research is easy. It’s sitting down to write that’s hard. It’s hard partly 
because it’s often dull. The most productive writing happens when I have a 
boring life and a clear run of days – nothing in the diary, no trips or 
meetings or coffees with friends. It takes me hours of circling each day to 
finally “land” on the writing. Hours of cups of tea and checking for email, 
checking Twitter, Facebook, the news. I am delighted to answer phone calls (no, 
you haven’t disturbed me at all – please call!), I pounce on the post the 
moment it arrives. I research some obscure fact that leads me down other rabbit 
holes of unnecessary information. I suddenly decide to look at new cars online, 
or for different curtain material.

Often I have to leave my study, with its tempting computer and the window with 
its view of my neighbours’ lives, and sit in the living room or at the kitchen 
table. Best of all – and where I’m writing this, in fact – isthe British Library
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/22/quiet-please-in-praise-of-the-british-library-celebration-users-love-it-olivia-laing>
. I lock my phone away, I bring my notebook or manuscript, and sit in the 
concentrated silence of the reading rooms there, the others around me focused, 
intent. There is nothing so galvanising as being around other people already in 
the zone.

What happens when I manage to block out the distractions, when I land on the 
blank page at last? I write one sentence, then the next, then the next. Paper 
and pen first (pencil in the British Library) – computer is for later. 
Surprisingly quickly, I accumulate 1,000 words, the empty pages that terrify me 
every day are filled and I’m done – for that day.

I am in this world, at my kitchen table, but simultaneously hold in my head 
another world

But what is going on when my pen is scratching, pausing, scratching? I am 
performing a magic trick that still surprises me. I am in this world, at my 
desk or kitchen table, but I am simultaneously holding in my head another world 
full of people I have never physically met but know to their core. That world 
and those people pour out through my pen: rough – often very rough – but 
insistent.

I know in my gut that it’s really working when what I say and how I say it 
merge. It doesn’t happen with every word – that’s poetry; prose is baggier and 
more forgiving. But when it works – maybe once a day, twice if I’m on a roll – 
it is deeply satisfying. Then I look up and laugh at myself for having spent so 
long using my refined procrastination techniques to put off that moment. What 
was I so scared of? There it is, the metaphor that rings, the character who 
speaks true, the surprise of a particular word combination.

Next day: the same thing all over again, if I’m lucky. The terror of the blank 
page. Circle it for too long; land; write. It has to be steady or it doesn’t 
work. And often, it doesn’t work.

Yeats <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats> described the writing life 
best when he said: “Do not hurry; do not rest.”Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/07/samuel-beckett-the-maestro-of-failure>
, too, with: “Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.” On a 
bad day I fail again; on a good, I fail better.

•Tracy Chavalier's At the Edge of the Orchard 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/at-the-edge-of-the-orchard-431034.html> is 
published by HarperCollins.
 