
Tracey Emin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin> has scrapped a 
controversial plan to demolish a listed building to create a large home and 
studio space in Spitalfields, east London.

The decision has been praised by conservation groups, who overwhelmingly 
opposed Emin’s proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/10/tracey-emin-house-studio-planning-opposition>
 to knock down a 1920s building on Bell Lane and replace it with a modern 
five-storey house connected to her studio, designed by David Chipperfield 
Architects.

Tower Hamlets council rejected the artist’s planning application in April. 
Emin lodged an appeal but withdrew it last week, a spokesman for the planning 
inspectorate confirmed to the Guardian.

A council spokeswoman said the only way to pursue the redevelopment would be 
to submit an entirely new application.

The planning application had angered conservation societies and elicited 
almost 60 objections to the council, one of which described the design as 
“ugly, an eyesore and a triumph for money over the preservation of local 
history, style and local aesthetics”. There were 11 submissions in favour of 
the project.

Emin argued last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/24/tracey-emin-demolish-listed-london-building-east-end>
 it was important to build a home adjoining her studio for “consolidating her 
way of living and working into one entity which is capable of adapting to new 
practices over the whole lifetime of the artist, enabling any artist occupier 
to live and work there for the whole of their working career”.

Planning officers said in February that although the proposed building had 
architectural merit, it did not justify the loss of the existing building.

Save Britain’s Heritage, which had been planning to oppose the project at the 
planning inquiry, welcomed the decision to withdraw the appeal.

Henrietta Billings, director of Save Britain’s Heritage, said in a statement: 
“Great care was taken to design this delightful, modest building on Bell Lane 
to blend with the traditional scale of the narrow streets around it. Just a few 
hundred metres away from the office towers of the City, the historic streets in 
this area buzz with life thanks to their human scale – in spite of intense 
development pressures. We are delighted that the building has been reprieved.”

The group, which was supported by the Spitalfields Trust, the Twentieth 
Century Society and other campaign groups, said the building stood at a 
“pivotal position” in the conservation area.

Tess Pinto, conservation officer at the Twentieth Century Society, said: 
“66-68 Bell Lane is a fascinating example of early 20th-century social housing 
in an area ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> which is rapidly 
losing much of its historic character to redevelopment. We are very pleased 
that Tracey Emin has withdrawn her appeal and hope that any future schemes will 
take a conservation-led approach, as this unique building deserves.”

A Tower Hamlets spokeswoman said: “The application was refused by the council, 
and a subsequent appeal was submitted. On Wednesday, we found out from the 
planning inspectorate that the applicant had decided to withdraw the appeal.

“The only way they could take the redevelopment plans forward, if they wished 
to, would be to submit a new application.”

Emin’s studio was contacted for comment but had not responded at the time of 
publication.
 