
Today, we present a haunting extract from a newly translated novel by 
critically acclaimed Dutch writer, columnist and journalist Hanna Bervoets. 
Stranded in a school building after a catastrophic event leaves the outside 
world uninhabitable, a TV crew and the subjects of their documentary struggle 
to survive in Bervoets’ post-apocalyptic universe. From the scattered diary 
pages of the crew’s researcher, we learn the troubling story of everything 
there was, and the little there was left.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

We haven’t turned on the computers in a long time. The last time we turned 
them off again, there still wasn’t any internet. Until then we still opened the 
browsers every day. Though perhaps that was just habit, like in the old 
situation, tearing a page off my calendar every morning, even though I already 
knew full well what day of the week it was, or what date. But the more often 
you do something, the stranger it is not to do it. So I can’t say whether we 
still believed the internet would come back. Just that we kept hoping it would.

It is perhaps hard for you to imagine how important the internet once was. I 
also find it hard to imagine. Perhaps it really wasn’t all that important.

But I think it was.

We started craving other things. Things that were there. Though they were 
becoming scarcer by the day.

People said: You can find anything on the internet. But you had to search for 
it first. Even more than searching, we liked looking at things other people 
thought we wanted to find: Pictures in which they stretched out one arm to take 
their own picture; songs about relationships that had just begun or just ended; 
videos of animals or babies doing things.

Me, I had a preference for videos of cats. I didn’t love cats. But I did love 
to see cats getting tickled, walking on a piano, or falling off something. I 
also loved videos with guinea pigs.

Of course we weren’t just watching cats and guinea pigs. Many people watched 
other people. In the old situation you could also do that at the supermarket. 
But at the supermarket most of those other people had their clothes on: You 
didn’t often run into people without any clothes on. Scarcity creates demand 
and demand creates supply. Supply caused the scarcity to decrease, but not the 
demand for people without clothes. And so the internet was soon full of naked 
bodies. If you paid you could even make the naked bodies move.

But, above all, the internet was a communication medium. Yes, communication 
might have even been the most important constant in the old situation. All day 
we were sending messages. Some messages had a specific goal. They were calls to 
action: To be at the meeting around 3:00 or to bring Thai food. The intentions 
behind other messages were more vague.

“I’m going to have dinner now.” “I’m listening to a song.” “I read an article 
in The Guardian.”

Such messages were aimed at people who hadn’t been searching for them but 
found them anyway, all through the day, on their computers, tablets, or phones. 
We didn’t know that we wanted to read this information. But then again, these 
messages didn’t have anything to do with wanting. They were there. Like the 
weather. Before you could even wonder whether it was raining, you saw that it 
was raining. Before you could wonder if you wanted to know what other people 
had eaten that day, it was there for you to see.

The strange thing was, we didn’t realize the importance of these messages 
then. Some people said: It’s all nonsense, I’m not doing this. Other people 
said: It’s all nonsense, but I’m doing it anyway.

Translation Tuesday: Life in the Court of Matane by Eric Dupont – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/jun/14/translation-tuesday-life-in-the-court-of-matane-by-eric-dupont-extract>
Only now do I understand what purpose those messages really had. They assured 
us that there were others out there—the only information that really matters, 
and the only information we craved during the first days of the new situation.

But craving something that isn’t there is torture. To spare ourselves, we 
started craving other things. Things that were there. Though they were becoming 
scarcer by the day.

Translated from the Dutch by Florian Duijsens

Click here <http://www.letterenfonds.nl/en/book/907/everything-there-was> for 
more information about Everything There Was.

*****

 * Hanna Bervoets (b. 1984) writes novels, essays, and screenplays. Bervoets 
won the 2009 Debut of the Year Award for her first novel, Or, How, Why. Its 
follow-up, Dear Céline, was awarded the Opzij Literature Prize 2012 for best 
book by a female Dutch author. It has since been adapted for the big screen. 
After Dear Céline, she made her definitive breakthrough as a novelist with the 
acclaimed bestseller Everything There Was. Her next novel, Efter, was nominated 
for the BNG New Literature Prize and reached the longlist of the Golden Book 
Owl and the Libris Literature Prize. The film rights of Efter have been sold to 
prominent Dutch producer NL Film. Bervoets’ fifth novel, Ivanov, came out in 
January 2016 and has received high critical acclaim. 
 * Florian Duijsens is a writer, editor, and translator who teaches in Bard 
College Berlin’s Language & Thinking program. He currently serves as fiction 
editor of SAND Journal, and co-hosts the bimonthly Dead Ladies Show. He 
recently contributed an introduction to Grasses and Trees, the first collection 
of Lydia Davis’ A.L. Snijders translations from the Dutch. You can find more of 
his work in Asymptote, The Guardian, and other publications, both online and in 
print.  