
From a distance it looked like the set for a fashion shoot, in industrial 
style. In the background the dark shape of the city hospital, built during the 
German era, emerged from the gloom. In the middle distance there was a yellow 
excavator leaning over a hole in the ground, as if peering into it out of 
curiosity, and close up was a patrol car. The streetlamps and the police 
vehicle’s headlights carved tunnels into the thick Warmian fog, casting strange 
shadows. There were three men standing next to the car, all staring at the hero 
of the scene, an immaculately dressed man with white hair, standing by the open 
door of an angular Citroën.


Szacki knew what the engineer, the policeman, and the unfamiliar young CID 
officer were all waiting for—for the pretty little pencil pusher from the 
prosecutor’s office to fall on his ass. He really was having a hard time 
keeping his balance on the cobblestones, which were coated, like everything 
else, in a thin layer of ice. The situation wasn’t made any easier by the fact 
that Mariańska Street ran slightly uphill, and the loafers he’d worn, to make 
an impression on the high school kids, were now behaving like skates. He was 
afraid he’d take a tumble as soon as he let go of the car door.

His presence, like that of the police, was a formality. The prosecutor was 
called out to every death outside the hospital where there was a concern of 
foul play. And a decision had to be made whether or not to launch an 
investigation. This meant that sometimes they had to tramp around a 
road-construction site or a gravel pit, where bones from more than a hundred 
years ago were quite often found. In Olsztyn it was called “checking off a 
German.” A thankless and time-consuming obligation, often involving an 
expedition to the other end of the province and wading up to your ankles in 
mud. Here, at least the German was lying in the center of town.

There was a piece of plywood lying on the frame, black with dampness, and on 
the plywood lay an old skeleton

A formality. Szacki could call them over to have them tell him the facts, then 
fill out the forms in his nice warm office.

He could, but he never proceeded like that, and he realized he was too old to 
start changing his habits.

He spied some lumps of ice-coated mud on the ground, which should provide some 
grip. In four bizarre steps he reached the excavator and grabbed its muddy 
bucket, managing to restrain a smile of triumph.

“Where’s the corpse?”

The young CID officer pointed at the hole in the ground. Szacki had been 
expecting to see bones sticking out of the mud, but instead there was a black 
pit gaping in the roadway, with the top of a small aluminum ladder protruding 
from it. Ice-coated like everything else. Without hesitating, he descended. 
Whatever lay in wait for him down there was sure to be better than the freezing 
rain.

He groped his way downward; in the hole it smelled of wet concrete, and after 
a few steps he was standing on a hard, wet floor. Freezing rain was lashing 
through the opening a couple of feet above him, and he could reach up and touch 
the ceiling. He took off his gloves and ran a hand over it. Cold concrete. A 
shelter? A bunker?

He stepped back to make room for the CID officer. The policeman switched on a 
flashlight, and handed a second one to Szacki. Szacki put on the LED light and 
looked at his companion. Young, about thirty, with sad eyes and a very 
out-of-date mustache. Handsome, with the provincial good looks of a healthy 
farmer’s son who has done well for himself.

“Prosecutor Teodor Szacki.”

“Deputy Commissioner Jan Paweł Bierut.” The policeman made a gloomy face, 
surely expecting the joke he usually heard in this situation. It must have been 
hard sharing first names with the Pope and last names with an infamous 
Communist president.

“I don’t know you, but then I’ve only been here two years,” said Szacki.

“I was transferred recently from the traffic police.”

The constant rotation of CID staff was the bane of Szacki’s existence. No 
rookies ever turned up there, just officers who had already done their time, 
mostly in the operations department. Most of them soon found out that working 
in criminal investigation was nothing like being a detective in a Hollywood 
action movie, and they eagerly took advantage of early retirement. These days 
it was easier to find an experienced community cop than a CID officer.

Without a word, Bierut turned and set off down a regular concrete corridor 
that could have been the remains of anything—it didn’t matter much to Szacki. 
After a dozen paces the side walls disappeared, and they found themselves in a 
vaulted hall, square in shape, over six feet high and about fifty feet long. In 
one corner towered some rusty junk, including hospital beds, tables, and 
chairs. Bierut went past the heap and approached the opposite wall. There was a 
bed there, white in several places where the enamel hadn’t come off, elsewhere 
orange with rust. There was a piece of plywood lying on the frame, black with 
dampness, and on the plywood lay an old skeleton. Pretty much complete, as far 
as Szacki could tell, though the bones were partly mixed up, perhaps by rats, 
and some of them were lying on the floor. At any rate the skull was intact, 
with almost its entire dentition. The perfect German.

The medical schools were always happy to process the cadavers. Old bones were 
worth more to them than ivory

Szacki clamped his lips to avoid sighing. For months he’d been waiting for a 
decent case. It could be tough, or controversial, or not at all obvious. In any 
regard—investigative, evidential, or legislative. But there was nothing. Cases 
of a more serious nature had included two murders, one armed robbery, and a 
rape at the university campus. All the culprits had been caught the day after 
each incident. The murderers, because they were in the immediate family, the 
robber, because the street cameras had recorded him almost in HD quality, and 
the rapist, because his pals at the dorm had roughed him up, then taken him 
straight to the station—evidence that something was changing in this country 
after all. Not only were all the criminals detained the same day, they had all 
immediately confessed. They’d made detailed statements, and Szacki had been 
able to go home at four o’clock, without his blood pressure rising.

And now a German. For dessert, after the school gala.

Bierut cast him an inquiring glance. Szacki said nothing, because there was 
nothing to say. Bierut had such a sorrowful look on his face it was as if the 
bones belonged to a member of his family. If the policeman was like this all 
the time, his pals at the station were probably passing around the phone number 
of a therapist to get them out of their depression.

There was nothing to do here. Szacki swept the room with the flashlight, 
partly for the sake of routine, partly because he wanted to prolong the 
moment—it was far warmer down here, and he wasn’t being assailed by any 
atmospheric phenomena.

Nothing interesting. Bare walls and the ends of a few corridors; judging by 
the architecture, the room was an old shelter, probably for hospital staff and 
patients. There must be some buried entrances somewhere, washing facilities, 
maybe a few more halls like this, or smaller rooms.

“Have you checked the rest of this space?”

“It’s empty.”

Szacki wondered how it had happened. Were the patients evacuated for the 
duration of some shelling at the end of the war, then this guy died, and the 
rest got out? Was there too much going on for them to remember a single corpse 
left underground? Or maybe someone hid down here when the war was already over, 
and his heart gave out?

Szacki went up to the remains and examined the skull. No visible injuries, 
characteristic depressions or holes from being struck by a blunt instrument, 
and nothing remotely resembling a gunshot wound. If someone had helped the 
German to the world beyond, there was no evidence of it. Whatever, death hadn’t 
saved him from wartime or postwar looting.

“There were no clothes,” said Bierut, reading his thoughts.

Szacki nodded. Even supposing rodents and worms had eaten what was left, there 
should still be some shreds of material—buckles, clasps, buttons. Someone must 
have helped themselves just after his death, before the clothing began to 
disintegrate.

“Secure these remains and have them taken to the university. I’ll write an 
order for their transfer. We might as well find a use for the German.”

Translation Tuesday: excerpt from The Lights of Pointe-Noire by Alain Mabanckou
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/mar/01/excerpt-lights-of-pointe-noire-by-alain-mabanckou>
Old Warsaw practice. No John Doe ever ended up in the ground. First, it was a 
waste of the taxpayers’ money, and second, the medical schools were always 
happy to process the cadavers. Old bones were worth more to them than ivory.

Translated from the Polish by Antonia Lloyd-Jones


Rage will be in bookstores from 1 August. Click here 
<https://www.amazon.com/Rage-Zygmunt-Miloszewski/dp/1503935868> for more 
information about the book.

*****

 * Zygmunt Miloszewski is an award-winning Polish novelist and screenwriter. 
His first two mysteries featuring prosecutor Teodor Szacki, Entanglement and A 
Grain of Truth, have received international recognition, making him the #1 
bestselling author in Poland and one of the world’s best-known contemporary 
Polish writers. Miloszewski has won the Polityka Passport for Polish 
literature. He’s also twice won the High Calibre Award for the best Polish 
crime novel and earned two nominations to the French Prix du Polar Européen for 
the best European crime novel. 
 * Antonia Lloyd-Jones is a full-time translator of Polish literature and 
twice winner of the Found in Translation award. She has translated works by 
several of Poland’s leading contemporary novelists including Paweł Huelle, Olga 
Tokarczuk, and Jacek Dehnel, and by authors of reportage including Mariusz 
Szczygieł, Wojciech Jagielski, and Witold Szabłowski. She also translates 
poetry, essays, and books for children (including rhymes by Julian Tuwim, 
fiction by Janusz Korczak, and illustrated books such as Maps by Aleksandra and 
Daniel Mizieliński). She is a mentor for the Emerging Translators’ Mentorship 
Programme run by Writer’s Centre Norwich and currently co-chair of the UK 
Translators Association.  