



Fresh from launching our Fall 2016 issue 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/asymptotejournal.com> yesterday, 
featuring exclusive writing from 31 countries, by such authors as Stefan Zweig, 
László Krasznahorkai and Anita Raja, we present a selection from “Written in 
the Dark,” a new, groundbreaking anthology out from Ugly Duckling Presse. The 
poems gathered therein were written in 1942, during the most severe winter of 
the Nazi Siege of Leningrad, in which one million perished. Charles Bernstein 
compares these poems to “the sparks from two sticks of wood, creating a fire 
that warms even in an apocalypse.”

— The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

. . .

Gennady Gor

The creek sick of speech

Told water it took no side.

The water sick of silence

At once began again to shriek.

translated from the Russian by Ben Felker-Quinn, Eugene Ostashevsky, and 
Matvei Yankelevich


. . .

Vladimir Sterligov, 1942

But I am king. In a white shirt

I lie, towering in consciousness,

And soar my flag of pale-blue body

through the barrier of ceiling,

And laugh, that it is not for us to walk through walls.

While twilight trundles tangles in the sky

Around the houses, naked trees,

And twitches its white snows,

Swaying suddenly the corridors of space,

As if with hands it touches objects,

As though there was no ban against it,

As though their skin were torn away.

 . . .

Snowdrifts, snow, the frigid wind, 

Square ice forms in the depths of glasses.

Today the third of them died quietly,

That family of shriveled idols.

Tomorrow morn to building’s depth

Will crawl the foot of soundless death.

translated from the Russian by Ainsley Morse


With plaintive, ardent reverie, / We drink these soundless words
Pavel Zaltsman 
Dinnertime Ode to Chub
by Pavel Zaltsman

O chub, O golden, sterling chub,

O’er this hungry world suspended,

Most bejewled, expensive grub,

Brimming priceless fat, transcendent!

Whose scales are more transparent,

Whose mold more finely etched?

—Yours! Yours alone!

You’re even far too delicate.

Amber fat hangs from your seams

That has absorbed the smoking peat.

We want it, oh, how we dream

To warm ourselves by its lifegiving heat.

Who else could have such eyes:

They hang, run through with string,

As on a widemouthed glass

The drunken dewdrops cling.

With plaintive, ardent reverie,

We drink these soundless words.

Our heads fog as we crane our necks to see

The shop’s concupiscent boards.

With this I flatter you and plea,

As o’er this dying world you hover,

O smoked chub, impart to me

How I may be a lucky burglar.

translated from the Russian by Charles Swank and Matvei Yankelevich

Click here <http://www.uglyducklingpresse.org/catalog/browse/item/?pubID=695> 
for more information about this anthology from Ugly Duckling Presse.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Gennady Gor belonged to the avant-garde circles of Leningrad in the 1930s, but 
was ostracized for his alleged formalism. After the Siege and his return from 
evacuation in Perm, he became a well-known scholar, collector of the art of 
Northern ethnicities, and science fiction writer. He was renowned in Leningrad 
as an art historian and mentor to young writers. The poems included here were 
written between July 1942, when his evacuation began, and 1944. He spent the 
first winter months of the Siege with his in-laws.


Vladimir Sterligov was an artist in Kazimir Malevich’s circle and a close 
friend of leading members of the OBERIU, Daniil Kharms and Alexander Vvedensky. 
Sterligov was wounded at the Leningrad Front in January 1942. He was released 
from the hospital with a diagnosis of distrophic exhaustion and emaciation and 
remained in Leningrad until his evacuation to Alma-Ata in June 1942. After the 
Siege, Sterligov returned to Leningrad, where he became a prominent figure in 
the world of unofficial art, founding and leading—with his wife, the painter 
Tatiana Glebova—an informal “school” that sought to carry forward the 
principles learned from Malevich and other early avant-garde artists.

Pavel Zaltsman, an artist, belonged to the circle of Pavel Filonov, one of the 
elders of the Leningrad avant-garde. His professional life was spent working 
for film studios, first in Leningrad and later in Alma-Ata. Having lost his 
parents to the famine, Zaltsman was evacuated from Leningrad in the spring of 
1942 with his wife and daughter. He stayed in Alma-Ata for the rest of his 
life, where he worked in film studios, made art, and wrote poems, a diary, and 
two novels. Zaltsman wrote poetry for thirty years, from 1922 to 1955. Only in 
recent years, through the efforts of his daughter, has his prodigious output of 
drawings and paintings before and after the Siege become known to scholars and 
a wider public.

Ainsley Morse is a literary translator and scholar of Slavic literatures. Her 
academic and translation interests include Soviet-era poetry and prose, 
contemporary Russian literature and Yugoslav literature.

Ben Felker-Quinn is an educator, community media-maker and poet from eastern 
Pennsylvania. He lives in Philadelphia.

Charles Swank graduated from Hampshire College in 2012. He is currently a 
graduate student at Princeton University in the Department of Slavic Languages 
and Literatures. His interests include 20th century Russian and Czech 
literature, literary theory, and translation.

Matvei Yankelevich’s books include the long poem Some Worlds for Dr. Vogt 
(Black Square), a poetry collection,Alpha Donut (United Artists), and a novella 
in fragments,Boris by the Sea (Octopus). His translations include Today I Wrote 
Nothing: The Selected Writings of Daniil Kharms(Ardis/Overlook), and (with 
Eugene Ostashevsky) Alexander Vvedensky’sAn Invitation for Me to Think (NYRB 
Poets), which received a National Translation Award. He has received 
fellowships from the National Endowment for the Arts and the New York 
Foundation for the Arts. He is a founding editor of Ugly Duckling Presse, and 
teaches at Columbia University’s School of the Arts and the Milton Avery 
Graduate School of the Arts at Bard College.

Eugene Ostashevsky is a Russian-born American poet and translator. His books 
includeThe Pirate Who Does Not Know the Value of Pi (Obnazhenie Priema), 
Iterature (Ugly Duckling Presse), The Life and Opinions of DJ Spinoza (Ugly 
Duckling Presse). He has edited an English-language anthology of Russian 
absurdist writings of the 1930s by such authors as Alexander Vvedensky and 
Daniil Kharms, and translated (with Matvei Yankelevich) Alexander Vvedensky’sAn 
Invitation for Me to Think (NYRB Poets). His PhD dissertation was on the 
history of zero. He teaches the humanities at New York University.
 