
She could spend long hours dedicated to this work and show no signs of 
fatigue. Ironing brought her peace. It was her favorite form of therapy and she 
turned to it daily, even after a long day of work. Lupita’s passion for ironing 
had been handed down to her by her mother, Doña Trini, who had washed and 
ironed other people’s clothes for a living her whole life. Lupita would 
invariably repeat the ritual learned from her sacrosanct mother, which began 
with the spraying of the garments. Modern-day steam irons do not require an 
article of clothing to be moist, but for Lupita there was no other way to iron. 
She considered it sacrilegious to skip this step.


That night when she got home, she immediately headed to the ironing board and 
began to spray the garments. Her hands trembled like a hungover alcoholic’s, 
which made the spraying that much easier. It was imperative that she 
concentrate on something other than the murder of Licenciado Arturo 
Larreaga—the delegado of her district, Iztapalapa—which she had witnessed just 
a few hours earlier.

As soon as the clothes were properly sprayed she went into the bathroom and 
turned on the shower, giving the water time to warm up. She filled a bucket 
with a copious amount of detergent and placed it in the shower. Before she 
stepped in she opened a plastic bag and immediately recoiled from the stench of 
the urine-soaked pants that were inside. She submerged the pants in the bucket 
and started to wash herself. She scrubbed away the cloying smell of urine that 
had emanated from her body, but the shame that was embedded deep in her soul 
remained.

Ironing was an act of annihilation in which wrinkles would die and give way to 
order

What had all those people thought of her when they realized she had pissed 
herself? What would they think of her now? How could she make them forget the 
pathetic image of a fat policewoman standing in the middle of a crime scene 
with dripping pants? As an incorrigible criticizer herself, she was acutely 
aware of the power an image could have. What she dreaded the most was the 
thought of Inocencio, the delegado’s new driver. Last week she had made such an 
effort to get his attention, and for what? Now when they ran into each other 
Inocencio would only remember her in soaking pants. What a way to finally get 
his attention. Although she had to admit that Inocencio had behaved delicately 
with her. While she was waiting to give her official statement, she had stepped 
away from everyone at the precinct in order to not offend them with her stench. 
When Inocencio approached her, she panicked. The last thing she wanted was for 
him to smell her! Inocencio was holding a pair of cashmere pants under his arm, 
explaining that he usually kept them in the trunk of his car. The pants had 
just been dry-cleaned, and he graciously offered them to Lupita so she could 
change. He even loaned her his handkerchief so she could dry her tears. She 
would never, in her whole life, forget this act of tenderness. Ever. But now 
was not the time to dwell on it, because she could no longer handle the 
emotional roller coaster she had been on since that morning. Lupita was so 
tired that the only thing she could do was iron. She stepped out of the shower, 
dried off vigorously, put on her nightgown, and hurried to turn on her iron.

This ritual helped quiet her thoughts; it would jolt her back into her right 
mind, as if removing wrinkles were her way of setting the world straight, of 
asserting her authority. Ironing was an act of annihilation in which wrinkles 
would die and give way to order: something she required more than anything. She 
needed to fill her eyes with white, with cleanliness and purity so she could 
confirm that everything was under control, that there were no loose ends, that 
the pavement at the corner of Aldama Street and Ayuntamiento Street—right 
across from Cuihtláhuac Park—wasn’t stained with blood.

That was what Lupita yearned for, but instead the white sheets she was ironing 
became a small movie screen on which images from that afternoon began to play 
out in front of her eyes.

Lupita saw herself crossing the street across from Cuihtláhuac Park toward the 
delegado’s car. Inocencio was opening the passenger door for his boss. Larreaga 
was on the phone. Lupita almost bumped into a man while crossing the street, a 
man who had his hand raised to wave to the delegado. Immediately afterward, 
Larreaga grasped his neck, which was hemorrhaging blood.

In that moment chaos erupted. Lupita screamed and rushed to the delegado’s 
aid, unable to make sense of what had just happened. Nobody had shot at the 
delegado. There was no explosion. There was no evidence of anybody in the 
vicinity having any sort of knife or blade; nevertheless, a sharp object must 
have caused the wound to the jugular that bled Licenciado Larreaga dry. The 
more Lupita struggled to understand what had happened, the more she doubted 
everything. The more she tried to forget the look of surprise in Larreaga’s 
eyes when he received the wound that would take his life, the stronger it 
replayed in her mind and caused her to feel nausea, tremors, anguish, 
discomfort, rage, indignation . . . and fear. Tremendous fear.

Lupita knew fear. She had felt it thousands of times before. She could smell 
it, perceive it, and predict it in herself or in others. Like a stray dog, she 
could detect it from a distance. She could tell if people were afraid of being 
robbed or raped by the way they walked. She could tell who was afraid of being 
discriminated against, who feared old age, poverty, or being kidnapped. But 
there was nothing more transparent to her than the fear of not being loved, the 
fear of being unseen, of being ignored. That was her greatest fear, and she now 
felt it deep in her bones in spite of having been the center of attention for 
several hours. In spite of appearing all over the news as the main witness to 
what the media were calling a political murder. In spite of her testimony being 
the only thing that could lead authorities to the perpetrator. Lupita had been 
pressured and rushed into giving her version of events. She’d felt forced to 
declare the first thing that came to mind so she would not seem like an 
incompetent fool who had not seen or heard anything, all of which magnified her 
fear of being ridiculed.

She even heard a television anchorman—referring to the fact that she had wet 
her pants—exclaim: “That’s what happens when you give a badge to a maid.” 
Asshole! Who did he think he was? The worst thing was that the comment actually 
got to her. It hurt her deeply. It cornered her as a third-class citizen. It 
catalogued her within a group of people who’d never be loved or admired even 
when they had stood in the eye of the hurricane. Nothing had spared her from 
being mocked for wetting her pants, not even the fact that she had rushed to 
the delegado’s aid. What bothered her most was the officer who’d taken her 
statement and his smug look when she mentioned that it might be important that 
a wrinkle had disappeared from the delegado’s shirt collar. Lupita felt she had 
not explained herself correctly. She had not been able to convey the importance 
of that wrinkle—a wrinkle that had been very clearly evident on his collar 
earlier that morning at the adult education center but was completely gone 
after he was murdered. In her opinion this opened a possible line of 
investigation.

The feeling of having made a fool of herself was eating at her from the 
inside. Her face was flushed and a fire burned deep within her. The discomfort 
was so great that not even two hours of ironing calmed her. Both her mind and 
the iron wandered aimlessly. Lupita wasn’t even aware of how clumsily and 
abruptly she was ironing. She slid the iron over the fabric without her usual 
finesse and created new wrinkles, which in turn forced her to spray more to get 
rid of the fresh markings. The steam that emanated as a result was irritating 
and increased the stifling sensation inside her. An incredible amount of shame 
was growing and spinning wildly in her chest. There were no words to describe 
what she felt; it was something similar to heartburn. It was a destructive fire 
that made her want to leave her body, to get away from herself before being 
engulfed in flames. Her heart was beating rapidly, out of control. Her hands 
went numb. She wished to escape this world, to be somewhere else, but at the 
same time she was terrified of dying. Her breathing was shallow, and she felt 
like she could lose her mind at any moment and go completely insane. Lupita 
turned off the iron and set it aside. She needed to alleviate some of her pain 
urgently or she would burst from sheer anguish.

To top it all off, her AA sponsor wasn’t picking up the phone. Lupita had left 
several voicemails, but he wasn’t calling back. He had probably gone on 
vacation because of the long weekend. She had a list of other AA members she 
could turn to for help, but no one was taking her call. Fucking holidays! 
Fucking country! Fucking TV news anchormen! Fucking corrupt politicians! This 
is what they had come to in order to prevent Licenciado Larreaga from 
interfering with their plans! Fucking thugs! Fucking narcos! And fucking gringo 
drug addicts! If they didn’t consume most of the drugs produced in the world, 
there wouldn’t be so many Mexican drug cartels trying to satiate their demand! 
Fucking narco-governments! If they weren’t so hungry for illegal money siphoned 
off from drug trafficking, there wouldn’t be so much death! Fucking chickenshit 
legislators! If only they had the balls to legalize drugs. Then there wouldn’t 
be so much organized crime or so much fucking ambition for easy money! We 
wouldn’t be in this state of disarray, damn it! And fucking God, who was so 
fucking distracted for some reason! Lupita cursed and cursed until there was no 
one left to curse, including herself, because in the past she had protected 
small-time drug dealers to ensure she got her fix.

Translation Tuesday: Life in the Court of Matane by Eric Dupont – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/jun/14/translation-tuesday-life-in-the-court-of-matane-by-eric-dupont-extract>
For a split second she felt inclined to go out and get a bottle of tequila, 
but the memory of her dead son held her back. Lupita had sworn on his grave 
that she would never drink again, and she intended to keep that promise. She 
tried, and failed, to remember her child’s face. It was a blur. It seemed to 
purposely evade her. Trying to recall the sound of his childish laughter 
produced the same empty result. It was as if it had never registered in her 
memory. Her memory operated in a strange manner. Who knows what it 
obeyed—certainly not Lupita. Worse still, it was her best weapon for self-harm. 
She could only remember things that hurt, that tortured her, that made her feel 
like the worst woman—the worst mother—in the world. She couldn’t even recall 
happy and luminous events without connecting them to painful and devastating 
ones. After a great deal of effort, Lupita was able to recall the color of her 
son’s eyes, and his innocent gaze came to her mind as well as his expression of 
utter shock when she—completely intoxicated—landed the blow that had 
accidentally taken his life. She doubled up with pain. A wave of guilt crashed 
over her and sent her reeling to the floor, howling like a wounded animal.

That night, for the first time in her life, Lupita left wrinkled clothes on 
the ironing board.

Translated from the Spanish by Jordi Castells

Pierced by the Sun is out in bookstores on July 1. Click here 
<https://www.amazon.com/dp/1503954749/ref=rdr_ext_tmb> for more information 
about the book.

*****

 * Laura Esquivel is the award-winning author of Like Water for Chocolate, 
which has sold over four and a half million copies around the world in 35 
languages, The Law of Love, and most recently, Between Two Fires. She lives in 
Mexico City.

 * Jordi Castells is a translator, graphic designer, illustrator, and 
producer. He has been translating at screenwriting workshops for several years, 
and he has illustrated novels, including Laura Esquivel’s Malinche, and created 
storyboards for feature films like Días de Gracia. Currently his production 
company, Charco Creative Industries, is working on a feature documentary about 
music in Mexican prisons. He also adapted and illustrated a graphic novel 
version of this novel. He lives in Atlanta, Georgia.  