
As Emily Colvin, a transgender woman living in the heart of Missouri, watched 
the election results pour in on Tuesday night, her mind began to race with fear.

It was time for her to find a self-defense class, she thought. And maybe to 
purchase a gun.

With the United States emerging from one of the most bitterly divisive 
presidential races in its history, throngs of Americans find themselves deeply 
distrustful, and even fearful ofthe winner, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trump-victory-obama-clinton-unity>
.

But few groups have expressed dismay and fear as uniformly as the nation’s 
trans people, who already report discrimination, harassment and violence at 
rates starkly higher than the general population. On Wednesday, those who spoke 
to the Guardian saw Trump’s election as destined to hobble their movement after 
years in which their acceptance grew by leaps and bounds. And they said they 
feared an immediate cultural reckoning.

I’ve got the safety net of being white - so why am I so worried about Trump? | 
Emma Brockes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/white-safety-net-worried-about-trump>
Cate Brenner, a trans woman on Long Island, said she was “absolutely 
terrified” for trans people and their movement. By Wednesday morning, it seemed 
as though every trans person she knew had gone into mourning. A friend of hers 
in California posted on social media about “going back into the closet”.

“It might be safer passing” as a straight, cisgender person, said this person, 
who spoke to the Guardian on condition of anonymity.

“I’m scared,” they continued. “I’ve been out and proud for most of my life, 
with supportive people around me. I’ve never had to deal with this kind of fear 
before.” Their fiance is also frightened to live openly as a transgender 
person. “We’re both scared to continue. We didn’t know before how we wanted to 
define ourselves, if we even wanted to. Now, we’re scared to even have the 
conversation.”

“We are all traumatized,” said Colvin. In her online network of trans friends, 
“The general reaction that I’m seeing is, ‘Oh my God. How are we going to 
protect ourselves?’”


Trump’s administration is expected to usher in a sea change after several 
years in which transgender rights activists notched critical victories in the 
culture and government. Between 2008 and 2016, the number of Americans saying 
they knew a trans persongrew 
<http://www.advocate.com/commentary/2016/3/31/power-our-trans-visibility> from 
one in 10 to one in three. The Obama administration, in its final years, took 
the controversial and unequivocal position that federal anti-discrimination 
laws applied to the rights of trans people. There were far-reaching 
consequences for schools, which were required to allow trans students to use 
the bathrooms and locker rooms aligned with their gender identities, and for 
entire industries, such as health insurers.

Those gains, made amid a hail of controversy, now seem at risk. Trump seldom 
mentioned trans issues on the campaign trail. But his running mate, Indiana
governor Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/mike-pence-not-dropping-out-donald-trump>
, first emerged on the national stage after signing an expansive anti-LGBT 
measure into law. And the Republican party at large has made its near-total 
opposition to trans rights clear.

On Wednesday morning, Pence seemed to confirm that the Trump administration 
would not place penalties on schools that fail to accommodate trans students, 
as Obama did. “Washington has no business intruding on the operation of our 
local schools,” Pence said, in aninterview 
<http://www.christianpost.com/news/mike-pence-james-dobson-trump-birth-control-mandate-transgender-bathroom-170485/>
 he gave to the arch-conservative radio host James Dobson.

Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are also poised 
to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and with it, an anti-bias measure that 
prevented many health insurance plans from discriminating against trans policy 
holders.

On Wednesday, Mara Keisling, the director of the National Center for 
Transgender <https://www.theguardian.com/society/transgender> Equality, 
rejected the notion that Trump’s victory represented a terminal setback for the 
movement.

“Trans people have spent decades educating their classmates and their families 
and their co-workers and the people they worship with about who they are,” 
Keisling said. “The government can maybe take back some of the policy 
advancements we’ve had. But they can’t take away the dignity we’ve created for 
ourselves, the freedom we’ve created for ourselves.”

Still, Keisling conceded, “This slows us down, this hurts a lot.” On Wednesday 
morning, her group heard from trans people across the country who were scared 
and angry. “This has got to be terrifying for many trans people. We’re going to 
have to be strong in the face of some really terrible stuff.”

Colvin is worried about her access to hormone therapy in a world without the 
Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. A student who was at one time homeless 
and suicidal, she credits her healthcare, which includes psychiatric therapy, 
with her survival. “I’m worried about our ability to change our names,” she 
continued. “I’m worried about laws that protected trans kids.”

Gianni, 18, a trans man who wished to be identified only by his first name, 
found himself wondering what would happen if he lost his healthcare coverage, 
or his insurer stopped covering his hormone therapy. He doesn’t believe there’s 
any way he could afford his transition treatments out-of-pocket.

He was worried for his safety, too. “I’m mixed race, and I’m transgender, and 
I feel like I’m in a big hole right now, and I’m scared,” Gianni said.

As Tuesday night gave way to Wednesday morning, Trans Lifeline, a national 
hotline for transgender people in crisis, saw its normal call volume triple. 
“Trans folks are frightened that they won’t be able to work, or access 
healthcare, or get travel documents updated,” said Greta Martela, the hotline’s 
director and founder.

Colvin witnessed a trans friend post about having suicidal thoughts on 
Facebook. The comments section pulsed with supportive messages and her friend 
sought help.

From his home in Sacramento, Mark Williams tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GiantsNerd/status/796229754160431104> that he was fearful 
as the father of a transgender child. “A bully and a bigot is at the helm, with 
a man who doesn’t believe in LGBTQ rights as his second-in-command,” Williams 
told the Guardian. “I’m worried that the people who voted them into office will 
take the fact that they won as an affirmation that they can now discriminate 
and bully whoever they don’t like.”

Trans children like his could face a new crossroads in the coming year. The 
supreme court in October agreed to hear its first case on whether federal 
anti-bias law covers transgender individuals. The suit has been brought by a 
trans Virginia teenager whose school district has prohibited his use of the 
boys’ bathroom. Trump and Republican senators could fill the supreme court 
vacancy left by the late Antonin Scalia before oral arguments begin.

Keisling, though, said she remained hopeful that many schools would continue 
to accommodate trans students. The way she saw it was this: for a short period 
of time, the government told schools how to treat transgender students, and 
hundreds of schools across the country complied.

There’s a lot of reaching out to do. I pray Trump’s arms are long enough | 
Jesse Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-america-jesse-jackson>
And in a potential victory for trans rights advocates, on Wednesday, it seemed 
possible that North Carolina’s governor, Pat McCrory, a Republican, would lose 
re-election in a state that had otherwise voted to remain red. McCrory entered 
the national consciousness for his efforts to overturn broad discrimination 
protections for trans and other people.

“It’s important to understand that the trans movement has moved faster than I 
think any movement in American history,” said Keisling. She recalled an 
encounter of 15 years ago, when she was lobbying the president of the 
Pennsylvania senate to include trans people in a new bill. He refused. “He 
said, ‘Mara, look at the bright side. Five years ago, I wouldn’t have let you 
into my office.’ That’s not the way it is now, and that’s not the way it’s ever 
going to be again.”

And Brenner, the trans woman from Long Island, felt herself emboldened by 
Tuesday’s election. As her friend was weighing whether to go back into the 
closet, Brenner had already decided to make her trans identity more public.

“I’ve always been semi-quiet about it,” Brenner said. “But last night was the 
wake-up call that that was not an option. The lines have been drawn and I don’t 
want to be on the sidelines.”

• In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255 <>; 
Trans Lifeline runs a phone hotline staffed by trans people for trans people on 
1-877-565-8860. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email
jo@samaritans.org <mailto:jo@samaritans.org>. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 