
Published in 2004 in Tehran, Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, 
Love in the Footnotes is Mahsa Mohebali’s second short story collection. Within 
a year of its publication, the book was in its third print and reaping national 
prizes before it was banned by the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance. 
The titular short story, presented here, is concerned with love and its ensuing 
ennui. The theme of this story is by no means novel. What sets “Love in the 
Footnotes” apart from all other “love” stories is its unique development, with 
most of the story being told in the elaborate intertextual footnotes which 
weave together an intricate web of films, songs, paintings, and novels from 
different cultures, at the crossroads of which the protagonist locates herself.

— Maryam Zehtabi Sabeti Moqaddam, translator

*****

In this story, Love happens. Like ivy, love wraps around my lover and me in 
the lines of this story. My lover and I and several films and stories get so 
tightly tangled that we become indistinguishable from one another.

My lover and I are sitting in our apartment, smoking gloomily Depression, like 
ivy, ties us together.

I have short auburn hair that falls across my forehead and temples. I weigh 99 
lbs. and with heels on, I’m 5’ 5”. I got a BA in literature from The Islamic 
Azad University. I had been a homebody for a few years before I met my lover at 
a relative’s Sizde Bedar garden party. My lover has drunk eyes and is a clerk 
at the Central Bank. He’s tall and very amiable. He has no other remarkable 
features except that he tends to constantly stroke his mustache. In a corner of 
the garden, my lover looks at me with his languishing, entreating, and piercing 
eyes. I avert my eyes from him, look down coyly, and move away. My lover 
follows me and extends a glass to me. Our eyes meet for a moment. My lover 
draws me close very gently and fills my glass with a wine-like drink.1 


1 See the miniature painting by Mohammad Tajvidi in Khwāja Shams-ud-Dīn 
Muḥammad Ḥāfeẓ-e Shīrāzī, Hafiz Diwan, Ed. Ghasem Ghani and Allameh Ghazvini, 
twenty-third edition, Tehran: Asatir Publication, 1995, p. 23, where the man in 
the miniature painting, with his beseeching eyes, clings to the girl’s robe, 
offers her a glass of wine while she turns the upper part of her body away from 
him and avoids his gaze as much as possible. In spite of her apparent apathy, 
she burns with a latent desire, evident as she watches the man stealthily out 
of the corner of her eyes. It seems as though the girl in the miniature 
painting has been looking forward to this moment for years and now that she 
finally has the opportunity to seduce, despite all the blood running to her 
cheeks, she tries to appear composed and indifferent. However, the man in the 
miniature painting doesn’t seem to be concerned at all. As in Hafez’s poem, 
“Curls disheveled, sweating, laughing, and drunk / shirt torn, singing ghazals, 
flask in hand,” he just gawks at the girl. He only thinks of getting together 
with his beloved and isn’t afraid of going down in history as a fool.

My lover and I are sitting in front of the TV, watching Medicopter 117, in our 
four-hundred-and-thirty-square-foot rental apartment on Hafez Street. At the 
most critical moment of the episode, I get up, go to my bedroom, put on my red 
nightgown and stand in front of the TV set, brushing my hair. In response to my 
lover’s protests, I look at him seductively. He smiles but still follows what’s 
happening on TV. I unplug it.2


2 See Graham Greene, Quiet American, Trans. Ezatollah Fooladvand, first 
edition, Tehran: Kharazmi Publications, 1984, p. 143, where Paul asks Fowler, 
the professional British journalist, what his most profound sexual encounter 
had been.

Fowler answers the quiet, young American, “Lying in bed early one morning and 
watching a woman in a red dressing-gown brush her hair.”

The middle-aged Briton had impregnated the scene with all the eroticism he 
could muster; a scene which he had most likely never experienced with any of 
his mistresses. But then, this was the only image that came to his exhausted 
and agitated mind while spending the night in the fortress, with the Vietnamese 
soldiers and the quiet American, anticipating the Viet Cong skirmishes. 
Probably, Fowler was not thinking about any of his mistresses in particular, 
not about Phuong, his Vietnamese phoenix, and not about his English mistress. 
That image was the culmination of his whole love life.

My lover and I are sitting in a beach café, sipping our cappuccinos. My 
lover’s wearing a white t-shirt, stuck to his damp body. I’m in a light-green 
manteau and have put a big white magnolia in one of its buttonholes. The 
fragrance of the magnolia and that of the cappuccino wafting out from my cup 
blend with the sea breeze and make me dizzy. I put my fingers on my temples and 
take a deep breath. My lover looks at me with worried eyes. I ask my lover to 
tell me the story of the drowning of the young couple again. He says that he 
has told me the story five times since yesterday and doesn’t feel like telling 
it any more.3


3 See Marguerite Duras, Moderato Cantabile, Trans. Reza Seyed-Hosseini, first 
edition, Tehran: Zaman Publications, 1973, p. 89, where Anne Desbaresdes is 
wearing a décolleté dress and has pinned a big magnolia to her chest. She gets 
up from the dinner party table quickly and is anxious to go to the beach bar 
and drink another glass of wine with Chauvin and ask him, for the last time, to 
tell the story of the young couple. It’s then that, for the first time, she 
discovers the magical power of magnolia and wine and the incredible and 
undeniable similarity of wine, magnolia, love, and exasperation. Anne 
Desbaresdes realizes that, just like when you drink a little wine, the 
fragrance of magnolia seems to be very innocent at the beginning, but, after 
some time, it overwhelms your mind and leaves no room for any other feelings or 
thoughts. This is how she feels at that moment: Intoxicated with wine and the 
strong scent of magnolia, she can think of nothing but love. Just like the 
scent of magnolia, love has inundated her mind, which is soon to be overcome by 
exasperation.

My lover and I are in our four-hundred-and-thirty-square-foot apartment. My 
lover is lying on the couch, a glass of ice on his chest and a cigarette to his 
lips. He’s staring at the ceiling and gives curt, nonsensical answers to all my 
questions. I’m sitting on the sofa and hanging my legs from its arm and 
thumbing through Art and Decoration magazine irately. I tell my lover not to 
ash his cigarette on the floor. He ignores me. He looks at the ceiling and 
flicks his cigarette ash on the floor again. I go stand at the head of the 
couch, my arms crossed, and look at him resentfully. He smirks while still 
looking at the ceiling. I yell at him and say that I’m sick and tired of him 
and the glass he’s always carrying in his hand. My lover puts on his pants, 
while cursing me under his breath, and buckles his belt. I’m standing in front 
of the door to block him, telling him that enough is enough; that he’d better 
stop pretending to be the hero of an American movie who is fed up with his 
mistress. He shoves me aside abruptly and slams the door.4


4 Don’t refer to happy-ending American movies. Because, unlike Jane Fonda or 
Julia Roberts, I’m not going to chase down my lover, find him in a park or a 
bar and bring him back home. As soon as he leaves, I put the opera Salome by 
Richard Strauss in my player and lie down on the couch and page through Oscar 
Wilde’s Salome and when Herodias asks Salome to dance for the propitious night, 
I join her with The Dance of Seven Veils. In the end, when Salome embraces 
John’s severed head, kissing the lips she couldn’t touch in his life, I take my 
lover’s photo off the TV set and kiss him on the lips. My sadism and 
vengefulness at that moment are no less than Salome’s toward John.

My lover and I are lying in the bathtub and are basking in the mild warmth of 
the water, slowly smoking our cigarettes. My lover rambles constantly and I 
respond with a dull smile and a duller voice. My eyes are closed and I’m still 
reminiscing about the previous hours, thinking to myself how my lover would 
feel if he knew what I was remembering. It gives me chills to even think about 
it. My lover says I’d better leave the bathtub because I might catch a cold.5 


5 See Unfaithful, directed by Adrian Lyne — the scene in which the girl is 
lying in the tub and suddenly sees the words her naughty lover has written on 
her belly while she was sleeping. This is definitely the most critical moment 
in determining her relationship with her husband. Up to that point, it had all 
been just mischief or even a joke. However, when she gets the sponge and wipes 
off the heart and dagger sign and her own name, she realizes the magical power 
of concealment. She has now entered a new phase in her game. Before that, she 
could confess everything to her husband in a trance or frenzy. But then, she 
sees the joy and excitement of cheating. That her husband could’ve seen the 
sign but didn’t awakens the snake of risk-taking that had been lurking dormant 
in her heart and makes her repeat the dangerous game over and over again.

My lover and I are coming back from the party arm in arm. I’m wearing a dress 
with an open neckline and my lover is wearing jeans and a t-shirt as usual. We 
are both singing “Tonight Is the Moonlit Night” a little too loudly. We 
sometimes stagger and, to keep our balance, cling to each other’s arms, 
sometimes bursting out laughing. Whenever my lover gets to the word “my lover” 
in the song, he draws his eyebrows together and points his finger at me with a 
serious expression. I accompany him in a lower octave.6


6 See the first scene of the movie Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?. In this 
scene, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton both try to conceal their innermost 
feelings towards each other. They engage in vigorous banter that might lead to 
insult and injury if they’re not careful. But oblivion comes to their aid. It 
helps them change their past memories and sometimes heal their emotional or 
mental wounds, arising from the death of a child, abortion, or an infidelity 
that was neither confirmed nor denied.

My lover and I are sitting in our apartment, smoking gloomily. I lie on the 
couch more wearily and smoke and he lies next to the fireplace more morosely 
and smokes. Depression, like ivy, ties us together. I say it would be best if 
one of us left the other because usually in these situations one of the lovers 
leaves. My lover turns on his side towards me and says he doesn’t feel like 
wandering the streets and that if I’m tired of the situation, I can leave. I 
remind my lover that usually men are the ones to leave. Despite my persistence, 
my lover doesn’t give in and just looks at me with his drunken eyes. I tell my 
lover that I can no longer smoke, sadly; that I can’t stand his smoking either. 
My lover takes another puff of his cigarette and says that nothing like smoking 
exhibits depression so neatly. I go to my bedroom, my upper lip twitching in 
anger, and play Chopin’s sonata No. 2 in B-flat minor, and lie on the bed, 
thinking about a couple of trivial matters.7


7 Had Wim Wenders begun his Paris, Texas some scenes earlier, where the couple 
experiences exasperation, you could’ve seen that film. However, right now you’d 
better refer to Sonata No. 2 in B-flat minor by Frédéric Chopin, where the 
notes of the harp remind us of the monotonous rain and Chopin’s ennui on 
Majorca. When he was at his piano in his sixteenth century villa on the cliff, 
writing the destructive and exasperating notes of this sonnet, he had one thing 
on his mind: exasperation, exasperation with love; the inevitable exasperation 
that follows a long period of lovemaking, cheating, indifference, 
forgetfulness, argument, intoxication, and languor. It left Chopin with no 
other choice but to—while listening to the repetitive sound of rain and the 
waves crashing against the rocks, without taking heed of George Sand’s 
grumpiness—write the dreary notes that carry a devastating tempest within them. 
Probably, in the next room, George Sand was writing a story about a lover 
killing the object of their desire out of exasperation. However, I think if 
George Sand and Chopin had instead gone to Arles, where Van Gogh painted his 
beautiful sunflowers, before reaching that intolerable boredom that destroyed 
their relationship, they would’ve gone so mad that one of them would’ve either 
killed the other or, as Van Gogh did, cut off a piece of their body.

Translated from the Persian by Maryam Zehtabi Sabeti Moqaddam

Explore the rest of Asymptote’s Summer 2016 issue here 
<http://asymptotejournal.com>.

*****

 * Mahsa Mohebali (b. 1972) is an accomplished Iranian fiction writer and 
literary critic. Although she is best known for her critically acclaimed novel 
Don’t Worry (2008), which won both the Golshiri Foundation’s and the Press 
Critics’ Best Novel award, she has also penned the novel The Grey Spell (2002) 
and two short story collections, The Voices (1998) and Love in the Footnotes 
(2004), the latter of which is now banned in Iran despite being the winner of 
the Golshiri Foundation’s award for best short story collection. Her works are 
translated into Swedish, Italian, Turkish, and English and are widely 
circulated in Iran as well as being adapted for the stage. 
 * Maryam Zehtabi Sabeti Moqaddam is a Ph.D. candidate in Comparative 
Literature at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. She received her MA in 
English Literature in 2012 from the University of Tehran where her research 
focused on black feminist dialogism in the works of Alice Walker and Zora Neale 
Hurston. She is particularly interested in women, gender, and sexuality studies 
and the intersection of religion and feminism. She is currently writing her 
dissertation on the representations of prostitution in Persian and Arab 
literature. She also aspires to introduce Iranian women writers to Western 
audiences through translation and criticism of their works.  