
The protagonist of Marie Darrieussecq’s latest outing is Solange, a white 
actress who falls desperately in love with a charismatic black actor in 
Hollywood. In the excerpt below, which sets the stage for Darrieussecq’s 
brilliantly droll examination of romance, movie-making and clichés about race 
relations, Solange’s love interest reveals his plan to direct an adaptation of 
Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness — in Africa.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com> 


--

He talked to her about the Congo. Not any old Congo, not the little 
Brazzaville Congo, no, the big Kinshasa one, where very quickly the road runs 
out and there are just the long arms of the river, which she had looked at on 
Google Earth three hours earlier. The coincidence was disturbing. She was going 
to chat about the islands—but he had drawn breath to introduce a new topic of 
conversation, and was now talking about Heart of Darkness. He told her about 
Conrad’s novel. The story of a man who is looking for a man. Marlow looking for 
Kurtz, a retired officer from a colonial regiment, a ‘devil of a rapacious and 
pitiless folly’. Conrad’s Congo is ‘something great and invincible, like evil 
or truth’. And Europe—white-faced Europe, the premonition of genocides. He 
cited the African woman in the novel ‘with a slight jingle and flash of 
barbarous ornaments’, ‘brass leggings to the knees’ (she pictured the sorceress 
in Kirikou). He cited the ‘Intended’, ‘this pale visage’, blonde and diaphanous 
(she pictured herself). Was it a racist novel? No. But it was time for an 
African to seize power in Hollywood. It was time to take back from America the 
history of indigenous people.

She was overwhelmed with tiredness. Couldn’t they just have a normal 
conversation? But he kept talking: he wanted to make a film adaptation of Heart 
of Darkness, something different from Coppola’s Apocalypse Now and, in any 
case, on location—a crazy project, he was aware of that, his first film as a 
director and with equatorial ambitions to transport a crew into the heart of 
the forest and, once there, attempt to mount that masterpiece of a novel. 
Coppola went to the Philippines in order to film Vietnam; he would go to the 
Congo to film the Congo.

She interrupted him. She hadn’t read the novel, but wasn’t it a bit of a 
cliché: Heart of Darkness? A bit too run-of-the-mill for Africa? He protested. 
What he was interested in was precisely the stereotype, the ultimate cliché, 
what white people saw when they thought about Africa: darkness and elephants.

Was she white people? That beam pierced her chest. Did he see her as a white 
person? Was he—worse—here because she was white? She had been loved for her 
buttocks, for her talent, for her celebrity, but never for her colour. Or else 
all men, all the white people who had desired her up until now, had only done 
it on condition that she was white?

She turned away and was startled by their reflection. In the bay window 
against the night sky, a man and a woman leaning into each other. She was 
struck by their beauty. The curve of the woman and the straight line of the 
man, her lying down, him sitting up, classically beautiful, thin and so 
Hollywood, her face-on and him in profile, yin-yang, snap: both perfectly 
matched. He could have any woman of any colour. She could have any man she 
wanted. Everyone on Earth may have wanted to sleep with him, but he was here 
with her.

She moved closer to him. He kept talking. His strange gaze fixed on her, on 
the surface of her camisole, as if he were carrying out a topographical survey. 
Surprisingly and almost inadvertently, the Congo had allowed itself to be 
enslaved. Belgium was a tick on a giant’s back, and how do you even locate the 
tick when humans, since childhood, have stared at the immense green patch that 
is the centre of Africa? He was describing, with circular gestures, how shot 
after shot, mise en abyme after mise en abyme, his film would become more and 
more claustrophobic, ‘burrowing deep into the centre of the Earth’. And 
suddenly she had the faint hope that someone might know, finally know—perhaps 
him—where the centre of the world was. Everywhere, and in men, she had searched 
for it, that centre, that intensity. From the sound of him, it was over there, 
deep in the Congo. With him.

He was impetuous, bitter and wise. She wanted to taste that charm; she wanted 
him to be quiet but to keep talking to her; she wanted to devour his mouth. In 
France, when a man spends a long time explaining something to a woman, it’s 
above all in order to sleep with her. She opened another bottle. She hadn’t 
considered matching her nail polish with her camisole, deep pink on flesh 
pink—and, what does it even mean: flesh-pink white?

‘To be honest,’ she began, ‘I’d completely forgotten, for instance, that 
Belgium had invaded the Congo.’

‘Not invaded. Colonised, violated, carved up, butchered. Fifteen million dead. 
And France. Twenty thousand dead for the only railway from the Congo to the 
ocean.’

‘As many as that.’ She sighed. Her living room was filled with skulls.

He checked his phone—she was frightened it was a text from another woman—but 
he started to read the first page of Conrad’s novel out loud to her from his 
screen: a gloomy London, the Thames, a ship in the night. He envisaged a murky 
opening shot, black sky, and then the sea emerging in a fade-in.

‘And you’ll find producers here, in Hollywood?’

He paused, an actor’s pause.

‘You know who will play Kurtz?’

A new beam illuminated her. She understood.

‘George.’

‘And who do you think will play the Intended?’

A rush of blood, her lips went taut, she felt the urge to inflate them and 
raise herself, yes her, towards him, towards the sky, towards an outlandish 
future, an expedition to the Congo, a marvellous and terrifying film shoot.

‘Gwyneth Paltrow.’

She got up. There are always moments of huge disappointment in the life of an 
actress, dishonesty, rigged horsetrading, nocturnal betrayals, and boorish 
behaviour. One of her nails was torn. She felt a childish regret, the silly 
idea that, if she had matched her nails to her outfit, he would have given her 
the role.

Translation Tuesday: A Little Love Story by Ödön von Horváth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/feb/09/translation-tuesday-a-little-love-story-by-odon-von-horvath>
He explained the finances of the project, the money George was putting in, and 
perhaps Studio Canal, and a producer in Lagos, even Africana Studies at UCLA. 
Why did she feel like crying at this point? She still fancied his lips, that’s 
what was so exasperating: her raging desire. His project would never get off 
the ground. George was forever having those philanthropic notions, and anyway 
that would be the biggest bit of miscasting of his career—George as a bad guy? 
But there was always the challenge, for a star like him, to surpass Brando. 
Even in a shambolic production in the depths of the jungle.

And it wouldn’t be a shambolic production. With George on board it would end 
up on screens all over the world. The perfect UFO. A huge action movie, but 
also a bit arty. A big deal in any case, entrusted to an African, with the 
anything-but-vulgar touch that George adds to Hollywood, and that this man 
Kouhouesso also has, yeah, baby, he’s got it.

Gwyneth Paltrow? That pathetic beanpole?

She placed her lips on his. It was like kissing a bouquet of peonies. Fleshy, 
luscious and beaded with freshness. Peonies saturated with a strong liqueur, 
soft, manly flowers, intoxicating.

She could no longer see his face, nor his roaming eyes. Their outlines 
cancelled each other out, cyclopean heat and moist mouths. He kept talking, but 
less. It was as if his mouth was blossoming from his scratchy cheeks, his lips 
even sweeter, and she was melting, soft and hard and tender and tense. He 
pulled away for a second and she thought he was going to preach to her again 
about the Congo, but no. He was staring at her. He looked happy.

Lying next to his big body, her camisole slipped above her head, she was once 
again touching this man, who was speaking to her about herself, who was saying 
wonderful things, who was burying himself in her and then pulling back as if 
reluctantly. She clung to him, until their bodies blurred in the embrace, deep, 
but not effusive. It was easy, so easy to remain in this marvellous suspension 
of breath where she was no longer waiting for him—it was he who was waiting for 
her.

Later, her thigh was resting on his thigh, and her arm was on his arm, and she 
was so white and he was so black that it made her laugh, it was tantalising, 
appetising, almost like a pastry confection; their bodies were so distinct one 
from the other, touched each other so unequivocally, ended and began exactly at 
the demarcation of the skins, and they wanted to start again just for that, to 
check once again that here is me and there is you and that we can locate 
ourselves and take pleasure in that, precisely that, the decorative difference, 
invented especially to look good. And he laughed to see her laugh and she said 
to herself, if he laughs he loves me. If he laughs we will keep on laughing and 
taking our pleasure.

The crows were cawing on the electricity wires; the sky was a milky blue. 
Their reflection had disappeared into the bay window. There was nothing left of 
them but their real bodies; there was nothing left of them but the two of them. 
The image of them had retreated to where images reside, in the folds of the 
Hollywood hills, in the shadows.

Translated from the French by Penny Hueston

Click here <https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/men> for more information 
about the book.

*****

 * Marie Darrieussecq was born in 1969 in Bayonne, France. Her debut novel, 
Pig Tales was published in thirty-four countries. Five other novels have also 
been translated into English including A Brief Stay with the Living, Tom Is 
Dead and All the Way. Marie Darrieussecq lives in Paris with her husband and 
children. 
 * Penny Hueston is a senior editor at Text Publishing and a translator of 
numerous stories, articles and poems, including works by Marie Darrieussecq and 
2014 Nobel Prize winner, Patrick Modiano.  