
I entered the apartment at eleven at night, unlocking three padlocks in 
succession. The flat took up the entire first floor of a tall apartment 
building. I paused for a few moments after entering, trying to make out my 
surroundings in the light coming in from the passage outside. I found the 
switchboard near my left hand. Stepping forward, I turned on all the switches. 
One after the other. And not a single light came on. But I could tell that a 
fan had started whirring overhead. Once my eyes had adjusted to the darkness, I 
found myself standing at one end of a hall. The main road below me had begun to 
quieten down. The light from the street lamps filtered into the dark hall 
through large windows, creating an unfocused chiaroscuro that came to my aid. 
Advancing in this hazy glow, I realised that there were doors running down both 
sides of the hall. On a whim I turned towards an open door on the left.


The room I entered was a large bedroom, with an ensuite. This time, too, I 
succeeded in locating the switchboard. I swiftly flicked all the switches on. 
Still not a single light came on. But this time, too, the ceiling fan began to 
rotate. I tried to understand the layout of the room. It wasn’t empty like the 
hall; rather, it was crowded with furniture. I found myself standing before a 
mirror stretching across the wall. The reflection didn’t seem to be mine, 
exactly, but of another, shadowy figure. I touched my hair. Eerily, the 
reflection did not. I paid no attention. Setting my bag down on the floor, I 
returned to the hall.

Closing the main door, fumbling at the switchboard until I succeeded in 
turning the fan off, I went back to the bedroom. I was very tired. The train 
had arrived seven hours later than scheduled. I’d had to scramble for a taxi to 
get to the flat and collect the key. He’d been waiting for me here since the 
afternoon. On calling the station and learning that the train was running late, 
he’d gone back home for a while, then returned to the flat later in the day. 
Handing me the key, he expressed his regret that all the restaurants in his 
club were closed at this late hour; otherwise, he would have taken me to 
dinner. Thanking him, I told him that I had bought myself a slice of cake at 
the station. He seemed relieved to hear this, and dropped me off at the gate of 
the high-rise.

Even in the darkness, I could sense another door on the opposite side of the 
hall. I went forward and opened it. A cold, moist wind instantly swept into the 
room. The taxi driver had told me it had drizzled all day.

I stepped out onto the balcony. There were several tall buildings in front of 
me. Fourteen storeys, sixteen, eighteen, twenty-one–going up would be no 
problem, but if the building caught fire you’d be trapped, unable to climb 
down. I hurriedly retreated into the room. All I needed was a shower. Fumbling 
for the towel in my bag, I pulled it out and went into the bathroom. My eyes 
gradually adjusted to the darkness. I undressed in the light from the street 
lamps and turned the shower on. A phone began to ring somewhere close by. It 
kept ringing, no one answered.

Wringing my hair dry, I returned to the room wrapped in the towel and lay down 
on the bed, feeling the fresh, soft bedclothes against my body. I was cold but 
I didn’t have the strength even to switch the fan off or shut the balcony door. 
I remained in bed. I remained awake.

Awake, I saw dawn break. I saw colours. The bedclothes were a light blue. The 
pillow was a light blue. Three of the walls were off-white, while the fourth 
was a somewhat incongruous brown. As the darkness lifted, the wardrobe, the 
couch, the mirror–all became visible one by one. An ancient, radiant sunlight 
fell on my bed now. Which meant there was no rain any more. The towel had come 
loose long ago. As I lay there, the sun rose on my nakedness. By the time I got 
out of bed, the day was well advanced. I checked out the kitchen. There were 
plenty of pots and pans. It was equipped with a cooking range, a toaster, a 
mixer...everything. In the dining space was a functioning fridge. I considered 
exploring the rest of the flat, but a moment later the desire had vanished.


*


After a shower, I went down into the street. Kolkata! I spent the whole day 
roaming this unknown city, in taxis, on foot, on the metro. I watched a movie 
then had dinner at a restaurant, and by the time I got back to the flat it was 
eleven o’clock. Unlocking the three padlocks one after the other, I entered the 
unlit interior. Then, allowing my eyes to adjust to the darkness, I slumped on 
to the dark bed and lay on it the same way I had the previous night. Once again 
I remained awake. The next morning I opened my bag. I took out the few clothes 
I possessed and arranged them in the wardrobe. The wardrobe was completely 
empty except for a single hanger. It would be useful to hang up my trousers, I 
thought. And in that moment, I caught sight of the crumpled panty.


The panty seemed to offer itself as a second presence in this solitary place. 
A feeling of companionship

I picked it up. Imported. Soft. Leopard print. At once I wanted to know who 
the owner was. Many years ago I had found a blue bangle in a bedside drawer in 
a hotel room. When I took it in my hand, it seemed to be dripping blue water. 
That day, too, I’d felt an urge to find out who the owner was.


The panty gave off the smell of moist earth. I saw a white stain on it, like 
mould. A stain like this in a woman’s panty could mean only one thing.


I wondered what to do with the panty. Strangely, I felt a pang of regret at 
the thought of throwing it away. The panty seemed to offer itself as a second 
presence in this solitary place. A feeling of companionship.


I didn’t throw it away. I tossed it on to one of the lower shelves in the 
wardrobe. Then I went to the bathroom and washed my hands with soap. I took my 
documents out of my bag, filed them away, and decided to take care of the phone 
call before anything else.


‘When can I meet you? I’ll need your letter.’ ‘The letter is ready.


You can take it today.’

As I dressed after a shower, I chided myself for not remembering about the 
lights today either. I left the flat again and went down into the streets. 
After a couple of meetings, I ate a light meal at a restaurant. I bought a 
loose gown to wear at home. The nakedness of the past two days would finally 
come to an end.


I met him in the veranda of his club at eight that night. He was poring over a 
Bengali book, marking up certain passages and scribbling notes in the margins. 
He also had a Bengali-to-English dictionary by his side. ‘So you can read 
Bengali?’, I asked. He nodded, smiling. ‘I read it very well.’ After accepting 
the letter from him and sharing some soup and bread rolls, I left him, 
returning to the flat late at night and unlocking the three padlocks again. I 
was lying in bed when I felt a certain familiar discomfort, and when I went 
into the bathroom I discovered that it was just as I had suspected–quietly, my 
period had started. And my panty was soaked with blood. I had no sanitary 
napkins. What was I to do, now, at midnight? I didn’t have a second pair of 
panties. I should have thought to pick up a few more things when I was buying 
the gown. Unless I changed the panty I was wearing, even sitting down would 
prove impossible, let alone sleeping in the bed. Going by my body’s usual 
routine, the bleeding would intensify in two or three hours. How would I stem 
this flow of blood? Would any of the shops still be open? If only I could at 
least get hold of some sanitary napkins...


When I went out to the balcony, wondering what to do, I discovered that there 
was in fact a pharmacy still open, called Park Medicine, just across the road.


Other than the occasional car speeding by, the roads were deserted. The 
streets were now under the control of dogs. So many dogs?


Slipping the black trousers back on with a sense of revulsion, I took the lift 
down and got the durwan to open the gate. I’ll only be a minute, I told him. 
I’m just going to buy some medicine. The first thing I did after getting the 
sanitary napkins was enter the toilet. With only the glow of the streetlamps to 
see by, I could still tell that my panty was a mess. Would any shop selling 
undergarments open before ten o’clock tomorrow morning? How would I tolerate 
this pair all night? I couldn’t bear the thought of having to set fresh 
sanitary napkins inside the blood-soaked panty. I had to buy a bulb tomorrow 
and get some light in the bathroom at least. In the morning I’d noticed that 
there were no bulbs in any of the sockets. Why had the bulbs all been removed? 
I tried to hold all of this in my mind as I stood there, drops of blood 
trickling down my thighs into the darkness.


I stood beneath the shower, miserable, while the cold water pounced on me. And 
then I remembered the black-and-yellow panty I’d found in the wardrobe. It was 
a panty worn by someone else, and mouldy to boot–I simply couldn’t use it, 
could I? Who knew whom it belonged to and how long it had lain there that way? 
A woman who wears a leopard-print panty must be quite wild. At least when it 
comes to sex. The question was, how wild? Wilder than me, or less so? As these 
thoughts ran through my mind, I wasn’t even aware of having taken off my 
blood-soaked panty and begun to wring and knead it clean beneath the tap. I 
stood in bewilderment for some time when I realised what I was doing; 
eventually I washed it thoroughly and spread it out to dry on the towel rod. I 
persuaded myself that I had no option now but to put on the other panty. I 
wasn’t going to come in direct contact with the mould, I rationalised. The 
sanitary napkin would form a layer in between.

Towelling myself dry, I returned to the bedroom and groped for the panty in 
the dark. I found it, picked up the sanitary napkin I’d laid out on the bed, 
then paused for a moment before fitting it inside the panty.


I slipped into the panty.


What I did not know was that I had actually stepped into a woman.


I slipped into her womanhood.


Her sexuality, her love.


I slipped into her desire, her sinful adultery, her humiliation and sorrow, 
her shame and loathing. I had entered her life, though I didn’t know it. I even 
slipped into her defeat and her withdrawal. I slipped into her nation, too, in 
that moment. Trite thoughts about her world passed through my mind. How fine 
the material was, I reflected. Soft. A perfect fit. As though tailored 
especially for me. After putting it on, I was no longer repulsed. I lay down, 
spreading my hair out on the pillow. Although I do not admit that I fell 
asleep, it is undeniable that I was woken up by a series of sounds in the room.


They were making out. Kissing. Fucking wildly. They were panting, but could 
not stop. Hours seemed to pass this way. They remained engaged in their sex – 
till I passed out.


I had not understood them that first night. I had opened my eyes at the sounds 
of passion and felt afraid – who were these people in the bedroom! But they 
weren’t in the room – they were on the wall. The one which was painted dark 
brown. Both of them were on that wall whose colour did not match the 
rest–naked, having sex, delirious, tearful.

Gradually I realised that they appeared on the days when I wore that 
particular panty. The leopard-print panty. I heard the woman say, ‘If only the 
past, present and future would pass while we two were conjoined, if only time 
would just waste away...’ When I heard this desire articulated, I felt as 
though the big, bigger, biggest expectations whirling restlessly within my 
vagina had died. So I could not be in pursuit of life any more. A disease had 
been born within me. My road was gradually coming to an end...


The days passed without form or shape. When one day ended, I couldn’t remember 
quite how I’d spent it–in what meaningful activities, and in what meaningless 
ones. Before midnight, I would forget all that had happened throughout that 
entire day.

I never did get round to buying a bulb.


I didn’t even get round to buying a panty.


At times I found the two of them unbearable. I wished they would put an end to 
it... but they didn’t. Their lovemaking went on and on. In desperation I would 
pull off the panty and fling it out onto the balcony. Then they would disappear 
at once.


Translation Tuesday: Albina and the Dog-Men by Alejandro Jodorowsky – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/may/10/translation-tuesday-extract-of-alejandro-jodorowskys-albina-and-the-dog-men>
 In the mornings I made tea in the small kitchen. As I sipped my tea, I would 
feel the pangs starting up again. Strolling out to the balcony, I would pick up 
the panty and put it back in the wardrobe. The panty definitely smelled of me 
by then. Of me. How strange!

Translated from the Bengali by Arunava Sinha


*****

Sangeeta Bandyopadhyay has published nine novels and over fifty short stories 
since her controversial debut Shankini. Also a newspaper columnist and film 
critic, Sangeeta has recently moved from Kolkata to London. Tilted Axis will 
publish her novel Abandon, also translated by Arunava Sinha, in 2017.


Arunava Sinha has translated over thirty books from Bengali. Winner of the 
Crossword translation award, for both Sankar’s Chowringhee and Anita 
Agnihotri’s Seventeen, and of the Muse India translation award for Buddhadeva 
Bose’s When The Time Is Right, his translation of Chowringhee was also 
shortlisted for the Independent ForeignFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> Prize. 

 