
Good People is a globe spanning, wide-canvassing novel that probes the depths 
of one of history’s darkest hours. With riveting narrative force, based on 
thorough historical research, this extraordinary novel spans World-War II 
Europe across time and space, boldly sketching an unflinching portrait of men 
and women and their times. In the extract presented below, our protagonist, 
Thomas Heiselberg, a Berliner, discovers a Jewish woman violently murdered in 
his home.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

That night he returned home into a white cloud of feathers. He heard glass 
splinters grinding under his shoes. The windowpanes, china bowls, lamps, 
mirrors — almost nothing was intact after the visit by Hermann and his friends. 
Even the door hinges had been jimmied off. Wooden cabinets and dressers were 
smashed with hammers, the gas and electricity lines ripped out. At least a 
dozen jars of fruit preserves had been hurled against the bathroom wall, and 
flour mixed with soap powder and blood was strewn all over the sink and 
lavatory.

Frau Stein had been stabbed in every part of her body. She lay face down, her 
head cradled in her folded arm. He leaned down and turned her over. When he saw 
her face, coated with a layer of blood-soaked flour, he realised that after 
stabbing her they had smothered her in the sink with a mixture of flour and 
soap powder. She looked like a sad clown in the circus. They hadn’t even let 
her die with that stern expression of hers, well versed in suffering, that had 
always aroused people’s respect. He gathered some feathers and covered her face 
with them.

Neighbours went up and down the stairs and stared into the apartment. Not one 
of them crossed the threshold except Clarissa Engelhardt, a student who lived 
with her parents on the first floor. She gathered up shards of glass from the 
floor and put them in a washbasin. A grey-haired, bespectacled man appeared in 
the doorway, coughed and wiped his nose with a handkerchief. He leaned over 
Frau Stein. Feathers clung to his clothes and his neck, and from time to time 
he brushed a dusty feather away from his face, where the wind, swirling through 
the room, had blown it.

‘I’m allergic to feathers,’ apologised the doctor, who must have been summoned 
by the neighbours.

Thomas didn’t know him. It was a good thing they hadn’t called in Doctor 
Spengler, that romantic soul who became attached to his patients and mourned 
for them. Even the dying had to hear about the suffering of the poor souls who 
had been buried the previous week.

The doctor stepped to the window and shouted something, and soon two men came 
in, picked up Frau Stein’s body and carried it outside. Only her high heels 
remained. Seeing them, Thomas remembered how she had crossed the city that 
morning to come here. She had doubtless walked for hours in those fine shoes 
that his mother had bought her for her fiftieth birthday, and in her best 
dress. Had she intended to ask for help? Jews were turning to everyone they 
knew. She had probably remembered that he worked for an American company. Maybe 
she had planned to coax his mother into asking for his help.

For the next half-hour he took care of Frau Stein’s body, surveyed the damage 
and tried to work out what to do, but he didn’t dare approach his mother’s 
room. A voice in his head shouted that he was in danger — he would be asked to 
explain why a Jewish woman was in his house — and he knew he had to think 
things through. If he saw his mother now, he would lose any chance of remaining 
lucid.

Between his encounter with Hermann and his gang and climbing the steps to his 
house, he understood that his mother was no longer living. Any faint hope was 
snuffed out as soon as he crossed the threshold. He had never felt anything 
with so much certainty as the fact of her death. When he came home from school 
and knocked on the front door, he always knew by the sound of Frau Stein’s 
heavy steps whether or not his mother was at home.

‘Where is Frau Heiselberg?’ the doctor asked.

Thomas stared at the man who was streaked with feathers and flour. The doctor 
shook him and slapped him. His hands were damp. Thomas was afraid that the 
source of the dampness was Frau Stein’s blood.

The doctor shook him again. ‘Where is Frau Heiselberg?’

He pointed down the dark corridor at the only door that remained in the house.

The doctor disappeared down the corridor, and in a few minutes emerged from 
the darkness. Thomas reached out and dusted away some feathers that clung to 
his lapel.

He touched her arm, and let his fingers rest there. He didn’t dare touch her 
face

‘It’s all right, Herr Heiselberg,’ the doctor said.

He doesn’t remember how he got to her room. Maybe they dragged him there. She 
lay on her bed in a nightgown, and pallor had already spread on her face. Her 
head rested on two pillows, her sculpted neck was slightly stretched, but it 
didn’t violate her tranquil expression. She seemed to have gone to sleep. Her 
arms were crossed on her chest, and her lower body was covered by a sheet. He 
cautiously approached the corpse, struggling with the fear that he would be 
called upon to explain why he had invaded her room in the middle of the night. 
He shouldn’t have left her with Frau Stein. His fingers crept along the sheet 
and touched her arm. They were even colder than her skin. He brought them to 
his lips and blew on them. Then he touched her arm, and let his fingers rest 
there. He didn’t dare touch her face. The questions that Erika Gelber would ask 
him were already whirring in his mind: Did you kiss her goodbye? Were you 
afraid of her dead body?

At last he gave a wild shout, shook off his fear and in one movement he leaned 
down, kissed her forehead and straightened up. Then he retreated until his hand 
felt the doorhandle. He went out, shut the door and stood in the dark corridor. 
There he stood until dawn with his back to the closed door of her room.

In the morning he hired the services of Clarissa Engelhardt, and placed the 
reorganisation of the house in her hands. Plump Clarissa agreed to his proposal 
even before asking her parents’ permission, ‘out of respect for Frau 
Heiselberg’. He moved into a hotel near the Milton offices. When he returned to 
the house two weeks later, not even a hint of that night remained, except for 
the space that yawned in his mother’s room where the window had been. He had 
ordered Clarissa not to repair it, and she reluctantly obeyed.

No official contacted him regarding the events of that night. About a hundred 
acquaintances and the entire staff of Milton attended the funeral. Some clients 
also attended, as well as representatives of government offices, the Four Year 
Plan, the Berlin municipality, and the French and Italian embassies. Georg 
Weller, the fellow from the Foreign Office, and two SD agents who worked with 
Carlson Mailer also came. Rudolf Schumacher showed up with a telegram from 
Walther Funk, the Minister of Economic Affairs. Schumacher had doubtless 
managed to boast to him about his connections with Milton, Thomas thought 
irately. The man was an amateur. The way people like that got on was what 
Thomas’s father called ‘wriggling through’.

The presence of people from the government alleviated his anxiety. It had 
apparently been decided to erase any memory of the incident. He heard that 
savage criticism in the foreign press of the attack on the Jews had irritated 
the government. Words like ‘unnecessary’ and ‘stupid’ were used openly amid 
claims that people had acted behind the Führer’s back and betrayed the trust he 
had placed in them. Nevertheless, Weller, who called him up a few weeks after 
the funeral to find out how he was, told him that in December the Foreign 
Minister von Ribbentrop had been warmly received in Paris, that the French 
Foreign Minister had made anti-Jewish remarks and that everyone understood that 
what happened that night was merely a temporary glitch. After all, very few 
Jews had been killed. Weller, who, to Thomas’s surprise, knew all about the 
event in his house, did not believe any action would be taken against him: the 
Foreign Office would not allow anyone to harass a protégé of Jack Fiske. How 
many friends like Fiske did Germany still have in the United States?

The only surprise at the funeral was the absence of Elsa, his ex-wife — if it 
was possible for anything disgraceful she did to surprise him. But he had 
expected her to come, if only to part once and for all from the woman she had 
loathed so much; in his opinion, the years they had all lived under the same 
roof should have been enough to temper her loathing with some sadness. Her 
condolence letter reached the office a few weeks later, and it would have been 
hard to call it heartwarming. Still, they hadn’t seen each other for more than 
ten years, and had scarcely written after she remarried. Now she gave her 
former husband some advice: ‘I hope that apart from your sadness this will be a 
day of liberation.’

‘If Friedrich Nietzsche and a Hollywood starlet sat next to Elsa in a café, 
she would turn her back on the philosopher,’ his mother declared the day she 
met her. A few years later she boasted to Frau Stein that she and her son had 
got rid of their spouses at the same time.

None of the mourners mentioned that night. ‘What a cursed sickness,’ one of 
the SD men said. Thomas silently agreed with him; his mother had died of her 
illness. No one had injured her. Of course the invasion of her house would have 
terrified her and hastened her death, but, to tell the truth, it also shortened 
her suffering.

He had not seen Hermann since. Sometimes the question gnawed at him: why had 
he done it? But, instead of letting it get to him, Thomas started planning how 
he could retaliate. He remembered that when they sold off Hermann’s father’s 
possessions or food stolen from hotels, Hermann was embarrassed and would 
complain about their damned country that forced him to act like a criminal so 
that his sisters wouldn’t starve. Hermann never concealed his distaste for 
Thomas’s practice of ‘swindling people’ (though he didn’t turn up his nose at 
the fruit of the swindles), and the moment came when their friendship began to 
leach away. That didn’t worry him: lots of boys swore fidelity to one another 
and got bored after a month. But even if Hermann now saw him as someone who had 
‘sold his soul to the Americans’ and nonsense like that, it was still hard to 
understand the hatred in his eyes or that he had violated a house where he had 
played as a boy.

Translation Tuesday: excerpt from Making Skeletons Dance by Peter Macsovszky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/apr/05/translation-tuesday-excerpt-from-making-skeletons-dance-by-peter-macsovszky>
One day Thomas decided there was no point in thinking about the kinks in 
Hermann’s soul. Taking revenge on an SS officer might lead to his own 
destruction. Perhaps Hermann felt that they were even now and wouldn’t see each 
other again. But Thomas had to keep an eye out: he wouldn’t let Hermann take 
him by surprise again, make him stand in the street, trembling, humiliated and 
ignorant. Next time he would land the first blow.

Translated from the Hebrew by Jeffrey Green

Nir Baram’s Good People will be out in bookstores next month. Click here 
<https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/good-people> for more information 
about the book.

*****

 * Nir Baram was born into a political family in Jerusalem in 1976. His 
grandfather and father were both ministers in Israeli Labor Party governments. 
He has worked as a journalist and an editor, and as an advocate for equal 
rights for Palestinians. He began publishing fiction when he was twenty-two, 
and is the author of five novels, including The Remaker of Dreams, Good People 
and World Shadow. His novels have been translated into more than ten languages 
and received critical acclaim around the world. He has been shortlisted several 
times for the Sapir Prize and in 2010 received the Prime Minister’s Award for 
Hebrew Literature. Text will publish a work of reportage by Nir Baram in 2017. 
 * Jeffrey Green is a writer and translator living in Israel. He has a 
doctorate in Comparative Literature from Harvard, and has also published, among 
other things, a novel in Hebrew, a book of poetry and a book about translation.  