
Via Ann Goldstein, also the translator of Elena Ferrante, here is a colourful 
extract from Emanuele Trevi’s Something Written, winner of the 2012 European 
Literature Prize and finalist for Italy’s Strega Prize. In a few deftly 
executed strokes, the literary critic recreates the cutthroat atmosphere 
presided over by a former boss (aka “Madwoman”), and mulls over what he took 
out of that period of “extravagant daily persecution”.

— The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

--


Among the many — too many — people who worked for Laura Betti at the Pier 
Paolo Pasolini Foundation in Rome, all of them endowed with a colorful store of 
more or less unpleasant memories, I believe that I can boast of, if nothing 
else, above-average endurance. Not that I was at all spared the extravagant 
daily persecution that the Madwoman (as I soon took to calling her, in my own 
mind) felt it her duty to inflict on her subordinates. On the contrary, I was 
so irredeemably odious to her (there is no more precise word) that I succeeded 
in plucking all the strings of her protean sadism: from the ceaseless invention 
of humiliating nicknames to real physical threat. Every time I entered the 
offices of the foundation, in a dark, massive corner building on Piazza Cavour, 
not far from Castel Sant’Angelo, I sensed almost physically the animal 
hostility, the uncontrollable rage that flashed, like the zigzag lightning in a 
comic book, from behind the lenses of her big square sunglasses. The standard 
greetings immediately followed. ‘Good morning, little slut, did you finally 
figure out that it’s time to GIVE HIM YOUR ASS? Or do you think you can still 
get away with it?!? But you don’t fool ME, you sweet-talking little slut, it 
takes a lot more than someone like you’ — and this first blast of amenities was 
ended only by the eruption of a laugh that seemed to come from a subterranean 
cavern, and was made more threatening by the counterpoint of an indescribable 
sound halfway between a roar and a sob. Very rarely could the avalanche of 
insults dumped on the unfortunate victim be traced back to meaningful concepts. 
Besides, as a general rule, the Madwoman detested meaning, in every form. There 
was no human instrument that in her hands did not become a dangerously 
explosive device. And language was no exception. Her tirades revolved on the 
pivot of an offensive epithet, savored with pleasure and constantly repeated, 
as if the gist of the conversation resided there, in the pure formulation of 
the insult. If addressed to a male, the epithet was generally feminine. Even 
people she liked, and admired, had to put up with this sort of symbolic 
emasculation. Alberto Moravia, for example, to whom she was very attached, at a 
certain point became ‘grandma,’ and there was nothing to be done about it. The 
entire remainder of the conversation, once the insult had been uttered, was 
pure and simple improvisation—a Piranesian prison of malevolence and contempt, 
heedless of logic and syntax. ‘Little slut’ — that was from the start the 
essence, the perfect expression of what I inspired in her. Sweet-talking, vain, 
lying, fascist little slut. Jesuit, murderer. Ambitious. As for me, though I 
wasn’t yet thirty, I had already, like the prisoner of Edgar Allan Poe, groped 
my way around the walls of my character, which, as in all dungeons, were 
properly damp and dark. That the Madwoman was not completely wrong I could 
easily enough admit. What really infuriated her was my wish to please her, my 
ostentatious lack of aggressiveness, and, ultimately, the indifference that has 
always been my sole defense against the threats of the world. There was no 
doubt about the type of damned who would willingly take charge of tormenting 
for eternity that sort of Dantesque monster, enveloped in the smoke of the 
cigarettes she left burning in the ashtray, with her excessive bulk and her 
hair, of a terrifying reddish-orange hue, knotted in a tuft that inevitably 
made you think, when she shook it, of the jet of a whale, or the crest of a 
psychotic pineapple. Laura hated hypocrites and, more generally, all those 
persons who, incapable of expressing themselves, appeared to her as fake, 
condemned to hide behind a papier-mâché mask. This was what I liked about her, 
even as I suffered the consequences. It seemed to me that, hidden in the 
recesses of all that hostility, there was a kind of medicine, a lesson leading 
to salvation. And so, from the moment I started going to the foundation, where 
I quickly gained experience of every sort of temperamental storm, from the 
slightest to the most severe, I had concluded that the time I spent there, in 
the shadow of that mental Chernobyl, was time well spent. What was it, exactly 
— a punishment that I had inflicted on myself by myself to expiate some grave 
sin? A spiritual exercise imbued with the most rigorous masochism? At a certain 
point, there could be no doubt, the Madwoman would fire me, as she had dozens 
of others (some such relationships had lasted no more than a few hours). But I, 
as far as it was in my power, would do nothing to leave. My job, which wasn’t 
very complicated, consisted of tracking down all the interviews that Pasolini 
had done: from the first, which went back to the time of Street Kids, up to the 
most famous, the one he did with Furio Colombo a few hours before his death. 
Once the material was gathered, I would assemble it into a book. Nothing 
exceptional, apart from the labor of doing it; and Laura was very generous when 
it came to money. She liked to tear off checks, after writing them in her 
dramatic way, transforming every compensation into an undeserved gift, 
something stolen from her greatness of soul, and a clear, unalterable 
confirmation of that greatness. If she could, she would have carved those 
checks in marble. She was also very skillful at getting hold of any type of 
public financing, to support all the initiatives of the foundation, and to pay 
a few regular employees: a great archivist, Giuseppe Iafrate, who was as 
patient and detached as a Tibetan bonze, and a couple of girls whom she flayed 
alive but who, without admitting it to themselves, ended up almost loving her. 
As far as I was concerned, inevitably, sooner or later, I would be fired: I was 
mathematically certain of it. The fact is that Laura had her own notions about 
how to publish those interviews. They were crazy, incomprehensible ideas, of no 
practical use, and she tortured me about them for hours. ‘Listen to me, little 
slut, these interviews of Pier Paolo are BURNING, do you understand? You’ve 
read them. Even you must get it. Burn-ing. And so, in this book, all the words 
have to FLY, you understand what a form that flies is? You have to make them 
fly, fly, fly.’ And I: Yes, Laura, I absolutely agree, that’s what I want, too, 
to make them fly. Like eagles. In reality, I wanted to publish those interviews 
as they deserved, and I would never ever understand how they would be made to 
fly. I continued on the only path that I considered possible. The accomplished 
fact — I predicted — would trigger the catastrophe. And that was how it 
happened. In the meantime, having tracked down all the interviews, I had 
arranged them in chronological order, taking care to eliminate the mistakes and 
misprints of the newspapers, translating some from French or English, and 
preparing lengthy, informative notes. Finally, I had written an introductory 
essay, in which I tried to explain how Pasolini, more than any other artist of 
his time, had considered the interview a literary genre that was anything but 
minor and casual. At that point, I could no longer put off the reckoning. For 
the entire duration of my last meeting with Laura, in her office, the sharp 
blade of a box cutter quivered a few millimeters from my jugular. The chain of 
insults reached levels of verbal tightrope-walking worthy of a Rabelais. I 
understood how precise and literal the expression ‘foaming with rage’ is. I was 
afraid at any moment of bringing on a stroke, for which I would have been in 
some way responsible. The wretched file containing all my work ended up, not 
without the usual melodramatic solemnity, in the wastebasket. The threat of 
that blade made an impression, but I didn’t think the Madwoman would go so far 
as to kill or wound me—it wasn’t that type of madness. Apart from the assault 
of cold steel, I had foreseen it all, in my insistence on carrying out the work 
as I thought best. Many months had passed, more than a year, in fact, since I 
started going to the foundation. I worked slowly, and other duties had been 
added, which delayed the collection and preparation of those damn interviews. 
What ended so abruptly had been, therefore, a period of time that was in all 
senses very instructive — I don’t know how else to describe it — for me. I 
consider it a kind of apprenticeship. We all need to learn something, and, 
before that, learn to learn. But the only schools that are truly worth 
attending are the ones we don’t choose, those whose thresholds we cross, so to 
speak, by chance; just as the only materials that we ought to study deeply are 
those which don’t have a precise name, and still less a rational method of 
being studied. Everything else, finally, is relative. Laura was a raucous and 
unpleasant textbook to page through, but full of revelations that, if they 
remained hard to describe, were no less penetrating. And to this I would 
immediately add, because it’s a fundamental fact, the publication of Petrolio, 
which struck Laura’s little kingdom in Piazza Cavour like a thunderbolt, like a 
handful of gunpowder on a crackling fire.

Translated from the Italian by Ann Goldstein

Click here <http://www.worldeditions.org/all-books/book/something-written/> 
for more information about the book.

*****

 * Emanuele Trevi is an Italian writer and literary critic. He has written 
many critical essays on poets and writers, and his book on the poet Pietro 
Tripodo won the Sandro Onofri Prize. He was creative director of the publisher 
Fazi, and, with Marco Lodoli, he edited a school anthology. Trevi has served on 
the jury for several literary awards and has written for magazines and various 
national newspapers, including La Repubblica, La Stampa, and il manifesto. In 
2012, he won the European Literature Prize for Something Written. It was a 
finalist for Italy’s most prestigious literary prize, the Strega Prize, and was 
on the Italian bestseller lists for many months. His work has been translated 
into more than 10 languages. 
 * Ann Goldstein is an editor at The New Yorker. She has translated works by, 
among others, Elena Ferrante, Pier Paolo Pasolini, and Alessandro Baricco, and 
is the editor of the Complete Works of Primo Levi in English. She has been the 
recipient of a Guggenheim fellowship, the PEN Renato Poggioli prize, and awards 
from the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the American Academy of Arts 
and Letters.  