
An award-winning fiction writer, essayist, and critic who grew up in Hungary 
and Brazil and now teaches American literature, Zsófia Bán is no stranger to 
forking paths, the roads not taken. Her beautiful essay below segues quickly 
from house-moving to the broader and richer philosophical theme of derailment 
against the backdrop of the ongoing refugee crisis. We hope you like it as much 
as we do.

—The Editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com/>

In memory of Svetlana Boym

Tumultuous, yes, tumultuous is what the summer of 2015 was. An unruly, 
riotous, tempestuous, bewildered summer, ravaged by the lack of order. Only the 
weather would not stir, hellbent on keeping up the atmospheric conditions 
prevalent since the beginning of summer. All heat records were broken, with 
temperatures close to 40 degrees recorded in July and August. We were clearly 
making meteorological history in Europe. The dull blanket of heat paralyzed our 
reason just enough to keep us from realizing the obvious until it was too late: 
history was being made, quite apart from the weather. In fact, the masses, the 
tumult of refugees pouring through the southern border, then the large families 
stranded in railway stations in the heart of our city, the gathering of 
desperate, exhausted people robbed of almost all their possessions warned us 
clearly enough, that this was the time, here and now, of fateful events. As we 
were leaving the paralyzed city and the country, we too were facing a journey, 
though rather than flight, it turned out to be a return: the compulsive, 
perpetual return to memory, to absence, to the relentless rigor of facts.

Europe and everything that represents the European idea is perhaps on the 
verge of falling apart.

On August 3 we packed the car and set out for Berlin. With an ingenious 
space-saving trick we packed the child’s plush animals into plastic bags shrunk 
with a vacuum cleaner, so even the plumpest specimens were docilely flattened 
to two dimensions.

Once taken out of their plastic bags upon arrival, they slowly regained their 
original dimensions: the breath of life gradually returned into them. Zserbó, 
the giant owl was the first to come to, then Dr Czuki-Czukermann, the anteater 
and finally Menyus, the ferret, Pöpe, the parrot and the rest, the whole 
sizeable coterie. The child greeted each miraculous resurrection with a dance 
of joy: her friends were saved, we had outwitted Archimedes or one of those 
types. The death news that came the day after our arrival flattened us to two 
dimensions the same way, except we held no hope of ever regaining our original 
shape. Remembrance, however alive, is inevitably flatter than the tumultuous 
nature of presence, the noisy, confusing, disorderly and yet, by virtue of the 
senses, coherent presence which only one word fits: the person’s name. The name 
that refers to the single being who is the sum of her traits: the voice, the 
gait, the colorful fabric of her mind, the fears and desires, the betrayals of 
the body, the dreams, and the loneliness. Her name is a message inscribed in 
stone, the imprint of sea-waves on prehistoric geological strata.

In our own lives prehistoric times mean the times before life became story, 
history. Whatever can be told becomes hopelessly two-dimensional, however fresh 
and lifelike the story. The smells, the scents still linger for a while on a 
necklace or jacket. We preserve them, keep sniffing them, but before long they 
take on our own smell; the memory of the voice fades out until it merges into 
our own inner voice, like the water of a river into its delta.


The Spree flows into the Havel, the Havel into the Elbe, the Elbe into the 
North Sea (upwards!); then the northern waters merge with the southern waters, 
and we with all the waters. We will all be together, that’s the idea. I murmur 
this, standing on Monbijou Bridge from which I throw a flower into the water in 
her memory. Unexpectedly the flower lands on the deck of a ship emerging from 
under the bridge; this hurts me to the quick, a glitch, but I soon realize the 
value of error and roll with it: this way it will reach its destination sooner. 
For it was precisely errors, the epiphanies of technical and historical 
glitches, out of which S. constructed theory—and life—, according to which the 
unexpected errors, derailments open the way to other solutions, other versions, 
other possibilities, a phenomenon she labeled “off”. Not post-, anti-, neo-, 
trans-, and sub-, but off. The moment of epiphany, to quote S, gives us the 
gift of a time out of time, which is invaluable. And although she used the 
concept off to explore the unrealized, potential events, the undeveloped, 
unexploited but possible processes and side-alleys of modernity (off modern), 
the concept is just as appropriate for examining the phenomena of life, for 
envisioning the script of “what if”, and for underscoring the necessity of 
ceaseless experimentation. The movement ofoff, S. writes following her beloved 
Shklovsky, can best be compared to the lateral movement of the knight in chess. 
Of course, the off moment par excellence, the technical and historical error 
(fatal error) of life is none other than death, especially sudden, untimely 
death. (“Off is about life caught unawares.”) This is no longer what she says; 
I am saying it, in light of the events. Or rather, in the darkness of the 
events.



The Spree flows into the Havel, the Havel into the Elbe, the Elbe into the 
North Sea, which is a stone’s throw from St. Petersburg, Петербург (here her 
throaty, ironic voice suddenly softens) that she left behind at the beginning 
of the 1980s, only 18 years old. If she left it behind, she did not leave it in 
place. For everything that she would write and think later, every single 
sparkling idea of hers was conceived in that city only to be realized in a 
world new and foreign to her. Her best-known work, The Future of Nostalgia, 
that turned her name into a brand all over the world, studies the forking paths 
and potentialities of emigrant life, exile, and historical memory. In her own 
terms: the possibilities of reflective nostalgia which alone can generate the 
necessary critical distance between the object of nostalgia and the time of the 
remembering subject, as opposed to the stale, ahistorical, yet dangerously 
contagious example of restorative nostalgia. “Criticism is a matter of correct 
distancing”, writes Walter Benjamin, one of the important inspirations for S.’s 
ideas. Here too she was already engaged with the idea of off: what happens, 
what might happen when a destiny, a life, or history leave their usual riverbed 
and create tributaries that continue through new, unfamiliar terrain. As for 
ourselves, this tributary is Berlin now for a year– hardly unknown terrain, 
though under a new constellation. Anything can happen.



We make an overnight stop outside Prague, and stroll for hours in the park of 
Pruhonice castle. A magnificent construction, designed with an engineer’s 
perfection, yet coming across as entirely natural, performing the naturalness 
of nature. We pick at random one or another of the winding, Borgesian paths 
interlacing the park; our choices do not make our task easier, for as we walk 
down the chosen paths, the creeping melancholy of renunciation, the eternally 
unanswered question of “what if” lingers. The artfully designed sudden vistas, 
the abruptly opening, spacious clearings, the purling creeks complete with tiny 
waterfalls, the rock gardens in bloom, the viewing points, the arbors and the 
carefully planned, rich combinations of the greenery give unforeseen delight at 
every turn. Still, deep in the recesses of our consciousness there lurks the 
missed experience of the paths not chosen, the nostalgia for experiences never 
had. We quickly decide that we will stop over again on our next visit home and 
will try to explore those as well. In vain, of course, for we are unable to 
discover all the paths of the park on a second and even a third visit, and 
that’s the way it should be. The architect had outwitted us, cunningly 
incorporating in the design the natural sense of opacity and unfulfillment, and 
this is indeed what completes the experience of the park. Similarly, S.’s off 
experiments with thinking and genres attempt to map such paths not taken from a 
historical or cultural-historical angle, at times in reference to her own life. 
“I want to be an artist too”, proclaims a color neon sign at one end of 
Monbijou bridge, unexpectedly summarizing S.’s yearnings. This was the path, 
more than any other, whose secret enticed her the most a path she did not have 
enough time to walk down. Within a year, the disease would rush her mercilessly 
down a different path, much against her will. I can’t help thinking that the 
correspondence of off would have crossed her mind, at least fleetingly, there 
on that American hospital bed, far away from the shimmering Saint Petersburg 
light, and that this might have come as a consolation. Untidy as she was in 
daily life, she loved when phenomena were revealed in some unanticipated order, 
in small epiphanies of correspondences. These made her happy, and perhaps 
consoled her to some extent for her losses.


While driving from Budapest to Berlin, I am waiting for the phone to ring 
(fearing it), waiting for news. In the car CD player the audio book Fancsikó 
and Pinta is playing for the umpteenth time, read by none other than the 
Master’s voice, in the best of all audiobooks ever made of it. His inimitably 
playful, ironic accents are dispersed beneficially in the car cabin lined with 
anxiety, though unable to ease the anxiety caused by his own illness. “Cut the 
poetry, Fancsikó!” says the Master gently, and I continue listening to the CD 
all the way to Berlin, again and again, like one desperately holding on to the 
reassuringly familiar string of words. This melancholy mixed with irony and 
lightness used to be S.’s mother tongue, too; this was the common language that 
guaranteed diasporic intimacy between us. She launched this concept in her 
supremely beautiful essay on the friendship of Mary McCarthy and Hannah Arendt 
– my favourite among her works, as I told her in a message sent to the 
hospital. Our messages went by strange, mysterious routes: this one I sent to a 
common friend of ours who happened to be in Estonia at the time, and she 
transmitted it to the one who could be permanently by S.’s bedside in Boston, 
unlike us. My messages would travel to her along immaterial, virtual pathways, 
and she would send word by the same paths, yet our words never failed to reach 
their destination. When hearing my message – she was no longer able to read – 
her face lit up [I read], this was, she said, her own personal favorite too. It 
is the intimacy of diasporic people that allows for strong bonds to be created 
even with friends living on a different continent, whom we see only very 
rarely. “The recipes of friendship are always imprecise,” she writes in this 
essay and indeed, friendship would sometimes find itself highly unusual ways, 
overflow its riverbed and show up where we least expect it. “Cut the poetry, 
Fancsikó!” the Master’s voice warns us as I fix my eyes on the highway, holding 
on to the steering wheel. Who would arrive there first, her or us? The phone is 
silent.


Crossing the Monbijou Park from the direction of the old synagogue on 
Oranienburger Strasse, we are walking toward Monbijou Bridge.Mon bijou, my 
jewel, my precious. A surprisingly flimsy, buoyant name for a Berlin bridge, it 
almost seems an error, a faux pas of naming. Each of us is holding a flower, 
awaited by the busy Spree. We stop at the middle of the bridge and look down on 
the turbid green water. Then one of us starts relating our friend’s last day 
the way she, too, had heard it from someone else. The transmission of the 
moment of death takes the form of some ancient ritual in the glaring hot summer 
afternoon, the handing down of a tradition from one human being, one spirit to 
another, from the one already dead to the living; we cannot see anything but 
only hear the sound of words dissolving in the air, just as the religion of our 
forebears is based not on sight but on hearing, Hear, o Israel, here and now 
these earthbound words, close to the body, will serve in place of a prayer. In 
such and such a way it happened. When she finishes she looks at us 
questioningly, what next. And it is as if S. herself had transmitted the 
solution, applying lipstick was her small, profane rite, performed countless 
times every day; she would carefully put on lipstick, whether she was going to 
the store, to teach, to a meeting, she insisted on her lipstick even on Skype, 
she wouldn’t want to appear naked, as it were, and probably didn’t know how 
much her stubborn insistence on wearing make-up denuded her. “In the last 
analysis appearances is all there is,” she would enjoy quoting Brodsky. They 
say that even in the hospital she worried she would run out of lipstick –rouge 
à lèvres. Mon bijou. I fish a lipstick out of my bag, pass it around, we all 
apply it without a mirror. Some of us smudgily, not quite following the line of 
the lips: a bit off. Then we throw our flowers into the water.


The Spree flows into the Havel, the Havel into the Elbe, the Elbe into the 
North Sea. Later I would inherit from her, together with the dark red leather 
jacket, a lipstick in a golden tube, Raisin rapture 892, L’Oréal, Paris. All 
further messages from me are sent to this address. The heat is long over, 
Berlin is snowed in, the smaller lakes are frozen. Along Hungary’s southern 
borders an imperious razor wire fence stands; Europe and everything that 
represents the European idea is perhaps on the verge of falling apart. We don’t 
know where to live, where to go, perhaps we will always be exiles from now on, 
inside or outside the iron curtain. There is only one thing that guides us, its 
warm, now stronger, now dimmer glow, its playful chiaroscuro has a preserving 
power even after it has turned to memory.

Translation Tuesday: The Midwife by Katja Kettu – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/oct/11/translation-tuesday-the-midwife-by-katja-kettu-extract>
“Writing about men and women in ‘dark times,’ Arendt observed that in 
circumstances of extremity, the illuminations do not come from philosophical 
concepts but from the ‘uncertain, flickering and often weak light’ that men and 
women kindle and shed over the lifespan given to them. This luminous space 
where ‘men and women come out of their origins and reflect each other’s sparks’ 
is the space of humaneness and friendship that sheds light on the world of 
appearances we inhabit. In other words, friendship is not about having 
everything illuminated or obscured, but about conspiring and playing with 
shadows. Its goal is not enlightenment but luminosity, not a quest for the 
blinding truth but only for occasional lucidity and honesty,” she writes in her 
essay “Scenography of Friendship.”

We are conspiring and playing with the shadows.

Translated from the Hungarian by Erika Mihálycsa and Katalin Orbán

Read this essay in full over at the Asymptote blog here 
<http://asymptotejournal.com/blog> and a short story by Zsófia Bán here 
<http://www.asymptotejournal.com/fiction/zsofia-ban-on-the-eve-of-no-return/>. 

*****

 * Zsófia Bán is a Hungarian writer who was born in Rio de Janeiro in 1957 and 
grew up in Brazil and Hungary. A fiction writer, essayist and critic, she made 
her fiction debut in 2007 with her acclaimed book Esti iskola – Olvasókönyv 
felnőtteknek. Her writing has been published in many languages and she is the 
recipient of a number of prizes for fiction and essay writing, as well as for 
art and literature criticism. Recently, she has been a DAAD writer-in-residence 
in Berlin (2015/16). She lives and works in Budapest, where she teaches 
American literature and visual studies at Eötvös Loránd University. Her website 
can be foundhere <http://www.banzsofia.net/>.

 * Erika Mihálycsa is a lecturer in 20th and 21st century British and Irish 
fiction at Babes-Bolyai University Cluj in Romania, and is a Joyce and Beckett 
scholar. She has translated fiction and poetry by Beckett, Flann O’Brien, 
George Orwell, Julian Barnes, Jeanette Winterson and others into Hungarian. She 
is a co-editor of literary and arts journal HYPERION - For the Future of 
Aesthetics,issued <http://contramundum.net/> by Contra Mundum Press. She has 
published short prose in both Hungarian and English.

 * Katalin Orbán is a scholar and translator. Her works on graphic narratives, 
cultural memory, and changing modes of reading have appeared in Critical 
Inquiry, Representations, and other journals. She has also written a book, 
Ethical Diversions: The Post-Holocaust Narratives of Pynchon, Abish, DeLillo, 
and Spiegelman. Before her current position at the Institute for Art Theory and 
Media Studies at Eötvös Loránd University, she taught at Harvard University and 
the National University of Singapore.
 