
The stories told with Southeast Asia’s shadow puppets, better known in the 
region as ‘Wayang Kulit’, range from adaptations of ancient epics to familiar, 
domestic sagas. This poem was written in 1977, when the Malayan-born Wong Yoon 
Wah (by then an outspoken scholar, critic, and award-winning writer) was 
appointed Director of the Institute of Humanities and Social Sciences at 
Nanyang University – just as higher education in Singapore was experiencing a 
period of upheaval. Here, Wong holds his own several identities up to the 
light, and a candid sense of his inner self shines through.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

*****

i. Birth

A sharp knife
pares the leather into shape.
A ruthless awl
carves each nub of my character.

With a dab of paint
I become the singing, dancing doll
everyone loves.


ii. Family Background

Though I’m a shadow
acting in the night’s mystery, 
I am a child of light,
nothing without its beam.

The village’s earth is a white gauze.
In this soiled world, I can’t find myself.

I’ve never left a footprint
on the path.
I sing movingly
but never with my own voice.

At home, I’m a shadow on the screen.
On stage: a self you can see.


iii. Confession 

Don’t take me
for one who loves fights,
schemes to be king,
or hankers
after Solomon’s princesses.

A shapeless thread holds each of my four limbs.
Being superstitious, I can’t refuse being fate’s plaything.
The old man backstage
has my voice in his hands.
Whether I’m crying or laughing,
he decides.


iv. Fate

If you go backstage
when the show ends,
you’ll find us – heroes, ladies – all
in the arms of the ugly puppeteer. 

After we’ve been played,
our heads are taken down,
bodies folded and stacked again
in his box, secured with string 
where patiently, like prisoners,
we’ll wait to see the sun.

November, 1977

Translated from the Chinese by Theophilus Kwek

*****


 * Born in Malaysia, Professor Wong Yoon Wah has won Singapore’s Cultural 
Medallion (1986), Thailand’s South-east Asia Write award (1984), and the ASEAN 
cultural award (1993). He has published more than 20 books as well as over 50 
articles on modern and postcolonial Chinese literature, and is presently senior 
vice president of Southern University College, Malaysia. 
 * Theophilus Kwek has published three collections of poetry, most recently 
Giving Ground (2016). He won the Jane Martin prize in 2015 and the New Poets 
prize in 2016. His translation of ‘Moving House’ by Wong Yoon Wah was placed 
Second in this year’sStephen Spender Prize for poetry in translation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/05/stephen-spender-prize-winners-poetry-in-translation>
.
 