
The Gravedigger’s Son

Death can arrive at any moment and for one anonymous woman it came when she’d 
been gestating a fetus for six months. Her shrouded body ended up tossed into a 
mass grave in a random cemetery. As a compassionate priest devoted a few words 
to her out of the goodness of his heart, the gravedigger covered her body with 
dirt. No one claimed or identified the cadaver, and the few folks who noticed 
her obvious pregnancy assumed that the baby had died along with its mother.


However that wasn’t the case. The fetus continued to nourish itself on her 
inert body and, just as blackness was about to envelop its incipient existence, 
the only power able to change its inevitable fate intervened. Death. Death 
itself, whose job was to carry off designated souls without a second thought, 
fixed her eye on that small creature.

Death had been tempted by the idea of being a mother for centuries. She 
figured it would pass and, in any case, she never expected to ever feel 
anything for anyone dwelling on the side of the living. But she was drawn to 
the fetus by the beating of its little heart and, when she headed over and ran 
a hand over its ribs to take its life, she hesitated. Her skinny, cold fingers 
moved around the tiny heart without actually touching it. Even the slightest 
brush would have silenced it. There was no reason for her not to do it. That 
life wasn’t meant to continue. But when the desire is strong enough, you find 
the justification you need, and Death found hers. If the fetus finished its 
gestation, its beating heart wouldn’t be accompanied by any other beating 
heart. Only by silence and the rustling of insects picking bones clean. The 
baby would be born surrounded by dead tissue. It would be her child, Death’s 
child, and Death, excited by the prospect, withdrew her hand from inside it and 
decided that that mass grave would not be its tomb.

Rats, spiders, and lizards all immediately began to distrust that part of the 
cemetery. The birds avoided flying over it, and if any unsuspecting animal 
entered the radius of the grave, by land or by air, it would be struck down. 
The fruits on nearby trees fell when they were at their juiciest and, no matter 
what slope separated them from the mass grave, they rolled over to it. That was 
how Death, making use of the life in her reach, managed to feed the fetus, 
converting the earth, which absorbed the essence of the bodies decomposing in 
it, into a womb.


After seven months and three weeks of gestation, the baby was moving about 
restlessly. A tramp, who’d just decided to confess his love to the young lady 
who begged for alms near the river, dropped dead at the cemetery gate. In other 
circumstances the body would have lain out on the ground for hours or days but, 
inexplicably, it began to decompose so rapidly that the smell alerted 
respectable passersby, and the respectable passersby alerted the police, and 
the police alerted the gravedigger, who urgently carted the tramp’s body inside 
the cemetery walls and began digging.


Death was expectant. It was the moment of birth. She, the sole one responsible 
for bringing souls from one side to the other, was so engrossed in that moment 
that she ignored everything else. Four streets away, in the courtyard of the 
tribunal, a woman with a noose already around her neck shouted for the last 
time to the crowd gathered that she wasn’t guilty of the crime of passion she’d 
been condemned for. Beneath his hood, the executioner, more worried about 
remembering the lines of his role in an amateur play than in that unfulfilling 
job, adjusted the noose and opened up the trapdoor beneath the woman. The 
doomed woman’s body fell of its own weight. Her cervical vertebrae let out a 
crack that elicited an ugh from the public. Seconds later, her toes dangling a 
few feet off the ground, the executed woman opened her eyes and looked up. She 
was curious to see what the other side was like but, to her disappointment, she 
saw the same faces. The crowd moved back. The ugh turned into surprise. Some 
excited voices attributed the miracle to divine justice and proclaimed her 
innocence. The most contorted face in the crowd belonged to a woman who, amid 
shouts demanding the real guilty party be found, slipped out of the courtyard.

At the cemetery, the gravedigger was preparing the hole. Suddenly, he noticed 
that the dirt was oddly spongy and instinctively began to dig more carefully. 
As he stood inside the pit, he pulled back his elbows to scoop out the last 
shovelful but, before the metal struck the earth, a tiny hand made its way 
through the remains of the bones. Unable to take in what he was seeing, the 
gravedigger dropped the shovel and dug his hands into the dirt. He soon touched 
a tender body and, to his astonishment, as if harvesting an onion, he pulled a 
baby out of the bowels of the grave. A thick root intertwined with the remains 
of human tissue emerged from its belly button and extended its lateral branches 
throughout the entire mass grave. The gravedigger broke the root to separate 
the baby from the earth. He held it in his hands with his arms extended, 
staring at it in amazement. The newborn burped out a handful of dirt, took in a 
gulp of air and started to cry.

Death was overjoyed. In the tribunal’s courtyard they were raising up the 
executed woman’s body one more time. A civil servant ordered the executioner to 
push her into the trapdoor again hard, once she was hoisted, before the 
swarming crowd was upon them. The executed woman didn’t know where she was. She 
couldn’t manage to straighten her neck. The executioner heaved her up as she 
swayed and insisted on her innocence, but Death returned her attentions to the 
world and the executed woman, once she was up on the gallows again, collapsed 
at the feet of the executioner with an expression suggesting she’d died from 
hanging a few minutes earlier, and the crowd dispersed.

No other human had witnessed the scene at the cemetery. The gravedigger pulled 
the child out of the grave and, after climbing out himself, buried the tramp. 
He wrapped the baby in his jacket and took him home making sure no one saw him. 
He lived alone in a little house inside the cemetery’s walls. He closed the 
door and placed the baby on the table. It was all so fantastical that he had to 
check the palm of his hand twice to make sure the scratch left by the root he’d 
torn from the baby’s belly was actually there. Mr. Soiler, the man who had been 
the gravedigger before him at that cemetery and whose assistant he’d been—it 
was Mr. Soiler’s death that had made his job and house available—had once told 
him about a case that he now recalled as he stood beside the baby.

The day before Mr. Sprout’s burial, his widow came to Mr. Soiler with a very 
strange request: the following day, when all the mourners had returned to their 
own matters, Mr. Soiler was to dig up her husband’s corpse, rebury it without 
clothes or a coffin and cover it only with a few inches of dirt. So that Mr. 
Soiler could fulfill the assignment to her satisfaction, the young widow 
explained the reasons behind her unsettling request.

Death had been tempted by the idea of being a mother for centuries

Each fall, Mrs. Sprout, when she was still Miss Brisel, would plant a tulip 
bulb in the garden at her house to watch it flower when spring arrived. One 
year, when the warm-weather flowers were already long gone and the trees were 
already bare, the tulip still hadn’t flowered. Its leaves hadn’t even peeked 
out from underground. Any other person would have thought that the bulb was 
dead, but Miss Brisel was certain that it was still alive underground. No 
matter what the weather, she would slip out into the garden when her parents 
weren’t looking—they wouldn’t have understood her weird obsession—to talk to 
the bulb. But nothing emerged from the ground where she’d planted it. Autumn 
came to a close, and winter, and when the new spring arrived, Miss Brisel 
waited. Every day, without exception, she knelt down in front of that patch of 
barren ground and spoke to it. A very hot summer was followed by a new autumn 
and winter, and as March was ending, a young man showed up at the front door, 
wrapped in a shawl that Miss Brisel had left on a chair in the garden. Mr. and 
Mrs. Brisel decided to take in the stranger until he regained the memories he 
seemed to have lost, but in the end he never did recover them. He didn’t speak 
either, and Doctor Lent, after an exhaustive examination, concluded that he was 
mute. But Miss Brisel had a suspicion that was confirmed when, eavesdropping 
behind a door, she overheard how shocked one of the maids was by the amount of 
dirt that had come from the stranger’s feet while they were making him 
presentable for the masters of the house. The name Mister Sprout was her idea.

She lied to her parents when she told them that the boy, in a moment of 
clarity, had written it on a slip of paper. Even though Mr. Brisel never really 
entirely trusted a young man who preferred water to wine, he didn’t stand in 
the way of him marrying his daughter.

“We’ve been very happy together,” said the young widow to Mr. Soiler, who 
thought the woman wasn’t all there. “But no bulb lives for that long,” she 
added sadly. “Just in case, follow my instructions.”

The baby was still laying on the table, in silence. The room had filled with a 
peace that was very different from the one the gravedigger had grown accustomed 
to living alone in the cemetery. No one would believe him. He would hand the 
baby over to the police and say that someone had abandoned it on his doorstep. 
Standing over the baby, he stretched out a hand. He touched him and his eyes 
filled with tears. There were many reasons for that man to be moved to tears 
before a new, unblemished life. He wouldn’t hand him over to the police. He 
knew firsthand the erratic future awaiting orphans, and when he held the boy 
for the first time in his hands he had felt himself part of the place we all 
belong to.

That night, as the gravedigger and the boy slept, Death tiptoed over to the 
small box the man had set up as a bed for the baby. The living are usually 
distressed by Death’s presence, but the baby didn’t bat an eyelash. He breathed 
happily when he perceived her company, remembering how she had looked after him 
when he was below ground. Death too felt the tie that bound them. She wouldn’t 
let anything happen to her boy. But Death was an expert in snatching away life, 
not creating it, and she’d forgotten something when she’d taken the place of 
the dead mother’s womb, an essential element that Life meticulously and without 
exception wove into every living being, to cling to until their very final 
sigh. She forgot to give the boy hope.

Translated from the Catalan by Mara Faye Lethem

*****

 * Teresa Colom (La Seu d’Urgell, 1973) is an Andorran poet and writer. She 
has published six poetry collections. Her debut work of fiction, entitled “Ms 
Keaton and other beasts”, and from which this text has been extracted, won the 
Premi Maria Àngels Anglada. (Past winners of this prize include Quim Monzó, 
Carme Riera and Sergi Pàmies).

 * Mara Faye Lethem has translated novels by Jaume Cabré, David Trueba, Albert 
Sánchez Piñol, Javier Calvo, Patricio Pron, Marc Pastor and Toni Sala, among 
others. These books have been featured as New York Times and Booklist Editors’ 
Picks, and among the Best Books of the Year in The Times and Readers’ Favourite 
Books in the Financial Times. Her translation of The Whispering City, by Sara 
Moliner, recently received an English PEN Award.
 