
David Clerson’s Brothers is an original, phantasmagoric piece of fiction that 
is steeped in myth and fable. In a world of “gruesome, gargantuan creatures, 
two-headed fish, turtles with shells as big as islands, whales with mouths so 
large they could consume entire cities”, two brothers set out to find their 
father. The elder brother is missing an arm, while his younger brother has been 
fashioned by his mother from that arm. Excess and adventure abound as fresh, 
original writing draws us in to “surreal, hostile worlds.” We meet the 
leech-boys, a wooden puppet the brothers drag from the sea to become a member 
of the family, six pig-children, and more, all conveyed in a tone that lies 
somewhere between delirium and a disturbing dream.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

*****

The sailboat was small and light, made of wood, and it glided on the ocean, 
attended by graceful seagulls and a few cormorants. This craft was much easier 
to handle than the brothers’ rowboat. This time, the older brother headed 
straight out to the open sea, pushed by fair, warm summer winds.

He had secured Puppet’s head to the bow, leaving his figurehead clad in the 
grey pelt. Often, the wind would fill the pelt, moving the body and limbs. It 
seemed to dance at the bow, and it made the older brother smile, a fleeting 
happiness.

He was walking on the ocean as one might walk across a desert, an ocean 
covered in bodies, a dry sea, not fit for life.

There had been a barrel of fresh water in the boat when he set sail, along 
with a few dry biscuits and some smoked herring. The older brother ate 
parsimoniously, nearly fasting, and he almost never slept, his eyes wide open 
over dark circles carved out by a scalpel.

The blood had dried on his face and on the pelt he wore. His skin was tanned 
by the sun, and hairs were beginning to sprout on his young man’s skin. He was 
not good at handling the sail and had quickly abandoned the idea of hoisting 
it, simply letting the waves carry his sailboat. He spent the days and nights 
standing in the bow, behind Puppet dressed in the grey pelt, with the wind 
blowing over his body and sprinkling droplets of salt water on his skin.

He had placed his prosthetic arm in the bottom of the sailboat. Fine cracks 
had begun to appear on the wood. It had been the arm of a puppet swept away by 
the ocean, and also the limb of a strange child, the paw of a dog turned 
murderous, and the handle of a weapon; most of all it was a present from his 
brother, a present he didn’t know what to do with.

The first days, the older brother passed a few small islands, then, nothing. 
Fewer and fewer birds travelled with him.

He rarely thought of the past.

He never felt alone.

In the bow, looking out at the ocean’s black water, he sometimes thought he 
was seeing things: giant squids, tritons and sirens swimming in the depths. His 
kin, he told himself. Monsters like him.

In his rare moments of sleep, he saw himself as a bloodthirsty god, marching 
over plains of burnt grass covered with cadavers, Puppet in his hand like a 
mace. He slaughtered women and children, and Puppet laughed, laughed and 
laughed.

After sailing for several days, despite his frugality, his stores of food were 
coming to an end, and he fasted in earnest. Always under the sun in the bow of 
the boat, he sometimes caught himself sleeping standing up. His body thinned 
out, the body of a wandering saint, with dried blood encrusted in the hollows 
of his face, and the cruelty of the world in his belly. He kept squinting: the 
light of the sun seemed threatening.

One morning, opening his eyes, the older brother saw a raven standing on 
Puppet’s head, and he thought he must have passed an island while he was 
sleeping, that the raven must have come from land nearby. He began to dream of 
Puppet’s home country, a world of wooden beings, a land of war, of bloodless 
wars, all splinters and wood shards, and the thought pleased him.

It might have been one of his mother’s ideas, he thought to himself, not 
expecting to be thinking about her, and he wondered whether she still talked to 
them, to him and his brother, every night at supper, if she still warned them 
against the temptations of the ocean, against that dog of a father that the 
brothers had wanted to meet despite the fear of sinking into the depths, never 
to return, into the depths from which the older brother sometimes thought he 
heard his brother’s laugh rising, as if he were at some eternal carnival with 
the tritons and the sirens.

Maybe the raven perched on Puppet’s head heard the laugh too. The bird stood 
there, its plumage black and glossy, looking at the older brother before 
turning its head toward the ocean. It must have seen and heard so many things, 
the older brother thought. “Raven, have you heard my brother’s laugh?”

“Caw,” the bird said.

The older brother hadn’t spoken in a long time, barking, mostly, over the last 
few months. The sound of his voice startled him. It sounded scratchy. He wanted 
to hear it again. “Caw? Caw, what?” he asked the raven, who turned its head 
toward him quizzically, but did not answer.

The next day, clouds filled the sky, growing darker as time passed. The older 
brother’s ribs were sharp under his skin, just above his hollow abdomen. He 
felt emaciated, his pelt huge and shapeless around him. He was a gaunt animal, 
a starving old dog lost on an ocean he didn’t know the end of, but where he 
floated without fear, without fearing death, but without wanting it either, 
without worrying about it.

He was tired. He had a hard time telling sleep from waking. And his brother’s 
laughter trickled up from beneath the waves more and more often, a jellyfish 
laugh, the laughter of the deep. The older brother’s ears were full, and his 
nose and his mouth. The laugher came into his body and filled his belly and his 
head, denying his brother’s death, as if it had been only a mirage.

Often, the older brother opened his heavy, pasty mouth to ask the raven, who 
never left him, “Do you hear it too? Do you hear?” The raven didn’t answer, not 
even deigning a simple caw. It hopped along the gunwale, sometimes opening its 
wings to keep its balance.

Translation Tuesday: The Midwife by Katja Kettu – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/oct/11/translation-tuesday-the-midwife-by-katja-kettu-extract>
The older brother no longer associated his brother’s laughter with happiness. 
He even wondered whether he had ever been right to think he was happy. 
Sometimes, it sounded snide; more often, he thought the sound seemed unhappy, 
laughter tinged with suffering, and he associated that suffering with their dog 
of a father: for him they had left their mother, for him they had set out to 
sea without knowing how to sail, for him his brother had been swallowed by the 
ocean, this ocean now echoing with the haunting laughter that rang in the older 
brother’s head, as if to say, “What were we supposed to find, when we found our 
father?”

The older brother sometimes closed his eyes and saw a wide, black, furry head 
emerging from the ocean, long strands of seaweed tangled in its fur, drooling 
over the boat as the older brother had so often seen him drool in his dreams. 
He had always been that big in his dreams, but the jaw was weaker now, with 
decayed teeth hanging loosely from rotten gums, and he told himself that he 
scared him less than before.

When, after many days of grey, rain finally fell on the older brother’s face, 
the water washed the dried blood, which ran into his mouth, and he drank it. 
The rain also washed his pelt, caked with the blood of the pig-children and 
their mother, and water mixed with blood pooled in the bottom of the boat. The 
raven cawed while the rain ran over its feathers. The older brother gathered 
water in the palm of his hand and wet his face. He threw his head back and 
drank the rain as it fell from the sky, while the raven ran around in the 
bottom of the boat, circling around him, cawing.

It rained a long time. As best he could, the older brother made a shelter, 
pulling the sail tight over the hull. He brought down Puppet from the bow, and 
took the head with him under the sail. The rain had cleaned the blood off 
Puppet and wiped away the painted smile. The older brother placed the head in 
front of him, both of them lying beneath the sail, and he spoke to Puppet as if 
to an old friend: “Do you remember the first time we saw each other? I pulled 
you out of the ocean. I did it for my brother. You were covered in seaweed. He 
had to wash you. Can you hear him laughing? He loved you so much…” Then he 
pulled the grey dog’s pelt over himself, petted it and said: “I loved you as I 
may never love again, and I avenged your death better than you could have 
dreamed.”

His brother’s laughter echoed under the sail in the shelter, and the older 
brother began to sing a song without words, though words slipped into the tune, 
words he didn’t know, archaic words maybe, or new words created from nothing, 
devoid of meaning, a tune like his mother used to sing, maybe the same one she 
had sung on the first day of his life to reassure him while she cut his arm off.

He sang to chase away his brother’s laughter, but couldn’t. His song rose from 
his empty stomach, where the laughter had already seeped in, and it filled the 
sail, mixing with the laughter that quickly drowned out the music. The older 
brother stopped singing and began to cry, tears streaming from his dry body.

The next day, when morning came, the rain had stopped and the older brother 
had fallen asleep, covered with the grey pelt, Puppet next to him.

In his dream, he was walking on the ocean as one might walk across a desert, 
an ocean covered in bodies, a dry sea, not fit for life, and he felt his hunger 
scream from the pit of his hollow stomach, a screeching voice like his 
brother’s on his angry days, a raging voice that nothing but the taste of blood 
would appease. And always he heard his brother’s laughter, laughter that 
sneered at death, and the older brother wanted to believe it, dreaming of his 
brother alive for all time.

At the peak of the afternoon, as the sun began to pierce the clouds, the raven 
joined him under the sail. The older brother turned to the bird in his sleep 
and asked, talking in his dream: “Did you hear him laughing?” The raven snapped 
its beak and answered in its bird’s voice, the voice of a ventriloquist in 
which the older brother thought he heard his own: “Caw. Your brother hasn’t 
laughed in a long time. Your brother is dead, unquestionably dead.” Then the 
older brother woke, staring into the empty eyes of the silent bird. How he 
hated this bird of ill omen. He grabbed it suddenly with his hand, brought it 
quickly to his mouth, bit into its throat and felt blood run over his tongue, 
and twisted its body to break the neck. Then he came out from beneath the sail, 
knelt under the sun, plucked his victim with his teeth, and ate the body raw 
before throwing the remains overboard.

He got up and looked out over the horizon and saw a dark shape swimming under 
the surface, a ghastly shape swimming away from him. He knew it: it was his 
father. He had set sail for his father. He had always been heading here. His 
brother had died wanting to find their father; if his brother was dead now, it 
was because his father had killed him.

And now, the older brother was going to kill his dog of a father.

Translated from the French by Katia Grubisic

Brothers is now available from QC Fiction, a new imprint of Quebec fiction in 
translation. Clickhere <http://qcfiction.com/?page_id=4852> for more 
information about the book.

*****

 * David Clerson was born in Sherbrooke, Quebec, in 1978 and lives in 
Montreal. He was a finalist in Radio-Canada’s 2012 short story competition. 
Brothers is his first novel. It won Quebec’s Grand prix littéraire Archambault 
2014. 
 * Katia Grubisic has been working as a writer, translator and editor for 15 
years, and has published poetry, fiction, translations and criticism in Canada 
and internationally. She has been on the editorial boards of a number of 
literary magazines and her work has been shortlisted for the CBC Literary 
Awards and the AM Klein award. Her 2008 poetry collection, What if red ran out, 
won the Gerald Lampert prize.  