
From our brand-new summer issue <http://asymptotejournal.com>, we are thrilled 
to bring you the first-ever English translation of Pedro Novoa’s The Dive. It 
is the first prize winner of the Story of 1000 Words contest, sponsored by 
Peru’s Caretas magazine. Novoa’s narrative talent and knack for spare but 
evocative description are in full display here. To introduce this fiery new 
talent to the world, we especially commissioned translations of this work into 
14 other languages (from Albanian and Bengali to Chinese), all of which you can 
read for freehere 
<http://www.asymptotejournal.com/fiction/pedro-novoa-the-dive/>.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

You dive. As you descend you hear your Grandmother Hiromi: “Bring back the 
algae of the old ways.” The words float around your handmade mask like fish 
shedding scales of light. Your bet on modern medicine came up empty. The iodine 
tablets that your brother Yochan took to combat anemia had little effect; at 
most, they turned his cheeks pink for a few weeks.
Next came your training: aquatics, the progressive submersions, and, of 
course, the medical checkups to see if your body was responding. You needed to 
be sure: Mama Misuki had died precisely because she had underestimated science, 
because she put more trust in myth than in reality. To Grandmother, her 
daughter hadn’t died, she’d been called back to the sea. No one contradicted 
her. As was custom, no one cried during the wake. Only Papa Hideo sought refuge 
in the bathroom, where he broke tradition and burst into tears.
Papa marched to his own tune. If the force of gravity insisted on dragging us, 
he levitated. If the world rotated left, he raced in the opposite direction. 
Knowing full well what lay ahead, he allowed Yochan’s doctor to talk him into 
moving us to Chosica, hoping that the dry climate would improve your brother’s 
health.

Don’t be afraid of the sea. Do not fear fighting for what you love deep down

When Grandmother found out, she disinherited him and readied her suitcases. 
“I’ll go back home,” she said as she carried her eighty years to the airport; 
and she left for Japan. The proud old woman lived alone, without electricity, 
cards, or supermarkets, eating only fish, abalone, and algae that she took from 
the sea herself. “I had the entire Pacific Ocean to myself,” she’d explain a 
year later.

After discovering that the climate in Chosica, instead of helping Yochan, was 
hurting him, we returned to Callao. It was you who talked Grandmother into 
coming back. It was also the time of betrayal, your betrayal: you traveled to 
Cusco because you got a good job, but you told Grandmother that you lived in 
Lima, just an hour from home. That’s why, every time there were family 
reunions, you’d invent the most outrageous excuses. And since you were her 
favorite — even though she never admitted it — she’d end up accepting whatever 
nonsense you told her. But when a phone call told you that Yochan’s illness had 
become critical and that the doctors had lost hope, you took the first plane to 
Lima. And there you were, diving in search of the algae that Grandmother used 
when medical science declared that your brother was going to die.

When Yochan was eight, Grandmother dived; at sixteen, Mama Misuki; and now, at 
twenty-four, the responsibility passed to you, the next generation. Your 
brother’s wife offered to go in your place, but she lacked history in her 
veins. The women of our family had dived in the sea for thousands of years in 
search of oysters and pearls. Distraught, she would dial your number with the 
same desperation with which she now held the rope tied around your waist. From 
the boat, your sister-in-law was sweating, suffering: your submerged body was 
in some way her body.

Translation Tuesday: About My Mother by Tahar Ben Jelloun – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/jul/12/translation-tuesday-about-my-mother-by-tahar-ben-jelloun-extract>
And you, face down, sinking into a universe of black milk with a snorkel that 
was a horn that sprouted from your mouth. And the agonizing stream of light 
from the lantern framed your descent, proving that night below the surface was 
more night. And without fins, without a diving suit, breasts exposed and 
dressed only in your underwear, you set out, infinite, toward a swarm of algae 
where you were supposed to find the yellow-brown ones, the famous fucus algae. 
Those plants that your ancestors, the amas, the ancient pearl divers, ate raw 
to ward off the demons of weakness. The bad thing was that they preferred to 
build their nests in the hostile depths of underwater cliffs. Now, thirty 
meters below, you felt the jaggedness of the rocks.

You took care to penetrate thickets of plankton and shell colonies. And 
finally, you felt the swollen vesicles of the fucus algae brush your hands and 
arms and trace the outlines of your breasts. You pulled out as many as you 
could to fill your small mesh bag and you were done: half the battle was won.

You’d gone a minute and a half without breathing: an eternity beneath the 
water. You felt, at times, that your tongue was growing, twisting, curling 
backwards: That’s how your mother had died when she failed to calculate the 
strain of the return journey. You could die in the same way. You moved as 
little as possible so not to saturate your body with carbon dioxide. Your arms 
clung to your thighs; you kicked just enough to return to the surface. Then, a 
knot snagged on your heels altered the plan. You’d become entangled in your own 
line.

“Don’t be afraid of the sea. Do not fear fighting for what you love deep 
down,” Grandmother used to say, the fish devouring remnants of light in front 
of your mask. From above, your sister-in-law exhausted desperate attempts to 
pull the rope, horrified to find it limp, then broken.

After feeling invisible punches to your diaphragm, a lulling dizziness that 
was pulling you from this world, you’re able to undo the knot, free yourself 
from the lead belt, and ascend almost by instinct. Your return was slow but 
constant, less than five meters from the surface from below you watch as the 
keel of the boat grows and becomes defined. You see bits of your life floating 
like irregular oil spots. Among them, you recognize the pale cheeks that Papa 
traced on Yochan, Mama’s smile when she found her first pearl, and 
Grandmother’s stern voice correcting everything. At that moment, your arms 
stiffen; your tongue is a giant snake obstructing your palate. The light has 
become a different light: whiter and more ferocious. You begin to dream. And in 
your dreams, your feet sprout fins, and oxygen is a mere superstition.

*****

Translated from the Spanish by George Henson

Explore more from Asymptote’s brand-new Summer issue 
<http://www.asymptotejournal.com/> uncovering new writing from 34 countries, 
including exclusive interviews with Pierre Joris and Sawako Nakayasu, and a 
Special Feature on Multilingual Writing.


 * Pedro Novoa has won numerous literary prizes in his native Peru, including 
the Premio Nacional de Dramaturgia in 2004, and the Premio Internacional de 
Cuento Corto Dante Alighieri for short stories. He has published the novel Seis 
metros de soga (Ediciones Altazor), which was awarded the Premio Nacional 
Horacio 2010 in the short novel category, and the novel Maestra vida 
(Alfaguara), winner of the Premio Internacional Mario Vargas Llosa. He has 
contributed to anthologies published in Chile, Argentina, Colombia, Spain, and 
Peru. His story Inmersión, which appears here as The Dive, recently won first 
prize in the XXVII Edición del Concurso de las 1000 Palabras, organized by the 
magazine Caretas. He is a professor at the Universidad César Vallejo. 
 * George Henson is a translator of contemporary Latin American and Spanish 
prose. He has translated works by many notable writers, including Elena 
Poniatowska, Andrés Neuman, Claudia Salazar, Raquel Castro, Leonardo Fuentes, 
and Luis Jorge Boone. His translations have appeared variously in Words Without 
Borders, Buenos Aires Review, BOMB, Literal, and The Literary Review. His 
translations of Alberto Chimal have appeared in The Kenyon Review, Flash 
Fiction International, and World Literature Today. His book-length translations 
include Sergio Pitol’s The Art of Flight and The Journey, both with Deep Vellum 
Publishing. George is a member of the Spanish faculty at the University of 
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, where he is affiliated with the Center for 
Translation Studies. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Dallas.
 