
Eugenio Baroncelli’s macabre, erudite vignettes of 271 historical and literary 
deaths won the 2011 Premio Supermondello, one of Italy’s highest literary 
awards. He catalogues accidental and premeditated deaths: illness, hypothermia, 
suicide. Each of his sly, epigrammatic sketches of dying is an object lesson in 
living.

—The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

Umberto Boccioni

Sorte, Verona, 17 August 1916. Never end up in a place called Sorte, or Luck. 
War had thrust him there, only for him to die in a stroke of misfortune. He had 
enlisted voluntarily, dressed hurriedly in uniform, and now he was dying, aged 
thirty-four. He had fallen from the horse he was learning to mount, struck his 
head full of colours, and would never get up again. That was how Maria Malibran 
died, and she was barely more skillful than he was; Genghis Khan, too, and he 
was born on a horse. He died with a dream: not of vanquishing his enemy on the 
battlefield, but of riding with her under the moon that bleached the lake white.

The gods looked down at him from the sky. He had the distinctive hand of a 
future great artist and the agile body of a seducer. A vexed Margherita 
Sarfatti, who had been in bed with him, would deplore the sharp escalation of 
his targets, from seamstresses to the wives of bank managers.

Three weeks beforehand, on the bank of Lake Maggiore, he had met Vittoria 
Colonna and fallen in love for the last time. Beautiful, married, impulsive, 
and greedy for life, she fell in love instantly too. They went swimming in a 
lake filled with water the hue of cobalt blue, the same colour his palette was 
wandering towards when he painted the master Busoni. Lazy as cats, they 
sunbathed on the terrace of the villa, that little strip of earth that she had 
transformed into a Garden of Eden. They dined alone by candlelight. Her last 
letter was found on him. He had taken it with him from their paradise.

Catherine Benincasa of Siena

Rome, 29 April 1380. She fasted for years. She bled every day from invisible 
wounds. At night she fought off the sleep that blinds us in order to dream with 
her eyes open. She would die at the age of thirty-three, exhausted by ecstasy. 
She would not be dear to the false and lying gods in whom she did not believe. 
But she was the same age as the god who became man and bled for her.

Georg Büchner

Zurich, 19 February 1837. He was on the run. He was after truth and the police 
were after him: “Wanted. Georg Büchner, medical student in Darmstadt. Grey 
eyes. Prominent forehead. Big nose. Small mouth. Short-sighted.” What had he 
done? It was said that he was a radical, that he had betrayed his class in 
organising impoverished peasants. He had myopia, it is true, but he was also 
far-sighted. He was just in time to invent modern theatre. “If there is one 
thing the French Revolution has lost, it is its head,” he said. He fled to 
Switzerland. He escaped the German pigs but not the fever, which ran faster 
than he did. He died of typhus far from home, like Hephaestion and Irène 
Némirovsky. He descended into darkness. It was better that way, because in the 
darkness no one feels like a foreigner. He was twenty-four years old.

Alexander Alechin

Some said he suffocated on a mischievous piece of meat... some said he died of 
solitude, which is no less mischievous.

Estoril, Sunday 24 March, 1946. At eight in the morning, with a bucket in one 
hand and clean sheets in the other, Mrs Izabel climbed to the first floor of 
her shabby little hotel, The England, entered the last room along the corridor 
and found him lying on his back on the armchair, like a tailor’s discarded 
mannequin. He had not gone to bed. Instead of pyjamas he had put on his 
overcoat: he knew that the last night of one’s life is cold. On the bedside 
table he left too many glasses of whisky and the chessboard on which he played 
his final game, the only one he neither won nor lost. It wasn’t until hours 
later that someone recognized him: he was the world chess champion. His body 
lay in the Lisbon morgue for three weeks before anyone arrived to claim it. The 
Portuguese Chess Federation had to see to the funeral. No more than ten people 
accompanied him to the grave. Samuel Beckett’s ghost could boast of the same 
number of mourners.

How did he die? Some said acute cirrhosis, others said a heart attack. Some 
said he suffocated on a mischievous piece of meat that went down the wrong way, 
some said he died of solitude, which is no less mischievous. No matter. He had 
not been alive for nineteen years, since he defeated the invincible Capablanca, 
the “genius of chess,” and obstinately refused a rematch. This proves the old 
saying that death is a life you prepare for.

Vitus Jonassen Bering

Bering Island, Kamchatka, 19 December 1741. Lying on his injured shoulders, he 
could hear the cries of seals that his men were beating to death for the 
nauseating meat that had been his and their dinner for months, on that 
godforsaken island to which we have now given his name. In those other deaths, 
he could smell the odour of his own. At seven in the morning, surrounded by his 
overflowing chests of fashionable wigs and gaudy courtier’s robes, he slipped 
away. What did he die of? “Hunger, thirst, the cold, parasites and pain,” noted 
the diligent ship’s doctor. What about scurvy, which had swollen his legs and 
left him without teeth like Veronique, Bloy’s companion? It had made his face 
yellower and his breath shorter with each passing day. As for the sand in which 
they had half buried him to protect him from the lethal cold, couldn’t that 
have suffocated him? Who knows. Whatever, there are so many ways of dying out 
there.

He ended up in a hole that they had dug out laboriously from that expanse of 
snow hard as steel. “He died like a rich man,” his second-in-command would say, 
“and was buried like a savage.”

Robert Bialek

Berlin, 4 February 1956. At eleven at night, white as the snow that has been 
falling for hours, he entered the darkness of Hohenschönhausen, that populous 
and lethal prison for dissidents, and became a number, 2357: he, the comrade 
who had spent five years in Nazi prisons, who knew Marx and Engels’ works by 
heart and used to head the Volkspolizei, the people’s police. One hundred 
minutes earlier, the Stasi police had dragged him from his house in the West, 
thrown him into an unmarked car and spirited him away to the East, to that 
duplicitous homeland that called itself a democracy. There was no Wall yet, but 
there may as well have been one. He became no one. He would dream privately of 
waking from that nightmare, but he was never to wake again. Officially, he 
never left Hohenschönhausen. Here the faultless computer hesitates: which page 
does he belong on? He didn’t even die. He enters this book by the side door, 
the way the Portuguese enter a stadium.

Emma Bovary

Yonville, 24 March, 1846. It is written that she died of despair – abandoned 
by two deceitful lovers, unable to repay the moneylender knocking at the door, 
old at twenty-four and hence dear to the gods, she left the world with those 
unforgettable smudges of poison on her lips. That much is enough. Those who 
find more in books than in the world know how it went.

There he was the next day, confused by the procession that accompanied her to 
the grave, keeping a respectful distance from the gigantic blonde Norman who 
did not want to miss the funeral, whom readers believed in blindly – there he 
was, her husband, the dull, baffled country doctor, whom we will blame for 
nothing apart from the fact that he existed. Or perhaps we are mistaken. Wasn’t 
it he who slyly allowed a shard to fall into a cup of hot chocolate belonging 
to his first wife, a widow from Dieppe, ugly, thin, pimpled, and more than 
forty-five years old? Didn’t he make his second wife, the young, beautiful, 
unfaithful one, swallow a wafer that was more poisonous than the arsenic powder 
administered by Flaubert’s fantasy? Who knows. Maybe there is more to the world 
than there is to books.

Translated from the Italian by Chenxin Jiang

© Sellerio Editore Palermo <http://www.sellerio.it>, 2010 

Click here <http://www.chenxinjiang.com/In-Progress> for more information.

*****

 * Eugenio Baroncelli was born in Rimini and lives in Ravenna. He was 
previously an Italian and Latin teacher and is also interested in film theory 
and criticism. His books include Mosche d’inverno. 271 morti in due o tre pose 
(Flies in Winter: 271 deaths posed two or three ways, 2010), which won the 
Premio Supermondello and Premio Piero Chiara, Falene. 237 vite quasi perfette 
(Moths: 237 almost perfect lives, 2012), and Pagine Bianche. 55 libri che non 
ho scritto (Blank Pages: 55 books I didn’t write, 2013). 
 * Chenxin Jiang is a writer and translator who grew up in Hong Kong and lives 
in Berlin. She most recently translated The Cowshed: Memories of the Chinese 
Cultural Revolution for New York Review Books.  