
If this year’s Man Booker international winner, Han Kang’s The Vegetarian, has 
whetted your appetite for Korean literature, we recommend that you check out 
Hwang Jungeun’s One Hundred Shadows; an oblique, hard-edged novel forthcoming 
fromTilted Axis Press <http://www.tiltedaxispress.com/deborah-smith/>, a 
publisher founded by Kang’s translator Deborah Smith. Set in a slum electronics 
market, One Hundred Shadows depicts the little-known underside of Seoul, 
complicating the shiny, ultra-modern face which South Korea presents to the 
world. Here is an excerpt.

— The editors at Asymptote <http://asymptotejournal.com>

--

I said goodbye to Mujae at the subway station, where we each took different 
trains. By the time I got back to the area where I lived it was noon and the 
sun was blazing down as I dragged myself down the street. My stumpy shadow 
slanted to the right, bulging like a soft-boiled egg, its movements mimicking 
my own. When I thought about how it had risen now and then, the familiar shops 
and familiar alley didn’t look familiar at all. I turned into the alley and 
heard the sound of television leaking out of a window. It sounded like a 
volleyball match, with a voice saying spike, very clearly enunciated, sounding 
more electronic than human. Spike, spike, spike, and I turned another corner. 
Fancy hearing a voice saying spike, I thought, then put my hands in my pocket, 
unable to recall what had come after. A sharp piece of paper pricked my finger. 
I pulled it out and saw that it was the wrapper from Mujae’s gum. I bent it 
with my thumb, and it rustled like a shrivelled ear.

That’s what’s scary, you feel light somehow, carefree, if you surrender to the 
shadow’s pulling at you…

I took down the pizza and fried chicken flyers that had been stuck to the door 
and stepped into the house. Inside it was dark, and seemed exactly how I’d left 
it even though I’d been gone a whole day. I took off my clothes, which smelled 
of soil, and went into the bathroom. I positioned myself beneath the naked bulb 
that dangled from the high ceiling, and looked down at my shadow. It looks a 
little bigger, I thought, and more thinned-out. I lifted my left foot up for a 
moment, then set it back down. I raised my right foot this time, put it down 
and lifted my left once more, then jumped up lightly so both feet were off the 
ground. The shadow spread out, a little thinner and wider, and definitely 
touched my feet when I put them down on the floor. I did a couple of jumps in 
my bare feet, examined the light bulb, then turned on the hot water and washed 
my hair. Wiping the suds from my eyes, I thought to myself that even if my 
shadow had drawn me deep in the woods, so deep that I never returned, someone 
would still have stuck flyers on the door, and pizzas would still have been 
sold. I went back into the main room, lay down and pulled a blanket over 
myself. The weather was sultry, but my toes were cold. I wondered if this was 
because I had my feet pointing north, and shifted them a little to the east, my 
head a little to the west. But this didn’t feel comfortable so I kept on 
shifting, again and again. I moved around so much I ended up back in my 
original position, but something still wasn’t right. I felt as if my lower back 
had lifted up off the floor, the whole of me trembling like a compass needle. 
Falling in and out of sleep, haphazard thoughts flitted through my mind.

I worked at an electronics market, a ramshackle warren of tiny shops close to 
the heart of the city. The market had originally consisted of five separate 
buildings, labelled A, B, C, D and E, but had been altered and added to over a 
period of forty years so that it was now a single structure. You had to know 
where to look to spot the signs that it had ever been otherwise. The market was 
where I first met Mujae. I manned the customer desk and ran errands at Mr. 
Yeo’s repair shop, while Mujae was an apprentice at a transformer workshop. One 
day I went down there with an old transformer that needed its copper wire 
replaced. There in that cramped space was Mujae, wearing wrist guards and an 
apron, Next to him, Mr. Gong was spinning the wheel with the copper wire twined 
around it. I held out the old transformer, needing both hands to lift its 
weight. Mujae took it casually in one, put it down on the table among all the 
copper wires, and made a note of the shop’s name and phone number. The only 
remarkable thing about him was his beautiful handwriting. I’d seen him several 
times before, on my way in and out of the building or running errands to other 
workshops, but nothing had made those encounters stand out.

I nodded off, wondering whether I would see Mujae at work on Monday, since we 
said, See you on Monday? When I started awake, the sun was about to go down. 
The light of the setting sun filled the room. I realised that I’d left my 
packed lunch in the woods.

***

My shadow rose, I said, and Mr. Yeo blinked.

He was sitting on a stool, holding a probe connected to an oscilloscope. He 
furrowed his brow under his salt-and-pepper hair, blinked once, then twice, and 
asked,

So what did you do?

I followed it.

You followed it?

Just a little way.

You shouldn’t have followed it.

I’m not going to any more.

That’s right, Mr. Yeo said, touching the probe to the circuit board and 
peering at the screen. The green line that had been streaming across the 
palm-sized monitor morphed into an undulating wave.

Those shadows, Mr. Yeo said, then stared intently at the monitor for some 
time. Whenever I assumed his thoughts had drifted he would reposition the 
probe, and when I thought he was engrossed in his task he suddenly came out 
with, those shadows, you know. After a while more of this abstraction he 
finally looked up at me.

So how did you feel, when you were following the shadow?

Pretty good, I said. I couldn’t help but follow it. Mr. Yeo nodded as if to 
say yes, that’s how it is.

That’s what’s scary, you feel light somehow, carefree, if you surrender to the 
shadow’s pulling at you, so you keep on following it, and that’s when it 
strikes. People turn slow-witted when they’re in that kind of daze, so it 
attacks when your wits are slowest of all, he said, and gently set the probe 
down on the worktable. Wait and see, it’ll start growing now.

Growing bigger?

That’s right.

And then what happens?

It becomes more dense. Gravity, or something.

Oh.

Don’t worry too much. They say you can survive as long as you keep your eyes 
peeled, even if you’re captured by a fox.

Isn’t it a tiger?

What do you mean, a tiger?

The saying is that you can survive as long as you keep your eyes peeled, even 
if you’re captured by a tiger.

A tiger, a fox, it’s all the same, Mr. Yeo said, pushing a lamp with a tin 
hemisphere shade right up against the board. What I’m saying is, you need to 
keep your eyes peeled when what’s in front of you has teeth.

***

So when my shadow rose, Mr. Yeo said.

By that time he had polished off the last of the shaved ice, which had melted 
into a pinkish puddle, fixed an amp that someone had brought in and sent it 
back to them.

It rose? I repeated, startled.

Mm, that’s right. Mr. Yeo glanced over at me, nonchalant. My life hasn’t 
exactly been plain sailing, so it was inevitable really – no big deal. I was at 
my front door when it happened, just putting on my shoes. I thought to myself, 
this is what you’ve been dreading, now it’s finally happened, and I thought of 
my friend, the one I told you about, Eungyo. As I watched the shadow rise, it 
occurred to me that whoever made up the saying about your hair standing on end 
must have witnessed something like this. There was nothing I could do – I mean, 
it was a shadow. Once it had risen I could feel it pulling at me, and who knows 
what would’ve happened if I hadn’t stood my ground? But I was more concerned by 
my family’s odd reaction. The shadow didn’t go far, just roamed around the 
house, and I wasn’t sure whether my family genuinely couldn’t see it, or 
whether they were simply pretending. This shadow would sit among us at meal 
times, you see. And my wife and kids never batted an eyelid, but at the same 
time they managed to avoid sitting near it, or touching it in any way. Whenever 
they passed each other one of the side dishes or a second helping of rice their 
arms never went too close to my shadow, and they even angled their heads 
slightly to the side so they could see each other round the shadow.

But shadows are visible, aren’t they?

Of course they are. They were just pretending not to see what was clearly 
there, even when I pointed right at it and said, My shadow, that’s my shadow. 
Like this, Mr. Yeo said, and put his left thumb and forefinger together, as 
though to pinch the air. They’d just frown a little and glare as if they 
couldn’t stand the sight of me. In a situation like that, wouldn’t it be 
natural for me to think that they didn’t care about me, that as far as they 
were concerned, I could follow my shadow and good riddance too? So then I 
started thinking, well, damn it, what’s stopping me?

So you followed it?

Yes, but it wasn’t easy. Because you’ve got your voice following too.

Your voice?

That’s right, whispering in your ear the whole time: you mustn’t, you mustn’t. 
So anyway, I ended up turning back before I’d even gone ten miles. It was 
pathetic. I mean, what kind of idiot can’t even follow their own shadow? I 
called myself all kinds of names. That night, the moon was so full and bright 
you could see its craters.

Mr. Yeo heaved a long sigh. I pictured him trudging wearily home with his 
shadow tacking along in his wake and the moon hanging bright in the night sky, 
its craters clearly defined.

It does still rise from time to time, but I tell myself it’s no big deal. I 
can bear it as long as I tell myself that. It’s not really true that it’s no 
big deal, but the more I tell myself that it is the easier it becomes to 
believe it, and with time you really do end up convincing yourself. After all, 
shadows might rise, but they can also fall, can’t they? It’s risky, I know. 
Right now I can tell myself that it’s no big deal, but there’ll be a day when 
that doesn’t work anymore, when it categorically is a big deal, and that’ll be 
the end, Eungyo. My shadow will pull me after it, somewhere infinitely far away.

Translation Tuesday: Two Poems by Kim Seung Hee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/jan/19/translation-tuesday-two-poems-by-kim-seung-hee>
Mr. Yeo got a screwdriver out of a drawer and began to fiddle with the shell 
of the amp.

Translated from the Korean by Jung Yewon

Click here <http://www.tiltedaxispress.com/one-hundred-shadows/> for more 
information about the book.

*****

 * Hwang Jungeun (b. 1976) is one of the bright young things of Korean 
literature, having published two collections of short stories and three novels 
to date.One Hundred Shadows <http://www.tiltedaxispress.com/one-hundred-shadows>
 (2010), her first novel, was both a critical and commercial success; its mix 
of oblique fantasy, hard-edge social critique, and offbeat romance garnered the 
Hankook Ilbo Literary Award and the Korean Booksellers’ Award. 
 * As well as One Hundred Shadows, Jung Yewon is also the translator of No One 
Writes Back by Jang Eun-jin and one of the co-translators of A Most Ambiguous 
Sunday and Other Stories by Jung Young Moon, both published by Dalkey Archive 
as part of their Library of Korean Literature series. Her translation of Jung 
Young Moon’s Vaseline Buddha is published by Deep Vellum.  