
Since she’s been ill, my mother’s become a frail little thing with a faltering 
memory. She summons members of her family who are long dead. She talks to them, 
is astonished that her mother hasn’t come to visit, and sings the praises of 
her little brother who, she says, always brings her presents. They file past 
her bedside, sometimes they linger. I don’t interrupt them, I don’t like to 
upset her. Keltum, her paid companion, complains: ‘She thinks we’re in Fez, the 
year you were born!’


Mother’s revisiting my childhood. Her memory’s been toppled, lies scattered 
over the damp floor. Time and reality are out of kilter. She gets swept away by 
the emotions that come surging back. Every quarter of an hour, she asks me: 
‘How many children do you have?’ Every time, I answer in the same even tone. 
Keltum is agitated and interrupts to say she can’t stand Mother’s repeated 
questions any more.

Her memory’s been toppled, lies scattered over the damp floor. Time and 
reality are out of kilter

Mother’s afraid of Keltum. She’s a woman whose eyes betray her wicked thoughts 
and she knows it. When she speaks to me, she looks at the floor. When she 
greets me, she’s obsequious, bowing and attempting to kiss my hand. I don’t 
want to push her away, or put her in her place. I pretend not to know what 
she’s up to. I can see fear in my mother’s eyes. Fear that Keltum might leave 
her on her own when none of us are here. Fear that she won’t give her her 
medication. Fear that she’ll let her go without food, or worse, give her meat 
that’s gone off. Fear that she might spank her, as if she were a naughty child. 
In one of her lucid moments, my mother said to me: ‘I’m not mad, you know. 
Keltum thinks I’m a little girl again. She tells me off, she threatens me, but 
I know it’s the pills playing tricks on me. Keltum’s not a bad person, she’s 
just prickly. She’s tired. She’s the one who washes me every morning, you know, 
son; she’s the one who cleans up the stuff that leaks out of me. I couldn’t ask 
that of you, or your brother, so Keltum’s here for that too. It’s as well to 
forget the rest …’

How can I forget that my mother’s in the care of a woman who, over the years, 
has become hard, cynical and grasping? Why is my mother journeying back to 
childhood under the malevolent gaze of this bully?

Mother started talking about the midwife, Lalla Radhia, again. She insisted I 
invite her to lunch and told me where to go: ‘She lives just before Batha, the 
big square at the entrance to the medina. Go to the café run by Sallam, 
Khaduj’s husband – you know, Uncle Moulay Ali’s daughter-in-law. Go into the 
café and ask for her. Everyone knows her, she has to come!’ I try to remind her 
that Lalla Radhia’s no longer with us, but she insists she wants her at the 
house for lunch.

Since Mother’s moved into a different bedroom, she’s convinced she’s in a 
different house and is living in a different city. We’re no longer in Impasse 
Ali Bey in Tangier, but the Makhfiya district in Fez. We’re no longer in the 
year 2000, but 1944. Her dreams won’t be extinguished. They assail her waking 
hours, refuse to leave her alone. The present is lurching. It flickers, 
sputters back to life and then fades altogether. It no longer concerns her. 
She’s become detached from it, which doesn’t worry her in the least.

She tells me she saw a man and a woman talking in the hallway. They must have 
come to buy the old house in Fez. She warns me not to let it go cheaply: ‘Times 
are hard. The war’s not over and besides, your father won’t be happy! I heard 
the man say to the woman, “It’s a bargain, we should seize the opportunity.” 
Anyone would think they lived with us and knew we were struggling. The man’s 
not from Fez, he has a country accent − Fassi’s more refined. And in any case, 
we’re not selling!’

Today, Zineb, her nurse, has come to change her dressings. No longer able to 
recognise her, Mother refuses to let her touch her foot. Zineb says she won’t 
hurt her. Mother smiles: ‘If you do, my father will know all about it. I’m not 
a child, so go on, clean the wound and don’t treat me like a frightened little 
girl.’ Then things fall back into place and she remembers everything. It was 
just a lapse. A memory lapse. Her recollections are a little hazy.

Mother threw a pretty gold chain down the toilet. Keltum fished it out and 
washed it repeatedly for two days, then soaked it in adulterated eau de cologne.

My sister has come from Fez to look after her. Mother’s annoyed: she thinks 
she’s her own mother. My sister’s getting on a bit too, she’s only sixteen 
years younger than my mother, the daughter of her first marriage. Mother 
remembers very clearly: ‘I’d just turned fifteen. My husband was strong and 
handsome. The typhus epidemic carried him off before my daughter was born. A 
widow at sixteen!’

*

My mother’s body continues to shrink. She is tiny. A tiny, light little thing 
with meagre flesh that causes her pain. Her sight has deteriorated but her 
hearing is perfect. She detected the call to prayer in the chirping of a 
sparrow. She said: ‘It’s calling God.’ My sister didn’t contradict her; she 
agreed the bird was an angel come to pray with them.

Once again she confused me with my older brother, asking me how his children 
were, getting everything muddled. Then she thought my children were my 
brother’s. I prefer to see the funny side, but he gets upset and his eyes fill 
with tears. I feel like crying too, but resist, because at times she is 
perfectly lucid and I see her as she always was – beautiful and graceful, 
clever and astute, conscious of what she’s suffering and of everything going on 
around her. She never loses her mind completely. My brother took it upon 
himself to work out how long her moments of clarity last compared with her 
rambling. He claims the periods when her mind wanders last longer.

Yesterday, sounding embarrassed, Keltum asked me to buy some pads. Mother’s 
increasingly incontinent, but she refuses to wear them. She tears off the 
adhesive strips and flings the pads under the bed. Keltum’s furious. She can’t 
take it any more: ‘You’re only here a few hours, but for me it’s all the time, 
day and night – and it’s worse at night. She hardly sleeps and wakes us up to 
talk about Fez and her brothers, who died a long time ago. Tell the doctor to 
give her a pill that will give her back her mind, or make her sleep. I can’t 
stand this any longer!’

Mother’s always had a serene attitude towards death. Her faith in God has 
driven out any fear of it. Once, in the days when her health gave no cause for 
alarm, she asked me for a large sum of money. ‘Why? Don’t be like your father, 
always asking what I wanted money for. I’m going to redo the sitting room, buy 
some new fabric, repaint the entire house, get two lovely low tables and some 
more cutlery and napkins.’ And why all that? ‘I want the house to be clean and 
tidy for my funeral. People will come from all over the country: I want them to 
find the house looking nice. They must be served good food; I’ve always 
received my guests generously. My farewell should be lavish, the best reception 
of all! That’s why I need money, son. I’m telling you now, and don’t forget. It 
has to be a grand occasion.’

Translation Tuesday: Miss Keaton and Other Beasts by Teresa Colom – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/may/31/translation-tuesday-miss-keaton-and-other-beasts-by-teresa-colom-extract>
My friend Roland’s mother celebrated her ninetieth birthday by going round the 
world. She lives in Lausanne, and her health is good, she plays bridge every 
day, reads books and goes to the cinema. Life in Switzerland is less tiring 
than it is in Fez. My mother never went to school, she doesn’t know how to play 
bridge, has never been to the theatre or the opera. She’s had three husbands 
and given birth to four children, fed them and raised them. Three husbands and 
only one true love. I’ve never heard her tell the story – I guessed. My mother 
doesn’t talk about love. It’s a word she uses only for her children. She says: 
‘I’d die for you, light of my eyes, rainbow of my life, I’d die for you!’ She’s 
uneducated but not uncultured, she has her own culture, religious beliefs, 
values and traditions. To live an entire life without ever deciphering a page 
of writing, without ever being able to read numbers, to live in a closed world 
surrounded by signs, unable to understand them… The problem became acute the 
day my father had the telephone installed: she felt the need to learn numbers 
so she could call her children, her sister and her husband. My father taught 
them to her but soon lost patience, leaving her with the numbers written large 
on a slate. She decided to learn two phone numbers, no more: mine and the one 
for my father’s shop. She spent all day dialling them until she’d learned them 
by heart. One day she managed to dial mine correctly but to her disappointment 
she got the answerphone. She spoke to it: ‘You, machine, you’re the machine of 
my son in lafrance, aren’t you? Now you listen to me, and whatever you do, make 
sure you don’t forget a word I say, so you can tell him when he gets back. Now 
you tell him that his mother called, she’s fine – well, more or less, she’s 
dying to see him. Tell him too that his father’s coughing a lot and won’t go to 
the doctor. You must make a point of that, so he’ll call his doctor friend and 
get him to come over. He’s coughing up and spitting out nasty stuff. Tell him 
too that his sister Touria has gone to Mecca. So that’s it, machine, don’t 
forget to tell him to speak to his father, tell him as well that my blood 
sugar’s up after Keltum upset me. Right, I’m putting the phone down and I’m 
counting on you to pass on the message. One more thing – I’ll be quick – tell 
him that El Haj, his cousin, has lost his wife and he should call to offer his 
condolences. Thank you, thank you very much!’

Translated from the French by Ros Schwartz and Lulu Norman

About My Mother <http://www.saqibooks.co.uk/book/mother/> will be released in 
bookstores later this month.

*****

 * Born in Fez, Morocco, Tahar Ben Jelloun is an award-winning and 
internationally bestselling novelist, essayist, critic and poet. Regularly 
shortlisted for the Nobel Prize in Literature, he has won the Prix Goncourt and 
the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award. His work has also been 
shortlisted for the Independent Foreign Fiction Prize. He received the rank of 
Officier de la Légion d’honneur in 2008. Some of his works in English 
translation include The Happy Marriage, This Blinding Absence of Light, The 
Sand Child and Racism Explained to My Daughter. 
 * Ros Schwartz has translated a wide range of Francophone fiction and 
non-fiction writers including Andrée Chedid, Aziz Chouaki, Fatou Diome, 
Dominique Manotti and Dominique Eddé. She was made Chevalier dans l’Ordre des 
Arts et des Lettres for her services to literature in 2009. 
 * Lulu Norman has translated the work of Mahi Binebine, Albert Cossery, 
Mahmoud Darwish, Amin Maalouf and the songs of Serge Gainsbourg. Her 
translations have been shortlisted for the International IMPAC Dublin Literary 
Award, Independent Foreign Fiction Prize and Best Translated Books Award, among 
others.  