
Take me there: Euganean hills, Italy


A stunning Renaissance villa which was once a summer retreat for the Bishops 
of Padua is being offered as an unusual holiday let by the Landmark Trust. Two 
self-catering apartments have been created on the top floor of the 16th-century 
Villa dei Vescovi in the Euganean hills near Padua. After the day-trippers have 
gone home, guests will have exclusive access to the formal gardens and can 
watch the sun set over the vineyards and orchards from the fresco-adorned 
loggia. Each apartment sleeps four, with prices from £434 for three nights. The 
nearest airport is Venice Marco Polo, an hour away by road (
landmarktrust.org.uk/villa-dei-vescovi 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/villa-dei-vescovi>)

It's a good time to… have a grown-up holiday


It's OK. You can come out now. They've gone. The kids go back to school this 
week and it's time for the grown-ups (or at least those grown-ups who don't 
have school-age children) to emerge from hiding and reclaim the beaches of 
Britain.

Having just spent my first August holiday in Cornwall, jostling for elbow room 
in so-called "secret" coves and being turned away from restaurants because we'd 
failed to book two months in advance, I'm counting the years until my daughter 
leaves school and I can enjoy an off-season seaside break again.

The great news is that there are now some wonderfully grown-up places to stay, 
like the Idle Rocks in St Mawes, which opened in July – all cool Cornish chic 
and breezy terraces – and looks set to give Olga Polizzi's nearby Tresanton 
some healthy competition (from £180,idlerocks.com <http://idlerocks.com>).

And there are some great deals, too – Helpful Holidays has 20% off all its 
West Country cottages for stays before 14 September, though you'll need to book 
before 7 September (helpfulholidays.com <http://helpfulholidays.com>). I can 
barely bring myself to look at the website though, as it'll be at least another 
11 years before I'll be bagging any September bargains. Bitter, me?
 To the manor born: a bedroom at Ghyll Manor. 
Give me a break: deals of the week


Home: living it up in Sussex Ghyll Manor, a 17th-century country house hotel 
in West Sussex, is offering savings of at least 30% until the end of September. 
A one-night stay at the hotel, including a three-course dinner, costs £150 for 
two people – a saving of £71 on the usual price of £221. Brighton, Arundel and 
Chichester are within easy reach (ghyllmanor.co.uk <http://ghyllmanor.co.uk>)

Away: roaming around Romania The Danube Delta is Europe's largest wetland and 
in autumn it is teeming with birdlife. Discover this hidden corner of Romania 
with Untravelled Paths, which has reduced its seven-night Danube Delta 
experience to £595pp – a 33% saving on the regular prices. Valid for departures 
on 14, 24 and 30 September (untravelledpaths.com <http://untravelledpaths.com>)
 