
Some of the survivors of a mass shooting in Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> say they were told by Tui travel 
agents before they travelled that the north African country was “100% safe” and 
were not shown official travel advice warning that the threat from terrorism 
was high, an inquest has heard.

Hundreds of tourists were sunbathing on the beach at Sousse in June 2015 when 
Seifeddine Rezgui opened fire with a Kalashnikov assault rifle, killing 38 
tourists, including 30 Britons, in a rampage that lasted nearly 40 minutes.

The inquest at the Royal Courts of Justice in London into the British deaths 
heard that Paul Thompson and his daughter visited a Tui branch in May 2015 and 
raised concerns about security in Tunisia following a terrorist attack on the 
Bardo national museum in the capital, Tunis, in March that year.

The pair were told by the branch in Ilkeston, Derbyshire, that Tunisia was 
“100% safe”, Andrew Ritchie QC, who is representing 20 victims’ families, told 
the inquest.

He also said Cheryl Stollery, whose husband, John, was killed in the Sousse 
attack, claimed not to have been shown Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) 
travel advice when she went to a Tui travel agent branch in February 2015 to 
book their holiday.

Ritchie was questioning an FCO official, Jane Marriott, about travel advice. 
Marriott told the inquest that as part of a scheme between the FCO and tour 
operators, called Know Before You Go, travel agents would be “expected to 
promote” the travel advice. Travel firms were also expected to display a 
“prominent Know Before You Go” logo and link to the travel advice on their 
websites.

Asked whether the claimed experiences of Stollery and Thompson would make her 
feel “comfortable”, Marriott, who was FCO director of Middle East and north
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> at the time of the Sousse 
attack, said: “We would expect our partners to fulfil that requirement [to 
promote the advice].”

Later in Tuesday’s hearing, the inquest heard that a British embassy official 
in Tunisia had warned the government in a report written months before the 
Sousse killings that security at hotels in the resort town was not good enough 
to prevent a terror attack.

The unnamed British trade representative, who was also in Mumbai, India, at 
the time of the 2008 terrorist massacre, conducted a “recce” of nine beachfront 
hotels in Sousse, including the Imperial Marhaba and nearby Port El Kantaoui, 
between January and March 2015.

Reading extracts from the heavily redacted report, Ritchie said: “It said 
‘despite some good security infrastructure around the hotels and resorts there 
seems to be little in the way of effective security to prevent or respond to an 
attack’.”

Ritchie told the inquest the government was aware that Islamic State-linked 
extremists had warned that the terror group would target tourists in a video 
posted on YouTube in December 2014.


Earlier, the inquest heard that at the time of the Sousse attack the official 
travel advice from the FCO stated: “There is a threat from terrorism including 
kidnapping.”

It made reference to the Bardo national museum attack and added “terrorists 
have threatened to carry out attacks in Tunisia”, while noting a failed suicide 
bomb attack in Sousse in 2013. 

Tui, which owns Thomson holidays, through which all 30 of the British victims 
booked their trip, is expected to come under significant scrutiny over its 
handling of travel advice for Tunisia from the FCO.

Lawyers representing some of the families will accuse Tui of “practically 
hiding and keeping out of the limelight” FCO warnings about terrorism in 
Tunisia, according to papers submitted in advance of the resumption of the 
inquest.

Tui representatives are to give evidence later in the inquest, which is set to 
run to the end of February.

In the attack on the Bardo museum, three Islamist fundamentalists killed 21 
people, mostly European tourists, including one Briton.

A cross-Whitehall meeting was held 12 days after the attack during which it 
was decided that the travel advice would not be tightened to advise against all 
but essential travel.

Marriott told the inquest that in order to change the advice to all but 
essential travel, the terrorist threat had to be “specific, large and endemic”.

She said: “We didn’t have anything to indicate the threshold had been met. The 
Bardo attack was clearly something different. It fitted a rising picture, but 
at the time we were at the start of what would become a rising trend.”

On the day before the Sousse attack, a meeting was held between FCO and UK 
government officials and the embassy in Tunis to discuss security issues in 
Tunisia.

The timing of the meeting was coincidental, the inquest heard. The meeting 
discussed “reaching out” to tour operators to ensure they brought travel advice 
to customers’ attention.

A counter-terrorism assessment for the FCO days after the Sousse attack 
questioned the security at the beach resorts, the inquest heard. The review by 
the Tunisian security assessment team found “security at the hotels to be 
generally of a low standard”.

Howard Stevens QC, representing Tui, took the inquest through a booking page 
for Tunisia, highlighting links to the FCO advice.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Tunisia inquest: gunman shown on beach before and after Sousse attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/16/tunisia-inquest-gunman-beach-before-after-sousse-attack-video> 