
Take me there: swimming in Loch Lomond


What better antidote to the recent heatwave than to dive into the cool waters 
of a Scottish loch? To mark its 10th anniversary this summer, SwimTrek has 
launched a swimming holiday in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. The four-day 
break offers the chance to combine open-water swims in pristine lochs with 
walks in the national park which is home to some of the UK's rarest species, 
including osprey, otter, red squirrel and deer. Swimmers are supported by a 
canoe rather than a motorboat which increases the chance of wildlife sightings. 
The trip costs from £390 and departs on 26 and 29 August (swimtrek.com 
<http://www.swimtrek.com/>)

It's a good time to… go wild in the country

 Monkey business. Photograph: PhotoAlto/Alamy 
A new attraction opens in Norfolk this weekend whose mission is to prise 
children away from their Nintendos and Xboxes and introduce them to the joys of 
running wild. WildRootz, at Pensthorpe Wildlife and Garden, is a two-acre 
woodland activity centre which will encourage children to build dens, explore 
underground burrows and swing through the trees on ropes (pensthorpe.com 
<http://pensthorpe.com>). It's the kind of fun earlier generations of children 
would have found for free on their own doorstep, but if it gets children away 
from their iPads and running around outside, few parents will begrudge coughing 
up the entrance fee (£7.50 per child).

Similarly wholesome fun is on offer at National Trust property Mottisfont in 
Hampshire, which inspired AA Milne's Winnie the Pooh tales. Tree climbing, pooh 
sticks, building a house like Eeyore's and laying traps for Heffalumps are just 
some of the activities on offer (until 15 September,nationaltrust.org.uk 
<http://nationaltrust.org.uk>).

And on Brownsea Island in Dorset, home to the Scouting movement, you can sign 
up for den building, beach combing, orienteering and bug hunts, as part of the 
nature reserve's 50th anniversary celebrations (nationaltrust.org.uk 
<http://nationaltrust.org.uk>).

Give me a break: the week's best deals


Home Toad Hall Cottages is offering discounts of up to 20% at its West Country 
properties this August. Le Phare 101, a chic cottage which sleeps eight near 
Wembury Beach in Devon, now costs £1,111 per week, a saving of £275. The Grade 
II listed Lime Cottage in Minehead, Somerset has also been reduced by £125 to 
£599 per week in August (toadhallcottages.co.uk <http://toadhallcottages.co.uk>)

Away Pierre & Vacances still has some last-minute availability at its French 
holiday villages this summer. Port Bourgenay in the Loire Valley offers a huge 
selection of activities from circus skills to DJ lessons. A week's stay in a 
studio apartment for four people now starts from £457 arriving on the 24 August 
– a discount of £196 on the original price (pv-holidays.com 
<http://pv-holidays.com>)
 