
Take me there: Martello Tower, Suffolk 

If sea views, big skies and splendid isolation rank high on your holiday wish 
list, this new bolthole on the Suffolk coast should be just the ticket. With 
spectacular 360-degree views from its roof terrace, the Martello Tower is being 
offered as a holiday let for the first and only time this summer, as the family 
who own it take an extended trip. One of a chain offortresses built along 
England's east coast <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martello_tower> during the 
Napoleonic Wars, it's been converted into a contemporary and quirky home with 
circular rooms, 13ft-thick walls and a light-filled kitchen-diner opening on to 
the balcony. The tower sleeps eight, plus four in an adjacent boathouse. It's 
available between June and October, with prices from £1,650 per week (
suffolk-secrets.co.uk <http://suffolk-secrets.co.uk/>).

It's a good time to... go on a busman's holiday

"We're all going on a summer holiday…" The double-decker bus may have been 
Cliff Richard's chosen method of transport, but for today's holidaymakers in 
search of novelty and adventure, it's the destination. Train carriages, boats 
and helicopters have been called into service as quirky "glamping" 
accommodation, but now it's the turn of the humble bus to enjoy a new lease of 
life. Cool campsite Blackberry Wood (blackberrywood.com 
<http://blackberrywood.com>) led the way with the addition of a 1964 London 
Routemaster which had been "pimped" to include a downstairs kitchen/diner and 
cosy upstairs sleeping area. Since its arrival on the Sussex site last summer, 
it's been pretty much booked up for weekends and school holidays.

Hot on its heels is a beautifully converted 1960s Bedford Panorama 
single-decker which has pitched up in a field near Hay-on-Wye and is taking 
bookings from this month (from £103 per night,canopyandstars.co.uk 
<http://canopyandstars.co.uk>). Boasting a wooden floor, handcrafted kitchen, 
soft linens in pastel colours, a wood-burning stove, solar heating and separate 
wooden bathhouse with rolltop bath, it's the bus equivalent of Babington House. 
Sort of. And it's still got the original driver's seat and steering wheel if 
you want to play bus driver. Ding ding!

Give me a break: the week's best deals

 'Celebrate the end of winter at Hell Bay Hotel on the island of Bryher': 
Joanne O'Connor visits the Scilly Isles. Photograph: Alamy 
Spring in the Scillies Spring comes early to the Isles of Scilly, with 
tropical flowers blooming, whales basking and seals sunbathing. Celebrate the 
end of winter at Hell Bay Hotel on the island of Bryher, saving 25% on normal 
rates. Guests staying four nights between 16 March and 1 April pay £720pp for 
half-board accommodation, return travel from Cornwall and transfers to the 
hotel (hellbay.co.uk <http://hellbay.co.uk>)

Skiing in Lapland March and April are the best months for skiing in Finnish 
Lapland, with longer daylight hours than the rest of Europe and great snow 
conditions until mid-May. A week's stay at the self-catering Villa Armas Cabins 
in Yllas, with the highest skiing in Finland, costs £560pp, and includes return 
flights from London Gatwick to Kittilä. The offer is valid from 24-31 March (
inghams.co.uk <http://inghams.co.uk>)
 