
Take me there: Urban Campsite, Amsterdam


A campsite near Amsterdam is offering guests the chance to spend the night in 
a work of art. The Urban Campsite project commissioned Dutch artists and 
architects to design 15 quirky sleep pods which have been installed at the 
Vliegenbos campsite, in a wood north of the city. Among the more outlandish 
creations are a wardrobe which sleeps two, a giant purple sperm-shaped "object" 
and a seemingly innocuous caravan which folds out flat to reveal an artificial 
garden complete with AstroTurf, stuffed animals, bird sounds and a BBQ. The 
Urban Campsite will remain in situ until 30 September, with prices from €20 per 
night (urbancampsiteamsterdam.com <http://urbancampsiteamsterdam.com/>).

It's a good time to... take a bake-off holiday 

 Slice of life: learn to bake on a short break. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
If you've been inspired by the new series of the The Great British Bake Off, 
you'll be delighted to learn that baking holidays are popping up all over the 
country faster than Mary Berry's Chelsea buns. In Essex you can join 2011 Bake 
Off winner Jo Wheatley at the cookery school she now runs from her home. 
Upcoming dates include a cupcake class on 28 September and an introduction to 
Christmas hamper baking on 27 October (from £145, including lunch,
essexcookeryschool.co.uk <http://essexcookeryschool.co.uk>).

In Suffolk, Food Safari will be running an "Artisan Baking in a Day" workshop 
on 2 November at its HQ in Saxmundham, where experts will take you through 
recipes for brioche, baguette and sourdough (from £160 per day, including 
lunch, foodsafari.co.uk). And in Herefordshire, Little Trewern Farm, a new bed 
and breakfast in the Black Hills, will be putting a continental twist on things 
with lessons in the art of French patisserie, including croissants, eclairs and 
tarte tatins (bed and breakfast, with a patisserie session and two hours' 
French language tuition is priced at £105 per couple or £55 per person,
littletrewern.co.uk <http://littletrewern.co.uk>).

Give me a break: the week's best deals


Yorkshire tea If you're not ready to kiss the summer goodbye, check out this 
new offer at the Devonshire Arms Country House Hotel in Yorkshire. The 
"Strawberry Dales" package includes one night's accommodation, a full Yorkshire 
breakfast and a strawberry cream tea on arrival, and costs from £75pp. 
Available until 30 September. To book online quote 'Strawb' (
thedevonshirearms.co.uk <http://thedevonshirearms.co.uk>)

Tuscan break The Castel Monastero in Tuscany is offering seven-night stays for 
the price of five throughout September, when booked through tour operator 
Western and Oriental. A week at the country house hotel and spa, including 
easyJet flights to Pisa, now costs from £1,370pp – saving £755 per couple. (
westernoriental.com/holiday/italy/castel-monastero 
<http://westernoriental.com/holiday/italy/castel-monastero>)
 