
Why go?
Santiago de Compostela gets all the glory, but stray from Galicia's 
well-trodden pilgrim's path and you'll find a wildly beautiful coastline 
indented with deep estuaries, orrías. This is where discerning Madrileños 
choose to holiday and it's not hard to see why: sandy beaches backed by dunes 
and pine forests, medieval towns and fishing ports boasting some of the best 
seafood in Europe make this a rewarding alternative to the costas.

What to do
Soak up the holiday atmosphere in the charming and lively seaside resorts of 
Sanxenxo, Baiona and Combarro. Take a ferry from Vigo or Baiona to theIslas Cíes
 <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2007/feb/16/beach.top10>, a trio of 
idyllic islands with glorious powdery beaches which locals have dubbed "the 
Galician Caribbean". (There's a campsite if you can't tear yourself away.) 
Taste the local Albariño wines in the cellars of the lovely old town of 
Cambados. The cities of Santiago de Compostela and Vigo are within easy 
striking distance.

Where to eat
The Galicians take their seafood seriously and few things can beat sitting in 
a port-side restaurant with a large plate ofmariscos and a glass of crisp, 
white Alberiño. The village of Arcade is famed for its oysters: you'll find 
them on the menu at the excellent Restaurante Avenida (
restauranteavenidaarcade.com <http://restauranteavenidaarcade.com/>). The 
medieval town of Pontevedra is the place to go for a tapas-bar crawl.
 Keep the camfires burning: Embers, near Lewes. 
Where to stay
Casas Cantabricas has a good choice of self-catering houses and hotels in Rías 
Baixas, ranging from simple seaside studios to manor houses (casas.co.uk 
<http://casas.co.uk/>). A week at the Casa Vilarello, an old stone house with 
private pool, near the port of Rianxo, costs from £920 per week mid-season 
(sleeps five).
 Reach for the sky: yoga in the French Alps. Photograph: Mark Junak 
Insider tip
"There is a beautiful hike along the Costa da Vela," says Nancy Frey, who runs 
walking holidays in Galicia (onfootinspain.com 
<http://www.onfootinspain.com/tours/>). "As the easy track descends from the 
cliffs, you pass three lighthouses and walk across two white sand beaches 
[Playas de Melide and Barra]. End your walk with a swim."

Give me a break


Home Embers Camping, East Sussex
 A new campsite is to open near Lewes in East Sussex with a campfire on every 
pitch, top-notch facilities and activities such as hiking, riding and 
mountain-biking bookable on site. Embers Camping opens in Bentley Country Park 
on 16 May with prices of £20 per adult and £5 per child, per night. A 
complimentary ticket to the Bentley Motor Museum is included in the price 
emberscamping.co.uk

Away boutique chalet, France
 Première Neige, a boutique ski chalet company based in the little village of 
Sainte Foy in the French Alps, has launched its first programme of summer 
holidays under the Première Zest brand. As well as relaxing Alpine breaks, 
there will be themed holidays covering activities such as pilates, yoga and 
cycling, with prices starting from £990pp for a week's luxury catered chalet 
accommodation premiere-zest.com
 