
The family of Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin>, whose shooting death 
inspired a national conversation about racial profiling in America and in many 
ways anticipated the Black Lives Matter movement, say they are “heartbroken” 
that their son will not receive justice.

Nearly three years to the day after the Florida teen was killed, the US 
Justice Department on Tuesday announced that it has closed its investigation 
into the fatal encounter and will not bring a civil rights charge against the 
gunman,George Zimmerman <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-zimmerman>.

Benjamin Crump, the family’s lawyer, told the Guardian that Martin’s parents 
were too distressed to address the media publicly on Tuesday.

In a statement released through the attorney, Martin’s family said they are 
“disappointed” with the findings, but thanked the DoJ for an “extensive and 
thorough investigation into the killing of our son”.

“We remain poised to do everything in our power to help eradicate senseless 
violence in our communities, because we don’t want any other parent to 
experience the unexplainable loss we have endured,” the family said. “We will 
never, ever forget what happened to our son, Trayvon, and will honor his memory 
by working tirelessly to make the world a better place.”
 George Zimmerman, the acquitted shooter in the death of Trayvon Martin. 
Photograph: MCT/Landov/Barcroft Media 
Crump said they do not intend to file a civil suit against Zimmerman. Instead 
he said they will focus on the foundation established in their son’s honor.

“They are steadfast in their decision to carry on the legacy of Trayvon,” he 
said.

Martin, who would have turned 20 on 5 February, was shot and killed by 
Zimmerman on 26 February 2012. Zimmerman, who has said he shot Martin in 
self-defense, was acquitted of second-degree murder charges in July 2013.


Federal charges would have required the DoJ to prove the killing was motivated 
by race. The DoJ informed Martin’s family and lawyers of its conclusion on 
Tuesday afternoon, the family lawyer confirmed.


“The death of Trayvon Martin was a devastating tragedy,” said US attorney 
general Eric Holder in a statement. “It shook an entire community, drew the 
attention of millions across the nation, and sparked a painful but necessary 
dialogue throughout the country.

“Though a comprehensive investigation found that the high standard for a 
federal hate crime prosecution cannot be met under the circumstances here, this 
young man’s premature death necessitates that we continue the dialogue and be 
unafraid of confronting the issues and tensions his passing brought to the 
surface. We, as a nation, must take concrete steps to ensure that such 
incidents do not occur in the future.”


A team of federal investigators conducted 75 witness interviews and reviewed 
the contents of relevant electronic devices, the department said. The 
investigation also hired an independent biomechanical expert to assess 
Zimmerman’s descriptions of the struggle and the shooting.


Investigators were specifically looking at whether Zimmerman’s decision to use 
force against the teen was based on his race. The department found 
“insufficient evidence” to support this, it said.

“Although the department has determined that this matter cannot be prosecuted 
federally, it is important to remember that this incident resulted in the 
tragic loss of a teenager’s life,” acting assistant attorney general Vanita 
Gupta of the Civil Rights Division said in a statement. “Our decision not to 
pursue federal charges does not condone the shooting that resulted in the death 
of Trayvon Martin and is based solely on the high legal standard applicable to 
these cases.”

Martin was killed as he was walking back from a convenience store, where he 
went to buy a pack of Skittles and an iced tea. The 17-year-old was wearing a 
gray hoodie pulled over his head when Zimmerman, a neighborhood watch 
volunteer, confronted him. Martin’s sweatshirt became a national symbol of the 
discrimination young men of color face.

Zimmerman told police he shot Martin in self-defense after a tussle with the 
teen, giving rise to a debate about the state’s controversial stand-your-ground 
law.

Reacting to the news that the investigation was now closed, Don West, a 
Florida-based attorney representing Zimmerman, told The Guardian that his 
client was “pleased and relieved” by the decision.

“We are certainly relieved [by the findings] but not surprised by them. This 
is always what we expected to ultimately be the decision by the DoJ.”

West said he hoped the nation’s leaders and the public will respect the 
criminal justice process, and accept “that this was not a race-based event, 
that it was not motivated by hatred. That it was a tragedy.”


He added: “I know he (Zimmerman) would like to live a normal life - or at 
least try to live a normal life, but given his level of notoriety I suppose 
that will be hard. It will be an uphill battle.”

Since the 2013 trial, Zimmerman has had several brushes with the law, 
including an arrest in January on charges of aggravated assault.Those charges 
were later dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/30/george-zimmerman-no-charges-assault-ex-girlfriend>
.


Tuesday’s announcement comes at an uncomfortable time for the nation, still 
grappling with the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, and the 
chokehold death of Eric Garner in New York. The deaths of black men at the 
hands of white police officers have touched off protests that spread across the 
country, reigniting a national debate about race and policing.


The DoJ has opened civil rights investigations into both cases. 

The Trayvon Martin case also inspired rallies in hundreds of US cities, and 
raised the issue of racial discrimination. Martin’s death even drew comments 
from Barack Obama.


“Trayvon Martin could have been me 35 years ago,” the US president said. “And 
when you think about why, in the African American community at least, there’s a 
lot of pain around what happened, I think it’s important to recognise that the 
African American community is looking at this through a set of experiences and 
a history that doesn’t go away.


“There are very few African American men in this country who haven’t had the 
experience of being followed when they were shopping in a department store. 
That includes me.”
 