
There is a small department in the Home Office whose job it is to investigate 
suspected miscarriages of justice. A considerable amount of their work, it is 
said, is devoted to parking offences. But Sir David Napley, a past president of 
the Law Society, recalled a few years ago in evidence to a Commons Select 
Committee, that it had never 'as a result of its own investigations felt able 
to recommend a pardon'.

Where the case is a high profile terrorist offence and the principal 
characters are Irish, the chances even of a reopening instigated by the Home 
Office must be zero. Where then do lawyers of families turn, who believe that 
people have been wrongly convicted of IRA crimes?

In 1977 when their case last went to appeal, the three Irishmen and one 
Englishwoman convicted of the Guildford bombings had the strongest new evidence 
anyone could hope to get: three IRA men convicted after the Balcombe Street 
siege, and another who had been arrested separately, gave detailed accounts as 
to how they and not the Guildford four , had planted the bombs at Guildford and 
Woolwich in 1974. They had volunteered to lawyers information that could have 
been known to no one but those who had carried out the bombings. Besides the 
vague, garbled and mutually conflicting statements of the Guildford four , this 
new evidence was impressive and convincing.

But the Court of Appeal rejected it. The three judges, led by Lord Roskill, 
decided the Balcombe Street men were lying. The new evidence was never heard by 
a jury, as it should have been.

Since the Appeal Court judges did not consider the new statements alongside 
those of the Guildford four , the vital task of comparing the quality of the 
two sets of 'confessions' was never done. As Lord Devlin later pointed out, the 
case had been tried in two halves, before two separate courts, and only half 
the evidence had been considered by a jury: in his view a fundamental error.

With the failure of the 1977 appeal, hope died for Patrick Armstrong, Gerard 
Conlon, Paul Hill and Carole Richardson, the four young people in prison. In 
the words of Armstrong's lawyer, Alastair Logan, 'I was incredibly depressed 
and disappointed, and felt I had been a party to something dishonest.' Gerry 
Conlon felt much the same. At the end of the appeal he wrote to his mother, 
'Mum, We were fitted up something rotten ..we will prove our innocence one day.'

Alastair Logan was absolutely convinced of that innocence. He couldn't put the 
case behind him. Apart from their confessions, there had been no evidence 
against the four, which meant there was nothing to chip away at, nothing to 
overturn.

Paddy Armstrong wrote to him from prison, 'You tried your best.' And 'Where do 
we go from here?' But Logan no longer knew.

He appealed to the media. hardly anyone was prepared to recognise that there 
was a story in what had happened. A few lone voices took it up - David Martin 
in The Leveller Gavin Esler and Chris Mullin in the New Statesman David 
McKittrick in the Belfast Telegraph - but it was scarcely mainstream news.

In 1980 the BBC Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> programme, Spotlight, featured 
the death in prison of Gerry Conlon's father Guiseppe. Guiseppe Conlon was 
convicted with the Maguire family in the explosives case linked to Guildford, 
another case for which the evidence has always been seriously suspect. Panorama 
devoted part of a programme on the shortcomings of forensic evidence to the 
doubts hanging over the Maguire case. But it was not until 1984 - almost 10 
years after the original convictions - that the first networked TV documentary 
to consider any of the cases was transmitted. It was made by Grant McKee for 
Yorkshire Television's First Tuesday and considered the Maguire/Conlon case in 
full.

The journalist who brought the idea to First Tuesday, Tom McGurk, had also 
mooted the idea of a programme on Guildford. But with so little evidence 
against the Guildford four there was little that was new to investigate. 
(Panorama did a substantial amount of research on the case, but their film 
never appeared.) What remained was some strong alibi evidence and two witnesses 
who had remained faithful since 1974 the commitment of Alastair Logan and 
relatives of the four and the apparent nonsense of the confessions.

I think it is safe to say that no one who had read the statements of the 
Balcombe Street men alongside those of the Guildford four could remain easy 
about the authenticity of the latter. During the making of 'Aunt Annie's Bomb 
Factory' on the Maguire case, the conviction grew among the YTV production team 
that Guildford had been an appalling miscarriage of justice.

First Tuesday went on to produce a film about Guildford: 'Guildford Time 
Bomb'(ITV July 1986). It made no claim to present new evidence the facts spoke 
for themselves. The day after transmission the Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, 
called for an internal inquiry: it was back to the Home Office. Everything went 
quiet.

But in the wake of the film and of Robert Kee's book Trial and Error that 
followed it, the 1974 Northern Ireland Secretary Merlyn Rees, the 1974 Home 
Secretary, Roy Jenkins, Lord Devlin and Lord Scarman joined forces with 
Cardinal Hume, whose disquiet about the case dated from meetings with Guiseppe 
Conlon on his deathbed in prison back in 1980. Together, persistently, they 
lobbied for a review of the case. In January 1987 Douglas Hurd announced that 
the case of the Birmingham bombers would be reopened, but that Guildford and 
the Maguires would not.

In March 1987 First Tuesday transmitted a second programme, A Case that Won't 
Go Away. We had found and interviewed a new alibi witness for Paul Hill, and 
unearthed expert opinions that threw doubt on the confessions of Carole 
Richardson. They had been commissioned by the Home Office itself and their 
contents never published.

Again, an internal inquiry was announced, but it was later expanded - only, I 
believe, as a result of the continuing pressure of Cardinal Hume's team - into 
a fullscale police investigation.

At last, as the four sat through their 15th year in prison, a full 12 years 
after their last appeal and as Carole Richardson, 17 at the time of her arrest, 
contemplated the likelihood of spending half her life locked up, a new appeal 
was announced in January this year. Now, it seems, that appeal will never be 
heard. Television has played its part in getting the case back into the public 
eye, but it was a belated part. Without influential pressure it would almost 
certainly not have succeeded.

The reasons for yesterday's development have yet to be disclosed, but for 
those of us who have lived with this case, there is, for the moment, relief 
that the nightmare for the four is about to end.

After our first film in 1986 Carole Richardson wrote, 'I think that is what 
hurts most .. nothing is different now to what it was 10 or 12 years ago. The 
evidence, or should I saw lack of it, is still the same. All that's changed is 
the people telling it. I don't know. Unfair isn't a strong enough word for what 
I feel about it all, but I can't think of another one.'

Time Bomb, Irish Bombers, English Justice and the Guildford Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/guildford-four> by Grant McKee and Ros Franey 
is published by Bloomsbury
 