
There are 17 people running for the Republican presidential nomination. Ten of 
them will meet on 6 August in Cleveland, Ohio, for the first presidential 
debate of the 2016 election.

But if you’ve been following American politics over the past week, there’s 
really only one name that matters: Trump. In the six weeks since businessman, 
casino owner, reality show star and megalomaniacDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> announced his intention to 
run for president, his name has overshadowed the “Grand Old Party” (Republican) 
field. Not only is Trump dominating the polls, but his readiness to say 
anything and attack anyone means TV producers and political journalists can’t 
get enough of him.

In his now infamous presidential announcement on 16 June, Trump called illegal 
immigrants from Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
 criminals and rapists – a charge that, rather than apologise for, Trump 
doubled down on. Since then he has called his detractors “dummies”, “losers,” 
and “zeros”; he mockedJohn McCain’s six years in a North Vietnamese PoW camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/19/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-prisoner-of-war>
 and even gave out South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham’smobile phone number 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/donald-trump-reveals-republican-rival-lindsey-grahams-phone-number-on-tv>
 after Graham attacked him.

If you ever wondered what it would be like if a 12-year-old boy ran for 
president, Trump has provided you with an answer. He is thin-skinned, 
melodramatic, petulant, impulsive, loud-mouthed, obnoxious, boastful, crude and 
shameless and, like many adolescents, he has at best a casual relationship with 
the truth. He simply makes things up as he goes along, and even when reporters 
point out that, for example, illegal immigrants are not responsible for a 
significant amount of crime (a regular Trump talking point) he merely brushes 
it off or criticises the media for misreporting his words.

Indeed, his entire public persona is completely incongruous. Trump is a 
populist billionaire, married to a former supermodel, lives in a palatial 
apartment in New York City and yet is adopting the image of a man of the people 
who will speak unpleasant truths. In a recent focus group of New Hampshire
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> who support 
Trump, one of those present said: “He’s like one of us.”

But in a party that is defined by a mass of resentments, anxieties and 
frustrations about the larger cultural and social changes occurring in American 
society, Trump’s message on immigration and his image as an anti-politician is 
resonating.

Trump is still garnering only about 20%-25% of the GOP vote in polls, but his 
presence is having an enormous impact on the race for the presidential 
nomination. Republican candidates were already in a bit of a bind. Since there 
are so many of them, the organisers of the first debate have decided to limit 
entry to the 10 candidates who are scoring the highest in public opinion polls. 
Former Florida governor Jeb Bush, Wisconsin governor Scott Walker, former 
Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee, neurosurgeon-turned-politician Ben Carson and 
senators Rand Paul, Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz are likely to make the cut. But 
for New Jersey governorChris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, former Texas governor 
Rick Perry, Ohio governor John Kasich, former Pennsylvania senator Rick 
Santorum and Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal, moving from 1% to 2.5% in the 
polls could make the difference between being in or out of the tent.

Beyond this instrumental challenge there is the added challenge of simply 
getting media coverage in what has become, increasingly, the Summer of Trump. 
The result has been a race to the bottom. Perry, who became a political 
punchline after his dismal performance in the 2012 race, took the high road. He 
launched a rhetorical attack on Trump, calling him “a cancer on conservatism 
<https://rickperry.org/defending-conservatism-against-the-cancer-of-trump-ism>
”. It’s hard to disagree, but this rings a bit hollow coming from Perry who, 
four years ago, suggested that Ben Bernanke, the head of the Federal Reserve, 
was potentially committing treason.

Cruz took the low road. He got into a public spat with the Senate majority 
leader Mitch McConnell, a fellow Republican, even going so far as to call him a 
liar on the floor of the US Senate. Next he accused Barack Obama of financing 
terrorism in agreeing to a nuclear deal with Iran.

That was relatively tame compared with Huckabee. He took the really low road 
and said Obama’s Iran deal would lead Israel “to the door of the oven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/26/huckabee-iran-nuclear-deal-obama-marching-israelis-to-door-of-the-oven>
”. It was a horrendous political attack, made worse by Huckabee’s response to 
condemnation from both sides of the political aisle – he pushed out a web ad 
repeating the charge.

Paul took a different approach to attention-getting. He literally took a 
chainsaw to the tax code. Going one step further, Graham responded to Trump 
announcing his phone number by making aweb video of him bashing his phone 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/07/lindsey-graham-destroys-cellphone-donald-trump-120476.html>
 with a baseball bat (I guess no one on his staff told him that he could just 
change the number and keep the phone).

This entire process has turned American politics into perhaps the worst 
reality show ever. It is also an unfortunate reminder of the state of the 
modern Republican party. While Republican elites have gone to great lengths to 
present Trump as somehow outside the political mainstream, his views fit 
squarely within the frame of modern conservatism – xenophobic nationalism, 
contempt for traditional politics, fetishisation of “authenticity” and 
dismissal and contempt of “others” in American society. Indeed, the progressive 
victories of the past few weeks, on Obamacare, same-sex marriage, the taking 
down of the Confederate flag as well as the rising influence of the Black Lives 
Matter movement, have likely only intensified these sentiments and helped drive 
Trump’s support.

For years Republican politicians railed against Obama, pledged to repeal 
Obamacare and stop the cultural shift in American society. They have completely 
failed. So it should perhaps come as little surprise that a healthy segment of 
the Republican base has simply tuned them out and rallied behind someone who is 
the opposite of a politician and “doesn’t care what people think”.

Trump’s success in the polls is unlikely to translate to success when votes 
are cast. There are simply too many Republicans who would never consider voting 
for him. Beyond that, being good at politics is a skill – one that Trump does 
not appear to possess. Stirring up some Republican voters and winning their 
early support is all well and good, but to win the nomination, Trump would need 
to expand his support, and there’s little indication that he will be able to do 
that.

The impact on the GOP, however, will endure. With so much attention being paid 
to Trump, lesser-known candidates such as Rubio, Kasich and Paul will find it 
that much harder to be heard among the din. Trump may kill each of their 
candidacies off. That would end up helpingJeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush> and Scott Walker, who though 
polling in the teens, are clearly in a stronger position than any of the other 
candidates.

The downside is that Trump’s bloviating risks driving the party even further 
to the right and further tarnishing the party’s image among non-Republican 
voters. After all, while the presidential election may still be 15 months away, 
it’s pretty hard to look at the party today and conclude that it should be 
granted the awesome power of the US presidency.
 