
YOUNG GROUPS

Grendon Lakes, near Wellingborough, Northamptonshire

Unlikely as it may seem, this family-friendly watersports park, set in 150 
acres of land, can go slightly Ibiza-esque when the sun goes down. By day, 
families and groups try wakeboarding, banana-boat riding and jet-skiing on two 
of the 12 lakes. Then, in the late afternoon, the Alpine-style clubhouse fires 
up the barbecue, the bar gets busy and, on certain weekends (especially bank 
holidays), DJs and bands get the crowd on to the dancefloor. There's a huge 
field, so young people can camp away from families.
• Open all year; tents from £12 per night; 01933 665303, grendonlakes.co.uk 
<http://www.grendonlakes.co.uk/>

Vintage Vacations, near Ryde, Isle of Wight


If you can't quite face the summer festivals, but want to create a similar 
atmosphere with friends for company, Vintage Vacations' brilliant "jamboree" 
service can help. You hire out an entire field and it supplies a vintage 
Airstream, a gypsy caravan and bell tents, plus kitsch decorations such as 
bunting, crochet rugs, cushions and even pink plastic flamingos. Rope in a few 
mates with guitars and you've got a personal mini Latitude going.
• Open all year; £48pp per night B&B – minimum 10 people, maximum 20; 
jamboreebag.com <http://www.vintagevacations.co.uk/>

Marthrown of Marbie, near Dumfries, Dumfries and Galloway

This is another private party option, where groups can hire a secluded 
clearing with a Celtic Iron Age-style roundhouse, a tipi and a yurt (sleeping 
around 20 altogether), and space for 10 small tents. The roundhouse has a wood 
burner, and there's a barbecue, a gazebo and even a sound system. On the other 
side of a hill, a bunkhouse and a normal campsite are available too, plus 
there's a Finnish sauna, a wood-fired hot tub, and mountain biking at the Seven 
Stanes trails nearby.
• Open all year; full site from £720 a night, roundhouse from £270 a night, 
yurt from £50 a night, camping from £12 a night for a two-three person tent; 
01387 247900,marthrownofmabie.com 
<http://www.marthrownofmabie.com/marthrown-roundhouse-c3.html>

Smugglers Haven, Newquay, Cornwall

"Buzzing with party people waiting for you to start your holiday with a bang" 
isn't a typical campsite slogan, but that's how this 18-30s campsite in 
Britain's most hedonistic seaside resort sells itself. Staying up all night is 
encouraged; tents are seen merely as places to "rest your spinning head". Yes 
it may sound like hell – unless you're looking for somewhere with zero 
noise-intolerance, a Shakin' Shack bar and a pool, with surfing and nightclubs 
on the doorstep. Those aged 16-17 are accepted with parental permission.
• Open January-October; from £6.50pp per night; 01637 852000, 
smugglershaven.co.uk <http://www.smugglershaven.co.uk/home.asp?id=1>

Surfers' Paradise, Croyde, Devon

Directly behind the dunes that lead to one of Britain's most reliable and 
popular beach breaks, this laid-back campsite is the first port of call for 
early-bird surfers. That doesn't mean early nights are necessarily in order, 
with the local pub, the Thatch, on the doorstep. If you're lucky, you might 
catch a gig by legendary local band The Universe Inspectors in the village hall.
• Open 16 July-31 August; non-bookable site, prices available from June 
(expected to be around £11pp per night); 01271 890671,surfparadise.co.uk 
<http://www.surfparadise.co.uk>

Hillend, Swansea, West Glamorgan

This campsite, near Rhossili Bay on the Gower peninsula, may be quiet at 
night, but after working up a thirst during a day from surfing, canoeing and 
walking the beautiful Gower coastal path, and an evening in the pub at 
Llangennith, you can do what Swansea students do and head into the dunes to 
carry on the party.
• Open April-October; from £15 per pitch, no advance bookings; 01792 386204

ACTIVITY

Wowo, Uckfield, East Sussex
 Out in the woods at Wowo, East Sussex 
This is perhaps the only campsite in Britain to feature capers such as 
superhero football. As well as encouraging spontaneous fun, there are loads of 
outdoor courses, from firecraft to knifecraft, archery demos, and yurt-building 
workshops, but Wowo is best known for its music. This year, there are live 
acoustic shows in the barn every Friday. Any musician can rock up and perform 
(and get free accommodation), providing they're willing to lead a sing-along 
around the campfire afterwards. Bring your own fancy dress box, ukulele or bow!
• Open all year; from £10 a night adults, £5 children (double at weekends), 
yurts from £112 for two nights (midweek rate); 01825 723414,wowo.co.uk 
<http://www.wowo.co.uk/> 

Wallett's Court country house hotel, near Dover, Kent

A newly opened giant tipi in the grounds of this hotel comes complete with 
Siberian goose down duvets, Lapland reindeer skins and a firepit. Even if 
tipi-dwellers get a bit grubby in the grounds, they get full access to the spa 
facilities, as well as the swimming pool, tennis court and croquet lawn.
• Open late March-December; £49.50pp per night B&B; 01304 852424, 
wallettscourthotel.com <http://www.wallettscourthotelspa.com/page8.htm> 

Grawen, Cwm-Taf, Merthyr Tydfil, Mid Glamorgan

This superb site is usually full of regulars who love the friendliness of 
owners Freda and Gwyn Pugh. It is nestled in the southern part of the Brecon 
Beacons and has some of the best hardcore walking in the country. It also sits 
close to a series of stunning gorges, home to waterfalls such as Scwd Ddwli.
• Open early April-October; £10-£12 per unit per night; 01685 723740, 
walescaravanandcamping.com <http://www.walescaravanandcamping.com/> 

Hidden Glen, Nairn, Highland

If you're seriously on a budget, this campsite lets you work for an hour a day 
to earn your keep. The site is very wild, and the facilities are basic: the 
shower is a bucket, and the experience will harden even the hardiest camper. If 
you'd rather just relax, or if there are too many willing workers when you want 
to visit, you can go white-water rafting or trek around the Cairngorms, and pay 
a small fee instead. Pitches inside the stone circle are available.
• Open Easter-end of September; free if you pitch in for your pitch, around £8 
a night otherwise; 01667 454630,hiddenglen.co.uk <http://www.hiddenglen.co.uk/>

FAMILIES

Berridon Farm, Bradworthy, Devon
 Berridon Farm, north Devon 
Berridon is one of the newest members of the hugely popular Featherdown 
network of farms (there are now 22 across the UK). There are just five 
pre-erected tents tucked into woodland on the cosy farm field. Kids will love 
the new nature trail, the tyre swings, hunting for fresh eggs, bread hot from 
the oven and, of course, the animals – they can feed lambs and chickens.
• Open Easter-October half term; from £385 a weekend, £545 a week (tents sleep 
up to six); 01409 241552,berridonfarm.co.uk <http://www.berridonfarm.co.uk/> 

Safari Britain, Firle, East Sussex

Safari-style tents come well equipped here, and kids can try activities from 
bow-and-arrow whittling to cooking snails and identifying bird songs. A 
falconer comes regularly to the site to introduce his birds of prey, and there 
are swimming spots nearby. You can sleep in luxury, wake up and shower in an 
oak tree, and climb some of its age-old oak tree friends. There's also the 
Seven Sisters country park to cycle or canoe at, and Drusilla's Park zoo.

• Group bookings only (max 18 people), £750 for two nights midweek, £1,000 for 
three, £1,250 Mon-Fri, £1,550 weekend; 07818 064456; safaribritain.com

Jerusalem Farm, Booth, Halifax, West Yorkshire

Jerusalem Farm has an amazing adventure playground, a wood to explore, and 
moor-walking nearby for the budding adventurer. TheEureka National Children's 
Museum <http://www.eureka.org.uk/> is close too, with more than 400 hands-on 
exhibits and a buzzing atmosphere.
• Open Easter-September; £5 a night adults, £3 children; 01422 883246, 
ukcampsite.co.uk <http://ukcampsite.co.uk>

Talton Lodge, Newbold-on-Stour, Warwickshire

A secret walled garden is a dream for children. And a secret garden with 
incredible home-cooking, luxury tents and no way for the kids to get lost makes 
Talton Lodge a dream for parents. There's also a kitchen garden, raspberry 
bushes, chickens and an orchard. Talton's owner, Olivia, runs cooking courses, 
while kids can go to the craft table in the Norwegian tipi, or play table 
football or tennis.
• Open April-October; from £35pp per night, 4-14s half price, under-fours 
free; 07962 273417,taltonlodge.co.uk <http://www.taltonlodge.co.uk/home.html>

Rosedale Abbey, near Pickering, North Yorkshire

Magical moorland, a moseying river, dam-building and rope-swinging potential – 
this is perfect outdoors territory for older children. Although Rosedale is 
owned by the slightly Hi-de-Hi!, Flower of May holiday resort company, this has 
nothing Butlins about it. There are two beautiful tent-only fields, and if you 
arrive on a good day you can pitch right beside the river. Go Ape is a nearby 
high-ropes adventure.
• Open March-October; from £14 a night for a family of four; 01751 417272; 
flowerofmay.com <http://www.flowerofmay.com/rosedale>

Billycan Camping, Arundel, West Sussex

Billycan Camping is an idyllic space for nippers to run free. Treat your 
troupe to a large bell tent for dining under the stars, children's art classes, 
face painting, and Ranch Riders horse riding lessons. There is absolutely no 
electricity on site, so pack torches for finding your way around and for scary 
face illumination during late-night ghost stories around the communal campfire.
• Open mid-May-September; from £195 for two nights (weekend) or £399 a week in 
a tent sleeping two to three (bigger tents available) including Friday night 
dinner and a breakfast hamper; 01903 882103,billycancamping.co.uk 
<http://billycancamping.co.uk/index.html>

COASTAL

Cae Du, Rhosllefain, Tywyn, Gwynedd

This lovely little spot is only a few metres from the sea. Apart from the 
views, the site has brilliant facilities. Nearby there's the miniature
Fairbourne railway <http://www.fairbournerailway.com/>, which trundles along a 
sandy spit to the astounding Mawddach estuary, plus a steam train that 
traverses the coast in August and can take you to Shrewsbury, or connect you to 
the Talyllyn railway for a scenic trip.
• Open March-October; £12 a night for two adults, £15 for a family; 01654 
711234

Eweleaze farm, Osmington, Dorset

It's a 50m scramble down to Eweleaze's half-mile stretch of Jurassic Coast 
beach, for swimming and fossil-hunting. Aside from the huge draw of a private 
beach, there are seven spacious camping fields on which campfires are allowed. 
This is a working farm and has an organic farm shop, a stone-baked pizza van, 
an organic pie and chip cabin, and an organic kebab barn all open this summer. 
TheSouth West Coast Path <http://www.southwestcoastpath.com/> runs alongside 
the site, so you can walk into Weymouth or take the eight-mile hike to Lulworth 
Cove.
• Only open August; £6 a night adults, £3 children (double at weekends); 01305 
833690,eweleaze.co.uk <http://www.eweleaze.co.uk/> 

Ardnamurchan, Kilchoan, Acharacle, Argyll

Ardnamurchan sits on a terraced spot overlooking a loch, and is surrounded by 
some of the most stunning beaches in the UK. The peninsula location is handy 
for walking into an extinct volcano (you can go through the centre of the 
crater, or walk right around the rim). If you can't peel yourself away from the 
beaches, there are regular fossil-hunting trips and bugs and beasties tours 
organised all summer by the Ardnamurchan Study Centre.
• Open April-September; tent plus one person from £7, extra adults £6, 
under-14s £3; 01972 510766,ardnamurchanstudycentre.co.uk 
<http://www.ardnamurchanstudycentre.co.uk/>

Warcombe Farm Camping Park, Mortehoe, Devon

There's a beach near Warcombe for your every summer holiday whim: the 
Blue-Flag Woolacombe sands for surfing, Grunta bay for sunbathing, and 
Barricane bay for exotic collecting and rock-pooling. Every pitch is landscaped 
– so your party can enjoy their sea views in private – and dotted with lovely 
wild flowers. There's a fishing lake, coastal paths and Exmoor national park 
nearby for nature-spotting and hiking.
• Open 15 March-October; from £12-£27.50 per tent per night; 01271 870690, 
warcombefarm.co.uk <http://www.warcombefarm.co.uk/devon-campsite.html> 

QUIRKY

The Bell Inn, near Frome, Somerset 

 The Bell, Somerset 
The Bell at Buckland Dinham, near Frome, is a historic village inn with a 
unique take on the pub. Facilities include a barn, which regularly hosts 
ladies' night schmaltzy charity film screening, a showground, and the Man Shed 
(fully equipped with a bed, chair and radio and the ingredients for a breakfast 
to cook on your stove), each of which is available for hire. There is also the 
Cigar Shack for the dedicated smoker, a boules court and a barbecue area. You 
can stay in the shed, park a caravan or pitch your tent in the grounds. A Lady 
Shed is in the works, and the summer promises much cider-fuelled festive action.
• Open all year; £8 per pitch plus £2pp per night, shed £50pp per night 
(breakfast and two-course meal included); 01373 462956,bellatbuckland.co.uk 
<http://www.bellatbuckland.co.uk/facilities/index.php?id=23>

Ecopod Boutique Retreat, Loch Linnhe, Appin, Argyll

This brand new eco-minded venture on Scotland's rugged west coast, 20 miles 
south of Fort William, is a 70 square metre geodesic dome furnished with 
recycled or handcrafted designer items, creating a stylish look more befitting 
a boutique hotel. Heating is from a wood pellet biomass stove, and toiletries 
and food are locally and sustainably sourced.
• Open all year; £995 a week (for two); 07725 409003, domesweetdome.co.uk 
<http://www.domesweetdome.co.uk/index.php>

4 Winds Lakeland Tipis, Ambleside, Cumbria

This campsite has a Native American theme, with 12 handcrafted and simply 
furnished tipis, plus games and books aimed at educating guests about Native 
American culture. There is a lake nearby where guests can launch small boats, 
canoes or dinghies or swim. 4 Winds is a haven for wildlife, with frequent 
spottings of deer, herons, kingfishers, rabbits and owls.
• Open 19 March-October; from £270 a week; 01539 821227, 
4windslakelandtipis.co.uk <http://www.4windslakelandtipis.co.uk/index.html>

Additional research by pitchup.com <http://www.pitchup.com>
 