
We'd love to hear about your summer holidays. If you came across a brilliant 
local restaurant, bar or cafe, discovered an off-the-grid corner of a 
destination, took a great local tour or met an amazing guide, we'd love you to 
write about it onGuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/522f24dbe4b0716040115ef5>. Perhaps 
you spent hours researching and planning your trip and can now advise others on 
the do's and don't's of a particular place.

Share the highlights of your trip with us and the best tips will be compiled 
into an online guide on the Travel site. To get us started, we've compiled a 
list of tips from Guardian writers and staff, starting today with the UK.

Your tip should contain as much detail as possible, including, where 
applicable, the place's website (or address/telephone number) and prices. And 
it must include your full name.

Yarde Orchard campsite, yurts and bunkhouse, Devon
 A yurt at Yarde Orchard 
This is my favourite campsite in southern Britain. You can tell you're on to a 
good thing when you speak to the friendly proprietors on the phone. You'll 
discover it's not really a campsite, more a halfway house right on theTarka 
Trail <http://www.devon.gov.uk/tarkatrail>(on the Devon coast-to-coast). It has 
a cafe, a large, clean and comfy bunkhouse, 12-foot and 18-foot yurts for 
glampers, and a beautiful little field at the bottom for tents (£5pppn). You 
can get a hearty breakfast, lunch or dinner at the rustic cafe, which also 
serves wine and whatever draught ale they've managed to get their hands on. 
Sometimes they put on bands. There's an outside kitchen and free firewood. They 
even helped us start a fire. It all has a pleasingly ad-hoc, community feel, a 
million miles away from the sterile caravan-oriented, manicured campsites we're 
used to, plus it's got all the amenities but without the inflated fees. Perfect.
• yarde-orchard.co.uk <http://www.yarde-orchard.co.uk>, 01805 601778 
Dave Hall 

The Red Lion, Snargate, Kent

Fancy a walk back in time? The Red Lion pub in Snargate 
<http://www.thegoodpubguide.co.uk/pub/view/Red-Lion-TN29-9UQ> (01797 344648), 
on the Romney Marshes in Kent, offers you the chance to do just that. It is run 
by eightysomething Doris Jemison and her daughter Kate, and the family has held 
the licence for 102 years, during which time little appears to have changed. 
Real ale is the order of the day, from tapped barrels behind a marble-topped 
bar – lager is not available and nor is food in this 16th-century former 
coaching inn alongside the B2080. The pub is a series of interconnecting, 
beamed rooms, the one at the back with a piano; the walls throughout are 
decorated with memorabilia, much of it from the second world war; the toilets 
are outside lean-tos; and there is a lovely garden which often plays host to 
passing Morris Men. Pub games are still evident, including the local one, Toad 
in the Hole, which is basically a variant of pitch and toss with a piece of 
furniture as the target, and Paul McCartney has been known to drop by for a 
pint or two.
Mark Tallentire

Discovering Constable's Great Landscapes, Suffolk
 Willy Lot's Cottage in Suffolk, famous for featuring in John Constable's The 
Hay Wain. Photograph: Alamy 
Back in 2006, Tate Britain showcased John Constable's The Great Landscapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jun/02/tatebritain>, which included 
several massive canvases of the river Stour. It was an eye-opener, displaying – 
in glorious brushwork – the lavish countryside of the artist's youth. After 
years of promising myself a visit, this summer I walked the Stour, between 
Stratford St Mary and Flatford Mill, scene of many of these great works. The 
river has a haunting, timeless charm and was buzzing with damselflies, 
dragonflies and butterflies. And although the landscape has changed a bit, it 
is essentially the same one that Constable depicted. The scene at Flatford 
Mill, where he painted the Hay Wain, is virtually unchanged. To cap a glorious 
couple of days, I stayed at the Sun Inn, in Dedham. The hotel has charm, great 
food and is perfectly positioned to explore Constable country.
• thesuninndedham.com, doubles from £110 B&B 
Robin McKie 

The Purbeck Breezer, Dorset

My nomination for the best British bus to start a holiday on: the number 50 
Purbeck Breezer <http://www.morebus.co.uk/purbeck-breezers.shtml> from 
Bournemouth to Swanage in Dorset. It's one hour and eight minutes of hair in 
your face, sea air up your nose and fantastic views, as the blue double-decker 
buses used on this route, and two others in the Purbeck area, are open-topped. 
Britain's rural bus services haven't had a great reputation since 
privatisation, but one thing I've learned in the year after my family gave up 
our car is thatin high season, on popular routes and especially coastal ones, 
these buses are ace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/28/britains-rarest-bus-service>. 
The Breezer (£8 for an all-day ticket) is the tops. Settle in on the top deck, 
and before long you're on the chain ferry from Sandbanks to Shell Bay, looking 
across Poole harbour at the glorious sandy beaches of Studland or enjoying an 
ice-cream on Swanage pier. Service is seasonal and about to come to an end on 
September 14, but keep it in mind for when it starts up again next May.
Susanna Rustin

Hidden Spring vineyard and campsite, Sussex
 Hidden Spring campsite 
I love this bitesize campsite in the lovely, leafy Sussex Weald because it has 
its own vineyard. You can sit and sip its chilled white as you pack the kids 
off to the swings and get the campfire going for the sausages, having spent the 
day taking lovely walks and nipping into great pubs with beer gardens full of 
flowers. And this year owners David and Tamzin Whittingham have gone one step 
further, arranging for a classy pizza van to stop by every Friday evening, 
meaning one less hassle for weekenders as they set up. It occasionally 
reappears and it's a wood-fired job so the pizzas take barely a minute. They're 
well tasty – and perfect with a glass of that local wine.
• 01435 812 640, hiddenspring.co.uk <http://hiddenspring.co.uk>. Pitches from 
£9pp in high season, £5 for children 3-15.
Andrew Gilchrist

Edinburgh apartment
 Photograph: Greatbase.co.uk 
My preparations for the Edinburgh festival are never organised, but this year 
was a particular disaster. Just a few days before my wife and I were about to 
head north, we discovered the website I'd booked our flat through – our 
unusually well-located, well-priced and astonishingly still available flat – 
turned out to be a scam. A Scottish friend took pity on us and tipped us off to 
Great Base, a small Edinburgh-based boutique agency, who found us a gorgeous 
one-bedroom flat in Moray Place, one of Edinburgh's most beautiful streets. 
It's immaculately designed (owned by two interior designers), with a roll-top 
bath and separate walk-in shower in the marble bathroom. The bedroom and living 
room are filled with 1930s furniture, as well as top-of-the-range technology. 
With the dining room set up as a bedroom, it can sleep three or four. Prices 
start at £900 for short stays or £1,300 a week, but even in mid-August we got a 
discount for late-booking.
• greatbase.co.uk <http://www.greatbase.co.uk/moray-place>, 0131 4633 866 
Matthew Glynn 
 