
It was the case of the superstar surgeon, the prestigious Swedish institute 
and the ill-fated windpipe transplants that escalated into allegations of 
misconduct, dismissal and a criminal investigation.

 Now, a leading British university has launched an inquiry into its own links 
with the endeavours of Paolo Macchiarini, the surgeon at the centre of the 
trachea operations following which six patients died.

The surgery, pioneered five years ago with the world’s first synthetic 
windpipe transplant at Stockholm’s prestigious Karolinska Institute, appeared 
to mark the beginning of an era in which artificial organs could be created 
from scratch by scientists and seamlessly integrated into the human body.

However, the remarkable success story began to unravel. In March, the Italian 
surgeon wasdismissed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/23/superstar-doctor-fired-from-swedish-institute-over-research-lies-allegations-windpipe-surgery>
 from the Karolinska Institute amid an unfolding medical scandal and Swedish 
prosecutors are conducting a criminal investigation.

Now, in a case that has sent ripples across the scientific world, University 
College London has launched an inquiry into links with the controversial 
surgeon.

The latest investigation will probe its relationship with regenerative 
medicine research that may have taken place at Karolinska. Several of its 
senior scientists contributed to the procedures pioneered by Macchiarini, in 
which donor or synthetic tracheas were seeded with the patient’s own stem cells 
with the aim of creating new, functioning organs.

There is no suggestion that the UCL academics are implicated in any misconduct.

The regenerative surgery initially appeared to have gone well, and was 
described as successful in high profile journal articles, but it later emerged 
that six of the eight patients to receive synthetic tracheas had died, while 
another remains in intensive care. Karolinska’svice chancellor 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/02/karolinska-institute-vice-chancellor-resigns-wake-macchiarini-scandal>
 resigned and itsentire board <http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i4894> were 
sacked earlier this year after they continued to back the Italian surgeon 
despite warnings of clinical and scientific misconduct.

Karl-Henrik Grinnemo, a surgeon who worked alongside Macchiarini at 
Karolinska, said of his former colleague that there was always a sense of 
emergency that led to him bypassing standard ethical safeguards in 
international collaborations.

“It was ‘They’re severely ill and they will die very soon and ... we can’t 
wait to get the permissions from the regulators’,” he said. “Everything was 
always in a hurry when it came to Paolo Macchiarini.”

Alexander Seifalian, a former UCL professor of biomaterials, created the first 
synthetic trachea to be transplanted into a patient. The 36-year old Eritrean 
man, Andemariam Beyene, had been suffering from advanced tracheal cancer and 
died two-and-a-half years after the transplant. Seifalian was dismissed from 
UCL in July, after a tribunal in an unrelated case found that he had 
dishonestly obtained £24,000 from an overseas student.

Seifalian, who had developed a polymer material to make artificial ears and 
noses, said he agreed to produce a synthetic trachea in just 10 days after 
being approached by Macchiarini, who told him his patient had only two weeks to 
live. In a 2013TED talk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DR4D24bDPaQ>, 
Seifalian recalled asking his PhD student to obtain sheep and pig tracheas from 
the butchers, because they did not know what the organ looked like.

“I said ‘Go on Google and type in trachea’,” he recalled in the talk.

According to Grinnemo, who assisted in the operation, “none of the [Stockholm] 
patients needed an operation that urgently. They would have survived even 
years. You could have waited for the regulators to look at the material and the 
cells.”

Grinnemo later concluded that the entire synthetic trachea concept was doomed 
to fail because the plastic would inevitably become infected as it was exposed 
to bacteria and viruses with each breath, adding that he now views the 
synthetic transplant as a “death tube”.

While the material was approved as safe for clinical use, the actual trachea 
was never formally assessed as a new medical device, meaning this risk was not 
fully considered.

Seifalian told the Guardian: “At the time he came to our laboratory and he 
said this is the only chance of survival for this patient ... Yes if we had a 
longer time, we would have made a better scaffold. Everything was in a rush.”

Seifalian later made a synthetic trachea for a 20-year-old British woman, 
Keziah Shorten, who was treated at University College Hospital London in 2011.

Martin Birchall, a UCL professor of laryngology who coordinated the surgery, 
said that on the back of positive reports from Karolinska, the team were given 
approval to perform a synthetic trachea transplant under compassionate use 
rules. The surgery allowed Shorten, who had been in a critical condition in 
intensive care following cancer treatment, to return home for a brief period, 
but she died three months later.

“At the time it was the rational thing to do,” said Birchall. “We wouldn’t do 
it again now.”

Birchall had collaborated with Macchiarini on a transplant carried out in a 
Spanish clinic in 2008.

He too recalls a sense of urgency when helping to prepare the donor trachea 
that had been stripped of its cells and re-populated with stem cells taken from 
the bone marrow of the 30-year-old patient, Claudia Castillo.

Birchall, then at Bristol University, was given permission by the Human Tissue 
Authority to prepare the cells in a veterinary laboratory, that was not 
licensed for clinical applications. In a 2008 letter the HTA said it would not 
stand in the way of what “could in this particular case be life-saving therapy” 
for a “carcinoma patient”.

The surgery was required because one branch of Castillo’s windpipe (the 
bronchus) had been damaged by a TB infection. Her left lung was at risk of 
being surgically removed, but she was not at immediate risk of dying, according 
to the Barcelona clinic where she was treated.

Birchall told the Guardian that he believed the additional risk this carried 
was justified because “my firm belief was her life was in danger and we needed 
to move quickly”, adding that even so he would not have carried out the work 
without HTA approval.

There is no suggestion that the cells caused any health problems, but Castillo 
suffered extensive complications and ultimately had her lung removed earlier 
this year, raising questions about whether the risk was warranted.

In a statement, UCL said: “Following recent events at the Karolinska Institute 
in Sweden relating to some aspects of regenerative medicine research, UCL’s 
Vice Provost (Research) has instigated aspecial inquiry 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0916/160916-special-inquiry-regenerative-medicine>
 in order to establish the nature and scope of regenerative medicine research 
at UCL and to establish the nature of UCL’s relationship with regenerative 
medicine research that may have taken place at the Karolinska Institute.”

Macchiarini rejected claims that he misrepresented the clinical condition of 
patients to collaborators. Of the first synthetic transplant, he said: “All of 
us involved in Andemariam Beyene’s care wanted to give him the very best chance 
possible, and he and his family expressed their gratitude for the extra years 
we gave him.”



 