 Eleven people were killed and 63 injured, 19 of them seriously, when a bomb 
planted yards from the cenotaph in Enniskillen, County Fermanagh, turned the 
small country town's Remembrance Day into a scene of carnage.
No organisation claimed responsibility yesterday, but the Royal Ulster 
Constabulary's Chief Constable, Sir John Hermon, said he was is no doubt that 
the IRA was responsible.

Sir John also admitted that while the route of yesterday's planned march 
through Enniskillen, a grey army town on the western borders ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, had been searched before for 
the parade, the building in which the bomb was planted - a former Catholic 
school, now a community centre - had not been searched because it was thought 
it was a "secure area".

It overlooked the town's cenotaph and was the traditional watching point for 
civilians. The RUC thought the IRA would not bomb it because it was used by 
civilians. The entire route had been checked for explosives by sniffer dogs.

Sir John said: "The location of the building has been known for many years as 
a place of congregation for pedestrians and relatives, and never at any time 
had it been used by members of the security forces."

He said that the RUC had received a message indirectly from the Provisional 
IRA to say that another bomb placed near a cenotaph at Tullyhammon, not far 
away, had failed to explode. Had that bomb gone off, there would have been 
severe casualties.

The Tullyhammon remembrance ceremony was called off, and last night the area 
was still sealed off while security forces continued a search.

The Chief Constable said: "The bomb was placed maliciously, with deadly 
intent, to murder civilians. I am satisfied their purpose was to inflict 
casualties on civilians."

He went on: "No one has accepted responsibility for this bomb, but even the 
terrorists, and I include the IRA, will be shocked by the carnage they have 
reaped today."

The attack was Northern Ireland's worst outrage and highest civilian death 
toll for five years since the bomb planted by the Irish National Liberation 
Army in the Droppin' Well discotheque at Ballykelly killed 11 soldiers and six 
civilians.

No warning had been given when a 30-pound bomb, placed behind the wall of a 
community centre, brought a three-storey-high gable-end down on a group of 15 
civilians. It was only 15 minutes before the square would have been full and 
the ceremony was due to take place.

Old and young were caught by the blast. The dead included three married 
couples, two of whom were elders of the Presbyterian Church, a retired 
policeman, a caretaker and a 20-year-old nurse.

The dead were last night named as Mr and Mrs William Mullen of Sligo Road, 
Enniskillen; Mr and Mrs Wesley Armstrong, of Cavanaleck; Mr and Mrs Kit 
Johnston, of Drumgay; Mr John Armstrong, Miss Quinton, and Mr Sam Galt of Coole 
Drive, Eniskillen; Mr Johnny Magaw, a caretaker from Culbackey, County Antrim, 
and the nurse, Maire Wilson, whose address was not released. Mr Mullen and Mr 
Johnson were both church elders.

The injured included four children under the age of 10, 17 teenagers, six 
people in their twenties, 21 people of middle age and three over the age of 70. 
One of the couples who died were said to be "extremely elderly". Last night, at 
least four of the injured were airlifted from the Erne Hospital to the Royal 
Victoria Hospital in Belfast and the Tyrone Hospital for neurosurgery.

Mrs Thatcher, visibly shaken by the news of the disaster, which had been 
relayed to her after the Cenotaph ceremony in Whitehall, said that the outrage 
was a blot on humanity.

In a clear reference to the extradition debate taking place in the Irish 
Republic at the moment, Mrs Thatcher said angrily that there now could be no 
country left to give support to the people that perpetrated this outrage.

Sir John said the Provisional IRA had suffered serious setbacks both 
nationally and regionally in west Tyrone. "The Provisional IRA have been dealt 
severe body blows in the attrition of both men and equipment this year. You can 
recognise their desperation because they have never had a morality attached to 
their campaign. This, I think, makes them more and more careless and reckless."

One of the injured victims described from his hospital bed last night what 
happened. Mr Harry Donaldson, aged 55, a lorry driver from Derrin Road, 
Enniskillen, said he was standing with a group of people underneath the wall by 
a pedestrian barrier when the bomb exploded.

"There was a crash and the wall came down on top of us. I was trapped and had 
this awful weight on my back." The man he had given a lift to, Johnny Magaw, 
who was standing next to him, died.

Another eye-witness described how a woman was blown through a mahogany door, 
yet survived the impact.

Mr Tom King, Northern Ireland Secretary, flew into the town yesterday 
afternoon after attending a ceremony at his home at in Bridgwater, Somerset.

After touring the scene he said: "If this is anyone's idea of the sort of 
incident which somehow advances their cause, then I don't think any decent 
person needs reminding that that cause is an obscene and debased one if it 
requires the murder of old women and young children."

Messages of sympathy flooded in from Ireland, the Continent and North America 
last night. Mr Charles Haughey, prime minister of the Irish Republic, yesterday 
condemned the people who planned "this criminal act of carnage" and said his 
government would do everything it could to find the perpetrators.

Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, said the bomb 
was "a direct attack on the unionist community".

At the weekend, his party's annual conference threw out a motion which 
insisted that the Irish Parliament should not pass the extradition act until 
the British Government had reformed administration of justice in Northern 
Ireland. After yesterday's outrage, it seems certain that the act will go ahead.
 