
Protests have been held outside offices of Sinn Féin and the Democratic 
Unionist party over the two parties’ decision to accept welfare reforms imposed 
by London to prevent the collapse of power sharing inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

The protests, organised by an affiliate of the Unite union, took place in 
Belfast, Newry and Ballymoney.Unite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>
 is also demonstrating against the DUP and Sinn Féin’s backing for a lower 
corporation tax regime in Northern Ireland, which the union claims will be paid 
for with hundreds of millions of pounds of cuts to local public services.

Fifty union activists protested outside the Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> office on Belfast’s Falls 
Road, and another 50 took part in a demonstration at the DUP’s constituency 
advice centre across the peace line on the loyalist Shankill Road. Smaller 
groups protested in Newry and Ballymoney, and another protest was to be held in 
Derry on Saturday afternoon.

The protests will be particularly embarrassing for Sinn Féin. In the Irish 
Republic, the party has been campaigning on an anti-austerity programme and 
hopes to gain power in a coalition after the general election, which is 
expected in late February or early March.

Far-left parties such as People Before Profit have accused Sinn Féin of double 
standards by allowing Tory-inspired cuts to public services in Northern Ireland 
while opposing austerity in the republic.

Albert Hewitt, the Unite Community organiser in Northern Ireland, said the 
deal to save the Stormont government would result in devastating cuts to social 
welfare as the price David Cameron and George Osborne extracted for allowing 
the power-sharing executive led by Sinn Féin and the DUP to set a low 
corporation tax.

“Perhaps of greatest concern is the deal’s proposal to reduce corporation tax 
to 12.5% in an unwinnable race to the bottom on global tax-haven status,” 
Hewitt said. “No one knows just how much this will cost but we can be certain 
that this will mean hundreds of millions of pounds of further cuts to public 
expenditure budgets at a time when we cannot afford them.

“Our communities deserve better. These protests send a clear signal that Unite 
in the community will be at the forefront of the campaigning against austerity 
in Northern Ireland.”

Erik Cownie, the west Belfast chairman of Unite Community, said: “Working 
class people are fed up with cuts and they are fed up with the politics of just 
orange and green. This is unprecedented and is a nascent movement.”

Unite Community is affiliated to the Unite union and is an alliance of 
community organisations, students and pensioners’ rights groups across Northern 
Ireland.
 