
Out Western Australia way unlikely new environmental heroes can be found 
toiling in the red ochre dust of the Pilbara.

Until recently companies such as Altura Mining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining>, which has a long rap sheet of 
coal projects to its name, weren’t exactly contributing to the effort to curb 
global carbon emissions, but that is about to change.

The coal price has slumped, so too that of iron ore – the Pilbara’s primary 
source of income – and mining companies are eyeing off the building blocks of 
green economies of the future, such as neodymium and yttrium rare earths for 
the magnets used in wind turbines, and gallium and indium for solar panels and 
energy-efficient lighting.

While these all have varying levels of supply capacity relative to demand, 
where the supply chain falls seriously short in comparison to the projected 
need is the materials needed for battery systems crucial for storing the 
intermittent energy output of solar and wind as well as powering the fleets of 
electric cars that companies such asTesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs/2015/jun/10/tesla-batteries-environment-lithium-elon-musk-powerwall>
 are planning to roll out in huge numbers over the coming decade.

Half the price in half the time: solar storage innovation harnesses new energy 
frontier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/23/half-the-price-in-half-the-time-solar-storage-innovation-harnesses-new-energy-frontier>
That’s where Altura Mining comes in, timing plans to develop the Pilgangoora 
Lithium project to coincide with the battery boom. AlturaMining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/mining> has secured an offtake 
agreement with Chinese batteries material producer Lionergy, and recently 
completed a feasibility study mapping out the mining, processing, logistics and 
support infrastructure required to commence mining and processing of spodumene, 
a hard rock source of lithium, at Pilgangoora.

The company is just one example of 40 Australian firms working in the lithium 
sector.According to the US Geological Survey 
<http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/lithium/mcs-2016-lithi.pdf#page=2>
 Australia produced more lithium than anywhere else in the world in 2015, 
harvesting 13,400 metric tonnes, ahead of Chile in second place at 11,700 
metric tonnes.

Until recently lithium was mostly used in the production of aluminium, 
ceramics and glass, but lithium-ion batteries are now the biggest growth area, 
with Tesla planning to make more of these batteries annually in just one 
factory by 2020 than were produced worldwide in 2013.

Most of the mining action is taking place in Western Australia, home to 
massive operations such as Talison Lithium’s Greenbushes project in the state’s 
south-west, a hard-rock lithium mine that has been running for 25 years and is 
the world’s largest.

Damien Giurco, professor of resource futures at the University of Technology 
Sydney’s (UTS) institute for sustainable futures, cautions that when it comes 
to the emerging market for lithium-ion batteries, some forms of lithium are 
more suitable than others.

“There are two dominant pathways,” he says. “One is hard-rock mining where 
Australia is the leader, but the other, which has big reserves particularly in 
South America, is to get it from salt lakes, and it is more readily taken from 
brine form to use in batteries.”

Brine harvesting is extremely water-intensive compared to hard-rock lithium 
mining, but is cheaper and more efficient in most other respects. This presents 
a challenge for Australian producers hoping to compete given the additional 
processing required to utilise hard-rock lithium in battery production.

In a joint venture partnership with Venus Metals corporation, Lithium 
Australia is out to prove that it can process hard-rock lithium at a 
competitive price by undertaking a study into the establishment of a lithium 
processing hub.

Beyond Tesla: solar-powered battery could challenge Australia's soaring 
electricity prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/19/beyond-tesla-solar-powered-battery-could-challenge-australias-soaring-electricity-prices>
Lithium Australia managing director Adrian Griffin says the company is seeking 
to start construction on a small scale pilot plant in New South Wales, before 
building a larger scale pilot plant in one of four shortlisted locations.

“The aim is to produce a pilot plant on a sufficient scale that it can cover 
operating costs by selling the product, so investors can come have a look at 
the operational parameters,” he says.

He singles out Port Hedland, located approximately 120km north of Pilgangoora, 
as the leading contender among the shortlisted sites.

“It is almost inevitably going to become one of the world’s largest lithium 
centres. There’s going to be increased demand, a shortage of supply, and we’ve 
got plenty of resources here. The demand will come from lithium-ion batteries 
to a large extent. People would have you believe it will be mostly electric 
vehicles, but there’s also stationary power back-up, the likes ofthe Powerwall 
from Tesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/01/tesla-announces-low-cost-solar-batteries-elon-musk>
, competing products from Panasonic, and evenAustralian companies  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/26/australias-answer-to-tesla-indigenous-firm-allgrid-shines-in-solar-battery-industry>
are coming up with stationary power storage domestic backup systems.”

Griffin notes the extensive port infrastructure established to export iron ore 
would also advantageous, along with the appropriately-skilled workers in the 
region.

Back at UTS, Giurco says lithium harvesting has – like any mining – an 
environmental impact, but a limited one overwhelmingly offset by the potential 
for lithium-ion batteries to reduce carbon emissions.

“It is not a process for instance like gold mining where chemicals are being 
leached [into the ground],” he says. “You have [issues such as] the 
environmental impact of constantly driving diesel trucks down into the mine, 
but with electric trucks it would be a different story.”

What he is more concerned about is what happens to the lithium batteries when 
they are disposed of. It’s a problem he believes Australia could turn into an 
opportunity by developing stringent certification systems and involving itself 
in the entire production cycle of lithium: mining, processing, leasing the 
batteries to users, then collecting them for recycling.

Lithium is by no means the only material required for the coming 
battery-storage revolution – lithium-ion batteries themselves require other 
minerals such as graphite, and then there are competing prospective 
technologies such as aluminium-ion batteries for electric cars and vanadium 
flow batteries for grid-energy storage.

The vanadium sector is less developed in Australia than lithium, but there is 
some activity: Australian Vanadium last monthannounced 
<http://www.proactiveinvestors.com.au/companies/news/68192/australian-vanadium-ltd-in-deal-to-develop-electrolyte-capacity-with-c-tech-68192.html>
 the development of a Perth pilot plant to research the preparation of 
electrolyte for use in vanadium redox batteries. The company is also 
undertaking a feasibility study on the Gabanintha deposit in the Murchison 
region of Western Australia, one of the highest-grade vanadium projects 
globally.

The Murchison area has seen this all before. One of its first claims to fame 
was as a hub for a mining frenzy that preceded even the iron ore boom: the 
Western Australian gold rush of the 19th century. The Murchison goldfields are 
littered with the ruins of ghost towns from that era, a lingering reminder that 
in chasing the next big thing, be it vanadium, lithium, or whatever else, those 
doing the digging would be wise to do so sustainably – in every sense of the 
word.
 