
Young migrant children held in one of the most controversial privatised 
detention centres in the US have been restricted from playing with crayons 
after staff members accused them of causing damage to property.

The move has been branded as unnecessarily punitive by lawyers working on 
behalf of 600 mothers and children detained at the Karnes detention centre in 
Texas.


What might Trump's deportations look like? 'A system that defies imagination'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>
The centre at Karnes is one of three federal facilities that holds migrant 
mothers and children. These family centres are one of the most controversial 
elements of the Obama administration’s border protection program, whichlooks 
set to rapidly expand under the incoming Donald Trump presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>
.

A spokeswoman for the Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal 
Services (RAICES), which provides pro bono legal support to detainees at 
Karnes, said detention centre staff enforced the ban after accusing children of 
damaging a table as they drew inside the prison’s visitation centre last week. 
The damage is said to have occurred as some mothers were taking legal advice.

In email correspondence seen by the Guardian, Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) staff state the punishment was “an action resulting from 
crayons which RAICES staff/volunteers have given children which has caused 
property damage to the contractor”.

The GEO group, the $2bn global security company that operates the centre, has 
made over $57m from it since November last year,according to local media reports
 
<http://www.sacurrent.com/the-daily/archives/2016/08/19/even-as-doj-phases-them-out-business-is-booming-for-private-prisons-thanks-to-immigrant-detention>
.

A spokesman for GEO group said “crayons, toys and books etc” were provided to 
children in other sectors of the detention centre, and the restriction only 
affected children playing in the visitors area.

Barbara Hines an adjunct professor at the University of Texas and RAICES 
member said in a letter to ICE that the reaction was disproportionate.


“Treating a child’s color markings as ‘destruction of property’ is altogether 
inappropriate. And such markings are a cost that comes with the detention of 
children. It is extremely disturbing that ICE’s concern for GEO’s property 
takes precedence over the well being of the children and their mothers’ rights 
to legal advice,” she wrote.

In an emailed statement, one 23-year-old detained mother said banning her 
children from drawing with crayons was already having an adverse effect.

“They are too young to read and if they just play can get too rowdy. We don’t 
always want them with us because some of the things we share we don’t want them 
to hear,” the mother said.

ICE did not respond to a request for comment by deadline.

This story was updated with comment from the GEO group.
 