


US officials responsible for the secret CIA drone campaign against suspected 
terrorists in Pakistan may have committed war crimes and should stand trial, a 
report by a leading human rights group warns.Amnesty International 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/> has highlighted the case of a grandmother who was 
killed while she was picking vegetables and other incidents which could have 
broken international laws designed to protect civilians.

The report is issued in conjunction with an investigation by Human Rights Watch
 <http://www.hrw.org/> detailing missile attacks in Yemen which the group 
believes could contravene the laws of armed conflict, international human 
rights law and Barack Obama's own guidelines on drones.

The reports are being published while Nawaz Sharif, Pakistan's prime minister, 
is in Washington. Sharif has promised to tell Obama that the drone strikes – 
which have caused outrage inPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> – must end.

Getting to the bottom of individual strikes is exceptionally difficult in the 
restive areas borderingAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, where thousands of militants 
have settled. People are often terrified of speaking out, fearing retribution 
from both militants and the state, which is widely suspected of colluding with 
the CIA-led campaign.

There is also a risk of militants attempting to skew outside research by 
forcing interviewees into "providing false or inaccurate information", the 
report said.

But Amnesty mounted a major effort to investigate nine of the many attacks to 
have struck the region over the last 18 months, including one that killed 18 
labourers in North Waziristan as they waited to eat dinner in an area of heavy 
Taliban influence in July 2012. All those interviewed by Amnesty strongly 
denied any of the men had been involved in militancy. Even if they were members 
of a banned group, that would not be enough to justify killing them, the report 
said.

"Amnesty International has serious concerns that this attack violated the 
prohibition of the arbitrary deprivation of life and may constitute war crimes 
or extrajudicial executions," the report said. It called for those responsible 
to stand trial.

The US has repeatedly claimed very few civilians have been killed by drones. 
It argues its campaign is conducted "consistent with all applicable domestic 
and international law".

The Amnesty report supports media accounts from October last year that a 
68-year-old woman called Mamana Bibi was killed by a missile fired from a drone 
while she was picking okra outside her home in North Waziristan with her 
grandchildren nearby. A second strike minutes later injured family members 
tending her.

If true, the case is striking failure of a technology much vaunted for its 
accuracy. It is claimed the remote-controlled planes are able to observe their 
targets for hours or even days to verify them, and that the explosive force of 
the missiles is designed to limit collateral damage. As with other 
controversial drone strikes, the US has refused to acknowledge or explain what 
happened.

Amnesty said it accepts some US drone strikes may not violate the law, "but it 
is impossible to reach any firm assessment without a full disclosure of the 
facts surrounding individual attacks and their legal basis. The USA appears to 
be exploiting the lawless and remote nature of the region to evade 
accountability for its violations," it said.

In Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, another country where US 
drones are active, Human Rights Watch highlighted six incidents, two of which 
were a "clear violation of international humanitarian law". The remaining four 
may have broken the laws of armed conflict because the targets were 
illegitimate or because not enough was done to minimise civilian harm, the 
report said.

It also argued that some of the Yemen attacks breach the guidelines announced 
by Obama earlier this year in his first major speech on a programme that is 
officially top secret. For example, the pledge to kill suspects only when it is 
impossible to capture them appears to have been ignored on 17 April this year 
when an al-Qaida leader was blown up in a township in Dhamar province in 
central Yemen, Human Rights Watch said.

An attack on a truck driving 12 miles south of the capital Sana'a reportedly 
killed two al-Qaida suspects but also two civilians who had been hired by the 
other men. That means the attack could have been illegal because it "may have 
caused disproportionate harm to civilians".

The legal arguments over drones are extremely complex, with much controversy 
focusing on whether or not the places where they are used amount to war zones.

Amnesty said some of the strikes in Pakistan might be covered by that claim, 
but rejected a "global war doctrine" that allows the US to attack al-Qaida 
anywhere in the world.

"To accept such a policy would be to endorse state practices that 
fundamentally undermine crucial human rights protections that have been 
painstakingly developed over more than a century of international law-making," 
the report said.
 