
Police in the Californian city of Oakland have arrested a former officer in 
connection with the killing of an unarmed man on New Year's Day.

Johannes Mehserle, 27, was taken into custody last night as part of the 
investigation into the controversial shooting of Oscar Grant earlier this month.

The 22-year-old victim was killed after transport police intervened to stop a 
fight on a train fromSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> to Oakland in the early 
hours of 1 January.

The manner of his death has sparked protests and rioting. Footage filmed by 
passengers on the train at Fruitvale station appeared to show Grant sitting 
calmly on the platform shortly before the scuffle that left him dead.

The films – many of which have been placed on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/jan/09/subway-killing-video-footage>
 and other video-sharing websites – show Grant being forced to lie face down on 
the floor before a brief struggle in which Mehserle draws his weapon and shoots 
once into Grant's back.

Mehserle had been a police officer for Bart – the Bay Area Rapid Transit rail 
system linking San Francisco, Oakland and other cities in the region – for two 
years. He refused to speak to investigators and last week resigned.

The killing of Grant, who was black, by a white police officer has increased 
racial tensions in the already troubled city of Oakland. Riots have caused 
hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of damage.

Some have likened the incident to the beating of Rodney King in Los Angeles in 
1991, which ended in widespread rioting after the police officers were cleared 
of using excessive force.

"Over the decades thousands of people, particularly blacks and other 
non-whites, have complained about police abuse – but until the King beating 
video, most police abuse charges were dismissed,"said Harrison Chastang 
<http://www.beyondchron.org/news/index.php?itemid=6470>, a columnist for San 
Francisco-based website BeyondChron.

"The cell phone video recorded by Bart rider Katrina Vargas shows that Grant 
was unarmed, and that he apparently was not acting in a manner that would 
compel an officer to consider using a firearm."

On Monday, the Bart police chief, Gary Gee, said he had passed the results of 
a preliminary investigation to Oakland officials.

"I'm not able to say whether there's enough for the district attorney to file 
criminal charges," he said. "This is a continuing investigation."

Oakland, with a population of 400,000, lies a few miles from San Francisco and 
San Jose, but its high levels of poverty, crime and unemployment are a marked 
contrast from its prosperous neighbours. While the cities that run in a string 
along Silicon Valley are among America's richest, Oakland was placed fifth in a 
Congressional Quarterly Press list of America's most dangerous cities.
 