
Abusive behaviour was a hallmark of Rebecca's relationship with her partner 
but it took her a long time to realise it - and longer still - to gain the 
confidence to leave him. Together for 11 years, he was controlling and 
dominant. There had been violent episodes at the start of their relationship 
but when the couple had children the violence stopped. But the emotional abuse 
continued. "He didn't physically hurt me for a long time. But he was always 
there, he got jealous. He didn't want me talking to other men."

It wasn't until Rebecca attended a specialist parenting programme at her local 
children's centre that she became fully aware of the extent of the abuse she 
was suffering. "Before [the course] I thought 'well he's not hitting me, it 
can't be that bad, I'm not really being abused. And he loves me'."

The programme helped Rebecca realise how unhealthy her relationship was and 
boosted her confidence levels. She has now split up with her partner.

Rebecca believes she got out before the emotional toll on her children became 
irreversible. Her son – once clingy and withdrawn – is now much more 
independent and happy, as are her three other children, she says. And Rebecca 
herself is optimistic about her future – she recently enrolled on a 
volunteering programme to help troubled families in the area and has long-term 
goals to forge a career helping other vulnerable women.

Rebecca's eight-week parenting support programme forms an integral part of the 
work carried out byBarnet Council's <http://www.barnet.gov.uk/> Safer Families 
Project. Initially piloted in 2010, the project funds a dedicated project 
manager and three domestic violence workers to support families where abuse or 
low-level violence is a regular feature of family life. This remit had 
previously been assigned to staff in the council's referral and assessment 
social care team but it had become apparent that they were failing to 
prioritise such cases against a rising workload of high level abuse cases.

The team's rationale is essentially early intervention, project manager, Jenny 
Stevens, explains. "We had real evidence of repeat police notifications of low 
level incidents involving children. [We want] to stop these cases escalating to 
social care. Obviously the further down the line you go the more costly it is 
[for the Council]."

The project uses the Barnado's multi-agency domestic violence risk 
identification threshold scales to identify tier one and two families – those 
experiencing minor incidents of physical violence, verbal abuse and controlling 
or intimidating behaviour – and assesses them for relevant support. Referrals 
come not only from police notifications and social care staff but other 
professionals in the borough, including midwives and health visitors. The team 
then makes contact with the mother in question (the project only works with 
women – male victims are referred to other services) as quickly as possible, 
preferably in person. "The beauty of it is you're meeting them soon after the 
incident, they've not forgotten or minimised it. I think that's critical to the 
process, that you get there straight away," says Stevens.

The parenting programme that helped Rebecca to gain confidence has been a real 
success, according to project staff. An eight-week course delivered jointly with
HomeStart Barnet <http://www.homestartbarnet.org/>, the programme has a strong 
focus on building self-esteem and helping women explore the impact of domestic 
abuse on children, as well as looking at safety planning and options for the 
future.

Charlotte Chambers, DV worker at the project, says that the group helps women 
to overcome the isolation and shame common amongst victims of domestic abuse. 
"They often tell us their friends don't understand why they haven't left their 
partners. The women all say that even though they find it quite painful talking 
about the abuse, they want to come back the next week, they know they're making 
progress."

As well as the parenting programme, service users can also access individual 
or family counselling and structured stay and play sessions in a neutral and 
child-friendly environment. Centre head, Sajni Sharma, emphasises that a 
multi-agency approach has been key to the success of the initiative. "There is 
a lot of joint working with outside agencies. It's extremely important. The 
whole idea is it has to be a co-ordinated and seamless service, people don't 
want to tell their story over and over again. They don't want to go through 
that painful process unnecessarily."

The project has received more than 700 referrals since it began – continuous 
promotion of the initiative among partner agencies and staff has helped boost 
numbers, according to Stevens – and feedback from parents indicates a high 
level of satisfaction with services provided by the team.

More importantly, the project is getting results where it counts. The 
evaluation of the six-month pilot indicated that, of 164 families helped by the 
initiative, only three were escalated to social care referrals as a direct 
result of domestic violence. This success has meant the project secured council 
funds to continue – funding is currently in place to March 2013 and Stevens is 
confident the future of the project is secure, despite the financial 
constraints facing the council. "We have no reason to suspect the funding won't 
be there [next year] – we have a very strong evaluation process and we can 
demonstrate the project works. The mums we've helped don't want their 
involvement [with the project] to end."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the social care 
network <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/social-care/start.php> to 
receive regular emails and exclusive offers.
 