
Unbeaten centurion Usman Khawaja produced his longest and greatest innings for 
Australia, resisting a South African fightback late on day two of the day-night 
Test to build a 48-run lead in Adelaide.

Khawaja’s knock of 138 not out, a decidedly old-school innings in the 
innovative fixture, pushed Australia to a total of 6-307 at stumps on Friday.

The elegant left-hander was a picture of concentration at Adelaide Oval, save 
for a mix-up between the wickets with Steve Smith, and will now bat for a third 
day in a row.

Australia v South Africa: third Test, day two – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/25/australia-v-south-africa-third-test-day-two-live>
Khawaja has faced 285 deliveries and spent more than seven hours at the 
crease, leaving Australia well placed to avoid the ignominy of a sixth straight 
Test defeat and their first whitewash in a home Test series since federation.

Skipper Smith and debutant Peter Handscomb both registered half-centuries in 
what was a remarkably more resolute batting performance from the hosts, who 
made five changes after losing the second Test, the series and almost all 
credibility in Hobart.

Khawaja faced 39 balls late on Thursday, having been forced to open the 
batting after Faf du Plessis’ timely declaration meant David Warner missed the 
start of Australia’s innings.

Some 24 hours later Khawaja showed the same composure against the second new 
ball, which triggered a collapse of 3-10.

Handscomb was clean bowled by Kyle Abbott, again the Proteas’ best bowler, 
then debutant Nic Maddinson departed for a duck.

Maddinson, whose stumps were rearranged by Kagiso Rabada, copped an almighty 
send-off from the fired-up paceman.

South Africa were even more chirpy when Matthew Wade came and left after one 
boundary, but Mitchell Starc dug in alongside Khawaja and was unbeaten on 16 at 
stumps on Friday.

Khawaja posted Australia’s first ton of the series, sharing a 137-run stand 
with Smith then a 99-run partnership with Handscomb.

The 29-year-old stroked 12 boundaries but attacked judiciously and only when 
he was set, having left the ball frequently as Australia crawled to 2-46 after 
26 overs.

The only lapse came when Smith was run out for 59.

Smith took off for a single after guiding the ball to point. By the time he 
noticed Khawaja had stopped mid-pitch, it was far too late and keeper Quinton 
de Kock had ample time to whip off the bails.

Nobody enjoyed the wicket quite as much as Hashim Amla, who fumbled a slips 
catch when Smith was on 46.

Amla also missed a simple run-out chance when Handscomb was on 35. The 
Victorian went on to score just nineteen more runs.

Abbott finished an inspired morning spell with figures of 2-7 from 10 overs, 
having found the edge of debutant Matt Renshaw and vice-captain Warner’s bats.
 