
Kathryn Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kathrynhughes> makes some 
big claims forVictorians Undone: Tales of the Flesh in the Age of Decorum. Her 
new book is, she writes in an enticing introduction, an attempt to reverse the 
situation whereby biography, the writing of life, has become indifferent to the 
“vital signs” of that life – to breath and movement, to touch, taste and smell. 
One can’t help but sense in this a certain weariness. Who can blame Hughes, the 
author of major books about George Eliot and Isabella Beeton, for wanting to 
try out a different kind of narrative, one both more visceral and less 
gargantuan? (Victorians Undone comprises a collection of five essays, each a 
study of a different subject.) Nevertheless, she has a point. How many times 
have you ploughed right to the end of a long biography only to find yourself 
asking: yes, but what was shereally like?

Lord Melbourne, Queen Victoria’s favourite prime minister, seems to have found 
her rather stinky

The Victorians, moreover, remain as stubbornly unfathomable as their more 
elaborate underwear. The sensible resist the idea that they were just like us. 
One of the frustrations of ITV’s soapyVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/04/the-week-in-tv-victoria-collection-night-of-are-you-being-served-porridge-till-death-us-do-part>
 – a series Hughes inadvertently picks to pieces in her book – was its absolute 
refusal to deal with the intense weirdness of the Queen and her court, with 
their devotion to beliefs and proprieties which, though well known to us by 
now, remain difficult to comprehend, much less to sympathise with. And yet they 
were only flesh and blood, after all. At the mercy of their hormones and their 
genes, they worried about their teeth and hair, just as we do; their aches and 
pains, vastly less treatable than our own, affected their moods as ours. 
Pondering this, who doesn’t wonder about their menopausal flushes and their 
middle-aged impotence? As Hughes notes, they were not bloodless insects, to be 
pinned for posterity to an inky piece of velvet, but farting, belching, squashy 
creatures with varicose veins, acid reflux and, in the case of Dante Gabriel 
Rossetti, a testicle so swollen his walk was lop-sided.

The trouble is, the details of such “fleeting, fine-grained intimacies” are 
deeply buried. While they probably can be found somewhere in the archives, you 
need the biographical equivalent of a nit comb to get at them. Group 
biographies, in addition, are extremely labour-intensive: the writer must read 
as if she were writing a single life, only to discard most of her research, a 
process she then has to repeat multiple times.Victorians Undone has taken 
Hughes, whose biography of Beeton came out in 2005, a long time to put 
together, nit comb (and, perhaps, smelling salts) in hand, and it shows. It is 
rich and scholarly, something fascinating to be discovered on every page. But 
it is also digressive, meandering. Her stated theme – how did the men and women 
whose tales she tells feel about their physical selves? – comes in and out of 
focus. Each essay works beautifully alone. Hughes is a thoroughly engaging 
writer: serious-minded but lively, careful yet passionate. In its entirety, 
though, it feels strained, uncertain of itself. The pieces do not quite fit 
together.
 Bocca Baciata, Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s ‘sensually knowing’ 1859 portrait of 
his mistress, Fanny Cornforth. Photograph: Alamy 
The first essay tells the story of Lady Flora Hastings, who arrived at 
Kensington Palace in 1834, a new member of the court-in-waiting whose first 
role was to spy for the then Princess Victoria’s mother, the Duchess of Kent. A 
victim of court intrigue, when her stomach began to swell, it was said she’d 
fallen pregnant by her mistress’s scheming comptroller, Sir John Conroy. In 
fact, still a virgin, she was dying. Her bulging belly was the result of a 
tumour. The second tracks the development and shifting meaning of the luxuriant 
whiskers without which, now, it is impossible to picture Charles Darwin; and 
the third is about George Eliot’s right hand, supposedly larger than her left 
thanks to the years she spent working as a dairymaid for her father. Fanny 
Cornforth’s Mouth stars Rossetti’s longest-serving mistress and the model for
Bocca Baciata, his sensuously knowing portrait of 1859. Finally, Hughes 
concludes with an account of the murder of eight-year-old Fanny Adams, whose 
body parts were found scattered across a Hampshire hopfield in 1867 (it’s to 
this dead child that, courtesy of some old naval slang, the expression “Sweet 
Fanny Adams” refers).

Some of the encounters in these pages, whiffy and indelible, will stay with me 
for ever

What do these essays have in common? The answer is: not a great deal. Hughes’s 
excellent account of the Hastings affair is vividly shocking, being so 
unsparing not only in the matter of Victoria’s spiteful role in the drama – on 
the July day in 1839 when Flora finally died, the relieved young Queen felt a 
wild desire to “roll in the grass” – but in the humiliations the young woman 
had to suffer in trying to lay the gossip to rest. Only by submitting to an 
internal examination by a doctor could Lady Flora prove that she was not with 
child, and yet this in itself turned her into the very thing she was accused of 
being: a whore. The essay about Darwin, too, is lively, and rather pertinent, 
in this, the age of the hipster beard. Whiskers in his day, just as now, spoke 
volumes. They told the world, among other things, whether a man was high or low 
church; post-Crimea, they were also a symbol of masculinity in a realm in which 
the middle classes led lapdog lives.

Related: ‘Do not take a girl home from the tobacconists’: the Victorians’ 
guide to freshers’ week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/shortcuts/2016/sep/07/victorian-guide-freshers-week-st-johns-college-cambridge>

But the essays concerning Cornforth and Eliot seem to have more to do with the 
murky business of biography itself – beware the class-conscious keepers of the 
flame! – than with the bodies of their subjects. And with the tale of Sweet 
Fanny Adams, we are in essence reading a penny dreadful. It’s a ghastly, 
chilling story – Hughes writes of Fanny’s eyes “cooling and viscous” in her 
killer’s pockets – but it’s too exceptional to be put to service as a way of 
understanding, say, Victorian attitudes to the sexuality of children.

None of this is to say that I didn’t enjoy Victorians Undone. Some of the 
encounters in its pages, whiffy and indelible, will stay with me for ever. 
Did Darwin really grow his immense beard because he felt competitive with his 
23-year-old nephew, Alfred? How didQueen Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/queen-victoria> cope with the prolapse of 
the uterus from which she suffered, and why did she not bathe more often? (Lord 
Melbourne, her favourite prime minister, seems to have found her rather 
stinky.) How might lusty Dante Gabriel Rossetti have felt about the operation 
to remove his ill-fated testicle? Such questions, even when only partially 
answered, bring us so close to the Victorians, they might almost be upstairs, 
fussing and occasionally panicking behind a locked bathroom door.

• Victorians Undone by Kathryn Hughes is published by Fourth Estate (£20). To 
order a copy for £17 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/victorians-undone.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 