
How I wrote my novel: in isolation, in a dream that lasted, on average, four 
hours a day at the laptop and an hour a day on the treadmill. This tempo led to 
a chapter every month over two years, a rhythm cushioned by leave from almost 
all my teaching obligations. I was unknown and I loved nearly every minute of 
it, except when I worried about whether anyone would publish the book – or read 
it or like it.

When I was not worried about others and wrote the book just for myself, as I 
did for almost all of those two years, I experienced, for the first time, the 
most extraordinary joy in writing. After having suffered for more than a decade 
writing a short-story collection where every sentence was either labour or 
punishment, now nearly every sentence was fun, even when the subject matter was 
bleak. This delight became even more precious when my wife became pregnant, 
compelling me to finish the first draft of the novel before our son was born. I 
beat the deadline by two days, and needed to, because his birth would signal 
the end of my independence, youth, and dreams. (Alright, none of that happened, 
but that’s how I felt).

Then the novel went into the world and did very well. It won prizes, including 
the Pulitzer. I learned about the award in a hotel room in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, on a promotional tour. I was writing emails when Facebook and 
Twitter began beeping and pinging, telling me that Something Very Important had 
happened. While I had known a degree of pleasure at winning prizes before, I 
had never been overtaken by this kind of physical sensation: trembling, 
accelerated heartbeat, disbelief - all due to a sense that my life was altered. 
I waited until my publicist called and confirmed the award before I really 
believed. Even so, I was numb, thinking about how lonely it was to sit in a 
hotel room without my loved ones, getting affirmation from my laptop. Later I 
went to the Harvard bookstore for my event, and the room was packed, and there 
was a photographer taking pictures of me, and people looking at me differently.

The value of my book and myself had changed, even if the book remained as 
invaluable to me as when I wrote it. I had a tremendous passion for this novel. 
It aimed to destroy the American perspective on the Vietnam war, which 
influences how most of the world sees the country. My book was to be the 
Vietnam war novel for everyone who thought they knew what this war was about, 
as well as for everyone who didn’t want to read a book about an exhausted 
subject.

It’s strange, that disconnect between the act of writing, which is pure in its 
optimal mode, and the existence of the writing in the world, where all our 
human foibles, desires, and prejudices transform it. It’s impossible to say 
that I have not been affected by the Midas touch of this prize, which has 
gotten more people to know my name and read the book. Still, feeling as I do 
the weight of that touch on my shoulder, the dream remains of returning to that 
anonymous space where I can find my next story and that story can find me. 
Anonymous, because when I wrote my novel, no one cared who I was, and I could 
say whatever I wanted. The only thing that mattered was the story. Even then it 
was apparent to me that long after I was gone, it would be the story that lived.

Extract

In this jackfruit republic that served as a franchise of the United States, 
Americans expected me to be like those millions who spoke no English, pidgin 
English, or accented English. I resented their expectation. That was why I was 
always eager to demonstrate, in both spoken and written word, my mastery of 
their language. My vocabulary was broader, my grammar more precise than the 
average educated American. I could hit the high notes as well as the low, and 
thus had no difficulty in understanding Claude’s characterization of the 
ambassador as a “putz,” a “jerkoff” with “his head up his ass” who was in 
denial about the city’s imminent fall. Officially, there’s no evacuation, said 
Claude, because we’re not pulling out any time soon.

The General, who hardly ever raised his voice, now did. Unofficially, you are 
abandoning us, he shouted. All day and night planes depart from the airport. 
Everyone who works with Americans wants an exit visa. They go to your embassy 
for these visas. You have evacuated your own women. You have evacuated babies 
and orphans. Why is it that the only people who do not know the Americans are 
pulling out are the Americans?

Claude had the decency to look embarrassed as he explained how the city would 
erupt in riots if an evacuation was declared, and perhaps then turn against the 
Americans who remained. This had happened in Da Nang and Nha Trang, where the 
Americans had fled for their lives and left the residents to turn on one 
another. But despite this precedent, the atmosphere was strangely quiet in 
Saigon, most of the Saigonese citizenry behaving like people in a scuppered 
marriage, willing to cling gamely to each other and drown so long as nobody 
declared the adulterous truth.

The truth, in this case, was that at least a million people were working or 
had worked for the Americans in one capacity or another, from shining their 
shoes to running the army designed by the Americans in their own image to 
performing fellatio on them for the price, in Peoria or Poughkeepsie, of a 
hamburger. A good portion of these people believed that if the communists won – 
which they refused to believe would happen – what awaited them was prison or a 
garrote, and, for the virgins, forced marriage with the barbarians. Why 
wouldn’t they? These were the rumors the CIA was propagating.

Review

Beyond such wilful attuning to Invisible Man, this impressive debut contains a 
Whitman-like multiplicity. The Sympathizer can be read as a spy novel, a war 
novel, an immigrant novel, a novel of ideas, a political novel, a campus novel, 
a novel about the movies, and a novel, yes, about other novels. This 
overreaching mixture leads to occasional missteps that matter little set 
against the greater result: a bold, artful and globally minded reimagining of 
theVietnam war <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> and its interwoven 
private and public legacies. Indeed, this book reads like the absolute opposite 
of Tim O’Brien’sThe Things They Carried 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-in-tim-o-brien-s-the-things-they-carried.html>
, the clipped, cool fragmentary narrative that has long served as the canonical 
US literary account of that divisive conflict and its ongoing aftermath. -Randy 
Boyagoda

Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/12/the-sympathizer-viet-thanh-nguyen-review-debut>

About the book

The Sympathizer is published by Constable and Robinson, priced £8.99. It is 
available from the Guardian bookshop priced £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sympathizer-412854.html>.
 