
Virat Kohli’s first half-century of the series saw India recover from a shaky 
start to impose a commanding lead over South Africa in Delhi, on day three of 
the fourth and final Test.

After bowling the tourists out for 121 on the second day, Kohli opted against 
enforcing the follow-on and ended the day unbeaten on 83 as he and Ajinkya 
Rahane saw India to 190 for four at the close – a lead of 403. The home side 
hold a winning 2-0 lead in the series.

India take full control of Test after Ravindra Jadeja skittles South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/04/india-south-africa-ravindra-jadeja>
For Kohli it was a welcome return to form after failing to pass fifty in the 
previous three matches of the series, and his demotion to No5 seemed to spark 
the India captain back to life.

He arrived at the crease under pressure however, after Morne Morkel had taken 
three early wickets to give the Proteas a glimmer of hope, and Kohli he took 
advantage of a reprieve on five. He was given out caught behind off Imran Tahir 
but a referral for a no-ball showed that the South Africa leg-spinner had 
overstepped – and further replays also suggested he had not hit the ball.

Murali Vijay was the first to go as he was forced to fend a rising delivery 
into the gloves of Dane Vilas, although replays suggested the ball may have hit 
the arm guard on the way through.

Rohit Sharma, promoted to No3 ahead of Cheteshwar Pujara and Kohli, was next 
to fall at the start of Morkel’s next over. Morkel got a ball to straighten and 
beat the defences of Sharma, who made his way back to the pavilion for a 
first-ball duck, before Shikhar Dhawan and Pujara were forced to grind out a 
partnership.

They did so for over 20 overs but, with both batsmen scratching for runs, they 
added only 45 before Dhawan was cleaned up by Morkel and Pujara bowled by Tahir 
shortly after to leave India struggling on 57 for four.

That brought the first-innings centurion Rahane to the crease, and he helped 
post the first century partnership of the series with his skipper before bad 
light forced a premature end to play.
 