
There was a heart-in-mouth moment on the third day of the first Test in 
Adelaide when the India captain Virat Kohli arrived at the crease and was hit 
full on in the helmet by a short-pitched delivery fromMitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>.

With much of Australia still coming to terms with the death of Phillip Hughes 
who died after being hit on the head by a bouncer, there was genuine concern as 
the hosts surrounded the Indian captain to check he was not hurt, while his 
counterpart Michael Clarke comforted Johnson.

Thankfully Kohli recovered to make an impressive 184-ball innings of 115 on 
day three that propelled the tourists to 369 for five at stumps after Australia 
declared on 517 for seven before the start of play.

He thereby ensured his side have a fighting chance going into day four by 
building key partnerships of 81, 101 and 74 with Cheteshwar Pujara, Ajinkya 
Rahane and Rohit Sharma respectively.

With the sun shining once more, Australia declared their innings before the 
start of play.
 Kohli is caught out by Ryan Harris after making 115. Photograph: Morne De 
Klerk/Getty Images 
In the third over of the day, Shikhar Dhawan, on one, survived a dropped 
chance when he got an inside edge off Johnson, although it was a tough one as 
Brad Haddin dived for the ball only to see it slip through his grasp.

Dhawan stuck around to help India score at a decent rate but was nevertheless 
the first man out for 25, another inside edge off Ryan Harris needing no 
further assistance this time as it went straight on to his stumps.

Murali Vijay had made a tentative start at the other end, but after taking 
eight off a loose over from Peter Siddle, he began to open up, and he ended the 
20th over with a six and a four off consecutive balls from Nathan Lyon.

He would hit Lyon for six again but soon after reaching his half-century he 
fell victim to Johnson, playing at a delivery which swung away from him and 
helping it into the gloves of Haddin to go for 53.

That brought Kohli to the middle and before he could set about a fine 
afternoon’s work there was the tense moment of Johnson’s delivery hitting his 
helmet as he ducked late.

Once Kohli was given chance to settle, he and Pujara got to work before Lyon 
broke their third-wicket stand with a good delivery which caused Pujara to 
hesitate before a tentative prod merely helped it through on to the stumps.

Lyon continued to put India under pressure, in particular asking lots of 
questions of the new man in Rahane, who was subject to one big shout for lbw – 
replays showed an inside edge – and then offered a half-chance to short leg, 
with the ball just falling short.

From the first ball after tea, Kohli brought up his first Test fifty in 11 
innings, a great way to show how he is handling the extra responsibility of 
captaining the side for the first time.
 Mitchell Johnson is congratulated after taking the wicket of Kohli. 
Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
At the other end, Rahane was nearing a half-century of his own, but still 
offering chances. A big pull shot from a Siddle bouncer went high but Lyon, 
racing in from the boundary, could not stretch for the catch and instead it ran 
for four.

Rahane would make it past 50, but with the new ball looming, Lyon stepped up 
his attack.

Australia claimed the catch when David Warner twisted acrobatically at short 
leg, but the ball had come off the pad. But from the next delivery, Rahane 
gloved it to the slips where Shane Watson hung on to remove him for 62.

With Sharma in at the other end, Kohli brought up his century in style by 
punishing Mitchell Marsh’s poor delivery to claim his 12th and final four of 
the day over the mid-wicket boundary.

They kept India ticking over before Johnson made the key breakthrough for the 
hosts in the 95th over, taking Kohli’s wicket with a bouncer that the India 
captain could only send into the palms of Ryan Harris at deep fine leg.

Stumps came two overs later with Sharma, unbeaten on 33, and Wriddhiman Saha, 
one not out, at the crease with India trailing by 148 runs.
 