
The main US visa program for technology workers could face renewed scrutiny 
under President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and his proposed attorney 
general, Senator Jeff Sessions, a longtime critic of the skilled-worker program.

Under the H-1B visa scheme, 65,000 workers and another 20,000 graduate student 
workers are admitted to the US each year. The tech industry,which has lobbied 
to expand the program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/us-tech-firms-visas-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-immigration>
, may now have to fight a rear-guard action to protect it, immigration 
attorneys and lobbyists said.

Strong-arm Apple and tax China bigly: a guide to Trump's possible tech policies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/trump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax>
 Trump sent mixed signals on the campaign trail, sometimes criticizing the 
visas but other times calling them an important way to retain foreign talent.

 Sessions, however, has long sought to curtail the program and introduced 
legislation last year aiming to make the visas less available to large 
outsourcing companies such as Infosys. Such firms, by far the largest users of 
H-1B visas, provide foreign contractors to US companies looking to slash 
information technology costs.

 “Thousands of US workers are being replaced by foreign labor,” Sessions said 
at a February hearing.

 A spokesperson for Sessions did not immediately respond to a request for 
comment and a Trump transition team spokesperson declined to comment.

 The H-1B visa is intended for specialty occupations that typically require a 
college education. Companies use them in two main ways to hire technology 
workers.

 Tech firms such as Microsoft and Google typically hire highly skilled, 
well-paid foreign workers that are in short supply. They help many of them 
secure so-called green cards that allow them to work in the US permanently.

 By contrast, firms such as Infosys and Tata Consultancy Services, both based 
in India, use the visas to deploy lower-paid contractors that critics say 
rarely end up with green cards.

 Infosys did not immediately respond to a request for comment. A Tata 
spokesman declined to comment.

H-1B visas are assigned through a lottery once a year by US Citizenship and 
Immigration Services. This year, companies filed 236,000 petitions for the 
85,000 available visas, a cap set in US law. They are awarded to employers – 
not employees – and tied to specific positions.

 Both Democratic and Republican critics have argued that companies such as 
Walt Disney and Southern California Edison, a utility, have used the program to 
terminate in-house IT employees and replace them with cheaper contractors.

 Sessions last year urged the then attorney general, Eric Holder, to 
investigate Southern California Edison’s use of H-1B visas, in a letter that 
was also signed by Democratic senators Bernie Sanders, Richard Durbin and 
Sherrod Brown. Disney and Edison did not immediately respond to requests for 
comment but have said previously that they paid foreign contractors comparably 
with local staffers.

Jeff Sessions: Trump's attorney general pick accused of racial slur in 1981
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur>
 The justice department in 2013 settled a visa fraud case with Infosys for 
$34m. Federal investigators accused Infosys of using easier-to-obtain business 
travel visas to import foreign workers who were required to have H-1B visas. 
Investigators also alleged that Infosys told foreign workers to lie to US 
officials about the cities where they would work.

 In the settlement, Infosys denied the allegations but agreed to retain a 
third-party auditor for two years and to provide the government with detailed 
descriptions of what its visa holders were supposed to be doing in the US.

Several constituencies have called for program reforms, including the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, that industry’s largest 
professional association. It wants the lottery ditched in favor of a system 
that would award visas to companies offering the highest-paying jobs, said Russ 
Harrison, director of government relations.

 That could potentially shut out employers looking to mine the program for 
cheap foreign labor. Sessions included a similar measure in his 2015 bill.

 Tech industry groups also want changes. FWD.us – the immigration lobbying 
group backed by Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg – supports setting higher 
minimum wages and giving priority to companies that sponsor H-1B workers for 
green cards.

 “We’re going to advocate for expanding the program, but we’re also going to 
advocate for reforming the program,” FWD.us president Todd Shulte said in an 
interview.

 The current program mainly benefits big companies at the expense of both US 
and immigrant workers, said Gaurav Mehta, a 32-year-old H-1B holder from New 
Delhi who works for a cybersecurity firm in San Francisco. H-1B workers 
struggle to switch jobs without risking deportation, he said, which allows 
employers to pay them less.

 “The current system is not working for Americans, and it’s not working for 
immigrants,” he said.

Some Trump allies expect him to keep the program mostly intact, including 
Shalabh “Shalli” Kumar – an Indian-born Chicago businessman who donated 
$900,000 to his campaign.

 “He has said to us that these are amazing people and it would be crazy to let 
them go,” Kumar said in an interview. But Kumar has urged Trump to eliminate 
country-by-country quotas that create long waits for Indian and Chinese 
nationals to get green cards.

 John Miano, an attorney with the Immigration Reform Law Institute – a 
conservative group that has been aligned with Trump – also supports 
prioritizing H-1B applications from companies offering higher pay.

 Such a change would hit the outsourcing firms hard. The top 10 recipients of 
H-1B visas in 2015 were all outsourcing firms, according to government data 
compiled by the IEEE. Tata Consultancy Services topped the list by securing 
8,333 H-1B visas.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
 Amazon, by contrast, ranked 12th and was awarded just 826 H-1B visas. Google 
and Microsoft ranked 14th and 15th, with Facebook at 24th and Apple at 34th.

 Some H-1B visa holders aren’t waiting. Sofie Graham – a marketer at the San 
Francisco startup BuildZoom.com and a dual Irish and British citizen – secured 
her H-1B visa last year. Although she could have worked for six years on the 
visa, she and the company decided to apply for a green card.

 “Everywhere I looked, people were saying we should have fewer H-1Bs,” she 
said. “I just wanted to get a green card as soon as possible.”
 