
Go to a kids' party for grown ups (Buckinghamshire)

Space-hoppers on the lawn, a vintage bouncy castle, a ball pool, swing dance 
lessons, hammocks, picnics, giant balloons, a midnight jelly feast and a 
gorgeous country house: these ingredients combine childish fun with 
sophisticated pleasures - and add up to one of the weekend's best parties, Time 
For Tea's Colourscape. Held at the stunning Stoke Place hotel in 
Buckinghamshire, the party lasts all night, though coaches from London return 
to the city at 3am. Others can stay over at the hotel to carry on til dawn.

• 01753 534 790, thewhiteblackbird.com <http://thewhiteblackbird.com>, tickets 
£35, return London coach £15 (ticketweb.co.uk <http://ticketweb.co.uk>). Rooms 
(01753 560 209,stokeplace.co.uk <http://stokeplace.co.uk>) including ticket and 
breakfast £172.59pp.

Moonwalk flashmob (London)

From the parties on the tube to mass pillow fights, joining a flashmob event 
(when hundreds of people gather at a prearranged time and location to perform 
some absurd act), is a must-do-once bout of silliness. Sure to be this year's 
most memorable and most poignant is the giant Thriller dance flashmob planned 
for next Saturday in London's Hyde Park, in an attempt to beat the current 
world record for biggest group moonwalk of 1,500 people. Meet at Trafalgar 
Square at 12 in your best Jacko get up (but check the Facebook page, World 
Record Attempt: Thriller Dance FlashMob, in case times change).

Swim across a lake

Reaching the other side of a lake after some ferocious front crawl will feel 
like a real achievement. The Outdoor Swimming Society has dozens of 
recommendations for pleasant lake swims on its website (
outdoorswimmingsociety.com <http://outdoorswimmingsociety.com>), including 
Semer Water in North Yorkshire, which is standing depth for half its length, 
and medium-sized so not too challenging - wear a bright cap and look out for 
boats. More formal swims include a one mile paddle next Saturday on Strathclyde 
Loch, for £30 (greatswim.org <http://greatswim.org>), open to all abilities. 
Liquid Leisure lake swimming at Datchet in Berkshire is open to anyone on 
Saturday and Sunday mornings, from 6am-8.30am (07979 212 211,openwaterswim.co.uk
 <http://openwaterswim.co.uk>, £5pp), and the centre also has a Jacuzzi and 
sauna.

Go to the wacky races
 Wacky Races from Hoo Farm Animal Kingdom Photograph: PR 
For many, racing means donning a fancy hat and going to bet on the horses, but 
there are other, barmier, races on which to take a punt. The athletic prowess 
of 18 sheep and goats will be pitted against each other in three races at Hoo 
Farm Animal Kingdom (01952 677 917,hoofarm.com <http://www.hoofarm.com>) near 
Telford, Shropshire on bank holiday Monday. You can study their form from last 
year's races beforehand, and all winnings go to The Brooke Hospital for 
Animals, so if you win a pony on a sheep - sorry, sweepstake (ahem), it's all 
going to a very good cause. Elsewhere, six rare breed pigs compete to hurdle 
hay bales at the Moorgreen Country Show in Watnall near Nottingham (30 and 31 
August,moorgreenshow.co.uk <http://moorgreenshow.co.uk>, £9 per adult). 

Dive with sharks (Isle of Man)
 Photograph: Alamy 
In August there's a good chance of spotting basking sharks off the south coast 
of the Isle of Man, either from land or by going out with one of the boats 
designated environmentally responsible by the island's WiSe scheme (
wisescheme.org <http://wisescheme.org>). Mann Scuba Divers, based in Port Erin, 
runs a couple of dives a day and the odds of spotting a basking shark are very 
good for the next month. You can't get too close to the sharks - they don't 
bite but a whack from their powerful tails is potentially lethal.

• You need a PADI open water qualification, then it costs £30 or £40 per dive; 
each lasts 50 minutes. 01624 835 202,mannscubadivers.co.uk 
<http://wisescheme.org>.

Hire a classic car (Perthshire)

It's usual to end the bank holiday rather more ragged and lager-soaked than 
you began it, but there are alternatives. Hiring a vintage car will ensure your 
perception of your own sophistication comes on in leaps and bounds as the 
holiday progresses. At the Lake of Menteith Hotel in Perthshire, weekend 
packages include the use of a Jag (from E-type to 3.8 MKII) to tour the 
Trossachs, from £465 for two people for two nights, including dinner, plus a 
day's hire of an XJS V12.

• 01877 385 258, lake-hotel.com <http://www.lake-hotel.com>.

Get bugged out (Plymouth)
 The Insect Circus Photograph: PR 
While others spend the day batting away wasps and fretting about ants in their 
picnic, you could embrace the many-legged world of creepy-crawlies at the 
bizarre Magnificent Insect Circus Museum, which comes to Dingles Fairground 
Heritage Centre in Lifton, Plymouth, next weekend (Aug 29-31). The Liberty 
Beetles and Cheeky Ladybirds perform circus stunts, you can watch Captain 
Courage, the intrepid wasp tamer, and peek inside the museum, a jolly 
travelling vintage circus lorry, lined with mahogany and stuffed with vintage 
costumes, props, puppets and other ephemera.

• 01359 268 209, insectcircus.co.uk <http://insectcircus.co.uk>, £7 adults, £5 
children.

Roll down a sand dune

Who didn't love rolling down a grassy /snowy/sandy slope as a nipper? 
Recapture that giddy, joyously sicky feeling with a tumble on some of Britain's 
biggest sand dunes, then climb back to the top for a picnic. Just behind the 
surf beach of Saunton Sands in north Devon, Braunton Burrows (northdevon.com 
<http://northdevon.com>), is an undulating 1,000-acre Unesco biosphere site, 
one of Britain's biggest dune systems. Public access is allowed but be careful 
not to squash the 400 species of wildflowers that grow there. Sefton Coast on 
Merseyside (seftoncoast.org.uk <http://www.seftoncoast.org.uk>) has England's 
biggest sand dune system - comprising 20% of the UK's dunes. Nearby you can 
visit the Ainsdale Discovery Centre which has free bike hire (see
visitliverpool.com <http://visitliverpool.com>). White Rocks in County Antrim 
has a massive dune beneath the limestone cliffs (Portrush, info centre 028 7082 
3333). The idyllic village of Merthyr Mawr in Bridgend (visitbridgend.co.uk 
<http://www.visitbridgend.co.uk>), South Wales, is home to what was once the 
largest sand dune system in Europe, and was used as backdrop in several scenes 
of Lawrence of Arabia - head to the "big dipper".

Sky dive

The thrill of a sky dive will stay with you for days, making that holiday 
feeling last til next month. Extreme Element has dozens of places left on 
tandem skydives throughout the UK next Saturday and Sunday, from its centres in 
Attleborough in Norfolk, Cirencester, Nottingham and Perranporth in Cornwall 
and all have £25 off at the moment, costing £250pp. The planes drop you from 
10,000-12,000ft, giving you 30 seconds of freefall - probably the most 
exhilarating half a minute of your life. You need a full day for the training, 
waiting for the conditions to be right and then nerve recovery in the pub 
afterwards.

• 0845 862 9900, exelement.co.uk <http://exelement.co.uk>. 

Let your kids take the wheel (Surrey)

One way to really feel you're breaking the rules is to let the children drive 
a car. If you value your vehicle, life or freedom though, the safest option is 
to let them take a spin under controlled conditions in a Mercedes Benz at the 
car company's experience centre in Weybridge, Surrey, which has several race 
tracks. The experience includes tuition by instructors who sit beside them in a 
Mercedes A Class to teach skills such as skid management and dynamic handling. 
Mum and dad can ride in the back, though they usually prefer to watch from the 
sidelines, hands covering their eyes. Height restrictions (1.5m and over) 
rather than age limits apply.

• From £40 for 30 minutes. 0870 400 4000, www2.mercedes-benz.co.uk 
<http://www2.mercedes-benz.co.uk> (click on Mercedes-Benz World).

Ride a toboggan
 Tobogganing at Swadlincote Ski Centre Photograph: PR 
You don't need snow to feel the thrill of speeding like a maniac down a 
toboggan run - there are plenty in the UK featuring carts that are towed up by 
a pulley and released to fly at high speed down a long looping metal slide. 
Several are owned by the same company and have runs of between 650-750m long. 
At the Llandudno ski centre (01492 874 707,llandudnoskislope.co.uk 
<http://llandudnoskislope.co.uk>) in Wales, the run is a whopping 750m long. 
Also available at Chatham ski slope (01634 827 979,chathamskislope.co.uk 
<http://chathamskislope.co.uk>) in Kent, in Plymouth (01752 600 220, 
plymouthskislope.co.uk <http://plymouthskislope.co.uk>) and in Swadlincote 
(01283 217 200,swadlincoteskislope.co.uk <http://swadlincoteskislope.co.uk>). 

Host a house party

It's not too late to persuade your mates to get away for a big fat house party 
in the countryside.Cottages4you.co.uk <http://Cottages4you.co.uk> still has 
availability for a number of big holiday homes for three day rental, starting 
on Friday. Eighteen is a large five-storey Georgian terrace in Bath with a 
terrace garden and summer house (sleeps 11, £1,369); Whitewave in Kilmuir on 
the Isle of Skye, has sea views and is next to an activity centre (sleeps 10, 
£440); and Fruer House in Framlingham, Suffolk a Grade II-listed chapel 
conversion (sleeps 10, £767). Now all you need is a fancy dress theme, a 
signature cocktail and a wannabe DJ.

Get a speed boat (Isle of Wight)

How glamorous to hire your own speedboat and zip off across the Solent, 
mooring up outside the Isle of Wight's most salubrious establishments for a 
glass of bubbly or two, knowing your private skipper is the only one who needs 
to worry about getting you home. Several operators have powerboats for rent 
over the bank holiday, and are happy to tailor-make trips to call at the 
popular Folly Inn on the river Medina for some award-winning lunch, or to pick 
up an ice-cream at one of the Minghella's ice cream outlets (family of film 
director Anthony, they have created 140 zany flavours such as chilli chilli 
chocolate, absinthe or Cold Mountain - named after his film). Evolution Marine (
evolutionmarine.co.uk <http://evolutionmarine.co.uk>) has RIBs for seven from 
£100 per hour including skipper, from Portsmouth or Southhampton. Java Charter 
(07813 089 192,javacharter.co.uk <http://javacharter.co.uk>) rents luxury motor 
cruisers from £95pp for eight hours including skipper, and can do barbecues and 
trips to the Needles.

Attend a Mad Hatter's Tea Party (Shropshire)
 Mad Hatter's tea party Photograph: PR 
The Blists Hill Victorian Town at Ironbridge loses its stern 19th century 
industrial atmosphere over bank holiday Sunday and Monday when it becomes 
Wonderland for the historic village's cast of actors, who play Alice, the Queen 
and Knave of Hearts, Cheshire Cat et al, for a special Alice's Adventures in 
Wonderland event. Visitors who dress in character get a prize, and everyone can 
join in a Mad Hatter's tea party, play croquet and follow a treasure hunt.

• 01952 884 391, ironbridge.org.uk <http://www.ironbridge.org.uk>; adults 
£13.25, children £8.50.

Bungee jump (Sheffield)
 Photograph: Darryl Leniuk/Getty Images 
The ultimate in extreme days out, your what-I-did-at-the-weekend story will 
trump everyone else's if you spend it leaping from a towering platform. Most 
are booked up now but in Sheffield, you can raise money for the city's 
children's hospital with a bungee on Sunday at The Belfry pub (07795 803 970,
eventsheffield.co.uk <http://eventsheffield.co.uk>) in Beighton; you must 
raise/ donate £50 to enter, or £40 if you do it in fancy dress.

• Ring in advance. 

Run away with the circus (Newcastle)

Joining the circus isn't as easy as it used to be, nowadays you need to prove 
you have the skills to make it to the big top. Young wannabe acrobats, jugglers 
and performers can take free workshops in Newcastle next Sunday; there are 
impromptu classes and workshops all day at the Quayside by the Frayed Knot 
circus group, then a more intensive class at the Live Theatre between 4-6pm for 
7-15 year olds (frayedknot.moonfruit.com <http://frayedknot.moonfruit.com>, 
emailinfo@frayedknot.org.uk <mailto:info@frayedknot.org.uk> or call 
07976629408).

• Near York, the Galtres Festival has circus workshops alongside kids 
activities and live acoustic bands including the Bluetones (Sat and Sun, £10 
adults, £3.50 kids 07977 408 376,galtresfestival.org.uk 
<http://www.galtresfestival.org.uk>).

Jump off a cliff (Pembrokeshire)

Deep breath, open your eyes, peer over the edge, step back, deep breath, count 
to 10 ... and finally, when you're ready, jump! Making yourself do something 
scary is a surefire way to end the day on a high. Coasteering combines a few 
scary jumps with easy rope-free rockclimbing through caves and rock arches, 
scrambling along coastal rocks and sea swimming. Preseli Venture in west Wales 
has availability for half-day adventures next weekend in the beautiful 
Pembrokeshire coastal national park, where guides will point out local wildlife 
such as seals and oystercatchers - though being quiet enough to avoid scaring 
them off may prove difficult. You'll be kitted out in wetsuits, helmets, 
neoprene gloves and socks and life-jackets - and despite the cliff jumping, 
it's not too extreme for most people.

• £49 per adult; depart from Mathry, Haverfordwest. 01348 837 709, 
preseliventure.co.uk <http://preseliventure.co.uk>.
 