
Olympic divers are judged on power, agility and the ability to crisply execute 
improbable combinations of somersaults and twists in the couple of seconds it 
takes to travel from the board to the pool below.

Now, a pair of Australian mathematicians have devised a dive of unheard of 
complexity, which includes one-and-a-half somersaults and a record five twists.

Based on their simulations the dive is physically possible – they are now 
seeking a brave candidate prepared to stand on a 10m board and put their 
proposed feat to the test.

Professor Holger Dullin, a mathematician at the University of Sydney and the 
senior author said: “We just need one pair of a determined coach and athlete!”

In competition, dives are rated on their precision, technique, and a clean 
entry into the water. The final score is then multiplied by the dive’s degree 
of difficulty, meaning that a scruffy but ambitious dive can potentially 
outscore a flawlessly performed, but more mundane, choice.

This creates a strong incentive for athletes to attempt increasingly 
complicated dives. “It really is hard to squeeze more complexity into 1.5 
seconds,” said Dullin.

The new dive, described in a paper on ArXiv <https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.06455> 
(a pre-publication repository), relies on a new sequence of body shape changes 
mid-air, designed to convert somersaulting motion into twisting motion and back 
again with the aim of packing in more twists than ever before.

The five-stage dive works as follows: the diver takes off with pure forward 
somersaulting motion. They then drop their left arm to their side, causing them 
to twist. Next, they bring their left arm back up while simultaneously lowering 
their right arm, ramping up their twisting movement. The twisting motion is 
then brought back under control by reversing the two previous steps (right arm 
up and left arm down, then left arm back up). All this is completed within 1.8 
seconds – a shade longer than the average dive time of 1.6 seconds.

At this point, ideally, the diver will also have completed precisely 
one-and-a-half somersaults, leaving them pointing downwards at the water, 
poised to disappear beneath the surface without a splash.

The dive is called the 513XD, following the Fédération Internationale de 
Natation’s (FINA) naming convention. The initial 51 denotes “twisting forward”, 
3 is the number of half-somersaults and X signifies the number of half-twists 
(10=X).

The academics said that the simulations suggest the dive should be possible, 
although the athlete’s timing would need to be incredibly precise.

William Tong, the lead author who is now based at Macquarie University, 
Sydney, said: “Performing the shape change at the incorrect time could still 
speed up the twist [in a suboptimal way], it could slow down the twist, or it 
could even leave the athlete in a state known as the wobbling somersault.”

The biggest challenge, he added, would be in the fastest twisting phase, when 
the athlete would be spinning at about 10 rotations per second. A tiny timing 
error could result in the diver failing to stop twisting before entry and 
potentially performing an inelegant and painful spinning belly-flop.

The research was carried out in collaboration with the New South Wales 
Institute of Sports, whereMatthew Mitcham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/22/tom-daley-matthew-mitcham-diving>
, a retired Australian diver and 2008 Olympic gold medallist, trained. The 
coaches and athletes had expressed an interest, but said it was not clear how 
to train towards the dive – a system of twirling harnesses was one possibility. 
“And with this unknown the risk of injury is also unknown and potentially 
high,” Dullin conceded.

A representative for British diving was also dubious, describing the dive as 
“a bit of a non-starter”.

“They have not in their summary taken into account a huge number of factors, 
they have overly simplified the model,” the spokesman said. “It would have been 
more beneficial to look at current trends to see if an additional twist in 
current dives is possible.”


However, the authors argue that the intricacy of dives in competition has 
ramped up so precipitously that their proposal is plausible.

The most complex dive attempted at the Beijing Olympics (a reverse 
two-and-a-half somersaults with two-and-a-half twists) had a degree of 
difficulty rated at 3.8. Today, FINA, the diving world governing body,lists the 
most difficult dive <http://diving.about.com/od/rules/a/newFINADD.htm> as a 
reverse four-and-a-half somersaults in the pike position, rated at 4.8.

The proposed dive does not have a FINA rating – these are assigned when a dive 
is performed in competition – but the authors predict that it would score a 
minimum of 4.7, and possibly higher.

Dullin is not a biomechanics expert and his primary scientific interest is in 
the mathematical description of rotations, vibrations and so on – typically 
relating to molecules on the quantum scale, rather than of human athletes.

“But watching what is currently already possible at the world class diving 
stage, which would not have been considered possible 20 years ago, I believe 
that somebody will be able to perform this dive in the near future,” he said.
 