
Warren Buffett <https://www.theguardian.com/business/warrenbuffett>, the 
world-famous philanthropist and billionaire head of the investment firm 
Berkshire Hathaway, has been diagnosed with stage one prostate cancer, the 
company announced late Tuesday.

A letter was posted from Buffett, 81, on the Berkshire website notifying 
shareholders of his condition. In itBuffett describes the cancer 
<http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/news/APR1712.pdf> as "not remotely 
life-threatening".

"This is to let you know that I have been diagnosed with stage I prostate 
cancer," the letter begins. "The good news is that I've been told by my doctors 
that my condition is not remotely life-threatening or even debilitating in any 
meaningful way. I received my diagnosis last Wednesday. I then had a CAT scan 
and a bone scan on Thursday, followed by an MRI today. These tests showed no 
incidence of cancer elsewhere in my body."

The letter goes on to describe a two-month treatment of "daily radiation" to 
begin this summer.

"I feel great – as if I were in my normal excellent health – and my energy 
level is 100 percent," Buffett writes. "I discovered the cancer because my PSA 
level (an indicator my doctors had regularly checked for many years) recently 
jumped beyond its normal elevation and a biopsy seemed warranted. I will let 
shareholders know immediately should my health situation change. Eventually, of 
course, it will; but I believe that day is a long way off."

Despite vague pressure from shareholders, Buffett has not publicly named a 
successor to replace him at the helm of the Nebraska-based Berkshire, which 
posted 2011 revenues of $143bn. A-class shares of Berkshire closed up 1.5 
points on Tuesday.

With a fortune estimated in the tens of billions, Buffett is one of the 
world's richest men and perhaps the most recognizable name in the history of 
finance. His investments run the gamut from insurance to railroads to 
restaurants. He recently purchased the Omaha World-Herald, his hometown 
newspaper.

His name has also become central to the 2012 presidential election campaign as 
Barack Obama pushes for an increase in tax for the highest earners. It is 
dubbed the Buffett rule because, Obama says, it was inspired by Buffett's 
comment that it is unfair that he pays less tax than his secretary.
 