
I noted an interesting item in the Daily Mail’s “clarifications and corrections
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/article-3835359/Clarifications-corrections.html>
” column on Thursday. It stated:

“An article on July 30 described the late IRA leader Joe McCann as a 
‘notorious killer’. In fact, he was never arrested for or charged with such an 
offence. We are happy to set the record straight.”

So I looked back to the Mail’s issue of 30 July to read the original story, 
which concerned a former paratrooper, identified as Soldier C, who is facing 
prosecution for the shooting McCann to death in 1972.

McCann, a member of the Official IRA, was unarmed and shot in the back. He was 
improperly described as a killer.

That killer reference has now been removed from the online version of the story
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3715451/A-bloody-outrage-decorated-Para-facing-prosecution-44-years-shooting-dead-IRA-killer-blood-soaked-men-terror-know-ll-never-face-justice-thanks-Blair-s-squalid-peace-deal.html>
, which carries a note at the foot of the article in similar terms to the one 
published in the newspaper’s print edition.


I note from the Facebook page of the Pat Finucane Centre 
<https://www.facebook.com/patfinucane.centre/> that the Mail’s climbdown 
followed complaints from McCann’s family and involved “several weeks of to-ing 
and fro-ing.”

That doesn’t surprise me because the Mail is renowned for its desire to avoid 
correcting or apologising. Although the paper doesn’t say sorry, the brief 
paragraph is about as close as it ever gets to doing so.

But there is another issue here, and that is the unsung influence of the 
existence of the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso).

My hunch is that the Mail decided to bow to the family’s will because it did 
not want to face what surely would have been a negative ruling by the regulator.

There wasn’t a scintilla of evidence to support its description of McCann as a 
killer. It was a gross factual inaccuracy and therefore very upsetting to his 
surviving family.

It should not have required much to-ing and fro-ing for the Mail to have done 
the right thing, although I can well imagine what happened. After the initial 
complaint, the paper would have stood by its story.

Only when that stock defence was no longer tenable did it realise it would 
need to agree terms. Although that isn’t necessarily in the spirit of press 
regulation, it says much for its desire to avoid censure byIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> that it acceded to the family’s 
request.

In such circumstances, as the Pat Finuncane Centre remarked: “It’s not often 
that a bereaved Irish family takes on one of the mightiest of the British press 
corporations and wins.” Ipso was their silent helper.
 