
It's three years to the month since John Szarkowski died 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2007/jul/11/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>: 
a good time to reappraise his role as a defining figure in photography, both in 
establishing it as an art form and in influencing the public's perception. 
Szarkowski was a good photographer, a great critic and an extraordinary 
curator. One could argue that he was the single most important force in 
American post-war photography.

Like all good critics and curators, Szarkowski was both visionary and 
catalyst. When he succeededthe esteemed photographer Edward Steichen 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAPsteichen.htm> as director of the 
Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1962, he was just 36, and must have been 
acutely aware of the long shadow cast by his predecessor. Steichen had curated 
the monumental group exhibition, The Family of Man, at Moma in 1955, which he 
described as 'the culmination of his career". Featuring 503 images by 273 
photographers, famous and unknown, it had aimed to show the universality of 
human experience: death, love, childhood. The show had drawn huge crowds to the 
gallery and then toured the world, attracting an estimated 9 million viewers.

It was, as Steichen had no doubt intended, a hard act to follow. "We were 
different people", Szarkowski later said, "with different talents, characters, 
limitations, histories, problems and axes to grind. We held the same job at 
very different times, which means that it was not really the same job."

More revealingly, Szarkowski also said that Steichen and his predecessor, 
Beaumont Newhall 
<http://www.mocp.org/collections/permanent/newhall_beaumont.php>, "consciously 
or otherwise, felt more compelled than I to be advocates for photography, 
whereas I – largely because of their work – could assume a more analytic, less 
apostolic attitude." That difference in approach would prove to be a crucial 
one, and it underpinned a new photographic aesthetic that continues to shape 
our view of the world to this day.

When Szarkowski took over at Moma, there was not a single commercial gallery 
exhibiting photography in New York and, despite Steichen and Newhall's 
pioneering work, the form had still not been accepted by most curators or 
critics. Szarkowski changed all that. He was the right person in the right 
place at the right time: a forward thinker who was given control of a major art 
institution at a moment when his democratic vision chimed with the rapidly 
changing cultural tastes of the time.
 John Szarkowski, curator of photography at the Museum of Modern Art in New 
York. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe 
Szarkowski insisted on the democracy of the image, whether it be a formally 
composedAnsel Adams <http://www.anseladams.com/> landscape, a snatched shot 
that caught the frenetic cut-and-thrust of a modern city or a vernacular 
subject like a road sign or a parking lot."A skillful photographer can 
photograph anything well," he once insisted 
<http://www.photoquotes.com/printableshowquotes.aspx?id=75>.

In his still-challenging book, The Photographer's Eye (1964) 
<http://www.jnevins.com/szarkowskireading.htm>, Szarkowski included snapshots 
alongside images by great photographers, and argued – brilliantly – that 
photography differed from any other art form because its history had been "less 
a journey than a growth". "Its movement has not been linear and consecutive but 
centrifugal," he suggested. "Photography, and our understanding of it, has 
spread from a centre; it has, by infusion, penetrated our consciousness. Like 
an organism, photography was born whole. It is in our progressive discovery of 
it that its history lies."

As a writer, Szarkowski was innovative; as a curator, he was revolutionary. In 
1967, during the so-called Summer of Love, he curated a show called New 
Documents at Moma. It featured the work of three relatively unknown 
photographers: Diane Arbus, Lee Friedlander and Garry Winogrand, and was, in 
its visceral way, as out of step with the times as the urban, edgy, atonal 
music of the Velvet Underground. It caused a stir. Arbus's images were 
transgressive in both their form and content: harsh black and white shots of 
so-called freaks, outsiders and misfits. Friedlander and Winogrand, in their 
different ways, shot on the streets of New York, producing snatched images of 
the city's everyday momentum that often appeared to be casual, even random – 
documentary photography, but not as it was then known or understood.

In his introduction to New Documents, Szarkowski deftly defined the shift in 
emphasis that the work represented and the attitude that unified the three 
photographers. "In the past decade," he wrote, "a new generation of 
photographers has directed the documentary approach toward more personal ends. 
Their aim has been not to reform life, but to know it."

At Moma, Szarkowski also hosted challenging shows by pioneering European 
photographers like Lartigue, Brassai and Cartier-Bresson, and, in 1969, 
purchased most of Eugene Atget's archive for the museum. The Lartigue show, 
which consisted of photographs he had taken as a child, was controversial and 
critically lambasted. The controversy was low-key, though, compared to the 
tidal wave of outrage that greeted Szarkowski's showing of the work ofa 
then-unknown photographer from Tennessee called William Eggelston, in 1976 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2004/jul/25/photography1>.

Entitled William Eggleston's Guide, it was the first show of colour 
photography at Moma, a decision that incensed the critics almost as much as the 
supposedly banal and vulgar subject matter. When I once asked Eggleston about 
the reaction to the show, he said, It didn't surprise or offend me. Didn't 
impinge on me at all". The loudest critical voice belonged to Hilton Kramer of 
the New York Times, who famously wrote:"Mr. Szarkowski throws all caution to 
the winds and speaks of Mr. Eggleston's pictures as 'perfect'. Perfect? 
Perfectly banal, perhaps. Perfectly boring, certainly." 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/09/arts/09szarkowski.html>

As time has shown, Kramer was wrong and Szarkowski – not for the first time – 
was right. Hisintroduction to the book of the exhibition 
<http://www.egglestontrust.com/guide_intro.html> remains one of the great 
pieces of writing on modern photography. In retrospect, though, Szarkowski's 
greatest gift was not his brilliant critical mind, nor his ability to help 
define what is now accepted as a canon of great photography, but his 
willingness to take risks with his own reputation. By the time he died, on 7 
July 2007, aged 81, Szarkowski had returned to his first love, the taking of 
photographs. He was described by an obituary writer as "the man who taught 
America how to look at photographs." It still does not seem too extravagant a 
claim.

Now see this

Nazraeli Press  <http://www.nazraeli.com/>specialises in producing beautiful 
limited edition art photography books.Retrados Pintado is no exception 
<http://www.amazon.com/Retratos-Pintado-Martin-Parr/dp/1590052676>. The book 
collects images of hand-painted portraits of the dead that appear on the walls 
of houses throughout north-east Brazil. Here, recently expired relatives take 
on the appearance of contemporary saints. Collected by Titus Reidl and edited 
by Martin Parr, the book is available from Amazon and selected photography book 
shops. At £40, it's costly, but beautiful.
 