
It is dusk when my friend Lee and I descend the hill into Stoke Gabriel 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoke_Gabriel>. The icy skin on top of the 
puddles is reforming, our walking boots are stained with clay and the village 
wassail is already under way. You can drive to the wassail if you like, but 
Stoke Gabriel is not a village whose helter-skelter layout was planned with 
parking in mind. Besides, I prefer the walking approach: it adds to the Merrie 
England ambience but, more than that, it offers the unique and special warmth 
of walking directly into a lively gathering of strangers after a trek through a 
long stretch of deserted countryside, stripped bare at winter’s height. We’ve 
travelled almost six miles to get here: not a vast distance but, in a 
frost-nibbled and undulating South Hams, enough to leave you rosy-cheeked, a 
little giddy and thirsty for a pint of ale – or, as is more apt in a gathering 
such as this one, cider.

 The hills cuddle protectively close to each other here in the Dart Valley: 
big pillowy walls of green, strewn with craggy, waterlogged paths and 
lichen-blotched twigs. I’m still fresh to this terrain – a wide-eyed, 
10-month-old bearded Devon baby – but I’m getting to know it quickly, 
voraciously. Back in my previous home county, Norfolk, I once had a neighbour 
who spoke longingly of one day “living in a house on a hill”. It was quite a 
big deal to him, since they only have about six of them there. I lived on what 
I thought was a hill, but now realise was merely a tussock with ideas above its 
station. People who visited me from Devon said they liked the place, but asked 
how I coped with the flatness. I didn’t understand. It was just a topographical 
feature, surely, not a malady? But now I sort of get it. If Raymond Inmon’s 
belief that “angels whisper to a man when he goes for a walk” is true, then 
they seem to whisper from especially magical, hidden places when you go for a 
walk among hills. Being accustomed to that magic, then seeing it steamrollered 
and rendered ostensibly more prosaic, must be a shock.

 These are some of the year’s toughest weeks in the Devon countryside. A few 
daffodils are popping up near my house, but they’re just expendable tester 
daffodils, sent out on suicide missions. They won’t make it through to spring. 
Winter, already long, is far from over. At this point, climbing a hill becomes 
an even more vital way to lift the spirit: a top-ranking rustic winter 
endorphin-booster, along with sniffing woodsmoke, listening to old folk songs 
about hares and singing to apple trees.

 Two hills in the countryside around Totnes have caught my fancy recently: 
Hood Ball hill andYarner Beacon 
<http://www.hill-bagging.co.uk/mountaindetails.php?rf=17856>. I knew nothing 
about either, but each called to me every time I drove past them. They didn’t 
say much more than: “I’m a modest yet unusually steep hill, top-dressed with a 
copse, upon which it would be really good fun to listen to The Battle Of 
Evermore by Led Zeppelin,” but it was enough. It was a clear day when I climbed 
the latter. I could see all the way to the coast and, in the low sun at the 
top, I felt a touch of a particular kind of lofty weirdness that, when a person 
tries to express it in words in a more commonplace setting, will tend to lead 
to them being called a big hippie prat or writing a really good series of 
spooky novels aimed the young adult fiction market. Probably both, in fact.

 “Yarner Beacon?” said my friend Nick from Buckfastleigh, who drives a van 
with “Unicorn Ambulance” written on it. “They called it the Dragon’s Hoof. My 
mate said it’s on a ley line. Or is it the Dragon’s Heart? I’m not sure. I 
prefer the Dragon’s Hoof, so let’s say it’s called that.” I searched online but 
could find no mention of the Dragon’s Hoof or Dragon’s Heart, though I did learn
 from a shamanism website 
<http://www.azizshamanism.com/dragon-faery-magick-ley-lines-temples-atlantis-glastonbury-dartington/>
 that Hood Ball hill was the centre of the Atlantean Temple of the Moon and 
that the surrounding area was “where people come to face their shadow”.

 Somehow, this made me love the Dragon’s Hoof all the more: the idea that some 
folk who lived in the area had decided to give it their own name, but that it 
wasn’t yet a matter of official electronic record. This is how folklore is 
supposed to work. It is the “unwritten history of the people”, which “exists in 
the liminal space between history and fiction”. I learned this a couple of 
months ago from folklore expert Steve Patterson, on the excellent course I 
attended atthe Museum of Witchcraft in Boscastle 
<http://www.museumofwitchcraft.com/>, hosted by him and the museum’s director, 
Simon Costin. Other highlights included finding out that an old Cornish cure 
for a sore throat was “to bite a tooth out of a human skull and put your right 
stocking on last”, and becoming acquainted with the legend of the originator of 
the harvest festival, Morwenstow vicar Robert Hawker, who dressed up as a 
mermaid in church and invited his nine cats to sermons, later excommunicating 
one of them for “mousing on Sundays”.
 Yarner Beacon, near Totnes in Devon. Photograph: Tom Cox/Guardian 
Out of Costin and Patterson’s storytelling and archive footage of local 
customs also emerged some important, timeless ideas about community, and a 
different, more fundamental concept of the English calendar to the commercially 
led one we’ve become used to, far more rooted in nature, survival and 
companionship.

 Attending a festival such as the Stoke Gabriel wassail – of which you’ll find 
little evidence on the internet – you get a further sense of this. Wassailing 
has pagan connotations, but there’s no concrete evidence of the word wassail – 
meaning “good health” – existing prior to the middle ages. It traditionally 
takes place on 17 January – Twelfth Night, if you go by the old, pre-1752 
Christian calendar – and involves blessing apple trees by splashing cider over 
their roots and singing to them. Organised well, and with an enthusiastic 
crowd, like Stoke Gabriel’s, it can feel akin to a late, naturalistic Christmas 
for outdoorsy people: a glowing way to banish the winter demons that, for all 
its feel-good perks, an oversized meal and a repeat viewing of It’s a Wonderful 
Life doesn’t quite match up to.

“Sounds very Wicker Man!” someone who lives in a city will nearly always say 
to me after I go to an event like this and describe it to them. Which I suppose 
it is, but only in the sense that The Wicker Man takes place in a very pretty 
part of the world, close to the sea, with an orchard, and has quite a bit of 
good singing in it. Oh, fine, all right, so I admit it: the Stoke Gabriel 
wassailers did put a virgin in a tree at one point, but it all appeared quite 
harmless, and the virgin seemed totally cool about it.

 The Stoke Gabriel event is a bigger wassail than the one I attended at 
Kenninghall in Norfolk a few years ago, boasting its own eight-page programme, 
complete with an advert for a local estate agent, presumably included just in 
case anyone pissed up on strong organic scrumpy gets carried away and slaps 
down a deposit on a £500,000 semi overlooking the mill pool at the centre of 
the village.

Standing amid several dozen people harmonising in the steep orchard, while 
lanterns glow around you, you feel part of something far more soulful than a 
novelty nod to a distant past: that we genuinely need stuff like this and, if 
civilisation collapsed, we’d need it more still. I roll the torch I’ve brought 
out with me around in my hands and look back towards the hills. They are 
impossibly dark. High on the atmosphere and local ale, I table to Lee the idea 
of a return walk the way we came, but he’s hungry and keen to go to Totnes for 
a kebab, and our friend Susie is driving home in our direction. The sky is lit 
up with fireworks but, as in The Battle Of Evermore, it is filled with good and 
bad. I’ve forgotten, for a second, that it is a winter night in January: a time 
when there’s never more potential for mishap and isolation in rural Devon, and 
when the daytime magic of the hills can easily be reversed. Susie opens the car 
door and we get in.

Tom Cox’s latest book, The Good, the Bad and the Furry is published by Little 
Brown 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/genres/nature-environment/good-the-bad-and-the-furry.html>
. Follow Tom on Twitter @cox_tom <http://www.twitter.com/@cox_tom>.
 