
As the former White House ethics counsels for Presidents Bush and Obama, we 
were involved in the submission of many presidential nominations to theUS Senate
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-senate> for confirmation. We and 
others worked hard to make sure those nominees’ financial disclosure reports 
and ethics agreements were finalized and certified by the Office of Government 
Ethics (OGE)before their hearings, so that the Senate and thus the public could 
explore any conflicts of interest and how they were addressed.

This week’s hearings for the president-elect’s cabinet are flouting that 
practice, and for that reason, should be postponed.

This point was made clear by Senator Mitch McConnell in a 12 February 2009, 
letter to the then majority leader Harry Reid, insisting that the “The Office 
of Government Ethics letter [be] complete and submitted to the committee in 
time for review and prior to a committee hearing”.

McConnell’s point was important. Short-changing the ethics review process in 
Congress jeopardizes nominees’ ability to do their jobs if confirmed. The 
Senate, and all of us, need to know if nominees will, for example, sell 
investments that create conflicts. If not, will they recuse themselves from 
certain issues? Will they have so many recusals that they cannot reasonably 
perform their duties, or will they be running the constant risk of violating 
the anti-conflicts laws? Those bear criminal penalties, so the danger is a 
serious one.

Now, in 2017, with more billionaires than ever before being nominated for top 
jobs in theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>, this argument for 
thorough review of financial disclosure and ethics agreements is more 
compelling than ever.

Donald Trump will violate the US constitution on inauguration day | Laurence H 
Tribe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>
To provide some context, the first step in the ethics review process requires 
the nominee to submit detailed information on a public financial disclosure 
report. This is known as the OGE-278, and includes nominees’ employment, 
outside activities and agreements, as well as financial assets and income 
information for them, their spouse and dependent children.

This information is then subject to a thorough review by the ethics official 
for the agency the nominee is joining and by OGE. This review ensures that the 
OGE-278 contains all necessary information legally required to be disclosed for 
the purpose of identifying any potential conflicts of interest.

Once any potential conflicts of interest are identified, the nominee 
memorializes and commits to certain undertakings to resolve conflicts in a 
written ethics agreement. It is signed by the nominee and agreed to by the 
agency ethics official and OGE. These ethics undertakings may include 
divestment, recusal or other measures deemed necessary to resolve conflicts of 
interest.

The completed OGE-278 and ethics agreement become the basis upon which the 
agency ethics official and OGE can properly certify the report for completeness 
and to represent that the nominee has no unresolvable conflicts of interest 
prior to the scheduled Senate confirmation hearing. The more extensive and 
complicated a nominee’s financial holdings and assets, the more time and 
attention is necessarily required to address any potential ethical issues.

Completion of the ethics review process prior to Senate confirmation hearings 
ensures that all parties have a detailed understanding of the nominee’s 
commitments prior to taking office, offers full transparency to the Senate, and 
mitigates the opportunity for undue influence on the independent ethics review 
process.

Some of President-elect Trump’s nominees have completed this process, but many 
have not.

For example, as of now, no such ethics certification or representation exists 
for Betsy DeVos, President-elect Trump’s nominee for secretary of education. 
While a billionaire should not be held to any higher ethical standard than 
other nominees, she should not be (nor should she want to be) held to lower 
ethical standards.

DeVos likely has potential conflicts of interest with respect to education. She
reportedly 
<http://www.politico.com/tipsheets/morning-education/2016/12/will-shareholders-shine-a-light-on-virtual-charter-217883>
 invested in K12 Inc, which manages public for-profit online charter schools, 
and indirectly invested in an online student lending firm. In 2011, the New 
York Timeschronicled 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/13/education/online-schools-score-better-on-wall-street-than-in-classrooms.html>
 the failings of one of the schools managed by K12 Inc, which had nearly 60% of 
its students behind grade level in math and 50% behind in reading. Whether and 
to what extent DeVos and/or her husband still invests in these companies is 
significant for conflicts of interest purposes.

Donald Trump didn't save the ethics committee. You did | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/donald-trump-ethics-committee-you-did>
However, there is no public disclosure of these or other any investments in 
the information included in her Senate nomination paperwork that has been made 
publicly available. To the contrary, in the public portion of her Senate 
paperwork, she did not provide detailed information in response to a request 
for information regarding business relationships, dealings or financial 
transactions that would constitute a potential conflict of interest.

In lieu of doing so, she represents that she will consult with the OGE and the 
agency ethics office to identify potential conflicts of interest and to resolve 
them in accordance with the terms of an ethics agreement that she will enter 
into but that apparently has not yet entered into.

The notion that DeVos will be questioned before entering into an ethics 
agreement and disclosing it along with her financial holdings is absurd. 
Senators, and all of us, cannot address these and other conflicts without that 
information. We cannot help but wonder if the fact that she has been a major 
campaign contributor has led to the unseemly rush to give her a premature 
hearing. She and her spouse arereported 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/overview/topindivs.php?cycle=2016> by OpenSecrets 
to have made $2.7m in donations in the 2016 election cycle, and to have 
contributed more than $7.7m to federal candidates, committees and parties since 
1990.

At this point in 2009, the Obama administration had ensured that its cabinet 
nominees completed their nomination paperwork, including an OGE-certified 278 
and a signed ethics agreement, at least three days in advance of confirmation 
hearings (and for many over a week in advance). This is the standard to which 
each new administration should be held if they want to give credibility to the 
Senate advice and consent process.

So far, most of Trump’s nominees fail this test. To his credit, Rex Tillerson, 
the president-elect’s nominee for secretary of state, who has an extensive and 
complicated financial portfolio, completed his paperwork on 3 January in 
anticipation of a confirmation hearing date of 11 January. If he can do it, the 
others, including DeVos and other cabinet nominees, can as well.

Don’t blame the delay on OGE. As noted in reporting by Politico and MSNBC, the 
Trump transition team failed to engage with OGE in a timely fashion 
notwithstanding extensive efforts on the part of OGE to reach out to the 
transition team. We appreciate President-elect Trump’s desire to get his 
leadership team in place as quickly as possible, but it is imperative that OGE 
be part of that process.

The tone of ethical leadership and conduct is set at the top. The failure of 
Trump as president-elect to address the conflicts of interest and 
constitutional problems deriving from his own business interests is a serious 
problem.

Last week, there was a failed attempt by some congressional Republicans to gut 
the Office of Congressional Ethics (President-elect Trump rightly dressed them 
down for that – on Twitter of course – and they quickly backed down). This week 
the serious and independent work of the Office of Government Ethics appears to 
be in jeopardy unless the Senate slows down and insists that each nominee take 
both financial disclosure and ethics agreements seriously.

To preserve the integrity of the ethics review process, we urge Senate 
leadership to postpone any confirmation hearing unless the nominee’s financial 
disclosure reports and ethics agreements are finalized in advance.

At a minimum, leadership should guarantee that hearings will be reconvened 
once this paperwork is submitted, so all members have the full opportunity to 
examine nominees in person on ethics issues before a committee vote. Only by 
taking such steps can the senate truly fulfill its constitutional duty to 
advise and consent.
 