
I wrote The Sex Lives of English Women: Intimate Questions and Unexpected 
Answers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/love-sex/oral-history-that-s-the-least-of-it-a7123191.html>
 because I wanted to know what being a woman was like for other women in the 
early 21st century. I wanted to know, what is it like to be an old woman who 
grew up during wartime? What does it feel like to be a Muslim and wear a veil – 
did that feel oppressive, or free and honouring? What was it like if you didn’t 
fit into straightforward ideas of beauty? What was it like to never have sex, 
or masturbate? What was it like to have slept with thousands of men? What was 
it like to be a nun? What was really going on with English women?

I could have asked my friends, but like most people, the majority of my 
friends are similar to me. I had no way of really understanding what English 
women wanted and felt and knew. There was no end of places to hear how women 
supposedly wanted to look, behave, talk and present themselves, taking in every 
cliche: the perfect princess, the sassy, trendy student, the self-possessed 
career woman, the capable mother.Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/society> has never been shy of telling women 
what to do and how to be; the dictates are long, detailed and have been around 
since Eve (who was told quite clearly not to eat that apple).

My intention was simple; I wanted to give women a voice, because I don’t think 
there is much uncensored, publicly available space where women can speak 
freely. I wanted to write a book in which women weren’t subjected to cod 
psychology, but instead just spoke, without anyone assessing them or greatly 
manipulating their portrayal. Rather like a circle of people in which everyone 
talked in depth about their experience of womanhood. But I needed it to be a 
circle in which everyone came from different backgrounds – racial, religious, 
social and sexual.

I interviewed 27 women aged between 19 and 94 from all over the country, and 
24 of them gave me permission to publish their chapters. From the outset, I had 
a few questions in mind that I had to ask all of them: what’s it like to be a 
woman? Are you sexually fulfilled? What are your sexual fantasies? Often my 
questions were jettisoned: the women began to talk and the interviews 
unspooled, led by the interviewee. And I followed them.

I didn’t know what any of the interviewees were going to say and I was often 
surprised, shocked, moved, amused, curious. Each of them was unique in their 
sexual history, experience and desires. I hadn’t expected so much variety.

The resultant book was an eye-opener for me, not just in terms of sexual 
knowledge but in terms of the depth and beauty that women have. I learned how 
deeply their sexuality affects women, and how vulnerable it can make them – and 
how through our sexuality, our common humanity is revealed.

Readers and reviewers have been fascinated, appalled, disgusted, delighted, 
shocked, enraged, politicised and inspired. There have been strong reactions to 
my book – but female sexuality always draws strong reactions. The most common 
response is about the great variety in the interviews and how different each 
woman is. Readers have said to me that they feel a great sexual freedom after 
reading the book, that what they had thought was unusual in their own sexuality 
was actually OK and acceptable. Many of the first female readers, in 
particular, said it gave them more self-esteem and self-acceptance, which was 
great to hear – and that they have found a new, and greater, joy in sex.

Extract

I wanted to be a woman when I was getting married. But I thought it would go 
away. I thought it would just wear off and I’d be normal like everyone else. I 
was completely wrong. It got more intense. I couldn’t get rid of this thing out 
of my head. Whatever I was doing it was in my head. I was washing up, I was 
thinking about becoming a woman. When I was in the bath, I was thinking about 
it. I was eating dinner, I was thinking about it. I was at work, I was thinking 
about it. It was what was in my head all the time.

I didn’t know if having sex would solve it because I’d never had sex before. 
We were both virgins when we got married. I had sex when I was married. Many 
times. Didn’t enjoy it, though, it was a chore. Because she wanted it. I never 
wanted it. I wanted to be penetrated but I didn’t have a vagina. My body felt 
all wrong. I hated the old penis. I hated it. I hated the sight of it, the look 
of it, the feel of it. Just hated it. Because it’s unnatural. What woman would 
want to have a penis? I wanted to have sex as a woman. Yeah. But I didn’t have 
a vagina. Very frustrating. Like someone in a wheelchair who wants to walk but 
their body won’t let them. And I wanted to have the child. I’ve always been 
jealous of pregnant women. So I did the next best thing. Don’t know why, to be 
honest, I had so many kids!

They say ‘trapped in the wrong body’. That’s a very true way of putting it. I 
was never gay. I had a day or two thinking I’ll try and be camp, and it just 
wasn’t me. I’m not at all camp. I’m common! You’d never see me acting in a camp 
way.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> don’t! What woman 
acts in a camp way? No one. Gay men do. No woman would act like that, it would 
look ridiculous.

More about the book

... good for a giggle is the chirpy “Guide Leader” who, at the age of 68, 
talks enthusiastically of having “organisms”, and the 94-year-old who describes 
the genuinely jawdropping amounts of casual sex she had by the side of the road 
when she was a land girl.

More seriously, the many stories of sexual abuse show how profoundly an early 
negative experience can affect a woman for the rest of her life. And not only 
in the extreme cases, such as that of Deborah, 41, who was abused by her father 
throughout her teenage years and has latterly become “asexual”. Other abuses 
were equally formative: one of the quietest and saddest stories is that of a 
woman who was touched by a male babysitter as a child and later found that her 
sexuality was “a bud that never opened”. But there are positive stories, too, 
about people who have recovered from early trauma or, in the case of “Healer” 
Gwyn, 49, from London, helped others to recover through massage.

As long as you’re not after any kind of higher purpose, there is no lack of 
colour in this book.– Alice O’Keeffe

Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/22/sex-lives-english-women-wendy-jones-review>

Buy the book

The Sex Lives of English Women is published by Serpent’s Tale at £9.99 and is 
available from the Guardian Bookshop for £7.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-sex-lives-of-english-women.html>.
 