
West Indies drove inexorably to their anticipated win in the Prudential Cup 
final by 92 runs at Lord's on Saturday. There can be no question that they are 
world champions of cricket.

In most fortunately fine weather and before a crowd passionately and 
contrastingly partisan, the result was shaped by the harsh realities of 
over-limit cricket. England resisted: they did all the things they do best as 
gallantly and as well as they could do them. They lost because West Indies were 
not merely equipped, but overequipped to win an over-limit match: and while 
they never deviated from the strict method by which such an operation is 
carried out, they managed it with immense elan. At its simplest, they scored 
their runs at a rate England would never be able to match against their bowling.

Quite apart from ensuring that they won, in order to save enough time to get 
through their overs before nightfall Holding bowled often from a half-length 
run, and they employed the slow spin of Richards, secure in the knowledge they 
could close the game with pace whenever they wished.

When Brearley won the toss he asked West Indies to bat: it it had been Lloyd's 
choice he would have put England in. The morning was slightly humid: perhaps 
there was a trace of greenness in the pitch. Above all England knew that this 
was their chance and they threw in the sum of their merits - seam bowling, high 
class fieldings, fine spirit and savage tenacity.

First Randall, coming in from mid-wicket, hit the stumps with an under-arm 
throw to run out Greenidge. Then Hendrick splendidly caught Haynes low at 
second slip and, recalled on Brearley's hunch, bowled Kallicharran behind his 
legs.

Now at 59 for three, the issue was in the balance. Richards was mixing 
handsome strokes with spasms of deep doubt. Lloyd, on the other hand, was 
middling the ball in the fashion which usually prioritises one of his longer 
innings. Yet it was he who went; fractionally mistiming Old in a drive which 
the bowler scooped up close to the ground. That was 99 for four and England had 
made themselves a positive, winning chance.

It was swept away by Richards and King. The tone was set by King. He announced 
his intention by driving Botham regally through the covers for four and 
continued to hit with joyous freedom, Richards, with increasing power and some 
savage hits to leg, matched him.

The English fieldsmen chased, dived and sprawled to keep the score within 
bounds. Decisively, though, they were a bowler short. In the absence of the 
injured WIllis, Brearley attempted to fill the fifth bowling place by a shuffle 
of Boycott, Gooch and Larkins. All three did their utmost but they are only 
stop gap bowlers at county level: here they were simply not good enough. Their 
divided dozen overs cost 88 runs.

In the afternoon the match was settled - with an almost pagan flourish. King 
and Richards (six sixes and 21 fours between them) created a joyous carnival of 
strokes; while under the grandstand balcony their supporters celebrated, can 
rattling, whistling, drumming, singing and dancing.

When King at length skied Edmonds to deep square leg where Randall happily 
took the catch, the fifth wicket partnership had put on 139 from 21 overs. 
Richards continued his jaunty way; flicking, cutting, sweeping; from time to 
time hooking fiercely. No one could stay with him. But he contrived another 48 
runs before he ran out of overs at 286 for nine, and ended the innings with a 
six to square leg at 286 for nine. He bowled thriftily, took a good catch and 
was, obviously, the man of the match.

England's start against the redoubtable West Indian fast bowlers did them much 
credit. The wicket was true and the West Indians did not exploit the bouncer. 
Impressively, though, Boycott (wearing a helmet for the first time) and 
Brearley first, calmly and efficiently, played themselves in, and then began to 
make fluent strokes.

An asking rate of 4.75 was a taxing one; but they set themselves gamely 
towards it. Brearley, with no hint of the anxiety that has inhibited his 
batting for the past couple of years, drove and hooked confidently. Boycott was 
characteristically efficient as of old and, all at once, England were in health.

There was, though, no such flaw in the West Indian attack as England's triple 
hybrid, "fifth" bowler. Lloyd kept two or three slips and gully for some time; 
when he moved on to defence he did all that was necessary; keeping England's 
batsmen so far behind a winning scoring rate than the issue was never in doubt.

The opening pair made 129 in 38 overs; highly capable but not fast enough. It 
could hardly be seen as a sound basis for an assault on the total they needed. 
In fact it proved not a beginning but an end. Brearley was caught at deep 
square leg, hooking Holding. Soon Boycott drove the same bowler to Kallicharran 
at mid wicket. By now, though, the asking rate was seven an over.

Good, especially, and Randall stirred the crowd with some bold strokes which 
took the score to 183 before the innings disappeared like names wiped from a 
blackboard. Randall was bowled by Croft; the towering Garner took five wickets 
for four runs in 11 balls and the last eight went down in four overs for 11 
runs.

England, like too many resistors before them, were destroyed by the 
stranglehold of the over-limit game. West Indies are at the moment the 
strongest side in the world. Whether the issue is disputed over one, three or 
five days, they have all the talents they need. Soon, perhaps, the balance of 
power will chance. For the moment their supremacy is unchallenged.
 