
Franny and Zooey is a fascinating book, but after living with it for a few 
weeks, I’m not sure I’d recommend it to anyone looking for an introduction to 
JG Salinger. Or even to anyone wondering what to pick up after A Catcher in the 
Rye.

I tried to highlight a few of the book’s peculiarities last week, and a 
fascinating discussion below the line has brought out a few more. One of the 
hardest to get around remains the strange shape of the book. Its two connected, 
but not quite complementary, stories don’t sit easily with many readers.Deadgod 
observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/19/is-jd-salingers-franny-and-zooey-posturing-or-profound#comment-79405680>
:

“I think the two pieces are put together poorly because, partly, of their 
unlike texture: Franny, to me, is coherent and tight – each piece following 
from and leading into the ones before and after … Zooey is the self-indulgently 
unrealistic thing many have complained of.”

Deadgod also put forward the intriguing idea of quietly putting Zooey “on an 
open source footing” and adding Franny to the collection known in the US as 
Nine Stories (it’s For Esme With Love and Squalor in the UK), and making a new 
book: Ten Stories.

I’d be loth to let Zooey go, but I understand Deadgod’s logic. Franny, with 
its tight, tense narrative and satisfying resolution wouldn’t feel out of place 
alongside other Salinger stories like A Perfect Day for Bananafish and Just 
Before the War With the Eskimos.

Looking at the books as a series (as Salinger clearly did), it makes sense to 
start with the earlier Glass stories. The astonishing A Perfect Day for 
Bananafish, and the insight it gives into the character and demise of Seymour 
Glass throws everything that follows into stark relief. Indeed, it seems so 
intimately bound up in the narrative of both Franny and Zooey that it 
astonished me to learn that it was originally published in the New Yorker (in 
1948) nearly 10 years before Zooey came along (in 1957).

Elsewhere, tiny details like the chicken sandwich that Franny doesn’t manage 
to eat, or the ignored chicken broth in Zooey, take on new symbolic meaning 
once you’ve read stories like Just Before War With the Eskimos, where another 
unwanted chicken sandwich becomes an emblem of miscommunication and despair. 
It’s also easy to draw parallels between bananafish who eat so much they get 
stuck in holes and Lane, the hopeless boyfriend in Franny, and his gorging on 
frog’s legs.

But there’s another good reason to start with the Nine Stories: they’re 
superb. Since I quoted a lot of biting criticism of Salinger last week, I’m 
glad to redress the balance and turn toEudora Welty’s 1953 New York Times 
review for Nine Stories 
<http://%20https//www.nytimes.com/books/98/09/13/specials/salinger-stories01.html>
. She didn’t mess around, coming straight in with: “JD Salinger’s writing is 
original, first rate, serious and beautiful.” There follows a hymn of praise:

“He has the equipment of a born writer to begin with – his sensitive eye, his 
incredibly good ear, and something I can think of no word for but grace. There 
is not a trace of sentimentality about his work, although it is full of 
children that are bound to be adored. He pronounces no judgments, he is simply 
gifted with having them, and with having them passionately.”

It’s a fine, warm appreciation but I do question Welty’s sign-off: “Best of 
all, he has a loving heart.”

“Loving” wasn’t the first thing that struck me about these stories. They 
seemed more angry, bitter and sad. Sure, there was warmth there too, but mainly 
there was depression and frustration. An overwhelming sense that something, 
somewhere, had gone horribly wrong.

The clearest explanation of what that something may be comes in the story For 
Esme With Love and Squalor. This story (generally thought to be Salinger’s most 
autobiographical) first shows a nervous, but affable young man, Sergeant X, 
warmly chatting to two children shortly before embarking for D-Day. There 
follows one of literature’s most-pointed ellipses. We next see the man after 
the official end of the war. Now he is shattered, shaking, vomitous, isolated 
from his comrades, uninterested in the world around him and too scared even to 
attempt to wind a watch.

This horror seems to me to underpin the disgust and sadness in Salinger’s 
other work. During last week’s discussion,commenter Humean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/19/is-jd-salingers-franny-and-zooey-posturing-or-profound#comment-79365416>
 made this point forcefully in reference to Salinger’s bad press:

“How many of those critics had seen action like Salinger in the second world 
war? I’ve always thought that was one of the keys to Salinger’s fiction, both 
Catcher and the Glass family pieces.”

Humean also pointed out that my own article about Franny and Zooey 
“underestimated” the impact of the war. That’s putting it gently, since I 
didn’t mention the war at all. But then, Salinger hardly does either. The two 
stories only contain brief asides about the elder Glass brothers’ war service. 
It’s perfectly possible to read them and barely think of the war at all. The 
same is true of many of his other works. Indeed, I’m wary of going too far and 
reading war experiences into everything Salinger wrote. Sometimes it may be 
just fine to take things at face value. Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes, for 
instance, could simply be about two lawyers and the complications in their love 
lives.

By the same token, I wouldn’t want to rule the war out of anything Salinger 
wrote after 1945, either – even when it isn’t referenced. When Hemingway talks 
about Big Two Hearted River in A Moveable Feast, he says: “The story was about 
coming back from the war but there was no mention of the war in it.”

Similarly, Salinger, a Hemingway fan, made war damage a largely silent, but 
hugely important and ongoing influence on the agonised mourning of his Glass 
siblings. Franny and Zooey’s struggles (and their feelings about their lost 
brothers) just make more sense following on from stories like For Esme and 
Bananafish. They also have to be understood, as Humean pointed out, as works 
overshadowed bythe author’s own terrible experiences in the war 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2011/02/salinger-201102>. Salinger was 
present at the liberation of Dachau and later told his daughter: “You could 
live a lifetime and never really get the smell of burning flesh out of your 
nose.”

In that context, how not to forgive and understand Zooey’s prolixity, his 
desperate hankering for religious truth and his need to argue his sister back 
into “action”? He’s using words to drown out unimaginable nightmares. Small 
wonder that he’s struggling.
 