
Let’s suppose, for a minute, that the Trump transition has some organizing 
principle beyond the chaotic, conflicting impulses of a megalomaniac.

What do the first two appointments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
 of President-elect Trump, as well as the first week of his transition to 
power, tell us about his forthcoming reign?

At first blush, Trump seems to have squared two competing desires. With Reince 
Priebus <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus> as his chief of 
staff, Trump is placating and controlling his own party, now ruling both sides 
of Capitol Hill. The RNC chairman is perfectly plugged into the messy politics 
of the Republican leadership.

With Steve Bannon <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon> as his 
chief strategist, Trump is placating the pitchfork mob that helped sweep him to 
power. Bannon’s role inside any organization is traditionally the keeper of the 
ideological flame. In case anyone was still confused about Trump’s ideology, 
Bannon is chairman of Breitbart, a sewer of racist and sexist excrement.

But nothing in Trumpistan is that neat. In the brief time the Great Orange 
Leader has presided over the semi-public enterprise of his presidential 
campaign, we know he has a track record of tolerating the kind of internal 
rivalry that ends up in ritual slaughter.

His first campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, warred openly with his second 
campaign manager, Paul Manafort. And the same goes for the third and fourth 
people to fill those roles (no matter their official titles): Kellyanne Conway 
and Steve Bannon himself.

Chaos is Trump’s coin of the realm. The only complex situation he seems to 
manage with some consistency are his tax-avoidance schemes.

The Bannon-Priebus announcement was carefully constructed with Bannon’s 
appointment ahead of Priebus. Such formalities do not go unnoticed in the 
corridors of power of the nation’s capital, where the pecking order is the only 
game in town.

Of the two, Bannon is by far the superior operator, having turned Breitbart 
from a cult into a powerhouse of white nationalism. Needless to say, this is 
not a positive development for an immensely diverse nation with a long history 
of racial violence.

Priebus, for his part, has shown his House of Cards talent by staging the coup 
thatousted his former boss 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2011/01/14/reince-priebus-ousts-michael-steele-as-rnc-chairman.html>
, Michael Steele. Priebus seized the job of RNC chair just after Steele’s RNC 
swept the board in the 2010 mid-term elections.

But with no experience in the executive or legislative branches of government, 
Priebus is hopelessly out of his depth. At best, he’s a party hack who will 
follow the orders of his friends on Capitol Hill. At worst, he’ll drown as he 
attempts to manage the West Wing, the federal bureaucracy, national security 
crises, Washington politics, the venal media, and a president who has returned 
to Twitter.

All of which makes him easy pickings for Bannon, who is offensive in every 
sense of the word. According to sworn testimony by his ex-wife, Bannon is so 
virulently antisemitic thathe insisted 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-campaign-ceo-steve-bannon-accused-anti-semitic-remarks-ex-n638731>
 “he didn’t want [his] girls going to school with Jews” (Bannon denies he ever 
said it). Not for nothing as the Anti-Defamation Leaguegone public 
<https://twitter.com/JGreenblattADL/status/797984801248673792> with its 
opposition to his appointment.

The coming Bannon-Priebus cage-fight is only one side of the struggle for 
power inside the administration. For the real influence lies in the hands of 
Trump’s children and son-in-law.

Already Jared Kushner, husband to Ivanka, has reportedly ousted the head of 
the transition, the hapless and gormless New Jersey governor, Chris Christie. 
Ostensibly Christie’s downfall was because he is embroiled in the scandal known 
asBridgegate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/chris-christie-bridgegate-george-washington-bridge-lane-closures>
. But the proceedings about the closure of the George Washington Bridge have 
been rumbling for three years. A more likely scenario is that Christie could 
not be trusted with such a powerful transition job because he presided, as US 
Attorney in New Jersey, over theprosecution 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/donald-trump-team-rivals-231277> of 
Kushner’s father.

Blood is so much thicker than water, especially inside Trump Tower.

With so many competing fiefdoms, the Trump presidency has already sown the 
seeds of its own chaos. Can these people successfully navigate their way out of 
a paper bag, never mind the confirmation process that could doom their own 
administration?

In case people have forgotten, with full control of Congress and at the height 
of his popularity, the newly elected President Obama stumbled repeatedly with 
nominees whose tax returns were questionable and who seemed too cozy with 
corporate power.

Perhaps President Trump can help his nominees dodge their tax questions by 
ordering the IRS to audit them all as quickly as possible. As for his desire to 
drain the swamp of corporate influence, those promises are now being managed by 
a small army of lobbyists who control his transition.

How clueless is Team Trump? According to the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/leading-contender-for-donald-trump-s-chief-of-staff-is-rnc-chairman-reince-priebus-1479069597>
, they had no idea the entire West Wing would evacuate on inauguration day next 
year: that they would have to appoint every single member of staff, except for 
the permanent help tending to the building and grounds.

As a result, President Obama intends to spend more time helping his successor 
understand the scale of what he’s about to take on. The first black president 
is going to help train the 44th white president whose campaign was built on 
questioning his own citizenship.

Obama started his presidency winning the Nobel peace prize, but he ends it 
deserving some kind of sainthood.

Like all good Shakespearean tragedies, the Trump presidency is presaging its 
own collapse at the height of its glory. The Priebus-Bannon-family disputes 
will corrode the West Wing from within.

They are the manifestation of a leader who projects certainty but cannot 
decide if he wants to repeal all of Obamacare or keep parts of it; if he wants 
to end abortion rights or force women to travel to get abortions; if he wants 
to bring the country together or end the wave of racist intimidation that is 
being spray-painted across our schools and churches.

The Republican establishment may think they can manage Trump through Priebus. 
But they are about to discover that this dumpster fire of a campaign just 
turned into a brushfire of a transition.
 