
The civil service is trying hard to shake off the image that it is dominated 
by Oxbridge-educated white men and has made a number of changes to this year’s 
fast stream scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/civil-service-fast-stream>, due to 
open at the end of September 2016, to support greater diversity.

But it’s still one of the toughest, as well as one of the most popular, 
graduate employment schemes in the country. We asked Guardian readers about 
their own experiences of applying. Here’s what you told us (some names have 
been changed):

Working in the civil service fast stream - what you told us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/06/civil-service-fast-stream-working-government>
“It took seven months” – Ann, 23. Applied successfully in October 2014

The application process was very, very long-winded. I started the process in 
October 2014 and navigated at a snail’s pace through the online numeracy and 
literacy tests, the judgment test and the e-Tray. I was finally invited to an 
assessment centre. All in all, it took a full seven months for me to complete 
the application process and find out I’d been accepted. I started on the scheme 
in October 2015.

“Long, but fair, so stick with it” – Mike, 22. Applied successfully in 2015

It’s long (although being shortened this year) so just stick with it. Most of 
the assessments are very fair to real life civil service situations, so it’s a 
good insight into the role.

“It’s about doing well in specific tests, rather than demonstrating 
experience” – Vicki, 23. Applied unsuccessfully in 2014 and 2015

The application process is the most long-winded and difficult I’ve 
encountered. Having achieved top A-level marks and attended a top university, I 
anticipated I would walk through to the interview stage. But I fell at the 
first hurdle. Being dyslexic, I found the tests extremely difficult to complete 
and failed to score well on them. After being knocked out straight away the 
first time around, I asked for adjustment the second time I applied. This 
allowed me to skip through some of the tests and progress further. However, I 
failed at the e-Tray exercise. The civil service application is more about 
performing well in their specific tests, rather than demonstrating your 
relevant experience. I believe many promising applicants who aren’t necessary 
good at these sort of tests get rejected immediately.

“Not enough thought about appealing to analytical people” – Tom, 25. Applied 
unsuccessfully in 2011

There are always places for statisticians on the analytical fast stream. The 
first session was about statistical ability, which was straightforward as I was 
doing a PhD. But the general fast-stream assessment was unnatural to me, and 
being asked to design a policy like the bedroom tax was not something I wanted 
to do. I have the impression that there has not been enough thought about 
selling the civil service to analytical people, where the competition for 
skills is intense.

“Very stimulating, but extremely time-consuming” – John, 29. Applied 
unsuccessfully in 2015.

Very stimulating – it’s about as interesting as job applications get – but 
also extremely time-consuming, bordering on exploitative in how much time 
commitment it takes from applicants while offering next to nothing in return.

I started my application in September 2015 with the standard verbal and 
numerical reasoning tests, followed a few weeks later by a more complete 
application form, and then a test involving a series of situational questions 
which are often quite obtuse and leave no option for explaining your choice 
when two answers might be valid.

If you pass this stage, again, after a wait of some weeks, you go onto an 
electronic e-Tray exercise where you have to cram 10–12 documents’ worth of 
information about a fictitious scenario/world into your memory before 
responding to a series of fictitious emails and following this up with an 
outline of a policy matter. If you get through this stage, there is another 
wait of weeks or even months before you’re invited to attend the final 
assessment centre, where you spend an entire day undergoing a series of group 
and individual tasks on top of interviews and mock briefings, with next to no 
breaks, under time constraints and with little to no preparation. If you pass 
this (again, it can take some months until you find out) your application is 
then put forward to the final assessment board.
I reached the final assessment board this summer, nine months after beginning 
my application. Why should candidates be expected to remain in job limbo while 
the fast stream takes so long to progress them through the process?
From my own experience, the final assessment board made no sense whatsoever. I 
had passed every single stage only to be rejected by this final assessment 
board, to which I was given no opportunity to present myself. What new evidence 
did they uncover which the previous four or five stages had failed to uncover? 
I still have had no response from the assessment team on this point.

A lengthy and detailed feedback document is provided after the assessment day. 
This is welcome, although virtually unintelligible as it comes weeks or months 
after the day, with the already obliquely-titled tasks and civil service HR 
acronyms rendered utterly baffling.
So, in summary: the process, though interesting, is far too long, involves an 
opaque final assessment board whose decisions don’t appear to tally with the 
rest of the process, and offers useless feedback.

“One of the worst experiences of my life” –  Beth, 25. Applied successfully in 
2011.

Going to the fast-stream assessment centre was one of the worse experiences of 
my life. Unlike most people who applied, I did not really know what the civil 
service was. I didn’t know any civil servants and my university had not 
prepared me for the assessment centre, so I wasn’t too sure what I was really 
applying for.

When I turned up I sat down next to someone who was doing a master’s with the 
UN, then in the break I spoke to two people who had done internships with an 
MP. I worked part time at Starbucks.

“My only prep was 10 pints of lager the night before” – Richard, 36. Applied 
unsuccessfully in 2000.

I passed the aptitude test and I was accepted for an interview over two days 
in central London. On the first day I introduced myself to a number of other 
candidates and quickly realised I was ill-prepared for the whole process, with 
no prep except for 10 pints of lager the night before.

The other candidates all seemed to be doing something productive since they 
had graduated, like a master’s or working for a large corporation, whereas I 
was working as an admin temp for a water board to fill my days. Also, they all 
seemed to have come from the right side of the tracks, whereas I was a bit more 
rough and ready. I felt out of my league and it showed during those two days. I 
was so bad that after the final test – a group role-play – I stood up to catch 
the earlier train home and the chair asked everyone else to give me a clap for 
my “efforts”. Patronising doesn’t come close – but then I really was that bad!

“They seemed surprised I asked questions about placements” –  Rosie, 31. 
Applied successfully, but declined the offer, in 2007.

I felt that as it was such a difficult process and so hard to get into, they 
assumed that they didn’t have to concentrate as hard on attracting people to 
the actual scheme. They seemed surprised when I had real questions in the 
interview about job-placement length etc.

As a scheme, it was less flexible and, to me, less attractive than others when 
I probed deeper. They offered me the job a week later via email. The grad 
scheme I accepted phoned me up the day after to offer me the job in person. 
These things matter.

If you’ve applied for the fast stream and want to share your top tips, email 
public.leaders@theguardian.com

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 