
When I am advising non-profits, I tell them that effective fundraising is part 
art, part science. You need structure and planning to support it, but you also 
need instinct and charisma to make it a success. Both sides are essential.

The same is true of fundraisers themselves, great ones are typically 
all-rounders who can turn their hand to all components of income generation. 
There are specialisms, of course, but mostly fundraisers are expected to be 
jacks of all trades.


There are some characteristics and competencies commonly sought by charities, 
though, that in fact most fundraisers should not be expected to bring to the 
table. I have needed to steer many clients away from obsessing about these 
qualities when building fundraising teams and I would like to see this change. 
So, when searching for your next fundraiser, I recommendnot prioritising the 
following:

A ‘black book’ of contacts

The reasons people give to charities are simple: they’re passionate about the 
cause and they have been well cultivated by the organisation. A lot goes into 
what “well cultivated” means, and while introductions from mutual contacts can 
go a long way, expecting fundraisers to bring a list of contacts with them is 
unrealistic and not recommended.

It’s better to hire an experienced and competent fundraiser who is totally new 
to your network than to choose a well-connected socialite who can’t create a 
gift table or an engagement plan.

Fundraisers may have connections from previous roles, but many of those will 
be owned by other charities, or will be donors with no interest in a new cause. 
As a result poaching donors from your team’s résumé is bad practice, for both 
of you. The key is to hire great relationship builders, who can work your 
networks and events in order to find and engage your hottest prospects. Don’t 
just recruit people who happen to have the phone numbers of people on a rich 
list.


Corporate sector experience

Experience in a variety of sectors can bring transferable skills – but 
recruiters should not necessarily be looking for connections in the corporate 
sector, specifically from finance, with £ signs in their eyes. Having worked 
with wealthy people or companies does not mean someone will be comfortable, or 
proficient at, soliciting ex-colleagues, friends or family.

Perhaps “insider knowledge” can be valuable, but if it’s not related to 
donations or partnerships, then it’s not that relevant.

Qualities that promote success in the corporate world do not always translate 
to non-profits. It can be quite a significant transition, and the most frequent 
line I hear from people who make the switch is that they didn’t realise it 
would be so hard to get money out of people for such good causes.

Enthusiasm and an MBA are, unfortunately, not enough to crack open the 
chequebooks of most donors, and the majority of charities do not have scope for 
a commercial income stream.

Passsion for the cause

Staff are certainly more likely to go above and beyond if they feel proud of 
what they’re doing, but passion alone cannot carry lacklustre fundraising 
practice.

Similarly, being an expert in the programmes of a charity does not mean 
someone will be good at raising money for it. The knowledge needed to raise 
money for a cause can be gained through a good induction process and a couple 
of weeks’ revision – and the ability to speak about it in an engaging way can 
come from one or two practice sessions. But gaining the skills to be a great 
fundraiser takes time and experience.

Some of my biggest fundraising successes have been in contexts where I only 
fully understood what the charity did after my first week on the job. I am not 
alone in this – a strong case could be made for the excellence and 
professionalism of fundraisers who are able to advocate for causes they do not 
particularly care about. Knowing when to bring other teams into conversations 
with donors is also important.

Rather than concentrating on the above traits, my key recommendation when 
looking to hire fantastic fundraisers, especially for new or larger targets, is 
to prioritise candidates with experience of successful fundraising at a 
comparable level elsewhere.

Decide the skills and knowledge you need for your organisation, and look for a 
cultural fit, but always favour applicants who have demonstrated those in an 
equivalent fundraising context.

 * Emily Collins works for IG Advisors <http://www.impactandgrowth.com/> 
For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community – it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 