
WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> is updating its 
messenger app so that every text and voice call on one of the world’s most 
popular apps will be protected with strong encryption – potentially putting 
millions more conversations outside the purview of authorities.

The development at the messenger company, which is owned by Facebook, is 
striking givenSilicon Valley’s recent staredown with authorities over user data 
privacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/apple-fbi-case-dropped-san-bernardino-iphone>
.

The FBI dropped a court battle with Apple over its iPhone encryption, and 
Brazilian police recently arrested aFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> executive because WhatsApp 
couldn’t provide messages sent by a criminal suspect.

None of that appears to have deterred WhatsApp founder Jan Koum, who grew up 
in Soviet-era Ukraine amid surveillance fears and has said that he often heard 
his mother say things like, “This isn’t a telephone conversation.”

“The desire to protect people’s private communication is one of the core 
beliefs we have at WhatsApp, and for me, it’s personal,” Koum wrote in ablog 
post <https://blog.whatsapp.com/10000618/end-to-end-encryption?> published 
Tuesday. “I grew up in the USSR during communist rule and the fact that people 
couldn’t speak freely is one of the reasons my family moved to the United 
States.”

The Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/14/facebook-google-whatsapp-plan-increase-encryption-fbi-apple>
 on WhatsApp’s plans in March.

All of WhatsApp’s 1 billion users, when running the latest version of the app 
on iPhone, a Google Android device, Nokia or Blackberry, will send and receive 
messages, attachments and voice calls that engineers say can only be deciphered 
by the intended recipient, saidMoxie Marlinspike 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/moxie-marlinspike-the-coder-who-encrypted-your-texts-1436486274>
, an encrypted messaging developer at Open Whisper Systems, whose technology 
forms the backbone of WhatsApp’s encryption.

This means WhatsApp shouldn’t be able to facilitate a wiretap of the contents 
of users’ messages, even if faced with a court order. It’s unclear if the 
company will be able to help authorities intercept data on when they use 
WhatsApp or with whom they communicate.

Additionally, WhatsApp will take the unusual step for a consumer app of 
notifying users if messages are encrypted, Marlinspike said.

If several users are trading texts in a group message and one of the users is 
running an older version of the app that doesn’t support encrypted group 
messages, the others will be able to tell which person is causing the session 
to remain unencrypted.

This is a departure from other mainstream technology companies, which have 
typically not highlighted security features for fear of provoking authorities 
or irritating disinterested consumers.

WhatsApp appears to be betting that three years after Edward Snowden’s 
revelations rekindled a global debate over digital surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files>, consumers do care about 
data security as a deciding issue in which apps they will use.

Telegram, a Berlin-based messaging service that has grown dramatically since 
2013, has made similar bets as it offers privacy features. Meantime, Google and 
Snapchat both are exploring their own encrypted messaging services.

WhatsApp and Facebook representatives did not immediately return requests for 
comment.

WhatsApp began adding strong encryption as a default for some messages in late 
2014, but it only worked for users on certain phones or in certain situations. 
Users also did not know if the encryption was or was not engaged, making the 
technology undependable for those most concerned about digital privacy, such as 
human rights works, dissidents and whistleblowers.

WhatsApp has spent 18 months discreetly expanding encryption throughout its 
service.

Marlinspike is a San Francisco-based developer who runs Signal, an encrypted 
messaging app similar to WhatsApp and popular among privacy advocates. He 
described the challenge as stark, being recruited to help WhatsApp’s 
engineering team add complicated encryption features to a service used by one 
billion people.

The programmer said he plans to help other apps add his encryption in the 
future, though he declined to state who he may or may not be working with. 
“We’re going to keep doing stuff like this,” he said.

There is also some irony in WhatsApp’s move given the current political debate.

Marlinspike developed his encryption tools with a grant from Radio Free Asia, 
which is funded by Congress.

On Monday, Senator Richard Burr, chairman of the Senate intelligence 
committee, said he planned to soon unveil legislation that would regulate 
encrypted communications.

In the blog post, Whatsapp acknowledged the recent controversy around 
encryption but downplayed any political implications of its most recent update. 
Rather, it said it was trying to protect consumers from hackers and “oppressive 
regimes.”

“All you need to know is that end-to-end encrypted messages can only be read 
by the recipients you intend,” the company said.
 