
As Edinburgh Zoo's panda freakshow continues to captivate the witless and the 
infantile, a real Scottish animal has been allowed to die. Under the noses of
Scottish Natural Heritage <http://www.snh.gov.uk/>, which likes to be known as 
the nation's leading conservation body, the Scottish wildcat hasall but been 
extinguished <http://www.scottishwildcats.co.uk/> from the Highlands. The 
importance of this news may be deemed worthy of a mere footnote on the schedule 
of important issues with which Scotland is grappling but it ought to rank much 
higher. For the wildcat's demise seems to be part of the neutering and 
emasculating of our wildest places. That which was previously held to be a 
quintessential part of what Scotland was originally meant to look like and 
smell like and sound like is now, it seems, unimportant.

Thus we allow golden eagles and our other great predators routinely to be 
executed by gamekeepers and farmers all over the Highlands. These wildlife 
crimes carry stiff penalties but no prosecutions are ever brought. After all, 
there are vast country estates to protect, mainly to ensure thatScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> remains the favourite country theme 
park of Europe's aristocracy. And a decade after their filthy feeding methods 
gave the country foot and mouth disease, it seems we must trust that the 
farmers are right when they claim that their livestock is threatened by our 
most iconic birds.

And as an ancient species such as the wildcat is allowed to die, it seems, 
too, that 2013 will also mark the beginning of the end of the Gaelic. There are 
now fewer than 60,000 Gaelic speakers left in Scotland and, unless proper 
government financial intervention is forthcoming, the language will soon reach 
that point at which death becomes inevitable. All this, of course, doesn't 
really matter if you remain indifferent to losing those natural treasures that 
make Scotland unique. Anything dangerous, wild, unkempt, ancient, jaggy and 
difficult to grasp thus becomes undesirable or of such a low priority in the 
drive to look and feel like everyone else that it is allowed to wither.

It's nothing short of a national disgrace that the Scottish wildcat is 
probably now extinct. Conservationists have been receiving warnings about the 
mammal's imminent decline for many years now. Last year, the entire 
conservation community was put on alert when it was revealed that only around35 
pure wildcats <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-highlands-islands-19569538>
 remained in the wild. Even then, the complacency and inertia that marked 
attempts to save the species was made apparent. Scottish Natural Heritage was 
still clinging to the hope that around 400 remained, even though it was known 
that this figure rested on unconfirmed sightings by passers-by. It was also 
known that earlier breeding programmes were probably contaminated by the genes 
of domestic breeds.

Scottish Natural Heritage, one of Scotland's teeming community of heritage and 
cultural bodies, none of which is made to account regularly for their continued 
existence, had talked vaguely about an "action plan". The Scottish Wildcat 
Association, along with other concerned bodies, has mapped out what any action 
plan ought to look like. Targeted wildlife management would enable wildcats to 
be trapped and then properly tested. The SWA has said: "If there are still pure 
wildcats left we need to create protected areas with proper management 
programmes to ensure feral cats in those areas are neutered to prevent further 
cross breeding." Scottish Natural Heritage has estimated that any national 
wildcat conservation scheme would require around £2m over the next five years. 
Depressingly, it has also said that funding has yet to be finalised.

Thus Scotland's skewed wildlife priorities are starkly exposed. For the want 
of a couple of million pounds, one of our most beautiful native species has 
been allowed to die. Meanwhile, we are spending £7m on a couple of inert and 
indolent black and white circus acts calledSunshine and Sweetie 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2312879/Edinburgh-zoo-panda-gets-IVF-treatment-Tian-Tian-artificially-inseminated-failing-mate.html>
. These have been rented for 10 years from a regime that routinely murders its 
own people as a vanity project for a zoo that should have been shut down years 
ago.

For this, we have been forced to acquiesce in a bizarre wildlife porn 
production as the female panda is prodded, primped and injected this way and 
that for the purposes of producing a Scottish panda. At which point the wee 
chap will be whisked back to China to participate in another breeding programme 
designed to bribe the stupid west into looking the other way when Beijing 
tortures its citizens.

I suppose, therefore, we should all be thankful that there appear to be 
advanced moves to reintroduce the lynx after a 700-year absence. This would be 
a grand move for this creature is also beautiful, ferocious and created by God 
to reside in the Highlands. TheLynx UK Trust <http://www.lynxuk.org/> is 
optimistic that SNH will permit a closely managed scheme.

Although, bearing in mind SNH's lamentable performance in trying to protect 
the Scottish wildcat, perhaps we shouldn't hold our breath. Any new lynxes 
roaming around the hills and glens might be in danger from over-zealous SNH 
officers in their belated attempts to save the wildcat.

Predictably, the National Farmers' Union and the Scottish Gamekeepers 
Association have raised concerns about threats to their beloved coos and sheep, 
despite the fact that the lynx preys on roe deer, a species of which Scotland 
has such an abundance that it could meet the world's venison needs. The 
Countryside Alliance also has worries, but these can be dismissed as coming 
from a body solely concerned in preserving the interests of the tiny minority 
who received their land windfalls through theft, murder and deception.

I'd like to see the return of wolves and bears to the Highlands too. These 
splendid animals were hunted to extinction several hundred years ago. And in an 
independent Scotland, I'd also be tempted to stick loads of them beside the big 
shooting estates so that they could prey on another of Scotland's alien and 
pestilent species.
 