
According to a recent Health and Social Care Information Centre report, we are 
seeing a return of diseases common in the Victorian era 
<http://www.hscic.gov.uk/article/4859/New-analysis-shows-current-picture-of-diseases-which-were-widespread-in-the-Victorian-era;>
.

The report highlights five conditions 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/10985260/Victorian-diseases-have-come-back-to-haunt-us.html>
: gout, tuberculosis, measles, malnutrition and whooping cough. It has a longer 
listing of rarer conditions, which also conjure the image of bygone pestilence 
and depravity – scurvy, mumps, rickets, scarlet fever, cholera, diphtheria and 
typhoid.

In a time of global public health disasters of biblical proportions, in west 
Africa and the Middle East, it appears an indulgence perhaps to be concerned 
about these conditions. We may be tempted to dismiss the report as a novelty. 
But that would be wrong: a civilized nation with an advanced economy and health 
system should see some conditions as markers for the failure of its public 
health policies or services. But which markers?

The NHS has "never events" 
<http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/patientsafety/never-events/> as quality of 
care markers. Never events are serious, largely preventable patient safety 
incidents. They include wrong site surgery, wrong route chemotherapy 
administration and suicide during psychiatric admission. The time has perhaps 
come for us to develop never events in public health.

In the HSCIC report, gout is the strongest contender for a returning Victorian 
disease – it may well be linked to an ageing population, epidemic obesity and 
excess alcohol consumption; 70% of cases are in the over 60s. There were 86,870 
hospital admissions where gout was coded, an increase of 78% on the same period 
in 2009-10 (48,720). There were 13.5 gout admissions per 100,000 population in 
the 10% most deprived areas, 8.3 gout admissions per 100,000 population in the 
10% least deprived areas, in 2013-14. Formerly the disease of kings, gout is 
now very clearly associated with deprivation.

Tuberculosis <https://www.theguardian.com/society/tuberculosis> and rickets 
are the strongest markers of both Victorian disease and public health never 
events. We should certainly regard tuberculosis contracted in this country, and 
tuberculosis deaths, as never events. The HSCIC figures show a welcome decline 
in hospital admissions for tuberculosis. New notifications are also stabilising 
but at an unacceptably high level, with 8,751 cases reported in 2012, an 
incidence of 13.9 per 100,000 population. The need to spend time in hospital 
should be declining as services become better able to treat people at home and 
cases are hopefully identified earlier and at less infectious stages.

Hospital admissions with a scarlet fever coding doubled, from 403 to 845. 
Public policy measures to prevent this, and the clinical significance of this 
change are difficult to determine; historically scarlet fever is a disease of 
deprivation, tamed by antibiotics. It manifests long cyclical rises and falls 
over 40 years – the rise may be part of that cycle. But we should be concerned 
we are seeing a period of enforced deprivation, withthe biggest cut in average 
wages since Dickens' era 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/5790419/wages-set-to-slump-by-largest-amount-since-Victorian-era.html>
.

Measles and whooping cough were rampant in Victorian times but remained so 
until the 1990s – hardly Victorian, but they should be never events as they are 
completely preventable through immunisation.

Over the past five years there was a 71% increase in hospital admissions where 
malnutrition was coded, from 3,900 admissions in 2009-10 to 6,690 admissions in 
2013-14. Patients are being found to be malnourished on admission to hospital 
as a result of neglect, in care homes, or at home. The figures may also reflect 
more complete coding and better awareness of nutrition issues in hospitals.

Rickets is a concern – a lack of vitamin D due to dietary and sunlight 
deficiency. We may have contributed to this through campaigns to keep people 
out of the sun. It is more common in dark skinned people, but also in deprived 
communities, black and white. We could reverse our skin cancer campaigns and 
encourage little and often sun exposure, or we could correct it by fortifying 
milk with vitamin D. Scurvy is rare – 72 cases in 2009-10, rising to 94 cases 
last year, but vitamin C deficiency really must be a marker of failed public 
health nutrition.

Interpreting the figures, we should be a little cautious about the impact of 
hospital coding – there has been upward pressure to code everything in the 
patient's discharge summary for hospitals to pull in maximum payment by results.

The figures do reflect classical diseases associated with mass poverty of 
Victorian times and so they should be a barometer for us. Gout, malnutrition, 
scurvy and rickets point us to failures in the nation's diet. Our complacent 
notion that we have better diets must be thrown out and there must be a 
national drive for a healthy, nutritious and balanced diet, casting aside the 
interests of the food industry. Major vaccine-preventable infectious diseases 
should be prevented.

We should be concerned about these figures – they tell us of a picture of 
neglect – by government with its active impoverishment of poorer parts of our 
society and with its complacent neglect of public health nutrition. And neglect 
too by the health and care system in respect of malnutrition, dehydration, 
failure to vaccinate and neglect of nutrition.

John Middleton is vice president for policy at the UK Faculty of Public Health

This article is part of the Beveridge Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 series from GuardianSociety Professionals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>, revising Sir William 
Beveridge's five great social evils for the 21st century.

Are you a member of our online community? Join the Healthcare Professionals 
Network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers.

This article was amended on 11 August to include some additional statistics on 
gout.
 