
Just what does Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon> believe? For some, his 
thinking can be boiled down to racism. For others, he is merely a sinister 
opportunist taking advantage of Trump and the “alt-right”, a far-right movement 
in the US, for economic gain and fame. But what if he is fundamentally driven 
by something else? Like: religion.

During a 2014 conference hosted by the very conservative Human Dignity 
Institute at the Vatican, Bannonlaid out his belief 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/lesterfeder/this-is-how-steve-bannon-sees-the-entire-world>
 in “traditionalism”. To him, it signifies, among other things, a third-way 
attempt to counter the “crony capitalism” of neoliberalism, and the “state 
sponsored capitalism” of the Soviet Union and China.

His traditionalism is predicated on a rather speculative historical argument. 
He argues that a form of “enlightened capitalism” defined western political 
economies from the second world war until roughly the downfall of the Soviet 
Union. This type of capitalism was predicated on the Judeo-Christian tradition, 
which, for reasons Bannon does not explain, was adequately able to represent 
the culture and economic interests of the working classes.

However, increasing secularization in the west eroded the Judeo-Christian 
tradition. This set the stage by the 1990s for enlightened capitalism to be 
supplanted by a new form of political economy, namely neoliberalism. The 
defining feature of neoliberalism, as Bannon describes it, involves the 
establishment of an international class of political and corporate elites – the 
“Davos party” – who presumably lack the values necessary to represent the 
economic and cultural interest of anyone else besides themselves.

The 'alt-right' don't belong in the American conservative tradition | Jamie 
Weinstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/alt-right-dont-belong-american-conservatism-jamie-weinstein>
This religious worldview provides one compelling explanation as to why he is 
willing to work with the political fringe. What is driving the populist 
movement is, according to him, primarily a reaction to neoliberalism. A return 
to Judeo-Christian traditionalism will allow for the necessary economic forms 
that will pave the return to enlightened capitalism, which in turn will “wipe 
out” the racist elements of right-wing parties. It will also provide the 
necessary virtues, Bannon argues, to resist the global threat of “radical 
Islam”.

His alleged Leninism is to be found here. He aims to destroy the political 
establishment and infuse the re-established state with Judeo-Christian 
traditionalism. This will aid in redirecting the central bureaucratic state 
away from globalism and towards economic nationalism.

Perhaps Bannon’s apocalyptic worldview will have little influence on Trump. 
Regardless, it is a dangerous ideology that entails a number of dubious 
political assumptions. His repeated claim that the racial fringe will be washed 
out by the political revolution to come is pure naivete.

More problematic is the question of where Bannon derives his understanding of 
traditionalism. There are plenty of traditionalists Bannon could mention who 
have pointed out the shortcoming of liberalism: the moral philosopher Alasdair 
MacIntyre or even the theologian John Milbank come to mind.

What do Bannon and Priebus tell us about Trump's coming reign? | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/steven-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-reign-deplorables>
Instead he references none other than Julius Evola – one of the intellectual 
godfathers of European fascism who promoted a spiritual type of racism – whose 
reception in Russian under Putin has inspired a traditionalist movement from 
which Bannon believes there is much to learn.

The most bothersome feature of Bannon’s talk is the fact that a Catholic group 
at the Vatican responded to it with enthusiasm. Their questions demonstrate 
that they knew Bannon’s desire to make his message receptive to rightwing 
populist parties. Excitement over his idea of a renewed Judeo-Christian Europe 
seemingly trumped such concerns. This is same political ideology that 
galvanized evangelicals to vote for Trump.

Seeking analogies to understand Trump’s rise has led many historians to point 
to the Weimar Republic and its demise as a warning for the present moment. But 
perhaps Vichy France is a more apt analogy. Bannon actually references the 
French Resistance in his talk but this is difficult to square with his fringe 
following. His idea of a return to traditionalism against the forces of 
secularism has led the faithful down the path of collaboration.
 