
 For personal reasons, I shall not broadcast on the matches of the South 
African cricket tour of England arranged for 1970. The B.B.C. has accepted my 
decision with understanding and an undertaking that my standing with them will 
not be affected by it.

 This course of action has not been dictated by mass influences. Apartheid is 
detestable to me, and I would always oppose it. On the other hand, I am not 
satisfied that the cricket tour is the aspect of apartheid which should have 
been selected as the major target for attack. It would have seemed to me more 
justifiable, more tactically simple, and more effective, to mount a trade 
embargo or to picket South Africa House. Surely the Nationalist South African 
Ambassador is a thousand times more guilty of the inhuman crime of apartheid 
than Graeme Pollock who, throughout the English summer of 1969, played cricket 
for the International Cavaliers XI with eight or nine West Indians and, before 
he went home said: "What great chaps - there couldn't have been a better bunch 
to play with."

 Jack Plimsoll, the manager of this touring team, was an intimate friend of 
mine on the South African tour of England in 1947, before the election of the 
first - Malan - Nationalist Government and the introduction of apartheid. Every 
one of the South African players of my acquaintance has already played with, 
and against, non-white cricketers. Indeed, only a multi-racial match, played in 
South Africa before the Vorster (Verwoerd) Government banned such fixtures for 
ever, provided the expert assessment of Basil D'Oliveira's ability which 
enabled me to persuade Middleton to give him a contract to play in England. Not 
all South Africans are pro-apartheid

Crucially, though, a successful tour would offer comfort and confirmation to a 
completely evil regime. To my mind, theCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council, acting on behalf of 
British cricket, has failed fairly to represent those British people - 
especially cricketers - who genuinely abominate apartheid. The council might 
have determined - and been granted - terms which would have demonstrated its 
declared disapproval of apartheid. It did not do so; nor give the slightest 
indication of a will to do so. To persist with the tour seems to me a social, 
political, and cricketing error. If I were a supporter of apartheid I would 
feel the same. It seems to me destined to failure on all levels, with the game 
of cricket the ultimate and inevitable sufferer. If it should "succeed" to the 
extent of being completed, what is the outcome to be - a similarly contentious 
tour four years hence?

 It is my limitation, and advantage, that I can only broadcast as I feel. 
Commentary on any game is pleasure; it can only be satisfactorily broadcast in 
terms of shared enjoyment. This series cannot, to my mind, be enjoyable. There 
are three justifiable reasons for playing cricket - performance, pleasure, and 
profit - and I do not believe that this tour will produce any of them.

 The terms of the B.B.C.'s charter do not permit expression of editorial 
opinion. It would not be professional or polite to disagree with my fellow 
commentators on the significance of the tour within the hearing of listeners. 
It therefore seems to me unfair, on both sides, for me to broadcast about the 
tour in a manner uncritical of its major issues, while retaining the right to 
be critical of them in this newspaper.

 It is my hope to write and talk about cricket in which the minor issue of a 
game is not overshadowed by the major issue of principle.
 