
I just registered for a meeting of the European Strategy Group 
<http://europeanstrategygroup.web.cern.ch/europeanstrategygroup/> on particle 
physics. This is a year-long talk-fest mapping out plans, aspirations and 
options for the next few years in the subject1. 

Amongst the issues being considered is the question of how we might continue 
to explore the high-energy frontier in the next decades, and what machines we 
might need to do this.

There are multiple constraints to deal with. Budget is one of course. 
Available, or potentially available, technology is another. But there are some 
very basic physics constraints too.

The main ones are related to the reason the Large Hadron Collider 
<http://lhc.web.cern.ch/lhc/> (LHC) is so big in the first place. It is 27km 
long2. Building a long tunnel is very expensive, so why not make a smaller one? 

In fact, the length of the tunnel limits the energy of the colliding beams, 
and in different ways depending what particles are being accelerated. And it's 
all down to Newton's laws of motion.

Particles travel in a straight line at a constant speed, unless acted upon by 
a force; in which case they accelerate - that is, they change speed or 
direction. Even when the speed of a beam in the LHC tunnel is constant, the 
particles are still accelerating, because their direction of motion is changing 
all the time. They are continually being bent around the curved path of the 
tunnel.

Before the LHC was installed in its 27km tunnel on the outskirts of Geneva, 
another machine occupied the space. This was LEP - the Large Electron Positron 
collider. This was turned off in the year 2000 because it had explored all the 
physics within its reach, and could not increase its energy further. The reason 
it could not go higher was synchrotron radiation. This is the energy radiated 
by charged particles when they are accelerated. Photons flew off as the 
electrons and positrons squealed round the corners. They carried away energy. 
Every circuit of the beam, more energy could be pumped in, but at some point 
you reach an energy where as much energy is lost in synchrotron radiation as 
can possibly be put in by the accelerator, and that's your maximum collision 
energy. LEP hit that wall.

As an aside, synchrotron radiation can be very useful for other purposes. For 
example theDiamond Light Source <http://www.diamond.ac.uk/> at the Harwell 
campus does it on purpose, and the radiated photons are used to study atoms, 
molecules, materials and surfaces. All very lovely and great science, but a 
pain in the neck if your want high energy colliding beams.

Anyway, that's where the size of the tunnel comes in. A big, 27km tunnel has a 
rather gentle curve. If it were smaller, the bends would be sharper, the 
acceleration would need to be bigger, so the energy lost through synchrotron 
radiation would be greater, and the maximum collision energy would be lower. 
Big tunnel needed.

So, LEP was dismantled and the LHC was installed. The LHC can get to higher 
energies because it collides protons, not electrons and positrons. Protons are 
about 1800 times heavier than electrons and positrons. The amount synchrotron 
radiation given off when a particle accelerates depends on the mass very 
strongly; it decreases like the mass to the power four. So if the mass is 1800 
times bigger, the energy lost on the bends is (1800 x 1800 x 1800 x 1800) or 
about 11 trillion times smaller.

This advantage outweighs the messy fact that protons are not elementary 
particles but are bags of quarks and gluons (which means we can't make use of 
all the energy, as I describedhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2012/feb/18/1>.) The 
useable collision energy we can get to is still higher than LEP though, about a 
factor of ten higher.

But at some point we hit another wall.

Remember Newton. Things travel in a straight line unless acted upon by a 
force. This is especially true of very fast moving particles. Trying to 
persuade our protons to travel in a circle is hard work. The force has to be 
huge. The LHC does it with magnets - big, superconducting magnets - and the 
limiting factor in the energy of the LHC is the strength of these magnets. Or 
how much electric current you can push through them to make that magnetic field 
and bend those protons round the ring.

This is essentially the centripetal force. Imagine whirling a brick round your 
head on a thin piece of string. If you whirl it too fast, the string will 
break. The protons are the brick, the string is our magnets. We really, really 
don't want them to break (again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2009/aug/12/lhc-shutdown-higgs-boson-cern>
).

So that, in the end, is why a big tunnel helps. Gentle curves. Therefore, for 
a given beam energy, less synchrotron radiation (which limited electron energy 
in LEP) and less force needed (which currently limits the proton energy in the 
LHC).

The strategy group will consider other options. 

There are designs for linear colliders, which get around the synchrotron 
radiation problem by being, well, linear. No bends. But only one shot, and they 
still have to be very, very long to get up to a high enough energy, since the 
electrons only get one pass through the accelerator rather than being kicked 
every time they go round a ring.

There are ideas to collide muons. These are heavy versions of electrons, so 
they have all the advantages of electrons but much less synchrotron radiation 
(1.6 billion times less, since they are 200 times heavier than electrons. Go, 
work it out.) One problem here is they decay in 2.2 microseconds. If you can 
accelerate them quickly enough, time dilation helps - time slows down at high 
speeds, and their decay time is therefore much longer. But it's tricky.

And this is just about the high energy frontier area. There are plenty of 
other things to look at too...

1 The meeting I registered for is a public one in Krakow. But there are others 
I have to go to since I am the UK representative on the group which will draft 
a report, eventually.

2 For Londoners, this is about as long as the Circle Line. Coincidentally, 
also yellow.
 