
Earmark around 5,000 acres north of London for development. Create a special 
company to buy the land and build a town like no other. Use any profit to 
plough back into development. Employ the best architects to prepare a master 
plan. Attract industry for a self-contained community of 34,000 people with 
every possible amenity. Surround it by farmland owned by the company, doubling 
as a green belt

For John Lewis, chief executive of Letchworth Garden City Heritage Foundation 
<http://www.lgchf.com/>, this is no utopian dream. It is the reality of the 
world's first garden city founded in 1903, 34 miles from the capital and still 
going strong.

And now, it seems, the prime minister, David Cameron, is the latest convert to 
the cause, promising to"apply the principles of garden cities" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2012/mar/19/cameron-roads-budget-health-bill#block-26>
 as part of the government'soverhaul of planning in England 
<http://www.communities.gov.uk/planningandbuilding/planningsystem/planningpolicy/planningpolicyframework/>
 launched last week.

Highlighting more housing as a key component of the government's growth 
agenda, Cameron evoked the idealism of the garden city's visionary founder, 
Ebenezer Howard, of mixing private and social enterprise to create "green, 
planned, secure, places with … characterful houses, not just car-dominated 
concrete grids."

Lewis says he is "delighted" with the PM's endorsement. "To hear 110 years 
later a government saying 'that's an interesting model and should be looked at 
again to tackle the growth pressures of this country', well, it's really 
welcome," he says.

Legacy

Whether Cameron fully appreciates the ethos behind Letchworth remains to be 
seen. Celebrating its centenary in 2003, the Town and County Planning 
Association, which grew out of Howard's Garden Cities Association, reprinted 
Howard's seminal book Tomorrow – A Peaceful Path to Real Reform. With 
accompanying commentary by the international planner and geographer Sir Peter 
Hall, it noted: "For Howard, 'garden city' was far more than just a town: it 
was a third socio-economic system, superior both to Victorian capitalism and to 
bureaucratic, centralised socialism."

Taking up this theme, Lewis cautions: "We have to make sure, thinking of the 
legacy of that [garden city] movement, that it's not simply about building 
houses. It's about taking the very broad approach of creating what I feel are 
great places and all that goes with that. It's not [just] about architectural 
statements or glamorous settings, it's actually about creating places where 
people are genuinely happy. At the heart of what the garden city movement was 
about [were] open spaces, where people were comfortable and had jobs. I just 
hope the government has all those things in mind and not just the pretty side."

The heritage foundation, working to the principles of Howard, uses the £7.6m 
annual rent from shops, offices and industrial space to operate a day hospital, 
offer some social care, provide mini-buses for residents who need transport for 
the town's facilities, help fund a homeless charity and the local Citizens 
Advice bureaux, and support families under stress. It also owns a classic art 
deco cinema and a farm.

"It might be an old cliche of town and country coming together, but the farm 
in our ownership is effectively a green belt around the town and no one is very 
far from open country," enthuses Lewis.

His career has embraced the private and public sectors, most recently as a 
senior director with the government's regeneration quango, English Partnerships 
and its replacement, the Homes andCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> Agency. He was latterly in 
charge of expanding Milton Keynes with 15,000 planned new homes. As one of the 
senior regeneration professionals charged with driving forward the housing 
growth agenda of the former deputy prime minister, John Prescott, Lewis is a 
great proponent of planning targets – abolished by this government – and sees 
Letchworth as a classic case study.

"Clearly, there's a need for new homes. What was being planned previously, 
strategically [with targets], was an important way of doing it because you need 
to give some certainty on where these houses are going to go. And when you take 
a broad, strategic approach you can really start to plan for how areas can 
work", he says.

"It [Letchworth] wasn't ad hoc, it absolutely followed a classic master plan, 
replicated not just in this country by the new towns, but around the world."

"I would hope that this government doing large-scale growth areas – whatever 
they're going to be called – sticks to the principle [of master planning], that 
we don't see pockets of 'in-fill' development, ad hoc phases. You need to hold 
things together with a grand plan, otherwise you don't get that creation of 
'place'."

His experience at Milton Keynes reinforces a belief that large-scale 
development proposals can deliver community facilities such as roads, schools, 
libraries and community centres without significant government funding. The 
so-called Milton Keynes tariff – dubbed a roof tax – involved builders putting 
cash into a community pot, initially calculated on the basis of £18,000 for 
each house completed.

"We created a whole investment vehicle able to put in infrastructure. It's 
still alive and a fantastic model, a brilliant way to get cash flowing into 
development and carrying the burden of some of these large infrastructure 
costs. We could say 'we know exactly what is being built, we can cost it, 
charge for it and guarantee the money is going to come back'. Basically you're 
giving certainty of development to the private sector. It meant we could put 
public money in, knowing it would come back."

Investment

Letchworth clearly offers a different challenge. While its residential 
properties, half of which are social housing and affordable homes often in the 
same street as more expensive houses, are physically in good shape, the town's 
shopping centre and businesses have seen better days.

"The town centre looks good, an attractive environment," says Lewis. "But 
retailers – as in a lot of towns – are struggling and we need to ensure there's 
a balance of uses to give it that sense of activity." On the plus side, many 
shops are locally owned with fewer national retailers than the average town.

The foundation, Howard's enduring legacy, underpins the community. "We are 
independent and have to be a commercial organisation with the aim of generating 
money to invest in the place. And when you walk through Letchworth now and ask 
what makes a place sustainable you see all the components of that ethos. 
There's that lovely phrase we thought was new about creating 'mixed tenure 
housing development' and it's all here," says Lewis.

More remarkably the town, built without government aid, became a truly 
"sustainable community" long before the term gained common currency, with a 
strong dose of what Cameron might now call the "big society" – testament to an 
extraordinary founder whose vision seems as fresh today as in 1903.

Lewis says the town embraces around 600 societies and groups, from sporting 
organisations to older people's luncheon clubs. "I get the sense that when 
Letchworth was started there was this real excitement about this community 
approach to development. I feel that still carries on."
 