 According to Lord Widgery, the facts of "Bloody Sunday" - when 13 civilians 
were shot dead in Londonderry - vindicate the army's operation in principle but 
imply serious criticism of the judgement with which some soldiers carried out 
their orders.
His report has been "accepted" by the Government but no formal action is 
contemplated either to modify the instructions on the soldiers' Yellow Cards or 
to reprimand individuals such as the anonymous Private H, who fired 22 shots, 
19 of which were "wholly unaccounted for."

Lord Carrington, Secretary for Defence, said that on the whole the army had 
reason to be proud of itself and expressed the - admittedly forlorn - hope that 
the events of January 30 could now be forgotten.

The violence of yesterday's reaction to the report from representatives of the 
political opposition and the Roman Catholic communities inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> suggested that it is indeed a 
forlorn hope.

The Prime Minister of the Irish Republic, Mr Lynch, last night renewed his 
call for an international judicial inquiry into the shootings. He found it 
difficult to see how Lord Widgery reached the general conclusions he did, even 
on the evidence set out in his report.

The report states that without the illegal march nobody would have died. It 
concludes that the security forces' decision to contain the marchers within the 
Bogside and the Creggan was justified by events and that the day might have 
passed off without serious incident but for the large-scale operation - 
involving the 1st Battalion the Parachute Regiment - to arrest "hooligans."

No doubt is left that the paratroopers came under fire as they went into the 
Bogside and on the question of Who fired first? (which Lord Widgery describes 
as perhaps the most important single issue) the report concludes: "There is no 
reason to suppose that the soldiers would have opened fire if they had not been 
fired upon first."

On the other hand, the report finds no proof that any of those who were 
subsequently shot dead or wounded were handling a firearm or a bomb, and some 
of them are wholly acquitted of any such action. Although some of the soldiers 
showed a "high degree of responsibility" in deciding when to open fire, some of 
the firing, notably in Glenfadda Park, "bordered on the reckless."

Lord Widgery comments that in the circumstances of that Sunday, involving 
paratroopers trained to take a hard line, "it is not remarkable that mistakes 
were made and some innocent civilians hit." He concludes that the commanding 
officer of the 1st Battalion the Parachute Regiment did not exceed his orders, 
as had been alleged, but that the commander 8 Brigade who gave the order to 
launch the arrest operation "may have under-estimated" the risk to civilians in 
the area.

Lord Carrington said yesterday that plans for dealing with the march, 
including provision for the arrest operation, were agreed by the Ministry of 
Defence in London as well as by general Tuzo in Northern Ireland.
 