
Among the many binary divisions that writers fit in to – raw or cooked, 
cowboys or Indians, town or country, etcetera – is that of larks or owls. I 
have a feeling that most writers are larks, starting their day early and 
winding down with a bibulous lunch. I’m very much an owl, however. It’s not 
that I sleep late in the morning, it’s just that my brain – my writing brain – 
seems to function best in the second half of the day, after lunch and on into 
the evening. So the morning is reserved for the mundane business of living – 
emails, admin, going for a walk, shopping, phoning, posting letters – and then 
after lunch (a sandwich, a bowl of soup, cheese on toast – nothing too copious) 
the day’s work really begins.

Sweet Caress by William Boyd review – love and war in the 20th century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/02/sweet-caress-william-boyd-review-photographer>
I write my first draft of a novel in longhand. I have found the perfect 
pen that goes by the bizarre name of a Rotring Tikky Graphic with a 0.2mm nib. 
It suits my tiny, near-illegible handwriting and I always write in 
spiral-backed marginless A4 notebooks – I try to keep my fetishes to a minimum. 
There are two desks in my study but I always seem to write on the one with the 
computer, perhaps because it has a view though it's an unexceptional one: 
a curving side street of terraced houses in Chelsea. Just out of sight is the 
houseJohn Betjeman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbetjeman> used to 
live in.

When I first started my life as a novelist I seemed able to write for hours – 
six, seven, eight – no problem. Now, writing my 15th novel, I can only manage 
three hours or so before brain fatigue sets in. It’s just like a plug has been 
pulled out of a socket and I have stopped – as if a battery has died. Maybe 
this decline will continue inexorably as I age further, but, anyway, three 
hours is not bad, and I always seem to manage a thousand words or so. I write 
every day – if I can; there is a life to be lived as well, after all – weekends 
included. A thousand words a day, seven days a week, is a good rate for me.

William Boyd: my advice for budding authors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/15/william-boyd-my-advice-for-budding-authors>
After I’ve finished the longhand draft, I take a break. The cocktail hour is 
looming. Wine, TV news, conversation, family, friends and food distract – a 
bit. Interestingly, I don’t require isolation or silence while I write – I can 
be interrupted by the phone or a knock on the front door – I just switch off 
and switch on again. Most evenings I’ll return to the study at some stage and 
type up that day’s writing on the computer.

A novel takes me about a year to write after approximately two years 
of figuring it out, plotting and researching. The working day, as the book 
progresses, takes the form of a slow crescendo. It doesn’t start any earlier, 
it just goes on longer – the inner owl takes over and, as the novel reaches 
its endgame, my evening session can go on past midnight into the wee small 
hours. Paradoxically, the more you’ve written of a novel, the more you find you 
want to write.

One great advantage of a longhand draft is that, in transferring it to the 
computer, every single word is written at least twice. Then the computer draft 
can be endlessly revised. Writing in longhand is important, I think – and not 
just because I’m a pre-computer novelist (I bought myself my first typewriter, 
an Olivetti, for my 21st birthday). In handwriting there is a vital 
head-hand-page connection that a keyboard and computer removes. When you write 
in longhand you’re unconsciously aware of aspects of your prose – such as 
sentence length, cadence, rhythm, repetition, prolixity – that I find keyboard 
writing doesn’t alert you to in the same way. Also you can see all the litter 
of the progress you’ve made that day – the scorings-out; the arrows; the 
insertions; the bubbles; the second, third, fourth choices. The page reflects 
the mental effort that the screen doesn’t. It’s a toiling, messy business 
writing a novel. I go to bed knackered and sleep well.
 