 Is there a danger of Protestant violence in Northern Ireland? And in what 
circumstances? Anyone who purports to give firm answers o these questions must 
be suspect, for any answer strengthens or weakens the negotiating position of 
one side or the other in the compromise which is the only alternative to civil 
strife in Ulster. But the questions ought to be asked and the possibilities 
analysed; otherwise discussion of the Ulster question is conducted in a 
dangerous half-light.
The alienation of the Catholic community from Stormont and the British is 
understood, and has been savagely confirmed by the deaths in Derry. The 
Protestant discontent is less in the news because, since the frightening riots 
and burning of August 1969, the Protestants have been quieter than anyone would 
have dared to prophesy.

It is important first to try to establish why the IRA's long campaign of 
killing, maiming, and destruction has not produced a reaction from the 
Protestants. One precedent one might have expected a parallel campaign of urban 
guerrilla activity directed at Catholic areas, with incendiariasm as the 
traditional Protestant alternative to the IRA's bombing. But since the arrival 
of the British army in force, and particularly since its campaign against the 
IRA began to achieve some success, even Protestant militants have come to 
believe that they have more to lose than to gain by militant action. Belief in 
how firm the British pledges to Ulster are varies from month to month, from 
person to person, and even from one of Mr Harold Wilson's speeches to the next. 
But only the most myopic Orangemen thinks that the British public would long 
tolerate its army facing both the IRA and a Protestant counterpart.

There comes a balancing point in any such equation of possible gains and 
losses, however. To put the question bluntly: When would it be to the advantage 
of the Protestant case to "make facts" which would help them in any 
negotiations - as the Israelis have done, as industrial militants do in the 
runup to wage talks, as the Catholics (or so the Protestants would argue) have 
done in Ulster? Many Protestants look at the events as different as the Derry 
deaths and the peaceful march at Newry with deep scepticism, seeing each as a 
contrived Republican trick for raising the stakes. In the same way many 
Catholics regard the very suggestion that Protestant violence is possible as a 
s spurious negotiating counter.

How would the Protestants "make facts"? At the moderate end of the scale, they 
might organise demonstrations like that at Newry - not Orange marches, but 
modelled rather on the huge Unionist rallies of the Home Rule period. At these, 
ironically, the Protestants also would be asserting their civil right: to 
self-determination on the basis of one man, one vote. At the other end of the 
scale the probable alternatives are the kind of sectarian arson campaign in 
which Protestant took part in the 1920s and again in 1969, or an urban 
guerrilla operation on the Provisional IRA model.

But the type of action to be feared can only be seriously studied by 
considering what might provoke it. It must be said at once that this fear need 
not unduly inhibit the British Government in its day-by-day dealings with 
Stormont, though doubtless it will be raised sometimes as a bogy. For example, 
if Mr Maudling decided to enforce the ban against Orange parades, while 
accepting the inevitable in Republican heartlands like Newry and Derry, by 
merely keeping illegality to the minimum, this would understandably seem to 
most Protestants (and probably Englishmen as well) to be unequal. But it would 
scarcely provoke a disaster.

Orangeism is not a breaking point, and the loose description of all Ulster 
Protestants as Orangemen, which is sometimes adopted in Britain, badly clouds 
the discussion. The Orange Order no longer represents the main body of 
Protestant opinion, if it ever did. The events of the past three years will 
have confirmed the belief of many unionists with a small "u" - and they are the 
real silent majority - that such ephemera as the Twelfth of July are not he 
epitome of their liberties or their British citizenship.

As the argument has developed the link with Britain and the restoration of 
peace have become all that matter to the main body of Protestant opinion. 
Protestants are angry with the Catholic community for failing to resist the 
IRA; there is an imaginative block, created by their own misfortunes, which 
prevents their understanding the deep Catholic alienation since August 1969 and 
since internment. But a deal with the Catholics is unlikely to cause widespread 
Protestant violence. It seems unlikely, for example, that the Unionist 
Government would get a massive Protestant support if it appeared intransigent 
when the British Government revealed its intention to bring Republican MPs into 
the Stormont administration. For many Protestants think that the most damning 
indictment of the Unionist Party is that its intransigence has put the Union 
with Britain at risk for the first time in 60 years. The Unionists' continued 
sole occupancy of power is not a fighting issue.

Any serious breach of the Protestant ascendancy would, of course, anger Orange 
extremists. But just as the IRA could be dealt with while it enjoyed little 
support among ordinary Catholics (that is, before 1969 and in earlier 
campaigns), so could those Protestants who probably have organisations and 
access to weapons. Without active sympathy in the Protestant community they 
would be in a worse position than was the IRA, for they would not even have 
sanctuary across the Border or the Irish Sea.

Direct rule or transfer of responsibility for security represent a more 
definite risk and will probably only be attempted when all else has failed. But 
even these might divide rather than unite Protestant opinion. Many moderate 
people take the phrase "full British citizenship" literally. Nothing would 
please them better than to live under the West Riding or Ayrshire County 
Council without having to leave homes and jobs. Weary of the mud which has been 
thrown at them in the past three years, such people might peacefully accept the 
removal of Stormont on two conditions: that it would bring peace and government 
by consent and that it was not a half -way house to losing their British link 
against their will and in breach of repeated promises by Labour and 
Conservative Governments.

It is important to understand that for such people British citizenship is a 
positive rather than a negative matter. The motives, like all motives to do 
with nationality, are mixed - sentiment, economics, social attitudes. To 
discuss Irish unity only in terms of amendments to the Republic's constitution 
which would make Ireland as much like England as possible, in order to be 
palatable to the Northern Protestants, is another clouding of the issue. If the 
only way to persuade Catholics that they were to have fair administration was 
by direct rule, and if the Protestants believed that the Catholics would accept 
that without further strings, a surprising number of Protestants, perhaps a 
majority, might now agree to the abolition of Stormont, or at least to its 
suspension until a new pattern of government by consent could be created.

But if they saw this as part of a slide towards an eventual sellout and a 
reneging on the guarantees of self-determination, they almost certainly would 
not accept. For it is on the issue of exclusion from the United Kingdom and 
forcible inclusion in the Republic that Protestants remain cohesive. It is the 
only issue which is likely to provide Protestant guerrillas with the solid base 
in their community which the IRA now has among Catholics. And just as the IRA 
gained its base first after the Catholics realised in 1969 that they had no 
effective protection against Protestant violence, so the trigger for the 
Protestants would be the threat of withdrawal of the British army and the 
danger that they would have no protection against the IRA. Mr Heath and Mr 
Maudling can probably proceed, with caution, up to that point.
 