
Serious tensions are emerging between the health service and local government.


There are three sources of conflict – centrally-imposed secrecy over the 
sustainability and transformation plan (STP) process, whether the aim of STPs 
is to fix the NHS or develop an integrated health and care system, and disputes 
over whether the financial plans being sent toNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England are fact or fantasy.

At least five councils have now published the STP, despite NHS England asking 
local areas to keep them hidden until the central bodies have given their 
verdict.

This pointless subterfuge has put local politicians in an invidious position; 
if they do as they are told they run the risk of being accused of conniving in 
a cover-up of plans to shut services. Faced with incurring the wrath of either 
NHS England chief executive Simon Stevens or local voters, it is not a 
difficult choice. The surprise is that more councils have not taken the same 
step.

The first local authority to reveal one of the plans was Birmingham city 
council. Its chief executive, Mark Rogers, articulated publicly the 
frustrations many in local government express privately. He complained in the
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service Journal that 
Stevens and NHS Improvement chief executive Jim Mackey were pressurising NHS 
organisations to sort out the health service debt crisis rather than make the 
entire health and care system sustainable.

Sustainability and transformation plans are 'least bad option' for NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/21/sustainability-and-transformation-plans-least-bad-option-nhs>
At the Ncas social care conference on Friday, NHS England operations director, 
Matthew Swindells, was forced to apologise after he said that councillors 
needed to be “managed” in the STP process.

“When I said ‘managed’ I meant brought into the whole of the conversation,” he 
responded to angry lead members for adult social care, who protested that they 
had been shut out of local STP discussions. “That was not our intention. If 
that has happened, that is not satisfactory and I apologise for that.”

Swindells admitted that NHSE’s handling of the STP process had been “not our 
finest hour”, explaining that while “most” of the 44 plans were good work, “a 
lot” needed rewriting before they were understandable by a wider audience. They 
would all be published before Christmas.

The Five Year Forward View 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/5yfv-web.pdf> held out 
the prospect of moving the centre of gravity of the health and care system at 
least a few inches towards primary and community services. But the STP process 
is now in danger of reinforcing the domination of the hospital sector rather 
than reforming it. The implications of that are far more serious than simply 
maintaining a system that is failing to cope; it will require even more money 
to be pumped into hospitals to expand the number of beds.

Arguably the biggest weakness of the STP process is that the pressure on 
hospitals to get their finances under control is so intense that some are 
offering up plans for savings that have virtually no chance of being achieved. 
One council chief executive said a local deeply-indebted hospital was claiming 
that it would save millions but did not have a credible plan for making it 
happen.

On Tuesday, Rogers took to the Today programme’s airwaves to ram the point 
home, pointing out that the funding gap will not be closed by “simply using the 
transformation word endlessly”.

Another local government chief I spoke to was visibly angry at the failure of 
his local hospital to take even the most basic steps to improve their 
estatesmanagement, back-office systems and procurement, while his authority was 
being eviscerated by another round of cuts – with public health taking a big 
hit.

There is a cultural chasm between the NHS and local government when it comes 
to handling public money. It is illegal for local authorities to run a deficit 
on their services spending, so they are compelled to make tough decisions to 
live within their means. Chief financial officers have extensive powers to 
intervene if they believe unlawful expenditure is going to be incurred.

A lethal combination of secrecy and jargon has overshadowed NHS plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/09/lethal-combination-secrecy-jargon-overshadowed-nhs-plans>
In contrast, in some trusts there appears little connection between the 
financial decisions of the board and what actually happens. It is that 
disconnect which lies behind scandals such as the financial collapse of St 
George’s in Tooting in 2015.

Local government <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> is no 
nirvana, of course. Several authorities – including Birmingham and Manchester – 
are still struggling to deliver effective child protection services, and 
although councils face severe increases in demand, these are not on the scale 
confronting the NHS. But local government’s financial management is far more 
effective.

Despite the inevitable tensions, the good news is that local government and 
the NHS are learning to work together, marrying up clinical services with a 
stronger sense of place and beginning to develop a clearer vision for 
integrating health and care.

The challenge now is to drive hospital efficiencies such as those proposed by 
Lord Carter before hospital debt derails the chance of building one system.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 