
When I’m working on a novel I type the initial draft first thing in the 
morning. Really: first thing. For preference, I have a cigarette ready-rolled 
and a coffee percolator loaded the night before; then I simply roll out of bed, 
fuel up and set to it. I believe the dreaming and imagining faculties are 
closely related, such that wreathed in night-time visions I find it possible to 
suspend disbelief in the very act of making stuff up, which, in the cold light 
of day would seem utterly preposterous. I’ve always been a morning writer, and 
frankly I believe 99% of the difficulties novices experience are as a result of 
their unwillingness to do the same. Narrative structure, mise en scene, 
characterisation − you can’t get to grips with these problems unless you’ve put 
the words on the page.

So, my rule is I don’t rise from my desk until I’ve done my allotted portion. 
When I began writing seriously I measured my word counts in “Conrads”, one 
Conrad being 800 words, which is what the master wrote daily – an output on 
which he was able to support a considerable establishment, including two 
housemaids and a chauffeur. Back in the 1990s I could manage two or even three 
Conrads in a morning, but with age (and possibly the increasing complexity of 
the work itself), my pace has slowed – and I now manage 1.25 Conrads. (My 
journalism word rate, by contrast, is 500 words per hour.)

I wrote all my early books on computers, but when broadband came along in 2004 
I understood intuitively it was inimical to the novel, an art form that depends 
on the codex for its inception as well as its reception. So I shifted to 
writing on a manual typewriter − an Olivetti Lettera 22 used by my late mother, 
who was also a writer. When I’m working on a first draft I may do some 
additional research in the afternoon, but usually I’ll shift my attention to 
something else altogether. It’s when I get about two-thirds of the way through 
that things get interesting, for then I begin rewriting the text from the 
beginning, even as I’m still working on the end. This necessitates 
a lengthening of the working day to around eight full hours − but it 
pays massive dividends: it’s far easier to make a novel “cohere” overall if 
you’re working on different parts of it simultaneously.

This methodology gets still more interesting when I finish the first draft and 
begin working on the third while I’m still writing the second. The second draft 
entails me rekeying the text into a computer – which in turn explains why doing 
the first draft manually isn’t really that onerous; after all, if you know 
you’re going to have to rewrite a work entirely, you can afford to be a little 
more cavalier when you attack the blank page. During the early stages 
of a novel I’m able to work under conditions of partial − but not total − 
isolation (no internet-enabled devices on, children and dogs muzzled); but by 
the time I’m working on the third draft I need up to 16 hours a day in complete 
purdah. I’ve often wondered if this isn’t an indulgence on my part, and whether 
I should train myself to cope with more human interaction − but I fear Auden’s 
characterisation of poetry (“The social act of the solitary man”) applies still 
better to novelising, which requires its practitioner to listen very intently 
so as to hear the voices and thoughts of wholly inexistent beings.
 