
When I turn up at work there, waiting for me as he does every morning, is Bob. 
Every day he is the first at the door for breakfast. I manage a small, 
independent homeless charity helping rough sleepers to access accommodation – 
not an easy task.

I say good morning, ask him how his night went, and let him in. As I watch him 
make himself a cup of tea, I feel sad. Sad because it’s now more than a month 
since he left prison. In that time everyday he has been the first in for 
breakfast, and every night he has slept rough.

As public cuts leave people destitute, it's charity workers like me who pick 
up the pieces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/24/destitution-charities-public-sector-cuts-benefits>
I can’t find him housing because he is a convicted arsonist with mental health 
problems. It is hard enough to find accommodation for someone without his 
complexities and I feel for the staff in the housing advice team at the local 
authority. They do their best but have their hands tied by rules and 
regulations. We don’t advise anyone we think is “single, non-priority homeless” 
to go to the council. There’s no point and it simply wastes everyone’s time.

Arsonist or not, Bob is still a human being. He wants to be warm and dry, he 
wants to have food to eat without asking for handouts, and above all he wants 
somewhere to call home.

Many people will be surprised to learn that it is harder to find accommodation 
for arsonists than it is for sex offenders. Sex offenders can be monitored, 
supervised and controlled, but it is hard to monitor someone who starts fires.

No-one wants to take the risk of offering him accommodation. Imagine the media 
storm if the council housed a convicted arsonist in a block of flats and a fire 
was started and someone was injured. My organisation is just as guilty: we 
provide a night shelter but for Bob and people like him, all we offer is a safe 
place to go to during the day.

But the biggest issue is his mental health. Did this lead to his offence? Or 
is it a result of the clear trauma the incident caused? Our problem is that 
because he regularly fails to attend appointments, the local mental health team 
has closed his case and so there is no way of answering these questions.

We dehumanise the situation and make it more palatable for us to live with.

So Bob slips through the cracks in the system and I wonder what will become of 
him. Is he going to be left to wither and die in the cycle of homelessness and 
mental health? Will he be overlooked and ignored until there is an incident?

All of us where I work will try to support him in the best way we know. Yet it 
feels like the blind leading the blind; we are not qualified clinicians or 
experts in any field.

Cuts made to statutory services over many years have moved the goalposts; the 
criteria for support is so high that Bob does not qualify. We are supporting 
more and more people who, just five years ago, would have received help via the 
Adult Social Care budget. This has been pared back so far that a choice is made 
on who is worthy enough to be supported.

We are a jack of all trades and definitely master of none and we quickly fall 
into the trap of using ‘in’ terms such as complex need and high risk almost as 
an excuse to explain why we don’t do the one thing that is needed – give Bob a 
bed. We label him like everyone else does so we don’t have to see the 
individual behind the label.

We dehumanise the situation and make it more palatable for us to live with. 
Labels are so easy to throw about. They land conveniently on the shoulders of 
those we want to keep in a box. Challenging, attention seeking and damaged are 
common labels and we stop seeing the person and instead see a problem which we 
feel the need to contain. Eventually the person labelled loses sight of 
themselves just as we lose sight of them.

I recently overheard a colleague say “it would be better if Bob went back to 
prison as winter is coming”. This is both sad and true. There is no money to 
help people like Bob – the pot of creativity for new initiatives that exists in 
the sector is vast but yet again lack of resources prevent them from getting 
any further than an idea. More than ever, contracts link money to outcomes, and 
outcomes seem to be all about numbers.

I work in a council homeless unit, where not helping people is seen as a good 
job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jun/11/council-homeless-unit-social-housing-assessment>
Most days I question my career choice. If it wasn’t for those I meet in my 
daily role, I would have moved on years ago. They know that they can reduce our 
funding and we will still keep trying to deliver the best possible service and 
fund it with events like quiz nights and sponsored sleep outs, which none of us 
get paid for – anything to keep helping those who need us.

Yes, Bob does set fires and has problems but everyone forgets that he is also 
a man who has talents and who is polite, helpful, funny and incredibly 
resilient. So, tomorrow I will lay money on the fact that Bob will be first at 
the door waiting for me to let him in for breakfast.

• Name has been changed.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 