
Despite growing numbers of women on corporate boards abroad, the proportion of 
women in US boardrooms still lags behind most in the western world.

The number of female directors on US boards grew only half a percentage point 
from 2009 to 2011, but at 12.6% it's still higher than the global average, 
according to a report from the watchdog GovernanceMetrics International (GMI).

That compares with an increase of 7.5% in France and 5.4% in Australia.

In a survey of 4,300 companies in 45 countries, GMI found that membership of 
women on corporate boards worldwide had nudged above 10% for the first time. 
But the rate of growth was meagre, at less than 1% since 2009.

"While any advancement for women is good and something to smile about it's 
still pathetic that women are half of the population and are now 10% of the 
boards of directors globally. The US is getting better but it's still pitiful," 
said Erin Matson, acting vice-president of the National Organization forWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>.

Matson had harsh words for one company in particular. 

"It's absolutely ludicrious, for example, that Facebook – one of the darling 
companies among people under 30 – has put forth an all-male board. This is 
pathetic."

As the world marks International Women's Day, the trickle of women into 
boardrooms is being held up as an example of the kind of change that counts. 
But not every country will be able to replicate the comparatively robust French 
rate of growth, which stems from a national law passed in 2010 requiring boards 
to be 20% female by 2013 and 40% female by 2016.

Australia achieved significant growth of female board membership without a 
national law, including a 3.5% increase in female directors in the last year 
alone. The change is partly driven by a transparency requirement which forces 
companies to report on their diversity policies and track record, according to 
GMI.

More than 68% of companies on the ASX 200, the Australian national stock 
index, have at least one female director, compared with 71.1% in the US and 
57.9% in the UK.

Norway topped the GMI rankings for proportion of female board directors 
overall at 36.3%. Near the bottom of the rankings was Japan, where women 
constitute only 1.1% of board directors overall, a proportion that has risen 
0.2% since 2009.

Growth figures for the UK were not supplied, but the report notes that 10.7% 
of board members in Britain are women, compared with 16.6% in France and 12.6% 
in the US.

To help companies recruit qualified women and people from minorities, the 
California Public Employees' Retirement System and the California State 
Teachers' Retirement System recently commissioned GMI Ratings to create the 
Diverse Director Datasource (3D), GMI announced in a statement accompanying the 
report.
 