
Ellyse Perry fired Sydney Sixers to a clean sweep of their Women’s Big Bash 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> matches on a busy 
Melbourne weekend. The Sixers won all four ties at Junction Oval across three 
days to surge from the bottom of the WBBL table into semi-finals contention.

On Friday the Sixers swatted 5-164 to beat Melbourne Renegades, with openers 
Alyssa Healy (81) and Perry (57) putting the match beyond reach. Perry 
top-scored twice on Saturday in a double-header against Adelaide, knocking 
totals of 47 and 65 to set up the perfect weekend.

Adelaide Strikers end Brisbane Heat’s Big Bash League finals hopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/adelaide-strikers-end-brisbane-heats-big-bash-league-finals-hopes>
And on Sunday the 25-year-old led the way with an unbeaten innings of 67 as 
the Sixers hauled in the Renegades total of 6-128 with 32 balls remaining. 
After starting their season with six straight losses, the Sixers now have five 
consecutive victories and could yet sneak into the final four.

Perry said she attributed the turnaround to a fixture quirk that sidelined the 
team over Christmas. “I don’t think there was much to it. Just freshening up,” 
she told the WBBL website.

“It was probably in our favour that we had those three weeks off over 
Christmas and everyone could go away and work on a few different things. I 
think for me in this format especially I’m still learning a lot with the bat.”

The Sixers will have to win their three remaining matches to make finals; 
against top two sides Sydney Thunder and Hobart Hurricanes.

Elsewhere, the last-placed Renegades saved their best performance of the 
season for the table-topping Thunder. More than 14,000 people watched the 
closing stages of the Etihad Stadium match, a curtain raiser to the BBL 
Melbourne derby.

Openers Rachel Priest (57) was named player of the match for her role in a 
match-winning opening stand of 72 with Dane van Niekerk (29). The Renegades’ 
total of 8-139 proved too much for the Thunder, with Alex Blackwell (45) the 
only batter to stand up.

Molly Strano (3-18) captured both Thunder openers, combining with Sophie 
Molineux (3-20) to inflict the Thunder’s third loss of the season.

Completing the round, Adelaide and Melbourne Stars took a win each from 
matches against each other.
 