
In his soon-to-be-published political memoir, Politics: Between the Extremes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/politics-419232.html>, the former deputy 
prime minister Nick Clegg has admitted that he regrets not having asked for 
more civil service advice when he took up his post in the coalition government.

“My mistake, at least at first, was to accept the model presented to me,” he 
writes 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/nick-clegg-i-regret-not-asking-more-civil-service-help>
. “Having negotiated the coalition agreement without the help of civil 
servants, and with no experience in government myself, I simply didn’t see the 
need to surround myself with teams of officials.”

How to join the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
Clegg soon realised his mistake. But his misconception about how the civil 
service works isn’t limited to would-be senior politicians. Many of those who 
eagerly apply each year for the civil service fast stream – one of the most 
popular graduate employment schemes in the country – do so without fully 
realising what it will be like to work for the government.

With this year’s scheme about to open, we asked Guardian readers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/30/applying-civil-service-fast-stream>
who successfully applied to the fast stream programme and who now either work 
for or have previously worked for the civil service what they enjoyed best and 
least about the work. Here are some of their responses.

The good

Work that matters

“I love working on the key issues facing our country and the world today. 
Being ‘in the room’ and providing ministers with advice and options to consider 
is something I am incredibly proud of. It’s always fun to be working on the 
issues all your friends are talking about in the pub.” Matt, 24*. 

“I love knowing that my work has impact, seeing policies I have worked on in 
newspapers. The civil service gives you real responsibility rather than just 
feeling like you’re an intern making coffee. The moment I realised I had really 
made it was when I met the chairman for the company my mum cleans for.”Beth, 25.

Great opportunities

“Sheer diversity. No where else could you go from working in prisons to health 
to pensions without ever leaving. I have met some of the brightest and most 
committed people.” Mary, 22.


“I’ve had great opportunities to attend training that has really helped me to 
develop, and at work I’ve continually been given stretching challenges. It’s 
also very rewarding to know that you are working for the public good.”Alex, 21.

“I’ve been brought together with an amazing bunch of like-minded people, some 
of whom I’ve formed real friendships with outside work. The work has been super 
interesting so far. I work on policy that is incredibly relevant and current 
and it’s very interesting to work in the engine room of central government.” 
Anna, 23.

I have met some of the brightest and most committed people

Trust

“Being trusted by my managers is a big draw for me to the public sector. In 
other, private sector jobs, I felt like a workhorse that my manager wanted to 
get their money’s worth out of. In the civil service I am trusted to manage my 
time responsibly and to get tasks done.” Karen, 25.

The bad

Inflexibility 

“It can be slow to get things done at times. For good and for bad there is a 
big focus put on stakeholder engagement, whatever it is you are doing. Most of 
the time this is great as you get to see what all the different views are on 
something and it can help you no end. At times though it can be frustrating 
when you are waiting for so many different people to comment. Different 
departments can have very different views on something and it can take a long 
time to come to an agreement.”Matt, 24. 

Pay

“The pay is not as attractive as some private sector opportunities, but I 
would argue that the quality of work and the other benefits (work/life balance, 
pension, etc) more than outweigh this.” Matt 24.

“Pay is a particular concern. I am paid less in 2016 than I was as a new 
joiner in 2012 for doing substantially the same job. I am required to live in 
London but given no London weighting for my salary – half of my take home pay 
goes on rent alone.”David, 30. 

Rigid career paths

“Fast streamers have no career control for four years. Fast streamers are 
prohibited from applying for other roles within the civil service and this can 
be extremely frustrating as opportunities pass by. The lack of direct input 
into jobs is a big concern. Department and role allocations are done in secret 
and the results announced as a fait accompli. This can be disempowering and 
some roles are extremely poor quality, whilst others turn out to be 
unintentionally excellent.” David, 30.

“There is no senior career path for experienced qualified staff unless they 
are on a scheme such as the fast stream. This discriminates against older staff 
or those who aren’t graduates.” Maria, 46.

“Too many civil servants have no experience of other workplaces or other ways 
of doing things and the civil service is not keeping pace with more modern 
attitudes to careers. I was keen to have a more varied career, with time out on 
secondment or for study, but the rules are very restrictive in many 
departments. My only choice was to leave, at which point I was told ‘you know 
there’s no way back?’ – which is currently true, given the lack of external 
recruitment in vast majority of roles.” Catherine, 36.

Still too many white men

“I grew up on a council estate and while I went to a good school and 
university, I did not go to Oxbridge. When I first joined the civil service I 
lacked confidence and felt I did not belong there or was good enough to be on 
the fast stream. It is a difficult place to start working when you feel your 
face does not fit. Eventually I did find that not all of the civil service or 
the fast stream is comprised of privately-educated white men, but it did take 
time before I felt like I belonged.”Beth, 25. 


Not sure about making a difference

“You can be very remote from the impact of your work. It’s hard to know 
sometimes the extent of the contribution that you are making.”Alex, 21.

What to do if you don’t get on the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>
And the ugly

Lack of resources 

 “The message that in some areas our job was to do as little as we could get 
away with, because of a lack of resources in areas such as climate change was 
very disheartening.” Anna, 36. 

Lack of diversity

“I do think the civil service struggles with diversity, particularly on the 
fast stream. It needs to do far more to get more people on the fast stream from 
working class and ethnic minority backgrounds. Only in the past year have the 
civil service talked about social mobility and people from ethnic minorities 
are more likely to drop out of the fast stream,” Beth, 25. 

Poor management

“I have had a very poor experience of the fast stream to date. My postings 
have been of poor quality, my managers have not been particularly good and the 
support from the fast stream team, while better than it was, is still not good 
enough. Others in the fast stream have had great postings and are getting a lot 
out of it, but I am not. If I found a better job I would take it.” Richard, 19. 

“I’ve just resigned from the fast stream after two years – it felt like 
indentured servitude by the end.” Alison, 24. 

*Some names have been changed. 

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.



 