
Talk about going in at the deep end. 

I had been shadowing an experienced care worker on her rounds for four days. 
Now I was out on my own on a frosty December morning with a list of client 
names, addresses and key safe numbers.

It was 2011. I’d been taken on as a homecare worker after the social research 
project I’d been working on was axed following government spending cuts. 
Suddenly there were very few jobs in my sector.


I’d always liked working with people and thought care would be just a sideways 
step from my current role. And unlike community development, it was clearly a 
growth industry.

My employer, a private company, covered the whole city. I’d been impressed by 
its friendly publicity promising a safe pair of hands and a listening ear, 
supporting a mainly elderly clientele to live at home.


My first day, looking at my rota consisted of 10 calls to make in just under 
seven hours, including travelling time. Ten strangers. No other information 
apart from how long I was to spend with each one.


First call, 6.45am: R O’Brien. A Reginald or a Ruby?


Time allotted, 15 minutes. 

Who was this person and what would they want from me? 

All I knew was, he or she was inside waiting and I was outside panicking, 
looking for the key safe to get in. A key safe generally means the person can’t 
easily get to the door to open it themselves, so they’re probably quite 
vulnerable.

The sky was still dark at 7am. I used my phone as a torch to scan the property 
but there was no sign of that little black box in any of the usual places.


My job in palliative care let me practise social work as it is meant to be
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/13/palliative-care-social-work>
Should I ring or knock? No lights on upstairs. Asleep? Dead? 

Time was ticking away and I had all those people ahead on my rota. We’d been 
told at the induction that company policy demanded we should never be more than 
15 minutes late for a call, and I was already past that for my very first 
client of my first day. I tried to stay calm.


Icy fingers shaking, feeling incompetent already, I phoned my office. 

“What house number have you got? Number 8? Oh, no, you should have gone to 
number 6.”


As if it’s my fault. No name, no information, and the wrong address.

I found the key safe round the side of the house next door and unlocked a 
creaking outer porch door, then an inner one.

Inside, hush and darkness.

Ahead of me a hallway, a patterned carpet, ornamental plates along the walls, 
a stairlift. So bizarre to be in a stranger’s house like this, just walking 
into their private world.

Where was the care plan? Why hadn’t my office told me anything? By now I was 
running half an hour late. Nine more people still ahead on my rota, all of them 
unknown quantities.


These strangers would need medications that must be checked for the right 
date, dose and time of day; maybe to be helped out of bed; cups of tea made, 
teeth and hearing aids inserted. Some of them might need cream applying to sore 
bottoms, some of them, heaven help, might need me to wipe their bottoms and 
empty their commodes. Not for the first time I wondered what the hell I was 
doing here, tiptoeing up a stranger’s staircase and stepping gingerly past the 
chair of the stairlift on the landing.


Still no sound or signs of life. Two closed doors. A third one ajar. I tapped 
hesitantly, whispering “good morning?”

“Who is it?” rang out a surprisingly robust voice with an Irish lilt. “Let’s 
have a look at you.” And as I peeped around the door, “Ach, what does it 
matter, I’ll be dead by Christmas.”


Rosie O’Brien lived another three years to the ripe old age of 102 and we were 
friends from that first moment. She was my first client and one of the best 
people I ever met in my life.


I left the company after eight months to return to community development. 
Although I’d grown to love the work and the people I met, the increasing 
emphasis had been on covering as many calls as possible, with people reduced to 
names on a list to work through while constantly watching the clock. My 
employer had taken on an additional service contract with the local authority 
and I think it just tried to do too much.


Diary of an accidental carer: 'I cannot deal with this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jun/10/diary-carer-dying-care-teams-challenges>
However, I have since found my way back to the care sector. I now work for a 
small organisation specialising in support for people with dementia, where no 
one is treated like just a name on a list, and the emphasis is on a 
person-centred service, not on the clock.


My role now is much more about advocacy, support and ways to reduce social 
isolation. It’s about listening rather than telling and I love my work.

But that very first morning five years ago was terrifying.


With no information from the care agency, not even a first name, I had felt 
like I was on trial, under pressure and trembling at the prospect of the 
unknown shape hunched under the bedclothes in a dark bedroom.

It wasn’t until a few days later when the adrenaline had subsided and Rosie 
had told me the care company never let her know who to expect either, that I 
thought how frightening it must be for that person, waiting for an unknown 
footstep at their threshold. Me.


 * All names have been changed 
The My Social Care Story series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 