
Wednesday

Aus v Eng women, 10am, Delhi

England always knew that, if they wanted to win the World T20 for the first 
time since 2009, they would almost certainly have to overcome Australia at some 
stage. The Aussies have won the last three tournaments, beating England in the 
last two finals, although they were beaten by New Zealand in the group stage. 
Charlotte Edwards is in outstanding form and is the joint leading run-scorer in 
the tournament while Tammy Beaumont has played some breezy cameos By their 
stratospheric standards, Sarah Taylor and Ellyse Perry have been quiet. So far.

Odds Australia 4-6, England 5-4

England’s Ben Stokes defies the numbers to be a danger man against New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/ben-stokes-england-new-zealand-world-twenty20>
NZ v Eng men, 2.30pm, Delhi

This is only England’s second semi-final at a World Cup or World T20 since 
1992 and they meet the team who led them towards a limited-overs epiphany last 
summer – New Zealand, who have easily been the team of the tournament so far. 
Both sides have high-class batsmen, notably Martin Guptill and Kane Williamson 
for the Kiwis and England’s Joe Root and Jos Buttler. The battle of the 
spinners could be decisive New Zealand’s have 20 wickets between them and a 
combined economy-rate of 5.13; England’s have eight wickets and go for 9.92 per 
over.

Odds England 10-9, New Zealand 11-13

Thursday NZ v WI women, 10am, Mumbai

New Zealand’s women won all their group matches, including a rousing victory 
over Australia in which the offspinner Leigh Kasperek continued the astonishing 
start to her T20 career: she currently has 25 wickets at an average of 6.96. 
Their opponents are the perennial semi-finalists of the women’s world T20 – 
West Indies have fallen at the penultimate hurdle in the last three 
tournaments. They will look for inspiration to their captain, the brilliant 
Stafanie Taylor, and the hard-hitting all-rounder Deandra Dottin; the pair 
secured the crucial three-run victory over the hosts India on Sunday almost on 
their own

Odds New Zealand 8-13, West Indies 7-4

WI v Ind men, 2.30pm, Mumbai

The awesome nature of Virat Kohli’s innings against Australia on Sunday has 
given the previously stuttering hosts some dangerous momentum, though they must 
now beat the most consistent side around. West Indies love the instant glory of 
T20 cricket and are the only side to make the semi-finals of the last three 
tournaments. For a variety of reasons Chris Gayle has faced only two deliveries 
since starting the tournament by pumping a century against England, though he 
will always havecan win a match off his own bat. The same is true of Kohli, who 
has redefined the art of finishing in limited-overs cricket Watch out for his 
duel with the mischievous, inventive all-rounder Dwayne Bravo. If they win the 
toss, West Indies might choose to chase just so that Kohli can’t.

Odds India 1-2, West Indies 2-1
 