
My writing day starts in the night, with midnight or early morning dreams. 
When I wake up in my east London flat, I ponder on them while making coffee. In 
one recurrent dream, my dead Chinese grandmother speaks in my hometown dialect 
to my western boyfriend, and my western boyfriend responds to her in his 
language. Both seem to understand each other perfectly without a translator. I 
must have been using a hidden language to narrate the dream – neither Chinese 
nor English. It is a dreaming language. I desperately want to capture it, and 
write in it.

Since I left China 14 years ago, my everyday writing life seems to be a battle 
between the language I think in and the language I write in. Sometimes, before 
my pen touches paper, none of my languages – Mandarin, English, Zhejiang 
dialect – come out; my hand freezes and I stare at my notebook or a scene in 
the street, my thoughts lost in translation. I cannot write – even though I’ve 
written several books in Chinese, and a few more in English; and I still feel 
there’s so much in me screaming to be heard. But something is deeply 
suppressed. My tongue is tied. I cannot express my thoughts with only one 
language. So I translate. I use one word to find another word. I try to write a 
transcript which is in both Chinese and English, a text that is alive and true 
for both cultures I am living in.

It has been like this for a while now. For the last decade I have led a life 
of an artist-in-residence in Europe. I’ve lived in France, Germany, Switzerland 
and Britain, although London and Beijing have been my main bases. When I lived 
in Paris, I was writing a Chinese novel –UFO in Her Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/14/xiaolu-guo-ufo-in-her-eyes> – in 
English while studying French. In Zurich, I worked on my memoir in English, 
largely set in China, and conversed with myself in a mix of Chinese, English 
and German. In those foreign cities, I woke up with confused dreams. I noted 
them down until I realised the linguistic disunity in my narrative. Then my pen 
froze again. My languages alienate me. They don’t make me feel at home. They 
tell me I live in the wrong place. They make me stateless. That’s the nature of 
my writing life.

The language of dreams exists beyond verbal language – one day I’ll fathom it

This morning I take my daughter to nursery. I’m aware that tomorrow we’ll be 
in Berlin and I need to print the boarding passes today. After China abandoned 
me (or did I abandon China?), I decided that I would be based in London, but 
Berlin would be my second home – so as to keep touch with the continent. Each 
time I return to Berlin, I try to write English novels, while studying some 
German. But, today, my mind is in Beijing – a city I lived in for a decade 
before coming to London.

After leaving the nursery, I print out our boarding passes, and go to a 
bookshop where I buy a well-known Chinese sci-fi novel in an English edition,
The Three-Body Problem 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/three-body-problem.html>. How fitting! It 
sums up my state. I will be interviewing the Chinese sci-fi authorCixin Liu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/11/seek-out-new-worlds-of-science-fiction-damien-walter>
 – I’ll converse with him in Chinese and then translate our words into English 
for the audience. I must prepare the interview this week in Berlin. Returning 
to my flat. I cook some Sichuan-style stir-fry, and plan the rest of my day – 
mainly writing and reading, and stretching my limited vocabularies.

Wittgenstein’s famous line stays with me: “The limits of my language are the 
limits of my world.” Words fail me all the time, whether in Chinese or in 
English. But I still churn my words out in a foreign world, in a language that 
I hope will become mine.

Since I began to write in English in 2003, I’ve been living in multiple 
spaces, each with its own language. The fact that I now write in my third 
tongue makes my writing days even more difficult.

This evening as I pack my luggage, I stand before my shelf thinking: should I 
bring Mishima to Berlin or keep his books in London? What about Laozi? Or 
Bolaño? Or Joyce? I need them by my bedside, even though I don’t read them very 
often. Without them, I feel I’ve lost my glasses. Everything blurs. In this 
perpetual living abroad, I need to locate myself through these authors, through 
their particular ways of using language, ways of dreaming.

The dream language exists beyond verbal languages. But it’s my real native 
language. I want to understand the dream in which my dead grandma converses 
with my western boyfriend. One day I’ll fathom it; that mysterious language 
will eventually belong to me.

• Xiaolu Guo’s UFO in Her Eyes is published by Vintage. She will be in 
conversation with Cixin Liu at the London Literature festival, Southbank 
Centre, London SE1, on 15 October.southbankcentre.co.uk 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/?gclid=CIT0tL251c8CFcEp0wodvrMAxg>
 