
Adil Rashid has been called many things over the years but his monikers at 
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> are a variation on the 
same theme: he gets Dyson, Henry and Hoover, all for his ability to clean up 
the tail.

The England leg-spinner’s tidying up of Warwickshire’s lower order – completed 
at 6.29pm, in the second over of the third day’s extra half-hour, when an 
impaired Sam Hain edged to slip – pushed the reigning county champions up to 
third in Division One.

Ominously for their rivals, with six matches remaining, their first-choice 
attack has been pieced back together following a months of injury blight. Their 
bid to emulate their Sixties predecessors with three titles in a row could not 
have been given a timelier boost.

Rashid’s late flurry provided match figures of seven for 61 but the decisive 
conclusion to a compelling contest belied the fact that, at tea, it remained in 
the balance. It was a stunning one-handed catch, low down by Jack Leaning at 
third slip, to dismiss Tim Ambrose and terminate the match’s biggest 
partnership – a 91-run stand with Jonathan Trott – that proved crucial.

“It turned the game that catch, and at six down you just bring the Hoover on, 
and he cleans the tail up,” Andrew Gale, the Yorkshire captain, said. “One of 
the things about us this season is that we haven’t been ruthless enough to win 
games of cricket but we were pretty ruthless this game.”

Warwickshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> were five 
down six balls after Ryan Sidebottom, playing his first game since April, 
snared Ambrose, when for the second time in the match Trott provided Jack 
Brooks with a return catch – this time from a top edge. Earlier in the week, a 
Trott hundred in the Royal London Cup match between the counties had been 
integral to his side’s winning of a quarter-final place, and he appeared on 
course to deliver an even better innings on a surface more Hyderabad than 
Headingley when he reached a 91-ball 50.

Yorkshire are unbeaten in 21 Championship matches in Leeds but that was under 
serious threat when Jeetan Patel and Rikki Clarke combined for a 32-over spell 
of spin and reverse swing to set up a chase of 229. Then, Trott and Ambrose 
realigned things superbly after their side were plunged to 14-3 by a trio of 
lbw dismissals either side of lunch: Brooks’ brace including the out-of-sorts 
Ian Bell for nought.

During this period it was uncertain whether Hain, impaired by a temporary 
shoulder dislocation after colliding into the concrete perimeter fielding, 
would bat. But he came in at seven, and provided two hours of defiance – both 
of the pain and match situation – before being suckered like Keith Barker, 
Patel and Chris Wright before him.

Yorkshire pegged back by Warwickshire after Ryan Sidebottom’s milestone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/yorkshire-warwickshire-county-championship-division-one-day-two-match-report> 