
Ryan Sidebottom celebrated another career milestone but admitted there is no 
guarantee of it being in aYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> win on an uncharacteristic 
Headingley pitch.

County cricket: Yorkshire v Warwickshire and more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/05/county-cricket-yorkshire-warwickshire-live-blog>
The 38-year-old was applauded by his team-mates in the dressing room at the 
close after reaching 400 first-class wickets for the club with the dismissal of 
Warwickshire’s Sam Hain. It came in impressive overall bowling figures of three 
for 41 in his comeback match.

The former England left-armer had been sidelined since April after fracturing 
his fibula kicking a football in the dressing room. “It’s been a stinking three 
months,” he said, “so it was nice to get to 400 and there is nothing like doing 
a day in the dirt. You can train all you want but it doesn’t compare to bowling 
15 overs and I love being part of this team, trying to help it win.”

However, despite Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> conceding a 78-run deficit 
on first innings, they fought back hard in the final session on a dry surface 
that has surprisingly taken turn from the word go. Rikki Clarke, who earlier 
struck an unbeaten half-century, took four wickets and had a hand in the other, 
catching the out-of-form captain, Andrew Gale, at slip off Jeetan Patel.

“The ball isn’t coming on, it’s spinning, it’s bouncing, so it’s going to be 
difficult from here on,” Sidebottom added. “Runs on the board will be crucial, 
and we have that, but we really need to hold together to get another 70 to 80. 
With us five wickets down it’s sort of in the balance.”

Yorkshire’s 257 appeared an undercooked effort – until their much-heralded 
bowling attack got their hands on the ball, that is. Title rivals Warwickshire, 
with two of England’s most successful modern batsmen, Jonathan Trott and Ian 
Bell, at Nos 3 and 4, could not muster a single batting point.

Not a single Warwickshire pairing could match the 53-run stand between 
Sidebottom and Steven Patterson for the final Yorkshire wicket, suggesting a 
pitch that is becoming increasingly difficult to master. Only Clarke, who took 
his first-class batting average at Leeds to an imperious 96.75, and Sam Hain, 
back in the touch that had him touted as a future England player following an 
early-season trough of 120 in 11 innings, did so.

Patterson’s lame skew to cover to terminate Yorkshire’s innings was the first 
of four wickets in the opening hour. Andy Umeed was then taken at third slip 
and Trott poked a return catch to give the returning Jack Brooks two successes 
either side of a delivery of perfect curvature from Sidebottom that missed the 
inside edge of Varun Chopra’s bat and struck a fatal blow on the pad.

Patterson relieved his partner in crime at the Football Stand end and struck 
in his first over when Bell miscued a drive to point, the disdainful look down 
suggesting he apportioned the blame to the pitch rather than injudicious 
stroke. Then, shortly after lunch, Patterson produced a pearler that brushed 
outside edge and Tim Ambrose’s trousers on its way through and half the 
visitors’ lineup had gone for 80.

Sidebottom’s reintroduction from the Kirkstall Lane End was decisive, his 
value to a teamchasing a hat-trick of titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/09/yorkshire-retain-county-championship-division-one-title-middlesex>
 emphasised when Hain became number 400, snaffled low at first slip. His tally 
increased to 238 victims at 20.99 runs apiece since his return from 
Nottinghamshire in 2011 when he nicked off the last man, Oliver Hannon-Dalby. 
Adil Rashid’s three wickets in 18 balls, the first terminating a half-century 
stand between Clarke and Keith Barker, had hurried the innings to the threshold 
of closure.
 