
Not for the first time opponents found champions Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> possess a nasty sting in their 
tail as a potentially pivotal Division One match took a late twist on its 
opening day.

For three quarters of it, Warwickshire, one of the suitors for their crown, 
appeared to hold the upper hand, only for a last-wicket stand between Steven 
Patterson and Ryan Sidebottom to alter the complexion. This season, late-order 
resistance contributed heavilyto Roses victory in Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/01/county-cricket-yorkshire-lancashire-live-blog>
, and the draw salvaged against Somerset at Taunton. Here, they added 48 
unbroken runs for the final wicket.

Yorkshire – aiming for an historic third County Championship pennant in a row, 
to emulate the achievements of their sixties predecessors – therefore nicked an 
unlikely second batting point, having begun this round 25 behind leaders 
Middlesex, with a game in hand.Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> are wedged between them, 14 
points shy of the summit.

Andrew Gale’s team were boosted by the return of their new-ball pair Ryan 
Sidebottom and Jack Brooks from injury, allowing them the luxury of resting 
their fastest bowler Liam Plunkett. A second member ofEngland’s World Twenty20 
final team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-final-carlos-brathwaite-sinks-england>
, David Willey, was overlooked. In light of Yorkshire’s top-six struggles this 
summer, their runs might have proved as beneficial as their wicket-taking 
potential.

Over recent seasons, Yorkshire have had the wood over Warwickshire in 
Championship cricket – unbeaten in eight, three of their four victories have 
been by an innings. Yet there was no inferiority complex about the way the 
visitors approached their task after Andrew Gale opted to bat on a morning of 
watery sunshine.

Had the toss taken place 90 minutes later, after a dramatic climatic change 
ushered in slatish clouds from the west, his call might have been a different 
one. The trick at Headingley is to look up at the sky, not down at the pitch in 
such situations.

Yorkshire had lost Alex Lees by that juncture, as Rikki Clarke shaped his 
third delivery back and struck the left-hander on the knee roll. Adam Lyth 
followed before lunch when Oliver Hannon-Dalby, returning to his roots and 
performing admirably, produced the kind of delivery Sohail Khan made a habit of 
at Edgbaston 24 hours earlier – forced to play, a nick was safely pouched by 
wicketkeeper Tim Ambrose.

But the innings was unhinged in the afternoon session during a period in which 
Warwickshire’s premier pairing of Keith Barker and Jeetan Patel operated in 
tandem. Brought on for the 36th over of the innings, off-spinner Patel sent 
down 27 on the reel from the Kirkstall Lane end, even continuing into the 
second new ball. The New Zealander provided his captain Ian Bell with control; 
Barker the cutting edge.

Gale’s personal experience this season will be a forewarning to specialist 
Championship batsmen as county cricket heads towards its 2017 schedule 
restructure of competitions played in blocks. Devoid of action due to his 
limited-overs jettisoning, he appears to have lost significant rhythm to his 
batting.

He fought for fluency alongside fellow left-hander Travis Head but departed in 
the teens when Barker curved one outside off-stump and located the edge of a 
hanging blade. Head registered a punchy debut Championship half-century off 78 
balls, with his most accomplished stroke – a drive on the up to the extra cover 
boundary – only to lace Barker straight to gully later in the over.

With the top-order southpaws now all departed, Patel was able to fizz his 
twirlers into the pancakes of rough Barker’s boots had left outside off-stump, 
and gained his first reward when Adil Rashid was caught at slip, following a 
deflection off Ambrose’s gloves.

Jack Leaning attempted to release the Patel-forged manacles by launching him 
for a straight six but it was an isolated show of aggression on a day of 
attrition. Barker produced another snorter to account for him, and increase his 
lead at the top of the Division One wicket-takers list, and a flurry of soft 
dismissals suggested job done – only Patterson and Sidebottom had other ideas.
 