
With four rounds of fixtures remaining, both divisions of the County 
Championship are beautifully poised.Yorkshire, by beating Nottinghamshire  – 
for whom relegation seems increasingly likely – by 305 runs, sit five points 
behind Middlesex, whom they meet at Lord’s in the final game of the season.
Surrey beat Lancashire by 10 wickets to seal their fourth win in seven matches 
and, having played two games more than the top two, sit two points behind
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire>.

It took Surrey only 75 minutes on the final morning to take the last two 
Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> wickets and then 
knock off 38 runs and as a result the threat of relegation – which, after 
failing to win any of their first seven matches seemed not so much a threat as 
an inevitability – has eased considerably.

Mark Footitt dismissed Nathan Buck, caught at second slip, and Kyle Jarvis, 
who drove to mid-off, to finish with career-best figures of seven for 62, 
before Rory Burns, celebrating his 26th birthday, reverse-swept Simon Kerrigan 
to secure victory and reach 1,000 Championship runs this summer.

“We started the game on the front foot and finished on the front foot,” said 
Gareth Batty, Surrey’s captain. “It was a pretty complete performance. A lot of 
the stuff behind the scenes doesn’t get seen but we have worked so hard [to 
turn things round]. Sometimes you get on the crest of the wave and you’ve just 
got to ride it. We cannot take any game for granted. It will bite us. We are 
not looking up or down. We are looking at our next game.”

England get better of the rain breaks to beat Pakistan on D/L method
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/24/england-pakistan-first-odi-match-report>
Yorkshire had to wait until shortly after lunch to seal their victory at 
Scarborough. Tim Bresnan took three wickets in the morning session to complete 
a first-class best of five for 36, before Brendan Taylor and Brett Hutton dug 
in for 21 overs to share 47. After lunch, Notts lost both and Luke Fletcher 
with the score on 130, and two overs later Imran Tahir, caught at short leg, 
became Jack Brooks’ fourth wicket. With three games remaining they are 35 
points adrift of safety.

The other two games in Division One were drawn. At Taunton, Hampshire gave 
their hopes of survival a boost by coming through a trial bySomerset’s 
spinners, Jack Leach and Roelof van der Merwe, who bowled 65 of the 96 overs. 
Sean Ervine scored his second century of the match and Jimmy Adams made 96 
(from 268 balls) but James Vince could only manage 13 before being caught at 
mid-on. Earlier, Van der Merwe and Craig Overton made centuries – the latter’s 
maiden first-class ton – as Somerset set up their declaration.

Scott Borthwick made 92 and Mark Stoneman 80 as Durham batted out 62 overs to 
save a rain-ravaged game againstWarwickshire at the Riverside.

In Division Two, after Essex pulled clear in the race for the single promotion 
spot by beating Leicestershire on Thursday, the chasing pack – led byKent, who 
beatGloucestershire by an innings and 69 runs, taking maximum points – closed 
the gap. A century from Hamish Marshall had led the resistance but Kent’s new 
overseas signing Hardus Viljoen took eight wickets in the match.

Worcestershire and Sussex pulled off magnificent chases to keep their 
promotion hopes alive. After two imaginative declarations, Worcestershire 
needed 401 from 80 overs to beatNorthamptonshire, and thanks to tons from the 
captain Daryl Mitchell (his second of the match) and Joe Clarke, they reached 
their target eight down. Sussex needed 233 to beatGlamorgan and also did so 
with two wickets to spare.
 