
The fact that Zafar Ansari dismissed Alastair Cook on his first-class debut in 
April 2011 probably does not have much bearing on his selection for England’s 
second Test against Bangladesh in Dhaka. On the eve of the match Cook announced 
to no one’s surprise that Ansari would make his Test debut on Friday, replacing 
his county captain, Gareth Batty, and that Steven Finn would come in for the 
rested Stuart Broad, who is left stranded – briefly, one assumes – on 99 Test 
matches.

Ansari probably has a clearer memory of his dismissal of Cook when playing for 
Cambridge University than the England captain but even his recollections were a 
bit hazy. “I can remember that if felt as if we had been in the field for a day 
and a half. Cook [who was on 120 at the time] played a reverse sweep and the 
ball dribbled onto the stumps.”

This was obviously not such a classical snare as the one endured by Ansari’s 
next victim, which took place a month later at Fenner’s when he had Kevin 
Pietersen, playing for Surrey, caught at slip for 30. This is not a bad pair to 
start with especially for a man who admits that he began his cricketing life, 
rather like Moeen Ali, as a batsman who bowls.

“At university I started bowling a lot and that was what got me into the 
Surrey side,” said Ansari on the eve of a Test debut, which he inevitably 
described as “very exciting”. “But I’m not too nervous at the moment,” he 
added. “I feel as if I’m starting in a strong group. So I feel relatively 
protected.”

Even though he has not played an international match Ansari is almost making a 
comeback in Bangladesh. He was selected for the winter tour last year but a 
severe thumb injury at the end of the 2015 season prevented him from taking 
part. “I see getting back after the problem with my thumb as a more significant 
achievement,” he said, perhaps recognising that England were always minded to 
play him in one of the Tests in Bangladesh if only to find out more about what 
he has to offer.

They are obviously attracted to the fact that he is a left-handed bowler (and 
batsman), especially since the likely Indian side has nine right-handed 
batsmen. On turning pitches it usually helps to spin the ball away from the bat.

Ansari understands that this Test can be treated as a one-off as England’s 
management team examine what ammunition they have in their bowling arsenal at 
the start of the tour. “For them it is a way of seeing how I go. If I bowl well 
I give myself a chance for Test matches in India,” said Ansari.

Being an intelligent man he tries not to overcomplicate the process of bowling 
in conditions that are likely to favour spinners again. Cook reported that the 
pitch for the Test in Dhaka was dry and cracked and he anticipated that it 
would behave in a similar manner to the one in Chittagong – though the overhead 
conditions may be different. On Thursday there was much rain in Dhaka and a few 
thunderstorms are forecast.

“I’ll just try to spin the ball and be consistent and then chances should be 
created,” said Ansari, who seemed flattered to hear that his captain had drawn 
a comparison with India’s Ravindra Jadeja. Bear in mind that Jadeja averages 23 
with the ball in Test cricket having taken 85 wickets in 20 Tests, 64 of which 
have come in his own country. “My style is direct; I try to bowl wicket to 
wicket and I would love to be able to emulate him,” said Ansari. If he bowls 
well in Dhaka he might just have the chance to do that opposite Jadeja in 
Rajkot in a fortnight’s time.

England stick with spin trident but could turn to Zafar Ansari for second Test 
| Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-zafar-ansari-debut-bangladesh-second-test>
England’s Jonny Bairstow keen to keep his eye on every ball in Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-jonny-bairstow-every-ball-bangladesh> 