
The chair of the Coalition’s inquiry into the Racial Discrimination Act, Ian 
Goodenough, has said the laws need to be fine-tuned to allow free speech to 
“bridge cultural differences”.


At the same time, academics and the media groups suggested a broader range of 
freedom of speech issues required addressing and review, including defamation 
laws.

But with the deadline for submissions to the human rights committee inquiry 
closing on 9 December, and a reporting date on 28 February, it would appear 
there is little time for hearings over the Christmas period.


Peter Greste says section 18C an attack on free speech that should be repealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/peter-greste-says-section-18c-an-attack-on-free-speech-that-should-be-repealed>
Labor has been urging ethnic community groups 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/labor-stokes-ethnic-groups-concern-for-fight-back-against-18c-changes-20161116-gsqgop.html>
 to make submissions to the committee, chaired by Goodenough, the Liberal MP 
for Moore with Labor’s Moreton MP Graham Perrett as deputy.

But Goodenough, who is Singaporean Australian, has made his opinion clear in a 
piece for the West Australian relaying an anecdote in which he was invited to 
eat before his female friend at an ethnic festival in his electorate. His 
friend and other women were served only after the men had eaten.

“Imagine if I had stood my ground, saying to my hosts, ‘This is Australia, 
mate, in our society it is customary for women to either be served their meals 
first or together with men’,” Goodenough said.

“That may have caused insult or offence to my ethnic hosts in a public setting 
with more than 2,000 people present. Even more so had I resorted to social 
media to express my contrary views on Facebook or Twitter.”

Goodenough questioned if he had made a stand, whether he would have been 
subject to complaint at the human rights committee just as the Queensland of 
Technology students had been.

“By fine-tuning our existing laws we can allow free speech to bridge cultural 
differences to achieve compromise,” he said.


However the terms of reference also relate to other encroachments to freedom 
of speech, by considering of theAustralian Law Reform Commission’s report into 
traditional rights and freedoms 
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/freedoms-alrc129> which not only 
considers laws such as the Racial Discrimination Act but also defamation laws 
among others.

Uniform defamation laws were introduced across the six states and came into 
effect on 1 January 2006. The unified law is subject to an inter-governmental 
agreement which also provides for any amendments to the laws.

A spokeswoman for the media coalition Australia’s Right To Know  
<http://www.australiasrighttoknow.com.au/>said on the issue of freedom of 
speech generally, it was time for an update of unified defamation laws almost 
11 years down the track.

“All of these years of ‘road testing’ have made it clear that some parts of 
the law do not operate as intended, and the law needs to be updated to apply 
consistently across all platforms, including digital,” the spokeswoman said.

University of Queensland law professor Graeme Orr supports removing the words 
“insult” and “offend” from section 18C. But he said defamation has much wider 
implications and costs a lot more to defend because the cases are entirely 
based in the supreme court and can expose speakers to unlimited liability.

“But because it is old judge-made law, and protects ‘reputations’, often of 
the powerful or wealthy, its reform remains a second order issue,” Orr said.

He said any broader inquiry into freedom of speech should address the fact 
that the ability to restrain speech has shifted in recent times.

“Few statutes censor today,” he said. “What is now more common is corporations 
and government bodies limiting ‘free speech’ using their contractual and 
property power.

“Such as journalists and academics being sacked or disciplined for tweeting 
things that offend their employers’ brand, even when it’s a social or political 
issue not really related to their work.

I used to think we didn't need 18C. But could a version of it represent our 
best selves? | Gay Alcorn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/i-used-to-think-we-didnt-need-18c-but-could-a-version-of-it-represent-our-best-selves>
“Or airports refusing to take advertisements from green groups (‘political’) 
but taking advertisements that promote and brand mining companies.”

 Chief executive of the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance, Paul Murphy, 
said defamation law was one of a number of concerns requiring more urgent 
reform than section 18C. He also named reforms including protection for 
whistleblowers, freedom of information laws and metadata laws.

The MEAA will make a submission to the inquiry in some form.


“As we have said in the past, we believe that an examination of the kind 
envisaged previously by the Law Reform Commission is a good idea,” Murphy said.

“However, it is also MEAA’s view that there are other concerns about press 
freedom in Australia which require more urgent reform than section 18C, 
including lack of protection for whistleblowers, defamation law, freedom of 
information laws and the metadata laws.”
 