
All I know about Devil is that it's about five people trapped in a lift, and 
one of them is, yes, the Devil. That alone makes me want to go and see it, 
though with M Night Shyamalan getting a story credit one fears there will be a 
preposterous narrative twist tacked on, as if being stuck in an elevator with 
the Devil weren't enough. Place your bets. Perhaps all the characters are 
already dead and the lift is really an expressway to hell, like the ones in 
Angel Heart and The Vault ofHorror <https://www.theguardian.com/film/horror>?

The classic template for low-budget movies, particularly from first-time 
directors, is a bunch of characters talking in a room; the results can be as 
different as, for example, Sex, Lies and Videotape and Reservoir Dogs. A bunch 
of characters trapped in a lift would be the reductio ad absurdum of this 
formula, though to my knowledge no mainstream full-length feature has ever been 
set entirely in an elevator. Stuck-in-a-lift scenes are routinely interspersed 
with flashbacks, extra-lift activity and CCTV, as if film-makers fear audiences 
would go stir-crazy if they were trapped in a huis clos for an unbroken 90 
minutes.

Lifts feature in thousands of films, but it's the ones where things go wrong 
that stick in our memories. Conveniently for horror movies or thrillers, 
elevators tap into two common phobias (fear of heights and fear of enclosed 
spaces) and then add the clincher – the guillotine effect. Plunging 
counterweights, whiplash cables or clamplike sliding doors are forever 
conspiring to slice lift passengers in half (Damien: Omen II was a pioneer in 
this regard) or sever heads (Final Destination 2, Profondo Rosso, De Lift and 
its Hollywood remake, Down) or limbs, as in Total Recall or Blackout, in which 
one of three people trapped in the lift turns out to be, not the Devil, but a 
sadistic psychokiller.

Lifts enable killers to corner victims (in Dressed to Kill or The 
Untouchables), or provide opportunities for mad bombers to hold passengers to 
ransom; the first half hour of Speed, set in and around an elevator, is 
arguably more viscerally thrilling than anything involving the 50mph bus later 
on. Lifts are like fishtanks, to be pumped full of water, like the one in the 
Rachel-Nichols-in-peril movie P2, or they can gush tsunamis of blood, like the 
hotel elevator in The Shining.

Or they can go into free-fall; Earthquake is chiefly remembered in my house 
for one of the sloppiest special effects in cinema history – plummeting lift 
passengers screaming in unison while someone chucks red paint at the lens. 
Factor in the possibility of being impaled (like Emilio Estevez in Mission: 
Impossible) and you have the ultimate death-trap, the perfect multiple-jeopardy 
mechanism, and barely bigger than a coffin. And there are invariably trapdoors 
in floors and ceilings, enabling people to clamber out into the shaft and 
dangle from girders, which is one of the absolute requirements of a lift movie.

But movies rarely feature the things I hate most about lifts: horrible 
elevator Muzak (never a cool Miles Davis soundtrack, like the one in Lift to 
the Scaffold) or the way that, when you're in a hurry, someone has pushed all 
the buttons so the damn thing stops at every floor. Nor are people trapped in 
movie elevators ever crammed shoulder to shoulder; there's always enough space 
for them to squint at each other suspiciously or have tantrums or knife fights. 
With claustrophobia and acrophobia already on the menu, perhaps it would be 
overegging the pudding to add demophobia as well.

The lift in my block of flats is such an antique it has a wire grille and 
doors that open outwards, like the ones in Lady in a Cage, enabling me to play 
pranks on visitors by pretending to be the little boy ghost from Grudge and 
peering in at them as they trundle slowly past. Sometimes, when the lightbulb 
needs replacing, you have to ride up and down in the dark, which is when my 
thoughts return to that terrifying haunted lift scene from The Eye. It's at 
times like this that I've been known to take the stairs.
 