
With just over a week to go, the Oscar race has reached that tipping point 
where the word "lock" is being heard a little bit too much. The thrill-hungry 
Oscar-watcher must hunt high and low for what little pockets of uncertainty 
they can find. Some movement in one of the acting races? A wobbly frontrunner 
in one of the screenplay categories? Last weekend,the Brits handed out the 
Baftas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/10/baftas-2013-winners>, 
further cementing Argo's momentum for best picture, Daniel Day-Lewis's claim on 
this third best actor trophy and Anne Hathaway's on her first.

Elsewhere there were signs of wiggle room and the odd crack of daylight: 
Amour's Emmanuelle Riva took best actress, Christoph Waltz won best supporting 
actor, andQuentin Tarantino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/quentintarantino> 
took home best original screenplay. And while Affleck won best director he was, 
of course, excluded from the Oscar nominees, so that race has still has some 
bounce to the ounce. There's some hope for upset hounds.
 Can Waltz win again? 
The British show of support for Django Unchained was probably the most 
unexpectedly rambunctious – to borrow a Candyism. Unexpected because critics 
have complained about the script's length, while yielding to its humor, and 
because Waltz's role – picking his way through Tarantino's rococo ultimatums 
with the daintiness of an 18th century fop – follows a little too closely in 
the footsteps of the actor's Hans Landa in Inglourious Basterds. Will the 
academy be quite so willing to reward him again so soon, for work so similar?

The actor's branch prize the smell of newly turned turf above all, which is 
why I slightly fancy De Niro's chances against Tommy Lee Jones in thesupporting 
actor race. Jones puts on a spectacular gnashing of the molars as abolitionist 
Thaddeus Stevens in Lincoln, but chewing out fools and dunces is what Jones 
does in his sleep – I didn't see any stretch marks in that performance. De 
Niro's turn in Silver Linings Playbook was not only his most technically 
precise since Heat, and his funniest since The King of Comedy, but unexpectedly 
affecting in a way we have not seen before. Actor in Autumnal Softening Alert! 
Histears for Katie Couric 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/robert-de-niro-breaks-tears-interview-article-1.1255750>
 cannot have hurt, either. Harvey has him trotting the campaign trail like a 
dressage horse.

Original screenplay is probably still up for grabs, although I'd give Michael 
Haneke the edge. Tarantino has won before, for Pulp Fiction in 1994, and this 
may be the academy's only chance to decorate the 70-year-old Haneke, the sole 
heir of the once-noble European art house, radiating the kind of Bergman-esque 
gravitas which sets off car alarms. Amour's five nominations – very high for a 
foreign film – mean that it is much loved, and Emmanuelle Riva's success at the
Baftas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas> makes her a sizeable threat to 
Jennifer Lawrence's run onbest actress. At 85 Riva would be the oldest winner, 
her birthday falls on February 24, the night of the ceremony, and she plays 
someone with a debilitating disease. On the other hand, she was not up for a 
Sag award and before Amour, most academy members would have struggled to 
remember who she was. It depends on how shameless they are willing to be in the 
game of catch-up. Oh that much-loved grande dame.
 Ang Lee v Steven Spielberg: of all of them, best director remains one of the 
hardest to call this year. Photograph: Carl Court/AFP/Getty Images 
Which leaves best director a toss-up between Ang Lee and Steven Spielberg. I've
made my case 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2013/jan/22/ang-lee-best-director-oscars>
 for why Ang Lee should get it, but I'm also alert to the drubbing a Lee win 
would administer to the much-nominated Lincoln and wonder whether Spielberg's 
self-vanishing act – Day-Lewis is unquestionably the star of this show, not his 
director – might prove popular enough with the actor's branch to seal a 
compensatory win for Spielberg. It would put Spielberg up there with other 
three-time director winners William Wyler, John Ford and Frank Capra, which 
seems the right kind of company, but Spielberg is resented, make no mistake. Of 
all of them, best director remains one of the hardest to call this year.

But don't even think of betting against Day-Lewis for actor, Anne Hathaway for 
supporting actress, Adele for best song, or Amour for best foreign film. Argo 
is now a very steady frontrunner forbest picture. Adapted screenplay is Tony 
Kushner's for Lincoln.Best animated feature is looking like Wreck-It Ralph. 
Cinematography, special effects and score are all likely going to Life of Pi. 
Costumes are Anna Karenina's, makeup and hair The Hobbit. When these come up in 
conversation affect a small yawn, cast a brief glance toward the 2014 race and 
say something like "I hearBefore Midnight 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movie/before-midnight/review/414032> has come 
out of Sundance strong …
 