
After last night’s lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/19/nba-draft-lottery-live>, 
every team knows where they’re picking in the 25 June draft at Brooklyn’s 
Barclays Center. That means it’s mock draft time, a yearly tradition where 
basketball experts compete to see whose predictions are the least 
embarrassingly inaccurate.


1) Minnesota Timberwolves, Karl-Anthony Towns (PF, Kentucky)

The Timberwolves received Andrew Wiggins and Anthony Bennett in last year’s 
Kevin Love trade. This means that, barring any additional moves, they will have 
the last three top overall picks on their roster. It’s either the start of a 
golden era of Timberwolves basketball or the beginning of its grimmest chapter 
yet.


Unless something impossibly unforeseen happens, expect the Timberwolves to 
take either Towns or Jahlil Okafor. It’s assumed that Minnesota will be taking 
Towns – a lane-clogging 7ft defensive stopper with an underrated offensive game 
– but be prepared for nonstop rumors saying that they are truly, seriously 
considering taking Okafor first overall. Then be prepared for he inevitable 
draft day announcement that they were just kidding and were going with Towns 
all along.


2) LA Lakers, Jahlil Okafor (C, Duke)

The Lakers have to be ecstatic about landing the second overall pick, 
especially since Okafor was probably the player they were hoping to land all 
this time. He is a talented offensive big man (6ft 11in, 271 lbs) who already 
has had experience playing for a team people either venerate or despise. In 
other words, he’s a perfect cornerstone for the post-Kobe Lakers.

3) Philadelphia 76ers, D’Angelo Russell (PG, Ohio State)

The 76ers apparently agree 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/sports/sixers/20150519_76ers_play_the_lottery__will_Russell_be_winning_ticket_.html>
 with the sentiment that Russell could end up being the best player in this 
draft, period. The question is if Philadelphia is ready to stop the controlled 
demolition and start rebuilding? If not, it’s possible they could choose Mudiay 
who has a higher upside but a steeper learning curve having last played in 
China, where he was sidelined by an ankle injury.


4) New York Knicks, Emmanuel Mudiay (PG, China)

The bad news: the Knicks have zero chance of getting Towns and Okafor, but 
either Russell or Mudiay will be here, and the team desperately needs a scoring 
point guard. Of course, they desperately need just about everything, so they 
may end up trading the pick, particularly if Russell’s off the board.


5) Orlando Magic, Mario Hezonja (SG/SF, Croatia)

Croatia’s Hezonja is very likely to be the first true international player 
chosen in the draft. The still-rebuilding Magic can afford to be patient with 
his development.


6) Sacramento Kings, Willie Cauley-Stein (C, Kentucky)

Should Kentucky’s Cauley-Stein, maybe the best defensive player in the draft, 
fall to the Kings, it might be an ideal fit for both team and player. The 
seven-footer has already had experience playing alongside a game-changing big 
man in Towns, it’s hard not to imagine that Sacramento aren’t wondering if he 
could do the same with DeMarcus Cousins.

7) Denver Nuggets, Justise Winslow (SF, Duke)

While the Duke freshman was always on the NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> radar, Winslow’s impressive showing 
during the Blue Devils’ championship run probably bumped him up a few spots on 
draft boards everywhere.


8) Detroit Pistons, Kristaps Porzingis (PF/C, Latvia)

A seven-footer from Latvia, 19-year old Porzingis is expected to be something 
of a project, but isn’t that why the Pistons brought in Stan Van Gundy in the 
first place?


9) Charlotte Hornets, Frank Kaminsky (PF/C, Wisconsin)

History tells us that some GM is going to select the college player of the 
year several picks too early in this draft, and historically there’s no 
likelier candidate than the team that drafted Adam Morrison and Cody Zeller.


10) Miami Heat, Stanley Johnson (SF, Arizona)

A versatile player that doesn’t do anything spectacularly, but does a lot of 
things very well, Johnson could be a key piece for a Heat team that hopes to 
return to playoff contention next season with a healthy Chris Bosh and a full 
year of Goran Dragic.


11) Indiana Pacers, Devin Booker (SG, Kentucky)

The Pacers could use some help with their outside shooting. Booker shot 40% 
from the three-point line last season with Kentucky. This feels like it could 
work out.


12) Utah Jazz, Myles Turner (C, Texas)

The Jazz could use Turner as a stretch 4 and possible replacement for Enes 
Kanter, who they traded to theOklahoma City Thunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oklahoma-city-thunder> last season. He’s 
already probably a better a rim protector than Kanter ever was.


13) Phoenix Suns, Bobby Portis (PF, Arkansas)

Portis would address the Suns’ need at power forward, although they could also 
jump at Turner if he’s still on the board.


14) Oklahoma City Thunder, Sam Dekker (SF, Wisconsin)

Could Dekker end up being the offensive weapon that the Thunder have been 
desperate to find ever since the franchise-crippling James Harden trade? 
Eventually they’ll have to stumble upon someone right?


15) Atlanta Hawks (via Nets), Trey Lyles (PF, Kentucky)

In a weird way, it feels like playing for Kentucky would be the perfect 
preparation for playing in the Hawks system: every teammate is basically an 
All-Star.


16) Boston Celtics, RJ Hunter (SG, Georgia State)

Even this Avery Bradley superfan acknowledges that the Celtics desperately 
need someone who can reliably shoot the ball besides sixth man Isaiah Thomas.


17) Milwaukee Bucks, Kevon Looney (PF, UCLA)

As impressive as the Bucks were last season, when they went from the worst 
team in the NBA to the playoffs, they still should be looking for someone to 
take Larry Sanders’s vacated spot in the lineup.


18) Houston Rockets (via Pelicans), Jerian Grant (PG, Notre Dame)

Grant could be the starting point guard for the Houston Rockets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/houston-rockets> right now. Yes, even though 
they are in the middle of the Western Conference finals. Sorry for the shade, 
Jason Terry.


19) Washington Wizards, Tyus Jones (PG, Duke)

It might feel like a weird move, considering that John Wall presumably isn’t 
going anywhere, but having depth at point guard is never a bad thing. Unless 
you’re thePhoenix Suns <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phoenix-suns>. 


20) Toronto Raptors, Montrezl Harrell (PF, Louisville)

It’s this or overpay for Amir Johnson.


21) Dallas Mavericks, Cameron Payne (PG, Murray State)

Because they can’t request a ‘do over’ from the league to reverse the Rajon 
Rondo trade.


22) Chicago Bulls, Kelly Oubre Jr (SF, Kansas)

There seems to be no consensus about where Oubre will land in the draft, 
possibly due to concerns about his lack of assertiveness. If he falls this far, 
the Bulls will be getting a player eager to prove everyone else wrong.


23) Portland Trail Blazers, Justin Anderson (SG, Virginia)

A solid two-way player whose presence could soften the blow if Wesley Matthews 
leaves via free agency or can’t recover from his Achilles injury.


24) Cleveland Cavaliers, Delon Wright (PG, Utah)

Kyrie Irving is irreplaceable, maybe one of the top 10 players in the Eastern 
Conference, but it also doesn’t hurt to also have a point guard who is, you 
know, actually a point guard.


25) Memphis Grizzlies, Rondae Hollis-Jefferson (SF, Arizona)

The grittiest available player.


26) San Antonio Spurs, Georges Lucas Alves de Paula (PG, Brazil)

It’s tempting to just cheat and say the Spurs will pick “a relatively unknown 
foreign player who turns out to be incredibly awesome.”CBS Sports’s Zach Harper 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/draft/mock-draft/expert/zach-harper> says de 
Paula “has the wingspan and hands of Kawhi Leonard, except he’s a point guard”. 
Sounds good enough for us.

27) LA Lakers (via Rockets), Robert Upshaw (C, Washington)

Upshaw would be listed higher here, but he was kicked off of two teams 
<http://www.nba.com/2015/news/features/scott_howard_cooper/03/14/despite-transgressions-robert-upshaw-could-still-go-in-first-round/>
 in the span of three seasons. With Okafor in their pockets, Lakers could 
easily take the ‘high risk, high reward’ gamble here.


28) Boston Celtics (via Clippers), Christian Wood (PF, UNLV)

Last time the Celtics had two first round picks, they picked up Fab Melo. It’s 
nearly impossible for Wood, or whoever they use this draft pick on, to be any 
worse.


29) Brooklyn Nets (via Hawks), Terry Rozier (PG, Louisville)

Considering how few draft picks the Nets will have to work with in the 
upcoming years, it’s a shame that there really won’t be a more exciting player 
available with this one.


30) Golden State Warriors, Rashad Vaughn (SG, UNLV)

Vaughn hasn’t played since February as he is rehabbing from a torn meniscus. 
Chances seem fairly good that this Warriors team will have a talented enough 
roster to stay afloat without him for a bit though.

 