
It really says a lot about the state of British politics that the televised 
leaders’ debate <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/leaders-debates> I’m most 
looking forward to is the one between Russell Brand andAl Murray 
<http://www.thanetgazette.co.uk/EXCLUSIVE-Pub-Landlord/story-25875316-detail/story.html>
. The way things stand, it looks more likely than a Cameron v Miliband debate. 
It also looks the more interesting.

A Brand/Murray smackdown would be hugely serious and relevant since it would 
go to the heart of what ails the UK’s democratic condition today: whether 
voting in elections is worth bothering with at all.Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/russellbrand> has spent the past six 
months arguing the party system is so busted that true and lasting change can 
only be achieved by turning our backs on it and, come election day, staying at 
home in droves.Al Murray, on the other hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/al-murray>, embraces the political process by
choosing to stand against Nigel Farage as the Pub Landlord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2015/jan/14/al-murray-the-pub-landlord-challenge-nigel-farage-general-election-video>
, in effect saying that voting counts because it can take real power away from 
those whom you fear or mistrust.

Surely the two of them should come together and have a debate: it would be the 
biggest political locking of horns since Gladstone and Disraeli. I realise 
these guys are actually comedians. I’m aware I’m sort of one too. And I’m not 
arguing here that comedians have a special wisdom that automatically 
fast-tracks them on to the political arena, even though our stock is up at the 
moment, what with satirists being gunned down in Paris. It’s just that I see no 
proper, mature engagement with democracy anywhere higher. Conversations about a 
TV debate between Cameron and Miliband have stalled on which minority leader’s 
addition would most annoy the others.

That’s what’s been most dispiriting since this election campaign started: 
while we’re all desperate to talk about health, wages, cuts and welfare, our 
political leaders can’t get past talking about talking. When they do grapple 
with content, it’s done in negatives: Cameron says Labour won’t mention the 
deficit and Miliband says the Tories won’t discuss health. Next toRussell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand> and Al Murray’s energising 
attempts to ignite the election, the collective noise from Westminster sounds 
no better than the bass-level wheeze of a punctured lung.

Politicians have always been protective about their brand, but a collective 
caution seems to have overwhelmed them. It’s difficult, despite the policy 
reviews and speeches, to know precisely what Labour is in favour of. Which 
spending budgets will they protect and which ones will they abandon to the 
fires? Dummy and alternative manifestos are being written then torn up at 
Labour party HQ, as the fight goes on to limit commitments to anything.

On the Tory side, we know they’ll give us a referendum on Europe but won’t say 
which side they’ll take. Nor will they supply us with any basic indication of 
how the laws of maths can deliver us from debt by taking more money from the 
poor than from the rich. The Liberal Democrats have currently no vision of the 
future that can take them beyond election day itself, since they don’t know how 
many of them will be left, who’ll be in charge of them and who that pitiful 
soul will be able to talk to. Meantime, Ukip don’t seem ready to propose 
anything other than huge capitalised single words such as IMMIGRATION and 
EUROPE.

Then there’s the real imponderable: devolution, regionalism, constitutional 
reform, English votes for English laws. Call it what you will, the stark fact 
is that on this most fundamental of issues – what form our future democracy 
will take – we only have vague suggestions from everyone. All the parties want 
to run the country but won’t say what country it is they want to run.

No doubt policies are up and viewable on websites somewhere. But the 
stupefying reality is we still don’t feel we know. They’ve had months, years 
even, to prepare and mighty budgets for media spend, and yet we feel so little 
the wiser. You get the impression they’d love their manifestos to go out 
encrypted.

It’s easy to see then why the Brand mantra – “Don’t Vote” – has so much 
appeal. Post 2010, we all got austerity measures, bedroom taxes, NHS reforms 
and tuition fees that absolutely nobody voted for because absolutely no 
political manifesto mentioned them. So why shouldn’t we abandon our political 
masters and stay at home? Looking at the polls, no one knows how this thing is 
going to end up, so why bother? The experts can’t even agree whether we’re now 
in a four-party system or a five-party one; what chance have the rest of us got 
fathoming what’s going on?

I would argue the opposite, that now is the best time in a generation to go 
out and vote. With such a fragmented system on offer, nothing is inevitable. 
Uncertainty may create instability, but it can also generate churn and change 
in a way that doing nothing never can.

The truth is, we haven’t been abandoning politicians – they’ve been abandoning 
us. The main parties have run recent elections focusing on smaller and smaller 
tribes of supporters in the hope that the bare minimum will squeeze them 
through. They realistically hope to form a government on the basis of 33% of 
the vote and they will point to those of us who choose to sit this one out as a 
validation of that complacency.

No politician voted into office is going to take the number of people who 
didn’t vote into account; what they will do is heed the number who voted, but 
not for them, if that number is overwhelming. The 45% who voted yes to 
independence in Scotland, because it was so large and because it was 
underwritten by the force of an 84.5% turnout, is driving the agenda in 
Scottish politics as powerfully as if it had been on the winning side. This 
says a lot about how weird democracy is at the moment, but it’s also a bright 
example of how effective a massive turnout can be.

Now, each one of us has the opportunity to look at our constituency result in 
the last election and see what would best make a difference this time round. 
Alternative answers such as Green, nationalist, pro-NHS, even the Pub Landlord, 
no longer look like stupid also-rans. This time round, the day after the 
election, party leaders are going to look at the numbers – how many voted and 
how many didn’t vote for them. If both those figures breach certain tipping 
points then, irrespective of the number of seats won, and regardless of the 
make-up of the new House of Commons, the political agenda will have changed 
utterly.

It may cause confusion, anger and upset. It could all end badly, but it’s 
there as an opportunity if we want to have any sort of impact on the national 
political agenda. It will only happen if we come out in numbers; there’s 
nothing to be gained from sitting at home, apart from the chance to watch again 
the Pub Landlord slugging it out with Russell Brand and us dreaming of a 
Brandlord coalition that might have been, had we bothered to vote for one.
 