
Job: chairman, Telegraph Media Group
Age: 53
Industry: publishing
Staff: 1,000
2008 ranking: 33 

It has been a remarkable year for the Telegraph Media Group's chairman, Aidan 
Barclay <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>.

Remarkable not only because of the Telegraph's MPs' expenses scoop – but also 
because the two national newspapers Barclay oversees, the Daily and Sunday 
Telegraph, finished the year since the last MediaGuardian 100 with the same two 
editors as they had when it began.

It was a rare instance of continuity in five years of upheaval since Sir David 
(Aidan's father) and Sir Frederick Barclay paid £665m for theTelegraph Media 
Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup>.

There has since been an extraordinary turnover of staff, with seven different 
editors on the two papers. To the Barclays' supporters, the papers were being 
dragged kicking and screaming into the digital age under their editor-in-chief, 
Will Lewis. To their detractors, it was nothing short of a disembowelment.

In the past 12 months the Telegraph titles relaunched in full colour. But 
there was also more upheaval, with the removal of all casual staff, and the 
departure of columnists such as Craig Brown and AN Wilson. 

As the famously reclusive brothers' representative at Telegraph HQ, Barclay is 
in charge of the day-to-day running of the Telegraph Media Group and also 
oversees another part of the Barclays' publishing empire, the Spectator.

Does he interfere with the papers' editorial line? The former Sunday Telegraph 
editor Dominic Lawson said yes. Daily Telegraph editor Will Lewis, with whom 
Barclay speaks on a weekly basis, says no.

Barclay turned down four invitations to appear before a House of Lords 
communications committee investigating media ownership, saying it was not in 
the "commercial interests" of the Telegraph group – concerns that were 
obviously not shared by Rupert Murdoch and Michael Grade, who gave evidence to 
the committee. Its chairman, Lord Fowler, said his non-appearance was 
"objectionable".

Barclay's aversion to the public eye is shared by Sir David and Sir Frederick, 
who live in a castle on a private island in the Channel Islands. Their business 
empire includes Littlewoods, the Ritz hotel in London and the Woolworths brand, 
which was bought after the high street store went out of business last year.

The brothers are notoriously sensitive to criticism and their willingness to 
resort to the courts to counter critics has won them few friends in the media.

They were unwillingly propelled into the spotlight last year in a dispute that 
saw them temporarily withdraw investment from the neighbouring island of Sark 
in a row over its system of government.

But the year will be remembered for the Telegraph's expenses story. It was the 
scoop that kept on giving, dominating the Daily and Sunday Telegraph front 
pages for more than a month, leaving their competitors trailing.
 