
We went to an autumnal wedding near Alderley Edge 
<http://www.alderleyedge.org/> when I was 10, and I remember so clearly the 
walk we went on the next day: cold and gloomy and grey though it was, I 
scurried off by myself to lean against a rock and try, desperately to imagine 
myself into the world of Alan Garner'sThe Weirdstone of Brisingamen 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/product-description/000712788X/ref=dp_proddesc_0?ie=UTF8&n=266239&s=books>
. I wanted the svart-alfar to attack me, Cadellin to rescue me, and the still, 
anticipatory atmosphere of those dimly lit woods almost convinced me they might.

Unsurprisingly, nothing happened, and we returned home. But I'm reminded of my 
childhood adoration of Garner by the startling news that it is 50 years – 50 
years! – since he published The Weirdstone, his first novel, and the occasion 
is being marked with events throughout this year. There's an interview with 
Garner and a lecture at the Oxford literary festival in March, an exhibition of 
the author's works in Chester this autumn, and most joyfully, aweekend festival 
in October <http://www.weirdstone.org.uk/index.php> in Alderley Edge where, 
among guided walks and lectures and readings and commemorative badges, there 
will even be a medieval fair.

Count me in: The Weirdstone of Brisingamen is a book that deserves to be 
celebrated, along with the rest of Garner's dark, unforgettable children's 
books: The Weirdstone's sequel The Moon of Gomrath, The Owl Service and Elidor. 
Drawing on the legend ofAlderley 
<http://www.derbyscc.org.uk/alderley/edge_legend.htm>, the novel follows the 
adventures of Colin and Susan. Susan is the unwitting possessor of the 
Weirdstone, a magical jewel that binds 140 knights into an enchanted sleep in 
Fundindelve, a cave on Alderley Edge.

When Colin and Susan are chased by dark elves, the svart-alfar, they are 
rescued by Cadellin Silverbrow, the wizard who has been searching for the lost 
jewel for more than 100 years. Evil forces (including the Morrigan, disguised 
as a "powerfully built" woman whose "head rested firmly on her shoulders 
without appearing to have much of a neck at all") are abroad and also looking 
for the jewel, and the children undergo a series of terrifying adventures, 
including one narrow escape that has been burned into my mind and has also, I 
think, contributed to a slight tendency to claustrophobia.

Escaping from the svarts, Colin and Susan and their dwarf friends are forced 
to climb through a deep, narrow tunnel. "They lay full length, walls, floor and 
roof fitting them like a second skin. Their heads were turned to one side, for 
in any other position the roof pressed their mouths into the sand and they 
could not breathe.  The only way to advance was to pull with the fingertips and 
to push with the toes, since it was impossible to flex their legs at all, and 
any bending of the elbows threatened to jam the arms helplessly under the 
body," writes Garner, in my trusty ancient copy which serendipitously happens 
to be here in London rather than at my parents'. "Colin found that he had to 
rest more and more frequently. He thought of the hundreds of feet of rock above 
and of the miles of rock below, and himself wedged into a nine-inch gap 
between."

They encounter a hairpin bend, where Colin gets jammed, and then, most 
horrifically, to water – unable to see how long it lasts, and with retreat 
impossible, they each decide that it's "better a quick road to forgetfulness 
than a lingering one" and push on through. It's sending shivers down my spine 
even now.

I also adored The Moon of Gomrath, particularly Susan's compulsive building of 
a fire that calls the Wild Hunt, but my favourite Garner novel must be The Owl 
Service and its plaintive, petrifying, "she wants to be flowers and you make 
her owls". It's a long wait until October: I think I'm going to have to read 
them all again in anticipation.
 