
For people of a certain age, the Adrian Mole diaries coincided with a growing 
political awareness. It wasn't til the late eighties that I caught up with the 
Sue Townsend's perfectly crafted characters, but the book's references to 3 
million unemployed, aged communists, sudden conversions to militant feminism 
and nouveau riche best friends was one that played its part in shaping my own 
political consciousness. For who could read Adrian's masterful poem 'Do you 
weep, Mrs Thatcher, do you weep? 
<http://wonderingminstrels.blogspot.co.uk/2005/02/mrs-thatcher-sue-townsend.html>
' without being moved to righteous tears?

Here are some of the most memorable political lessons from the Adrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole> series of books. Please leave 
your own in the comments thread below.

1) Thatcher has 'eyes like a psychotic killer, but a voice like a gentle 
person'

The Adrian Mole books are full of political signifiers, and in the early 
diaries Adrian often acts as the voice of conservatism railing against the 
rapidly changing times. His description of Thatcher, though, chimed with many: 
"I'm not sure how I will vote. Sometimes I think Mrs Thatcher is a nice kind 
sort of woman. Then the next day I see her on television and she frightens me 
rigid. She has got eyes like a psychotic killer, but a voice like a gentle 
person. It is a bit confusing."

2) The Female Eunuch is a very powerful book

Adrian's mother, Pauline, becomes a 'new woman' after reading Germaine Greer's 
seminal text: “My mother has gone to a woman’s workshop on assertiveness 
training... my mother came home and started bossing us around.”

She also took part in the anti-nuclear peace camps around Greenham Common, or, 
as Adrian obliviously wrote, "my mother has gone out with Mrs Singh, Mrs 
O'Leary and her women's group to have a picnic on Greenham Common."

3) The royal family should go and live on a council estate

Bert, the Woodbine smoking Communist whom Adrian befriends, made this 
suggestion one Christmas. Susan, Adrian's aunt, replied: "oh no dear, that's a 
bit drastic. Milton Keynes would be more suitable."

Townsend expanded the idea into her novel, The Queen and I, in which a 
left-leaning populist leader does indeed force the Royal Family out of their 
palaces and to come to terms with normality.

4) Blair's babes aren't to be trusted

It seems like a long time ago now - and even typing 'Blair's babes' makes me 
realise, with some degree of glee, how far we've come since the nineties - but 
Pandora Braithwaite was the perfect depiction of an upwardly mobile New Labour 
poster girl inThe Cappuccino Years. Though, to be fair to her, she did later 
oppose the Iraq War.

5) The SDP tore the left asunder

The precise implications of the 'Gang of Four' and the split from Labour were 
lost to me as a 9 year old, but I could see the impact it was having on the 
Braithwaites' marriage. Pandora's mother favoured the SDP, whereas her father 
was a Tony Benn man - and accidentally resigned as Chairman of the local Labour 
party when Adrian unhelpfully sent his drafted letter.
 