
Job: presenters, producers
Age: 32 
Industry: broadcasting
2007 ranking: 65

This time last year Ant and Dec - AKA Anthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly - were 
two of the most important faces at ITV. They still are, so why the slide down 
this year's MediaGuardian 100?

Two words: Jiggy Bank. The competition on Ant and Dec's Saturday Night 
Takeaway, in which viewers phoned in to ride a giant pig full of cash, was 
implicated in the premium-rate phone-in scandal that landed the broadcaster 
with a £5.7m fine from Ofcom.
 Ant and Dec. Photograph: TalkBack Thames/ITV  Both McPartlin and Donnelly 
were listed as executive producers on the show. But the pair said their 
executive producer roles were "purely creative ones" and they had no idea that 
viewers were paying to enter a competition they had no chance of winning.
Ant and Dec were further tarred by the scandal when it emerged that they were 
presented with a British Comedy Award on a live ITV show even though viewers 
had voted to give the prize to Catherine Tate. The pair, once again ignorant of 
the behind-the-scenes fakery, said they were "appalled" and promised to return 
the award.

So how much has their standing been damaged by the wrongdoing they knew 
nothing about? Very little, to judge by last year's National Television Awards, 
where they picked up a hat-trick of prizes.

Accepting their awards by video link from Los Angeles, they said it had been a 
"difficult couple of weeks, especially for Saturday Night Takeaway". They 
weren't kidding. But it was about to get a lot more difficult with revelations 
of the British Comedy Award fiasco and ITV's record fine from Ofcom.

ITV executive chairman Michael Grade's suggestion that the pair's executive 
producer role was a "vanity credit" hinted that their behind-the-scenes 
participation on their ITV shows was rather less than previously thought. 
Imagine Simon Cowell accepting a "vanity credit".

Signed to a £30m "golden handcuffs" deal tying them to ITV until the end of 
2009, Ant and Dec first worked together on children's TV drama Byker Grove.

After cutting their teeth on Saturday morning kids' show SM:TV, they conquered 
Saturday night prime time with Simon Fuller's ITV1 talent show, Pop Idol, and 
have gone on to present some of the channel's biggest shows, including I'm A 
Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here! and Cowell's Britain's Got Talent.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 