 A £100m scheme to quicken the pace of medical innovation in the NHS will be 
unveiled by ministers today as Gordon Brown prepares to give the health service 
pride of place in Labour's electoral shop window.
Lord Darzi, the leading cancer surgeon who was made health minister when Mr 
Brown became prime minister in June, will deliver an interim report on his 
plans to make NHS services in England more cost-effective and accessible.

Mr Brown last night put him in charge of a new Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Innovation Council which will be 
set up to accelerate the introduction of hi-tech medical devices, diagnostics 
and drugs. It will be presented as providing the foundation for "a 21st century 
NHS providing a world-class service".

Lord Darzi is also likely to give the prime minister a blueprint for improving 
patients' access to GPs outside normal office hours, but the Department of 
Health was unwilling to disclose this part of the package last night.

The Tory leader, David Cameron, promised on Saturday to renegotiate the GPs' 
contract to make them open surgeries during evenings and weekends. Mr Brown 
knows that Labour needs an alternative answer to the problem, to address one of 
the voters' main criticisms of the government's stewardship of the NHS.

Lord Darzi's interim report had been due later this month, but publication was 
advanced as Mr Brown cleared the decks for a possible election announcement. 
For the same reason, the Treasury's comprehensive spending review will emerge 
ahead of schedule on Monday. Alan Johnson, the health secretary, has been 
battling to secure an above-inflation settlement for the NHS and for social 
care for older people.

Lord Darzi will say that delivering the highest quality of care for everyone, 
as good as or better than any country in the world, must be a fundamental goal 
of the NHS. To achieve this, staff must be given more influence over how the 
service is run locally.

He said last night: "I want to see the UK become a world leader in 
pharmaceutical and medical technology, research and development, so NHS 
patients have access to the best innovative treatments and services."

Lord Darzi will present his interim report as an "emerging vision" of the 
future of the NHS. It will be less specific than the blueprint to reshape 
healthcare in London that he produced for the capital's strategic health 
authority in July.

The London document included plans to centralise major surgery, maternity and 
paediatric services in a small number of super-hospitals. It said most routine 
work should be carried out by GPs and peripatetic hospital consultants in a 
network of 150 "polyclinics" across the capital. "The days of the district 
general hospital seeking to provide all services to a high enough standard are 
over," the London report said.

Lord Darzi's interim national report will be less prescriptive. He is planning 
to produce reports in the spring on the future of the NHS in the nine English 
regions outside London. Each region will submit eight reports on the main areas 
of NHS activity. He has enlisted 72 leading doctors to supervise the work 
locally.

This timetable would allow Labour to go into an early election claiming it has 
no plans to close hospital services. Any that emerge next year would be driven 
by the clinical judgment of local doctors and nurses, not by central political 
dictat, health ministers will say.

The shadow health secretary, Andrew Lansley, said: "This is hypocrisy gone 
mad. Bringing forward Lord Darzi's findings so soon is yet another example of 
this government using our NHS as a political football.

"How can NHS professionals feel confident, and how can patients feel safe, 
when they know that this report must have been cobbled together without 
consideration for clinical evidence?"

Niall Dickson, chief executive of the King's Fund, an independent health 
research institute, said: "An additional investment of up to £100m on 
innovation in health services must be welcomed. Take-up for new technology has 
sometimes been patchy across the NHS. But we really need to see further detail 
of how this proposed innovation council will operate alongside the other 
organisations currently charged with the assessment and promotion of best 
practice in the health service. It has not yet been made clear how the creation 
of yet another central organisation will help."

Karen Jennings, head of health for Unison, the public service union, said: "It 
will mean a lot to staff in the NHS that Lord Darzi has recognised that they 
are creative and can be on the cutting edge of innovation given the 
opportunity. This is a very different message from the mantra that the private 
sector has the monopoly on creativity."
 