
Pablo Picasso’s 1955 painting Les Femmes d’Alger (Version O) is such a 
remarkable and important masterpiece that it could maintain the world record 
auction price for at least a decade, the auctioneer who sold it has predicted.


There were whoops and whistles in the New York saleroom of Christie’s on 
Monday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2015/may/12/picasso-women-algiers-world-record-auction-video>
 after Jussi Pylkkänen put down his gavel at $160m. Including commission that 
means it sold for $179, 365,000 (£115m), easily beating the previous record of 
$142m for a Francis Bacon triptych.

It had been a dramatic 11 and half minutes in the Rockefeller Center auction 
room. At $151m Pylkkänen remarked: “We’re in new territory.” At $160m he 
declared: “Brett, it’s yours. Sold.”

The Brett in question was Brett Gorvy, the South African-born Briton who is 
Christie’s New York-based international head of postwar and contemporary art. 
He was bidding on behalf of an unknown and clearly stupendously rich buyer.

Pylkkänen said afterwards that it was no surprise that such a work, by “the 
Mozart of 20th-century painting”, should sell for a world record price. “It 
will be fascinating to see for how long this Picasso will hold the world 
record,” he said. “It could be a decade. It could be longer than that. We 
really have witnessed a piece of not just art history, but cultural history at 
Christie’s.”

The price is staggering in a way, double the annual income of, for example, 
the entire National Gallery. But it was not a surprise to the auction house.

Before the sale Christie’s deputy chairman, Olivier Camu, explained to the 
Guardian the rationale for giving it one of the highest estimates in auction 
history.

“It is a sort of Gesamtkunstwerk and the more you read and look at it and 
think about it, the more you discover.

“It is just amazing, it is extraordinary and so the estimate follows naturally 
from that. $140m? Why not?”

In Camu’s opinion, there were few Picassos which had a comparable importance. 
There isLes Demoiselles d’Avignon 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=79766>, the 1907 Cubist 
painting that fundamentally changed art and is a star attraction in the Museum 
of Modern Art in New York, and there isGuernica, his vast Spanish civil war 
history painting which is in the Reina Sofia Museum in Madrid 
<http://www.museoreinasofia.es/en/collection/artwork/guernica>.


 “This is the most important Picasso after the war,” said Camu.

One reason for that is because it is so full of art historical references. 
There is perspective in one half, with homage to Delacroix and Velazquez, and 
on the left hand side there is Cubism, his muse Jacqueline Roque and references 
to his great friend and competitor Matisse, whose death in 1954 inspired him to 
make the painting in the first place.

The Picasso was one of 10 record breakers on Monday night. They included 
Giacometti’s life size L’Homme au Doigt (Pointing Man) which set a new record 
price for a sculpture when it sold for $141.3m (£90.7m); and a canoe painting 
by the British artist Peter Doig which sold for a record $26m (£16.6m). Other 
artist records were achieved for Robert Delaunay, Cady Noland, Jean Dubuffet, 
Diane Arbus, Jean-Michel Basquiat, René Magritte and Chaim Soutine.

In total the Monday night sale on the Avenue of the Americas brought in 
$705.9m.

Splurging £102.6m on Picasso’s Women of Algiers is simply insane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/may/12/picasso-women-of-algiers-world-record-insane-splurge>
The boiling art market is being driven by a growing number of extraordinarily 
rich buyers who can contemplate spending more than $100m on a work of art.

Pylkkänen said: “We have entered a new era of the art market where collectors 
from all parts of the world compete for the very best across categories, 
generating record prices at levels we have never seen before.”

The buyers are convinced of the sound investment value of the works and the 
prices are encouraging owners of premium works that now is the time to sell. 
One dealer, Richard Feigen, said: “I don’t really see an end to it, unless 
interest rates drop sharply, which I don’t see happening in the near future.”

Sarah Lichtman, a professor of design history and curatorial studies at The 
New School, agreed. “I think we will continue to see the financiers seeking 
these works out as they would a blue-chip company that pays reliable dividends 
for years to come,” she said.

The prices are also being stoked by a rising number of super-rich Chinese 
buyers. Last week it was revealed that the buyer at Sotheby’s of Picasso’s 
Femme au Chignon dans un Fauteuil ($29.9m), which belonged to Hollywood film 
mogul Samuel Goldwyn Sr, was Chinese film mogul Wang Zhongjun, chairman and 
co-founder of Huayi Brothers media group.

The buyer of Monet’s Le Bassin aux Nymphéas, les Rosiers for $20.41m, 
meanwhile, was China’s Dalian Wanda Group.

• This article was amended on 15 May 2015 to correct the spelling of Brett 
Gorvy’s name.

 