
Eight minutes after most of Europe's class of 2009 stood for Beethoven's Ode 
to earlier todayJoy , the new MEPs for North West England and Yorkshire and the 
Humber sidled to their black leather seats at the back of the Strasbourg 
chamber.

"Just finding our feet, new boys at a very large school," Nick Griffin, the 
British National party leader, said after he and his colleague,Andrew Brons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-brons>, had occupied seats 780 and 
781 in the second row from the rear of the large blue and white hall. They 
missed the Beethoven, skulking at the back of the class. Brons fiddled with a 
blue and white Samsonite bag on his desk, apparently nonplussed by the 
electronic voting gadgetry in front of him.

Griffin took the little credit card-like piece of plastic, slipped it in the 
slot, pointed to the small screen and showed his colleague how democracy works 
in the European parliament.

The pair were surrounded by likeminded colleagues: a trio of Hungarian 
Gypsy-haters, a quartet of Dutch Muslim-baiters, a pair of Austrians elected on 
a platform of antisemitism, a French father and daughter team with the elder 
believing the Holocaust is a myth, and a sprinkling of Italian racists.

"A sad day for Britain," Glenis Willmott, the Labour party's leader in Europe, 
said. "Two UK fascists are taking their seats in this parliament for the first 
time."

But Timothy Kirkhope, a leading Tory MEP, said he was "not particularly 
uncomfortable" sitting in the Strasbourg assembly with two extremists behind 
him. "I'm not happy – but they were elected by the people of Britain," he said. 
"If enough people in Yorkshire decide they want theBNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp> as part of the system, that's their 
choice."

While Wilmott vowed that "we will not let matters rest", it was Glenys rather 
then Glenis who was the target of Griffin's anger. The new UK Europe minister, 
Glenys Kinnock, is to host a drinks reception in Strasbourg tomorrow nighthosts 
a drinks reception in Strasbourgtomorrow for 70 of the 72 members of the new 
parliamentary intake from Britain. Griffin and Brons are the sole British MEPs 
not to have been invited.

"They said we couldn't join in the champagne trough," Brons said.

Griffin said: "I wouldn't want to share a drink with Glenys Kinnock anyway. 
They [the Kinnocks] haven't got their noses in the trough, they're in the 
trough."

While Griffin parades as a true-blue patriot, at times yesterday he sounded 
fonder of the continental Europeans than his fellow Britons. "We're speaking 
happily with European nationalists. I even spoke to several German Greens," he 
said. "But there is very childish behaviour from some of the British." He 
complained that the Democratic Unionist party's Diane Dodds had abandoned her 
seat when she discovered she had been put next to Brons.

For MEPs who detest the EU and all its works, Griffin and Brons also sounded 
as though they were catching a mild dose of Euro-fever.

Brons said he was looking for a flat in Brussels to share with his party 
leader and said both would be assiduous attenders at the parliament.

His acknowledgment – or otherwise – of Brussels' legitimacy was confused. "Our 
default position is that this place and Brussels have no right whatsoever to 
legislate on Britain.

"But since they also have that power, we're not here as total abstentionists," 
he said.
 