
An Anglican bishop says he has received warnings from parishioners that he is 
not safe in his own diocese after he revealed claims of his abuse as a young 
man by senior church clerics.

Newcastle bishop Greg Thompson said cathedral parishioners had turned their 
backs on him, and screws had been placed in his staff members’ tyres.

He said the message was that he would face public harassment and public shame 
if he did not “follow what they want me to do,” he told the royal commission 
into institutional responses to child sexual abuse on Thursday.

As bishop of a community plagued by systemic child sexual abuse over decades, 
he says a national church response is needed as the Anglican “house is burning”.

Knox Grammar: elite school covered up sexual abuse for 30 years, inquiry hears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/23/knox-grammar-elite-school-covered-up-sexual-abuse-for-30-years-inquiry-hears>
Thompson, who last year went public with allegations of his abuse at the hands 
of senior diocesan figures, says change will be slow until church “hearts and 
minds” are persuaded child safety is of the highest order and that victims need 
proper redress.

He took long pauses as he detailed his alleged abuse by boarders as a child 
and at the hands of Canon Eric Barker and then-Newcastle Bishop Ian Shevill at 
the age of 19.

He said Barker kissed and fondled him after a dinner, in which he was heavily 
encouraged to drink wine.

He said he was “honoured” when he was later invited to watch a film with 
Barker and Shevill because he naively thought their attention meant they saw 
potential in him.

The two men sat either side of him and groped him at the same time as the 
R-rated film, which depicted a black slave experiencing sexual advances by a 
white slave owner, played.

“Greg, if you want to get into ministry, we have to have a relationship,” 
Thompson said Barker later told him.

The commission has heard that a group of influential parishioners wrote to the 
royal commission questioning the timing of Thompson’s abuse claims. They said 
he could have put other young people at risk by waiting until 2015 to come 
forward.

“It sends a strong message that I’m not safe in that place and there are 
consequences if I do not follow what they want me to do,” he said of the 
actions of the dissident parishioners. “Public harassment. Public shame.”

The royal commission has heard of a divide within the diocese, with some 
members believing a number of priests were unfairly disciplined over sex abuse 
allegations.

Thompson said he was encouraged at his episcopal consecration to meet the 
defrocked Dean of Newcastle Graeme Lawrence and his boyfriend Greg Goyette, who 
were accused of having three-way sex with a teenage boy, and “care for them”.

In calling for one consistent practice of professional standards to be applied 
over the abuse, Thompson said: “We are facing one of the greatest health crises 
of our time because of the trauma of child abuse.

He was the last person to give evidence at the 16-day hearing into the 
Newcastle Anglican diocese – the longest case study at the royal commission so 
far.
 