
The national disability insurance scheme (NDIS) will require uniform 
guidelines for the treatment of children with a disability, assistant social 
services minister, Mitch Fifield, said, in the wake of revelations a cage-like 
structure was built in a public school for a child with special needs.

The Australian Capital Territory government has launched an independent 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/02/canberra-school-investigated-after-cage-like-enclosure-built-for-special-needs-student>
 after the education minister, Joy Burch, learnt of the 2m by 2m structure.

It has been reported the student is a 10-year old boy with autism, but Burch 
would not comment on the individual circumstances of the child.

Fifield said the case was “appalling”.

“Regrettably, we do hear of instances around Australia in schools from time to 
time where there are inappropriate restrictive practices used,” the assistant 
minister said.

“But this is something that we need to look at not just in schools, but also 
as we look to the rollout of the NDIS nationwide. At the moment, the safeguards 
arrangements for people with disability are essentially state-based. With the 
NDIS nationwide, we will need a national safeguards regime in place,” Fifield 
said.

The director of Autism Awareness Australia <http://www.autismawareness.com.au/>
, Nicole Rogerson, told ABC News that a national framework was needed so that 
teachers could be trained on how to integrate students with autism into 
mainstream schools.

“Autism has been in the too-hard basket for a long time with successive 
Australian governments, both federally and state,” she said.

“Gains can be made, but it requires intensive intervention, and there needs to 
be a national standard to what that is.”

Rogerson said the framework would require extra funding.

Labor’s education spokeswoman, Kate Ellis, has called the case “shocking and 
deeply disturbing”.

“The abuse or neglect of students with disability is absolutely unacceptable,” 
she said.

The principal of the school, which has not been named, has been suspended 
pending the investigation.

The director general of the education and training directorate, Diane Joseph, 
said: “The structure has been in the classroom from 10 March until 27 March. It 
was built for a particular student to help manage his behaviour and to provide 
a space for that student to withdraw.”

Debra Costley from Autism Spectrum Australia 
<http://www.autismspectrum.org.au/> told ABC News on Friday morning the use of 
safe places in schools was not uncommon.


“Often we try to make a quiet space, a safe space where if children are 
feeling anxious ... they can take themselves off and just sit quietly, do some 
breathing exercises, calm themselves down and then come back into the lesson,” 
she said. “Many classrooms do put quiet places for children but they might be 
something like a beanbag in a library corner or some headsets children can put 
on.

“The concept of withdrawal is not unknown for children with autism and other 
disabilities but what we’ve heard [of the cage-like structure] does go to the 
extreme,” Costley said.
 