
“Do I smell?” I asked this question to the man I’m dating, and he was 
appropriately perplexed.

“What?” he asked.

“Do I smell bad?” I repeated.


“No,” he replied, with a wide grin. “You smell terrific. Why?”


“Well,” I began, “There’s this guy on Twitter …” 

Since starting down this eco-friendly life years ago, I’ve discovered that 
people have a variety of responses to my many green-living endeavours: doubt, 
curiosity, enthusiasm, disgust – you name it and I’ve been on the receiving end 
of their reactions.

I’ve had reporters smell my hair after I wrote about not washing it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/22/problem-sanctimonious-environmentalists-baking-soda>
, and friends eye me up and down after I eagerly shared my recipe forhomemade 
laundry detergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/06/how-to-make-your-own-laundry-detergent-and-help-save-the-planet>
.

“Does it work?” they ask. “I’ve used it for years!” I say. “Yeah,” comes the 
inevitable the response, “but does itwork?”

And then of course, there’s Twitter guy. It all started when I came out with 
my DIY shampoo and conditioner recipe. “Our columnist hasn’t washed her hair 
with shampoo for five years. OOOooo!,” read one tweet linking to my article. 
“Don’t you mean ‘ewww’?” he responded, cheekily. When I posted my toothpaste 
recipe he begged me to get some real shop-bought stuff. “Halitosis is real!” he 
cried.

I responded to him regularly and enjoyed our fun, lighthearted exchanges, but 
I also started wondering how much truth lay behind his 140 character teases. 
Were people really wondering about my personal hygiene? Were those around me 
becoming exasperated by my recipes and eager exhortations to justtry it, 
please, just once?

So I asked them. 

 “It is a bit awkward not being able to buy new things or plastic toys for 
Olive,” conceded my mother, when I ask her about the most frustrating 
side-effects of my eco-friendly life. Olive is my three-year-old daughter, my 
mother’s first granddaughterand the first grandchild on our side of the family. 
Gifts are aplenty, but my no-plastic, secondhand-only rules stem the tide 
somewhat.

 “So you’re a frustrated nana,” I summarized. “Not frustrated,” she amended, 
“I’m generous. A generous nana hobbled by your green criteria.”

 Now, we were getting somewhere! The truth was slowly coming out. I approached 
a few of my sisters next. Somewhat surprisingly, they had only positive things 
to say. “The best part is that you show people that this kind of life can be 
lived by a normal person” says Mawney. “You dispel myths.”

 Lizzie chimes in: “The coolest part was when you started making your own 
stuff – toothpaste, body lotion, cleaners. I’d never fathomed that that was 
something a person could do. It made me want to try, too.”

 I eyed them suspiciously, but their responses seemed genuine.

 “What about the worst parts?” I prodded, unsatisfied.

 There was a long pause. Lizzie broke the silence first, “Maybe your worm 
compost,” she offered finally. “It was cool, but it kind of grossed me out.”

 Worm compost? That’s it? That was bullshit, I knew there had to be more dirt. 
Time to call in the big guns.

 “It’s really not that irritating,” said my older brother, mildly, “You’ve 
done worse.”

I’ve done worse? Was he just being kind? Surely not. My brother has never 
missed a genuine chance to lambast me in the 31 years I’ve known him.

 I was bewildered.

 “Not that irritating?” I wanted to shriek at my family. “I’ve asked you to 
carry your groceries to the car individually when you’ve forgotten your 
reusable bags! I’ve asked you to bring reusable containers to pick up my 
late-night takeout sushi cravings! I’ve asked you to wash your floors with tea 
and test homemade cat litter recipes. And yet no complaints?”

 I sat there, poring over the assembled notes from my interrogations and I 
started to think. Could it be that living an environmentally friendly life – or 
loving someone who does – really isn’t that terrible, that inconvenient, that 
obnoxious, that smelly?

 After all, I’ve never demanded allegiance to this lifestyle from those in my 
life, nor have I insisted upon it. But what I have always done is ask that they 
try.

And now, I’m asking you, too.
 