
Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable> has just come 
back from a Friday afternoon dance lesson and is full of beans. "I am now at 
the top grade," says the former star ofStrictly Come Dancing, who has been 
polishing his routines ahead of a big exam this weekend. "The next stage is a 
teaching diploma. At some point, when I retire or get thrown out, it will be 
quite a nice retirement job. It is always useful to have another string to your 
bow."

In his sitting room in Twickenham, Middlesex, a stone's throw from the England 
rugby stadium, the 69-year-old business secretary insists on perching on a tiny 
stool with his knees up near his chin, so he can be close to his two 
inquisitors. His wife, Rachel, suggests that he might like to spend the 
hour-long interview on the sofa where he had just posed for photos, but he 
refuses.

It has been a tough week for the government and particularly for ministers in 
charge of the economy. But at the end of it – and despite the release of some 
grim manufacturing output figures earlier in the day – Cable is on sprightly 
form and the atmosphere is utterly relaxed.

Unlike most politicians, he has few airs and graces and rarely resorts to 
defensive obfuscation. He sees an interview as an exercise in which a 
journalist puts questions and he answers them. So when asked if Britain's 
economy might endure a Japanese-style "lost decade", he admits it might well. 
"There is a real worry about [that], a real risk of that," he says. At every 
turn he is disarmingly frank. Most ministers would run for safety if asked 
whether the economy could be heading for a "triple dip" recession but Cable 
takes the question head on. "Well, there is certainly a risk," he says without 
the slightest hesitation. "I always try not to get drawn into forecasting 
arguments [but] there clearly is a risk. The most likely outcome is that we 
continue bumping along the bottom."

On Wednesday, chancellor George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> tried his best in his 
autumn statement to put a positive gloss on the economic outlook – despite 
downgrading growth forecasts again, admitting that he would break his "golden 
rule" on borrowing and announcing that austerity measures would be extended 
another year to 2018.

Cable instead focuses on what will be a "long hard slog", lasting years, with 
no guarantee of good times around the corner. Even a return to growth, he 
warns, will not deliver the feelgood factor that coalition politicians pray 
will arrive before the next general election. When the economy starts to pick 
up, interest rates will have to rise. "Interest rates will go back to normal 
and that will affect a lot of people whose mortgages are hanging by a thread at 
the moment. Even the recovery is going to be very painful."

As a key player in the cabinet, Cable is fully signed up to the coalition's 
deficit reduction strategy. He is scornful of Labour for, in his view, not 
knowing whether it believes government should borrow more or less. What was 
most surprising about Ed Balls's stumbling response to Osborne last week was 
that it offered "no economic critique". "He was on pretty good ground when he 
started talking about the posh boys, and that was hitting close to the mark. 
But the economic critique was directionless."

Cable is more than willing to create distance between himself and the Tories, 
to highlight coalition tensions rather than hide them. He believes he did well 
for his department last week, but is frustrated by the Tories failing to make 
austerity appear fair to all. He proudly lists achievements en route to 
creating a full-blown, long-term industrial strategy for Britain. He is pleased 
with the announcement of a tenfold increase to £250,000 of the tax-free 
investment allowance for companies. He is proud of the progress he has made 
with the car industry, the aerospace sector, winning investment for science and 
the setting up of two banks, the Green Investment Bank and the Business Bank. 
But he is disappointed at the lack of measures on housing and the absence of a 
"mansion tax", which would have raised money and, just as importantly, 
demonstrated that the rich were also being stung.

His message to the Tories is that the coalition will only keep the public on 
board the austerity rollercoaster if it can show that fairness informs 
everything it does. "You can persuade the public there's a long hard slog if, 
first of all, they feel there's a sense of direction, which is why you have to 
have a strategy for rebalancing the economy, sorting out the banks, getting 
behind growth industries with an industrial strategy. And secondly, if you can 
persuade them that it's fair." The fact that David Cameron seems to have 
opposed a mansion tax because his donors warned him off is a "bad reason" and 
symptomatic of Tory attitudes at the top, he suggests.

While Cable believes that no responsible government could have avoided 
measures to slash the welfare budget, he was appalled last week by the way 
Osborne presented his decision to cap most benefit rises at 1% for the next 
three years – breaking the link with prices. "I was critical of some of the 
language that was used to demonise people who are out of work. It is utterly 
wrong," he says. "Most people are out of work through no fault of their own. 
The worst thing you can do is insult them."

He is relieved, though, that the Lib Dems saw off other "appalling stuff" 
proposed by the Conservatives, such as making under-25s ineligible for housing 
benefit and Iain Duncan Smith's plan to penalise people on benefits who have 
more than two children. Unlike his Conservative colleagues, he sees no 
justification for another assault on benefits before or even after the next 
election. "I think that the Tories haven't learnt their lesson from Michael 
Howard. You know, 'Are you thinking what we're thinking?' was what he said. It 
sounds clever but people don't like politicians exploiting that kind of mean 
streak." He can't understand why the Treasury will not allow councils to borrow 
more to "build council houses on their own land" and doubts the private sector 
will be spurred into action by the loosening of planning rules because 
developers are nervous and people can't find mortgages. "So that's why I would 
use an old-fashioned public sector solution."

Cable says that no one should be surprised by the weakness of the recovery. 
"This is the fallout from a very unusual, historically unprecedented type of 
financial crisis. We don't know much about these strange economic events, 
because there hasn't been much experience of it – in the UK, anyway," he says. 
Families, businesses and banks will be scarred for a long time by the downturn. 
"It's changed the whole psychology of the country in a very difficult way," he 
says.

Despite the warning from ratings agency Fitch that Osborne's failure to hit 
his debt target "weakened the credibility" of his plans, Cable is unconcerned 
about the prospect of Britain losing its AAA credit status. A downgrade is 
widely expected in the City and would damage the coalition, but government 
strategists point out that Barack Obama won the presidential election despite 
surrendering America's cherished top-notch status.

"Other things being equal, it's better to have a AAA rating than not," he 
says, while pointing out that the borrowing costs of France and the US, both of 
which have lost their AAA scores in the past two years, have barely budged.

He is much less laid back about the Bank of England's complacency in the face 
of flatlining growth. Having injected £375bn into the economy through 
quantitative easing (printing money), he fears the Bank's monetary policy 
committee (MPC) has hit the pause button.

He is sympathetic to the argument made by Adam Posen, who recently left the 
MPC, that the Bank should take a more drastic approach – by lending directly to 
businesses, for example. "We have got to have a very expansionary monetary 
policy, which we have had until quite recently, but I sense the Bank of England 
is running out of steam, or perhaps motivation. A lot depends on this new 
governor." Cable would like to see the Bank given a more explicit target to 
boost growth, instead of just focusing on inflation – an idea gathering steam 
among economic commentators. "Every other quango in Britain is now required to 
have a growth objective," he says.

After an hour, Cable remembers that he has failed to read out a glowing script 
he had prepared. A piece of paper lies ignored on the floor. "I haven't given 
you my speech yet on all the wonderful things I've done," he says, before 
donning a cycle helmet and heading off to a constituency surgery in the 
freezing cold.
 