
The Sunday Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> and Stern 
magazine have called off serialisation of the so-called Hitler Diaries after 
the West German Government declaration yesterday that a sample it had tested 
was counterfeit.

The Bonn Minister of the interior, Mr Friedrich Zimmermann, said that three 
volumes of the alleged diaries sent to the Federal Archive, in Koblenz, for 
checking had been shown to be forgeries, made with post-war materials. The 
archive had called in federal forensic and standard institute experts to test 
the papers.

A Sunday Times spokesman said: “The Sunday Times accepts the report of the 
German archivists that the volumes they have examined contain materials that 
demonstrate thediaries are not authentic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/jul/29/books.humanities>. In view of 
this, the Sunday Times will not go ahead with publication.”

Mr Henri Nannen, the publisher of Stern magazine, of Hamburg, which claimed to 
have discovered the diaries, said they would stop publication of the diaries. 
“There won’t be a single word about these diaries in the next issue (of Stern 
magazine),” he said. The magazine would do all it could to clear up the reasons 
behind the apparent forgery, he added.

Lord Dacre, better known as Hugh Trevor-Roper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/27/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, the historian and director of Times Newspapers, who originally said that the 
diaries were authentic and then backtracked, commented last night: “I don’t 
want to blame anyone. It is my fault.


“I should have refused to give an opinion so soon. I have been convinced for 
some time that they are forgeries.”

Asked whether he would stay on the Times Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> board, Lord Dacre said he did 
not know. He hoped the company would not have to pay for the diaries, which it 
had agreed to buy from Stern, which published a first extract on Thursday, for 
£250,000.

In his statement for News Corporation, which owns Times Newspapers, Mr Arthur 
Brittenden, director of corporate relations, went on to say: “In the course of 
the last few days two volumes of the diaries have been brought to the Sunday 
Times office from Hamburg so that independent examination can be conducted by 
experts in this country.

“This examination will proceed and the experts’ opinion will be published. The 
decision to purchase rights to the diaries was taken after the very positive 
indications of their authenticity by Lord Dacre, and the assurances received 
from Stern magazine.”

The Sunday Times was to have started serialisation tomorrow.

Mr Brittenden said that half the £250,000 agreed for the British and 
Commonwealth rights had already been paid to Stern. “There will be no further 
payments,” he said. He did not know if there was an indemnity clause in the 
contract for repayment of money if the diaries were proved to be fakes.

“I don’t know what is in the contract, but we will certainly seek to recover 
all the payment we have made.”

Few West Germans were surprised, and many were relieved, when the Government 
said that the so-called diaries had been found to be forged. This promised an 
end to the 14-day historical mystery-thriller, in which experts changed their 
minds, Jewish leaders were horrified at an apparent attempt to white-wash 
Hitler.

 Mr Zimmerman said that the paper, ink and the string of the “personal” seals 
on the three volumes examined had all been found to date from after the second 
world war. “Historical research also shows Hitler could not have written the 
texts.”
 