
This week’s dilemma 

Dear NGO agony aunts, 

After the Canterbury earthquakes [in Christchurch, New Zealand] I found myself 
personally impacted by a disaster, leading a team of impacted people, who in 
turn were supporting impacted communities. I found that there was little focus 
and little guidance on how to support the workers in this situation.

My frustration eventually led me to start talking to those who’ve been in 
similar disaster situations elsewhere. Disaster recovery is of course in and of 
itself challenging, but I found the majority of the stressors came from 
interactions with the workers’ own organisations.

When the working environment doesn’t support workers’ wellbeing, what do you 
suggest they do? How should they raise awareness of the needs of staff in their 
own organisations, especially given the pressure in the industry to ensure 
resources are directed to communities (rightfully) but thereby minimising 
resources for staff? What support can be sought outside their organisations?

‘Above all, prioritise your health and relationships’

Alicia Jones and James Guy, The Headington Institute  
<http://www.headington-institute.org/>

Your experience is unfortunately very common; organisational and team dynamics 
are often the biggest source of stress. While agency dysfunction may be 
tolerable in low-stress times, during a humanitarian emergency it can become 
the tipping point that makes stress unmanageable for aid workers. This is why 
it is a good idea to start at the top when addressing agency culture and 
stress. Leaders set the tone for workplace climate and how they manage crisis 
significantly affects the resilience of others.

But what can individuals do? Take some time to reflect on the primary sources 
of the organisational stress you experience. Identify any key areas of 
frustration and, during a low-stress time, meet with your manager and discuss 
them.

Prior to signing a contract ask what professional training and support 
resources are available to the staff. Agencies are increasingly aware that they 
will be unable to retain top talent if they don’t address workplace climate 
concerns. Above all, don’t sacrifice your personal wellbeing in an attempt to 
fill in the gap for agency chaos. This will be a losing battle. Focus on what 
you can control. Write down specific problems and make a plan for addressing 
them. Above all, prioritise your health and relationships. You can find some 
resources here that may alsobe of help 
<http://www.headington-institute.org/resource-index/pdfs/stress-and-burnout>. 

‘Learn about what support is out there’

Catarina Andrade, leadership and wellness coach 

It is important to avoid just “pushing through”. Instead, here’s a few ways 
you can actively protect your wellbeing:

Find the courage to be vulnerable and voice your needs 
This can be done by initiating a dialogue with your team, manager, human 
resources department, or – depending on position in the organisation – with 
donors themselves.

Learn about the resources at your disposal 
In organisations where support is available – access to counselling, referral 
systems, trainings, emergency hotlines, or peer support structures – these 
services are often under utilised.

Educate yourself about stress and trauma 
Extreme stress, trauma, and vicarious trauma are inherent in the development 
and humanitarian sector. Workers who choose to work in this sector should be 
familiar with symptoms and coping strategies. Where training is not offered in 
the workplace, you can obtain this information from outside sources such as the 
Headington Institute, or by consulting a mental health professional in person 
or virtually.

‘Try and encourage your team to take time out of the office’ 

Ruth Allen, humanitarian consultant

Anyone working with other people feels the effects of those around them but 
you need to try to protect your own wellbeing. Encourage your team to take some 
time out of the office once a day. I try to set a time to close the office to 
allow people to stop and change scenery, even if they continue working in the 
evening at home. Encouraging people to eat real food regularly is important on 
many levels but breaking the coffee and cigarette patterns is not easy. I used 
to arrange a team dinner once a week to encourage proper eating. Establishing 
an exercise class can help, too.


Talking about the issue in your organisation helps raise awareness that staff 
welfare and wellbeing are important, and that all agencies should build on the 
People in Aid Code, and commit toCore Humanitarian Standards 
<http://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/>. 

Do you have a problem you would like help with? Email us on 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with NGO Agony Aunts in the subject line. All 
letters will be kept anonymous.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 