
Anita Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> has long 
been a hero for shoppers with a social conscience. Back in the 1970s, when she 
was in her early 30s with two young children and a husband away travelling, she 
set up the Body Shop - the UK's first natural beauty company.

Thirty years later, in March 2006, many Body Shop fans were shocked to learn 
that she had agreed to a £652m takeover by French cosmetics giant L'Oréal. 
Prior to the sale, Ethical Consumer magazine had given L'Oréal its lowest 
rating because of the company's record on animal testing, something which 
seemed to jar strongly with the intense campaigning done by the Body Shop 
against animal testing.

Roddick had become strongly associated with her opposition to big beauty 
companies, once famously saying: "I hate the beauty industry, it is a monster 
selling unattainable dreams. It lies, it cheats, it exploits women." So why 
sell up?

When I meet her at her office in Chichester I find that it's not because her 
views have changed. She tells me: "The beauty industry hasn't improved much. 
You still have models that look glum - the 'glum cow disease'. You're still 
thrown on the trash heap of life if you have wrinkles on your skin or dimples 
on your bum ... and models have got much, much, younger too."

Rather, she sees herself as a kind of "trojan horse" who by selling her 
business to a huge firm will be able to influence the decisions it makes. 
Suppliers who had formerly worked with the Body Shop will in future have 
contracts with L'Oréal, and working with the company 25 days a year Roddick 
will be able to have an input into decisions.

There are lots of questions any ethical business needs to answer, says 
Roddick. "Can you look at harvesting ingredients that are grown naturally? You 
need purchasing programmes and to have a dialogue in the most honourable way 
with the most fragile and poorest communities you are working with. You have to 
ask them if you can purchase from them and under what conditions and how much 
you would have to pay as a social premium."

She adds: "This has always been the language of The Body Shop and this is the 
bit that makes me want to sing with joy - this is also what L'Oréal wants to 
embrace.

"I'm not an apologist for them, I'm just excited that I can be like a trojan 
horse and go into that huge business and talk about how we can buy ingredients 
like cocoa butter from Ghana and sesame oil from Nicaraguan farmers and how we 
can do that in a kindly, joyful way and that is happening."

Roddick says Body Shop customers should not be put off by the change of 
ownership and that she trusts the company completely. "I spent yesterday with 
L'Oréal and I meet up with them a lot as a consultant as part of my mission and 
vision for the beauty industry," she says. "I believe they are honourable and 
the work they do is honourable. Especially the work they do on sourcing 
ingredients. I've spent lots of time with their sourcing guys."

But what about the company's position on animal testing? "Watch this space 
with L'Oréal," she says. "It has bought a big company to look at alternative 
testing methods and they're developing it. It uses in-vitro testing and culture 
testing. It's very, very, interesting and they know (because of the changes in 
European law) that everything they do has got to be aligned to that. They've 
already started the process."

She does, however, think the subject of animal testing has fallen off the 
radar. "The bigger issue here is, 'is this subject sexy any more?'" she asks. 
"Do people care? Because my gut feeling is the number of people who care is 
dropping."

While she is still connected to these issues, she has moved on and is focusing 
much of her time, energy and money in to her trust, the Anita Roddick 
Foundation. It was set up using her share of the money from the sale of the 
Body Shop and she seems to suggest that it was one of the main reasons for the 
sale. That, and the fact that she had become less hands-on with the company as 
it got bigger.

"After 30 years of leading the company I had other avenues to pursue ... I 
wanted to do something useful with the money I had while I am still able to," 
she says. But while she is nearing 65 years old, Roddick shows no sign of 
slowing down. "A woman advancing old age is unstoppable," she laughs. "I think 
it's an obscenity dying rich and I don't want to be defined by business; after 
all, we're only remembered for what we do in civil society."

· A full version of this interview appears in the December issue of Lifescape 
<http://www.lifescapemag.com/> magazine
 