
It is hardly acute literary criticism to say that Sue Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend> really knows how to hit the 
nail on the head, but that she does so with such apparent effortlessness and 
consistency is surely worth remarking. Witness a poignant little diary entry 
fromAdrian Mole: The Prostrate Years, which covers the period from mid-2007 to 
mid-2008. Adrian, nearing 40, recently diagnosed with prostate cancer (the 
misspelling in the book's title is deliberate, and people's inability to get it 
right is a source of much irritation to Adrian) and living in a converted 
pigsty with his dangerously dissatisfied wife, Daisy, is in need of cheering 
up. "For some reason," he writes, "I always feel comforted when I am in 
Woolworths. When I was a child, I spent my first pocket money there. I was five 
years old and forked out twenty pence on flying saucers. It is good to know 
that whatever travails we may suffer in life, Woolworths will always be there."

Adrian made his first print appearance in 1982, in The Secret Diary of Adrian 
Mole <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole> Aged 13¾, which followed 
a play broadcast on Radio 4 earlier that year. He had hitherto been part of 
what Townsend calls her "secret writing" – the manuscripts that piled up under 
the stairs, added to by night but spoken of to nobody. "He came into my head 
when my eldest son said 'Why don't we go to safari parks like other families 
do?' That's the only real line of dialogue from my family that's in any of the 
Mole books. It's in because it triggered it. I remembered that kind of whiny, 
adolescent self-pity, that 'surely these are not my parents.' I heard him 
first, and then saw him, but I only saw him from the head down; I didn't see 
his face, didn't know what he looked like – well, not until I saw John Major on 
the telly." By way of qualification, she adds that John Major has a lovely face 
when he takes his glasses off, and Adrian has become steadily more attractive 
over the years, the more plausibly, perhaps, to stoke a future relationship 
with Pandora Braithwaite, his childhood sweetheart, now a polished and 
rampagingly on-message New Labour MP.

Pandora makes suitably dramatic appearances in The Prostrate Years, as do 
Adrian's parents, Pauline (now writing an entirely fabricated misery memoir 
entitledA Girl Called Shit) and George, his best friend Nigel ("an unpleasant 
blind person!" laughs Townsend, who was herself registered blind in 2001), and 
the Chinese restaurateur Wayne Wong, to whose premises Adrian repairs to sit 
near the fish-tank and eat beef in black bean sauce, one of his few indulgences 
in life. The ninth volume of Adrian's diaries – following updates that have 
taken us fromThe Growing Pains of Adrian Mole to The Wilderness Years, The 
Cappuccino Years and Adrian Mole and the Weapons of Mass Destruction – is, like 
its predecessors, an ensemble piece smuggled into a monologue.

But, aside from much of the topical humour that fuels the book's jaunty pace 
and often throwaway comedy – the smoking ban, flooding, Northern Rock andThe 
Jeremy Kyle Show all pop up – there is an undertow that makes it a far darker 
and at times angrier work than Townsend's readers might expect. For a start, 
Adrian is ill, quite possibly terminally; and, second, he writes his diary as 
the New Labour project shows ever more serious signs of strain. On Tony Blair's 
last day in office, Adrian summons up all his hauteur to write: "I expect he 
will have a full day trying to repair his reputation."

Townsend is unequivocal about the extent to which she feels betrayed by the 
Labour party and how completely her views were changed by the Iraq war. "I am a 
passionate socialist," she says, "but, God, I can't stand them now. I support 
the memory and the history of the party and I consider that these lot are 
interlopers . . . I could still cry to think about shock and awe, to watch it 
on television and think 'there are bombers and they're bombing children'. That 
Blair could sit and watch that, with his kids, possibly. How would he have 
explained it to his children? They were old enough to understand politics 
easily. What would he have said? I suppose that stupid line about the weapons 
of mass destruction. But I think he's been punished."

Nor is her disillusion confined to British foreign policy. In 1997, asked to 
write a pre-election dispatch for the Observer, she travelled to the Gipton 
estate in Leeds, deliberately distancing herself from her native Leicester, 
where she has lived all her life. There, she found grinding poverty and very 
little hope, concluding: "The vermin, as Aneurin Bevan described the Tory 
party, will shortly be crawling back behind the skirting-board and New Labour 
will be dancing a victory jig on the floor. And I hope that over the coming 
years a socialist Labour party will gather strength. Somebody has to care for 
the poor."

Revisiting Leeds in 2005, Townsend was able to report significant improvements 
for the inhabitants of the city's estates. But she also described the ubiquity 
of CCTV cameras, each of them surrounded by iron spikes "uncannily like a crown 
of thorns"; she inveighed against the government's attitude towards the sick, 
revealing how a fascination with Bevan had turned her into a childhood 
socialist and writing: "I am from the working class. I am now what I was then. 
No amount of balsamic vinegar and Prada handbags could make me forget what it 
was like to be poor."

Everything about Townsend's life is informed by her sense of where she has 
come from. Her house, a former vicarage that sits at the top of a broad, leafy 
avenue, is within walking distance of Leicester city centre but clearly in one 
of its more well-to-do suburbs. It is beautiful but not flashy. In her writing 
room, where we sit and talk, the walls are covered with framed publicity 
posters and jackets from her plays and books, but they only arrived there after 
a good deal of soul-searching that ended when she saw a television programme in 
which her friend and sometime mentor, the late John Mortimer, had decorated his 
study similarly. "They used to be all up in the attic," she explains, "because 
I was almost ashamed of it – I couldn't bear any evidence that I was a 
professional writer. Then I saw a documentary about him, and he had all of his 
posters, thousands more than I've got, and I thought, if he can do it, I will."

The eldest daughter of a postman, she was born in 1946 and brought up in a 
happily close-knit family who lived on the edge of the countryside, four miles 
from Leicester. "We were probably the last generation to be truly free to 
play," she says, remembering days spent stalking through the grand rooms of an 
abandoned mansion, foraging for berries and soft grass, building rope swings 
and rafts. Somewhere along the way, she also discovered reading, fuelled by the 
affordability of Penguin Classics, an acquaintanceship with a second-hand 
bookseller and a passion for the great Russian novelists, and later the 
Americans. At the age of 14, the secret writing began. "Nobody ever knew. I 
learned to hide it. It was stories about a teenage girl, much influenced by the 
Russians. She certainly suffered privations."

At the same time, Townsend's life was developing along another track. She was 
married at 18, and had three children by the time she was 22. The secret 
writing continued at night, when the children were in bed: "I became an 
insomniac, really, hardly slept at all, didn't even try to. And it's carried 
on. I hate to say I only need as much sleep as Mrs Thatcher, but I can cope 
really well on five hours. When all my kids were at home, I used to write from 
midnight onwards. Television was boring in those days."

But it wasn't until her first marriage had ended and she had met Colin 
Broadway, who became her second husband and is the father of her fourth child, 
that she considered that her writing could be anything other than a nocturnal 
activity. Even when she "confessed" to Colin, she didn't allow him to read what 
she'd written or tell anyone else about it. It was only when he saw an 
advertisement in the local paper for a writer's group that things began to 
happen. In 1979, her first of many plays,Womberang, was produced, later winning 
her a Thames Television bursary (John Mortimer was on the panel), and the box 
under the stairs was opened for good. It was something of a jolt to those 
around her: "I was married to my first husband for seven years, and he didn't 
know. It was a massive surprise to him when he saw a poster in town to do with 
the play I'd written. Last time he sees me I'm surrounded by kids and wearing 
an apron, and then I've written this play, and there's an article in the local 
paper: "Local Mother Moves Into Theatre World". Local mother! I was a novelty, 
but then it was the 70s. Women had made a good stab at getting equality, but 
you were still fighting. Still skirmishing."

Adrian Mole went on to make her a bestselling novelist throughout the 1980s 
and beyond, and one of the country's foremost humorous writers. I tell her that 
I am almost exactly the same age as Adrian and was, as a young teenager, 
utterly addicted to him: his premature world-weariness, his combination of 
self-importance and neurotic lack of confidence and his romantic agonies struck 
a chord with me, as they did with teenagers (not to mention their teachers and 
parents) everywhere. The illustration on the front of my dog-eared copy ofThe 
Secret Diary hints at the reason, with its Noddy toothbrush to one side, razor 
and shaving-brush to the other; the book captured the painful drama of 
adolescence, of feeling caught between two worlds and belonging to neither, 
down to the last detail.

Now Adrian is at another of life's staging posts: on the brink of middle age, 
he is a man whose life still feels as provisional, bewildering and unsteady to 
him as it did 27 years ago. But this time, he is forced to confront a crisis 
that can't be wished away or played down. "I wanted him to face death," says 
Townsend. After his diagnosis, his thoughts are a characteristic blend of 
melodrama and mundanity: "I can't die yet. I've got responsibilities and a 
family and I have to look after my parents; they're completely irresponsible 
and couldn't survive without my help. And there are so many places I haven't 
visited yet: the Taj Mahal, the Grand Canyon, the new John Lewis department 
store they're building in Leicester."

Throughout the novel, Adrian goes through radiotherapy and chemotherapy but, 
although he ponders much on the fraught love-life of his hospital nurse, he is 
reticent when it comes to his own suffering. "I imagine he doesn't have the 
words for the fear he feels," Townsend says. "He knows it's a feeling, but he 
doesn't want to express it because that would make it real. That's what quite a 
lot of people do. I'm really good at detachment myself. It's been a handy trick 
over the last three months or so."

One feels that Townsend has had to do what she calls her "detachment trick" 
for longer than the last three months. She was diagnosed with diabetes in her 
30s, having previously been fit, healthy and active. "I did go overly 
dramatic," she says, although everything about her suggests that this was not 
the case. "I did lie on the couch and employ a cleaner." Through the decades, 
her condition deteriorated significantly; she lost her eyesight and, over the 
course of five years or so, her kidneys failed. Eight weeks before we met, she 
had a kidney transplant, using an organ donated by her son; she had endured 
years of dialysis. She is still a frequent visitor to the hospital, and will 
remain on medication for the rest of her life.

But if illness is one of novel's most fruitful themes – Adrian's initial 
attempts to secure a doctor's appointment will chime with most people – it 
doesn't prevent Townsend addressing other concerns. Issues of paternity and 
family run through the Mole books (Adrian himself has three children by three 
different mothers), and in the wake of the latest crisis – who is his sister 
Rosie's real father? – Townsend dispatches the interested parties to that great 
arbiter of contemporary ethics,The Jeremy Kyle Show. But what you don't get is 
anyde haut en bas satire on reality television. "I love those people," she says 
firmly. "I've worked with them, and I know them intimately. They're completely 
manipulated by the show, but . . . I think it's validating their life; being on 
the television is success, it doesn't matter what the context is. You haven't 
been able to make much of yourself because nobody's expected anything of you; 
first your parents, second your schoolteachers, certainly not your peer group – 
they're more comfortable with the lowest common denominator, because we're all 
in this together, so . . . I am overly sentimental, probably, about people like 
that."

As a child, Townsend used to sit on the bus into Leicester city centre, 
fascinated by the thought that the workers from the Fox's Glacier Mints factory 
would buy the bread made at the bakery up the road, following the chain of 
production and consumption as far as she could. She is convinced that the lives 
of the working class had more compensations than we now realise: Leicester 
itself had 15 working men's clubs, and most factories had several sports teams. 
Latterly, one of Townsend's contributions to community life has been to buy two 
pubs that would have otherwise disappeared, knowing that "if you gave people 
really good clean lavatories, not the 60-year-old urine smell, and you treated 
people well and were friendly, you could fill the place".

She is committed to the idea that the vast majority of people are looking for 
an opportunity to demonstrate their best selves, and that this is being 
thwarted by the depredations and excesses of government – a belief that 
surfaces not only in the Mole books, but also in more overtly political novels 
such asNumber Ten and Queen Camilla. Her anxiety that we are increasingly wary 
of one another leads her to believe that "we're on the cusp of something 
significant, because if it goes on that way what kind of a world are we going 
to be living in? We're going to be paranoid, fearful, isolated."

Townsend's novels are little hymns to the power of family and community to 
make life bearable. It seems horribly obvious to ask her whether she keeps a 
diary, but rather remiss not to. She laughs and assumes a mock-dramatic voice: 
"I prefer to keep my secrets to myself, to the grave . . . and beyond!"
 