
Alfie Allen, the 29-year-old actor, is not the boastful sort, but there have 
been occasional moments lately when he’s realised his career is not going too 
badly. One of these came when he was shootingStephen Poliakoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/29/mondaymediasection.bbc>’s new 
BBC drama,Close to the Enemy – pretty well a decade on from the writer-director 
giving him his television break in 2007’sJoe’s Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/nov/05/lastnightstvjoespalace>
.

“Part of the reason I got to work with Stephen again is because I’m still 
doing OK,” says Allen, with sincerity. “I mean it. I’m doing this TV show, 
which is big. And Stephen likes me as an actor, which is fantastic. He’s so 
energetic, I love working with him; I think he’s a genius.”

Yes, and “this TV show”, if you didn’t know, is Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
, which Allen has appeared in – something of a rarity – since the very 
beginning. And he’s quite right about it being “big”: the sixth, most recent 
series had an average UK audience of more than 5 million, making it Sky’s most 
popular TV series ever. Allen plays Theon Greyjoy, presumed heir to Pyke in the 
Iron Islands, though in recent times he’s been caked in mud as the simpering 
manservant re-named Reek.

It’s a pretty bleak role – he has been kidnapped and memorably castrated – but 
Allen has loved being inGame of Thrones and the opportunities it has given him. 
“I’m forever grateful for that,” he says, “but I don’t think I’ll ever really 
know how big it was or is until it finishes and then something else comes out 
that equals it. Then I’ll be able to view that as an outsider and go, ‘Bloody 
hell! Is this whatGame of Thrones was like?’”

Allen, who today wears a throwback, on-trend Champion tracksuit with a tweed 
flat cap and Seinfeld-white Nike trainers, seems to have been famous for ever. 
His parents are the actor Keith Allen and film producer Alison Owen, and he was 
immortalised in an affectionate but not wholly flattering 2006 song by his 
sister, Lily Allen, called “Alfie”.

“Yeah, I definitely feel like I had a different upbringing to a lot of other 
people, but not in a bad – or good – way,” he reflects. “When I was a kid I was 
roaming through Glastonbury Festival at eight years old, on my own. I say ‘on 
my own’, but I was probably with my oldest sister Sarah, and she would have 
been 13 or 14 at the time, so she’d have been walking us around. But I got to 
go places and meet people, and was trusted a lot, without a doubt.”

Equus put me on the map more as an actor rather than as a celebrity

Allen never seriously considered anything other than being an actor, although 
his father gave him a warning: “He told me that 95% of the acting game is about 
rejection and 5% is the good part. And that was definitely true for a long 
time.” A turning point, he feels, came in 2008 when, aged 21, he took over from 
Daniel Radcliffe in the revival of the playEquus. “It put me on the map more as 
an actor rather than as a celebrity,” says Allen, “which was great.”

And now the parts just seem to be getting better and better: the 5% his dad 
alluded to. Allen has just finished the West End run of Jesse Eisenberg’s hit 
playThe Spoils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/03/the-spoils-review-jesse-eisenberg-trafalgar-studios>
, and in September he returns to Northern Ireland for a four-month stint on the 
penultimate series ofGame of Thrones. Before that, there’s Poliakoff’s six-part 
series, which is set in 1946 and tells the intriguing story of the postwar 
effort to recruit Nazi scientists for Britain’s national interest. Allen plays 
Ringwood, part of a team ensconced in a bomb-ravaged London hotel charged with 
securing the intel to develop the jet engine for the RAF.

“That period is great,” says Allen. “People were still rationing, living in 
wartime conditions and everybody was still having it off with each other 
because they thought the next day might be their last.”

All of which is decent going for an actor who will still only turn 30 next 
month. “Yeah, I’m up and coming,” Allen laughs. “I don’t have any fear of 
turning 30. But maybe that’s because I know I’m never going to be 30 mentally 
at any point in my life!”

Close to the Enemy starts this autumn on BBC2
 