 A rightwing author who made his name undermining the reputation of a woman who 
accused a supreme court judge of sexual harassment says now that he was lying 
all along.
David Brock, whose best-selling book represented Anita Hill as "a little bit 
nutty and a little bit slutty", says that he did so to defend JusticeClarence 
Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clarence-thomas>, the conservative 
black judge whose Senate confirmation hearings were among the most rancorous in 
history.

"I demonised Democratic senators, their staffs and Hill's feminist supporters 
without ever interviewing any of them," Mr Brock says of his 1993 book, The Real
Anita Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anita-hill>.

"I was so blinded by my partisan tunnel vision and my tortured desire to make 
it in the movement that I believed my own propaganda."

Ms Hill had told the hearings two years earlier that the judge had instigated 
graphic discussions of pornographic films with her when she worked for him, and 
Mr Thomas was said to be a regular patron of the "adult" film shelves at a 
Washington video shop.

Mr Brock had become "a witting cog in the Republican sleaze machine", he 
writes in the August issue of Talk magazine.

"I had stumbled on to something big, a symbiotic relationship that would help 
create a highly profitable, rightwing Big Lie Machine that flourished in book 
publishing, on talk radio and on the internet throughout the 90s."

Apart from confessing to having lied, Mr Brock claimed that Justice Thomas 
used a go-between to smear another woman, Kaye Savage, who backed up Ms Hill's 
allegations about the pornography.

Mr Brock says that the go-between, a friend of the judge, gave him information 
about Ms Savage's divorce which he then used to intimidate her into withdrawing 
her support for Ms Hill's case.

The piece in the magazine is an extract from his next book, Blinded by the 
Right: The Conscience of an Ex-Conservative. It says that in an article he 
wrote in 1992 for a rightwing magazine, and which became the basis for The Real 
Anita Hill, he did all he could to destroy her credibility with "virtually 
every derogatory and often contradictory allegation I had collected on Hill 
into the vituperative mix".

Mr Brock names Mark Paoletta, a Washington lawyer who is now a Republican 
counsel to the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce, as 
the go-between.

He says that Mr Paoletta gave him the damaging personal details about Ms 
Savage to limit the damage that another book, Strange Justice: The Selling of 
Clarence Thomas, might do to the judge.

Mr Brock was reviewing the book and Ms Savage had told its authors of Justice 
Thomas's interest in pornography.

"Confirmation that Thomas frequently rented porno tapes made Hill's entire 
story much more plausible," Mr Brock writes in Talk.

Still, his review of the book described it as an outrageous hoax and said that 
there was no evidence that the judge had ever rented an "adult" movie.

"When I wrote those words I knew they were false," he says. "Thomas was 
playing dirty and so was I."

Mr Brock says he lied to protect the conservative political agenda. 

He visited Ms Savage, put to her the personal information he had received 
through Mr Paoletta, and demanded a retraction of the Strange Justice 
statements "or I would blacken her name, just as I had done to every other 
woman who had impugned Thomas's reputation." Ms Savage complied later with a 
fax.

Justice Thomas and Ms Hill both declined to comment. 

Mr Paoletta, however, said: "It's not true. Justice Thomas did not ask me to 
pass along any derogatory information to David Brock about Kaye Savage."
 