
Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> does everything 
himself. He plays every instrument on his recordings, makes every noise, 
records it all. But there's a reason he doesn't have the professionals in to 
help. "If I tried to explain what I needed, I'd sound like some mad producer," 
he says. "'I want blue clouds! I want sunny phantoms! OK, now play guitar like 
a Zeppelin falling out of the sky!' It's easier on my own. I get results."

Pink was born Ariel Rosenberg 27 years ago, and despite his technical 
deficiencies manages to sound simultaneously like the second coming of Prince 
or Frank Zappa. He has released three "legitimate" albums since signing to Paw 
Tracks, the label run by the acclaimed American folktronica quartet Animal 
Collective, but all the songs were part of the archive of thousands he had been 
assembling in Los Angeles since 1996, and he had already released the albums 
himself, as homemade cassettes and CD-Rs. The three you can get - The Doldrums, 
Worn Copy and House Arrest - form part of his Haunted Graffiti series, which 
includes many more recordings. It was meant to have gone a little differently.

"My dad was always asking me, 'What are you going to do with your life?'" Pink 
tells me when we meet in Munich, where he is halfway through a European tour. 
He looks frail, with a bony shoulder poking out of his faded Batman T-shirt. "I 
told him I was going to be a rock'n'roll star. But I had no verifiable talent, 
no instruments, nothing. I was just completely disturbed. I wore it with 
pride." In time, his shortcomings dictated his sound. "Recording enables me to 
produce the illusion that I can play. What I can do, you see, is edit. I can 
have my toe on the 'record' button of my 8-track machine, play 10 seconds of 
bass, then press 'stop' and then 'record' again once I've mastered the next 10 
seconds." For The Doldrums, he only played half the strings on his guitar. A 
year later, a friend showed him how to play the remaining three. "I was like, 
'Wow! So that's a chord!'"

What hits you first is the texture of the recording. Is it supposed to sound 
so, well, ropey? Yes, it is. Resistant to all things digital, Pink shrouds the 
music in a muted fuzz not heard since the heyday of home-taping, beneath which 
his tantalising melodies are half-submerged. His poppiest moments - Worn Copy's 
Immune to Emotion and Jules Lost His Jewels - would not have disgraced the 
Brill Building. Other songs sound like they have been excavated from an MOR 
radio station where DJs spin Hall & Oates and the J Geils Band, unaware that 
the 1980s are over and white trousers are out. The combination in the 
spaced-out Life in LA of sarcasm and despair would find favour with admirers of 
Steely Dan. On the other hand, Creepshow, with its pornographic grunts, betrays 
a love of 1970s industrial pioneers Throbbing Gristle.

The music is soaked in melancholy, the idea being that the greatest moments, 
in life and pop, are gone. But in recreating those moments with such 
inventiveness, Pink delivers ample evidence for the future of music. He draws 
no distinction in his songs between high and low culture, avant garde and pop, 
cool and uncool. "I try to create music that's like a totem pole of different 
elements," he says. "I see myself as an experimental artist inspired by the 
unreality of pop."

Animal Collective's Geologist, aka Brian Weitz, remembers Pink giving him a 
home-burned CD of Worn Copy, which originally formed part of the self-released 
Haunted Graffiti series. "We weren't looking to sign anyone," he says. Pink 
wasn't looking to get signed either. "I was handing out CDs to everyone. If you 
were a Jehovah's Witness and you showed up at my door, you'd get one." But 
Geologist and his band-mates were seduced by the frightening, visionary 
11-minute epic, Trepanated Earth. "It was so genuine and unique. You knew no 
one could have made this music except this one person. We all agreed that we 
should let him do whatever he wanted."

Given the freedom to release anything from his vast archive, Pink drew a line 
in the sand. "I thought, 'These guys are a hotshot label, right? I'll give them 
The Doldrums. That's got no commercial chance whatsoever.' I'd made the saddest 
record I could; it was negative not only emotionally but aesthetically." Animal 
Collective's response was to reject the album. "We'd all been in love with Worn 
Copy for so long that we were hoping the first release would be something like 
that."

Pink was nonplussed. "I just said, 'I'll send you some other stuff.'" Then 
Animal Collective reversed their decision. "Once we separated The Doldrums from 
Worn Copy," says Geologist, "and listened to it with a clear head, we realised 
it might actually be Ariel's best work."

A disadvantage of making such intricate albums is that they are impossible to 
reproduce live, as Pink's brief history of gigging has shown. He has toured 
with backing tapes for company, and been booed off stage. He also toured with a 
band. He couldn't afford to pay them, so he let them choose the set-list 
instead. Unfortunately, they didn't pick anything from the album he was 
promoting. Again, he was booed.

Recent dates have been decidedly brighter. Sure, there have been hitches. The 
merchandise stall, for instance, is looking threadbare. "The T-shirt guy let us 
down," Pink explains at Munich's Rote Sonne club, where he is eating chow mein 
with a spoon minutes before taking the stage. "So we had to improvise." This 
meant spray-painting a selection of thinning, XS-size T-shirts from his own 
luggage, and putting them on sale at €20 a pop. On the plus side, these are now 
collectable one-offs. Also, there will be less dirty washing when he gets home. 
Talk about win-win.

There is no sound-desk at the club, so Pink is forced to twiddle knobs and 
faders himself as he sings emphatically from behind his veil of lank hair. His 
girlfriend Geneva, from the LA band Bubonic Plague, plays keyboards. His friend 
Nick, on bass, has shot Pink's promo videos, in which anything can happen - one 
shows Pink in the bath, trying to eat the foot of a woman whose leg he has 
recently shaved. Before each song on stage, Pink inserts a cassette into a 
clunky recorder: there is still no way of playing these songs without recourse 
to tapes. This is charmingly lo-fi, but it has its drawbacks. When an audience 
member calls out a request, Pink replies: "No, sorry. Blame Stockholm." In 
Stockholm, it transpires, five of the cassettes were stolen. How endearing that 
Pink came out on tour with no back-up copies.

Booming out over a muscular PA system, the songs seem less elegiac. But later, 
pacing outside the club in the early hours of the morning, Pink maintains that 
sadness is the key to his work. "I was at my cousin's wedding with all my 
family. They're getting drunk, dancing, letting loose. Someone says, 'Ariel, 
come on out and let loose.' And I'm going, 'Nah, I'm not gonna dance.' And it 
hit me, alone at the table, as I was being curmudgeonly: I always dance; I 
dance on stage for people. But while most people get inspired to be extrovert 
when they're having a good time, for me the opposite happens - I only get like 
that when I'm at my most vulnerable and insecure. I'm interested in failure. 
That's always what gets me up out of my seat."

Popularity is a daunting prospect for Ariel Pink, even if stardom remains a 
great distance away. "The more successful I get," he shudders, "the more 
suspicious it makes me. I'll play a show and someone will speak to me after and 
I'll think we have a connection. Then I'll see their record collection and 
think, 'What am I doing wrong?'"

He shoots a look of exaggerated exasperation. What could be so bad - Dire 
Straits? "No, with Dire Straits you'd be in the clear. But if for instance you 
had Death Cab for Cutie, I'd be like, 'What the fuck, dude? Don't you realise 
what I'm talking about?'" His laugh fails to disguise the fact that he is 
deadly serious.

Geologist believes Ariel Pink will cope well with success, should it come. 
"I'm sure he'll handle it. He'd be doing these records whether or not he was 
getting paid, whether or not people thought he was cool. He can't help 
himself." But he concedes it's time to forge ahead. "I would personally like to 
hear some new material from Ariel," he says.

"I haven't recorded a new album since my career started," admits Pink. "I've 
been clearing out the archive." The consequence of this is that, as arresting 
as the songs are, they refer to a version of Ariel Pink that is as much as six 
years out of date. "I'm a different person now. I'm much more together." He 
says the next album will be brand new. He's so keen to get started that when he 
suffered from writer's block earlier this year, he organised a "Write Your Own 
Ariel Pink Song" contest through his website. Did that turn up any gems? "Nah," 
he shrugs, "just a bunch of horrible lyrics." But then his poor fans have a lot 
with which to compete. On Interesting Results, for example, he declares: "Every 
time I pick up a pen/I get interesting results" - which could be the 
understatement of the year.

· Ariel Pink plays the Freebutt in Brighton tonight, and is on tour in the UK 
until June 16 (seewww.arielpink.com <http://www.arielpink.com> for details).
 