
Accidentally referring to uni as “home” in the presence of Mum and Dad can be 
the first sign that you have settled in. But the idea of home can be 
complicated when moving away for the first time.

While university can be an exciting escape from parental authority, it’s 
common for students to feel uncomfortable in their new surroundings.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> tell us what has made them 
feel most at home.

I must at all times have Squishy, my teddy 

Holly Dorson, 18, who studies French and Spanish at Queen Mary’s, says her 
bedroom means everything when it comes to feeling settled. “I must at all times 
have my teddy (he’s called Squishy), photos of my family and friends, and some 
bunting to remind me of my farm back home,” she says.

“That along with making my room really pretty and organised. I can’t imagine 
having to come home after a day at uni to somewhere that doesn’t look familiar 
and presentable.”

I try to be out of my accommodation as often as possible

Sometimes living quarters won’t be so cosy. “I try to be out of my flat as 
much as possible, says Emily Lafoy, 19, a drama student at Exeter University. 
She was placed in first-year accommodation which made her mum squirm on her 
first visit.

Emily says her horrible halls don’t matter since she found her feet getting 
involved with societies. “It isn’t all about the home comforts or a nice cup of 
tea; I think it’s also how you manage your free time. That certainly made me 
forget about my prison cell of a room and the fact that I missed my Mum every 
now and again.”

I found it too difficult to settle in without a familiar face

“I know university is about meeting new people but I found it difficult to 
settle in,” says Jake Murphy, 20, who dropped out of psychology at the 
University of Bristol in his first term. “I didn’t have one familiar face to go 
out and fully embrace the university lifestyle with.”

Jake has since moved back to his hometown where his girlfriend also lives. “I 
simply wasn’t compatible with the people around me: personalities clashed, and 
the vibe just wasn’t right.”

Having my boyfriend both at home and at university is amazing

Camille Jones, 21, studies natural sciences at the University of Birmingham 
where she suffers from anxiety. Attending the same uni as her boyfriend seems 
to have helped, however. It’s been “amazing”, she says, “because it means I 
have a piece of home with me all the time.”

Camille also finds solace with her flatmates. “If you are homesick, reach out 
to those who you feel closest to. More often than not you can make friends 
easier than you think you can.”

Home is where your stuff is

Ania Galasinska, 19, who studies English at Loughborough university, found 
herself caught between two homes in her first year. “Half of your belongings 
are left back in the house where you grew up, and the other half are in your 
new room at university. On the one hand you start getting used to living in 
this new accommodation, and yet it feels natural to go back to my ‘real’ home 
during the holidays. It can feel like you’re in limbo.”

I just miss my countryside bubble

Lizzie Powell, 22, a history finalist at Manchester University, had never 
visited the city before applying. The moment she arrived on her first day of 
fresher’s week, she hated it. “I am a quiet country girl,” she says. “People 
tell me I am an idiot but I had no idea Manchester was such a party place.

“Living in my little bubble back at home I just thought any uni would do. I 
never realised they were all so different. Trust me, you want to look around 
before you decide.”

Exam fiascos: what's the worst that could happen?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/20/students-exam-horror-stories-a-levels-university>
It’s frustrating to talk to my family on the phone

Emily Knoles, 19, who studies English at Brighton University, has found the 
new distance from her family frustrating at times. “Something that seems 
important to me is met with a ‘hmm’ down the phone, and a change of subject 
onto something like the new toy the dog has been bought,” she says.

“This happens in the opposite direction as well. I’m ranted to about 
day-to-day hassles, when all I really want to do is go and make dinner or get 
on with my essay.”

There’s stigma attached to living with your parents

Matthew Blagdon, 22, at St Mary’s University in London studies drama and lives 
at home with his mum. “Being able to escape the uni life and come back to the 
house I have always lived in is invaluable,” he says.

“I love my uni but not staying in halls of residence or a student house has 
meant that I have saved myself a lot of money. And I have the comfort of a 
flat-screen TV in the living room. There is stigma attached to staying at home, 
but at the end of the day, it’s your happiness that counts.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 