



Send us your questions on topics from mental health and wellbeing to 
employment rights and we’ll get answers from our expertpanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/23/ngo-agony-aunts-meet-the-panel>


This week’s dilemma

Dear NGO agony aunts,

Lately I’ve been in the situation where the INGO [international 
non-governmental organisation] I work for is trying to get rid of me from the 
mission. Iam wondering if there is a regulatory body for international NGOs 
where I can complain about racism, nepotism and bullying happening now? Is 
there a regulatory body of NGO activities? After discussing with friends I feel 
hopeless because it is happening in many settings and many organisations. I 
feel somehow that thereare no rules for them and they can do whatever they 
want. You may ask why this is happening – I think maybe it’s because I voice 
the problems I think the INGO has in terms of security, and drinking alcohol 
openly in a conflict zone in an Islamic country etc. How can NGOs be held to 
account for their behaviour towards us, humanitarian aid workers? 

Share your stories: mental health and wellbeing in the aid industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/share-your-stories-mental-health-and-wellbeing-in-the-aid-industry>
‘My first point of call would be speaking to your staff representative’


Kate Denman, training coordinator, RedR

Well done for speaking up and voicing your concerns, it’s a difficult thing to 
do. You should be entitled to a staff representative that can raise issues for 
you anonymously, and help with ways to deal with any discrimination. A large 
INGO should have clear grievance procedures available to everyone. And check if 
there is any counselling service available to you as field staff, many 
organisations offer it for free with a call up service for those working 
remotely.

If you have concerns that standards are not being met this should be addressed 
with the appropriate people in the organisation. Start by speaking to your 
staff representative, failing that your line manager. If you feel neither of 
those are possible, look into the correct procedures for making a formal 
complaint. Racism, nepotism and bullying is not acceptable on any mission. We 
are accountable to the beneficiaries and to ourselves as NGOS, INGOs, and 
individual aid workers. As we move forward as a sector we need to really work 
on this standard as, unfortunately, it is a complaint we hear far too often.



‘Log all the incidents that are concerning you – and read up on organisational 
policy’
Lucy Heaven Taylor, accountability specialist 

The first place to start is within your organisation; you could go up the 
management line, or contact regional or headquarters HR with your concerns. Log 
all the incidents that are concerning you – and find out if the INGO has 
policies on bullying or harassment. These policies might also contain 
definitions that will help you to unpick exactly what it is you are dealing 
with. What is the formal procedure for raising complaints? Most INGOs should 
also have a disclosure of malpractice, or whistleblowing policy that protects 
complainants.

There is no one regulatory body that covers all INGOs; most instead sign up to 
voluntary codes of practice such as the CHS Alliance’sCore Humanitarian Standard
 <http://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/the-standard>, which commits them to 
certain standards. Is the INGO you work for headquartered in the UK? If so, 
they are regulated by theCharity Commission 
<http://www.gov.uk/guidance/whistleblowing-guidance-for-charity-employees>, who 
deal with complaints against UK-registered NGOs. If not, it is worth checking 
if there are any similar regulatory bodies where your employer is based. Good 
luck!


Steve Dennis: the aid worker suing his NGO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/15/steve-dennis-aid-worker-suing-his-ngo>
‘This problem is prevalent and, sadly, widely accepted’ 
Maia Gedde, author of Working in International Development and Humanitarian 
Assistance: a career guide

Begin by checking your contract to see which country’s law is said to be 
applicable. You can, like any employee, launch a complaint using the labour law 
specified in your contract, subject to the courts in that country having 
jurisdiction to hear your claim.

 On the wider issues regarding the juxtaposition of humanitarian workers and 
the situation of local people and their culture, this is indeed a problem which 
is prevalent and, sadly, widely accepted. Numerous people I interviewed for my 
book brought up the stereotypical thrill-seeking or veteran humanitarian who 
drinks hard and plays hard. Everyone needs to find coping mechanisms in these 
difficult circumstances, and alcohol is a common vice.


At the same time the composition of teams is important as you spend all your 
time with those people during a humanitarian mission. If one person doesn’t fit 
in, it can negatively affect the whole team. Changing the whole system will be 
hard, but for your future missions find out who the team is comprised of, that 
they share your values, or check what the NGO policies are on alcohol and 
respecting local culture so that you can find a good fit.

Do you have a problem you would like help with? Email us on 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with NGO Agony Aunts in the subject line. All 
letters will be kept anonymous.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 