
"I voted BNP," said John Webb, an apprentice plumber, without the slightest 
hesitation. Such a statement would have been unthinkable in the former Labour 
stronghold ofBarnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> only a 
few years ago.

"I'm not a racist. I know they used go on about the Pakis coming here and 
that, but that's history. They're here now, and it's all this money we pay 
Europe which swung it for me," Webb added.

£40m a day to Brussels was the figure he was given by BNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp> canvassers, who are mainstream 
enough to man a stall every week outside Barnsley market.

"They set it up just over there," said Edward William Smith, a 70-year-old 
retired miner who left the pits to make milk bottles in the town's other former 
staple, the glassworks. Resting with his bags of shopping, he added: "There's 
one of them always going at it with his microphone. They do have things to say, 
but it always seems to have a touch of hatred to me."

But the BNP activists manning the stall are usually neat and tidy, Smith said, 
not the crewcut thugs whose image dominated the old National Front. The BNP's 
new MEP for ­Yorkshire and the Humber, 61-year-old retired lecturerAndrew Brons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-brons>, is a former NF chairman 
who also speaks calmly and politely and wears a suit.
 Barnsley, South Yorkshire, where intense BNP campaigning helped the party 
gain a seat in the European parliament representing the Yorkshire and 
Humberside region. Photograph: Christopher Thomond/Guardian 
His share of the vote in Barnsley more than doubled from 8% in 2004 to 17% , 
sending the Yorkshire average to 9.8%, and Phil Davies, a taxi driver, reckoned 
to know why. Joshing with the town's bus drivers, whose smoking break area is 
just by the cab rank, he said: "It's a protest, undoubtedly – a protest against 
the government, all the fighting around Gordon Brown and specially the 
expenses."

He still would not touch the BNP with a bargepole and neither would Margaret 
Scott, resting with her shopping beside her partner Robert Grange, a retired 
lorry driver.

"They shouldn't be doing well here," she said, "but people are so angry about 
the expenses. I know I am. I nearly smashed my TV when the news about it came 
on. You can see why people thought: let's show them and vote BNP."

Younger voters like Webb and his friend Jordan Parks, 17, suggest, however, 
that the extreme rightwing group may have made more lasting inroads. "As I say, 
it's not racist, but there are loads of foreigners coming here and competing 
with us for jobs," said Webb. "It took me three years to get my apprenticeship, 
and times are a lot harder these days. The ones coming from Europe should be 
looking for work in their own countries first. It's not personal, it's just 
common sense."

The party still attracts a nastier fringe, however, and these supporters are 
also less reluctant to admit BNP support than used to be the case. "Ask me, I 
voted for them," shouted Amber, a student running across Barnsley's precinct to 
give her views, but not her surname. "My mam and I both voted for them, because 
if you want a job here, you need to colour yourself in and have a funny name."
 