
Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> claims it would 
be physically impossible to play tennis while high on crystal meth and says he 
never played the game while doped.

In an interview in the Sydney Morning Herald in the wake of his admission that 
he once took crystal meth and then lied about it, Agassi was emphatic about the 
deleterious effects of playing while high.

"No, I never did it in tournaments," Agassi said, addressing rumours he may 
have played while doped. "I never did because it would have been a disaster. 
It's hideous; it's not the way you feel but what you're incapable of. Your 
heart rate runs high enough as it is but to have that kind of heart rate and to 
tell yourself to calm down and hit a second serve is literally impossible.

"Then there's the dehydration factor, the fact you can't drink a lot of water, 
you don't want to eat, you just wanna burn, you wanna burn, you wanna burn. 
You'd be lucky to last a set; it would not be physically possible to play a 
match without real health problems."

Agassi has had two weeks to absorb the reaction to his admission he regularly 
got high with a guy called "Slim" during 1997 – the year he dropped out of 
tennis as he coped with his impending marriage to actress Brooke Shields, a 
marriage he did not want to go through with.

"I wasn't surprised by the reaction," Agassi said. "I have a clear 
understanding of how someone would feel angered by it and disappointed by it – 
you have to remember I lived years feeling angry at myself and disappointed at 
myself, so the reaction doesn't surprise me.

"It took me years to process and it will take other people time to process the 
shock and to work through the anger and disappointment but in the end I think 
calmer heads will rule the day as it relates to the fact that this is the true 
me; there is nothing about this that isn't true.

"It might not be the perception people want of me and it's not the perception 
I want of myself but it is my true self and in the end that's what we're left 
with."

The drug-taking marked a low point in Agassi's life. The first part of his 
career was framed by a loathing of tennis, which was the legacy of his father 
force-feeding him the game as a child. He also resented living a life he did 
not "choose".

He said any damage to his reputation was a small price to pay if his story was 
of value to readers in similarly dark places.

"If my story can help one person, let alone millions of people who wake up in 
a life they didn't choose, wake up in a marriage they didn't want … if it can 
help a teenager about to step into the pitfalls I stepped into – then that's an 
easy price to pay if the price is some judgments, or some loss of reputation or 
some false image."

Agassi's major regret about the incident is lying to the Association of Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Professionals about how the drug got 
into his system. The ATP bought his lame excuse of a spiked drink and buried 
the story. If Agassi had admitted the truth, he would have been banned for 
three months for testing positive to a recreational drug.

"I regret it [lying], I'm ashamed of it and I could argue that, had I owned 
up, I would have learned faster and it would have helped me more," he said. "I 
should have owned up. There's no justification for lying but you're in a whirl 
and emotionally and logically you cannot even process what it means.

"In the years after it I thought to myself, 'Do you own up now?'. When do you 
tell the truth? This can't be a press release, this can't be an interview – it 
took me 400 pages to place this in the context of my life."

On a lighter note one of the other startling revelations of Agassi's book is 
the fact he won the 1999 French Open without wearing underwear for the duration 
of the tournament.

It started when he forgot to pack some for his first-round match and did not 
have time to find a spare pair so decided to go "commando". He won and because 
of superstition played the rest of the tournament in the same relaxed fashion.

"It was just one of those things," Agassi said. "I've seen it a lot in tennis: 
a player starts a tournament a certain way, whatever that might be, like 
putting on their left sock first, and they can't stop."

Agassi said it was the first time he had told that story. "That's because this 
is the first platform I've had to tell it – it's not something you put out a 
press release on."
 