
How do you feel about retirement?
I wanted to stop while I am still in pretty good shape, the difference with my 
colleagues being that I'm not addicted to giving concerts. I've never been just 
a pianist, or even just a musician; there is actually a lot I want to do. I 
wanted to stop two-and-a-half years ago, aged 75, but friends persuaded me to 
go on.

I started giving recitals 60 years ago, in Graz. One year later, I went in for 
the Busoni [pianists'] competition and carried off one of the prizes. But for 
me, a musical career was always a long-term proposition. I had an idea that I 
wanted to achieve certain things by the time I was 50. Fortunately, it has gone 
on from there - there was still plenty to learn. [But] now it shouldn't be 
drawn out until some of my faculties deteriorate, or until I become a 
glorification of arthritis.

Will you miss giving concerts?
What I will miss, probably, is the adrenalin - its medical benefits. It takes 
away some pain, from nerves, muscles, joints, so I shall have to see how I can 
replace that.

As to the public, I am most grateful - in spite of all those obnoxious 
coughers and the mobile telephones and hearing aids going off. They have kept 
faithful when I changed the diet of my concerts about 15 years ago, when I had 
some trouble with my left arm. For quite a few years I have been one of the 
pianists who sells out halls, wherever [they] may be. It made me wonder if my 
playing was really as cerebral as some people made out. These farewell concerts 
have turned out to be enlightening. When I have been told, "You are leaving a 
big hole in the lives of so many people," I felt glad that I could leave 
something behind, even if it's a hole.

I always also had a literary life, and I shall pursue this quite a bit more. I 
shall give lectures, readings of my poetry - and I will have more time to look 
after a few young pianists. At the moment, there's Kit Armstrong, a 16-year-old 
boy who is a real prodigy. He has composed since he was seven. He is also a 
mathematical wizard, the most natural Bach player I have ever met. He has a 
phenomenal memory. Watching this boy, I understood much better how the mind of 
somebody like Mozart or Schubert or Bach worked. The mind simply works 10 times 
faster than ours, and with complete concentration.

You have always been a great concerto player, and are ending your playing 
career with two of the Mozart concertos, the early one in E flat, K271 - 
"Jeunehomme" (which you like to refer to as one of the wonders of the world), 
and the C minor, K491.
I started playing Mozart in my teens but I had a hard time with his piano 
music. And then, as an 18-year-old, I went to the great Swiss pianist Edwin 
Fischer's masterclass and played the A minor Sonata there, and that opened the 
door [to his music]. I played Mozart's concertos for years in Vienna and 
Salzburg. That was my early Mozart period.

Later, there was another Mozart period, starting 12 or 15 years ago, where I 
dared to tackle the sonatas, too. [Pianist Artur] Schnabel's remark about them 
is still the best: "Too easy for children, too difficult for artists." One 
couldn't say it more concisely.

In my young years, the notion that Mozart was predominantly graceful was 
widespread. But there were people who were of the other camp, people such as 
Fischer, Bruno Walter and Schnabel, who let the demon in when the music was 
demonic. I think in my 1960s period, I was more on the graceful and poised 
side, and only later began to perceive Mozart's full range. The violinist 
Sándor Végh once asked what I thought constituted good Mozart playing, and I 
said a combination of singing and speaking. I still think this is so.

The ninth piano concerto, K271, has one of Mozart's greatest cadenzas, and a 
movement in C minor - one of my favourite keys, which was as important to 
Mozart as it was to Beethoven. I once wrote a poem in which Beethoven murders 
Mozart in order to take full possession of the key of C minor. The Ninth is the 
concerto where everything is written out, every note, every lead-in and 
decoration, which didn't happen in the later works, since they were not 
finished for print.

Thanks to musicologists we now know more about the so-called "Jeunehomme" 
Concerto. It used to be thought Mozart couldn't spell the name, and, in fact, 
it was [written for a pianist] called Jenomy or Jenomé, the daughter of a 
famous dancer. I haven't seen a picture of her and there are no accounts, but I 
like to think she must have been very good-looking to have inspired him to 
write this phenomenal piece. It is as if his earlier concertos are by another 
composer. Suddenly there is a structure and the most wonderful ideas, formal 
ideas, and a vision of everything the classical piano concerto could become, in 
subtlety and richness. For me, it is a perfect work, with that special 
freshness of something done for the first time and succeeding at the same time.

As a pianist, do you work more by intellect or instinct?
I have never been somebody who analyses a piece and then plays it. I want to 
know the piece well and for it to tell me what it is about, and what is special 
about it. Structures are relatively easy to get, [but] some people maintain, 
particularly in Germany - following the writings of the composer and critic 
Theodor Adorno - that when you have grasped the structure, the character will 
come by itself, it is implied; but that is not at all the case. I have always 
felt actors to be an inspiration. On stage, they have to turn into a character, 
to impersonate many different characters: I feel they are my colleagues. Some 
musicians do not appear to have thought about it, or maybe it is not taught 
that you cannot sit there starting the Moonlight Sonata with a smile on your 
face.

What I want to get is the message from the piece, which doesn't mean that I 
block myself out. There is always this simplification: "Oh, you know, Brendel 
is the most modest of people." But I don't expect to get directions from heaven.

I've found it possible to talk about music without talking nonsense, and I 
think you should always be a little witty. And I want to say this about music 
in general - I've also had a lot of fun. I was never a tortured person.

• A fuller version of this interview appears in Gramophone magazine, published 
today.

Essential Brendel

Beethoven: Complete Piano Sonatas, 
Philips (11 CDs)
Pared down to the bare bones of musical truth.

Schubert: Piano Sonatas D 575, 894, 959 & 960, 
Philips (two CDs)
Later performances - memorable A major and B flat sonatas.

Beethoven: Piano Concertos, 
Philips (three CDs) 
With Simon Rattle in the late 1990s.

Haydn: Piano Sonatas,
Philips (four CDs)
Few have championed this music more persuasively. 

Mozart: Piano Concertos K271, 450, 482, 503, 595,
Philips (two CDs)
With Neville Marriner in the 1970s.

Liszt: Années de Pèlerinage, Third Year etc, 
Philips (one CD)
One of his finest discs.

Andrew Clements
 