
People were laying bets: ‘Is it going to make it!? Come on, son! COME ON!’

Tony Davidson, executive creative director at Wieden + Kennedy 
<http://wklondon.com/>, wasn’t the only one who had a good time making the Cog 
chain reaction advert <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cog_(advertisement)> for 
the Honda Accord back in 2003.

So did French director Antoine Bardou-Jacquet and a motley crew of creative 
pals, including a designer, sculptor and photographer, who spent months in a 
Paris studio figuring out its intricacies. “Honda delivered the car for the 
test and when it arrived everybody jumped on with tools and we started to 
remove everything,” recalls the director. “It was great fun to destroy a 
beautiful car. Once we had all the car parts everywhere, we started playing. A 
bit like monkeys in a zoo.”

Wieden + Kennedy had initially pitched the idea – the seed of which the team 
at Honda came up with – for the Civic model. It was knocked back and later, in 
the midst of discussions about a campaign for the new Accord, Cog was put back 
on the table.

It was an incredibly long process. You just can’t believe that you were given 
that time to prove something.
Tony Davidson 
The ad appealed to Honda because “it was an engineering problem”, says 
Davidson. “They got the principles behind it.” The company was very open to new 
ideas during this period, the adman recalls. “They didn’t really have any 
strategic briefs. They would sort of just tell you about the car.”

Honda gave the agency £100,000 and two cars with which to test the idea – and 
the company appointed Bardou-Jacquet. But before that, Wieden + Kennedy’s head 
of production, Rob Steiner, insisted that creative director Matt Gooden and 
copywriter Ben Walker draw a complete version of the chain reaction to prove it 
was theoretically possible.

“So Ben and Matt had to get a Haynes car manual and figure out what parts 
could knock into another part. I’d love to know if the bit of paper is still 
around,” says Davidson.

Bardou-Jacquet remembers the drawing, but also that hardly any of the 
connections dreamed up by Gooden and Walker made it into the final film. It was 
partly a question of cinematography, the director explains; the chain included 
both very small and very large car parts and there’s only so fast the camera 
could refocus as it moved from one to the next.

As the months passed, Davidson and his team received work-in-progress clips 
and went back and forth to Paris to see how the chain reaction was taking 
shape. Satisfied that the idea for the advert was going to work, Honda approved 
it with a production budget of £1m.

“It was an incredibly long process,” says Davidson. “You just can’t believe 
that you were given that time and that openness to prove something.” He doesn’t 
think such a project would be possible today: firms spend enormous sums on 
research and development but aren’t prepared to experiment when it comes to 
advertising like they used to, he says.

'A character that will live forever' – how we made the Levi's Flat Eric ads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/31/levis-flat-eric-advert-puppet>
The move was eventually made to a larger studio, so that Bardou-Jacquet could 
put all the different elements of the chain reaction together. Finding one long 
enough to fit the entire reaction, however, proved prohibitively expensive, 
which is why the advert was shot in two takes, with the join halfway through as 
the exhaust pipe and muffler rolls across the floor.

But there was no cheating involved, as Davidson and Bardou-Jacquet are quick 
to point out. “Every time [the exhaust pipe] rolled exactly four times,” 
explains Davidson. “So the principle was: we could have done this in one.”

As the shoot approached, Honda made life that bit more difficult for the 
creatives with late-in-the-day requests to include particular car parts or 
features it was keen to show off, such as wipers that switch on automatically 
when water hits the windscreen.

It took around 60 takes, over three days, to get the ad in the can. 
“Everything was very sensitive and fine-tuned. If you have a temperature 
change; if you have a little wind – anything could affect everything on the 
ground,” says Bardou-Jacquet. “But that was fun.”

Sometimes it was the reaction that failed (Davidson remembers the dripping oil 
can as a particularly frustrating moment). Sometimes it was the camera, which 
had to do a complex dance up and down along a track to keep pace with the 
moving parts. Either way, the entire reaction needed to be reset each time, 
with anticipation growing for each fresh attempt.

There was very little done in post-production, Davidson explains: “The idea, 
the PR story, is that you do it for real. That’s as important as the film 
itself – the fact that Honda, as an engineering company, took these things to 
pieces, did this thing and spent months in studios. That’s part of the magic of 
it.”

Sound was an important component though, all part of getting across what 
Davidson describes as Honda’s “warm engineering” (as opposed to the “cold feel” 
of companies such as BMW or Audi). Garrison Keillor was hired to do the 
voiceover because of the uniqueness of his intonation and The Sugarhill Gang’s
Rapper’s Delight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mcCK99wHrk0> selected to help 
the advert appeal to a younger age group than that previously associated with 
the Accord.

The full two-minute advert was only aired on a handful of occasions in April 
2003, appearing in premium spots during major sporting events such as the 
Brazilian Grand Prix, before going out in shorter formats over the following 
weeks. The response was impressive and immediate, leading to a huge increase in 
traffic to the Honda website and lots of media coverage. The ad won a slew of 
industry awards too.

Davidson wasn’t surprised. “That was one of those ones that you knew was going 
to be pretty epic,” he says. “There is something about chain reactions that 
human nature is attracted to. It’s just a thing that people want to watch.”

Ad facts

• Director: Antoine Bardou-Jacquet.
• Companies involved: Honda (brand); Wieden + Kennedy (agency); Partizan 
(production company).
• Length of the project: five days’ shooting, plus pre-production.
• Credits: The Sugarhill Gang: Rapper’s Delight, BMG (recording rights); 
Warner Chappell/Sony ATV (shared publishing rights).

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/sponsored-content>.
 