
When Margaret Thatcher died in April 2013, the Sheffield Star led with the 
headline: “We Will Never Forgive Her”.


Just 61 miles away, one of our other titles - The Grantham Journal - ran the 
headline: “Margaret – World and Queen Set To Mourn”.
 The Sheffield Star. Photograph: Sheffield Star 
Now that’s media plurality for you, and the local media industry can deliver 
it in a way theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> never can.

And that is probably why local media remains the most trusted source of 
information (Consumer Catalyst 2014).

When I first read the BBC’s Future of News report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
 last week I’m not sure what depressed me most - the inflammatory language 
used, the misguided sentiment behind it, or the fact that the BBC intends 
parking a tank on every local lawn and offering its version of hyper local news 
controlled from London W1A.

The contributors to the report read like a roll call of the BBC Great and Good 
Alumni – Mark Thompson, Nic Newman, Richard Sambrook … so its conclusions are 
hardly a surprise.

I immediately took to Twitter in utter dismay that the BBC vs local media 
spark had been reignited.

World Service cuts will reduce UK's global 'soft power', BBC report warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
Because I genuinely thought we were making headway. I, like my colleagues, 
welcomed a healthy discussion with James Harding last year about the provision 
of local – truly local – news.

I do still dare to believe that we can actually create a genuinely 
collaborative partnership – one which allows the BBC to play its role in the 
provision of local news but which still allows local media to thrive in the 
communities they have been serving for hundreds of years.

Now that a few days have passed I remain exasperated that the BBC is peddling 
inaccurate information about an industry with enough challenges to fight. And 
we’re rising to those challenges. Digital revenues for local news brands rose 
by a quarter over the past year with digital display growing at 36% - faster 
than the media industry average. (Advertising Association)

We’re not all closing newspapers – we’ve not folded a single paid for title in 
the three years I’ve been atJohnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnstonpress>. Moving a title online is 
simply not the same as closure and this seems a disappointingly analogue view 
from the BBC.

And moving a daily to a weekly does not signal an end to daily news and daily 
publishing. According to ABC, traffic to local media websites grew by 57.6% 
year on year. The Northampton Chronicle & Echo news desk still meets daily, and 
publishes not just daily but hourly to the web. Great journalism is great 
journalism. Copy doesn’t need to appear in a newspaper to touch local lives, 
champion local issues and hold those in power to account, locally.

It now has a total weekly audience of close to a quarter of a million – way 
beyond the numbers it had as a print only title. It’s profitable too. And, as 
part of a large publishing group, sustainable.

With the BBC’s own local websites underperforming, the report surprisingly 
doesn’t cover how this is to be addressed, but linking to local newspaper 
online content could be the solution.

Future of News picks out one of Johnston Press’ titles for particular 
criticism – the Scarborough News.

“Considering the town hit the national headlines earlier this month as its 
hospital declared a major incident, there were very few news boots on the 
ground to hold those responsible to account…”

Where’s the supporting evidence for this rather damning statement I wonder? As 
many people are reading the Scarborough News now as they did when it was a 
daily – and we have many thousands of new digital readers across iPad, mobile 
apps and the website. The only ‘journalism that is failing people’ here is the 
BBC’s accuracy.

And, by the way, the Scarborough News – which fosters hyper-local community 
conversation in a way the BBC never can - has been holding those responsible to 
account since 1882.

It is also somewhat baffling that the BBC has become obsessed by the spoils of 
hyper-local news, particularly now, when their focus should be on everything 
but…(with the small matter of the Charter Renewal to consider).

I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again: the BBC needs to focus on what it’s 
brilliant at – creating world-class content – and stop trying to be all things 
to all people. The BBC sets the standard for national and international news. 
They simply don’t have the resources to be brilliant at everything.

Last year I suggested a way of working with the BBC that could increase public 
value by increasing the reach of BBC content if the BBC allows us to access it 
– all of it – from video content to weather - free of charge, and take it to 
market.

Anything with a potential regional benefit should be made available, free, to 
regional publishers. A great big content bucket, properly tagged and indexed, 
that we (trusted, accredited, local publishers), can dip in to.

They can keep their regional brands – Look North, BBC North West et al, but 
close their underperforming local websites and work with us, rather than 
against us, as we become their local media distribution partner and fully 
utilise our own, highly trafficked, rapidly growing, hyper local sites.

We’ll give proper attribution to that content, whichever medium we publish it 
in, whilst ensuring we keep our own local voice. This way, plurality of voice 
is maintained. In return the BBC can focus on being innovative whilst 
fulfilling its duty of delivering great education, information, and 
entertainment.

And much like its regulated quota for the amount of content it commissions 
from Independent TV production companies, it could be given specific content 
targets for how much content we use, by a beefed up regulator. The traffic this 
content gets on our platforms would count towards the BBC’s reach too – and be 
counted in any Public Value Test when re-assessing a Service Licence.

Johnston Press, Newsquest, Local World take on Facebook and Google
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/19/johnston-press-newsquest-local-world-1xl-facebook-microsoft-google>
The report also questions the relevancy of local media. I would argue that in 
some ways our titles have never been more relevant. Local news brands reach 73% 
of the UK each and every week. That wouldn’t be happening if they weren’t.

User Generated Content, whilst not new, is actually increasing hyper-local 
content in our titles. Our readers are engaging at a real grass-roots level by 
sending in details of events and groups that matter to them. This allows our 
teams to focus on the bigger stories.

We genuinely want to work with the BBC – and believe that the BBC can help, 
not hinder by providing content to us – and indeed commission (rather than 
borrow) content from us. Fast forward to a digital world where there is not 
supply from a television and radio broadcaster to a print publisher, but a flow 
of digital content to and from a national media brand to hyper local titles.

Local people, local businesses, local stories – that’s what we do. In fact, we 
–Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> - have been 
doing it at a hyper-local level, for 300 years since the first Stamford Mercury 
was published.

The BBC has been around since 1922.

Page 8 of Future of News is entitled The Misinformation Age. Initially I 
wanted to retitle it The Misinformation Report. Now, I want to help create The 
Collaboration Report.
 