
A rare and luminously beautiful landscape by Gustav Klimt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/klimt> that was crated up by its 
owners during the Nazi annexation of Austria in 1938 and then more or less 
disappeared for decades is to be auctioned in London, Sotheby's announced today.

The painting – which represents a key turning point for the artist – is being 
sold in what the auction house says is one of the most eye-catching sales of 
impressionist and modern art it has ever held. As well as the Klimt, 
conservatively valued at £15m-£18m, there is a quintessential Cézanne still 
life estimated at £10m-£15m and a similarly valued Giacometti life-size 
sculpture. It will be the first London sale of its type to include a trio of 
£10m-plus masterpieces.

All three were today displayed at the auction house's London headquarters; but 
it was the gorgeousness of the Klimt that was turning heads.

"It is absolutely wonderful," said Sotheby's specialist Patrick Legant. "It's 
a dream in a way to be so privileged to handle a painting like this."

But it is the story it tells – of Klimt and Vienna as well as the tragic story 
of its owners – that makes the painting so special. "In one painting you get 
some of the history of the 20th century," said Legant.

Klimt painted Church in Cassone – Landscape with Cypresses while he was on 
holiday in Italy with his lover and muse Emilie Klöge in 1913. The picture 
postcard village on the edge of Lake Garda, with its dominating church and 
ramrod cypress trees, clearly caught the artist's eye, but the nearest point he 
could paint it from was too far away – so he used a telescope.

The painting represents a key moment in Klimt's artistic journey, the point 
where he began embracing the modernist influences that were swirling, ever 
louder, around Europe. So while you can see the influence of the impressionists 
and Monet – just look at the reflections in the water – the new influences also 
loom large, ­people such as his friend Egon Schiele and the Cubists.

Legant said: "When you think of all the earlier Klimt landscapes you have the 
beautiful meadows, lots of flowers, all very playful. This picture is one of 
the first that shows a much more modern style – it's very geometrical and 
architectural, and that's something you wouldn't have found in his earlier 
pictures. This painting reflects the change in approach to art, an absolutely 
new way of approaching landscapes."

It was owned by one of Klimt's most important patrons, the Austro-Hungarian 
steel magnate Viktor Zuckerkandl and his wife Paula. After they died childless 
in 1927 it passed into the hands of Zuckerkandl's sister Amelie Redlich, where 
it occupied pride of place in the family's grand Vienna home.

Everything changed with the Anschluss in 1938. Redlich had arranged for her 
paintings to be stored by a shipping company, even paying what was an enormous 
bribe of 2,000 Reichsmarks for them to be kept safe and away from the Nazis.

In 1941 the story takes a depressingly predictable turn: Redlich and her 
daughter Mathilde were deported by the Nazis to Lodz in Poland. They were never 
heard of again.

Redlich may have succeeded in keeping the art from the Gestapo but the overall 
goal failed: when her son-in-law went looking for the paintings in 1947 the 
crates were empty. No one knows what happened and that, for the Klimt, was 
pretty much that until 1962 when it suddenly appeared at an exhibition in 
Austria labelled 'from a private collection'.

It comes to auction after a deal was brokered by Sotheby's between the 
painting's unnamed owners – who bought it in good faith – and the Redlich 
family's surviving heir and son of Mathilde, Georges Jorisch, a retired 
Montreal camera shop manager, now 81.

He was lucky enough to get out of Vienna aged 10. An amicable restitution deal 
has been struck in which the ­proceeds from the sale are split.

The Klimt, the Cézanne and the Giacometti will be sold at Sotheby's on 3 
February along with works by artists including Henri Matisse,René Magritte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magritte> and Joan Míro.

Sotheby's impressionist and modern art vice-chairman, Helena Newman, said the 
success of its New York November sale – it realised $182m when the upper 
estimate had been $163m – had encouraged sellers that the big buyers were still 
out there.

The top end of the market has also seen a new buoyancy because of the new 
billionaires on the block – the Chinese.

A few years ago they were mainly buying Chinese contemporary art; now Chinese 
collectors are competing with Russians, Americans and British buyers for the 
very best examples of European impressionist and modern art, Newman said.

The Giacometti sculpture of a thin walking man (L'Homme qui marche I) has the 
distinction of being the only lifetime cast of the subject ever to come to 
auction and could easily realise a record price for the artist. That it has 
come to market is partly down to the banking crisis – it was part of the 
collection of the collapsed Dresdner Bank and is being sold by new owners 
Commerzbank, with proceeds going to charities.

The Cézanne, Pichet et fruits sur une table, is regarded as a particularly 
fine example of the artist's work, so quintessential that it was used as the 
cover for John Rewald's authoritative biography of the artist.
 