
Adult learning can take many forms, from studying an Open University degree or 
taking a night course to pursuing a first-aid qualification. But, as the four 
people below demonstrate, whatever the final outcome, gaining a new 
qualification can often be a life-changing experience.

Building a business 


When Roy Steggles left school at 16 in the 1960s his only qualification was a 
cycling proficiency certificate. He held down jobs in factories, the army and 
lorry driving, but because of his school record he considered himself a 
"dunce", and for many years was not interested in learning.

However, when he started breeding dogs he took a short course in animal 
first-aid at Norton Radstock College. This led to volunteering, a job with the 
PDSA and a course in animal nursing. Not only did Roy find studying easier than 
expected, he was able to communicate with a wider range of people and lost his 
lifelong stutter. His commitment and the way in which he became a role model 
for younger students won him a south-west learner of the year award in 2008. 
"This had a profound effect on me," he says. "It came at the point where it 
confirmed all the positives and justified all the efforts of the past two 
years. And it was recognition for all those who helped – including my family, 
Norton Radstock College and the PDSA."

Now in his 60s, he runs his own animal welfare centre, managing the government 
regulations, finance and IT as well as the animal care, a position he would 
never have achieved without learning in later life.

A desire to be a better dad 


Declan MacIntyre has persuaded many of his colleagues into learning because, 
as a trade union negotiator who had to confront his own dyslexia and ask for 
help, he is a role model with whom they can readily identify.

But what pushed him to take the first step was his desire to be a better dad 
by reading with his son. Having achieved this, he felt able to go on to other 
courses and become a union learning representative. Although he left school 
with only a handful of CSEs, he has since completed many courses including a 
City and Guilds and is now aiming for an OU degree.

Learning has not only improved his own job prospects and enabled him to help 
others, it has also given him confidence and skills in many other areas – from 
supporting his children at school, to coping with challenging circumstances, to 
getting a better deal on car insurance. "The gift I've got now, the skills that 
have been given to me – I've got that for the rest of my life, for both my 
sons' benefit – it's something I can't lose, I've got it now. That's why my 
whole life has improved, in every aspect without any shadow of a doubt."

Pursuing a new career


Christine Townsley has always been a resourceful person, sometimes holding 
down three part-time jobs at once to support her children, but having left 
school at 14 with no qualifications, she thought she would never achieve more 
than the type of jobs she was doing in factories or serving in shops or garages.

But then she and her husband were made redundant and he saw a leaflet at the 
jobcentre for a course in customer care. Christine, then in her late forties, 
was so terrified of going to college that she was only prepared to try it for a 
day – but that was enough to get her hooked. She went from one course to 
another and won the adult learners' award in 2002. Learning not only gave her 
the skills to do more rewarding jobs but also the confidence to apply and to 
perform well in interviews. Since then she has worked in offices, run her own 
successful cafe business with her husband, and is involved in campaigning on 
local issues with the parish council.

Her newfound confidence has come through learning. "My life really started 
when I went to college," she says. "After that it was on the up. Round every 
corner there was something new for me to do."

Staying active


"I think we are becoming recycled teenagers," says Sylvia Wright, reflecting 
on the impact adult education has had on her life. As the first training 
officer of the Sheffield Elders' Congress, Sylvia plays a key role in 
encouraging other members to sign up for the computer training course she 
started and to go on other courses at Northern College.

She has also interviewed the MP Margaret Hodge on film for the Better 
Government for Older People group, has been part of a medical research project 
on nutrition and ageing as well as a volunteer in local council staff training 
in handling conflict reaction tests. Sylvia is also very active in the Adult 
School movement, writing handbooks and training others to write.

All this has happened since she won the senior learner of the year award in 
1999 on gaining a degree in English literature at the age of 64. After leaving 
school at 15 with no qualifications, she attended night school while bringing 
up her family. But, she says, taking a leading role did not come naturally – on 
her first course she was almost too shy to say her name and job in front of the 
class.

She puts the change down to the adult education she has experienced, often 
with her husband. "Life is now exactly as we want it. I think I felt older 
before I went to college than now [over 25 years on]. Before, you didn't have 
that excitement when you woke up."
 