
Peter Moores and Alastair Cook were unveiled and acclaimed as "the future of 
English cricket" on Saturday morning in a Lord's press conference that will be 
better remembered for providing the fullest explanation yet of whyKevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has been 
consigned to the past.

Paul Downton, who made the decision to end Pietersen's international career 
shortly after taking over as the managing director of England cricket, said 
that the 33-year-old had become "disconnected" and "disengaged" from his 
team-mates during the dog days of the Ashes mauling in Australia, and that 
everybody he consulted agreed that he was no longer worth the extra effort 
required to "accommodate Kevin".

Downton also said that it had been Pietersen's decision to terminate his 
England contract, and ruled out any remote possibility that he might yet play 
again – one that Pietersen had alluded to in an ambiguous tweet in response to 
Moores's appointment, saying: "Everyone deserves a 2nd chance."

"I don't see any intention of going back," said Downton. "The sooner we 
understand that Kevin has had his time, the better."

When asked for a response to Pietersen's message, Moores said: "Good tweet. An 
important point to make is that I never fell out with Kevin – he fell out with 
me. I moved on quickly, went to coach a great club at Lancashire. I think 
that's a strength of mine, I prefer to move forward."

Downton said "there is no smoking gun, no specific issues" surrounding 
Pietersen, but the picture he painted was vivid. "I arrived in Sydney on 31 
December and it was clear from Andy Flower that there were two issues we were 
facing," said Downton, taking questions for the first time since he succeeded 
Hugh Morris at the turn of the year.

"He [Flower] was uncertain about his future – and what were we going to do 
about Kevin?" Downton was even talking in handy headlines.

"The issue was a senior player had got disconnected from the team. I spent two 
to three weeks speaking to all the coaches on the trip and the senior players 
about the situation. To the captain, to the national selector, and we came to 
the conclusion that if England are going to rebuild after a dispiriting 5-0 
loss then we had to make a decision. Not for the next three months but for the 
future, the next two, three or five years.

"We had to build a new team with core values and it was decided that wouldn't 
happen with Kevin in the side. I don't see any intention of going back."

Pietersen had been "scoring runs for 10 years" for the team but, whereas in 
the past England were "a strong side with strong leadership that could 
accommodate Kevin", now "that balance has shifted and a new side won't 
accommodate Kevin".

"Watch what happened in Australia," Downton continued, most devastatingly of 
all. "I watched every ball of [the fifth Test in] Sydney, and I have never seen 
anyone so disengaged from what was going on. What you need from a senior player 
is backing and support and everybody working together, but we had got to a 
stage where that was no longer the case.

"We sat down, we talked about it over a number of hours, Kevin and I and his 
advisers, and he was the one in the end who wanted to terminate his contract, 
and we came to an agreement to do that."

Pietersen is currently in Dubai where an injured finger has ruled him out of 
the first two Indian Premier League fixtures for his Delhi Daredevils.

Cook welcomed the appointment of a man Downton had described as "the 
outstanding coach of his generation", with whom the captain worked closely in 
his early days at the NationalCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Academy and with the England Lions.

"I've been a bit in limbo the last couple of months so to finally get a new 
leadership group in place and be part of that is an exciting time," said Cook, 
who was told that he would be teaming up again with Moores when eating a hot 
dog on Good Friday afternoon – but expects to have lengthier discussions in the 
next few days over something more substantial.

Moores confirmed that he would be using Flower, who has moved upstairs to a 
new role as technical director for elite performance and will be based at the 
academy in Loughborough, as "a fantastic resource" and "a sounding board".

There is no role in the new setup for Ashley Giles, who has been politely but 
brutally dumped, 20 months after being plucked from Warwickshire and earmarked 
as Flower's successor. "No, the defeat to Holland didn't cost Ashley his job," 
said Downton, denying the common assumption that it wasEngland's surprise defeat
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/31/england-humiliation-holland-world-twenty20>
at the end of an underwhelming World Twenty20 campaign in Bangladesh that 
tilted the odds in Moores's favour.

"I drove to see him yesterday and he was obviously extremely disappointed not 
to be appointed to this role. In all honesty this has just come a bit too early 
for Ashley. He's been a coach since 2007, and you compare with Peter who has 
coached for the last 16 years and has a vast range of experience. What I said 
to Ashley yesterday was that this is by no means the end. I'd be surprised if 
Ashley doesn't come back and maybe in the future he will be the England coach."
 