
Home Office ministers have dropped their attempt to replace antisocial 
behaviour orders with new injunctions to prevent nuisance and annoyance in the 
face of widespread criticism and one of the biggest anti-government defeats in 
theHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>.

Peers voted by 306 to 178 earlier this month to back an amendment by the 
crossbench peer Lord Dear, a former chief constable, who claimed the move could 
criminalise any nuisance or annoying behaviour in the streets including 
peaceful protest, street preachers and even carol singers and church 
bellringers.

The Liberal Democrat Home Office minister, Norman Baker, said he would table 
amendments next Monday that would restore the original Asbo test under which 
"harassment, alarm or distress" must be caused before a court can grant an 
injunction.

The new injunctions form part of the antisocial behaviour, crime and policing 
bill and can only be granted by a court. Baker said the test of engaging in 
"conduct capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to any person", which has 
long been used to secure court injunctions in noisy neighbour cases in social 
housing, would continue to be used and extended to the private housing sector, 
but would not be used as a general test.

Baker said: "I have listened to what people said. We will be tabling 
amendments next Monday to the antisocial behaviour bill which accept Lord 
Dear's amendment."

He said he still believed the "injunctions to prevent nuisance and annoyance" 
– or Ipnas – would not have led to carol singers or bellringers being banned. 
Baker said it had never been the government's intention to prevent people 
exercising their freedom of speech or rights of protest.

But he added that there had been a very large vote in the House of Lords that 
was indicative of widespread concern.

The 128-vote defeat in the Lords came after Dear said anyone over the age of 
10 could be served with an Ipna, it could last for an indefinite period of 
time, and it could lead to a prison sentence if breached.

A Labour former attorney general, Lord Morris, warned that "nuisance and 
annoyance" was such an elastic term it would catch all sorts of people who 
should not be before the courts. He argued that the "harassment, alarm and 
distress" yardstick had been well tested in the courts.

A disparate alliance of 11 charities and civil liberties groups, including 
Justice, the Christian Institute and the National Secular Society, had all 
written to the home secretary, Theresa May, urging her to accept Dear's 
amendment to clause 1 of the antisocial behaviour bill. They had warned it 
would clog up the courts with needless applications.

Dear's successful rebellion in the Lords had been supported by four former 
Metropolitan police commissioners, a former lord chancellor, a former director 
of public prosecutions and a former president of the supreme court.
 