
Shukria Barakzai had other things on her mind when the suicide bomber hit. “I 
had a busy day ahead. I was thinking about all the things I had to do,” she 
says.


The outspoken parliamentarian was on her way to work. She was running lateand 
was anxious to get to her office where a group of college students was waiting 
to see her. After that she had a meeting with abused women, and a speech about 
the bilateral security agreement to draft. Then a car slammed into her armoured 
vehicle and the assailant, wearing a suicide vest, detonated his explosives.

“For a minute, I thought it may be a dream,” Barakzai recalls. But the smell 
of burned hair – her own – told her otherwise.

She had survived three other attempts on her life. In this latest attack, was 
left stunned but able to walk away. Shedoesn’t know if she will always be so 
lucky, “but I’ve decided I will never give up”, the women’s rights activist 
said from her hospital bed where she was recovering from burns and whiplash. “I 
will happily die for the values I believe in.”

Paying the ultimate price is increasingly becoming a possibility for 
Afghanistan’s women’s rights activists, who had previously enjoyed the 
protection of the foreign troops in the country. The international support had 
afforded them a special legitimacy and power, but many say that is changing.

The rollback is already under way. The quota for female representation in 
provincial councils has been cut from 25% to 20%. The elimination of violence 
against women lawwas voted down in parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/jun/20/afghan-womens-rights-under-threat>
. A 2013International Crisis Group report 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-asia/afghanistan/252-women-and-conflict-in-afghanistan.aspx>
 found that with foreign troop withdrawal, “insurgent attacks on pro-women 
legislators and senior female officials have multiplied”. News of killings and 
other violence against women crowd the papers.

Donors insist they remain committed to women’s rights. It will be one of the 
main areas of focus at this week’sLondon conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/afghanistan-london-conference>
. Oslo hosted a symposium on the issue in late November, and the US aid agency 
USAid launched a $216m (£138m) fund to support women’s leadership initiatives. 
And yet, the sense of things slipping backwards takes centre stage, says 
Mahfuza Folad, who runs a legal aid NGO that mainly supports marginalised women.

In the space of a week Folad learned that two of her funders were withdrawing, 
meaning a loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars. “I was really shocked,” she 
says. “We are dizzy. We don’t know how to deal [with it].”

This change means that, unless another funder steps in, two legal aid clinics, 
which have been providing free advice to thousands of women, will have to close.

Their most popular service, Folad says, is supporting women who are seeking a 
divorce. Due to the absence of legal safeguards, and the stigma, divorce is 
rare inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. Folad’s 
clinics help women fight for access to their children. The Kabul office, opened 
in 2009, has helped more than 6,000 women.

At the office, three lawyers, all women in their early 20s and 30s, sit behind 
stacks of files, busily transcribing as their clients relay their cases.

Gul Gatay is waiting to see her lawyer. She explains how her husband divorced 
her 16 years ago “by saying I divorce you, I divorce you, I divorce you, just 
like that”. She has been fighting to see her children ever since. “I am all 
alone. No one helps me, except for here,” she says. “Here there is kindness.”

Spectre of western influence


Nilofar Ibrahimi is one of the 69 female lawmakers in the Afghan parliament, 
who are arguably the most visible manifestation of international attempts to 
institutionalise gender parity. Ibrahimi flourished with international backing, 
but as foreign troops prepare to leave, her celebrity has become her greatest 
liability. As one of the most visible symbols of western progress, she is also 
the most vulnerable.

Because women’s freedom was appropriated to help justify the 2001 invasion, 
the latest brand of women’s rights has been inextricably linked to western 
values.

Ibrahimi has just begun her bid for re-election as an MP from one of the most 
remote districts in the country’s north. But without military assistance, she 
cannot visit her home district of Tagab, which has fallen to the Taliban. 
Tagab, nominally under government control, has been run by the Taliban since 
2011.

“I haven’t visited my district in two years,” she says. “How am I expected to 
campaign and win?”

She often gets phone calls from her constituents in Tagab. “They call me 
asking for help, but there is nothing I can do,” she says.

Orzala Ashraf Nemat, a women’s rights activist, calls the west’s efforts in 
Afghanistan “irresponsible and unsustainable”. “If you say something you don’t 
mean, we say it is like it was written on ice and left under the sun,” she 
says. “Their promises to Afghan women were written on ice and left under the 
sun.”

But she went on to chide those who assume Afghan women are incapable of 
surviving without western support. “The struggle for women’s rights did not 
begin with the arrival of international troops, nor will it end with their 
departure,” she says. “The shape of our struggle will change, but the nature of 
it will be the same.”
 