
Niall Dickson, chief executive, King's Fund: 


"This strategy is by no means guaranteed success, but it probably has the best 
chance of bringing about change that we have had for a long time.

"There are two reasons for optimism. First, I don't see his proposals as a 
blueprint imposed on the healthcare system from above, saying this is what must 
happen in this place in exactly this form. It shows the case for change is 
overwhelming and we should see it as the start of a process for engaging 
commissioners and clinicians. It avoids the mistake of getting stuck on 
institutional arguments about hospital A being better than hospital B.

"Second, we now have some powerful levers for bringing about change. 
Commissioners are in a position to know the quality and outcome of the care 
their patients receive. They can discuss with providers how best to improve 
clinical pathways. This is not about moving institutional chess pieces on a 
board.

"The decision about what closes and what opens should not be made by NHS 
London. Local commissioners have to work out their strategic plans, based on 
clinical evidence. Some of this is about building new services while the old 
ones still exist, and that will have to be funded. Institutions can start to 
reduce their footprint by selling off surplus estate as they develop different 
activities.

"There is always the danger of judicial review and of people getting hugely 
excited. If proposals are presented as a single plan, the plan can be defeated. 
But if everything is done on a case-by-case basis in response to a changing 
world, we have a much better chance of bringing about a substantial change in 
the care Londoners get."

Gill Morgan, chief executive of the NHS Confederation:


"The challenge now is to demonstrate to public and staff why this model of 
care is needed to deliver the highest standards of 21st century health services 
- as opposed to the current shape of services, which was fit for 1948, but 
cannot deliver the level of modern care the people of London deserve.

"There are real challenges for the delivery of healthcare in a large and 
complex city like London and these plans give the opportunity for care in 
London to leapfrog to the best in England."

Geoff Martin, head of campaigns for the pressure group London Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Emergency:


"This review of services by NHS London is a package of cash-led cuts to local 
services dressed up as a rational planning process. We have no objection to 
developing services but not at the expense of local accident and emergency and 
maternity units. If these plans are bundled through, Londoners can expect long 
journeys through the capital's busy streets in a blue-light ambulance in order 
to access emergency care. The public know that it's those extra minutes in 
transit that threaten lives and that's why the oppose these cuts."

The union-backed pressure group said the proposals would leave nine major 
acute hospitals facing closure or downgrading. It identified them as:
· Chase Farm Hospital in Enfield 
· Epsom and St Helier - both hospital sites threatened with downgrading 
· Queen Mary's in Sidcup
· Central Middlesex in Park Royal 
· King George's in Enfield 
· Hammersmith Hospital 
· One north London hospital to be identified - possibly the Royal Free 
· One west London hospital to be identified - possibly West Middlesex


The group predicted "a new wave of public protest to the planned NHS London 
attack on services, which will see accident and emergency, maternity and 
critical care centralised on a narrow range of favoured sites. Thousands are 
expected out on the streets once they know that their local hospital is in the 
frame for closure."

Dr Tiz North, chairman of the British Medical Association's London regional 
council:


"It is unclear how the latest proposals by the London strategic health 
authority would improve patient care in the capital. There is a case for 
changing how some services are provided, but doctors fear that some of these 
proposals may not be in the best interests of patients.

"The concept of care closer to patients' homes may sound appealing, but 
polyclinics have the potential to destabilise and fragment existing hospital 
and GP services.

"The review points out that many GP practices do not have the facilities to 
take on extra work, such as diagnostics and some hospital outpatient services. 
So surely it would make more sense to strengthen and build on the excellent 
services already provided by family doctors rather than invest in new 
providers. It seems odd to invent a new model for healthcare when there is 
already a successful and proven system of general practice which is highly 
rated and trusted by patients.

"There will be services that should remain concentrated at local hospitals to 
make the best use of expensive resources and allow for round-the-clock care. If 
this latest review is to succeed, it must build on the best aspects of a 
service and not introduce damaging fragmentation or waste money on superficial 
initiatives that are designed to appeal primarily to the independent sector 
rather than improve healthcare for patients.

"The extent of consultation and dialogue with local clinicians and patients is 
unclear. Successful change occurs when it is clinically led, in partnership 
with patients, and based on evidence that would enhance patient care. Any 
changes to health services must be safe, based on sound clinical evidence and 
be in the best interests of patients. We will need to examine the details of 
Professor Sir Ara Darzi's proposals to ensure these principles have been met."
 