
People have always gone out of their way to tell me how lucky I was for being 
able to spend so much time with my grandmother. If I mentioned that I had to 
take her shopping or to the doctor or that she was waiting for me and so I had 
to rush away, someone would inevitably slip into a long reverie on the subject 
of my good fortune. 'My grandmother lives in Peoria... Tacoma... New 
Brunswick,' they would say. 'I only see her once a year. I haven't seen her for 
three years now. I couldn't make it home last Christmas, but I think about her 
all the time.' Then there would be a great deal of pining and sighing. How sad 
it was that time and geography had separated the speaker from this baker of 
cookies and keeper of happy childhood memories. They would put a hand on my 
shoulder. They did not want me to miss their point. 'Enjoy every minute of it. 
Soak up her wisdom. I only wish I were you.'

Then they would go off to their lunch dates and tennis courts, and I would get 
in the car and go fetch my grandmother. The counsel I received from nearly 
everyone (those with dead grandmothers were as bad or worse) was a never-ending 
source of irritation to me, in the same way it's irritating to cook 
Thanksgiving dinner while someone is leaning against the kitchen door telling 
you what a pretty picture you make wrestling the turkey out of the oven. Hard 
work is first and foremost hard, and whether or not it's ultimately rewarding 
is very rarely the thing you're thinking of at the moment. The worst of it was 
that I had planned to be one of those people myself. I had planned to live far 
away from my family and miss them terribly. I had every intention of feeling 
simply awful that I wasn't with my grandmother in her years of decline, because 
I loved my grandmother, loved her more than anyone, just as she loved me more 
in return. In this faraway city in which I would always be compelled to live 
due to some unknown necessity, I would meet perfect strangers who took tender 
and constant care of their elderly loved ones and I would feel such a pang of 
jealousy that I would be forced to tell them, 'Appreciate what you have! She 
won't be here forever. I only wish that I was as lucky as you.'

In 1994, I was 30 years old and finishing up a fellowship at Radcliffe 
College, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. My grandmother was 85 and living in a 
small apartment on the side of my mother's house. By then she had been living 
there for eight or nine years. In all the time that I was far away, I wrote her 
letters and called her regularly. I went home to visit. I sent books, 
thoughtful presents. If there was an average level of long-distance involvement 
with one's grandmother, then I felt safely above the median range. I gave 
myself a nice pat on the back for it. But then something happened. On my way 
out to Los Angeles to start work on a new book, I came back to Nashville for a 
longer than usual visit. While I was home I went out on a date with a man named 
Karl and I liked him, even though he lived in the city where I had grown up and 
therefore never planned on living again. It was because of Karl and the promise 
of something that could be fun for a while that I finally decided to put off 
the move out west. I saw it as a temporary postponement. I rented a studio 
apartment for six months, took an old bed and a desk out of my mother's 
basement, and started to write another novel. I stuck my foot in the tar pit 
with every assumption that I would be able to get out again.

In 1994 the best thing about being back in Nashville was the time I got to 
spend with my grandmother. I'd pick up the horrible fried-fish planks from 
Captain D's she loved for lunch, and we'd watch her soap opera together and 
then take a mile-long walk through the neighbourhood. Or we'd skip the walk and 
spend an hour pushing a shopping trolley through the aisles of Target. 'Heather 
always went to Wal-Mart,' my grandmother would say wistfully, believing that 
Wal-Mart was less expensive just because it wasn't as clean and was further 
away.

'But Heather lives in Minnesota now,' I said. My sister, who once looked as if 
she'd stay in town forever, had suddenly figured out how to be the one who was 
far away. 'You're stuck with me.'

Her eyes fell on a package of face cloths, but she kept walking. 'Heather 
really looked at things. We'd go to the fabric store and look at patterns all 
day. You're not like that. You know what you want, and you go in and get it.'

'We can go to the fabric store,' I said. But my grandmother wasn't paying any 
attention to me. She was still weighing the pros and cons of winding up with 
either me or my sister, knowing good and well she'd never have both of us. She 
decided to make the most of it. 'You're always on time. If Heather said she was 
coming at 10, she'd never be there until noon. That drove me crazy.'

'Exactly.'

'We'd always stop for ice cream on the way home. You never stop for ice 
cream.' This was a point she really worked on, because she loved ice cream. 
'But it's better this way. Neither one of us need the calories.'

Twelve years ago my grandmother was able to shop in Target. With an enormous 
amount of cajoling, she could be dragged into a department store once a year to 
try on clothes. My grandmother could walk a mile. She could follow a programme 
on TV and issue an opinion about what she wanted for lunch. She could think of 
her nieces back in Kansas, find their phone numbers in her address book, and 
call them up. She did her own laundry, flossed her own teeth, caught a ride 
with a neighbour to a monthly Bible study meeting, even though she was not 
especially religious. Every single one of these things seems so unfathomable to 
me now that I might as well say my grandmother did a high-wire act in her 85th 
year, or sat around in the living room writing out maths proofs. Neither of us 
knew it during those halcyon days at Target, but we were just at the beginning 
of the clearing house then, the time when every ability and pleasure my 
grandmother had would be taken from her one by one by one.

As is true in every life, there was for my grandmother a long, slow pull up to 
the top of the hill before she began her rapid descent. She started out as Eva 
Mae Nelson of Ogden, Kansas, the second to last of nine children. The family 
lived in an abandoned hotel, and the children were forbidden even to open the 
doors to any of the rooms where the floors had fallen through. The younger 
children spent whole afternoons playing on the top floor of the hotel, which 
had once been a ballroom. On the top floor they could do anything they wanted. 
They could hoist up boxes of dirt and rocks from the ground on a long string or 
write on the walls. When she was 11 her mother sent Eva to live for several 
years in Kansas City with her older brother Roy and his wife, Sarah. Roy and 
Sarah had no children of their own and they needed one to keep Roy out of the 
draft for the First World War.

Eva Nelson was a beautiful girl. I have seen the pictures. All the soldiers 
from Fort Riley lined up to dance with Eva and her sister Helen on Saturday 
nights. They ran a laundry from home with their older sisters, Mary and Annie 
and Daisy, and told one another jokes while they boiled vats of water and hung 
the wet sheets out to dry. Eva got a job at the Coffee Cup in town working as a 
waitress, and she was promoted to night manager. She loved to tell me a story 
about a doctor who ordered his piece of apple pie with a slice of cheese and 
how she refused because it was illegal to serve pie with cheese in the state of 
Kansas. Later on she got an even better job as a governess for a baby named 
Juanita. Juanita's parents moved to California, and it was Eva's job to bring 
the baby later by train. California is where she met my grandfather, a widower 
with two children who needed a nice reliable Kansas girl to look after them.

Every day I drove over to eat lunch with my grandmother while my mother was at 
work. I'd get a big sandwich somewhere on the way between my house and her 
house and we'd split it. Every day she'd tell me that I shouldn't be spending 
so much money on sandwiches. I'd take her to the grocery store and keep up a 
running dialogue through the aisles. 'Do you need tuna? Do you need oatmeal? Do 
you need apples?' But before long that didn't work, because she wouldn't admit 
to needing anything. Nothing sounded good to her. Her sight was getting worse 
and she was terrified to have me walk away from her even to pick up a jar of 
peanut butter 5ft away. 'Do you think I'm going to forget that I brought you?' 
I'd say. 'Do you think I'd leave you in the grocery store?' I would write out 
her cheque and she would sign it, but then that was too hard. She found it 
humiliating not to be able to keep her name on the line or to run out of space. 
More and more we relied on cash.

'This is my granddaughter,' she'd say to the bored teenage checkout girl. 'I 
don't know what I'd do without her.' I gave a smile and counted out the change. 
'You're never going to have to find out,' I'd say. A few months later my 
grandmother refused to go to the store with me any more. She said she was sick 
of it all. Then she refused to give me a shopping list, and so I bought the 
foods I thought might interest her. Every day, LA was further away from me. I 
got a dog and a better apartment. It was becoming increasingly clear that I 
wasn't going anywhere.

This wasn't because of Karl. In fact, Karl and I had broken up. I just 
couldn't imagine telling my grandmother that I wasn't coming over for lunch any 
more. I couldn't imagine telling my mother, who did the lion's share of the 
caretaking - booking the doctor's appointments and filing insurance papers and 
fixing her dinner. I couldn't tell my mother or my grandmother that they were 
on their own when, in fact, I was a novelist and that was something that can be 
done pretty much anywhere. So I stayed put. Karl and I started talking again, 
and after a while we got back together. I always told him he had my grandmother 
to thank for that. Without her I never would have stayed.

My grandmother lived in fear that I would marry Karl and have a baby. If I 
ever complained of a headache or an upset stomach after a dose of fried fish, 
she always leapt to conclusions. 'I'm not pregnant,' I'd tell her. 'Not now, 
not ever.'

'Don't have a baby,' she warned me. 'You don't need one.' What she meant was 
that she was my baby and I didn't need another one. My grandmother loved her 
own baby, my mother. She loved my sister and my sister's children, but that was 
enough. She needed my undivided attention. She could no longer see well enough 
to read or watch her television programmes. Books on tape worked for a while. I 
went to the library every week and picked out anything I thought she'd like, 
but soon that slid away from us, too. She couldn't remember how to work the 
tape player. She refused to knit or crochet any more, even when I bought her 
bulkier yarn and thicker needles. She would try to break the needles in fits of 
frustration and then bury the whole thing in the rubbish. I started reading her 
books in the afternoon after we'd eaten. I read her That Quail, Robert, which 
she had read to me as a child, and in the end when Robert died we both cried 
until we felt ill and exhausted. My grandmother had spent her life taking care 
of other people, cooking their food, cleaning their houses. It was her proof 
that she was valuable in the world. Now I cleaned my grandmother's apartment, 
which hurt her every single time. My cleaning was an accusation, no matter how 
quietly I went about it.

My grandmother, who had spent her life being easygoing, was becoming 
increasingly agitated. Bank statements and doctors' bills sent her into awful 
fits of panic. She would wait by the back door in the evening for my mother to 
come home and then wave the papers around tearfully, saying there was a 
terrible mistake and she didn't understand. Some nights it would take my mother 
hours to calm her. I started to edit the post when we walked down to the box in 
the afternoons, pulling out offers for free credit cards, notices that she may 
already have won, bills that would be put aside for my mother to pay. Anything 
with numbers I stuffed into my pockets, because numbers seemed to drive her 
wild.

It was my mother who figured out that a good day or a bad was often decided by 
my grandmother's hair. In her states of complete despair, my grandmother's hair 
fell from its grips and stood wildly out to the sides. My mother, who was now 
fixing my grandmother's dinner and bringing it down to her on a tray at night, 
also got up early in the morning to fix her mother's hair before going to work. 
When her white shoulder-length hair was in a neat chignon, my grandmother 
seemed to feel she had a grasp on things. Unkempt hair meant food on her 
clothes, a forgotten pan boiling down to smoke on the stove; nameless, weeping 
panic.

In this arena I was no help at all. I did not want to touch her hair. I could 
cook and clean and shop. I could get her to doctors' appointments an hour early 
to soothe her. I could leave my work whenever she called and said she needed me 
because she couldn't find her radio or because she'd dropped a glass jar of 
molasses on the tile kitchen floor. I could kiss her and hug her and get down 
on my knees every two weeks to soak her feet and clip her toenails. I could do 
anything except her hair.

Those were the days, around the time that her hair became more than she could 
manage, that my grandmother began to talk seriously about wanting to die. This 
got worse after her youngest brother, Lou, the last of her siblings, died out 
of turn and left her the only one of the Nelsons. It was as if a train were 
coming to take her away: I pictured her packed and waiting on the platform, 
every day waiting, sitting on her suitcase past goodbyes. She ate less and 
less. She lay on the couch and cried. If she wanted to talk about death, then I 
would talk to her. I would tell her I was sorry and that I understood, even 
though I'm sure I didn't. It seemed to me, to my mother, and to my grandmother 
herself that she was in fact dying, that soon she would go to sleep and slip 
off into her peace. Some nights I would sit over dinner with Karl and cry. Karl 
was a doctor. He didn't think she'd last much longer. Her heart had an 
arrhythmia. She took blood thinners to avoid a stroke. She seemed held to life 
by about three silk threads. But she didn't die. She simply got worse. When she 
was 92 years old and weighed 102lb, her doctor put her on antidepressants and 
we put her into a geriatric psychiatric unit.

My grandparents moved to Tennessee from California in 1975 so that my mother 
could help take care of her father. He had already lost a leg to poor 
circulation, and he had become too difficult for my grandmother to manage 
alone. I do not believe my grandmother loved my grandfather, a thought that 
didn't occur to me until I was in my thirties. Although she didn't complain 
about him after he died, none of the stories she told contained proof that he 
had ever shown her any kindness. She raised his children like her own, and they 
had one child together, my mother. Her happy memories were about her friends, 
her children, her sisters, especially Helen and the nights they did each 
other's hair and worked on their dresses for the dance. When my grandmother 
thought of my grandfather at all it was how he had raised his voice to her in 
front of other people, how he had made her feel embarrassed and ashamed. When 
she began to forget the people she had known in her life, my grandfather was 
the first to go.

My mother had kept my grandmother at home for 16 years. She had wanted to keep 
her at home until she died. But the thing about death is that you never have 
any idea when it's coming. I used to think all the time: if only I knew when 
she would die, I could pace myself. My grandmother was 92. Could I do this 
every day for another five months? Absolutely. Another five years? I wasn't 
entirely sure. My mother and I went to the hospital twice a day. That was when 
I learnt how to fix my grandmother's hair.

When my grandmother was discharged from the hospital, we put her in assisted 
living. She was perfectly aware what was happening to her, and I wish it had 
been otherwise. I cannot remember a worse time for any of us. We woke up in our 
separate beds, under our separate roofs, all of us in a state of despair. I 
went to New York to speak at the memorial service of a friend and was trapped 
in the city by the attacks on the World Trade Center. My grandmother could not 
raise any concern for what had happened to the country. She only wanted to know 
why I wasn't there. 'Where is Ann?' she would cry.

My grandmother adjusted after a fashion, but it never held. As soon as a new 
normality was established and each of us had adapted to it, everything would 
change again. I changed along with it. Anything I thought I couldn't do turned 
out to be something I managed fine. I stayed in the room with her and held her 
hand when the dentist pulled out her tooth. I pulled back her eyelids to clean 
out a persistent infection. I cleaned out her ears. I learnt how to remove 
impactions. I brought my grandmother over to my house in the afternoons and 
fixed her lunch. I'd put her in my bathtub and scrub her down, then I'd haul 
her out again and dry her and cover her in lotion and powder. Every Tuesday I 
washed her hair in my kitchen sink and pinned it up after it was dry. I did her 
nails and rubbed her neck and took her back to where she lived.

'Don't leave me off at the front door,' she'd always say. 'I won't be able to 
find my way back.'

'Have I ever dropped you off at the front door?' But then I always wondered if 
that wasn't exactly what I was doing. What would have happened if my 
grandmother had stayed in Kansas and lived in an old hotel that was falling 
down around her, but was full of her sisters and nieces? What if I was there 
with her? Would she remember where the bathroom was? Would all her teeth be 
splitting in half? Would she open her eyes when she walked?

One day when I took her back after lunch she told me she had never been to 
this place before. 'You've made a mistake,' she said, holding my wrist with 
both hands. 'We have to go back. This isn't the place where I live.'

I brought in several of the women who worked there and we showed her the 
things in her room and talked to her gently, but nothing would calm her. After 
that I came and ate lunch in the dining room with her. A few months later my 
mother took her home for the day and my sister drove in from South Carolina 
where she was living, and together with her son we moved the contents of my 
grandmother's apartment from the third floor to an identical apartment on the 
first floor in a locked dementia unit called the Neighborhood. I drew a chart 
of all the pictures on her walls so that we could hang them up in exactly the 
same spot. Everything was in the same spot except the room itself, and when we 
brought her back she never knew the difference.

My mother and I were nervous about the Neighborhood the way anyone is nervous 
about places that are locked. We were hoping to be spared that. At first it 
seemed like a madhouse, but in a few days we were all much more comfortable. It 
was so much smaller, and no one expected my grandmother to figure out how to go 
to lunch by herself. My mother and I read the Little House on the Prairie books 
out loud to her, turning the page down when we were finished so that the other 
one could come along and read the next chapter the next day. The Ingalls family 
gave us a place to put our anxiety. Instead of worrying about my grandmother, I 
could worry about the blizzard that came up out of nowhere and buried Pa alive. 
I worried about running out of firewood and running out of food. I worried 
about the threat of Indians and poor Jack the dog, who was later kept on a 
chain. It was a pleasure to encounter so much diverting hardship.

I never tried to associate my grandmother who lived in the dementia unit with 
the grandmother I had known years before. I resolved to love the woman I had. I 
put aside all memories of her feeding the quail in her back yard in northern 
California. I made a point to forget about her cherry trees and the friends she 
had who came over to drink gin and tonics in the evenings. That person, the 
careful seamstress of dolls' clothes, the generous sharer of S&H Green Stamps, 
the one who made stews and loved her dogs and washed my hair in her kitchen 
sink, she was gone. But this person I had in her place still loved bananas and 
was capable of very sweet moods. She slept most of her days away, and sometimes 
I would wake her up to feed her a piece of the mango mousse cake that I told 
myself was her favourite. She would barely have the last bite swallowed before 
she was asleep again. When my grandmother fell out of bed in the middle of the 
night and broke her hip, I learnt to call her Eva in the emergency room instead 
of Gram. For Eva she would turn her eyes toward me and sometimes say yes. I 
hoped that she was Eva again and that her dreams in those long days of sleep 
were full of dance halls and her father's blacksmith shop and her mother's 
kitchen in the old hotel.

The hip replacement didn't kill my grandmother, who by this time was 95. 
Neither did the month-long stay in the dreaded nursing home, where my mother 
and I took turns sitting with her in the afternoons after physical therapy, 
spooning bites of apple sauce into her mouth. She went back to the Neighborhood 
in a wheelchair, and everyone kissed her and praised her for coming home. My 
grandmother had forgotten most of her words by then, but she always said thank 
you and please. She would tell anyone who showed her kindness that she loved 
them, and for that she was greatly loved in return. The two subsequent falls 
that sent her back to the emergency room only left her badly bruised. She could 
not remember that she didn't know how to walk any more, and so she kept getting 
up.

What killed her finally was a fever caused by sepsis, caused by the bedsores 
that no amount of turning could prevent. For four days she sweated and shook 
and said nothing, giving my sister enough time to drive in from South Carolina. 
Heather and my mother and I stayed in her room together during the days, and at 
night we went home and waited. The last morning I came in early, and my 
grandmother and I were alone. There were things I had wanted to tell her that 
up until now had seemed too sentimental to say out loud, but there is a time 
for everything. I told her a story about Helen, how she and Helen were young 
again, how they were beautiful. 'You and Helen are going to the dance together 
now. From here on out you'll always be together.' Helen had been dead for 50 
years. If it was possible that one soul could wait around for another, I felt 
certain Helen would have waited for Eva. I felt certain about nothing. I felt 
certain that this had been one of the greatest loves of my life, and I climbed 
into the bed and held her in my arms and told her so. Her eyes were open, and 
she touched her finger to her lips. I got up to call my mother. The nurse came 
in. I was crying, and then that was that.

I married Karl a few months before my grandmother died. It was a decision that 
had been nearly 11 years in the making. I never would have moved back to 
Tennessee without him, and I wouldn't have stayed long enough to make up my 
mind without her, so together they did me, and each other, a great service. By 
the time I finally married, love no longer seemed like such a romantic thing, 
though I understand that romance is part of it. Since my grandmother died, I 
have dreamt about her every night. I go back to the Neighborhood and I find her 
again. Her death was just a misunderstanding. She is better now, walking and 
laughing, telling me stories. She doesn't need me to take care of her any more, 
and she has not come back to take care of me. We are simply together and glad 
for it.

There are always perfect times with the people we love, moments of joy and 
equality that sustain us later on. I am living that time with my husband now. I 
try to study our happiness so that I will be able to remember it in the future, 
just in case something happens and we find ourselves in need. These moments are 
the foundation upon which we build the house that will shelter us into our 
final years, so that when love calls out, 'How far would you go for me?' you 
can look it in the eye and say truthfully, 'Further than you would ever have 
thought was possible.'

·  Run by Ann Patchett is published this autumn by Bloomsbury at £14.99. To 
order a copy for £13.99 with free UK p&p go toobserver.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.observer.co.uk/bookshop> or call 0870 836 0885
 