
In the middle of the 20th century, the conservative political philosopher 
Michael Oakeshott gave one of the most sublime accounts of the value of a 
university education ever written. It is worth quoting at length fromThe Idea 
of a University, 
<https://www.msudenver.edu/media/content/facultyevaltaskforce/sources/oakeshotttheideaofauniversity.pdf>
which was published in 1950. Partly because of the beauty and humanity of the 
prose, but also because you just don’t get thinking like this any more in 
Britain.

“The characteristic gift of the university,” writes Oakeshott, “is the gift of 
an interval. Here is an opportunity to put aside the hot allegiances of youth 
without the necessity of at once acquiring new loyalties to take their place. 
Here is a break in the tyrannical course of irreparable events; a period in 
which to look around upon the world and upon oneself without the sense of an 
enemy at one’s back or the insistent pressure to make up one’s mind; a moment 
in which to taste the mystery without the necessity of seeking a solution. And 
all this, not in an intellectual vacuum, but surrounded by all the inherited 
learning and literature and experience of our civilisation…”

The gift of an interval? One wonders what Oakeshott, who died in 1990, would 
have made of last week’s coverage of A-level results day. This annual landmark 
is now treated not as a threshold to be crossed into a protected world of 
ideas, but as the starting gun in a debt-fuelled race for economic preferment 
in later life.

A confusing barrage of income-related studies framed results day: the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies found <https://www.ifs.org.uk> that the graduate 
salary “premium” for degree holders has emerged unscathed from the huge 
expansion in numbers going to university.

On the other hand, the Longitudinal Education Outcomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/13/quarter-of-graduates-are-low-earners>
 survey established that one in four graduates from 2004 was still earning far 
less than the average national wage, 10 years later.

So is going to university – and emerging from it with upwards of £40,000 worth 
of debt – really a“phenomenal investment”, to quote Greg Clark 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/11387392/Universities-minister-Tuition-fees-cost-same-as-daily-cup-of-posh-coffee.html>
, the former Conservative minister for universities? A lot depends on where you 
go, another analysis revealed, also by the IFS. Gaining a qualification from a 
high-end Russell Group university is far likelier to bring financial reward in 
later life than one from what Alastair Campbell might describe as a 
“bog-standard” institution.

What a grimly utilitarian world we are bequeathing to future undergraduates

Journalists last week duly focused on the battle for the top spots. On the 
BBC’sToday programme, an understandably delighted young woman called Rebecca was
interviewed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07p13h8> as she discovered she 
had scored a stellar three As. “So now you can go through clearing and get to a 
better university,” the reporter told her (a process described as “trading up” 
by university recruitment types).

Fair enough, and hearty congratulations to Rebecca on the A grades, but why 
did no one think of asking her which course she hoped to study and why? Isn’t 
that what this is supposed to be about?

What a grimly utilitarian world we are bequeathing to future undergraduates. 
The dismal and mercantile discourse surrounding higher education in England and 
Wales should be a source of dismay to policymakers. It certainly is to the 
increasing numbers of students suffering debt-related stress in the era of 
sky-high tuition fees.

Most arguments over the current state of our universities concern issues of 
access and inequality. When Oakeshott wrote The Idea of University,only 3.4% of 
young people went to such an institution 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/features/participation-rates-now-we-are-50/2005873.article>
. That figure is now approaching 50%, and no one would advocate turning the 
clock back to the days when only a tiny elite entered the groves of academe.

But the chosen method of expansion – replacing public funding of higher 
education with a system in which students pay, on average, the highest fees in 
the world – has turned a university education into a purely private good. In an 
increasingly fraught marketplace, a youthful buyer, looking for a return on his 
or her investment, confronts a needy seller who requires bums on campus seats. 
And the (metaphorical) cost of that approach is becoming steadily more 
apparent: a world that used to exist to promote learning for its own sake is 
now sold as a means to an end. As the universities minister, Jo Johnson, puts 
it: “There is no better way to improve your life chances than getting a good 
higher education.”

Where that might lead was vividly illustrated in an article appearing in the 
Daily Telegraph on results day. The author enthusiastically envisioned a future 
in which “a simple app showed what leavers’ salaries were three, five and 10 
years from graduation, for each degree category and university. Students would 
realise that it makes sense to study physics and mathematics at a top 
university rather than English at a mediocre one.”

“Makes sense”, presumably, in terms of “value for money”, a phrase that 
peppers Johnson’s green paper on HE reform. But what about the value of reading 
and discussing, for example, James Joyce and developing a deepened and 
sophisticated love of literature? Unfortunately, one can only know the worth of 
that experience by experiencing it and such knowledge will never come in an 
app. It is, in any case, a different kind of value altogether.

A university education is not a fridge, where the benefits are knowable in 
advance of purchase. Nor should it be treated like an investment in a hedge 
fund or shares, the advisability of which depends on an estimated financial 
return. It is, or should be, a transforming phase of life that equips you, as 
Oakeshott puts it, “to look for some meaning in the things that have greatly 
moved mankind”.

Each academic year, thousands of students still discover the truth of that. 
But the way we are financing our universities – and the ways we are talking 
about what university is for – are in danger of changing the nature of what a 
modern university actually is. A society with our resources and ambitions 
should be capable of offering young people such as Rebecca the “gift of an 
interval”.
 