
I have seen the future and it seems to be working fairly well at the 
Brocklebank health centre, next to a bus stop on the road south from Wandsworth 
to Tooting. The top brass at the south London strategic health authority say 
this large practice with more than 15,000 patients under the care of 13 GPs is 
well on the way to becoming one of the polyclinics that lie at the heart of the 
Darzi plan.

In addition to the standard run of GP services, Brocklebank already provides 
chiropody, district nursing, health visitors, midwives, audiology, speech 
therapy, counselling, family planning, antenatal care, physiotherapy, 
dentistry, minor surgery, nurse-led chronic disease management and a range of 
diagnostic tests including phlebotomy, ECG and dental x-rays.

This is not yet the full set of services that would be provided in a 
polyclinic. Tom Coffey, a senior partner, says he would like to see another 
practice joining Brocklebank. That would justify the cost of enlarging the 
premises to provide more space for hospital consultants to run outpatient 
clinics, supported by x-ray and ultrasound equipment.

Coffey performs minor operations, such as mole removals, in a small theatre at 
the back of the health centre. But he says extending the GP's traditional role 
is only a small part of the polyclinic concept: "This is not about GPs doing 
more. It is about consultants working in the community, nearer patients' homes."

People needing a serious operation would still have it done in hospital. But 
why should they trek back and forth to hospital for consultations, tests and 
follow-ups that could be done perfectly well within a mile of home?

Coffey says some consultants were sceptical about moving out from their 
hospital strongholds. Was it not better use of their time to have 40 patients 
travel to see them, instead of them driving here and there to see the 40 
patients?

But Brocklebank has proved that people are much more likely to attend a 
consultation at the local health centre than at a hospital outpatient clinic.

"Our non-attendance rate has about halved," Coffey points out. "It's been a 
particular benefit for disadvantaged groups, who were the least likely to show 
up at hospital. It is my refugees and my chaotic and vulnerable patients who 
are benefiting the most from the new arrangement."

From the outside, Coffey's health centre looks more like the past than the 
future. The redbrick, mostly single-storey building dates from 1975. The paint 
is peeling around the entrance where patients were queuing at 8am, waiting for 
the doors to open for the first appointments.

But the practice shows how Sir Ara Darzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/aradarzi> can achieve his vision of 150 
polyclinics across the capital, each with about 50,000 patients on its books.

Some may be in shiny new premises with 25 GPs, consulting rooms and the full 
range of primary care services. They might be bolted on to the front of a 
hospital, providing an urgent care centre that would deal with all but the most 
serious life-threatening emergencies. Others, like Brocklebank, would not need 
to provide urgent care. Its patients would continue to use St George's 
hospital, two miles away. Brocklebank would become part of a federated 
polyclinic - a cluster of practices providing community care across several 
sites.

Coffey, whose medical career has included a spell as team doctor for Chelsea 
football club, says: "For us to combine five practices on one site may be more 
trouble than it's worth. The key is to create a service for about 50,000 
patients." That would be large enough to create a critical mass of specialist 
services at community level. For example, instead of sending a patient to 
hospital when painkilling injections failed to settle a bad back, the GP could 
call immediately on advice from a physiotherapist.

Coffey does not expect GPs to become rich on the profits of running a 
polyclinic. Hospitals sending out consultants to care for people in the 
community would continue to be paid at the set NHS tariff, but could save on 
overheads.

Ruth Carnall, chief executive of NHS London, the capital's strategic health 
authority, acknowledges that the detail of how GPs and hospitals would be 
rewarded under the new system have yet to be agreed. Specialist trusts want to 
be fairly sure that consultants doing outreach work in polyclinics would get to 
treat the patients who needed an operation. This might imply some restriction 
of patient choice.

She says: "This is not a report that can end up on the shelf or be watered 
down by all and sundry. I don't want to see it weakened. I would like to see 10 
or 12 polyclinics up and running in a couple of years. There is no top-down 
plan. We want to see polyclinics flourish, with variations on the model to meet 
local needs.

"You will find some GPs who say they don't want to work in a big organisation 
- that working in a polyclinic will undermine their relationship with patients. 
They believe they provide a fantastic service from smaller facilities and act 
as a gateway for patients to access the rest of the NHS." GPs might resign if 
the health authority tried to implement a one-size-fits-all polyclinic model, 
but it would not try to do so. The Darzi model provides for some GPs to remain 
separate, but be networked so that their patients could use the polyclinic's 
facilities.

Carnall says: "This is the most ambitious and radical plan for the NHS in 
London since 1948. It will be controversial when we get into the individual 
plans of primary care trusts [PCTs] ... The fact that we want improvements in 
the health service in London to make it the best in the world has been 
welcomed. The difficulty will come in specific choices - whether this or that 
hospital gets a particular status. Will it be a local hospital or a major 
hospital? I don't know how many major hospitals there will be. In south-west 
London, St George's is obviously major, but in other parts of London we would 
expect the PCTs to work it out."

· Healthcare for London is available at healthcareforlondon.nhs.uk 
<http://www.healthcareforlondon.nhs.uk/>

· Email your comments to society@theguardian.com 
<mailto:society@theguardian.com>. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication"
 