
Marlene is leaving and a spoon bender is coming: Blaenavon is changing, and 
not everyone likes it.

Behind Chattertons, and Brownings, the children's bookshop, a sloping, grassy 
alleyway runs like a ditch along a country lane. On fine Saturday nights, when 
there is no film in the Workman's Hall and the leisure centre is closed, little 
clumps of the town's youth settle down in the alleyway with large bottles.

The fact that they can do this is a sign of how Blaenavon, a World Heritage 
Site town built on iron and coal, and almost destroyed in the collapse of 
Britain's heavy engineering industrial might, is changing.

Six months ago the alley was choked with builders' rubble and rubbish, slates 
which had cascaded off the roofs of buildings, and chest-high brambles and 
nettles. Like the newly planted roses in the car park, the cleaned up alley is 
intended as a signifier that the much abused Torvaen council cares.

For decades, as that entire stretch of shops slid into dereliction, their 
ground floors were used as store rooms, and the upper floors wholly abandoned. 
Now, exactly one month after the new bookshops opened, up and down Broad Street 
lights are beginning to appear at night in upper floor windows. The newly 
inhabited rooms are an excellent listening post to hear, like Dylan Thomas's 
Llareggub, the midnight voices of the town.

James Hanna, the engine driving the planned metamorphosis of a small depressed 
Welsh town into a proposed town of happy bookshops, comes from New Orleans, and 
to him all the new shop keepers and business owners look pretty local. That is 
not necessarily how it looks from Blaenavon. Louise the Witch, owner of 
Cobwebz, comes from Newport, Mark in the Left Bank from Penarth, and even they 
look pretty foreign to Blaenavon. The new landlord of the Castle comes from 
Kent, the landlord of the Queen Victoria from Oxford. So although Hanna was 
shocked, Jo Wyborn - who stays in Blaenavon some nights and drives home to Bath 
on others - was not at all surprised to hear a chorus of young voices outside 
her window. "Go home!" they roared. "Get out! You're ruining our town."

"Only," she recalls, "I think there may have been a few more adjectives."

Marlene is going. For two years she has worked miracles in The Old Liptons, a 
cafe converted from an old grocery shop, where she had a handsome solid marble 
counter salvaged from two valleys away, but no proper kitchen. Her cooking was 
astonishing. The first time I visited to report on the Booktown experiment, 
sleet and hailstones were rattling down the steep main street, and Marlene was 
serving great bowls of Welsh lamb stew with dumplings at a price which would 
scarcely buy a large cappuccino in London.

The loss of the cafe would be a disaster - Hanna's own bookshop is now 
installed in the former Koffee Korner - but that it is being taken over next 
Monday by Rhiannon, girlfriend of Mark, assuming she gets back in time on 
Sunday from a hen party in Blackpool.

But the loss of Marlene is still a small town tragedy: she fed the little army 
which built the new Booktown, and from Chatterton's, directly across the road, 
Jo was able to order in semaphore. She has left a farewell ode on a blackboard 
in the cafe window.

Marlene's lament
 Tis sad I know
But I have to go
No kitchen you see
Oh woe is me
Four toilets I have
But no time to wee
To clean them no more
Oh happy is me

Meanwhile tarot card wars have broken out. The psychic front line is drawn 
across Broad Street roughly at the Bethlehem Chapel. Up the hill, above the 
line, the posters are for tarot readings, £10 weekdays, £7 Saturday special, by 
Louise the witch, owner of Cobwebz bookshop, who once saw a structural crack in 
a house gable in the cards. Below the line the posters are for readings at the 
Left Bank bookshop by Brenda, who lives in a bus with Irish Tony, the genius 
who painted Steve McQueen on his motorbike in one window and Marilyn Monroe in 
the other window, as well as the facades of most of the bookshops in town.

Up the hill they say Louise is uncannily accurate, down the hill they say 
Brenda has no rival. Both sides have appealed to Booktown organiser James Hanna 
for arbitration. He responded with news which neither woman seems to have seen 
on the cards: "Witches, sharpen up your act, heavy duty competition is coming." 
One of the boarded up shops at the bottom of the hill was bought last winter 
for a Christian bookshop, but it never opened. To the rage of Mark at the Left 
Bank and Joanna and Lata at Broadleaf Books, downhill from the hoardings, the 
shop stayed boarded up, one of the blighted witnesses to the street's former 
nickname of Plywood City. Now the shop has been sold on: the rumour on the 
street is that it was bought for £28,000 and sold less than six months later 
for £90,000.

And next, Hanna says, a spoon bender is coming. He is slightly vague on the 
details. The spoon bender is German, or possibly eastern European. And he's 
going to open something between a psychic tea room and an internet cafe, with 
fortune-telling phone lines and readings over the internet.

"The more the merrier," says Hanna happily. "Can't have too many witches. 
Perhaps we could organise witch racing up the main street?"
 