
Carol Pounder tugged at her trousers to show how loose they were. She was 
standing outside the coroner's court in Chester-le-Street, County Durham. "I 
used to be a size 12, and look at me. These are size six. I've lost four stone 
over the past three years." She is alarmingly thin, constantly on the verge of 
breaking down.

In August 2004, her 14-year-old son, Adam Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-rickwood>, became the youngest child to 
die in custody in Britain in modern times. He hanged himself after being 
restrained by four adult carers at Hassockfield secure training centre, where 
he had been on remand for just over a month on wounding charges. The restraint 
involved a technique known as nose distraction, which has variously been 
described as a squeezing, tweaking, flicking or karate-like chop to the nose. 
Adam bled for an hour. Six hours later he killed himself.

Mrs Pounder believes that Hassockfield had been negligent in numerous ways. On 
Thursday, the jury ruled that her son committed suicide after making a ligature 
from his shoelaces and hanging himself from a curtain rail. It found that staff 
had not been at fault in their treatment of him. However, the coroner, Andrew 
Tweddle, called for an investigation into the use of force against vulnerable 
children.

Adam Rickwood came from a complex background - he had never known his father, 
he was brought up on a tough estate in Burnley, Lancashire, and family members 
had been in trouble with the law. But he loved everything - his family (he had 
been brought up by Mrs Pounder and his stepfather, John, alongside his three 
sisters), school (he was bright, and reports from primary and junior schools 
were excellent), animals (his pets included rabbits, ferrets and a pair of 
parrots), cooking (his curries and meat pies were famous in the family). He 
especially loved his bed-ridden grandad and used to prepare his insulin for him.

In 1999 everything began to go wrong. His cousin John Boy died of an overdose. 
The next year his grandad and grandma died. Adam moved to secondary school and 
could not settle. He became disruptive, and started to smoke cannabis and hang 
out with older boys on the estate.

He closed up, kept to his bedroom, and when he was angry he would punch the 
wall. He self-harmed and was admitted to hospital seven times, after either 
overdosing on drugs and drink or cutting himself. "They were a cry for help," 
Mrs Pounder said. But when she tried to help he withdrew further into himself. 
Sometimes he'd say that he just wanted to be with his grandad. He started to 
get into trouble with the law and at school, where he had emotional and 
behavioural problems.

Pat Jones, his special needs assistant, said he was a loveable rogue. "When 
you wanted to be at your most severe, he'd just grin at you and you melted." 
Everybody who was close to Adam talks about his sense of right and wrong. They 
say that when he was in the wrong, he'd own up, but when he felt he or others 
had been wronged, he'd go ballistic.

"Sometimes he was uncontrollable, wouldn't listen to rhyme or reason, but he 
was never violent," Mrs Jones said. She cried when she talked about Adam. "You 
wouldn't take him for tea with the vicar, but he was super. At the funeral you 
couldn't get into the church. There were 250-300 people there. Have you ever 
seen Shameless? Well, most of these kids were from the Stoops estate, which it 
was based on, and they were all there immaculate in black trousers and white 
shirts with a single rose in their hand. They all loved him."

After he was permanently excluded from school, Adam was shifted from 
institution to institution. Whenever there was a glint of hope, it was dashed. 
In 2003, Adam's mother told social services she needed respite care, and they 
agreed to send him to a home in Blackpool one week every month. "The staff were 
brilliant," Mrs Pounder says. "Then when it comes to the next respite care, 
they said he couldn't go, they didn't have enough funding."

In July 2004, he was accused of stabbing 19-year-old Stephen McNally. He 
denied the offence and magistrates remanded him in custody, but no places were 
available locally because of financial cuts. Meanwhile, Lancashire social 
services failed to tell the Youth Justice Board that he had a history of 
self-harm and attempted suicide. The first place that became available was 
Hassockfield, in Consett, 116 miles away. Adam was moved there without his 
parents being told. The Youth Justice Board declined to comment on why Adam was 
placed so far from home.

"Make sure someone sees McNally please," Adam wrote home in July 2004. Mr 
McNally was the youth who had been stabbed and ended up in intensive care with 
a punctured lung. After Adam was sent away, Mr McNally went round to his house 
and told Mrs Pounder that he wanted to drop charges. When he turned up at the 
police station, Mrs Pounder says, he was told to return another day because the 
officer who took the original statement was on holiday. Adam expected to be 
released as soon as Mr McNally withdrew his statement. But it wasn't to be.

Secure training centres, STCs, were the brainchild of the Conservative home 
secretary Michael Howard - a cheaper and more professional alternative to 
secure local authority children's homes. At the time of Adam's death, there 
were three in England; now there are four.

In 1994, when the Tory government's proposals for STCs were first discussed, 
Tony Blair told the Commons: "To weaken the provisions in local communities and 
then to claim that building the new secure training centres will help to 
prevent juvenile crime is a sham." The first secure training centre, Meadway, 
was opened in 1998 under the Labour government.

STCs may be cheaper than the secure local authority homes, but they are still 
phenomenally expensive. An answer to a parliamentary question in January 2007 
revealed the cost of the four STCs commissioned from the private sector by the 
Youth Justice Board to be £42.7m, for 274 places. This represents a cost per 
place figure of £172,300.

Despite the fact that STCs stress their dedication to education and 
rehabilitation, they have often been referred to as kiddie prisons. In March 
2006, Lady Linklater told the House of Lords: "I recently visited a secure 
training centre. I was more thoroughly searched, in a cubicle, by a member of 
staff, than I have ever been in a lifetime of visiting prisons, including the 
Maze."

At the inquest in Chester-le-Street, the director of Hassockfield, Trevor 
Wilson-Smith, told the jury how quickly and happily Adam slotted in. He 
described how he attended all his lessons, ate six pieces of toast at supper, 
and behaved like a gentleman. He often referred to the trainees as young men, 
even though some are only 12. He talked about "lock-down" and of trainees being 
"behind their doors" - jail jargon.

Mr Wilson-Smith told the inquest most of the children were not local. While it 
is the policy to place adult prisoners as close to home as possible, this does 
not apply to children in custody.

On arrival at Hassockfield Adam was strip-searched. "There's barbed wire all 
round it," says Mrs Pounder. "It's just a prison." Adam didn't phone her for 
three days. When he did finally speak to her, he was very quiet. She drove up 
to Durham. "His head was down and he were biting his nails. He said some of the 
screws are all right, some are bastards. He told me that the screws had 
battered one kid and he was black and blue."

In December 2006, Lady Scotland told the House of Lords that between November 
2005 and October 2006 physical restraint was used 642 times at Hassockfield. 
Between October 2004 and September 2005 the nose distraction technique was used 
437 times in the country's four STCs. Over the past 17 years 29 children have 
died in custody.

Shortly after Adam's death, Hassockfield stopped using nose distraction.

The details of the final hours in Adam's life are blurred. The day before he 
died, his mother visited and hid two cigarettes for him in a pair of trainers. 
This was regarded as contraband, and when they were discovered Adam had his 
privileges withdrawn - his television and hi-fi were taken from his room. At 
the inquest, Mr Wilson-Smith said he took the sanction "like a man".

On the Sunday evening, Adam, who was 5ft 1in (1.55 metres) and weighed 7½st 
(47.6kg), was restrained shortly before 7pm. Hassockfield says he came out for 
supper half an hour after the restraint and was fine. Yet at the same time, it 
says he was so distraught he blocked out his windows with toothpaste and 
squirted shampoo all over his room.

Although the children are supposed to be observed every 15 minutes, care 
officers admitted to the inquest that they could not account for him between 
10pm and 11.15pm. They also said that they had not been informed Adam had been 
restrained earlier in the evening.

At the inquest more new questions arose than were answered. If he was such a 
model trainee and had made such progress, why did they restrain him so 
aggressively at the first sign of non-compliance?

At one point it looked as if the inquest itself would grind to a halt. Adam's 
lawyers argued that the very act of restraining him was illegal because all he 
was doing was failing to comply with a request to go to his room rather than 
posing a threat. (STC rules state that restraint can only be applied to 
"prevent somebody escaping from custody, injuring himself or others, damaging 
property" or inciting another trainee to act unlawfully.)

At 11.15pm he was observed looking out of his door window. At 11.30pm he was 
observed still looking through the door window. By 12pm he had killed himself 
by tying his shoelace round his neck and attaching it to the curtain rail. 
Officers observed a dim light, and a shoelace coming from behind Adam's right 
ear up the right side of his head and attached to the curtain rail. His head 
was bent forward.

Mrs Pounder says that it's not just Adam who has been destroyed; her whole 
family has been. "My daughter Sarah's head has gone. She's proper sick. Laura's 
having visions of Adam hanging, and she's been excluded from school because of 
her anger."

As for herself, she knows just how damaged she is.

The Guardian asked Serco, the company which runs Hassockfield, why Adam had 
been taken off the high risk assessment team's (HRAT) list after his mother had 
warned that he might harm himself. Michael Clarke, communication director, 
said: "Adam was monitored closely for the risk of self-harm throughout his time 
at Hassockfield. He was initially assessed as relatively high risk and an HRAT 
opened. That was later closed because his behaviour and outlook, continually 
assessed on the basis of his interactions with staff and other trainees, had 
altered in a positive way. There were no signs from then on that he was feeling 
suicidal."

But on July 20, 10 days after Adam had entered Hassockfield, Mrs Pounder met 
his case worker, Kath Bridon, a trainee social worker, to tell her that her son 
was suicidal. "She told me 'Don't worry, we've never had a death here yet, 
we're not going to have one, and we'll watch him all times'."

Hassockfield did not inform Mrs Pounder that Adam had left this suicide note. 
She was told about it by one of his friends at the centre.

Mark Scott, of Bhatt Murphy, who represented Adam's family, said that the 
inquest was flawed by the coroner's failure to give directions to the jury as 
to whether the use of force on Adam was lawful. He said that the issue was 
crucial, given that lawyers acting for the Youth Justice Board had accepted (in 
the jury's absence) that the force used in such circumstances as applied to 
Adam would be unlawful. He said that a full inquiry into the issue of issue of 
children in custody was needed.

"Obviously, nothing can bring Adam back to his mother, but she would draw some 
comfort if lessons were learned. The only way this can be properly achieved is 
to have a public inquiry into the way that all vulnerable children are treated 
by the criminal justice system."

His call is echoed by Mrs Pounder, who points to the 29 children who have died 
in custody in the last 17 years. "All of those children have parents and most 
of the people in authority have children," she said. "Those responsible for the 
treatment of children in the justice system should ask themselves how they 
would feel if their kids were treated in the way that Adam and all of the 
others who died were. They put their kids to bed at night and give them a 
kiss," she said. "I'm left with memories."

Letters from Adam

25/07/04

Dear Mam/Dad,

Mam, I can't stay in here another two weeks or less cause I need to be at home 
with you's ... I need to be in my own home and my own bed, it's either that or 
I'm gonna crack up. I can't be away from home and I won't be, trust me my head 
is up my arse and I can't last much longer. I will end up trying to kill myself 
and this time I will probably succeed. I will then at least be with my nana and 
grand-dads. If I could have the chance to be at home, and be with my family I 
will never get in trouble again in my life. I will do anything to be with 
you's, but if people try and stop that I will flip. I've got to go cause I'm 
too upset to write any more.

Luv you's all

Adam

Undated (July 2004)

To Mum,

I am in Hassockfield secure training centre in Durham ... There is a 30-foot 
wall and cage all around me, but who's arsed. I need some posters and stamp. 
Please come and see me. All this shit has fucked my head up and I keep on 
blanking out and going dizzy ... Make sure someone sees McNally please.

Got to go. Luv you loads

Adam

Adam Douglas Rickwood DOB 14/11/89

My Statement [to the authorities]

On the 8th August at aprox 6.50pm, I was sat at the table on the wing 2 Bravo. 
And my friend was messing about, so he was put in his cell for 30 minutes (time 
out). When my friend was in his cell he asked me to go over to his door. When I 
went over he slid a piece of paper under the door and asked me to give it to a 
female member of staff.

When I gave the paper to her she told me to get in my room. I asked why and 
she said 'Just go in' then at that point I refused because there were no 
explicit reason for this. Then she called for first response (assistance from 
other staff). When the other staff came they all jumped on me and started to 
put my arms up my back and hitting me in the nose. I then tried to bite one of 
the staff because they were really hurting my nose. My nose started bleeding 
and swelled up and it didn't stop bleeding for about one hour and afterwards it 
was really sore. When I calmed down I asked them why they hit me in the nose 
and jumped on me. They said it was because I wouldn't go in my room so I said 
what gives them the right to hit a 14-year-old child in the nose and they said 
it was restraint.

Dear Mam, Dad, Sarah, Sharon, Laura, Nadia [his girlfriend], Nana and all of 
my loved ones.

Sorry! Sorry! Sorry!

I will miss of all you's, and I know all of you's will miss me. I know some of 
you will think I'm daft, stupid and selfish but that's what you think. I will 
be OK with my granddads and my nana and I can look after them and make sure 
they're all right. I'm sorry.

I would like to be buried with my granddad Rickwood. I want my dad, Craig, 
Uncle Dave, Martin, Uncle Tom and Uncle Ste to carry my coffin to my granddad 
please. I want you to play these songs for me please. - 2pac, That's The Way It 
Is; UB40 - Red Red Wine; Bob Marley - NoWoman No Cry.

I love you all. Sorry.

PS I would like to be buried with my gold and my other personal belongings!! 
Especially a joint of green and a bottle of scotch for me and my granddad!

Timeline

November 14 1989 Adam Rickwood is born in Burnley

1998 Cousin John Boy, 16, whom he is close to, dies of drug overdose. Six 
months later his Uncle Arthur, who used to baby-sit him, dies of cancer

1999 Grandad Rickwood dies in March and Grandmother Pounder dies on Christmas 
Day

August 2001 Adam starts at Gawthorpe high school

June 2002 Permanently excluded after nine temporary exclusions. Two months 
later starts at Marleshill pupil referral unit. Does quite well, but has 
emotional and behaviour problems

November Moved to Barrowsford community centre, Burnley, for one-to-one 
teaching. Stays 10 days before brief stay at Nelson college

November/December Transferred to Springfield House pupil referral centre. 
Performs well academically, but school says it is not equipped to deal with his 
behaviour

Summer 2003 Leaves Springfield and for next few months is shunted around, 
sometimes on a daily basis, between community centres

2004 Put on an intensive supervised programme for travelling in stolen car. In 
February starts at Windsmoor House, Blackburn, for children with emotional and 
conduct problems. Restrained several times, then excluded

July 10 Transferred to Hassockfield secure training unit

August 9 Found dead, the youngest person to die in custody in the UK in modern 
times
 