
I started All Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties> 10 years ago because 
I wanted to give people an alternative to Reading and Glastonbury. When we 
started the event, a booker for one of the bigger festivals declared ATP would 
go down like a lead balloon: "Who in their right mind would pay £100 to go to 
an out-of-season holiday camp to see a load of indie bands that no one has 
heard of?"

It wasn't easy getting this off the ground and I'm surprised it's turned into 
a full-time job. But with three festivals a year in the UK, one in New York and 
offshoot events in Australia and Spain, we must have done something right to 
have kept this ship afloat for so long.

Warp Films recently made a documentary about ATP (you can watch an exclusive 
clip above) and it's a fitting testament to the last 10 years of the festival. 
The film is a kinetic montage shot by fans and bands; a kaleidoscopic collage 
of Super 8, video and mobile phone footage. There was something like 600 hours 
of material to plough through, so the film isn't a straight story of ATP, more 
a collective memory. The director credit was shared between Jonathan Caouette 
(who directedTarnation <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0390538/>) and the 200 fans 
and musicians who contributed, who we called All Tomorrow's People. One of the 
fans who sent in some of the most amazing footage was Vincent Moon, who went on 
to become well known for theTake Away 
<http://www.blogotheque.net/-Concerts-a-emporter-> shows. We've had him back to 
every festival since.

It's a fast-paced film; we don't spend too much time on performances because 
what happens offstage defines the festival as much as what happens on (although 
full performances are on the DVD extras). But the film does capture some iconic 
ATP moments from the last decade, such as Grizzly Bear playing on the beach at 
Minehead, Portishead's first show in more than 10 years, and the killer debut 
performance of Grinderman.

The spirit of the festival has been captured perfectly. We don't have a VIP 
area or sponsorship, all the artists stay in chalets alongside the fans. 
Footage such as Daniel Johnston playing a set on the grass captures the 
atmosphere of a place where bands mingle with fans and there's an impromptu 
performance around ever corner. We also encourage all artists with egos to 
leave them at the door when they arrive – there's a strict no–asshole policy. 
If you play and you act like an asshole, we won't ask you back, no matter who 
you are.

Looking back at the acts we've worked with – from Ennio Morricone and Sonic 
Youth to Aphex Twin and Iggy and the Stooges – we realise how fortunate we've 
been. But equally important is the fact that we wouldn't be anywhere if it 
wasn't for the loyal fan base that has developed into a community of 
like-minded souls who share a passion for seeing great music and having a good 
time. So here's to another 10 years!
 