
As the many sceptics warned, the first day of the Blaenavon Booktown 
experiment ended in tears.

 True, up and down Broad Street, the steep main road, hundreds of books were 
sold - perhaps thousands, shiny new stock-keeping systems were overwhelmed as 
the new shopkeepers, many standing behind counters for the first time in their 
lives, struggled to cope.

 Visitors were rattling the doors of the new bookshops while they were still 
closed for the official opening. Once the doors opened change ran out within 
half an hour, paper bags within an hour, the piles of maps showing the new 
bookshops by mid-afternoon. By evening yawning gaps were opening up on the 
brand new shelves.

The new booksellers joined hands and danced down the steep main street behind 
a silver band, in a rollicking procession to mark the birth of Blaenavon 
Booktown, and the heritage day proclaimed three years ago.

The heritage day was invented to celebrate the town winning the awesome title 
of WorldHeritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Site, in honour 
of its industrial past and the best preserved historic ironworks in Britain.

The title was regarded as a black joke by many in the town: the remains of the 
ironworks were so well preserved because they became a fossilised corpse 80 
years ago, as industrial jobs ebbed down the valley. The most productive coal 
mines in the world withered and died on every hillside. The only miners in the 
procession were a costumed samba band, with silver foil lamps taped to their 
white plastic building site hard hats.

Old photographs line the stairs of the palatial Workman's Hall, built by iron 
money. They show the main street dying on its feet as early as the 1930s. 
Edwardian photographs show a proud little market town, with immaculately 
dressed shopkeepers standing proudly by their glittering shop fronts.

By the 1930s shops were already closing, paintwork was already flaking, and 
even in the grainy black and white you can see that the stuffing has been 
knocked out of the town.

The rot continued remorselessly, until there was so much dirt cheap empty 
property that traders from other towns bought Blaenavon shops to use as lockup 
stores.

 "We always thought that Blaenavon was the back of beyond," a man from Cym 
Bran said yesterday - Cym Bran is the next town down the valley, and frankly 
it's no Newport, never mind Cardiff.

This weekend a small meteorological miracle happened. On Friday it rained. On 
Saturday and Sunday, through all the long hours of daylight, the sun blasted 
down on the town where rain clouds and a fog of gloom had seemed permanently 
tethered.

In Chatterton's - specialising in poetry and the romantic movement, but 
hopefully not in youthful genius and enthusiasm blighted and destroyed - the 
two books that no bookshop would ever be able to give away were sold. They 
seemed such hopeless cases that even with two walls of floor to ceiling shelves 
to fill, Jo Wyborn almost sent them back to the warehouse. Within an hour a 
very large bearded man came over to the counter and bought the two hideous 
30-year-old paperback volumes of a concise dictionary of the Bible.

Jo, who had already taken enough money to pay two month's rent, danced a 
little jig step, and permitted herself to breath and suspect that it might, 
just, all work.

In the late afternoon gangs of booksellers took it in turns to keep James 
Hanna, the tireless American who has organised the whole experiment, away from 
the former cafe which has become the headquarters - and will become his own 
bookshop, as soon as he has time to build it.

 When the shops finally closed, and he was finally allowed back to his office, 
a park bench had appeared outside it, with four booksellers sitting on it and 
rudely refusing to get up and greet him. Champagne corks popped, the 
booksellers got up, and a brass plaque honouring James Hanna, "with heartfelt 
gratitude from the Blaenavon Booksellers" was revealed.

Mr Hanna had to retire to the former back kitchen of the Koffee Korner for a 
little weep.
 