 The NHS needs a major operation, and one of Gordon Brown's first acts as prime 
minister was to call upon a leading surgeon to undertake the task. Just before 
being appointed as a health minister in June, the respected oncologist 
Professor Ara Darzi had been drawing up plans to reshape services in London. 
His blueprint was radical - new "polyclinics" would be established so that more 
care could be delivered outside hospitals; the more controversial flip side, 
however, was fewer local maternity, paediatric and A&E wards. The first stage 
of his nationwide ministerial review, published yesterday, put less stress on 
closures - perhaps partly because fewer tough choices will be needed in most of 
the country than in London. But the possibility of an early election doubtless 
affected the balance of the report.
Be that as it may, Lord Darzi's immediate conclusions were welcome, focusing 
on making doctors more accessible. Labour has banished the longest waiting 
times and driven up the quality of care, but patchy provision of family doctors 
outside of office hours remains a real weakness. When GP pay was increased by a 
quarter in 2004, the chance was missed to extract more flexible hours in 
return: the number of NHS hours worked by family doctors actually declined. It 
would, of course, have been better if the problem had been tackled at a time 
when a large prospective pay rise was still strengthening the ministerial 
negotiating hand. But Lord Darzi believes he has found ingenious ways to make 
working weekends pay. There were also other measures to make the service more 
accessible. Lord Darzi's boss, Alan Johnson, announced plans for 150 new 
walk-in centres - hosting GPs along with other services, such as dentistry and 
physiotherapy - as well as 100 extra practices in the run-down areas, where 
they are needed most.

Most of the tough decisions, to merge or scale back hospitals, will not need 
to be taken for months. Some painful change will be needed - not just to secure 
efficiency, but also to build up centres of expertise. David Cameron must know 
that his promise to preserve every district hospital in formaldehyde is just 
not serious. Until now, however, technocratic talk of "reconfiguration" has 
lacked credibility. Financial deficits made it look like a shabby cover for 
cuts, and medics had little reason to endorse plans that ignored their 
concerns. But now, at last, there is at least a chance of a rational discussion 
about rationalisation, both because the service is back in the black and also 
because doctors are back in the driving seat. Lord Darzi yesterday appointed a 
team of clinicians in every region to map out the pattern of services that they 
believe are required. If, after discussion with colleagues, they conclude that 
things have to change then that should carry real weight - with both the public 
and their fellow professionals.

The engagement of health professionals is one welcome change from the Blair 
years. Another is a subtle shift in the role that choice is intended to play. 
Lord Darzi yesterday emphasised its importance in primary care. If the likes of 
Boots were running GP surgeries there would be tricky issues about big business 
controlling NHS purse strings through practice-based commissioning. But when it 
comes to selecting a family doctor, patients are well placed to shop around. 
That is less true, however, in the hospital sector, where the Blairite drive to 
expand competition became frenzied: yesterday'sHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service Journal revealed the huge 
number of operations that private firms are being paid for but not carrying 
out. Lord Darzi's suggestion that services must be shaped by clinicians is one 
of several signs that the new government understands that choice in healthcare 
should be balanced by a measure of planning. The next challenge is to refine 
the rules on competition so that such planning does not end up unravelling in 
the marketplace.
 