
The comté cheese souffle encapsulates my region, my terroir, my home – it is 
the defining dish of the whole region of Franche-Comté.

When I was a child, we’d take our two-litre pot to fetch fresh milk from the 
fromagerie, an immense room tiled with white and furnished with huge copper 
vats. The taste of sweet fresh milk is an enduring memory, as is that of the 
comté being made. I loved watching the fromagers – cheesemakers – in their 
white plastic aprons, scooping milk solids from the bottom of this six-metre 
wide vat – about 300 litres of milk – and lifting out the curd with a 
mousseline net, maybe 150kg of it. They’d divide the curd on to huge wheels of 
wood then press it. It was mesmerising.

Comté is used in hundreds of Franche-Comtois recipes – raclette, quenelles … 
and this souffle, which was always one of my mother’s staples. I come from a 
working-class family. My mother made delicious food in vast quantities – she 
had five kids to feed! Meat only twice a week, lots of pulses, and lots of 
cheese.

We usually ate in the kitchen, except for Sundays when the whole clan would 
descend and we’d all eat in the dining room. It was very regimented – French 
children were highly disciplined at the table. My dad was in charge – we’d wait 
for him. There’d be a big 2kg loaf of bread that only he could serve, because 
he had earned it. Before slicing it, he’d do a cross on the bottom of the bread 
– a nice way to show his respect.

More than just food, my childhood gave me a complete philosophy about eating. 
We had a relatively small garden, which I was always weeding, watering or 
tidying, while my friends were playing football! I didn’t hold it close to my 
heart then, but now I know it’s where I learned everything about varietals. My 
mother would never just say “get me some potatoes”. We’d go foraging in the 
forest for berries, mushrooms and wild asparagus, which gave me an 
understanding of seasonality, of variety, of food being so much more than 
simply sustenance. It was about being connected to both family and the 
environment. It was about authenticity.

Souffle franc-comtois

The souffle base can be prepared a day in advance and kept in the fridge, the 
surface covered with buttered greaseproof paper to avoid crusting. You need to 
have everyone seated and ready to eat when you take the dish from the oven – 
even a perfectly cooked souffle will stay inflated for only around 5 minutes. 
Montgomery cheddar or gruyere could be substituted for the comté. You might 
like to put a layer of cooked Swiss chard, leeks or Belgian endive into the 
bottom of the dish.

Serves 6
20g unsalted butter, melted
20g dried coarse breadcrumbs
7 organic/free-range medium egg whites (210g)
4 drops of lemon juice
20g comté cheese, finely grated

 For the base
50g unsalted butter
50g plain flour
300ml whole milk, hot
160g comté cheese, finely grated
20g dijon mustard
3 organic/free-rangemedium egg yolks (60g)
Salt and white pepper

 For the sauce
150ml double cream
70g comté cheese, grated
1 tsp dijon mustard
A pinch of white pepper
1 tbsp kirsch <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirsch>

1 Preheat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3½ and put a baking tray (or stone) 
on the middle shelf to heat up; a baking stone, if you have one, would be even 
better. Meanwhile, using a pastry brush, brush a large round or oval 
earthenware dish with a thin, even layer of melted butter and coat with the 
dried breadcrumbs. This coating will help the souffle to rise evenly in the 
oven and give it a beautiful crust. Set aside.

2 For the souffle base, melt the butter in a large saucepan (ideally one with 
rounded sides) over a medium heat. Add the flour and whisk until smooth. Cook 
to a nutty-coloured blond roux. Lower the heat. Whisk in the hot milk, little 
by little, it should be smooth. Add the grated cheese and mustard. Cook for 2–3 
minutes, whisking now and then. Remove the pan from the heat. Let it cool a 
little.

3 Add the yolks. Stir until the mixture is silky smooth. Season with a pinch 
of salt (only a little as the cheese is salty) and 2 pinches of white pepper. 
Keep warm in a hot bain-marie.

Chef Raymond Blanc on his favourite home town places: Besançon, France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/13/raymond-blanc-franche-comte-besancon-france-way-i-see-it>
4 When you are ready to assemble and bake the souffle, whisk the egg whites 
with the lemon juice until soft peaks are formed. Continue to whisk to slightly 
firmer, but not stiff, peaks. Whip ⅓ of the whisked whites into the warm 
souffle base to lighten it. Fold in the remaining whisked egg whites, 
delicately cutting and lifting the mixture to ensure the minimum loss of volume 
and maximum lightness.

5 Gently pour the souffle mixture into the dish, filling it ¾ full. Sprinkle 
the grated cheese over the surface. Put the dish on the hot baking tray (or 
stone) in the oven and bake for 25 minutes.

6 While the souffle is in the oven, make the sauce. Bring the cream to the 
boil in a small saucepan and add the grated cheese, mustard and white pepper, 
stirring continually. Once the cheese has melted, remove from the heat and add 
the dash of kirsch. Check the seasoning and pour the sauce into a sauceboat.

7 Serve the souffle as soon as it is ready, placing it in the middle of the 
table so everyone can help themselves. Serve with the sauce to pour around the 
souffle.

 * Raymond Blanc is the patron chef of the two-Michelin star Le Manoir Aux 
Quat’Saisons. The eponymous cookbook is out now on Bloomsbury
 