
We have learned two things in recent days: that scandal-hit coffee chain 
Starbucks has "listened to customers" and will now voluntarily overpay 
corporation tax by £20m across two years; and thatGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has pledged in parliament 
to "lead the international effort to prevent artificial transfers of profits 
[by multinational firms] to tax havens".

Both commitments generated a few headlines helpful to those opposed to the 
nefarious tax management tactics routinely deployed by large companies. And 
while they might not have been enough to derail UK Uncut's protests on Saturday 
in 40 espresso bars around Britain, they will doubtless have tempered levels of 
outrage among a wider, mainstream audience.

But is this really a turning point? Rhetoric aside, there is still little 
indication that this government – let alone corporations active in the UK – has 
a genuine appetite for permanent tax reform.

Take the chancellor's autumn statement: no sooner had he paid lip service to 
the idea of co-ordinated international action to repair the credibility of 
corporation tax than he had moved on to announce yet another cut to the UK 
rate. With palpable relish, he bragged that UK corporation tax, which had been 
at 24%, was to drop to 21% by 2014. Other countries were "scrambling to keep 
up".

Having a markedly lower corporation tax rate than these countries, Osborne 
argued, was "an advert … that says: 'Come here, invest here, create jobs here.'"

This beggar-thy-neighbour taunt says more than anything else about Osborne's 
true attitude to tax on the international stage. The real message to French and 
German counterparts is not one of co-operation – in truth, Britain is a 
poacher, not a partner.

Underlining his intent, the chancellor reeled off the comparisons with tax 
rates abroad – "in America it is 40%, in France it is 33%, in Germany it is 
29%". His words echo the approach taken in Ireland, where, despite the nation 
being in hock to the IMF, the corporation tax rate has remained at just 12.5%. 
Little wonder Google, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook all have their European HQs 
in the republic.

Another way of assessing Osborne's true appetite for reform is to consider 
what the impact of genuine change might be on the UK. Not every firm in the 
spotlight here is American: a great number of the most aggressive international 
tax acrobats are listed on the London Stock Exchange. They are substantially 
owned by British pension funds and insurers, who pay tax on dividends and 
reinvest profits in the UK. Remember that in 2006 Britain's GlaxoSmithKline 
agreed to pay $3.4bn to America's Internal Revenue Service after 14 years of 
wrangling. It was the biggest settlement for shifting profits overseas to lower 
a tax bill ever seen.

To GSK and many British corporations – as with Google and Starbucks – gaming 
tax regimes can be a significant profit generator. It is not hard to imagine 
what advice such firms, and the big four accountancy groups, might be 
whispering in the chancellor's ear behind closed doors.

There are those on the right who privately cheer the crumbling of governments' 
ability to levy taxes on corporate profits despite the dire state of public 
finances. And these fringe views are only likely to gain more traction should 
nothing be done to rein in tax abuses.

Self-interest may keep Osborne from joining the vanguard in this important 
battle, but there are other, more powerful forces on the international stage 
whose commitment to the cause may be more enduring.

As the balance of global economic power shifts from west to east, it is 
fast-growing Brazil, India, China and others who are increasingly setting the 
tone for international agreements. They have been growing impatient with the 
pace of reform at the OECD. Emerging economies have been the true net losers 
from global tax abuses. It is they, if anyone, who will drive change.

HBOS shambles is all the evidence we need to break up the banks

Lord Stevenson admitted last week that "there are very few days" when he does 
not think about the collapse of HBOS, the bank he chaired until its rescue by 
Lloyds in September 2008. Odd, then, that the crossbench peer ennobled by Tony 
Blair had trouble recollecting so much of his time at the bank whenhe appeared 
before MPs and fellow peers last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/04/former-hbos-chairman-lord-stevenson-mps>
.

Until his appearance before the banking standards committee, chaired by MP 
Andrew Tyrie, the story of HBOS had largely been untold. The collapse of Royal 
Bank of Scotland – resulting in Fred Goodwin being stripped of his knighthood – 
has dominated because the numbers were so much bigger, and because the bank has 
retained its own identity rather than been consumed by a rival.

But four years after the rescue of HBOS, it is extraordinary that it was only 
last week that Sir James Crosby – knighted for his services to financial 
services in 2006 just as he left the bank – was called to account. Tyrie and 
his committee extracted an apology, and an acknowledgement that the bank had 
doled out money in an incompetent manner.

Expect the word "incompetent" to appear again and again when the committee's 
report on HBOS is published next year. Before then, Tyrie and co will publish 
their views on the legislation needed to implement the recommendation of Sir 
John Vickers that high street and investment banking be ringfenced. Everything 
that was aired last week should give them the motivation to argue for the 
toughest possible interpretation of the Vickers recommendations in their report 
on 18 December.

The committee has been testing the idea that the government should lay down on 
the statute books the right to break up banks entirely if they waver over 
ringfencing. Tyrie and his colleagues should force upon the government the 
option of a full bank breakup. It is what parliament owes a public still paying 
the price of the banking crisis, the seeds of which lie with men with peerages, 
knighthoods and fading memories.

Leahy's elementary – and disastrous – American mistake

Philip Clarke, Tesco's chief executive, was careful this week not to trample 
on Sir Terry Leahy's legacy when he pulled the plug on Fresh & Easy, his 
predecessor's pet project in the US. To many outsiders, however, Tesco's US 
adventure was misconceived at the outset. Leahy, it appears, simply misread the 
tastes of US consumers. For a retailer who prided himself on researching 
shoppers' preferences in elaborate detail, it was a stunning mistake.

The evidence lies in the numerous overhauls and U-turns Tesco had to perform 
in its doomed attempt to get Fresh & Easy up to speed. US shoppers revolted 
over basic elements of the original offer – fruit and veg in cling-film, 
self-service payment, stark stores and the absence of a bakery. All those 
problems had to be addressed. True, there was no point in Tesco entering a 
crowded west-coast market with a me-too offer. But it couldn't afford to stray 
too far from mainstream tastes.

To compound the problem, Leahy had bet big. Fresh & Easy's low-price format, 
he had determined, required size to produce acceptable returns. That required 
two distribution centres and its own factory. Tesco would have to be running at 
speed before it knew if the format was a hit.

The net result, we now know, was that £1.6bn was chalked up in invested 
capital and trading losses. Some of that sum may be recouped if the 200-store 
business can be sold, or placed into a joint venture. But, even for a company 
the size of Tesco, Fresh & Easy was still an almighty bet to lose.
 