
Programmatic trading has become an integral part of the modern media 
landscape. Individuals working within the field of media today are required to 
have at least a basic understanding of this important and rapidly evolving area 
of expertise.
This half-day Masterclass aims to cast a lens over programmatic trading, 
specifically focusing on digital advertising within the current market context. 
The day will be led by three experienced industry professionals who will break 
down each piece of the programmatic puzzle, from core principles, to the 
importance of data, to how trades are executed.


To get the most out of this Masterclass, attendees should have some experience 
of making decisions on media buying, either client-side or agency-side, and 
should be keen to expand their knowledge in this space. Each person will be 
given a playbook that allows them to make personal notes around each discussion 
area in relation to their real world situation.

This course is for you if...

 * You’re current role is involving to include programmatic trading 
 * You’re a student wanting to understand the world of programmatic trading 
Course description

Attendees will be asked to put forward specific challenges they face in their 
role leading up to the day. Speakers will choose a number of these and address 
them within the flow of their sections.

Topics covered on the day include:

 * A brief history (how did we get here) 
 * TLA overload 
 * Types of transaction and scalability 
 * Current market statistics 
 * The future, at a glance 
 * Resources 
 * Data; trends, different types, how to get it and what’s its value 
 * Making the trade; sell-side and buy-side dynamic 
 * Real-timing thinking 
 * Panel – emerging trends and issues in Programmatic Trading today 
You will leave this course with an action item list for you to address in your 
real-world context, and feel comfortably conversant in the main concepts around 
Programmatic Trading of digital advertising.

Tutor profile

Phil Eligio is the head of commercial optimisation for The Guardian Australia, 
responsible for setting up the programmatic trading capability of The Guardian 
in this market. He has several years of working on trading models in major 
digital publishers. He also has worked as a Digital Marketing Manager in the 
Financial Services space, as well a media planner in a media agency, giving him 
a rounded view of the buy/sell dynamic relevant to marketing and advertising.

Andrea Chin is the senior account director, APAC for Krux Digital. She has a 
wealth of knowledge across the digital space, having worked in the market for 
some time across a range of companies including Brandscreen and News Corp 
Australia. Andrea’s past experience has allowed her to develop expertise in 
areas such as programmatic trading and best practices to position brands 
effectively to both manage and trade data.

Adele Hanzlicek is the country manager for Rubicon Project, which operates one 
of the industry’s largest independent real-time trading platforms for the 
buying and selling of advertising, she is responsible for the team which works 
with buyers and sellers in Australia and New Zealand to help them maximise 
their advertising automation strategy. Prior to joining Rubicon Project, she 
has worked for a number of major digital publishers in Australia, with a focus 
on trading strategy, optimisation and analytics.

Book now

Details

Date: Thursday 5 November
Times: 10am-1pm
Location: Surry Hills, Sydney
Price: $299
Event capacity: 20
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in

To contact us, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/about-guardian-masterclasses-australia>
. Terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
.

Returns policy
Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course 
start date. Please see ourterms and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
 for more information on our refund policy.
 