
Dear Readers, I have just got lost for a dizzied 90 minutes within something 
like 200 square yards of Santa Fe. Last night I spent another goodly portion of 
time (I don't know how long, I had forgotten to wear my watch. I had, in fact, 
temporarily mislaid my watch) trying to enter my loaned apartment. As it turned 
out, I couldn't open the door because it wasn't the door to my apartment. I 
live somewhere else – somewhere with a lock that my key can open. I would have 
become tearful, but I was tired and dehydrated and coated with (hoping to ease 
my withering skin) what turned out to be hair conditioner and not body lotion. 
Oddly, it seemed to work quite well and was fragrant. After a while, all the 
little travel bottles look the same ... In short, I'm at 7,000ft where the air 
is thin and water boils too quickly to make you a nice restorative cuppa and am 
writing to you from a fragment of my former self. Happy, but a fragment.

I'll get to the happy later – the drive to defer gratification: it never wears 
off, even when I'm crumbly and my oxygen levels are below par. First let me 
take you through a wibbly, retro flashback, à la Alfred Hitchcock to somewhere 
around 5,000 miles in my past – or someone else's past, at the moment I'm not 
sure.

Two weeks ago, my novel and I plunged once again into the muggy near-death 
experience which is Penn Station, all set to trundle off, steampunking it for 
Chicago and Portland Oregon, then LA and Santa Fe – not a plane in sight and 
all was almost well. I wasn't expecting North by Northwest – the 20th Century 
Limited stopped running long ago, in every sense. But even so, it was something 
of a shock when I met my roomette. Did I, Best Beloveds, in any way suggest 
that US train cars were roomy last time we spoke? Did I? The Amtrak roomette – 
ugly, ugly, ugly word – is not big in the same way that leptons and quarks are 
not big. It has no room for most of the normal activities a human being might 
expect to enjoy: standing, breathing, thrashing in and out of a foetal position 
while begging for an aneurysm to intervene ...

Up and down the passageway as you sink into a compression-induced fugue state 
you will hear the tiny cries of other passengers as they contemplate their own 
accommodations, or simply wonder numbly: where the fuck did they put the rest 
of it? And roomettes are designed for two – even the ones that incorporate a 
prison-style sink-and-toilet combo – which also acts as a handy set of steps. I 
feel I am not alone in believing this would remove every shred of helpful 
mystery from even the most resilient relationship. I cannot think of anyone I 
love enough – and I do have large capacities for affection, Readers – to spend 
hour after dank hour with them while learning too much about all their 
previously adored places in what amounts to a cross between a tea caddy and a 
commode.

There were, of course, compensations. There would have to have been.

First Compensation. Train travel has allowed vast tracts of America to limp 
past at a wonderfully detailed pace. I have watched a misty pink sunrise across 
gentle Indiana, seen the farms and autumnal dells of Wisconsin, the wheeling 
perspectives of corn fields, pumpkin fields, harrowed earth and prairie roads. 
I have sat and stared out at the Columbia Valley cliffs, seen the sun set on 
the rolling Pacific Coast and the surfers' bonfires lighting up thereafter, 
watched the tawny plains of Montana and North Dakota, the blue distances and 
wind-worn mountains of Arizona and New Mexico. I could go on, but you'd get 
bored. I should also have witnessed a setting sun in the picturesque Glacier 
National Park but massive delays – this is Amtrak – meant it was dark long 
before then and the sun had, in fact burnished and gilded the delightful brown 
oil processing facilities of Shelby, Montana. Shelby granted us a "fresh air 
stop". These have generally brought me both relief and anxiety. I come from a 
small town myself, and I know they're hard to escape. Many's the time I have 
alighted from the high, safe, silvery railcar and felt that tingle of panic – 
what if the train just moved on without me: this is somewhere you'd never be 
able to leave: this is a kind of nowhere: this is fading amateur murals 
declaring the dangers of drugs: this is stray yellow dogs and hand-painted 
signs reading "Cold Beer. Good Food. Band every Saturday Night." This is a 
savage place in a savage time. Local newspapers along my routes wrote of 
electoral candidates who hadn't bothered attending community debates, of 
foreclosures and soup kitchens, unprecedented demands for assistance, 
homelessness. Outside the windows, a nation has fallen in two.

Second Compensation. Amtrak staff behave with extraordinary and democratic 
levels of courtesy, charm and attentiveness – this being all that prevents 
their benighted cargo from re-enacting Night of the Living Dead within moments 
of boarding. Their kindness quite literally keeps everything going. En route 
announcements blend humour, menace and levels of enjoyable psychosis and I 
certainly will never dream of spitting at fellow travellers, nor will I alarm 
children, wander about with my shoes off, or smoke. I am fully aware that 
smoking on a train will involve my being disappeared to Diego Garcia and not 
heard of again. So hello to Paul, Victor, Louis, Tiffany, Joyce, Moses and 
everyone else. Yes, I remember their names, the last 14 days have been, among 
other things a crash course in hardcore friendliness.

Third Compensation. Friendliness. I usually see this a threat, Best Beloveds, 
but Amtrak is determined that I should adjust and embrace it. Apart from being 
thrown on the mercy of uniformed strangers simply to survive (and I'm aware 
that I wasn't trying to sleep in coach accommodation – I have seen the coach 
sleepers, they will haunt my dreams) Amtrak is determined that everyone should 
sit together, be together and eat together. If they ran the UN, then ceasefires 
would be gruelling and yet weirdly binding. Anti-social curmudgeon that I am, 
if I wanted to receive actual hot food on a plate I had to batter along to the 
dining car and be forcefully seated at a table with three other people, all of 
them terrifyingly convivial. Before I could even sit down, I was barraged with 
personal details, affection and warmth and I suspect it has altered my makeup, 
perhaps forever. I now find I am unable to eat without first reciting, "Hi, I'm 
Alison. I live in Glasgow, Scotland. Not Glasgow, Montana. I am both travelling 
and working. I don't fly. I am writing a novel. It is book number 13. I am 
right-handed, 44, single, I have no children and I don't drink. What about 
you?" And so hello to the lady who worked in one of the many posh Minnesota 
rehab clinics. Addiction, like any illness, is an income-source in the US – it 
will bring you bills, not help. If you're wealthy, you may recover. If you're 
not, you'll die. And hello to the mother of a serving soldier who has survived 
Iraq and Afghanistan and hello to the second world war veteran who listened to 
her pride politely, although his war was not like her son's war – destruction 
all they have in common. And hello to the man amazed by his country's capacity 
only to destroy and then apologetic that he'd talked about it for so long. 
Hello to all the decent and friendly and promising human beings currently being 
shafted by their government, much as we are being shafted by ours. People like 
Wayne who asked me for money in LA Union Station – a poem of a building, 
extravagant in the beauty it offers everyone who enters it, First Class the 
only class available – the product of a lost philosophy.

Fourth Compensation. The first draft of my novel was finished aboard the 
Empire Builder: my pages and I trundling together somewhere in the dark, I 
think across the little bit of Idaho that protrudes north between Washington 
and Oregon. We were not riding the 20th Century Limited, I was not Eva Marie 
Saint and neither was my novel Cary Grant, but we did sit quietly for a bit, 
side by side, and enjoy the end of our initial adventures. And in the morning 
car 2730 celebrated with me and we had hugs – all human beings together. 
Onwards.
 