
Even though I’ve lived in New Mexico for 27 years, I grew up in California and 
still refer to it as “home”. My siblings, their children, my publisher and many 
friends live in the Golden State, so I make the trip at least once a year.

I drive. It takes two days, but as I always plan on bringing back a trunk full 
of goodies, it’s entirely worthwhile. My brother’s olive oil, my 
sister-in-law’s jams, a friend’s blackberry preserves, almonds, walnuts, 
pistachios and fat medjool dates from my hometown farmers’ market … If it’s 
winter, I’ll have interesting citrus fruits, such as yuzu and bergamot oranges. 
If it’s summer, stone fruit will be tucked safely in a cooler.

When I first moved to New Mexico, Californian friends would bring egg cartons 
with ripe figs nestled in each cup, and suitcases full of quince: two more 
foods that mean California to me. It’s been years since that’s happened and I 
no longer mind, which tells me that maybe New Mexico has become my home for 
real. The moment I cross from Arizona, I start to feel a tingle of pleasure. 
There are still six hours of driving ahead, but I’m back in the land of mesas 
and red cliffs and, mostly, chilli. It’s what I long for, as hungrily and 
intensely as anything I can imagine,: a blue corn enchilada smothered with red 
chilli sauce – rich, smooth and hot.

Miriam González Durántez’s recipe for Castilian chicken pot stew | A taste of 
home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/05/castilian-chicken-pot-stew-apple-recipe-miriam-gonzalez-durantez-taste-of-home>
When I get to Grants, a small town largely defined by uranium mining, I leave 
the freeway and drive down the main street in search of the Uranium Cafe, a 
great old place now called Nana’s Home Cooking. I sit at the counter and order 
a stacked (not folded) enchilada with red chilli. “Is that all?” the waitress 
asks. “No beans? No rice? No posole? No fried egg on top?”

Sometimes I do go for the whole plate, but mostly it’s just the enchilada and 
Nana’s chilli that I want. Good chilli is rich, the colour of red bricks, and a 
little sweet. Its flavour is rounded, perfect with the nuttiness of tortillas 
made with blue corn. The cheese is not heavy and gloopy, but cooling. Usually 
it’s cheddar, but it could be a goat’s cheese or another good melting cheese. 
While others might prefer fresh green chilli, the red has absorbed all that 
extra sunshine as it dries in the fields. To me, it is the quintessential taste 
of New Mexico.

As I wait, I have a glass of water, and gradually stop vibrating from the 
road. My plate arrives and the flavours meet in my mouth in a big way. They’re 
so good. I exhale deeply. I’m back. Just as the peaches in California have 
their familiar magic, this native food does too. It tells me where I am, where 
home is now. California might always bea home to me, but it will never be the 
land of blue corn and red chilli.

Stacked blue corn tortillas with red chilli sauce

You can use other corn tortillas, but blue corn tortillas have a rich, nutty 
flavour that is perfect with the sweet heat of the red chilli. I make my stack 
with two tortillas, but you can use three or four with extra cheese. This 
recipe makes enough for 4 enchiladas. Any left over will keep in the fridge for 
several days. Rice, beans or posole, and a fried egg are standard 
accompaniments.

Serves 2
Oil, for frying
4 blue corn tortillas
4 tsp onion, minced
200g mild cheddar or monterey jack, grated

For the sauce
1 tbsp oil
1 small onion, very finely diced
1 plump garlic clove, minced
40g red chilli powder
500ml water, or chicken or beef stock
½ tsp dried oregano
½ tsp salt
A few drops vinegar (optional)

1 First, make the sauce. Warm the oil in a small, heavy saucepan over a medium 
heat. Add the onion and cook for a minute. Add the garlic and cook for another 
minute, then stir in the chilli. Add the water in 2 or 3 portions, followed by 
the oregano and salt. Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat to low and simmer 
for 20-25 minutes, stirring occasionally. If the flavours aren’t well 
integrated, add a few drops of vinegar and taste again.

2 Preheat the grill. Pour about 1cm of oil into a pan large enough to hold a 
tortilla. When the oil is simmering, put a tortilla in it for few seconds, just 
long enough to soften; it should not go crisp. Repeat with the other tortillas.

3 Lay a tortilla on a heatproof plate. Cover it with ¼ of the onion, ¼ of the 
chilli sauce and ¼ of the cheese. Add a second tortilla and repeat. Do the same 
on a second plate.

4 Grill the enchiladas until the cheese melts and serve immediately.

Deborah Madison  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Deborah+Madison+&order=relevance&dir=desc>
is a cookbook author and an expert on vegetarian cooking.
 