
If the struggle for adult education has not been won over the last century it 
is not because it has enemies, but because it needs a generous environment and 
the full, focused attention of its supporters.

Throughout the 20th century, the government periodically funded and directed 
voluntary efforts in adult education towards what it saw as the national 
interest, and according to what it thought it could afford. Meanwhile, 
campaigning individuals and organisations sought to expand the range of what 
adult education should include.

After the first world war, local authorities were charged with providing adult 
education and there were grants for voluntary organisations, such as the 
Workers' Educational Association. "The 20s and 30s saw a big expansion of local 
government provision, often designed to help women manage tight budgets and 
keep men off the streets with activities like boxing and car repairs," says 
Alan Tuckett, chief executive of the National Institute of Adult Continuing 
Education. Despite the expansion of "night school" part-time classes, however, 
the global economic slump led to savage spending cuts and few post-war 
aspirations for a better educated nation were realised.

Even so, pioneering work was carried out by Niace's forerunner, the British 
Institute of Adult Education, established in 1921 to advocate adult education. 
It helped create a hospital education programme, a trust to promote learning 
among the unemployed and organisations that went on to become the British Film 
Institute and the Arts Council. During the second world war, it worked with the 
Army Bureau of Current Affairs to produce pamphlets on political and social 
issues for service personnel and supply books for air-raid shelters.

Further education expansion after 1945 focused on vocational training for 
young people. "Adult education continued largely in response to articulate 
demands from members of the public who already knew they wanted to learn," says 
Tuckett. "And formidable champions like Richard Hoggart emerged in the 1950s 
with his hugely influential book The Uses of Literacy." And so, from the 1960s 
there was a widening of access through the Open University, new universities, 
polytechnics and more part-time courses appropriate to mature learners with 
jobs.

It was in the 1960s and 70s too that momentum really built towards widening 
participation through new youth and community centres, the Plowden report's 
emphasis on the importance of family in a child's educational development, the 
involvement of parents in the Pre-School Learning Alliance and the BBC's On the 
Move broadcasts to support literacy.

The Russell report on adult education in 1973 called for broad educational 
opportunities to improve the quality of life as well as its economic value.

But successive governments have often seen the issue as a dilemma between 
funding measurable economic development through skills for employment or fluffy 
notions of "quality of life" and "social cohesion." While research showed 
informal learning could make people happier, healthier and more confident, the 
Moser and Leitch reports raised concerns over the UK workforce's lack of skills 
for a modern economy and society, noting that millions of adults were 
"functionally illiterate or innumerate". Leitch says: "Continuing to improve 
our schools will not be enough to solve these problems. More than 70% of our 
2020 workforce have already completed their compulsory education."

Promoting equality


New Labour governments clearly demonstrated the conundrum. In the Learning Age 
green paper in 1998, the then education secretary David Blunkett set out the 
broadest vision yet of "learning that promotes equality, spiritual development 
and citizenship". But, despite record spending on adult learning, the switch of 
funds to skills saw 1.4 million learners lost to the system in recent years.

Now, under the coalition government, emphasis is again on informal adult 
learning, with a strong advocate in the further education minister, John Hayes, 
who has ringfenced £210m for the purpose. But, says Tuckett "as FE faces cuts 
of 25% over four years, the future for adult learning still looks precarious".
 