
In 1999, when Alberto Weisser was named CEO of Bunge Limited, a leading 
agribusiness, he announced his plan to move the company in a more sustainable 
direction. Not surprisingly, he met with a lot of resistance. “I faced 
hostility everywhere,” he says. “We saw ourselves solely tasked with making 
money – at the expense of everything.” When Weisser continued to press for 
sustainability, some started calling him “the green guy”.


It wasn’t a compliment. 

Facing inertia and confusion from his colleagues, Weisser reached outside of 
his firm to start the process of pushing the company in a more sustainable 
direction. Specifically, he sought personal meetings with government officials 
in his home country of Brazil – including the minister of the environment, 
whose office was widely considered to be hostile to the interests of Bunge and 
its industry.

The minister was initially opposed, but Weisser was insistent, and he 
eventually set up a face-to-face meeting with the environmental office’s 
second-in-command. Together, the two discussed some of the major ecological 
dilemmas facing Brazil, particularly soybean farming. “We discovered that soy 
had an indirect impact on deforestation because of the land reselling effect,” 
Weisser explains. In 2006, working with the Brazilian government, Greenpeace, 
and competitors Cargill, ADM, and Dreyfus, Bunge was able to launch the 
now-famous “Soy Moratorium”, a cross-sector initiative aimed at reducing the 
impact of soy cultivation.

“We were able to make sure that all of the industry would not buy any more 
soybeans from newly deforested land,” Weisser says. Using satellite mapping, 
the soy coalition was eventually able to significantly reduce deforesting.


It’s an impressive result, but it came from a modest beginning – namely, an 
open-minded executive reaching out to his company’s most vocal critics and 
competitors. When we discuss how companies deal with sustainability, we tend to 
think in terms of major trends, vast initiatives, and sweeping regulations. 
It’s easy to forget that trends can start with a single executive reaching out 
to a potential partner in government, an NGO or even in a competing company. 
Weisser’s experience highlights this effect – and the power of openness, both 
inside and outside of the boardroom.

Outside of his company, Weisser’s efforts showed the Brazilian government that 
it could partner successfully with corporate players. Internally, his team 
started to see sustainability and protecting the environment as clear positives.


“The moratorium was never meant to be permanent. It was a shock to the system 
– a way to change perceptions and conversations and start collaboration toward 
a longer-term solution. And it has really worked,” Weisser says. 
“Sustainability became a value of Bunge. The employees demanded it. They wanted 
Bunge to state that we are here to positively impact the communities in which 
we operate.”

Other partnerships followed, including an alliance with Conservation 
International <http://www.conservation.org/about/Pages/default.aspx>, a 
nonprofit environmental organization. The group came up with the concept of 
connecting parcels of virgin land from individual farms into contiguous 
corridors large enough for natural fauna and flora to flourish. Weisser and 
Conservation International had to persuade farmers to go along with the plan, 
and they eventually signed almost 100. “It spread like a virus,” Weisser 
recalls. “People said, ‘Wait a minute, the farmers are in agreement with it!’”

Increasingly, Bunge’s employees voiced their desire to cooperate with 
different communities. Weisser responded with new policies allowing employees 
to devote a day each month to volunteer work. This, in turn, exposed the entire 
company to new influences, further opening up Bunge’s culture.


Today the Bunge website declares that “We’re working on one of the world’s 
biggest challenges – how to ensure food security for a growing population in a 
sustainable way.” It’s a bold statement – and one that Bunge seems to be 
working hard to live up to. But the vast initiative started with a simple 
beginning: Alberto Weisser’s determination to open the door to his company’s 
critics – and his hard push to set up a meeting with a skeptical Brazilian 
bureaucrat.

Christoph Lueneburger, author of A Culture of Purpose: How to Choose the Right 
People and Make the Right People Choose You 
<http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1118814568.html>, founded 
the sustainability practice and currently leads the private equity practice at
Egon Zehnder <http://www.egonzehnder.com/us/>, the world’s largest 
privately-held executive search and talent strategy firm.

The values-led business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/values-led-business> hub is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.



 