
Sir – The atrocities in Herr Hitler’s prisons and concentration camps are 
known to the outside world. The slow death to which German Fascism has 
condemned innumerable political opponents is less dramatic. Even unemployment 
relief is refused in most instances to Jews, Socialists, pacifists, and 
Communists who have been chased out of their positions. It is without example 
in modern history that a brutal victor should revenge himself thus terribly 
upon the guiltless wives and children of his defeated enemies.

Take, for example, the journalists and writers who have been chased out of 
their positions by Hitler and his regime. The whole Socialist, pacifist, trade 
union, and Communist press has been forbidden. Their property, offices, and 
technical plants have been confiscated. Their employees – workmen, journalists, 
draughtsmen – have been thrown on the streets without notice or compensation, 
their pension funds have been expropriated. No legally concluded contract 
stands. Even the payments to the widows and orphans of dead journalists and 
employees have ceased, since the prohibited newspaper undertakings have been 
forced into bankruptcy.


Writers with celebrated names whose works have been translated into many 
foreign languages, are in extreme need – some inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, some abroad.


There used to be about two hundred Socialist dailies in Germany, as well as a 
trade union press with a circulation of millions. Their employees had a safe 
income and were employed for years together.


For the most part they were former workmen or clerks who had worked themselves 
up to their positions and the corresponding standard of life through diligence, 
intelligence, and ability. They had succeeded in acquiring small libraries and 
decent dwellings; their children, for the most part, reached the higher schools 
or universities. To-day the lives of these thousands of opposition journalists 
have been ruined. Many of them are in concentration camps and are robbed of all 
their income. They must take their children away from school; they cannot pay 
their rent; they starve with their families; they are politically and socially 
defamed and calumniated. No bourgeois undertaking or newspaper dares to give 
work to Socialist, pacifist, or Left-wing journalists or draughtsmen, not to 
speak of the Jews, who, with an ever-decreasing number of exceptions, have been 
driven out of journalism.


Some of these journalists – especially the best known and those who are on 
this account in greatest danger – have fled the country. They are in the 
adjoining countries without a penny; they are forced to live on charity. Their 
manuscripts pile up in editorial offices in Prague, Paris, London, Brussels, 
Amsterdam, Vienna, and so on. Very few of them write a foreign language, and 
their translators wait impatiently for the printing of an article. They are 
forced to go the thorny way of the relief committee. Hours and days of waiting 
in a charity bureau are necessary before support can be obtained. These men are 
driven along a road full of humiliations.


A whole class of extremely cultured men has been degraded by the Hitler regime 
into penniless beggars without employment or prospect for the future. A few 
months ago they formed the elite of a nation. They were committed to the cause 
of peace and civilisation, and progress in Europe. To-day they are a sheer 
burden to themselves and their environment. Ninety per cent of them are 
pacifists, Socialists, democrats, and trade unionists. It was their life’s work 
to educate classes and nations to equality of status and to peace. For this 
reason the Hitler regime has denied them the right to live. For this reason it 
should be the duty ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
of every man who seeks the same ends as they to help these German intellectuals 
and to give them the means of existence.


Yours, &c.,
X. X.
Prague, June 15. 
 