
The new Labor caucus rules are apparently marked private and confidential, and 
therefore can't be shared outside the family – well not officially at any rate.

This minor inconvenience – I'd tell you, but I'd have to kill you – may 
explain why Labor's two leadership candidates seemed slightly unclear on some 
of the finer points guiding the historic ballot for party leader, which will 
get under way over the next four weeks. Labor's national executive would clean 
that all up next week, went the rationale.

A few things were confirmed. There would be an acting interim leader, and it 
would be Chris Bowen. The party leadership was to be contested –Anthony Albanese
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> and Bill Shorten 
nominated themselves as candidates – therefore a ballot would ensue.

Labor's national secretary, George Wright, issued some further points of 
clarification: nominations from federal Labor members of caucus would be open 
until next Friday; eligible Labor members would have two weeks to cast their 
vote; the vote would be "tallied and combined 50-50 with the result of a caucus 
vote".

The party membership would vote first, followed by the caucus. The caucus 
would not be aware of the results of the grassroots ballot when it voted for 
either of the two candidates on offer. No one seemed to be able to answer what 
would happen should the vote deliver a tie.

Whether it was all nailed down, or whether it wasn't, Labor dragged itself 
over the critical threshold on Friday: there would be a leadership ballot 
involving grassroots members for the first time in the ALP's history, these new 
caucus rules bequeathed by Kevin Rudd would stay (well most of them anyway; I 
really don't think that debate is yet over).

So for Labor, an election defeat sparks yet another election. But if the 
opening of the next iteration of the permanent campaign is any guide, it will 
allow the party to think through its options both now and over the medium term, 
to consider what worked in the period in government and what did not.

I know there is commentary around suggesting this is bad for Labor. This view 
is rational enough – why would you end a period of division with yet more 
public division?

I'm not buying that. It's messy, sure – but so what? If we who cover politics 
don't allow political parties to take a breath and have debates about important 
things, we are not serving the public interest. We are just reinforcing the 
institutional cynicism.

Labor has an interesting choice to make: Albanese and Shorten are not playing 
up their differences for obvious reasons, but they are fundamentally different 
characters – they would pursue distinctly different styles of opposition 
leadership.

Both men would have to make a significant personal transition from their 
immediate past. It's much easier to imagine what you would do with leadership 
than to actually be the leader. Opposition leadership is the hardest job in 
professional politics.

The view inside the party is Shorten has the numbers in the caucus and 
Albanese the numbers with the rank and file. With this historic ballot we'll 
learn just how much the parliamentary representatives are in sync with the 
grassroots.

And we'll also learn just how committed Labor is to learning from past 
mistakes, and overcoming their considerable talent for self-sabotage and 
self-destruction.

Talking about new politics is all very well – but delivering it?

Something else entirely.
 