
When Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> decided to 
set her sixth novel in the Amazon, she called up her editor on the glossy 
magazine Gourmet, and asked him to arrange a trip.

"I really wanted to be on a boat but they couldn't find the right boat in 
Brazil, it was either a cruise ship which I didn't want or a raft with 
cockroaches which I didn't want. I wanted something very small but nice and 
they found it in Peru, it was called the Aqua and I think it had a dozen rooms 
and it was absolutely gorgeous."

On the journey (which the magazine paid for on condition she wrote an article 
about it), Patchett immersed herself in the rainforest, paddling down 
tributaries, walking through the jungle with a guide to point out poisonous 
frogs, and imagining the terror of being lost or left behind. "I could have 
gone and stood there for two hours and gotten more than I ever needed," she 
says. "It wasn't as if I was interviewing anyone, I wasn't talking about 
anything, just to stand there and look, just to go out at night and see the 
stars, just to feel the bugs hitting your face."

The resulting novel, State of Wonder, is a triumph and Patchett's best book 
yet. Partly this is due to the setting: Patchett's jungle seethes and seeps, 
the humidity and the insects and the utter strangeness of it all but 
suffocating its American visitors. Partly it is down to a plot, involving the 
investigation of a mysterious death, that takes hold of the reader on the first 
page and doesn't let go. But mainly it is thanks to the novel's 42-year-old 
heroine Marina Singh, the pharmacologist from whose point of view the adventure 
unfolds and who is the strongest character Patchett has written.

The similarities between the novelist and the scientist are as obvious as the 
differences. Both the real and the imaginary woman have a much older partner 
with a previous wife and grown-up children. Both have divorced parents and lost 
regular contact with their fathers as children: while Patchett's mother moved 
from California to Tennessee before remarrying, Singh's father went back to 
India. Singh has a recurring nightmare in the novel, brought on by anti-malaria 
pills, in which she loses hold of his hand in a crowd and wakes up screaming.

But most significantly Singh, like Patchett, is a woman who has chosen to be 
childless. Fertility isState of Wonder's big theme. Vogel, the midwestern 
pharmaceutical giant for which Marina Singh works, is funding the research of 
Dr Annick Swenson in the Amazon in the hope she will develop a fertility drug 
for post-menopausal women. Singh is sent to Brazil to check on her progress, as 
well as to learn more about the circumstances of her colleague Anders Eckman's 
death, and the novel is much concerned with the emotions and ethics and 
physiology of reproduction. In one spectacularly graphic set-piece, Singh 
performs an emergency caesarean on one of the indigenous Lakashi women whom Dr 
Swenson's team are studying.

As preparation, Patchett gained permission to attend a real operation. "It was 
phenomenal, so unbelievably violent," she says. "The nurse is on one side and 
the doctor is on the other and they're pulling so hard to tear her apart, to 
wrench this little baby out. I was just absolutely amazed by the brutality and 
physicality of it all. And I did actually pass out, at the very end while they 
were sewing her up."

Now an elegant 47, Patchett has reached an age when people have stopped 
questioning her decision not to be a mother, but she remains indignant at the 
memory: "I never wanted children, never, not for one minute, and it has been 
the greatest gift of my life that even as a young person I knew. It freed me up 
tremendously. Children are wonderful but they're not for everybody, and yet it 
never stopped. To constantly have people tell me that I didn't know my own mind 
and I didn't know my body was kind of outrageous."

Convinced from childhood that she wanted to write fiction, Patchett pursued 
her ambition faithfully, encouraged by her mother. A quiet and obedient 
schoolgirl, with one older sister, she studied creative writing first at Sarah 
Lawrence college in New York, and then at the Iowa Writers' Workshop, where she 
met her first husband; she divorced him a year later. She returned to 
Tennessee, where she worked as a waitress and produced a first novel,Patron 
Saint of Liars, set in a Catholic home for unmarried pregnant women, before her 
30th birthday. The book was intensely emotional, and unusual in combining a 
religious theme with a deep interest in women's psychology influenced by 
feminism.

Since then she has written five more novels including the Orange prizewinning 
Bel Canto, and a memoir about her friendship with the writer Lucy Grealy, who 
died in 2002 of a heroin overdose. She has also done some journalism and 
teaching, and got married again, aged 41, to her partner of many years, Karl 
VanDevender, a doctor.

Patchett went to a Catholic school, and has often spoken of how a childhood 
spent praying to statues and dreaming of miracles was the perfect preparation 
for her life as a storyteller. Not a regular churchgoer, she describes herself 
as both "adoring and struggling with" her faith, but there is nothing but 
warmth in a recent essay about Sister Nena, one of the nuns who taught her. In 
a way, she says, the childless nuns with their vocations were role models for 
the would-be writer.

"I think I would probably have been a good mother," she says, "I'm incredibly 
domestic, I love to be home, I love to cook and clean and sew and have people 
over, I'm really all about home and hearth, but for me it was either/or. My 
friend Elizabeth [McCracken, the writer] and I used to say if we ever met 
someone who desperately wanted to have children and who was willing to do half 
or slightly more than half the work, then we would think about it. And she 
found that person, she found that astonishing man. I have never had a cup of 
coffee with that man. I have never met him."

In State of Wonder, Dr Swenson's single-minded pursuit of work verges on 
fanaticism. Singh, her student in medical school, has spent her career battling 
the shadow of her teacher's disapproval. The relationship at the heart of her 
new novel could not be less equal, less symmetrical, but Patchett says it 
"makes complete sense to me. I had a couple of teachers in college who changed 
my life, I shaped myself in order to please them."

These mentors were the writers Allan Gurganus and Grace Paley. "Allan's lesson 
was how to work," she says. "We had to write a story a week, and a revision 
didn't count. He said think of yourself as a pipe with a lot of muck in it and 
you have to get it out. The only way you can find out what you're good at is to 
have written a ton of work. In the same way that if I was learning the cello I 
would understand that I had to practise hour after hour."

Paley's influence was less tangible but just as important, and she was even 
more ruthlessly determined to stamp out ego and preciousness. Seminars were 
cancelled and assignments ignored as students were bussed to political 
protests. "Grace's lesson was the lesson of having a single voice and being one 
person, so you're the same person as a mother, a friend, a teacher, a writer, 
an activist, a citizen," Patchett says. "That was an enormous lesson that I had 
a very, very hard time learning." In Nashville, Tennessee, where she lives with 
her husband and dog, with his ex-wife (a friend), step-grandchildren and 
childhood friends all close by, Patchett is putting Paley's teachings into 
practice. "I feel like I'm playing my part in the community and I like that," 
she says. "When the Literacy Foundation needs somebody to come and be the 
spokesperson for something, I'm the person they call. I have such a connection 
to the place and I feel like what I'm doing is important."

Patchett divides her career into two distinct phases: before and after Bel 
Canto. Before her fourth novel became a paperback bestseller, Patchett 
struggled. Her second novelTaft could not live up to the passionately personal 
promise of her debut, and the fact that it is so little read still rankles. She 
calls it her "neglected child . . . it's as if it smells or it's sticky or 
something".

But Bel Canto, a stylish and theatrical kidnapping fantasy set in an unnamed 
South American capital, was a game-changer. "I sort of jumped into a different 
kind of bracket," she says bluntly. "I've met so many interesting people 
because of it. I've become very close friends with Renée Fleming [the American 
soprano] because of that book, it's like I'm invited to better parties now, ha 
ha."

She believes her success was in part a matter of timing: Bel Canto came out in 
May 2001, and after the events of September 2001 "people wanted to have a way 
to discuss what was going on, they wanted to get together in book groups and 
talk about terrorism."

But the book was not universally admired, and some in the British publishing 
world were perplexed that Patchett's take on terrorism, strong on romantic love 
and light on violence, took the Orange prize in an unusually strong line-up 
that included Sarah Waters'sFingersmith and Helen Dunmore's The Siege.

Since then, critics including John Updike have taken Patchett to task for her 
unswervingly cheery outlook. When I ask about this she says she can't help it: 
"I think it's brain chemistry, I'm a positive, cheerful person and I think it 
is absolutely the luck of the draw. I think the life I have had has come 
largely from the chemicals in my head. I see my life as good and I think a lot 
of times if you see your life as good then that's how it turns out." When she 
feels disappointed – for example by the fact that her readership is, she 
estimates, a startling 98% female – she turns it round and thinks "lucky me, at 
least I have all those women reading my books".

In many ways Patchett's optimism is appealing. She has made a specialism in 
her novels of characters bonding across classes and races —Run features 
African-American brothers successfully adopted by Irish-American Catholics — 
and her belief in happy endings can feel progressive as well as redemptive. 
Human goodness, in her books, usually carries hints of divine grace, whether or 
not these are interpreted by nuns or priests, and her epiphanic endings are 
moving. When her fiction jars, at least with secular readers, it may be when 
spiritual uplift seems to tip over into a didactic cancellation of difficulty 
or sadness.

"I have been accused of being a Pollyanna," she says, "but I think there are 
plenty of people dealing with the darker side of human nature, and if I am 
going to write about people who are kind and generous and loving and 
thoughtful, so what? In my life I have met astonishingly good people."

It seems no wonder that Grealy, the friend Patchett made at Iowa, made such an 
overwhelming impression on her. Injured by cancer in her jaw as a child, Grealy 
spent her 20s and 30s undergoing surgery after surgery in an attempt to rebuild 
her damaged face.

But Grealy was also often demanding and difficult, with episodes of 
self-destructive behaviour and self-harm. Did Grealy test her belief in 
positivity? Is that why, following Grealy's sad death, she felt bound to write 
a book about their friendship,Truth and Beauty, even at the cost of alienating 
Grealy's sister, who wrote a long article in which she explained how offended 
the family was by the book, and called Patchett a "grief thief"?

"I always saw the goodness in Lucy and maybe that's why she loved me," 
Patchett replies. "She was the smartest person I knew and the funniest. She was 
the person who would get up at every party and dance first and she had a 
tremendous capacity for joy. She had more friends than anyone I've ever known 
and she wrote two great books. It's astonishing what she managed."

Her thoughts about a cure for malaria, rather than reversing the menopause, 
were the starting-point forState of Wonder. John le Carré's The Constant 
Gardener is the obvious point of comparison, with the Amazon taking the role in 
the American novel that Africa played in the British one. But although Patchett 
loves Le Carré's novel, she is quick to point out that the pharmaceutical 
company in her novel is "not sinister". Patchett's husband is a doctor, as was 
her step-father, and her mother was a nurse before launching herself on a 
second, post-retirement career (encouraged by her daughter) as a popular 
novelist.

As a child she accompanied her step-father to the operating theatre in the 
summer holidays, and watched him perform brain surgery –"I can remember the 
burning smell and little chips of bone coming up like snow in the air". 
Medicine has always been part of Patchett's life, and she does not share Le 
Carré's rage at multinational corporations avid for profits and prepared to 
sacrifice ethics – and lives – in their search for billion-dollar drugs.

While Patchett describes herself as "very liberal", and "crazy about Obama", 
the politics of the modern-day Amazon are missing from her new novel. When I 
met her in the week that Brazilian conservation activists José Cláudio Ribeiro 
da Silva and his wife Maria do Espírito Santo da Silva were murdered, and asked 
why deforestation does not figure in her story, she pointed out that Dr Swenson 
does refer to it at one point.

But this is not to say that Patchett, who is pretty much a vegan for both 
moral and health reasons, does not take the environment seriously.State of 
Wonder is passionate about nature – but Patchett has used a real jungle as a 
setting for a fictional conflict, and an imaginary set of dilemmas based around 
an invented ecosystem. "In a way it is likeBel Canto, it is like all my books. 
I didn't write about the world outside the house. It's about a pocket of the 
world just before that pocket disappears. It's a glimpse into something 
magical."
 