
Like reviving a failing marriage, restoring the relationship between 
politicians and voters was always going to be an arduous task. Political 
leaders cannot be faulted for the energy with which they have approached the 
wooing of the electorate. Today the Guardian reveals that the Conservative 
leader David Cameron is considering swingeing cuts in ministerial pay. A 
fortnight ago,a report for Gordon Brown 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/mps-face-ban-from-lucrative-second-jobs-875768.html>
 trailed the idea of outlawing all extra-parliamentary work for MPs. 
Politically, Mr Cameron's might be the smarter move. From the outrage yesterday 
at Alan Duncan'sdaft complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/12/mps-expenses-alan-duncan-apology>
 that MPs "have to live on rations", secretly filmed at the House of Commons 
last month, it is clear that public forgiveness is some way off. A way back, as 
the marriage counsellors would say, must be found: it is vital to our democracy 
that politicians succeed in overcoming the deep scepticism of voters. The 
danger is that this, the biggest opportunity for reform since 1945, is 
squandered in a race for electoral advantage. What makes good politics is not 
necessarily good for politics.

Eye-catching initiatives are becoming such familiar events in the current 
dutch auction for political probity that it is tempting to dismiss this latest 
idea as a mix of political positioning and internal party chest-thumping. But 
whenthe median wage is less than £25,000  
<http://www.statistics.gov.uk/CCI/nugget.asp?ID=285&Pos=1&ColRank=2&Rank=224>
and a cabinet minister currently earns more than £144,000, there seems at the 
least room for movement. Even cutting, say, a quarter of the ministerial 
element of pay would still leave a cabinet minister earning around £120,000, 
comfortably in the top 2% of earners. That is easily enough to insulate them 
from the kind of concerns that keep their constituents awake at night. Almost 
like bankers, the politicians' dilemma is that to most people their pay is 
wildly out of line with their public status. It may be too much to suppose that 
such a pay cut would elicit sympathy, but it would indicate a degree of 
repentance. And if, privately, some aspiring ministers claim they would not be 
able to afford to serve more than a single term in office, that there will be a 
surge in ministerial turnover, there are plenty of people who would welcome 
more new brooms and fewer old hands around Whitehall. More problematically, it 
would mean a cabinet minister earning less than their permanent secretary or 
the chief executive of their local authority.

But politicians' pay is not only about the relationship with their voters. In 
this mood of new puritanism, it is worth observing that not since the 18th 
century has politics appeared an opportunity to get rich (although a few have 
succumbed to the appeal once there). Historically, the argument has been about 
widening opportunity, even if the idea of opportunity is relative. So an 
exchange during a debate in 1850 ("If the salaries of these offices were 
brought so low as to exclude the possibility of men of small fortune taking 
them," said the then chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Charles Wood, "I conceive 
it would do a most irreparable injury to the public service, and great 
injustice to such parties." 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/upload/m06.pdf#page=8>) will, with 
syntactical modernisation, be repeated now. Labour, for whom parliamentary and 
ministerial salaries have always been financially more necessary, will claim 
that only rich Tories could afford to suggest cutting ministerial pay, while 
pointing out that some Labour cabinets have forgone pay increases. And Tories, 
two-thirds of whom have pay beyond their MPs' salary, feel that any ban on 
second jobs would be expressly aimed at them – although that has not stopped Mr 
Cameron ordering his shadow cabinet to shed their outside earnings. Deciding 
how and how much we value the political classes is at the heart of this crisis 
of politics. The danger is that the appearance that every proposal is weighed 
for its conspicuous contrition will undermine good ideas and make the chance of 
real reform look as distant as that other great missed opportunity, change in 
the City.
 