
I didn’t expect Mum to say yes. She wouldn’t have normally, but there was 
something different about her that day. Perhaps it was the shoes – chunky 
silver platforms covered in glitter which caught the light wherever they went. 
“They were £6 in a closing-down sale,” she told me. “It’d be rude not to buy 
them.”

It was New Year’s Eve and we were finishing up a belated Christmas dinner. I’d 
spentChristmas Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/17/christmas-day-doesnt-have-to-be-about-families>
 with my in-laws and this was our surrogate celebration, but now it was time 
for Mum to go and she was gathering up her things. The blinking lights from the 
Christmas tree bounced off her wedding-best bangles, unboxed just once this 
year, and in the low light the shoes spoke to me.

Mum was nowhere to be found. I wandered around until my ears tuned in to 
cheering on the dancefloor

They said two words: disco inferno. I had a change of heart.

A nearby mega-pub had a large back room it used for occasional club nights, 
playing that specific brand of inoffensive, decade-old pop you’d probably hear 
at a wedding. That in itself was significant. My mum doesn’t “do” pubs; she 
doesn’t “do” drinking, even in moderation. Drinking was a source of conflict 
between us, but it wasn’t really about the alcohol. Rather it was a symbol of 
something bigger, and not just in the obvious way: that I was becoming 
“westernised”. It was everything else that followed.

My hunt for hedonism regularly took me into central London. On breaks from 
university, I would temp in the City. I made friends there; I slept on their 
couches. When I came back to our modest council house, I talked about 
avant-garde theatre, cocktail bars and essays about Karl Marx in papers you 
could only read by subscription. I once corrected my mum’s pronunciation of 
fajita (she said it with a hard j) and I saw her eyes well up.

“Pubs are for white people!” she would say as I slammed the door behind me. 
She wasn’t completely wrong about that. If I think about every time I’ve been 
really heinously abused for the colour of my skin, when I think about the times 
I’ve been truly afraid, a finger hovering over the call button having already 
typed in three nines, and if I think of the times I’ve been reminded I am a 
mere visitor in the nation in which I was born, they have been in a boozer. And 
now, here she was, in the pub: my mum.

The queue for the bar was five deep and when I finally squeezed myself out of 
the scrum, Mum was nowhere to be found. I wandered around until my ears heard 
cheering from the dancefloor.

Approaching the crowds, a familiar song came over the speakers. I’d recognise 
the Nile Rodgers-esque guitar intro anywhere. It wasMark Morrison’s Return of 
the Mack <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uB1D9wWxd2w>. I pushed past people 
until I fell into a clearing, at the centre of which was my mother, eyes closed 
and lost in her own world, doing what I can only describe as a kind of 
Bollywood dad dance – noticeably retro, creaky and totally out of time to the 
music. One hand was on her hip as she slowly shuffled around in a circle; the 
other arm was up, her hand doing a kind of exaggerated “come hither” gesture 
synonymous with Hindi dance (especially from the 70s).

People were surrounding her, whooping and cheering: “Go Saima, go Saima, go go 
go Saima!” I laughed, touched to the heart. Then I noticed a group of three 
lads also laughing, perhaps a little too hard. One of them was recording my mum 
on his phone, while another stood in between her and the camera as though he 
was “presenting” the video.

The presenter was copying my mum’s dance while throwing in a couple of 
stereotypical gestures. He clasped his head in anamaste 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namaste> gesture and gave a little head wobble, 
followed by a bow to the camera. They were laughing at her. Was everybody?

What’s your New Year resolution? This can be the cruellest question | Linda 
Tirado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-year-eve-resolution-tradition>
Before I’d had a chance to gather my thoughts, the countdown to midnight 
began; people were kissing and hugging – now really was not the time to start a 
fight.

Mum practically skipped home, regaling me with stories about how, before she 
got married, people said she could have been a dancer, and did I know that she 
even had an audition once? I didn’t mention what I’d seen.

In the weeks after that, I thought a lot about those lads, and looked for them 
every time I went to the pub. I wanted to know what, or who, the joke was and 
why exactly it was so funny. I even decided to search online to see if they’d 
uploaded the video.

By the end of the search I’d watched hours of grainy, shaky footage: a 
slightly different accent here, a different outfit there, all seemingly 
hilarious for reasons I didn’t want to think about. But in all those videos, I 
never found my mum.

I still don’t understand why that night was so significant. Each time I try to 
figure it out, I come to a dead end. But most days I just laugh, my heart 
bursting with joy at the memory of my mum; my Bollywood dancing disco queen.
 