
The walls are dust-clad sheets, hung from a dark awning. There are no windows. 
"Children suffer violence here," Amani says. "Here, in this community. They are 
beaten and abused. They are raped. They think this is normal."

Amani is a 12-year-old resident of Chamwino, a densely populated and deeply 
impoverished slum area on the outskirts of Morogoro town, in central Tanzania. 
He is one of more than a thousand children in the community growing up beneath 
a shroud of disempowerment, hunger and violence.

The conditions that characterise life in Chamwino are, in many respects, 
similar to those endured by slum-dwellers the world over: the lack of access to 
basic services, such as healthcare and sanitation; the malnutrition and 
overcrowding, fuelled by a high birthrate; the families that live on top of 
each other in mud-floored, tin-roofed huts; the hunger and neglect that drive 
many children to a life on the streets. More than a billion people across the 
world live in slums. Those living in Chamwino, however, face a particularly 
malign challenge.

The Faraja Trust Fund, a local NGO working with street children, estimates 
that five children in the community are raped each day. This is a pattern of 
abuse enacted with such relentless regularity that the victims have begun to 
perpetuate the violence inflicted upon them. "At the river, older street 
children waylay girls who come to fetch water," one boy recounts. "They grab 
them and rape them. There are also street children who are willing to be 
sodomised by older children for money. They give them money and take them to 
the nearby graveyard."

Underlying issues exposed

The social collapse underlying this violence cannot be accounted for purely on 
the basis of poverty, alcohol and overcrowding. These factors are only the 
outward mask of a deeper issue. A landmark study, published in August 2011, 
throws light on what that issue might be. The study, entitled Violence Against 
Children in Tanzania and co-ordinated by the United Nations Children's Fund, is 
the first of its kind in Africa and documents in detail the prevalence of 
mental, physical and sexual violence suffered by children across the country.

"What really surprised me about the study," says Tukae Njiku, director of 
children's development at the Ministry of Community Development, Gender and 
Children, "was the relationship of the perpetrators to the children. Much 
violence is taking place close to the home. This is a collapse in community 
responsibility. Traditionally, we lived according to extended family systems 
and every child would belong. Those ties have gone now."

Tanzania was founded as a unified and independent nation in 1964 upon a vision 
ofUjamaa, as articulated by Julius Kambara Nyerere, the first Tanzanian 
president. The son of a tribal chief of the small Zanaki ethnic group, Nyerere 
held that beneath the myriad ethnic diversity of the region, there existed a 
set of common social values exhibited in tribal and communal ways of living 
that gave rise to an authentic east African identity. These were expressed as
Ujamaa, which is Swahili for "familyhood". Nyerere's vision was of a nation 
built upon these extended family relations; he called this "tribal socialism".

This social ethic, which once lay at the heart of Tanzanian identity, has 
disintegrated under the weight of enduring disempowerment and deep 
impoverishment. The violence and abuse inflicted upon the children of Chamwino 
takes place in the space where these values once existed. As an elder in the 
community explains: "There were once laws that ruled communal life, but we 
cannot see them anymore. They are hidden in shadow."

Faraja is working with the people of Chamwino to rekindle and redefine those 
lost communal values. In partnership with UK charity International Childcare 
Trust, Faraja has established a series of Child Rights clubs in schools 
throughout the slum. Children are learning for the first time that they should 
not accept a life of violence and neglect. Armed with an understanding of their 
right to education, to health and to freedom from abuse, children are demanding 
change, and are catalysing a transformation in the social consciousness of the 
community.

"The attitude of parents and of adults is different now," 13-year-old Rehema 
reflects. "There is less violence." Local elders are embracing the changes, and 
are working with Faraja and the police to ensure that clear reporting lines 
exist where children can claim redress when their rights are violated. "I know 
what to do now if I have been abused," Rehema explains, her eyes welling with 
tears. "Without this I would not be safe."

With Child Rights education as the bedrock of transformation, Faraja has begun 
granting small loans to parents, enabling them to start generating an income 
and care for their family, and special schools for street children have been 
established, allowing them to reintegrate with the public education system. 
Each project is focused on further empowering the community to define the 
values by which it will live, and so create a renewed sense of collective 
identity.

This process is of significance beyond Chamwino. The "breakdown of the tribal 
system" was noted by the Law Reform Commission in 1994 to have entailed a loss 
of collective identity, but the full impact of this upon the younger generation 
did not become clear until August of this year, when the Violence Against 
Children in Tanzania study was published.

The breakdown, many argue, may be traced back to Nyerere's. They claim that 
his poor economic management forced Tanzania into the hands of the World Bank 
and International Monetary Fund, and that it was in the wake of the reforms 
demanded by these organisations that the traditional system of "social 
parenthood" ceased to function. The Law Reform Commission recommended in 
response to this "that new ways of incorporating the community into child care 
should be innovated, developed and fostered".

This innovation is underway in Chamwino. It is an innovation in social 
parenthood and community empowerment; an innovation with deep historical roots, 
driven forward by the demands of children; an innovation in identity, informed 
by traditional values. After many years, the shadows are receding.

"We are demanding change," Amani explains. "There is still violence. There is 
still abuse. But we know our rights now," he gestures at the world beyond the 
walls, "and this means everything". In the skies above Chamwino, the east 
African sun is rising.

Some names have been changed
 