
It was the looks of contempt that did it. I didn’t normally spend new year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/new-year> with my parents and 
sisters, but that year I did. I had nowhere else to go really as I’d pretty 
much run out of friends, and time with my family seemed marginally preferable 
to time on my own.

To be clear; this wasn’t about them, it was about me. I’d been a heroin addict 
for 10 years and my life was a mess. I’d done next to nothing other than a few 
dead-end jobs from which I was invariably sacked and I got by on a round of 
handouts and petty crime. Lying had become second nature; I’d been to rehab 
five years previously and sworn blind to everyone that I was off the smack, but 
the truth was I’d never been clean for more than a few days. My life had been 
reduced to the getting and using of heroin. Not that I turned down booze or 
other drugs; it was just that none of them hit the same sweet spot of 
nullification. That feeling of feeling nothing.

My sisters broke through my shield and saw my soul. What was left of it

That new year, though, I was forced to feel my shame. I’d arrived – late, of 
course, what junkie ever arrives anywhere on time? – and my parents had made a 
great show of welcoming me. Several years later they told me one of the reasons 
they had always been so pleased to see me was because my arrival was proof that 
I wasn’t dead. I kissed my mum hello and my dad offered me a drink. “Don’t 
worry,” I said. “I’ll get one myself.” I went into the kitchen, downed a 
tumbler full of scotch, before refilling the glass to a more acceptable level 
and going off to the living room to rejoin the rest of the family.

Awkward doesn’t begin to do justice to the misery that followed. My parents 
began, as they always did, by asking me what I had been up to. I came up with 
the usual hard luck lines of why what I had previously told them hadn’t 
happened and how I was sure next year would be different. They sat there and 
nodded, desperate to believe me. My sisters remained impassive, barely even 
bothering to say hello.

I can’t remember the rest of the evening in detail, but if it ran anything 
like every other evening, it will have gone something like this. Every now and 
again I will have announced that I needed to go to the toilet and disappeared 
for the best part of 20 minutes to shoot up some smack. I’d have then wandered 
back into the living room as if I’d only been gone for a couple of minutes and 
slump, barely conscious, back into the chair. This would have been repeated 
several times until the clock ticked round to midnight – the chimes of freedom 
that allowed everyone to slope off to bed after the briefest “happy new year” 
and to escape the horrors of the preceding hours.

Our neglect of ageing heroin users has fuelled the rise of drug-related deaths 
| Paul Hayes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/ageing-heroin-users-drug-deaths-four-steps-to-save-lives-nhs>
What I do remember is the contempt in my sisters’ eyes. Normally, nothing 
could touch me when I was out of it on heroin; it was as if there was a 
protective barrier between me and the world. If people didn’t like me I seldom 
noticed, and if I did I wasn’t that bothered. But that New Year’s Eve my 
sisters broke through my shield and their eyes had seen my soul. Or what was 
left of it. They may not have known what exactly was wrong with me or just how 
bad a state I was in, but they had seen enough to give up on me. Loving me had 
become just too painful; disgust was all that remained.

The details of the following morning are equally fuzzy, but something had 
changed. I couldn’t get my sisters out of my head. Even more striking was the 
revelation that no matter how much they hated me, it was nothing compared to 
how much I hated myself. Like most junkies, I often talked to other junkies 
about how I was going to give up smack. But also like most junkies, I never got 
round to doing more than getting the occasional methadone script to tide me 
over a few days of trying not to take quite as much heroin as usual. It was a 
depressing cycle of failure that only served to reinforce my self-loathing.

Yet that New Year’s Eve had been a game changer, because it was also the 
moment I realised that I wanted to live more than I wanted to die. It took 
time. Junkies seldom rush anything and I continued to use, with the overdoses 
becoming more frequent. But within two months I was in rehab, and this time it 
worked. That was back in 1987. Fingers crossed in March this year I will have 
been clean and sober for 30 years.
 