
At first blush the insistence of the surgeon turned minister, Professor Lord 
Ara Darzi <https://www.theguardian.com/society/aradarzi>, that the NHS should 
have "quality of care at its heart" seems a statement of the blindingly 
obvious. After all, every decent medic aims at caring well. But the emphasis on 
quality running through the report Lord Darzi published yesterday was in fact 
distinctive and important. More important, indeed, than the draft NHS 
constitution, also published yesterday, which - despite the grand title - is 
principally a tidying up exercise. For, during a turbulent decade in the 
service, the overriding concern in Whitehall has been quantity instead.

Ten years ago patients were forced to queue for up to 18 months, so boosting 
capacity had to be the priority. A mix of extra money, top-down targets and a 
bewildering array of other reforms has now succeeded in cutting the waiting 
lists in half. The trouble is, as Lord Darzi came close to conceding yesterday, 
this progress has come at a cost in terms of staff morale. Medics are confused 
by endless change, and sometimes witness targetry trumping the real needs of 
the patient - as when patients are shuffled out of casualty before they have 
been seen to, or shuffled off one waiting list only to be shunted on to to 
another. Meanwhile, big variations in standards remain a brute fact: between 
the best hospitals and the worst, there is a 20-fold difference in the 
proportion of staff who would be happy to be treated in their own institution. 
Gordon Brown acted shrewdly in appointing a doctor, who understands theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> from the inside, to treat these nasty 
symptoms.

Lord Darzi's prescription is a serious dose of professional engagement, making 
for a welcome contrast with the days when Tony Blair's health secretaries would 
engineer needless confrontations with the medical establishment. Rightly, he 
resists handing doctors a blank sheet - GPs will, for the first time, face 
proper inspection, and NHS trusts will be required to collate data on clinical 
outcomes and to ask the views of patients. All of this will be made public in 
an annual report on quality that will sit alongside financial accounts. 
Crucially, however, medics themselves will take the lead in designing the 
metrics by which they will be judged. They will be encouraged to take more of a 
role in managing the service as a whole, instead of passing the buck to 
bureaucrats at the door of their own surgeries. That has to make sense: the 
experience of a patient often depends not just on several different parts of 
the service, but on how well these are joined up. That joining up is much more 
likely to happen when the medics are involved. But making any of this happen 
will require a big cultural shift, involving changes to medical curriculum, 
continuous professional training and, crucially, buying out the time of staff 
so they can come together and discuss how they do their jobs. Lord Darzi 
signalled he understands as much, but whether he can deliver remains to be seen.

Two opposing dangers could undermine the Darzi plans. First, they could 
unravel in the burgeoning healthcare market. Lord Darzi had several ideas to 
make this work better - including expanded information to make patient choices 
more meaningful and tweaks to the financing rules to reward quality. But 
private providers and foundation trusts cannot be told what to do; Lord Darzi 
will have to try and persuade them to go down his preferred path by force of 
argument alone. At the same time, there is an antithetical danger in relying 
too much on the regional health bureaucracies. Lord Darzi has made much of 
avoiding a one-size-fits-all national blueprint, but leaves much power in the 
hands of the 10 strategic health authorities, bodies that can be remote from 
hospitals and clinics.

The balance between giving power away and retaining influence is a difficult 
one to strike. It is too early to know for sure whether Lord Darzi has got it 
right, but the signs yesterday were encouraging.
 