
As some of you may know, I've spent decades participating in literary events, 
many of which involve Q&A sessions. So I'm used to audience queries which are 
just plain bonkers, or refer to dark conspiracies that mean the enquirers will 
never themselves be published, or properly appreciated, while sneaky Illuminati 
and/or Lizardpeople such as myself are given favourably-termed contracts and 
buckets of baby mice on demand. I am also familiar with questions asked both in 
reality and episodes ofMurder, She Wrote 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YWz9lpxv3NM>: "Do you write with a pen, or 
using a refurbished shuttle from a Portuguese handloom?", "When do you first 
pick up your shuttle of a morning?", "How long before you have to break off and 
eat some baby mice?" and the inevitable, "Where do you get your ideas from?"

Many of the above are now regarded as uncool and avoided by more savvy 
literary audiences, even though an attentive new writer might conceivably find 
something encouraging about X's yellow legal pads, or W's penchant for vellum, 
or N's fondness for scribbling on the backs of ginger lumberjacks. And if an 
audience is sitting there, reproachfully expectant, once the Where From 
Question has been asked, then some kind of response probably should be 
forthcoming. I have known writers who routinely refuse to answer questions 
posed onstage, but unless they are genuinely being intruded upon this tends to 
mean they come across like a date who kisses your ear and then slaps you for 
letting him. Not answering the Where From Question can leave a lingering sense 
that perhaps the typist under scrutiny acquires ideas under the counter from 
seedy backstreet inspiration dens, or cheaply from abroad, where they are bred 
in conditions involving cruelty and inadequate hygiene. And then there's the 
ideas-provided-by-Satan-at-the-cost-of-my-mortal-soul option.

Am I happy about answering the Where From Question myself? Not hugely. This is 
partly because the area, though ill-defined, is hedged about with superstition: 
if I look at it too closely will it disappear? And it's partly because my 
answer will occur in a wider context which renders it absurd. I don't think 
it's any coincidence that the demonic bargain scenario began to lose currency 
just as authors lost their allotted role as people who performed (albeit minor) 
acts of creation and invention. It once seemed likely that human beings who 
could make something out of nothing were divinely inspired, or rattled by 
demons, or somehow Connected. This could make priests of poets – which isn't 
healthy for anyone – but it also gave respect to the craft and opened the 
possibility that imagining and creating might be human as well as divine.

Then literary criticism remade the writer as a kind of self-obsessed 
photocopier: regurgitating cheap repros of reality, pinching bits of friends, 
lovers and acquaintances, then sewing them together and sending the monstrous 
results off to populate unsurprising little worlds. Fiction became 
autobiography. Or Commentary. Or Essay. Which is to say, not fiction at all: 
not powerful, mysterious, wonderful and overwhelming, but something that can be 
fitted neatly into a PhD essay, or a review of the type which suggests the 
reviewer is privy to certain intimate facts about the character and 
circumstances of the author without which the reader will be lost. If the 
reader would be lost without those facts, of course, the piece of writing 
wouldn't work. Writing is about communication, not which parties you attend.

So now the tail wags the dog. Readers who love all kinds of fiction – 
including the most fantastic of fantasies – have to shut up about their 
passions for fear of being considered silly. Writers who spend their lives 
chasing ghosts, angels, demons, syllables and the shapes of things unknown 
aren't allowed to articulate how disturbing and fantastic and marvellous this 
process is. Meanwhile, the essays and the reviews flourish in the context they 
have constructed. It is very largely a dead context. It is a context many fine 
academics loathe. It is a context within which every mind is dreamless, has no 
whims, no thoughts of the past beyond accurate accounting, no hopes for the 
future, no intuitions about the present and above all no inspiration.

Inspiration originally referred, as you will know, to the idea of being filled 
with divine spirit <http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=inspiration>, some 
kind of transforming, burning Otherness, the sense of having an idea, a 
thought, a need, breathed straight into your lungs. I don't, as a writer and as 
a reader, ever want writers or readers to be locked away from the power and the 
beauty of that. Any individual might interpret it differently, but its absence 
would always be no fun at all. Its denial would be emotionally, psychologically 
and even morally debilitating. I'm not saying that creation is always Good – 
it's patently not. But without it, we can get very short on remedies for Bad 
very quickly and the stories we tell ourselves shrink around us and reduce what 
we feel we can be.

To return to Q&As, there is now, quite naturally, an expectation that the 
Where From Question will be answered with something that refers to the author's 
personality and life, to people from whom he or she has stolen this or that, to 
a type of plagiarism from reality. This would, apart from anything else, be 
crushingly simplistic. Yes, the story does come through the author and is of 
the author. A tale of a murderous baker with one eye, as expressed byJohn 
Banville 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/5907/the-art-of-fiction-no-200-john-banville>
, might not at all resemble that expressed byRichard Curtis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdzH6a-XEGM>. The work will reflect the 
passions of the writer – it's unlikely that an author will commit to a novel 
about philately unless it really is something they want to be around for 
months. Then again, if an idea arrives and is insistent and involves stamp 
collecting then an enthusiasm for the sticky little buggers must be cultivated, 
because fantasy must be given the certainty of lived experience. The author's 
beliefs probably won't be transgressed – it's unlikely that I'll write about a 
woman who's scared of mice and wants only to cook for Her Man. And yet … if one 
arrived to be expressed I'd have to. The process of personal commitment, 
exploration, loss, surprise and puzzlement fluctuates and coheres. Initial 
ideas are shaped and reshaped, sometimes consciously, sometimes – once again – 
in a rush of pressure which can seem external.

I have no meaningful idea where my characters are from. Beyond those authors 
who are working through serious relationship issues via prose, I have never met 
anyone who could be particularly clear about the roots of characters without 
also becoming quite vague. We all have our ways of developing character but 
their sources remain blurry. I feel characters and their worlds are also 
potentially as engaging and visceral as your childhood's monsters, 
companionable toys and landscapes of adventure.

And this is where I'm supposed to deliver something technical which will 
deliver your worlds and your characters to you. But how can I? The good news 
is, that's what you do. It's also the bad news, but not really – if we simply 
decide to be open to whatever might arrive, this will ensure that something 
does. No theft or patchwork necessary. Each piece of each piece will be 
bespoke, grown to fit its place and no other. And the joy of making something 
of nothing will be real. Along with – undoubtedly – its uncertainty and its 
fears. When I hear, "Yes but … he must have been based on someone …" I am 
listening to someone afraid of letting go and seeing what will happen, someone 
afraid of making things up, of something simple, childish, immeasurably 
influential and a gift. We are dealing with belief here: scary, exposing, 
generous, extraordinary belief – if you like, professional belief. If you 
believe your material is there for you, it will be. You have another option, 
but why take it? Letting what you need come and find you isn't easy, but it is 
lovely. Onwards.
 