
One rarely hears: “Oh, how I love a green salad – so cosy and homely.” And 
yet, to me, it is. Not that I come from a particularly salad-savvy home. The 
only salads I knew growing up were made from crisp, dependable, uber-American 
iceberg lettuce and bottled “Italian” or “French” dressing.

But I did have an aunt who made a very good green salad with a variety of 
lettuces, finely sliced radish and cucumber. She mixed everything by feel, 
adding just the right amount of vinegar and oil, a pinch of kosher salt and a 
little garlic powder. Watching her prepare this was a lesson in how to cook. I 
always looked forward to her salad.

One of my first restaurant jobs at a summer resort was washing several days’ 
worth of salad greens. My morning drill involved chopping mountains of 
lettuces, and soaking them, along with some shredded carrots and slivered 
purple cabbage, in a mysterious solution meant to keep the lot from oxidising 
and the cut edges from turning brown. It was stored for days in giant bins in 
the fridge. My afternoons were spent producing gallons of blue cheese dressing, 
“Russian” dressing and vinaigrette. The poor customers got a pile of those 
chilly crisp greens on a plate topped with a large ladle of whichever dressing 
they desired – the polar opposite of a praiseworthy salad. Strangely, this 
industrial chore didn’t dampen my spirits. I’d go home and make a proper 
spinach salad for dinner.

During travels in France I became familiar with peppery roquette, the 
colourful young cut leaves called mesclun, and the beautiful, pale-green, curly 
heads of frisée (curly endive). And in Italy, I was introduced to chicory, from 
ruby-hued radicchio di Treviso to speckled yellow castelfranco. I learned to 
dress these slightly bitter greens assertively with a bit of garlic, anchovy, 
lemon juice and fruity olive oil.

It didn’t hurt that I ended up cooking at Chez Panisse, where salad is 
revered, thanks to Alice Waters’ unbridled and contagious enthusiasm for all 
things perfectly fresh and green. There I honed my salad skills further, for 
ever spoiled by organic ingredients straight from the farm.

Nadiya Hussain’s cod and clementine recipe | A taste of home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/04/nadiya-hussain-bake-off-interview-cod-clementine-curry-recipe>
Nowadays, when shopping for salad greens, I try to emulate that just-picked 
feeling, choosing lettuces as if harvesting them from a well-tended garden. At 
the market, I look for smallish lettuces and bunches of watercress, rocket or 
other spicy greens. Armed with a paring knife and a basin of cold water, it 
takes only a few minutes to customise a beautiful salad mixture. I’m not 
interested in a grab-and-go plastic pouch of too-tiny, too-tender leaves on the 
way to wilting. I’m talking about a bowl of perky mid-sized leaves dressed with 
utmost care, napped with a nuanced vinaigrette.

Salad, for me, is emblematic of good home cooking. When I dine at home, which 
is often, it’s a rare meal that doesn’t begin or end with a salad of green 
leaves. Nothing fancy – a roast chicken, a bottle of wine, some cheese. Or a 
quickly made simple dish of pasta.

If I’m away from home and travelling for an extended period, a fine green 
salad is what I miss most. On the road, salad opportunities dwindle. Restaurant 
salads can be lacklustre at best. The kitchen of a borrowed apartment or 
country cottage may not produce the salad of your dreams – though you can 
manage well enough with salt, olive oil and a squeeze of lemon, it’s true. 
Still, even after the most thrilling sojourn abroad, it is always a pleasure 
and comfort to return to my kitchen and the waiting well-used wooden salad bowl 
I know so intimately. The first real salad at home always feels luxurious and 
invigorating.

A proper green salad

Serves 2
400g (2 handfuls) vigorous mid-sized salad leaves (preferably a mixture of 
lettuce, curly endive and radicchio)
1 garlic clove, mashed to a paste with a pinch of salt
Juice of ½ a lemon
Salt and black pepper
Fruity extra virgin olive oil
1 small fennel bulb, thinly sliced
A few radishes, thinly sliced

1 Wash the greens: dunk the leaves in a large basin of cold water and give 
them a swish, then allow a few minutes for sand or dirt to fall to the bottom. 
Lift the greens from the bowl and shake or spin them dry, then lay them out 
between a couple of tea towels. Roll the towels into a cylinder, starting at 
one end and rolling like a carpet. Store in the fridge.

2 Prepare the dressing: put the garlic and lemon juice in a bowl. Season with 
a little salt and pepper, then whisk in 3 tbsp of olive oil. Taste and adjust – 
the dressing should be tart, but with the flavour of the olive oil at the fore.

3 Dress the salad: put the fennel and radishes in a wide salad bowl. Sprinkle 
with salt and pepper. Toss with half the dressing. Add the leaves and toss well 
to coat, then add the remaining dressing and toss again. Your hands make the 
best salad-tossing tools.

David Tanis is a food writer, author and columnist for the New York Times: 
davidtanis.com <http://davidtanis.com/about/>, @DavidTanisCooks 
<https://twitter.com/DavidTanisCooks> 
 