
What can a novel know about how its events appear from different points of 
view? In Bel Canto, the narrative easily slips into the minds of many 
characters. We get most access to the thoughts of four or five of those held 
hostage by guerrillas. We are taken as far as their childhood memories or their 
never-spoken feelings about their spouses. But we also get, fleetingly, the 
private reflections of others - of several characters whom we meet only once or 
twice (including some of the terrorists).

The novel can do this because, in effect, almost nothing is happening. If a 
plot were being unfolded, Patchett's shifting of point of view might well make 
us suspicious. We would always be wondering why we were being told how things 
looked to one character rather than another, wondering what was being 
concealed. But in the suspended animation of a siege, it is possible to drift 
from one consciousness to another without seeming to cheat.

When the English novel first developed, it offered two extreme choices of 
narrative point of view. On the one hand, there was the first-person account. 
The novels of Defoe are all fictional autobiographies: Robinson Crusoe and Moll 
Flanders tell their own stories and the reader can know no more or less than 
the character. On the other hand, Henry Fielding developed the "omniscient 
narrator" who could look down on his characters like a little god. Yet this 
meant that his characters were a little like chess pieces, their inner selves 
unrealised.

Thanks to the innovations of writers such as Jane Austen and Henry James, 
novelists now know ways of merging the two alternatives. A narrator of, say, an 
Anita Brookner novel invariably adopts the point of view of a leading character 
while remaining separate from him or her. Other novelists sometimes divide a 
novel up in some formal way between characters. Graham Swift's Last Orders and 
Julian Barnes's Talking It Over are like this.

It is more unusual to do as Patchett does and have a third-person narrator who 
moves in and out of the thoughts of different characters. A pioneer of this 
technique was George Eliot, who perfected it in Middlemarch. Though some are 
known deeper than others, Eliot takes us inside the minds of all her leading 
characters at one time or another. She makes fiction into a complex, testing 
effort of sympathy. A shift in point of view often forces us to understand a 
hitherto objectionable character. Sympathy is shown to be an effect of 
narrative point of view.

New versions of Eliot's technique became interesting to modernists. In 
Virginia Woolf's To the Lighthouse, the narrative moves at its own will between 
the interior worlds of its characters. In Eliot, people may have private 
motives and secret fears, yet they think in the same language as that in which 
they speak. In Woolf, the inner thoughts revealed by the narrative are 
stranger, often connected to what is said only by accident or association. 
Memorably, the opening of the novel tells us that Mr Ramsay's pessimism about 
the possibility of a trip to the lighthouse makes his young son silently want 
to kill him.

Patchett's characters think things at odds with their official selves, but in 
ways that offer them all as sympathetic. This is where the novelist's technique 
risks our disbelief. She wants to have access to their thoughts, but without 
any danger that she will uncover their thought-crimes. She wants the reader 
infallibly to be able to share their different points of view.

· John Mullan is senior lecturer in English at University College London. 

· Have your say about Bel Canto on the Guardian talkboards at 
booktalk.theguardian.com <http://booktalk.theguardian.com>
 