
In a country where lawyers are jailed for defending their clients (such as 
Nasrin Sotoudeh, who has got 11 years), photographers are arrested for taking 
photographs (such as Maryam Majd, still missing) and film-makers are sentenced 
to lengthy terms for making films (such as Jafar Panahi),Asghar Farhadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/asghar-farhadi> has proved able to make good 
films – and even obtain the government approval as well as international 
admiration after winning the Golden Bear at this year's Berlin film festival 
for A Separation.

A Separation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-separation> follows the story 
of Simin (Leila Hatami), who is seeking to leave her husband, Nader, because 
she wants to leave Iran for a better life. Nader, a traditionalist, wants to 
remain and care for his ill father. When Simin goes back to her parents, Nader 
hires a maid, Razieh (Sareh Bayat) to take care of the housework – this results 
in a cross-class clash after an incident that takes both families to a sharia 
court.

A Separation is also a bigger picture of the modern Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> with all its complexities and 
contradictions. Filmed in the aftermath of Iran's 2009 disputed election, which 
left dozens of Iranians dead and hundreds injured and imprisoned for protesting 
at what they called a "stolen" vote, the film is a unique insight into Iranian 
society that, at the time, was invisible because of media censorship.

Farhadi, who looks older than his 39 years, with his sparse hair and goatee, 
says that his film-making choices were not entirely governed by imposed 
limitations. "Don't be mistaken, it's not because of the restrictions that I 
have chosen this style. There is no privilege in restriction. In other words, I 
disagree with people who say restriction makes you more creative. I think 
that's a misleading slogan. I might have been more creative without them than 
with them."

How would it look like if it were to be made in a free society? "I would have 
had the same narrative, regardless of the atmosphere and the restrictions. This 
kind of film allows the audience to discover by himself/herself – I see that as 
a modern art; an art in which the artist doesn't look at its audience from a 
superior level and it does not impose its viewpoint on the viewer."

But Farhadi does accept that the society he has lived in has influenced him. 
The role of religion, the confrontation of tradition and modernity, the 
manipulation of lives by the authorities, and, most importantly, a sense of 
abnormal stress and frustration in Iran's everyday life are apparent in the 
film's bigger picture. He says, though, that A Separation "is attempting to 
give an honest picture of the situation of only a part of Iran's society today 
and not the whole of it".

As well as the confrontations between the characters, there is, according to 
Farhadi, another level: "self-confrontation". "The bigger confrontation is the 
one an individual has with itself. When we talk about self-confrontations, we 
are speaking about moral issues rather than social issues."

Despite everything, Farhadi still ran into trouble. Official permission for A 
Separation's production was briefly removed in 2010, after Farhadi's remarks in 
support of Panahi at the Iran Cinema Celebration. "I think that was a very 
honest wish and [the authorities'] behaviour was very strange," Farhadi says. 
After days of negotiations and support from other film-makers, he was told he 
could proceed with his film.

"More than anything else, I think today's world need more questions than 
answers," he says. In his films, Farhadi says he wants to offer his viewer 
questions. "I'm not hiding the answers away from my viewers, I simply don't 
know them.

"If you give an answer to your viewer, your film will simply finish in the 
movie theatre. But when you pose questions, your film actually begins after 
people watch it. In fact, your film will continue inside the viewer."

"The important thing is to think and give the viewer the opportunity to think. 
In Iran, more than anything else at the moment we need the audience to think."
 