
 Author: Raymond Chandler (1888-1959) was born in Chicago, but grew up in 
England after his parents divorced. After having some poetry published in this 
country, he returned to the US in 1912, seeing service in the first world war 
and working in a string of jobs. He lost his post as a book-keeper in 1932 as 
the Great Depression bit, and turned to writing full time, having his first 
mystery story published by Black Mask magazine in 1933. His first novel, The 
Big Sleep (1939), introduced the character of private detective Philip Marlowe, 
andThe Long Goodbye <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-long-goodbye>, 
published in 1953, was the sixth in the Marlowe series. In the meantime, 
Chandler had experienced life as a Hollywood scriptwriter - hired, among other 
things, to adapt James M Cain's Double Indemnity for Billy Wilder. (Wilder, 
notoriously, told him his script was "shit".) Playback (1958) was the last 
Marlowe novel, and Chandler died a year later.

 The story:  A drinking buddy of Marlowe's, Terry Lennox, heads off to Mexico, 
leaving behind his dead wife Sylvia, and then apparently commits suicide. While 
attempting to rebut police assumptions that Lennox murdered Sylvia, Marlowe is 
hired by Eileen Wade to locate her alcoholic novelist husband, Roger Wade. But 
Roger is soon found dead, and shortly afterwards Eileen turns up dead too. She 
confesses in a note to the murder of Sylvia Lennox (out of fury over Sylvia's 
affair with her husband) and the subsequent murder of Roger. Marlowe discovers 
that Eileen was also married to Terry Lennox before the war. Though the case is 
over, Lennox rematerialises in Marlowe's office, his appearance surgically 
remodelled.

 Film-makers:  Robert Altman (b1925) had a long career in TV before getting 
the chance to direct his first feature film, Countdown (1968), aged 43. (Studio 
head Jack Warner fired him during production.) But the unexpected success of 
M*A*S*H (1970) put Altman on the map. Altman hired one of his M*A*S*H leads, 
Elliott Gould, to play Marlowe, even though the producing studio, Universal, 
ordered Gould to undergo psychiatric tests, fearing he might be mentally 
unstable. The script was written by Leigh Brackett, who had worked on Howard 
Hawks' adaptation of The Big Sleep (1946) with William Faulkner.

 How book and film compare:  The film retain's Chandler's major characters, 
and the essence of their relationships, but refashions much of the narrative 
and almost all the novel's pungent detail - to the extent that Michael 
Billington called the film "a spit in the eye to a great writer". Most 
radically, Marlowe's entire persona is reinvented as a louche but unflappable 
weakling. He does, however, share the original Marlowe's stern moral code, 
shooting Terry Lennox dead in the final frames, when the extent of his 
culpability is made clear. The film makes Lennox out to be Sylvia's killer; 
Eileen does not commit suicide, but flees the US to be with him.

 Inspirations and influences:  The Bogartian gumshoe anti-hero was a key 
counterculture icon, and appeared in 1970s movies as varied as Play It Again, 
Sam (1972) and Chinatown (1974). Altman also inserted frequent homages to 
golden-age American cinema - from impressions of Hollywood actors by a minor 
character, to Marlowe's anachronistic 1930s Lincoln automobile. The Marlowe 
persona, as portrayed by Gould, has itself become the subject of homage, cited 
by the Coen brothers as the inspiration for the Dude in The Big Lebowski (1998).
 