
"Merry Christmas! Here's another gift-wrapped half-volley or long hop." That's 
what most of the England bowlers seemed to be saying to Matthew Hayden, Justin 
Langer and Steve Waugh on the first day at the MCG.

I know it is the season for giving rather than receiving but just how long can 
you dollop out mince pies and candy canes and have them gratefully dispatched 
to the boundary before the credit card runs dry? Of the 130 balls Matthew 
Hayden faced until his dismissal, only six would have hit the stumps.

Australia once again got off to an absolute flyer. The first 200 came almost 
without tremor, with barely a false stroke or play-and-miss before 3pm. Can 
someone please tell the bowlers that the target is the three skinny wooden 
poles at either end of the cut-and-rolled stretch?

Yet there is one bowler who should be praised and that is Steve Harmison. He 
could lay claim to be the single ray of starlight to find its way out of the 
black hole that has become the 2002-03 Ashes Tour, bowling yesterday at 94mph. 
He has shown on this tour that judgments made of his wariness of travel and 
indeed, on occasion, of the battle itself may have been near the mark in his 
previous life but, just like maturing adolescents, fast bowlers can grow up.

Harmison's time at the academy in Adelaide last southern summer was brushed 
with homesickness and tempered by a lifestyle unlike that of his native 
north-east. The life of an international cricketer involves a thick passport, a 
steely digestive tract and the ability to sleep on seven different mattresses a 
month, not mum's lamb roast, black pudding and the Chester-le Street video 
store.

Many pundits south of Darlington have not seen him bowl in the County 
Championship, because of injury or visa problems, yet the selectors saw promise 
in the tall, rangy frame and deployed him further afield. Pace and bounce are 
difficult traits to instil; they are generally natural attributes. Accuracy, 
persistence and tactics can be taught if the pupil is willing, and Harmison has 
been listening to someone in recent months when he hasn't been writing 
postcards home.

His debut against India was promising but hardly electrifying, yet he had the 
fire to torch the bellies of unwary bats. England could not succeed in 
Australia with dinky little medium-pace line-and-lengthers; it needed Gough, 
Jones and Harmison to shoulder the wheel and put nose to the grindstone. 
Gough's story is as unlikely as it is irresponsible, Jones in nine overs at the 
Gabba teased the gallery with pace and athleticism before undeserved tragedy 
struck - what could have been.

Harmison was pilloried at Lilac Hill, the tour's opening social game, for 
delivering a few wides. Surely every player needs the creases taken out after a 
long voyage; it's much the same as driving from Scarborough to 
Weston-super-Mare and being expected to bowl perfectly in the nets before a 
festival game.

Perhaps the defining point for Harmison on this tour came in the second Test 
at Adelaide when he lost his run-up. This is a blight that affects most bowlers 
at some time. I have seen Lillee stutter, Thomson shuffle and Botham balk. It 
happens. It can be embarrassing in front of 20,000 or so, especially when most 
are the enemy, but to the man's great credit he bowled through the episode. 
Under pressure he worked it out and got it right. He was a better bowler and a 
more confident soul for the experience.

The Australian batsmen do not let bowlers settle into a rhythm. The attack 
comes from the opening delivery and England have not been up to that initial 
challenge issued by Matthew Hayden and co. It is no easy task to bowl at this 
line-up and Harmison's statistics may not be flattering, but he is running in 
hard, taking some aggressive options and winning some minor battles.

His path to stardom in the world of fast bowling may be forged from the 
intense heat of this Ashes fire. There are many more steps to take on the 
journey but the strides are significant.

It would be fitting if he were to take four or five wickets in this Australian 
innings, just to give him the confidence in the scorebook that his progress at 
the crease deserves.
 