
There is a paradox at the heart of our politics today. Never has the need for 
politics to ­effect change been greater, but never has trust in politicians and 
the ­political process been at a lower ebb. People across Britain are still 
outraged by theexpenses crisis <http://www.guprod.gnl/politics/mps-expenses>, 
and by what they regard as a betrayal of trust by some of their elected 
representatives. Many of our citizens either do not vote at all or have been 
tempted by the fringes and the extremes. That is why I believe that the way we 
do politics needs to change. And it is why I believe now is the time to take 
action.

Since 1997, we have delivered devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland. We have provided a mayor for London. We have created the independent 
supreme court, and guaranteed individual liberties through the Human Rights 
Act. We have created an independent regulator for parliamentary standards. Next 
we are ending the outdated hereditary principle in the House of Lords. These 
are important changes of which progressives can be proud. But the cause of 
renewing our politics has been put back by the damage of the expenses scandal.

That is why I want to launch a rallying call for a new progressive politics. 
To be blunt, we need to give politics back to the people. We need the people to 
know it's their parliament, not ours. As part of this I believe it is time to 
look afresh at theelectoral system 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/politics/2010/feb/02/gordon-brown-electoral-reform>. Can 
we enhance the mandate of the constituency MP, as well as engaging people 
further in the choice they have at the ballot box?

I believe we can now build a progressive consensus in favour of change, so we 
will bring forward legislation to hold a referendum on moving to the 
alternative vote system, which should be held before the end of October 2011.

We must act now. I am determined to do everything I can to take on and 
persuade those who want to deny the people the chance to decide at a 
referendum, and I will build support across the Commons, the Lords and the 
country. This is about giving the people a choice, and it can unite those who 
believe in electoral reform with those who want to maintain a strong 
constituency link.

Second, I want us to address the question of a written constitution – an issue 
on which I am inviting all parties to work together in a spirit of partnership 
and patriotism. If we are to decide to have a written constitution, it would be 
fitting to complete it in time for the 800th anniversary of the signing of 
Magna Carta in Runnymede in 1215.

But it is not just about formal ­democracy, it is also about opening up 
government. Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the world wide web, has worked 
with us to open up more ­information to citizens: on health, ­education, crime 
and local communities. Citizens are using this information to develop websites 
that inform, enrich and enliven our democracy. It is truly direct democracy in 
action.

I am inviting the leaders of all parties to engage positively in these debates 
and back our constitutional reform and governance bill. So far the 
­Conservative leadership have offered soundbites about the price of chips in 
the ­Commons canteen, or proposed changes to ­parliament that would promote 
their party's interests. But every time they have been tested on the big issues 
of reform – from devolution to the future of the hereditary peers – the Tories 
have been found wanting.

Faith and trust in parliament has taken a severe knock in the past year, but I 
do not believe people have lost their appetite for politics, or for the change 
it can bring.

Let us work together so that ­politicians on all sides can ­reconnect with the 
people. For it is only by ­changing our politics that we make the changes to 
build Britain's future.
 