
Ah, it was bound to go pear-shaped, Best Beloveds – all major obstacles to our 
sweaty union had been tumbled away, all chaperones had been dodged, 
misdirected, or anaesthetised – finally, it was just me and the novel in the 
smallest, brownest London hotel room I have ever suffered. (And those of you 
who know London will realise that England's capital is heaving with minute, 
dun-coloured cells and establishments generous and imaginative only in their 
provision of misery with an added option of mild disease.) It was going to be a 
lovely weekend – possible cover designs had been emailed, an actual real-live 
contract had been signed (for some reason I had been finding it light and 
relieving not to sign a contract and simply to write) and a genuine coin of the 
realm advance had been received and banked. We were all set ... You're guessing 
there were tears long before bedtime? Well, of course.

It's always awkward: that first time when there's nothing in the way. You've 
been hoping, expecting, daydreaming, but now – here it is. Here you are – one 
half of a couple. Ish. You've dumped your bags and coat and suddenly an 
inviting tryst feels very like waiting alone with a stranger for something 
possibly awful to happen in a cramped space which includes an embarrassing bed. 
Perhaps you fumble around with a paragraph here and there and find that you're 
not in the mood – many of the words are in the wrong place and a bit, somehow, 
chilly.

You try turning on the telly, reclining gingerly against the too many pillows. 
(Why does everywhere have too many pillows? Even places with no sink and holes 
in the shower stall have too many pillows, when surely they could be investing 
their pillow money in mousetraps and bleach?) You mumble that maybe there'll be 
something on pay-per-view with some hot and heavy plotting or perhaps an 
achingly wide range of inspirational characterisation and credible psychology. 
It's not an ideal option, but perhaps it'll slap some ginger and mojo into your 
mood.

It doesn't – possibly because pay-per-view tends only to offer vampires, men 
who blow things up, young people with impossible skins intent upon falling in 
love and/or being murdered, and nurses/air hostesses/dancers with surprisingly 
repetitive personal lives. You abandon artificial stimulations and potter off 
to the tiny bathroom: perhaps a shower will relax you – if you can ignore the 
fact that there seems to be eyebrow hair everywhere. (Finding other people's 
pubic hair in bathroom areas is, naturally, unpleasant but somehow much less 
disturbing than finding what amounts to handfuls of eyebrow hair.) Meanwhile, 
your novel rests sullenly on the bed, peering at you as if you are the worst 
mistake it has ever made and it may throw up if you touch it.

Yes, the Dark Night Of The Soul had arrived. Well, Dark Night Number One – 
there are usually several. This one involved page 153 – all the other pages 
weren't helping, but 153 was especially off-putting – plus unwise 
accommodation, a hideously nervous stomach which was preventing me from eating 
and sleeping (two things I enjoy), a number of oncoming onerous tasks for 2011, 
a marked inability to focus when trying to read illuminated signs and the 
complete failure of EVERYONE to email or call as and when expected. No sleep, 
no food, novel-wrestling and radio silence from all manner of previously 
lovely, useful and important folk, left me surveying the ruins of my career 
within minutes, envisaging a sad and unremarked death up an alleyway in 
Streatham, my withered corpse later consumed by feral badgers. Before the day 
was out I was chewing my own ankles for relief.

I came home. I got an eye test. (I now need glasses – just a bit – for 
illuminated signs and, if it's small, the telly.) I went to the doctor and 
scored a prescription for stomach-pacifying medication.

EVERYONE got back in touch. I sat in my comfy chair and stared at page 153 
until it giggled and scampered up to stroke my brow in the manner which 
(unlikely though it may seem) I find irresistible.

This does not, of course, mean that all is well – or that page 153 is in any 
way readable. But at least my pages and I are trundling along once again, 
holding hands and looking at pictures of beach resorts where we would kill each 
other before the initial sunset's end.

And we are actually heading for foreign parts, Dear Readers. Should everything 
go to plan – and I needn't say that I anticipate it won't – then we will soon 
be aiming for the US and Canada. As my novel and I are both phobic about air 
transport this will involve a boat, a number of trains and then another boat – 
all spread out over a significant period. The cost of travelling this way means 
that my entire tour will only break even, but does also mean that my entire 
stomach won't combust, I won't become hysterically blind and I won't find 
myself unable to write even a postcard for the duration of my residence abroad, 
deafened as I would be by the internal monologue which – trust me, I've heard 
it before – runs as follows: "what's the point of typing anything if the wings 
are going to fall off as you try to get it home, or the tail fin is 
compromised, or the rudders get jammed, or there's clear air turbulence or a 
head-on collision or all of those other things you've studied on 'Air Crash 
Investigation'? Why would you bother when it's hard to write books and you 
could be concentrating on drawing up your will and being nice to toddlers and 
puppies in ways that mean your afterlife – should you get one – will be 
moderately comfy and not conducted in a small, brown hotel room, filled with 
eyebrow hair not your own and a vile-tempered novel?"

Which is where I came in. Except that – forgive us, Best Beloveds – me and the 
pages are currently not unhappy and, in fact, heading off at this point for a 
little time together where you can't follow. We have some issues to work out. 
Onwards.
 