
The old buffers within tennis are always banging on about changing the rules 
and, above all, reducing the size of rackets to cut down the power of the serve 
and allow the returners to do more with the ball. "The materials they use to 
make the rackets these days make them ridiculous. The game's too easy," spouted 
Martina Navratilova at this year's Australian Open.

Of course, it is not. Navratilova was a dominant force in the women's game 
during the 80s because she was physically, athletically and mentally superior 
to the majority of her rivals and such has been the case throughout the history 
of the sport. Hence the dominance of the Williams sisters and the superior 
strength in the men's game, because until recently the women have not worked as 
hard in the gym or on the practice courts.

But all that is changing. It is a constant game of catch-up, with new 
champions setting new standards. The Williamses have raised the bar 
considerably. The men's game is similar, with Lleyton Hewitt pushing back the 
bounds of fitness and speed.

But speed is a pejorative word among the old farts. "It all went wrong when 
they did away with wooden rackets," they wail. "There's no artistry any more."

Something similar was said about soccer but few will deny that football in the 
Premiership has reached a standard of excellence undreamed of a few years ago. 
The game has developed and got better and, if tennis can sometimes appear 
two-dimensional, with too much clump and not enough flick, then blame the 
coaches, not the technology or the players' fitness.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is at its best when there is 
a contrast of styles. The first-round match here between Serena Williams and 
Emilie Loit of France was a classic, because Loit, while not lacking in power, 
employed slice, cunning and variety to upset Williams and very nearly succeeded.

If tennis was to ban one shot for the overall benefit of the game, it would be 
the double-fisted backhand. This stroke, more than any other, has encouraged 
players - Hewitt included - to pummel away from the baseline and eschew the 
net. A one-handed backhand allows a player to move forward with heavy slice. 
This is all but impossible with two hands.

There has been talk within Australia's cricket academy that at some time in 
the future all players will be able to bat and bowl right- and left-handed. 
This would certainly open up new avenues in tennis but for the moment, to 
counter-balance the baseline dominance, coaches will have to devise new ways of 
getting their players into the service box.

The Williamses claimed a couple of years ago that phase two of their game was 
to get to the net more. This has not happened, the simple reason being that 
they have had no need to. But Loit dragged Serena into territory in which, for 
all her brilliance and dominance, she remains uncomfortable, and that is surely 
the way forward for her opponents - including Venus, who is a better volleyer 
than her younger sister.

Meantime, the game should be left to evolve on its own. The four grand slam 
events continue to attract huge crowds, and facilities get better, while the 
Davis Cup, despite significant under-promotion, remains a jewel. But there are 
too many subsidiary tournaments. It would be no bad thing if virtually the 
whole European indoor season were abolished, leaving a joint end-of-season 
men's and women's tournament in September after the US Open, followed by the 
Davis Cup final. Then the season would be over by mid-October at the latest.

That might shut up those players who whinge on about how the season is too 
long. The sensible ones - including Andre Agassi and the Williamses - have 
always cut the tournaments they play to a minimum. It is in every players' own 
hands but greed often holds sway, with the minor tournaments paying wads of 
appearance money.

So the next time you hear a top player claim to be hard done by, or too tired, 
remember they are all millionaires. And feel no pity.
 