
This two-part series in association with the Sydney Contemporary Art Fair will 
explore contemporary art in its many guises. You will develop an eye for 
contemporary art and learn to express your art opinion with confidence, insight 
and flair. Gallery visits and dinner party conversations will never be the same!

We have assembled some of Australia’s leading art curators, critics and 
experts to take you on this journey. First you will be introduced to the wide 
breadth of contemporary art by the Fair Director Barry Keldoulis and leading 
art consultant, Mark Hughes. This intimate tutorial will highlight art works, 
movements, neos and isms that all fall under the term contemporary art. Then 
after a guided tour of selected works as part of the Fair, you will be invited 
to debate and discuss the work with the Guardian’s art critic Andrew Frost, 
leading gallerist and consultant Melissa Loughan along with Barry Keldoulis and 
Mark Hughes.

This is your chance to hear a range of expert voices on the work highlighted 
but you will also be invited to join the debate, express yourself and ask any 
questions you may have. It is also a great way to be introduced to a wide range 
of contemporary art and hear directly from those involved in the making, buying 
and selling of art. You will also meet fellow art lovers.

All are welcome and in this friendly environment - any question is a good one! 

This course is for you if...

 * Anyone wishing to gain further insight into contemporary art 
 * Anyone interested in arts and culture in general, especially those who 
might feel intimidated by the traditional gallery space 
Course description

This Masterclass is for those who have an affinity with art and want to engage 
in art conversations with confidence, and for those who may want a refresher on 
current trends and developments.

Topics covered on the day include:

 * Thursday 3 September 7pm -9pm: an introduction to to contemporary art with 
Mark Hughes and Barry Keldoulis at QT Cinema Space 
 * Sunday 13 September 12pm – 2pm: tour of the Sydney Contemporary with Mark 
Hughes, Melissa Loughnan and Andrew Frost (in small groups)

 * Sunday 13 September 3 -4.30pm: panel discussion and q&a at Sydney 
Contemporary with Barry Keldoulis, Mark Hughes, Melissa Loughnan and Andrew 
Frost

This course will offer entry-level information to the curious art mind. You 
will leave this Masterclass with a new understanding of the contemporary art 
world, and maybe even some new friendships.


Tutor profile

Barry Keldoulis has more than three decades experience in contemporary art. 
After many years as Private Secretary and Chief of Staff to The Honorable Henry 
Geldzahler, Commissioner of Cultural Affairs for The City of New York, Barry 
returned to Sydney and worked in the museum and commercial gallery worlds. In 
2003 he opened his own gallery to fill a gap in opportunity for young artists 
to exhibit between artist-run spaces and the major commercial galleries. He 
chose the transitional City of Sydney neighbourhood of Chippendale, before 
moving the gallery to Waterloo. Artists from his stable are represented in all 
the state galleries and the National Gallery of Australia, and now exhibit in 
museums and private galleries around the globe.

Melissa Loughnan is an art consultant and public art project manager. She was 
the founding director of Utopian Slumps, which operated in Melbourne as a 
non-profit gallery from 2007 to 2009 and a commercial gallery from 2010 to 
2014. During its commercial operation the gallery participated in ten local and 
international art fairs, including Art Basel Hong Kong, Auckland Art Fair, Art 
Stage Singapore, Art Fair Tokyo and Art Forum Berlin. She is currently writing 
An A to Z of New Australian Art (working title) to be released by Thames and 
Hudson in 2016.

Mark Hughes is a leading Art Advisor with over two decades experience working 
in commercial galleries in Sydney and New York. Mark has represented artists 
from all over the globe and collaborated on exhibitions with many of the 
world’s leading museums including the Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney, 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, The Whitney Museum of American Art New 
York, Centre Pompidou Paris, and the Tate Gallery London.

Andrew Frost is an art critic, lecturer and broadcaster. Since 2007 he has 
written and presented a number of TV programs for the ABC on contemporary art 
and he is the author of the monograph The Boys published by Currency Press.

Book now

Details

Date: Thursday 3 September, 7pm-9pm and Sunday 13 September, 12pm-4.30pm
Times: Various times
Location: QT Cinema Space and Carriageworks, Eveleigh
Price: $120
Event capacity: 60
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in

To contact us, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/about-guardian-masterclasses-australia>
. Terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
.

Returns policy
Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course 
start date. Please see ourterms and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
 for more information on our refund policy.
 