
To say money will talk when it comes to tonight’s 2014 Australian Academy of 
Cinema and Television Arts awards would be an understatement. Since rebranding 
from the AFI Awards three years ago 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/movies/afi-looks-to-academy-awards-in-reinvention-20110628-1gp2j.html>
, the Aactas have awarded their Best Film prize to the highest-grossing 
Australian films in both 2011 and 2012.

With Baz Luhrmann’s The Great Gatsby nominated 14 times in 13 categories – you 
can see the nominations in full here 
<http://aacta.org/winners-nominees/3rd-aacta-awards.aspx> – and having already 
won six, plus a bonus award for its visual effects, this year appears to be 
headed the same way.

This is in spite of some truly compelling homegrown productions. Nominated in 
six categories,Ivan Sen’s Mystery Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/18/mystery-road-film-western-australia>
 is the underdog’s pick. The tense, socially conscious Outback noir looks like 
a world-class production, as convincing in its red-soil grittiness as Gatsby 
was in its entertainingly outrageous extravagance.

Sen directed, wrote, edited, scored, and shot the film with breathtaking 
flair, yet is unlikely to receive recognition for one of the country’s best 
films in years. Mystery Road made a fraction of what Gatsby did in cinemas, but 
was watched on ABC1 on Sunday night by over half a million people.

The Aactas even failed to nominate its Indigenous star, Aaron Pedersen, 
instead opting to nominate noted non-Australian Leonardo DiCaprio for best lead 
actor, as well as veteran Hugo Weaving in the same category for a 15-minute 
berth in three-hour omnibus The Turning.

DiCaprio and English co-star Carey Mulligan are eligible in the acting 
categories here because AACTA guidelines require only that they be chosen by 
the entrant, and that they be male or female, and human. While the films must 
be pursuant to the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997's outline of "significant 
Australian content", the actors themselves don't.

The nominations read in a way that betrays the Aacta's preference for star 
power, weaselling categories to fit in as many notables as possible, extending 
as far as their ludicrous International Aactas, held in Los Angeles, which 
exist solely as celebrity flypaper.

The Turning, adapted from the Tim Winton short story collection, is the film 
most likely to snatch victory from the jaws of Hollywood money. Directed by and 
starring an array of well-known Australians, the film once seemed like a sure 
winner, combining commercial success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/aug/16/break-through-film-australia-2013>
 and artistic flair. While the film isn’t wall-to-wall brilliant, it’s a unique 
showcase for up-and-coming Australian talent.

Among the other major nominees is the charming picture The Rocket, submitted 
to this year’s Academy Awards for best foreign language film. Unlike last 
year’s phenomenal Lore, The Rocket failed to be shortlisted, but has racked up 
nominations here for best film, director, and some fine performances – as with 
Gatsby, the non-Australian performers are eligible here– and technical credits 
in the tale of a Laotian family displaced by dam construction, from Australian 
writer/director Kim Mordaunt.

In 2011, smaller films scooped up awards alongside Red Dog, but 2012 saw The 
Sapphires sweep almost every category in which it was nominated. Part of the 
problem is how few Australian films are widely released in cinemas anymore; 
other nominees including Christos Tsiolkas adaptation Dead Europe, surfing 
chronicle Drift, and Indigenous drama Satellite Boy flashed in and out of 
theatres. You could blink and miss them. At what point do we demand that cinema 
chains meet Australian content quotas as commercial TV networks must?

Since rebranding from the AFIs in 2011, the Aactas have also given out awards 
for television – and the small screen has proven to be far more competitive. 
The drama nominees – Wentworth, Redfern Now, Offspring, and Serangoon Road – 
are all at least solid choices. The only repeat nominee is Redfern Now, a 
brilliant, vital series which would be more than deserving of the recognition.

In the comedy arena, expect a tight race between internationally acclaimed 
sitcom Please Like Me, class-clash comedy Upper Middle Bogan, and Australia’s 
finest satire in the form of Shaun Micallef’s Mad as Hell. Jane Campion’s Top 
of the Lake is already poised as the best telefeature, miniseries or short run 
series favourite after winning two technical awards yesterday.

The television nominees are far more egalitarian by nature of transmission, 
but the nominated shows have viewerships in the millions. The Aactas have quite 
starkly highlighted the disparity between audiences for the each medium; what 
is it going to take to mobilise the Australian public to support smaller 
Australian films 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/arts/film/box-office-takings-not-a-pretty-picture/story-e6frg8pf-1226807145683>
 in the way they now do Australian TV and music?

If The Great Gatsby is as successful in the major ceremony as it was at the 
technical awards, it’s hard to say what the point will have been. The best 
thing the Aactas can do is highlight underseen productions; helping raise the 
profiles of emerging talent and allowing them to become the Luhrmanns of 
tomorrow. Unfortunately, it seems likely they will have to remain in his shadow.

• The 3rd Aacta Awards will air on Network Ten on Thursday at 8.30pm. It will 
encore on Foxtel's Arena channel at 7.30pm on Saturday.
 