
There came a moment during last night’s Aacta awards ceremony where I found 
myself wondering, “Why are all these awards being handed out during theBaz 
Luhrmann <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baz-luhrmann> show?” Said moment 
came during the musical tribute to the director’s work, which felt redundant 
since the rest of the night was almost entirely about him anyway.

Luhrmann’s unfairly maligned, tangentially Australian The Great Gatsby took 
out every award it was nominated for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/aacta-awards-2014-baz-luhrmann-gatsby>
, except best lead actress (sorry, Carey Mulligan) which went to Rose Byrne for 
a magnetic seven-minute performance inThe Turning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2013/aug/05/the-turning-tim-winton-review>
, a film in which she was nowhere even close to being lead actress.

For Australian film, it was truly a night of oblivious purpose.

It is a somewhat embarrassing reflection of what’s important to our industry 
to see the significance of money and celebrity placed on the ceremony’s highest 
pedestal. With each passing award the glimmer of hope that someone without 
significant international cache would eke out a win against Baz’s glittery 
leviathan faded.

Seeing the Aacta proudly tweet of Luhrmann’s brief recognition of The Rocket 
star Sitthiphon Disamoe during an acceptance speech for best lead actor on 
Leonardo DiCaprio’s behalf, without any trace of self-awareness, was dismaying 
to say the least. What was worse was watching talents like Kim Mordaunt and 
Ivan Sen fight over scraps for best original screenplay; Mordaunt emerged 
victorious for The Rocket.

On the Aacta website <http://www.aacta.org/>, the industry organisation boasts 
proudly of the awards’ ability to “create new career opportunities for 
Australia’s best performers and practitioners”. It’s at this point I must 
wonder: exactly what do these industry members expect The Great Gatsby, Baz 
Luhrmann, and international movie stars Leonardo DiCaprio, Joel Edgerton and 
Rose Byrne to gain from winning what is perhaps mockingly referred to as the 
“Australian Oscar”? The answer can only be “nothing”.

These voters have to know that such an award is ultimately sentimental metal 
on a mantelpiece to these people. So why vote for them? Because voting for a 
film like The Great Gatsby is the easiest and most profitable option. It 
required the least effort to see, and has the added benefit of kicking a 
favoured goal for the Australian film industry. If they show how willing they 
are to shower international productions with marketable plaudits, it will 
potentially encourage more of said productions to head Down Under.

On this level it’s more difficult to be frustrated by Gatsby’s dominance. It’s 
fantastic to seeElizabeth Debicki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/elizabeth-debicki> win for her 
wonderful performance, which will hopefully help her break further into 
international roles. And far be it from me to begrudge the work of anyone who 
toiled on Gatsby – such jobs are few and far between in a difficult business. 
But the film is already a financial success. Isn’t that proof enough?

It’s a shame, too, that on the same night that the phenomenal Redfern Now took 
out a competitive best drama series award, Indigenous filmmaker Ivan Sen went 
unrewarded for his jaw-dropping work on Mystery Road. To watch(as you can on 
iView <http://www.abc.net.au/iview/#/series/80784805>) how eloquently his 
cinematography told tales of outback sorrow, how tensely minimalistic its 
climactic shootout is in its editing, and how smartly his script unfolds the 
unseen devastation wracking rural communities and realise that he went 
unrewarded for it is, frankly, mind-boggling.

Perhaps, then, Sen’s and others’ futures lie in Australian television, which 
went more diversely rewarded last night. TV seems to now be where audiences go 
for Australian productions. Josh Thomas’ winningly melancholic dramedy Please 
Like Me was named best television comedy, while Shaun Micallef and Claudia 
Karvan won for their lead performances in a comedy and drama respectively.

Other TV winners included Lachy Hulme and Luke Ford for their performances in 
Power Games: The Packer-Murdoch Story, the always excellent Kat Stewart in 
Offspring, Red Obsession for best documentary, and Jane Campion’s chilling 
miniseriesTop of the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-of-the-lake>. A hat, of course, 
must be doffed to Australian screen doyenne Jacki Weaver, who became the first 
actress to win the Raymond Longford award for life achievement.

So ends a year in Australian film and television which can be easily 
classified a double-edged sword.

With promising fare such as These Final Hours, Sundance hits The Babadook and 
52 Tuesdays, and David Michôd’s The Rover to come later in the year, as well as 
the beautiful Tracks hitting cinemas in March, there’s a good chance the 2015 
Aactas will be able to look inward rather than outward.

 