
It was more of a party than a football match at times as the Welsh public 
turned out to salute their heroes on a night when Chris Coleman’s side 
celebrated their qualification for next summer’sEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> finals with a 
victory that was nothing like as entertaining as Joe Ledley’s dancing after the 
final whistle in Bosnia-Herzegovina on Saturday.

For a while this was in danger of turning into something of an anti-climax as 
Wales, 72 hours after securing their place in France, huffed and puffed without 
success against anAndorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> side 
who had lost their previous 53 competitive matches and spent the day of the 
game strolling around a Sports Direct shop.

Holland miss out on Euro 2016 play-offs with defeat by Czech Republic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/13/holland-czech-republic-euro-2016-qualifiers-match-report>
The opening goal finally arrived, however, in the 51st minute when Aaron 
Ramsey was perfectly placed to sweep home a close-range, left-footed shot. From 
that point any concerns that Andorra – who are ranked 205th in the world – 
might dare to dampen the mood in the Welsh capital disappeared.

Gareth Bale, the inspiration and driving force behind this resurgent team, 
fittingly added the second with his 19th international goal to draw level with 
Craig Bellamy as the fifth-highestWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> scorer of all time. By that stage 
the home supporters had gone through their full repertoire of songs over and 
over again – brace yourself, France, because it is a lengthy list – and there 
was also a stirring rendition of Land of My Fathers.

In truth the singing, which started with Super Furry Animals performing on the 
pitch beforehand, was better than the football for long periods. Not that the 
scoreline, or the performance, was particularly important on an evening when 
the home fans were more interested in acknowledging the achievements of the 
manager and players.

The last time Wales qualified for a major tournament was in 1958 when Cliff 
Jones, Ivor Allchurch and John Charles took Wales to the quarter-finals of the 
World Cup. Few would have predicted that the current generation were going to 
write their names into the history books when they fell behind to Andorra in 
the opening game of this campaign.

Thirteen months on Coleman and his players were walking out on a red carpet 
after beating the same opponents. The stage was set in more ways than one after 
the final whistle as the Wales players were introduced to a sell-out crowd one 
by one. Coleman followed them to the centre of the pitch where champagne corks 
popped and the Zombie Nation soundtrack that has turned into a cult anthem for 
the Wales fans blasted out. “The support has been incredible,” Coleman said. 
“I’ve never seen anything like it playing and managing Wales. I’m so happy for 
them.”

Bale, without question, is the star turn. He has scored seven of his team’s 11 
qualification goals and the fact that he was still on the pitch at the end 
here, completing 90 minutes twice in the space of four days after only recently 
recovering from a calf injury, says everything about his commitment to his 
country.

“Gareth’s a world-beater,” Coleman said. “It’s not just his goals, it’s 
everything – his whole manner when he’s wearing a Welsh jersey; he loves it. 
He’s always part of the group and puts the team first.”

For Coleman and his players, the focus now turns to one, possibly two, 
international friendlies next month followed by December’s eagerly awaited draw 
forEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

Coleman used the word “fearless” to describe his players’ approach to the 
finals although he did admit he would prefer not to face one of the home 
nations.

While Wales proved in this campaign they are difficult to beat, this was 
another occasion that highlighted how breaking down opponents content to set 
deep does not come easily to a team that likes to play on the counter-attack.

Andorra, though, were finally breached when Ramsey converted from six yards 
and it was then left to Bale, with a shot that he almost scuffed into the 
corner, to finish off a memorable campaign.

“They’re broken down the barriers and they will be remembered now in history,” 
Coleman said.
 