
Abbey National welcomed the appointment of a Spanish banker at its helm today 
as Banco Santander Central Hispano outlined its plans for the banking giant.

Spain's largest bank said its finance director, Francisco Gomez-Roldan, would 
take over from Luqman Arnold as Abbey's chief executive from next month.

It also confirmed that Lord Burns would remain chairman, working with Mr 
Gomez-Roldan to lead Abbey into a new era of Spanish control.

The appointment - which is subject to the £9bn takeover by Santander gaining 
regulatory approval - marks the first time Abbey has had a foreign chief 
executive.

Mr Gomez-Roldan was appointed Santander's finance director in 2002, having 
joined the company two years earlier. He had previously held positions at Banca 
Catalana and then Grupo Argentaria, which was a consolidation of all of Spain's 
state-owned banks.

He said he was looking forward to moving to the UK and that he had been 
impressed by the quality of the Abbey team during the past two months.

"We have a big challenge ahead of us, but I am entirely confident that 
together we will realise the immense opportunity presented by combining the 
strengths of Abbey and Santander," he said.

Abbey had already announced that Mr Arnold would leave his role upon 
completion of the deal. He will continue to work with Santander as a senior 
adviser to the bank's chairman, Emilio Botin.

Lord Burns, who endured a rough ride from shareholders at its recent meeting 
to approve the deal, said Mr Gomez-Roldan's extensive experience would be 
invaluable in ensuring the smooth transition to new ownership.

Investors in Santander were poised to give the green light to the takeover 
today, leaving it subject only to approval from the Financial Services 
Authority.

Although no formal decision has been made, the FSA recently said it saw "no 
material impediments" to the takeover.

The deal will create the fourth largest bank in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the eighth largest in the 
world.
 