
Luqman Arnold, chief executive of Abbey National, is likely to walk away with 
£5.2m if the bank is sold to Banco Santander Central Hispano.

Mr Arnold, a former investment banker who joined Abbey two years ago, has 
options which are expected to make him a profit of £3.5m if the deal is 
completed and other performance criteria are met. He will also receive a £1.7m 
pay cheque for his future work: he has agreed to stay on until next June, but 
receives the £1.7m even if he leaves before that.

Details of his shares and pay deal are contained in the 400-page document 
which Abbey posted to its 1.8 million private investors last night. Each 
document is estimated to have cost about £5 to print and post, suggesting a 
total cost of £9m for the communication with shareholders, many of whom 
received their shares for free in 1989 when Abbey converted from a building 
society and the share price was 130p.

The Santander offer was worth 576p a share last night. The document, which 
urges shareholders to vote ahead of the extraordinary meeting on October 14, 
shows that the offer per share comprises one of the Spanish bank's shares and 
31p in cash.

Abbey investors who hold fewer than 2,000 shares can use a free dealing 
service to sell. If they decide to take the Santander shares and sell them 
later they will need to fill in tax documents in Spain. Abbey is in talks with 
the Spanish authorities about simplifying this process.

The cost of posting the document is included in the €178.75m (£120m) of 
administrative costs for the deal. It is made up of €75m - largely to cover 
investment bank and lawyers' fees - for Santander, and €13.75m to apply for a 
listing of the Spanish bank's shares in London, as well as €90m to be incurred 
by Abbey.

The document shows that Stephen Hester, Abbey's chief operating officer, who 
is leaving to become chief executive of property company British Land, has 
share options and other performance-related equity deals worth about £2m. The 
£500,000 of Abbey shares he bought when he joined in May 2002 have fallen in 
value by £50,000.

Mr Hester and Mr Arnold have worked to rebuild Abbey's credibility with the 
City after the previous management embarked on a disastrous foray into bond 
investments and life assurance which ate up capital.

They have recommended the Santander offer before the results of their efforts 
to rebrand as Abbey and focus on retail banking is known.

Abbey said the executives were receiving their contractual entitlement, while 
the precise value of the share and options deals will be known only once the 
deal is completed and if certain performance criteria are met.

The document was printed before HBOS told the City on Wednesday that it was 
not going to make a counteroffer, reducing the likelihood of a bidding war.

Mr Hester and Mr Arnold are the only executives whose departures have been 
announced.
 