
Spain's biggest bank is gearing up to take it over, but Abbey ational this 
week signalled that it shouldn't be written off just yet by launching a new 
savings account paying a table-topping 6.5% interest. The high street bank, 
which now styles itself as Abbey, is offering this best-buy rate - which beats 
pretty much everything else out there - to anyone aged over 16 who is willing 
to save a set amount every month for one year.

If you think that sounds familiar then you'd be right. Abbey's new Fixed Rate 
Monthly Saver account is almost identical to the Halifax's Regular Saver 
account, which was launched amid much publicity earlier this year and currently 
pays 6%.

Both accounts involve people paying in a certain amount each month for 12 
consecutive months, but in addition to having a slightly higher rate, the Abbey 
offering has a couple of tweaks that probably give it the edge. Abbey's attempt 
to get one over on its rival is intriguing when you bear in mind that until 
this week Halifax's parent group HBOS was considering launching a bid for the 
former building society, which is already the subject of a proposed takeover by 
Spain's Banco Santander Central Hispano.

So how does the new account work and what are the catches? Fixed Rate Monthly 
Saver is, as the name suggests, a regular savings account with a fixed rate of 
interest - 6.5% before tax (5.2% after tax for basic rate taxpayers) for one 
year. Its big promotional push starts this week. The account comes with a 
passbook and can be opened with a minimum deposit of £20 (maximum £500). Savers 
then need to make 11 consecutive fixed monthly payments of between £20 and £500.

You can choose how much you want to pay in but you can't change the amount 
from month to month, and payments must be made by standing order from your bank 
account. No monthly payments can be missed, and no withdrawals are allowed 
before the year is up. Abbey's account certainly beats the Halifax's when it 
comes to how much you can pay in - the Halifax account's minimum monthly 
payment is £25 and the maximum is £250. But the Halifax one has the advantage 
of allowing you to vary how much you put in from month to month depending on 
how well-off (or not) you're feeling.

With Abbey, at the end of the 12 months, the money transfers into an Abbey 
Monthly Saver account, which currently pays a pretty decent 5%. You are then 
free to withdraw your cash, move it somewhere else or leave it where it is. 
Interest is calculated daily and paid on the anniversary of the account opening 
date. So this is an account for people happy to commit to saving a regular 
amount each month, and who don't mind the fact that they can't access the money 
for a year.

Abbey says it is aimed at people who "want to earn a guaranteed high rate of 
interest but want the discipline of making fixed monthly payments, from as 
little as £20". However, as with the Halifax's account, there is a catch of 
sorts. If you put the maximum £6,000 into the Abbey account, you will at the 
end of the period receive gross interest totalling £199.99. What this means is 
that in the case of someone putting in the maximum £6,000 and getting £199.99 
interest, their money has, over the year, earned 3.3%. If you miss a payment or 
make a withdrawal on the Abbey account, there is a penalty of one month's loss 
of interest, and the account will automatically become a Monthly Saver account. 
At the end of the 12 months, you'll receive interest of 6.5% up until the last 
day of the month before the missed payment or withdrawal, no interest for the 
month of the missed payment or withdrawal, and the Monthly Saver rate for the 
rest of the term.

The new account is on sale for a "limited period" and people can apply in 
branches, over the phone or from the Abbey website (abbey.com 
<http://www.abbey.com>). A Halifax spokesman said of the new account: 
"Imitation is always the best form of flattery. These sorts of accounts get 
people into the habit of saving regularly."

The Derbyshire, Cheshire and Yorkshire building societies, paying 5.85%, 5.75% 
and 5.7% respectively, offer similar accounts.

· ING Direct wins our award for best savings account provider.

With one eye on the offer ...

This weekend will see a near-400-page blockbuster dropping through several 
hundred thousand letterboxes with an almighty thud. But sex and high intrigue 
will be in short supply because this hefty tome is the so-called "scheme 
document" giving full details of the proposed takeover of Abbey National by 
Spain's biggest bank, Banco Santander Central Hispano.

It's being mailed out to Abbey's 1.8 million small shareholders and should 
start arriving today. It contains acres of financial information relating to 
Abbey and Santander but will be accompanied by a shorter summary document which 
should answer most if not all of the questions likely to be asked by 
shareholders.

Santander is bidding more than £8bn for Abbey and this week's announcement 
that the Halifax's parent company HBOS is not launching a counter bid means the 
Spaniards' offer is the only one on the table.

It's a mainly shares-based deal. If approved, shareholders will get one share 
in the new, enlarged Santander group for every Abbey share they own, plus 31p a 
share in cash. Most of Abbey's small investors received 100 free shares valued 
at £1.30 each when it floated in 1989. Someone with 100 shares would therefore 
get 100 Santander shares plus £31 cash.

It means you'll hold shares in a foreign bank. But Santander plans to seek a 
secondary listing on the London stock exchange early next year, which means UK 
shareholders will be able to see the value of their shares in sterling.

Santander will pay dividends in sterling four times a year, and confirmed it 
will be setting up a free share-dealing facility so that people holding less 
than 2,000 shares can sell them without incurring charges and receive the 
proceeds in sterling.

Santander's UK shareholders can also expect some other perks too. Its Spanish 
small shareholders currently get discounts on everything from laser eye surgery 
(above) to wine, and the bank looks likely to offer similar benefits to British 
shareholders.

There are voting forms in the scheme document packs and you can have your say 
by post, or in person at the shareholder meeting being held at London's Wembley 
Conference Centre on October 14 at 11am. Provided it gets the go-ahead, the 
takeover would formally take effect in mid-November. A 75% majority of those 
shareholders voting is needed for the proposal to be approved.

· Abbey helpline: 0870 532 9430
 