
The new owners of Abbey National, Banco Santander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/santander> Central Hispano, yesterday 
appointed their own man to head up their £9.1bn acquisition and pledged not to 
close any of Abbey's 740 branches.

Santander said its own chief financial officer Francisco Gómez-Roldan will 
take over as the chief executive of Abbey, confounding recent speculation that 
a British executive would be slotted into the top spot. Current chairman Lord 
Burns, however, will continue to oversee the board.

News of the appointment came as the Spanish bank's shareholders approved the 
deal. Their vote follows a meeting of Abbey's shareholders last week. But while 
the Santander meeting was a rubber-stamping exercise, last week's Abbey meeting 
was an ill-tempered four-hour affair. Smaller shareholders barracked the Abbey 
board but the vote was carried by institutional investors.

A number of high profile City names had been placed in the frame to take the 
top job at Abbey. Laurel Powers-Freeling, former head of Marks & Spencer's 
financial services business, was rumoured to have been approached for the job.

But yesterday Santander chairman Emilio Botin explained: "On such an important 
deal, even if we had a real star player locally, we prefer our own star player."

He said the team behind the Mr Gómez-Roldan, 51, will be British "but that 
does not mean that there can't be a Spaniard leading it".

Mr Gómez-Roldan, who speaks good English and has developed a close working 
relationship with Santander's chief executive Alfredo Saenz, was previously 
head of Banco Español de Credito and Argentaria which the government privatised.

He helped revive the fortunes of Santander's retail banking unit Banesto by 
cutting costs and bringing in new technology. But Mr Botin yesterday pledged 
that there will not be any branch closures at Abbey.

"We are going to strengthen Abbey's business capabilities and enhance the 
quality and efficiency of its products and services. We will do all this 
without closing branches," he added.

Separately Santander said yesterday it is deciding what to do about its 
15-year alliance with Royal Bank of Scotland in light of the Abbey deal.

At yesterday's closing Santander price the Spanish bank's bid valued the UK's 
second largest mortgage lender at 612p per share. Abbey closed at 609.5p up 
0.5p.
 