
Angus Porter, the Abbey National director who played a crucial part in 
rebranding the high-street bank as Abbey, is leaving after 18 months.

He will receive a termination payment of nearly £1m as a result of Abbey's 
takeover by Banco Santander Central Hispano. Mr Porter, who was hired from BT 
with much fanfare as customer propositions director, is not being replaced 
directly.

Instead his job is being subsumed into a new role of marketing director to be 
filled by Graeme Hardie, who runs NatWest's 1,630-strong branch network.

Mr Hardie, who was parachuted in to run the NatWest branches after the Royal 
Bank of Scotland takeover, is also replacing Abbey director Mark Pain, whose 
resignation as sales director has already been announced.

Mr Pain is leaving in March after 16 years with the bank and will receive 
payment in lieu of his contract of about £650,000.

Mr Porter is expected to leave with a payment of £945,000 and is reportedly 
"seeking a new challenge outside of Abbey" in the summer of 2005. The bank said 
Mr Porter had agreed to stay on until 2005 "to ensure an orderly transition".

Mr Porter was a senior executive at BT before joining Abbey and taking part in 
the project to "turn banking on its head" and spruce up the high street bank. 
He also worked at Mars where he was responsible for rebranding Opal Fruits as 
Starbursts.

A date is yet to be set for his successor, Mr Hardie, to join Abbey, which is 
expected to launch an aggressive assault on high-street rivals under its new 
Spanish owners.

Abbey chief Francisco Gomez-Roldan said Mr Hardie's task was to "create a 
single focused division that will help accelerate our plans to turn Abbey 
around and to take the brand on to the next phase following the successful 
relaunch in September 2003".

The bank is looking for an outside candidate to run a life-insurance arm that 
will include Scottish Mutual and Scottish Provident.

At NatWest, Mr Hardie is being replaced by Paulette Rowe, a marketing 
director. NatWest has been trying to stand out from its rivals by not 
outsourcing jobs overseas and encouraging customers into its branch network.
 