
Abbey National's small investors tried to stall its planned £9bn takeover by 
Banco Santander <https://www.theguardian.com/business/santander> Central 
Hispano at an ill-tempered, four-hour shareholder meeting yesterday dominated 
by stinging criticism of the UK bank's board.

Abbey's executives eventually succeeded in winning the approval of its 
shareholders thanks to its institutional investors, most of whom cast their 
votes before the meeting began. The deal will now go ahead to create the 10th 
largest bank in the world.

One of the 900 private investors at the Wembley Conference Centre brought a 
halt to the proceedings by winning support for a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
Only proxy votes cast by major institutions and used by Abbey chairman Lord 
Burns to block the motion put by small investor Richard Pout prevented an 
embarrassing delay that might have derailed the takeover.

One investor mounted the stage to confront Lord Burns, who said "it's not the 
easiest thing in life to stand up in front of shareholders" who had repeatedly 
heckled him, called for his resignation and branded him a liar.

Within minutes of the start, the anger of private investors, many of whom 
received free shares when Abbey converted from a building society in 1989, 
surfaced. "The only people to benefit are the people sitting on the platform," 
one jeered.

The first shareholder to take the podium after Lord Burns spoke for more than 
half an hour and taunted the chairman, saying: "You can't shut me up." None of 
the 20 or so who followed offered any support for the board, many questioning 
the speed with which the deal was done and the price achieved.

Abbey investors are swapping each of their shares for one Santander share and 
31p in cash, which valued each Abbey share at 607p last night. Three years ago 
Lloyds TSB had offered £13 before its deal was blocked by the competition 
authorities. "We feel you are selling Abbey on the cheap and for a piece of 
paper which has no use to us," said one.

"It took me longer to sell my home than to sell this bank," said another, Mike 
Batchelor of Ruislip, who told the hall he had been surprised how vocal they - 
"the small people" - had been. In the end, though, he said, "the big people 
will be able to swing it their way".

Even so, the small investors mounted their rebellion, led by Mr Pout, a holder 
of 500 Abbey shares and a policy officer for the rail lobby group Railfuture. 
He was applauded after he conducted his own show of hands for his adjournment 
motion and only a handful of investors failed to raise their hands in support.

When Lord Burns overruled them with the proxy votes, one shouted: "We've lost 
our democracy."

Technically there were two votes at two meetings yesterday. One was to back 
the deal, which is structured as a scheme of arrangement, and required the 
backing of 50% by number and 75% of value by shareholders, and the other 
required a 75% majority by value.

Fewer than 300,000 of Abbey's 1.8 million investors voted by proxy. By number 
of shareholders who voted, 35% voted against the scheme but this translated to 
just 5.4% by value. The second vote won the support of 94% of shareholders by 
value.

The head of steam for Mr Pout's motion came from a Santander investor who told 
the hall about charges faced by the executives of the Spanish bank, including 
the chairman, Emilio Botín.

Mr Botín and some of his colleagues face trials in Spain for allegations of 
misappropriation over payoffs to former directors and for helping clients evade 
tax.

Mr Botín did not attend yesterday's meeting but Santander did send Juan 
Inciarte, the general manager who is leading the takeover.

One investor, who was dressed in a white floppy hat and dark glasses and had 
lamented that he would not be able to travel to Spain for the Banco Santander 
Central Hispano shareholder meetings, was told that he would be able to tune in 
through a webcast.
 