
The new Spanish owners of Abbey National will not be selling off its troubled 
life-insurance arm, despite speculation that they were keen to get rid of the 
costly operation.

In a restructuring of the high street bank - which includes the departure of 
Mark Pain, the customer sales director, and Yasmin Jetha, the IT director - 
Banco Santander Central Hispano said that it was forming a new division that 
would include the life-insurance arm.

Head-hunters have been appointed to hire an executive from outside the bank to 
run the division, which will include Abbey's two closed with-profits funds, 
Scottish Mutual and Scottish Provident. Abbey said: "This draws a line under 
the speculation that Abbey will be selling off its life operations."

About 3,000 Abbey employees who face redundancy as a result of the takeover 
have yet to be identified, but some are expected to come from the division run 
by Ms Jetha.

Less than two weeks after taking control of Abbey, Santander said Mr Pain, 43, 
had "decided to leave", while Ms Jetha, 52, had been made redundant as a result 
of the restructuring. Mr Pain will leave at the end of March after 16 years 
with Abbey, including a stint as finance director, and will receive payment in 
lieu of his contract of about £650,000. Abbey said his departure was not 
connected to the restructuring, but was because he wanted "to move on to 
something new".

Ms Jetha's redundancy is caused by the creation of a manufacturing division 
that will incorporate IT and will be run by an existing Abbey director, Tony 
Wyatt. She will leave at the end of the month with a redundancy payment of 
£400,000 for her 19 years of service.

Santander also revealed that a previous Abbey non-executive, Keith Woodley, 
would join Abbey's former chairman, Lord Burns, on the new board.

The new Abbey chief executive is the Santander banker, Francisco Gomez-Roldan, 
who said the restructuring was necessary to "accelerate Abbey's turnaround 
plan".

"Abbey has the potential to be one of the most efficient and profitable banks 
in the UK, and the new structure is a decisive first step towards achieving 
that goal," he said.

Juan Inciarte, the Santander executive who spearheaded the takeover, is 
joining the new board in a non-executive capacity.
 