
Santander today raised the prospect of further job cuts at Abbey, the British 
bank it acquired in an £8bn deal last year.

However, the Spanish bank said the cuts would not be on the same scale as 
those imposed earlier this year.

"Abbey will continue to review headcount against the needs of the business and 
our future plans ... with further job cuts expected, though not of the 
magnitude experienced in 2005," it said in a statement.

Santander bought Abbey last November, and 4,000 jobs are slated to go by the 
end of this year. The UK bank, which is looking to make cost savings of £300m 
by the end of 2007, is already on course to make £200m in savings by the end of 
2005.

The Abbey National Group Union expressed concern at the prospect of more job 
cuts, and said it would meet bank officials next week.

"We feel disappointed because our members have already gone through the trauma 
of 4,000 of their colleagues going, and we believed there would be no more," 
the union's general secretary, Linda Rolph, said.

Analysts believe a total of 6,500 jobs could eventually go - around a quarter 
of Abbey's workforce.

The bank says it will transform itself over the next three years by shifting 
its historical focus from mortgages and savings to a full retail bank, and aims 
to challenge Britain's big four high street banks - HSBC, Barclays, NatWest and 
Lloyds TSB.

Asked whether any other European acquisitions were on the cards, the Santander 
chairman, Emilio Botin, said: "We have a clear strategy in Europe.

"For the moment, we want to grow the business internally and to put Abbey on a 
firmer footing. That's enough work for the next three years."

Santander said it aimed to grow Abbey's revenue by 5-10% annually over the 
next three years.

Abbey's current level of sales productivity ranges from 15% to 35% below the 
average of its peers, and is significantly lower than its most efficient rivals.

The bank contributed €492m (£333.5m) to Santander's profits in the nine months 
to September 30, and said gross mortgage lending had totalled £8.1bn between 
July and September - up 21% on the previous three months.

Unsecured personal loans rose 31% in the third quarter compared with the 
previous three months.

Santander's acquisition of Abbey was Europe's first big cross-border buyout. 
Santander had been keen to enter the UK market as a way to offset risks in the 
more volatile Latin American market.

Abbey intends to push aggressively into areas such as current accounts, 
unsecured loans, investments and pensions, in which it is under-represented.

"Abbey is a natural competitor to the big four clearing banks, and it will 
attack in the areas where it is has significant opportunities to grow and take 
market share," the company statement said.
 