
Abbey National has been fined £800,000 today for mishandling mortgage 
endowment complaints and for providing inaccurate and potentially misleading 
information to the financial services watchdog.

The Financial Services Authority handed down the fine, following an 
investigation into the bank's handling of complaints from its mortgage 
endowment customers.

Between January 1 2001 and December 31 2004, Abbey received approximately 
65,000 mortgage endowment complaints. Between October 1 2001 and September 30 
2003 - the period investigated by the regulator - the bank received 37,453 
mortgage endowment complaints and, of the 20,044 cases it made a final decision 
on, 18,593 - nearly 93% - were rejected.

The FSA found that it had mishandled around 5,000 complaints, including 3,500 
that were rejected when they should have been upheld. Based on industry 
averages, losses of up to £19m may have been caused to the customers involved.

Abbey has admitted that similar failings were likely during the rest of the 
four-year period in question.

The bank was also found to have misled the regulator in letters it wrote in 
April and May 2002. In these, Abbey claimed that it was already applying advice 
on the proper handling of mortgage endowment complaints outlined by the FSA's 
managing director at the time, John Tiner.

In fact, the FSA found that the firm had not properly applied three of the 
principles raised in Mr Tiner's letter. It said that Abbey's conduct fell well 
below the standards it would expect of an authorised firm's communications with 
the regulator.

However, Abbey managed to escape a higher fine by cooperating with the FSA's 
investigation and committing to a review of all mortgage endowment complaints 
rejected since January 1 2000. It will pay compensation where appropriate and 
has launched a complete overhaul of its complaints handling procedures.

Clive Briault, the FSA's director of retail markets, said: "By putting its own 
interests ahead of those of its customers with a mortgage endowment complaint, 
Abbey has singularly failed to treat its customers fairly."

"Abbey would certainly have been in line for a far higher fine had its new 
owners not acted immediately to ensure that no customers would face loss as a 
result of its mishandling of complaints. By agreeing to review complaints it 
has rejected, and by committing to revise its entire complaints handling 
procedures, Abbey has taken positive steps to prevent its past mistakes in this 
area being repeated in the future."

Abbey will review all complaints made between January 1 2000 and May 25 2005 
about policies it sold and advised on, with the exception of any cases that 
have gone to the Financial Ombudsman. The total number of cases being 
re-examined is around 50,000.

The bank will write to those customers affected by June 22 2005, and expects 
to have completed the review by the end of the year.

Consumer group Which? welcomed the FSA's ruling, but said its findings raised 
questions about how other providers have handled endowment complaints.

Louise Hanson, head of campaigns at Which?, said: "We fully expect Abbey to 
learn from its mistakes and its new owners now have an opportunity to ensure 
its systems are more focused on its customers in future. However, if a bank the 
size of Abbey has failed to handle complaints in a fair way then it leads you 
to question the record of other major players.

"Which? is also concerned that it has taken the FSA so long for them to name 
and shame bad practice that goes back as far as 2001 and possibly even further."

Abbey is not the first endowment provider to be fined by the FSA. Friends 
Provident Life and Pensions was fined £675,000 in December 2003 for failures in 
its procedures which led to the mishandling of mortgage endowment complaints, 
and in March 2004, the FSA fined Allied Dunbar Assurance plc £725,000 for 
serious flaws contained in its procedures for handling mortgage endowment 
complaints.
 