
The managing director of the ABC, Michelle Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-guthrie>, has issued a rallying cry 
to women urging them to reject sexist questions in the workplace and to lobby 
their bosses for pay equal to their male counterparts.

Speaking at the Telstra Australian Business Women’s awards in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> on Tuesday night, 
Guthrie shared her own experiences of being underpaid and overlooked in 
workplaces, despite her credentials.

Workplaces that consider themselves meritocracies 'often hide gender biases'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/workplaces-that-consider-themselves-meritocracies-often-hide-gender-biases>
She said her experiences echoed those of many women in the workplace and said 
it was why the US election result, which saw Republican Donald Trump elevated 
to the presidency, had been “a bruising experience for women everywhere”.

“Are we really going to ignore what this might mean for women everywhere on 
the basis we apparently don’t understand what this election is really about?” 
she asked the room, which included chief executive officers, professors and 
entrepreneurs.

“Of course not. And so the question becomes, what do we tell our daughters and 
sons?”

Guthrie continued that she had thought a lot about the legacy she would leave 
her own children, both as a parent and the head of the ABC. When she was 
interviewed for the position by the ABC board last year, Guthrie said she made 
a point of saying that a “critical reason” for her wanting the job was the 
importance of ensuring there was a public broadcaster for her children and 
grandchildren.

“It is important that we make a difference in our workplaces for our daughters 
and our sons,” she said.

She described how when she became the managing director of Star TV in Hong 
Kong, she was “stunned at the rush of male executives to form a queue outside 
my office to brazenly ask for a pay rise”.

ABC loses first executive of Michelle Guthrie's reign, as Angela Clark quits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/05/abc-loses-first-executive-michelle-guthrie-reign-angela-clark-quits>
“Some of them had just signed new contracts,” she said. “Women aren’t raised 
to show such audacity, to make such demands, they aren’t told to build yourself 
up and display such sheer confidence and audacity, to take advantage of the 
leverage of a new CEO.”

Guthrie said she later found out that at the time she took the Star TV 
executive role, she was the lowest-paid member of her team.

 “Some will interpret what I am saying tonight as a whinge,” she said. “Well, 
given my boardroom experience here and overseas, I am eminently qualified to 
speak on the subject. When I consider my own career and the professional 
experiences that have shaped me, I often remember the things no man is asked as 
he forges his own career. Have you had children yet? Will you have children? 
Will you be able to maintain a full-time and demanding role while also managing 
a family?”

ABC head Michelle Guthrie plays curly questions with a straight bat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/18/abc-head-michelle-guthrie-plays-curly-questions-with-a-straight-bat>
She added that when hardworking women did stand up for themselves, they were 
often dismissed as “difficult”.

Guthrie concluded by telling the audience that work and leadership was most 
effective, and children and society flourished, when there was a balance of men 
and women. Steps could be taken towards this, she told them, by demanding an 
equal relationship, equal child rearing expectations, and equal access to 
flexible work practices.

“Don’t feel beaten by the US election result,” she said. “Feel empowered 
instead, use the feeling to fuel your ambition. Demand equal pay to the guy 
next to you, and speak up when a female colleague deserves a promotion. And 
above all tell each other as often as you can – go for it and don’t let anyone 
stand in your way.”
 