
Libyans expressed relief rather than sadness on Sunday at the news of the 
death of the convicted Lockerbie bomberAbdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>.

The state news channel Libya Hora (Libya Free) broadcast a brief news item on 
the death, and the country's ruling National Transitional Council said it 
remained committed to uncovering the truth behind the Lockerbie bombing.

"We would have liked to uncover more truths but his death will not shut the 
Lockerbie file," the NTC spokesman Mohamed al-Harizy told Reuters. "The Libyan 
government will continue to investigate."

Libya's authorities have yet to start any public investigation into the 
Lockerbie attack, with diplomats predicting that no such case will be opened at 
least until a new government takes office after elections in June.

In the streets around Megrahi's home in Tripoli's upmarket Hai Damascu 
neighbourhood, many said his death was a reminder of an era they preferred to 
forget.

"All Libyans know his face, and we know that he put us back maybe 10 years," 
said Arfa Mohamed, a 25-year-old bearded cashier at a nearby fast-food shop. 
"Thanks to him it gave the outside world a view of Libyans as terrorists."

At the house itself, a cordon of male family members stood around the large 
entrance gate, keeping journalists away. "We are sorry, but we want to be 
alone," said Abdul Salem, Megrahi's nephew. "He is an innocent man. We want to 
have peace, we don't want to let journalists near to the house."

For ordinary Libyans, Megrahi's position as a security official with the 
Gaddafi administration, and the expensive villa he was given, marked him out as 
part of the hated former regime.

"Was he innocent or guilty? Only God can know," said Mohammed Ferake, in a 
hardware store close to Megrahi's villa. "I never saw him, his family never 
shopped here. The [Lockerbie] case did not helpLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>."

The international sanctions that plunged the country into isolation after the 
Lockerbie bombing were keenly felt. "After that, Libya was given a bad name 
around the world. Because of that, all that Libyans were known for was Gaddafi 
and his oppression," said Ferake.

Megrahi's death comes amid diplomat deadlock over the NTC's refusal to allow 
British police officers to visit Libya to investigate Lockerbie.

It also touches on the sensitive subject of the prevalence of former regime 
officials in Libya's new transitional authorities. The Gaddafi-era security 
apparatus was destroyed in last year's unrest, but much of the administration 
remains intact, albeit under new leaders.

Opposition figures in Benghazi, Libya's second city, said local elections held 
over the weekend would produce a city council that could act as an alternative 
administration if, as some predict, the national elections due on 19 June were 
not transparent.
 