
Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
, the Libyan intelligence officer convicted of the Lockerbie bombing and 
released from prison in Scotland amid a storm of international controversy in 
August 2009, has died aged 60 of cancer. He protested his innocence to the end. 
His death is likely to leave unresolved many doubts about the case with which 
he will always be associated: the murder of 270 people on board Pan Am flight 
103 and on the ground in the Scottish Lowland town on 21 December 1988.

Megrahi was born in Tripoli into the Magarha tribe, one of Libya's largest, a 
few months after the country's independence. Following the collapse of Italian 
rule during the second world war, it had been administered under UN trusteeship 
by Britain and France. He was a teenager in 1969 whenMuammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/colonel-muammar-gaddafi> and his 
fellow "free officers" seized power and deposed the prowestern monarchy. 
Magarha occupied key positions within the regime – one reason why, throughout 
Megrahi's imprisonment in Scotland, there was domestic pressure, even in a 
dictatorship, to free a man most of his countrymen considered the victim of a 
miscarriage of justice.

Little is known of Megrahi's early years, but he was clearly privileged, as 
shown by his education in both the US and UK in the 1970s. In November 1991, 
when he was indicted for the Pan Am bombing along with Lamin Khalifa Fhimah, 
Megrahi was head of security for Libyan Arab Airlines (LAA) and director of the 
Centre for Strategic Studies in Tripoli. His position was said to give him 
regular access to Malta, where it was alleged he planted the briefcase bomb 
that destroyed the Pan Am flight. He used several false passports.

British and American law-enforcement agencies identified him as an officer of 
the Libyan intelligence services, a claim he denied but which was accepted by 
the judges at his trial. In US eyes, Megrahi was "a well-connected senior 
Libyan intelligence official" with extensive experience in civil aviation, 
cargo movements and small business operations. He was said to work with his 
cousin, Said Rashid Kisha, "the leading architect and implementer of Libya's 
terrorist policies and a powerful member of Libya's inner circle".

In an interview at the time of his indictment, Megrahi protested his innocence 
and expressed sympathy for the people of Lockerbie. "I'm a quiet man," he said. 
"I never had any problems with anybody." Later, however, he admitted that as an 
intelligence officer his LAA job was a cover for buying spares to keep the 
fleet airborne in the face of US and other sanctions; but he was no terrorist, 
he insisted.

From late 1991, as Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> faced a 
wider UN embargo for refusing to surrender the two Lockerbie indictees, Megrahi 
spent eight years living under armed guard, relying on a state pension and work 
as a teacher. He was finally handed over for trial, with Fhimah, to a specially 
constituted Scottish court, with three judges but no jury, at Camp Zeist in the 
Netherlands. Hearings began in May 2000, 11 years after the Lockerbie atrocity. 
Megrahi, dressed in traditional white robes, denied the charges – but, 
crucially, declined to give evidence. In January 2001, he was convicted of 270 
counts of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. Fhimah was acquitted.

Though both men were tried as individuals, they were charged with conspiracy 
"to further the purposes of the Libyan intelligence services". And the Libyan 
government, ending its long period as an international pariah, later paid out 
$2.7bn in compensation to families of the Lockerbie victims and "accepted 
responsibility for the actions of its officials" – language that came close to, 
but fell just short, of admitting it had carried out the bombing. Considering 
the nature and role of the Libyan security services, Megrahi is unlikely 
to have acted without higher approval.

Still, many continued to believe that Iran or Syria were behind the crime, and 
that the Gaddafi regime had been "framed" for political reasons. Critics also 
argued that vital prosecution evidence, including the identification of Megrahi 
by a key Maltese witness, was flawed.

Sent first to Glasgow's Barlinnie prison, Megrahi was later moved to Greenock 
prison, where as prisoner number 55725 he behaved in an "exemplary" manner. His 
wife, Aisha, and children moved toScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, with Libyan government help, to be 
near him. A Libyan consulate was established in Glasgow to provide support. His 
first appeal against conviction was rejected in 2002, when he was reported to 
be at risk of suicide. In 2007, he was granted leave for a second appeal on the 
recommendation of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission. But the 
following year, he was diagnosed as suffering from terminal prostate cancer. 
That triggered the intervention by the Libyan government, which warned of the 
negative consequences of his death in prison, and urged his release, either 
under a prisoner-transfer agreement or on compassionate grounds.

In 2009, Megrahi was freed by Scottish ministers on compassionate grounds amid 
accusations that the decision was part of a shady "deal" in exchange for 
contracts for British companies. Megrahi said he shared the frustration of 
Lockerbie victims' relatives that he had been forced to drop his appeal, which 
had raised substantial questions about the trial and the quality of the 
evidence against him. After his release he published extracts from his appeal 
submission on the internet (www.megrahimystory.net/ 
<http://www.megrahimystory.net/>). Scotland's lord advocate at the time, Elish 
Angiolini, strongly criticised the "selective publication" of his view of the 
evidence.

"I cannot find words in my language or yours that give proper expression to 
the desolation I have felt," Megrahi said. "This horrible ordeal is not ended 
by my return to Libya. It may never end for me until I die. And I say in the 
clearest possible terms: all of this I have had to endure for something that I 
did not do." He added: "If there is justice in the UK I would be acquitted or 
the verdict would be quashed because it was unsafe. There was a miscarriage of 
justice."

As the Arab Spring spread revolution through the Middle East and North Africa, 
in July 2011 Libyan state television broadcast images of Megrahi at a rally in 
support of the beleaguered Gaddafi. When rebel forces took control of Tripoli, 
Megrahi was discovered in a villa to the north of the city, apparently close to 
death. The justice minister of the rebels' National Transitional Council, 
Mohammed al-Alagi, ruled out extraditing him to Britain, saying: "Megrahi has 
already been judged once and he will not be judged again."

Nonetheless, allegations persisted that vital evidence about the bombing had 
been suppressed. And in afinal interview last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/22/abdelbaset-al-megrahi-lockerbie> 
Megrahi again insisted that he was innocent.

He is survived by his wife and five children.

• Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, intelligence officer, born 1 April 1952; 
died 20 May 2012
 