
The reported death of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/20/abdelbaset-al-megrahi-lockerbie-bomber-dies?newsfeed=true>
 from cancer in Tripoli has made a lot of media people pull out their files. 
Megrahi was a former Libyan intelligence officer, and the only man convicted of 
responsibility for the Lockerbie disaster in which a bomb placed on a Pan-Am 
aircraft killed 270 people in 1988. He was released by the Scottish government 
on compassionate grounds in 2009.

I doubt, however, that many government people have pulled out their files – 
unless they are mainly concerned with the media. Megrahi's death was expected 
and probably changes nothing. We know that he was convicted by a Scottish court 
in 2001, and that his first appeal was rejected in 2002. His second appeal was 
abandoned, although the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Board had drawn 
attention to grounds for believing that there might have been a miscarriage of 
justice, inan 800-page report that has since exceptionally been published 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/home-news/lockerbie-exclusive-we-publish-the-report-that-could-have-cleared-megrahi.2012036248>
.

So why the media interest? First, this was a horrible crime. The families of 
the victims want justice. The demand for justice from those families that have 
gone public has taken two different forms. The American families believeLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and Megrahi to be guilty and were 
disgusted when he was released on compassionate grounds. The British families 
want the truth; some are not convinced of Libyan guilt, some firmly believe 
Megrahi to be innocent. The American families have been backed by American 
politicians up to the president, and oddly also by British politicians up to 
the prime minister, who has spoken of the distress caused by Megrahi's release, 
although no British families seem to have said that they were distressed.

Second, Megrahi's release raised some questions that have not been answered. 
For example, why did he abandon his appeal immediately before his release was 
announced? If one accepts at face value the Scottish government's insistence 
that the release of a dying man was simply a humanitarian decision, there is 
the embarrassment that he turned out not to be dying so quickly as doctors had 
predicted. If not, a complex of political factors may have been involved. It's 
a natural for the conspiracy theorist: Tony Blair in that tent with Gaddafi, 
intelligence cooperation, oil contracts, lack of cooperation or worse between 
the Labour government in London and the nationalist government in Edinburgh.

Finally there is the Libyan side of the story. Megrahi's return home in 2009, 
when he was welcomed by Gaddafi's son Saif al-Islam and a substantial crowd, 
has been described as a hero's welcome. I thought this was misleading. A real 
hero's welcome in Libya would have been something Gaddafi himself would not 
have missed. Not many Libyans know whether Megrahi or Libya were guilty but 
Megrahi was a Libyan from an important tribe and it is only natural that many 
people were simply happy that he was allowed to come home and die with his 
family. Asking the Libyans not to lay on a welcome for him was a prime example 
of a well-known diplomatic mistake: demanding that water should run uphill.

And what of the country after the revolution? Libyans are ready to believe 
that Gaddafi was guilty of all kinds of crimes, but that is not the same thing 
as evidence. Right now they have other things to think about. For the future 
this means local elections in Benghazi after 42 years of one-man rule, and 
national elections a month from now. For the past it means theAbu Salim prison 
massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/09/search-victims-tripoli-prison-massacre>
 in which 1,200 people were slaughtered, all of them Libyans. Lockerbie, 
dreadful as it was, is not top of their list.

Many Libyans will want to clear up Lockerbie if they can, and they will 
support us if we make reasonable requests for help in our investigations. No 
one can be sure, but my guess is that the truth will not be found. Only a few 
will have been in on any secret, and most of them are dead.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/uk-edition>
 