
Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <http:/www.guardian.co.uk/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>, 
the former Libyan intelligence officer convicted of the 1988Lockerbie bombing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/lockerbie> that killed 270 people, has died, his 
brother has said.

Abdelbaset's brother, Abdelnasser al-Megrahi, confirmed reports that he had 
died aged 60 after a long battle with cancer. Abdelnasser, who was at the house 
in Tripoli where his dead brother lay on Sunday, told the Guardian: "I don't 
want to talk right now, I am very upset, I don't really feel like talking. He's 
dead, that's it, what more do you have to know?"

In an interview with the Guardian earlier this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/aug/29/lockerbie-bomber-close-to-death>, 
Abdelnasser said that his brother, who had moved to the secret address from his 
large home in Tripoli, was innocent. "He really is ill, he is too ill to even 
change the channel on the TV, he is lying down all day."

The Scottish government and East Renfrewshire council are investigating the 
claims of Megrahi's death. The Foreign Office is awaiting their confirmation. 
Megrahi was the only man convicted of the bombing, which killed 270 people, 
including 11 on the ground, when Pan Am Flight 103 blew up over Lockerbie four 
days before Christmas in 1988.

There was no immediate reaction from the Libyan government.

Abdulkarim Morajea, spokesman for the Democratic Libya Gathering, a party with 
the secularist National Forces Alliance, said he hoped elections due on 19 June 
would produce a government that will fully investigate Lockerbie. "He [Megrahi] 
is just another page in howLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> is 
governed, a chapter in our history. But it is not a chapter that is closed, 270 
people died there (at Lockerbie). If we have a proper government, I hope it 
will be investigated."

Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
 was sentenced to life in prison in 2001, but was released on compassionate 
grounds by the Scottish government in August 2009 after being diagnosed with 
terminal cancer. At the time, doctors estimated he had around three months to 
live.

Megrahi's release prompted accusations that it had been linked to UK attempts 
to forge new trade deals with Libya, then still led byMuammar Gaddafi 
<http:/www.guardian.co.uk/world/muammar-gaddafi>, and prompted outrage in the 
US, home to most of the victims on board the flight, after he returned to 
Tripoli to a hero's welcome.

Carole Johnson, 68, from Greensburg, Pennsylvania, mother of Beth Ann Johnson, 
a 21-year-old American student on the plane, said at the news of Megrahi's 
death: "This is three years too late. While I'm happy that he is dead, long ago 
I left it in the hands of God. I know exactly where he is, and I know it is 
quite hot. I'm sure he and Gaddafi are reunited again.

"When a parent loses a child there is never closure. You find a way of coping, 
but to say closure indicates you are closing the door on what has happened, but 
it is never over. It is the closure of a chapter in the book, a long overdue 
chapter."

Frank Duggan, president of Victims of Pan Am Flight 103, said: "He was an 
unrepentant murderer and now I hope he will finally see justice."

But Jim Swire, whose daughter Flora was killed in the bombing, said the 
reported death was a "very sad event".

Swire, a member of the Justice for Megrahi group, believes there is evidence 
yet to be released that will prove Megrahi's innocence.

"I met him last time face-to-face in Tripoli in December last year, when he 
was very sick and in a lot of pain.

"But he still wanted to talk to me about how information which he and his 
defence team have accumulated could be passed to me after his death.

"And I think that's a fairly amazing thing for a man who knows he's dying to 
do."

Swire added: "Right up to the end he was determined – for his family's sake, 
he knew it was too late for him – how the verdict against him should be 
overturned.

"And also he wanted that for the sake of those relatives who had come to the 
conclusion after studying the evidence that he wasn't guilty, and I think 
that's going to happen."

David Ben-Ayreah, a spokesman for the victims of Lockerbie families, said: "I 
was told seven days ago by very good sources in Tripoli that he was slipping in 
and out of quite deep comas, that the secondary tumours had affected his 
abdomen and lower chest, and that he had had three blood transfusions.

"His death is to be deeply regretted. As someone who attended the trial I have 
never taken the view that Megrahi was guilty. Megrahi is the 271st victim of 
Lockerbie."

In August 2009, Kenny MacAskill , the Scottish justice secretary, said Megrahi 
was going home to die after release from Greenock prison, amid suggestions he 
had about three months to live.

He acted on the basis of a medical report provided to him by Andrew Fraser, 
the director of health and care at the Scottish Prison Service.

His report described the three-month prognosis as "reasonable", but stated 
that no one "would be willing to say" if Megrahi would live longer.

Scottish ministers have always insisted that their decision was made in good 
faith, on compassionate grounds alone and followed the due process of Scottish 
law.

After his return to Libya, Megrahi rarely appeared in public. His family had 
on several occasions said that he was near death, in what was seen as an 
attempt to justify his release.

Prior to Megrahi's death, reports suggested his prostate cancer had spread to 
his neck. Others said he had been kept alive with cancer drugs unavailable in 
the UK.

Megrahi lost an appeal against conviction in 2002 but was given a new chance 
in 2007 when the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission (SCCRC) referred his 
case back to senior judges for a second time.

Following a £1.1m, three-year investigation into the case, the commission said 
there were grounds where it believed a miscarriage of justice may have occurred.

The appeal in full got under way in April 2009, almost two years on from the 
SCCRC's referral, but was dropped by Megrahi two days before he was released.

The decision to withdraw from the court process removed one possible obstacle 
to his returning to Libya by another mechanism, under a prisoner transfer 
agreement, although it was on compassionate grounds that he was ultimately 
released.

The Justice for Megrahi campaign group has called for an independent inquiry 
to look again at the conviction.

The SCCRC's report, which raised questions about identification evidence that 
led to Megrahi's conviction, has not been made public, but the Scottish 
government has pledged to bring about a change in the law to allow the 
paperwork to be published.
 