
The Foreign Office is being urged to prevent the summary execution in Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> of Abdullah al-Senussi, the former 
Gaddafi intelligence chief accused of orchestrating the 1998 Lockerbie bombing.

Ben Emmerson QC, representing Senussi, who was once described as the "world's 
most wanted man", is calling for the trial to be held at the international 
criminal court in The Hague. The lawyer has also raised the issue of whether UK 
officials were involved directly or indirectly in questioningSenussi while he 
was held in Mauritania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/05/abdullah-al-senussi-lockerbie-libya>
 after fleeing Libya.

In a letter to William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, the foreign secretary, 
Emmerson alleges Senussi was subject to "unlawful rendition" and handed over to 
the new Libyan government for 250m dinars (£125m).

His client's trial, said Emmerson, was "likely to be a short and summary 
process resulting in his conviction and summary execution … I assume that the 
United Kingdom considers the flagrantly unlawful conduct of Libya in Mr 
Al-Senussi's case [is] … a direct challenge to the authority of the [UN] 
security council and the ICC ... and it flies in the face of the Libyan 
authorities' professed commitment to the rule of law."

He told Tthe International Bar Association that sanctions should be imposed on 
Libya 
<http://www.ibanet.org/Article/Detail.aspx?ArticleUid=E08B9908-ADE2-49BA-83F3-E76E3C74558C>
.

Lord Macdonald, the former director of public prosecutions, has also raised 
questions about the case in the House of Lords, asking for information about 
payments and whether "any [government] servants or agents has taken part in the 
questioning of Abdullah al-Senussi during the period of his detention in 
Mauritania [from 17 March to 5 September 2012) or in [Libya since then]".

He asked if there had been involvement "either directly or by providing 
questions or lines of questioning to be put to him in interview". That method 
has been used in the past by British intelligence agencies in Pakistan, 
Bangladesh and Algeria. The Foreign Office declined to comment on the 
allegation or intelligence matters.

Senussi's lengthy service as spy chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/05/abdullah-al-senussi-libya-secrets>
 means he may be in possession of crucial information relating not only to the 
Lockerbie bombing but also the 1984 shooting of the police officer Yvonne 
Fletcher outside the Libyan embassy in London, as well as arms shipments to the 
IRA.

British intelligence relations with Libya are extremely sensitive. A former 
Libyan dissident, Abdel Hakim Belhaj, is suing over his rendition back to 
Tripoli with the help of MI6 in 2004.

Libyan sources close to Senussi told the Guardian on Thursday they did not 
believe a trial was imminent and the recent announcement from Tripoli was 
intended as a tactical response to continuing ICC pressure.

Taha Baara, spokesman for Libya's attorney general, said on 1 January a trial 
would be held "within a month". The ICC is due to hold a hearing on the case on 
23 January. Libya was not obliged to hand him over to the ICC, Baara said.

Senussi is being held incommunicado in a prison at the Hadbat al-Khadra 
compound in Tripoli. The Libyan sources said he had been questioned by US and 
possibly French intelligence officials while being held in the Mauritanian 
capital, Nouakchott. No foreign officials had seen him since he was transferred 
to Libyan custody in September.

Foreign interest in Senussi focuses mainly on his role in the Lockerbie 
bombing. At the time he was head of Libya's external security organisation.
Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
, the only person convicted over the bombing, comes from the same tribe as 
Senussi, who is Muammar Gaddafi's brother-in-law. But inside Libya Senussi is 
most closely associated with the notorious 1996 massacre of 1,200 inmates at 
Abu Salim prison in Tripoli.

His case is closely linked to that of Saif al-Islam, Gaddafi's son. All three 
were indicted by the ICC in March 2011. Islam is being held by a militia 
brigade in Zintan, west Libya, and will be tried there.

Gaddafi's last prime minister, Baghdadi al-Mahmoudi, is also facing trial for 
war crimes. He was handed over to Libya from neighbouring Tunisia.

Macdonald said: "The Libyan government need to decide whether they want to 
join the international community or not. If they continue to flout the UN 
security council [resolution] ... they are not going to be treated seriously as 
part of the community of nations. It's also an important matter for the British 
government because we played a significant role in putting these people in 
power."

A Foreign Office spokesman said: "We continue to engage with the Libyan 
authorities on their plans following the extradition of Senussi back to Libya. 
We have underlined with the Libyan authorities that it is important Senussi is 
detained in accordance with Libyan law, that he is held by a legitimate 
authority, and that any potential criminal trial held in Libya meets 
international standards. It is also important that Senussi has access to legal 
representation.

"The Libyan authorities are fully aware of their obligations to the 
international criminal court and receive expert advice from their own 
international lawyers. We understand that the deadline for the Libyan 
authorities to provide to the specific response to the ICC is 15 January 2013. 
We continue to remind the Libyan authorities of their obligation to co-operate 
with [UN security council resolution] 1970 and engage accordingly with the 
international criminal court."
 