
An Aboriginal inmate has been left braindead after an altercation with guards 
at a South Australian prison, his family says.

Twenty-nine-year-old Mr Morrison allegedly attacked five prison guards at 
Yatala Labour prison on Friday while he waiting for a scheduled video-link 
court appearance.

But Morrison’s sister Latoya Rule disputes the allegation, saying her brother, 
who was five-feet tall, “was a non-violent fisherman and artist”.

“This is beyond heartbreaking,” she posted on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/latoya.rule/posts/1100284663395345?pnref=story>. “All 
prison officers involved have been release from the hospital with minor to no 
injuries, and my brother is brain dead and has no life left.”

Rule said her brother, of Pitjantjatjara and Wiradjuri ancestry, was on life 
support at the RoyalAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> hospital following the 
incident. She said doctors had told her family he was braindead and would not 
wake up from the incident.

Several guards were also injured in the incident, including two who suffered 
facial fractures.

Rule said she planned a series of national protests and would fight for 
justice for her brother.

“This is not just another death in custody, this is state sanctioned brutality 
in the same stream as#blacklivesmatter 
<https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/blacklivesmatter?source=feed_text&story_id=1100208100069668>
 and deserves the same level of attention. My brother’s life matters and he 
should not be portrayed as someone he was not.”

Morrison had been in custody for six days, during which, Rule said, her 
brother was denied “the human right of healthcare”.

The state’s authorities have not revealed the details of Morrison’s offending 
which caused him to be imprisoned. Rule said he was due to be released into 
home custody.

Morrison’s brother, Patrick, condemned South Australia’s Department for 
Correctional Services over the incident.

“My brother is going to die because of what they’ve done to him,” he wrote on 
Facebook.

“There will be justice, I demand justice. You cannot hide what you’ve done.” 


Wayne Morrison was waiting in the admissions area of Yatala prison ahead of a 
scheduled video-link appearance at Elizabeth magistrates court when the 
“critical incident” erupted at about 11:30am Friday.

Authorities allege Morrison was involved in an altercation with two officers, 
including a young woman, when he had to be restrained by three other guards.

It is understood Morrison was then taken back to G division of the prison, 
Yatala’s maximum security area, when he suffered a medical episode, believed to 
be a cardiac arrest.

The correctional services department chief executive, David Brown, told the 
Sunday Mail in Adelaide 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/national/prisoner-critical-and-five-guards-injured-during-critical-incident-at-adelaides-yatala-prison/news-story/03aaded5ddddb90326724c33acde3a9d>
 the “critical incident” involved an alleged assault by an inmate on prison 
staff.

“The prisoner involved in the incident was brought under control by responding 
staff,” Brown said. “In the course of the incident, a medical emergency ensued 
and the correctional staff applied immediate first aid to the prisoner and 
sought assistance from onsite medical staff.”


Five staff were injured. Two – a man and a woman – sustained facial fractures.

Brown said an ambulance was called and the prisoner transferred to the Royal 
Adelaide hospital.

CCTV cameras reportedly captured vision of the incident. That footage is now 
the subject of an investigation by South Australian police’s major crime 
investigation branch.


Australian Associated Press contributed to this report

 