
 The author: Stephen King (b1947) grew up in the US state of Maine, and 
started writing stories at school. His first novel, Carrie (1974), struggled 
for sales until the Brian De Palma film became a smash hit. King's popularity 
was then assured. His second and third novels, Salem's Lot (1975) and The 
Shining (1977), confirmed his reputation as a master of a new wave of US horror 
fiction. "The Body", the story from which Stand by Me is adapted, was written 
right after Salem's Lot but not published until 1982 in the collection 
Different Seasons, alongside "Apt Pupil", "Rita Hayworth" and "Shawshank 
Redemption". King has subsequently produced a stream of novels and story 
serials - some under the alias Richard Bachman. Many have found their way into 
cinematic adaptation, including The Dead Zone (1979), Misery (1987) and The 
Green Mile (1997). In 1999 King was badly injured in a road accident, and three 
years later announced he would stop publishing after finishing the last three 
novels of his Dark Tower series.

The story: "The Body" is set in 1960 in the fictional town of Castle Rock, 
Maine. Gordie Lachance is a 12-year-old aspiring author, who treks across 
country with three friends to find the corpse of another boy rumoured to be 
lying by railway tracks. Subtitled "Fall from Innocence", "The Body" details in 
retrospect the emotional journey of each as they race - and then violently 
confront - a group of older kids for the "honour" of discovering the dead body. 
King weaves stories-within-stories into the narrative, showing Lachance's 
evolution as a writer.

The film-maker: Rob Reiner (b1947) is the son of legendary comic Carl Reiner, 
and made his first mark as a regular performer in US TV sitcom All in the 
Family . He moved into film-making with spoof music documentary This Is Spinal 
Tap (1984). Stand By Me was his third feature; after subsequent success with 
When Harry Met Sally (1989), he returned to King's work with Misery (1990). 
Reiner cast four relative unknowns in the lead roles, among them River Phoenix, 
who was himself to die seven years later. Richard Dreyfuss, whom Reiner had met 
as a 15-year-old, was brought in to provide linking voiceovers as the mature 
Lachance.

How book and film compare: King considered the story's "tragic hero" to be 
troubled delinquent Chris Chambers, and Lachance to essentially function as an 
observer. Reiner, however, felt Lachance's rite of passage should be the 
central focus. Hence the most significant deviation from the original: it's 
Lachance who picks up a gun and threatens the older group at the story's 
climax. Other changes are minor: for example, the film is set a year earlier, 
in 1959, presumably to point up the nostalgia value.

Inspirations and influences: Reiner was concerned not to repeat the mistakes 
of previous King adaptations. Films such as Cujo (1983), Christine (1983) and 
Silver Bullet (1985) had fallen well short of the standards set by Carrie 
(1976), The Shining (1980) and The Dead Zone (1983). He avoided the straight 
horror tactics normally employed, modelling his film instead on retro-inspired 
classics like American Graffiti (1973) and The Outsiders (1983). Stand By Me's 
influence remains low-key but profound: its pop-culture discussions ("You think 
Mighty Mouse could beat up Superman?") would, along with Diner (1982), set a 
template for the 1990s generation of indie film-makers.
 