
About Kable

Kable is a leading provider of public sector research, publishing and event 
services.

The company helps suppliers to understand the government market better and to 
reach public sector decision-makers. Kable also helps public servants to make 
informed decisions about transformation and technology.

Kable offers a combination of subscription and bespoke research online and 
print publications (including GC (Government Computing magazine) and Smart 
Healthcare), and a series of conferences and exhibitions (including GC Live, 
Smart Healthcare Live and Procurement Solutions Live). The company also offers 
customised event, publishing and research services for both public and private 
sectors customers.

Kable is an accredited Catalist supplier.

The company was founded in 1990 and in 2007 became a business division of 
Guardian News and Media Ltd.

Kable clients

Clients include most of the world's leading ICT suppliers, including Affiniti, 
Agresso, AtosOrigin, BT, Cable & Wireless, Capita, Capgemini, Civica, 
Computacenter, CSC, Dell, EDS, Ericsson, Fujitsu Services, HP, IBM, Lagan, 
Logica, Microsoft, Network Appliance, ntl:Telewest Business, Oracle, SAP, SAS, 
Serco, Siemens IT Solutions, Steria, SunGard Public Sector, Thales, Thus and 
Tribal.

Public sector clients include Citizens Advice, the Department of Health, the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the Ministry of Defence, OGCbuying.solutions 
and the Information Commissioner's Office.

Kable services

Publishing

Kable publishes the leading titles covering key developments for the 
professionals who are delivering connected e-government:

- GC (Government Computing) magazine <http://www.kable.co.uk/gc>, with a 
circulation of 15,000 and a readership of over 50,000 public servants, half of 
whom are business service leaders
- SmartHealthcare.com <http://www.SmartHealthcare.com>
- GC Weekly <http://reg.kable.managemyaccount.co.uk/GC/page0.php>, the free 
news email which succinctly selects the top events of the week and gives 
original analysis
- GC News/Kable.co.uk <http://www.kable.co.uk>, which is Kable's website and 
also the host of the company's free daily news service
- Bespoke services for suppliers and government

Market intelligence

Kable helps ICT and BPO suppliers to government to understand and to size 
public sector end user markets. Nine of the top ten suppliers use Kable market 
intelligence to win public sector business. Kable's knowledge and forecasting 
is based on over 1,000 in-depth interviews with public sector decision-makers 
annually as well as other sources and the company's extensive experience and 
contacts. Market intelligence services include:

- KableDIRECT, the online service which delivers the core data, forecasts, 
organisation profiles, news, contracts and analysis about your marketplace - 
both in the UK and across Europe. The service includes on-site briefings and 
push email alerts as well as a telephone research service and access to the 
unqiue KableDIRECT database.
- KableDIRECT Tactical provides sales leads, competitor tracking and access to 
government documents.
- Research and advisory services give clients focused answers from the experts 
on their particular needs. Specialisms include market research, market sizing 
and segementation, market training, customer satisfaction, focus groups, 
benchmarking, and strategy or campaign advice

Events

Government Computing (part of Kable) has been organising conferences and 
exhibitions since 1988, addressing the information age issues most relevant to 
public service business leaders and ICT decision-makers. Government Computing 
events are known for their stimulating and common-sense approach, and provide 
excellent networking opportunities across the public services. These include:

- The major annual GCExpo, now in its 18th year and very much the key event of 
the calendar
- A series of themed and regional conferences
- Customised events, conferences or workshops, tailored to suit supplier or 
government needs

Services to government

Kable provides leading edge services to government in areas such as 
administration, e-government, ICT, outsourcing, procurement, social and 
community services and health care.

Kable is an approved Catalist services supplier to government.

Amongst the company's specialisms are:

- Marketing and market research consultancy, focused on helping public 
servants better understand customer needs and behaviour
- Market research and analysis, particularly to help evidence-based 
policy-making and assessment
- Event management and creation services, both large and small
- Publishing services, whether online or in print, one-off or ongoing

What they say about Kable

"Government Computing [expo] is well-known as the single most important 
gathering of technologists and public servants in the country," Hugh Barrett, 
chief executive of OGCbuying.solutions

"GC magazine and GCExpo are the most influential magazine and exhibition in 
the public sector IT arena." Intellect

"We found KableDIRECT to be invaluable for our UK market. So much so, that we 
extended our subscription to cover Europe as well," Northrop Grumman Mission 
Systems

"The KableDIRECT market intelligence services provide HP with a crucial source 
data on the UK Public Sector. Our account teams rely heavily on the service to 
understand trends and developments in the markets they serve." Head of 
Marketing, HP

"With its GC magazine, conferences, website and bespoke research, Kable is the 
single most authoritative source of information on the ICT market in the UK 
public sector." Director of public sector, BT
 