
It has been bizarre to watch, from the safe distance of Moscow, how the 
British press has reportedthe court case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/20/abramovich-berezovsky-oligarchs-london-courtbattle>
 between Roman Abramovich and Boris Berezovsky. All the classic ingredients of 
tabloid fare are there: vast wealth, broken promises, honour, shame, "krysha" – 
Russian for "roof" but a slang term meaning "protection" – and a few chateaux, 
yachts and flamboyant women thrown in too.

But I hope the glitz and glamour of these mens' lives has not blinded Russian 
people, or Britain's media and political class, to what made them rich in the 
first place. And to many Russians, they are settling their dispute in London 
not because it has an independent and efficient judicial system, but because 
the British government cares not at all about the history of their accumulated 
wealth.

Everybody knows what happened after the fall of the Soviet Union. A few 
opportunistic businessmen swooped like vultures to claim whole industries for 
themselves. Quickly, they made hundreds of millions by monopolising them. The 
Kremlin, whose long slide into autocracy shows no sign of relenting, made deals 
with several of them, knowing it would be easier to keep them on side than to 
open up Russia's economy to proper procedures, competition, and fair trade. 
That's the story people are familiar with. But something is beginning to 
change. First of all, several of these men – it's almost always men, I'm afraid 
– have grievances with each other which date back many years; but they have 
only recently called in their lawyers. So expect more disputes in the manner of 
Berezovsky v Abramovich soon.

Second, the sheer scale of the losses to the Russian people – in shady deals 
and contracts, and lost productivity, jobs, and income – is only now becoming 
clear. My own estimate is that over $500bn has been effectively stolen from the 
Russian people between 2003-2011; economists I speak to in Moscow suggest it 
could be more. Russia's struggling citizens have every right to reclaim these 
funds, and as awareness of this vast sum spreads across the country, so too 
will intolerance of it. When demonstrations broke out in Moscow before 
Christmas, it was noticeable how many of the protesters were demanding their 
money back from the Kremlin.

If that is to happen, the Russian people need help. I have long felt that the 
people best equipped to hold the powerful to account are journalists, which is 
one reason why Mikhail Gorbachev and I publish the pro-democracy paper Novaya 
Gazeta, many of whose reportershave been assassinated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>. As the digital 
revolution spreads across Russia, and dissident bloggers such as the notorious
Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jan/15/alexei-navalny-profile-vladimir-putin>
 find their voice, a new wave of articulate young soldiers will join our fight.

Brave journalists cannot do it alone, however. Russia's people need the help 
of the EU, OECD, UN, and IMF. Perhaps Nato and the distinguished guests at 
Davos might take an interest too. We need the best human rights lawyers, 
because it is the human rights of the Russian people that have been so 
violated. But above all, perhaps, our neighbours among national governments 
need to stop pretending they are innocent bystanders in this battle. And top of 
that list is the British government.

Businessmen in Russia sometimes ask me why so many of my wealthy countrymen 
fromRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the former Soviet 
Union end up in London. The simple reason is that the British government does 
not ask too many questions of them.

Together with the autocrats of the Kremlin, some controversial Russian 
businessmen have come to convey an image of Russia that is cruel, inhumane, and 
deeply unjust. Actually this nation of tolerant and honourable people is 
nothing like the stereotype that now prevails. That is why I am trying to draw 
attention to the issue of holding the powerful to account, and why we cannot 
let the squabble between two of London's richest men distract us from the real 
story. A vast deception has been perpetrated against the Russian people; but 
with the right international support, they can reclaim what rightfully belongs 
to them.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree
 