
Two of Britain's most famous oligarchs – political exile Boris Berezovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky> and Chelsea FC owner Roman 
Abramovich – have clashed in the high court in a sensational case that is 
likely to set a record for privately-funded litigation in the UK.

The court heard claims that Abramovich blackmailed and betrayed Berezovsky, 
his former mentor, and put wealth and influence above loyalty and friendship. 
Berezovsky says Abramovich intimidated him into selling shares in the Russian 
oil company Sibneft at a fraction of their real value.

Berezovsky is claiming more than £3.2bn ($5bn) in damages from Abramovich over 
the Sibneft deal, his barrister, Laurence Rabinowitz QC, said, opening the 
12-week trial. Berezovsky – who fledRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in 2000 after falling out with 
President Vladimir Putin – also wants £363m ($564m) in compensation for another 
deal involving the Russian aluminium giant Rusal.

The case was taking place in the new Rolls building of the commercial court in 
London's Fetter Lane, before Mrs Justice Gloster.

Both Russians sat at opposite ends of the packed courtroom. They arrived 
separately, looking relaxed. Abramovich listened to the proceedings in Russian 
via headphones. Their respective entourages included bodyguards wearing dark 
glasses, numerous legal assistants and friends.

Rabinowitz told the judge that both men had worked together to create Sibneft 
in 1995 and became friends. He said Berezovsky had been betrayed after falling 
out with Russia's president Vladimir Putin and leaving Moscow for Britain in 
October 2000. "This is a case about two men who – and this is common ground – 
worked together to acquire an asset – that is Sibneft – that would make them 
wealthy beyond the wildest dreams of most people," said Rabinowitz.

"In the process, we say, [they] became and remained good friends until, that 
is, Mr Berezovsky, who had adopted a high political profile in Russia, not 
least through his control of certain media outlets, fell out with those in 
power in the Kremlin and was forced to leave his home and create a new life 
abroad."

He said Abramovich was left with the choice of remaining loyal or betraying 
Berezovsky and seeking "to profit from his difficulties".

Abramovich had made threats that Berezovsky's interests in Sibneft would be 
expropriated "by those in the Kremlin led by Mr Putin who regarded Mr 
Berezovsky as an enemy", the court heard. Berezovsky had no choice but to sell 
at a knock-down price, said Rabinowitz.

He added: "It is our case that Mr Abramovich at that point demonstrated that 
he was a man to whom wealth and influence mattered more than friendship and 
loyalty and this has led him, finally, to go so far as to even deny that he and 
Mr Berezovsky were actually ever friends."
 