
He is one of the most scrutinised people on the planet, famous for his yachts, 
extravagant lifestyle and a certain football club in west London. But for the 
past five years Russian oligarchRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich> has said nothing in public.

On Monday however, Abramovich was forced to break his long silence when he 
gave evidence for the first time in his colourful legal battle withBoris 
Berezovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky>, the Kremlin 
critic and political exile.

But those who came to the high court in London expecting to hear great 
insights into the billionaire's mindset, or a rousing speech in defence of his 
actions will have left rather disappointed.

Abramovich said little and spoke only in Russian, with the judge, Dame 
Elizabeth Gloster, and a packed courtroom of barristers, security guards and 
supporters listening to a translation via headphones.

After being sworn in, he faced a volley of preliminary questions from 
Berezovsky's QC, Laurence Rabinowitz. He replied to all of them with a single 
word – "Da". For most of the day his style was similarly minimalist. At one 
point, having failed to receive an answer, Rabinowitz prodded him politely with 
the words: "Could you say "Da", please." Abramovich clearly cannot speak 
English. He complained of being unable to understand his witness statement.

Berezovsky is suing Abramovich, a former friend, for more than $5bn in the 
world's biggest private litigation battle.

Berezovsky claims Abramovich betrayed him after Berezovsky fell out with the 
Kremlin in 2000 and fled to Britain. He says theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> FC owner took advantage of his 
political difficulties with Vladimir Putin, forcing him to sell his interests 
in Russian oil company Sibneft at a knockdown price. He also says Abramovich 
cheated him in another deal with Russian aluminium firm Rusal.

The case on Monday offered a fascinating study in two contrasting 
personalities – the pugnacious Berezovsky, the quintessential frontroom 
operator, versus the diffident and media-shy Abramovich, a man clearly more 
comfortable operating behind the scenes, or standing mutely on the football 
terrace. Up until now Berezovsky has watched the case unfold with an expression 
of cheerful bemusement. Unlike his adversary, he gave evidence in fluent if 
idiosyncratic English.

In exile, Berezovsky has become Putin's most prominent adversary, and a source 
of trouble in Britain's fraught relations with Moscow. Abramovich, by contrast, 
has been a model of political loyalty, serving as governor of the frozen far 
eastern Russian province of Chukotka.

During the four-week case the high court has often struggled to understand 
1990s Russia – a lawless, physically perilous place which Abramovich's star 
barrister, Jonathan Sumption QC, likened to "14th-century England".

The dispute dates back almost 17 years to when Boris Yeltsin, then president, 
practically gave away Russia's state-owned assets to a series of powerful 
oligarchs in return for their political support.

In his witness statement before he started giving evidence, Abramovich denied 
he had gone into business partnership with Berezovsky when Sibneft was created 
back in 1995. "Mr Berezovsky has already received from me more than $2.5bn for 
his services, and still this is not enough for him," Abramovich stated. "I am 
disappointed and surprised that he additionally asserts a legal claim to a 
significant further portion of my wealth."

Instead, Abramovich says, he employed Berezovsky as a krysha – the word means 
roof in Russian – to further his business interests and work as a political 
fixer deep inside Yeltsin's court.

He argues that without this patronage it would have been impossible to succeed 
in the murky world of Russian business. At the time, the two men were close. 
Abramovich admitted: "I felt a strong emotional bond to him."

He added: "He was first and foremost a politician. I was not his protege and 
he was not my mentor. Although I now have a high media profile, I never aspired 
to be a public figure. I have always been interested in real business and the 
development of business strategies." Of Berezovsky he says: "There was at times 
something of the megalomaniac about him." He also describes him as "detached 
from reality".

The two men met for the first time in 1994 on a Caribbean yacht. At that point 
Abramovich was a trader in oil products, keen to muscle into the lucrative 
opportunities offered by Russia's dubious privatisation programme. He conceded 
that Berezovsky was already a well-known figure, with influence in high places.

Abramovich said of himself, by contrast: "I created little noise."

Asked whether he was a details person, he said: "I think to a greater extent 
than Boris Berezovsky, but not much either."

The two co-operated closely during the Yeltsin years. But in his witness 
statement Abramovich is scathing about Berezovsky's fall from favour once 
Vladimir Putin took power.

Putin became Russian president in 2000, partly due to Berezovsky's 
enthusiastic support. Within months, however, Berezovsky had had a "series of 
serious disputes with Putin", Abramovich says – leading to Berezovsky's 
decision to fly to Britain and into exile that October.

"His time had passed. His period in Russia's post-communist history was over. 
Russia had moved on. I had moved on," Abramovich said bluntly in his statement.

Nevertheless Berezovsky still treated Abramovich as a "cash cow", he said, and 
expected regular multimillion-dollar payments even though thekrysha arrangement 
was now defunct.

Abramovich also said he picked up the tab for Berezovsky's private jet 
flights, his chateau in France, and jewellery for Berezovsky's then girlfriend 
and now partner, Elena Gorbunova.

Berezovsky turned up in court yesterday wearing a red poppy, a further symbol 
of how – after more than a decade in London – he has integrated into British 
society. During the lunchbreak he munched on a plate of sushi, laid on just 
opposite the courtroom on the third floor of London's new Rolls building, built 
to hear high-profile commercial cases. Abramovich, by contrast, still has the 
air of an outsider. At times he had to ask for questions to be repeated after 
they apparently got lost in translation. He insists in his witness statement 
that he is "domiciled" in Russia, not Britain, adding that his row with 
Berezovsky is a "uniquely Russian story."

The destinies of the two feuding oligarchs offer their own eloquent commentary 
on Russia under Putin. By 2000 Abramovich said in his statement that he and 
Berezovsky "were growing increasingly apart in our views". By the summer 
Berezovsky had ceased to have any political influence with the Russian 
government, he remarks. Abramovich, by contrast, admits that he welcomed 
Putin's new rules, set out in a meeting with the oligarchs. Putin's message 
was: obey the state and steer clear of politics.

Abramovich recalled: "President Putin made it clear that he would support 
business to develop Russia's economy. In return for his support and business 
certainty, we needed to contribute taxes and act responsibly and transparently."
 