
The result in Saturday’s Australian Capital Territory election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/act-election-liberals-face-19-years-in-opposition-after-labor-wins-fifth-term>
 was largely for business as usual: a Labor government, likely continuing in 
alliance with the Greens.

After 15 years of Labor government in the territory, there was an expectation 
that a surge of support to the Liberals could deliver them government but the 
Liberals ended up falling backwards, leaving the centre-left parties in a 
stronger position in the assembly.

A 17-member assembly has governed the ACT since 1989 but that assembly has now 
been expanded to 25 members, with five electorates each sending five members to 
the assembly.

ACT election: Liberals consigned to 19 years in opposition after Labor wins 
fifth term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/act-election-liberals-face-19-years-in-opposition-after-labor-wins-fifth-term>
At the time of writing, Labor has won 12 seats in the 25-seat assembly, with 
10 Liberals and two Greens. Labor and Liberal each won two seats in each 
electorate, with the final seat up for grabs. Labor has gained third seats in 
the northern electorates of Ginninderra (Belconnen) and Yerrabi (Gungahlin), 
while the Greens won seats in Kurrajong (central Canberra) and Murrumbidgee 
(Woden).

One seat remains in play, in the Tuggeranong-based electorate of Brindabella. 
While theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> looked likely to win 
the seat early on election night, a drop in the Liberal vote has left them 
vulnerable to losing the seat to either Labor or the Sex party.

If Labor wins the fifth Brindabella seat, it will give them a majority for the 
second time in ACT history. If the Sex party win, it will be only their second 
election win after their victory in the last Victorian upper-house election.

There was no public polling about the ACT election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/uncharted-territory-why-the-act-election-result-cannot-be-predicted>
 but a strong conventional wisdom had formed about the election: that the tired 
15-year-old Labor government was vulnerable to a Liberal surge. The Liberals 
fiercely attacked the Labor-Greens government for its plans to build light rail 
through parts of Canberra and there was speculation about the Liberal party 
sweeping into power.

This conventional wisdom was wrong. There was a swing of 3.3% against the 
Liberals, while the vote for Labor and the Greens remained stable. In 
retrospect, the 2012 result was a high water mark for the Liberal party. The 
Liberals won eight seats, only one seat short of a majority. It was the only 
time when the Liberal party had won eight seats – the party had only managed 
seven when it was in government in the late 1990s.

The total vote for Labor and the Greens didn’t change much but this masks 
regional swings. Labor’s vote dropped in four of five electorates, by about 1% 
in the southern electorates of Brindabella and Murrumbidgee, and by smaller 
amounts in Ginninderra and Kurrajong. This was balanced out by a large 2.8% 
swing in Yerrabi. This electorate will be the main beneficiary of the first 
stage of the light rail and it appears that the focus on the light rail helped 
Labor shore up their third seat in this northern electorate.

The Greens vote became more concentrated, with a 0.7% swing in their strongest 
seat of Kurrajong and a 0.6% drop in the Greens vote in outer-suburban 
Brindabella.

This election is a reminder that Canberra as a city leans to the left of 
politics and it will take more than an “it’s time” factor for the Liberal party 
to take power. The city is more socially progressive than most of Australia, 
without rural hinterland areas that favour conservative parties, and with a 
large public servant population that favours centre-left parties.

Labor and the Greens have a strong relationship in the ACT, due to the 
electoral system and demographic factors that make it more politically feasible 
for the parties to have a close relationship. Eight years of formal alliance 
has strengthened these ties and it will be difficult for the Liberals to bust 
up this partnership.

The Liberals are a long way from forming a majority in their own right. If 
they are to govern again, it’s likely to be with the support of independents or 
other minor parties which are currently absent from the assembly. The Liberals 
governed the ACT from 1995 to 2001 with the aid of a more diverse crossbench. 
The best prospect for a future Liberal government is if parts of the 
Labor-Greens base, looking for a change after close to two decades of 
centre-left government, vote for centrist independents and minor parties who 
could choose to ally with the Liberal party.

Uncharted territory: why the ACT election result cannot be predicted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/uncharted-territory-why-the-act-election-result-cannot-be-predicted>
We saw a large range of minor parties try their hand at this election but most 
fell far short, with only the Sex party having an outside chance of winning a 
seat. The five-member electorates will make it very difficult for outsiders to 
break into the assembly and thus reduce the Liberal party’s options.

While not much has changed in the political make-up of the assembly, the 
increased numbers will likely change the way ACT politics operates. There’ll be 
more room for backbench MPs to challenge their party’s leadership, with both 
major parties having more MPs to manage, and not everyone expecting a 
frontbench role.

If Labor doesn’t win a majority, you’d expect to see a continuation of the 
current Labor-Greens government. If Labor does reach a majority, you wouldn’t 
expect to see the current alliance continue. The Greens will have room to 
differentiate themselves from their long-time ally but you wouldn’t expect any 
burning of the bridges between Labor and the Greens – they will likely need 
each other again in four years.
 