
Animal welfare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animal-welfare> activists 
have called for a boycott of the Body Shop after its founder Anita Roddick and 
fellow shareholders sold out to French cosmetics giant L'Oreal for £652m.

The boycott was called by Naturewatch and backed by Uncaged.

The animal welfare groups oppose L'Oreal's policy on the testing of cosmetics 
ingredients on animals.

Body Shop made its name championing ethical consumerism and opposing animal 
testing and went on to make a fortune of £130m for Mrs Roddick and her husband 
Gordon.

The chain insists that these policies will remain after the sale to L'Oreal.

Bill Eyres, Body Shop spokesman, said: "It has been agreed that all our values 
are ring-fenced and we will continue to apply our animal testing policy."

The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection said it would question the 
Body Shop about how it could retain its cruelty-free status under L'Oreal 
ownership.

"We are urging everyone to boycott the Body Shop," said John Ruane, director 
of Naturewatch. "If you spend your money at the Body Shop, it could now go to 
animal testing."

Mr Ruane said the chain's policy of not using an ingredient tested on animals 
after 1990 meant it had been on the Naturewatch list of approved retailers for 
the past three years.

"They will come off it now because of their ownership by L'Oreal," he said. 
"They have been testing on animals for years and continue to do so."

Naturewatch's list of approved high street cosmetic suppliers include Clarins, 
the Co-operative, Kwik Save, Waitrose, Sainsbury's and Next.

Mr Ruane said the ultimate holding companies of all these businesses had 
cruelty-free policies approved by Naturewatch.

"While the Body Shop is owned by L'Oreal we are going to have to inform all 
our supporters not to go into the Body Shop any more," said Dan Lyons, Uncaged 
campaign director.

"It's a sad day, and it is going to make it more difficult for consumers to 
not buy animal-tested cosmetics."

Body Shop adheres to the strict humane cosmetics standard, which requires a 
company to prove it does not conduct or commission animal testing by applying a 
fixed cut-off date (in the case of body Shop, 1989), after which no animal 
testing must have taken place either within the company or throughout its 
supply chain.

But even if this continues, campaigners say consumers cannot be sure money 
spent in Body Shop will not be channelled to L'Oreal's testing programme, which 
uses animals.

Body Shop will be granted access to L'Oreal's research and development 
programme.

Asked if the Body Shop can continue to be an ethical, campaigning business 
under L'Oreal ownership, Mrs Roddick said: "There's only one area we challenge 
[in relation to L'Oreal's policies], and they have a great statement about what 
they're doing on the issue of animal testing, or what they're trying to do ... 
I'm too old, I'm too smart, to give it away for it to be destroyed".

L'Oreal has not tested its cosmetics on animals since 1990, but continues to 
test new ingredients on animals, as required under European law.

It said it aims to phase out the use of animal testing within 20 years.
 