
Call of Duty publisher Activision Blizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/activision-blizzard> has acquired the 
veteran eSports organiser Major League Gaming (MLG) in a deal worth $46m.

The purchase gives Activision access to MLG’s content streaming platform, live 
gaming events and competitive gaming leagues. The company’s MLGtv online 
eSports channel is reportedly watched by over 20 million viewers a month.


In a statement about the deal, Activision Blizzard chief executive Bobby 
Kotick said his plan is “to create theESPN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/espn> of eSports” – a reference to the 
sports broadcasting network, which itself is increasing its coverage of eSports 
events.

“MLG’s ability to create premium content and its proven broadcast technology 
platform – including its live streaming capabilities – strengthens our 
strategic position in competitive gaming,” said Kotick.

In October, Activision announced the formation of a new division dedicated to 
eSports. The company hired MLG co-founder Mike Sepso and former ESPN head Steve 
Bornstein to run it. The new deal will also see MLG’s other co-founder Sundance 
DiGiovanni joining Activision.

The eSports industry has been growing at a rapid rate since its inception in 
the mid-90s. According to research firm SuperData, over 130 million people 
worldwide now regularly watch eSports tournaments and events, mostly via online 
streams. The biggest titles in the sector, League of Legends and Dota 2, also 
attract huge audiences to their live events, which sell out vast sports 
stadiums.

Activision has been taking a growing interest in professional gaming over the 
last five years. It’s Starcraft strategy title was instrumental in building the 
popularity of pro-gaming during the 2000s, especially in South Korea where the 
game effectively became a national sport. The publisher now runs annualCall of 
Duty <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> and Hearthstone 
world championships.

The acquisition of MLG represents a desire to oversee all aspects of the 
eSports tournament process – much like RiotGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, the developer of sector leader 
League of Legends, which has complete control over its tournaments and events. 
Close industry rival Electronic Arts, creator of the Fifa and Battlefield 
brands, is also working to create a similar pro-gaming business – it announced 
its own eSports division in December, putting games industry veteran Peter 
Moore in charge.

Although eSports tournaments and events generate modest incomes through 
sponsorship, advertising and subscription sales, the value is in creating 
dedicated and enthusiastic communities around the titles themselves, thereby 
ensuring longevity and sales in an increasingly expensive and complex market.

However, Activision Blizzard no doubt hopes that by creating a dedicated 
eSports business with a mainstream audience in its sights, it will be able to 
compete with ESPN, not only for audience, but for lucrative big brand 
advertisers. In the traditional games industry, production costs on major 
releases have risen considerably since the arrival of the newXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One and PS4 consoles. In this 
context, eSports may well represent a significant new revenue stream.
 