
Three years ago, a group of senior Activision executives led by CEO Bobby 
Kotick met with Stephane Kurgan and Riccardo Zacconi, the heads of mobile 
gaming company King. It was, says Kotick, a social engagement, two powerhouses 
of the global games industry shooting the breeze in a fancy restaurant. During 
an investor call this week, however, Zacconi talked about the “mutual fear and 
respect” at the table. Executives don’t meet like this for fun. They were 
sizing each other up.

On Monday, Activision announced that it would be acquiring King, creator of 
the massively successful Candy Crush Saga game – as well as other more modest 
smartphone hits – for $5.9bn. Predictably, the revelation sent shockwaves 
through the industry: it’s a hefty sum – more than Disney paid for legacy 
entertainment companies Marvel and LucasFilm. What was Activision thinking?

Of course, the basic strategy was obvious. Although Activision is big in 
console games with its Call of Duty, Destiny and Skylanders brands, and has 
might inPC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> gaming thanks to the 
Blizzard titles (Diablo, Starcraft and Warcraft), it has largely failed to make 
an impact in the explosive smartphone gaming sector. Purchasing King would 
bring it an experienced workforce, plenty of proven IP, and a vast global 
audience, stretching far beyond the traditional “hardcore” gaming demographic.


But analysts were quick to question the deal. King shares have consistently 
traded below the asking price set at the company’sdisastrous IPO in March 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/26/candy-crush-king-digital-shares-collapse-ipo>
. The latest accounts showed an18% year-on-year fall in revenue 
<http://www.mcvuk.com/news/read/king-revenue-and-profits-dip-year-on-year/0154277>
. Candy Crush Saga has probably peaked, and although titles like Pet Rescue and 
Farm Heroes have performed well, they’re not doing well enough to replace Candy 
Crush Saga as the sugar rush fades.

In a coruscating article on the deal, the journalist Rob Fahey wrote: “In all 
likelihood, Activision has just paid a huge premium for a company which is past 
the peak of its greatest hit title and into a period of managed decline, not to 
mention a company with which its core businesses simply don’t fit in any 
meaningful way.”

The IHS Digital analyst Piers Harding-Rolls added: “The mobile games market is 
highly unpredictable, even with a strong set of games franchises and brands 
success is far from guaranteed.”

So what does Bobby Kotick make of all this? Activision’s boss, the pantomime 
villain of gamers everywhere, is the longest-standing CEO in the tech industry. 
In 1991, he took control of a fading games company and over the next 25 years 
turned it into an entertainment giant with a brand – Call of Duty – that could 
dwarf Hollywood box office takings. Unsurprisingly, he has a different view on 
the deal.

“Look, here’s my immodesty,” he says via a phone call from Activision’s HQ in 
Santa Monica, “but if you look at the growth in operating profits and the 
return on invested capital that we’ve generated for our shareholders, we are 
really good at prioritising opportunities. We have now gotten to a place where 
we’ve seen mobile as an opportunity. We’ve prioritised it, evaluated a variety 
of alternatives, both building and buying, and we came to the conclusion that 
King does the best job of any team that we’ve come across in the creation of 
franchises, in sustaining those franchises, in commercialising those franchises 
and thinking about new franchises. Today, mobile is a $36bn market. King 
supports audiences in 196 countries. We felt very confident that they were the 
right partner for us.”

But then, traditional game publishers have floundered in the past when they 
tried to buy their way into the mobile industry. Electronic Arts paid $680m for 
Jamdat in 2005, $300m for social gaming specialist Playfish in 2009 and $750m 
for Bejeweled creator PopCapGames <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>
 in 2011. While the latter still exists as a brand, the others have faded and 
disappeared. Is this not a stark lesson in how the gears grind when very 
different development cultures meet?

“Well, if you look at the history of our company, we don’t do a lot of 
acquisition,” says Kotick. “The reason is, we need to see that people are 
culturally and philosophically aligned with the way that we approach the 
business. At the end of that first meeting with Riccardo and Stephane I said to 
the other Activision participants, ‘That team is aligned with the way we 
operate the business. If we can someday figure out how to do something with 
them we should’. It’s very rare that you find people who have the same 
commitments, and the same commercial instinct.”

Kotick also shrugs off concerns about King’s reliance on Candy Crush. “They 
had product concentration, and so Mr Market looks at that and says, ‘Hey, you 
know, is that a one-trick pony?’ But when we looked at King, we saw four great 
franchises with lots of potential, one super franchise, and a fantastic 
pipeline. That got us really excited.”

From King’s point of view, the deal makes sense in that it gives them 
Activision’s proven IP with which to build new smartphone titles. But again, 
there’s another question: is the world ready for Call of Duty Saga? Destiny 
Soda? Skylanders Rescue? The latter is the most obvious brand for re-thinking 
into the casual smartphone space, and Call of Duty should be a useful asset in 
the growing “mid-core” sector of more challenging mobile gaming experiences.

But is that what this is about? “Just reskinning games with our intellectual 
property is not an appealing prospect for opportunity,” assures Kotick. “That 
isn’t something that creates long-term value for shareholders.”

Indeed, you get the sense that what really interests Activision – or at least 
its CEO – is sheer numbers. “We now have 500 million players in 196 countries 
around the world,” he says with barely contained zeal. “In the past, our 
business was largely concentrated around middle-class consumers who could 
afford $300 or $400 for a dedicated game console or $1000 for a PC. Now, with 
the introduction of high-quality mobile devices, we’re looking at everybody 
being a consumer. And one of the things I love about King is 60 percent of 
their consumer base is female. There are more opportunities now than we’ve ever 
had before.”

That’s the thing really. Over the last five years the console games industry 
has grown to resemble its younger smartphone sibling. The future is about what 
he calls “perpetual franchises”: the old model of annual boxed copy iterations 
is coming to an end. Call of Duty with its scheduled DLC drops, Destiny with 
its endless feed of new content – it’s about building communities and 
engagement now; it’s about finding new models for a growing audience that now 
thinks about games in a different way. King was able to rise up within the 
densely crowded smartphone space with an “audience first, revenue later” 
approach that Activision now covets.

“From Activision’s point of view the relatively slow burn of this generations 
console market and the transition towards increasingly digital delivery is 
major risk for their business – like any traditional publisher – so it makes 
sense to consolidate their position by acquiring one of the giants of mobile 
gaming,” says smartphone industry veteran Oscar Clark, now at Unity. “Leaving 
King as a separate entity is a smart move but if Activision is to really 
benefit they have to really learn from them and be willing and able to adapt 
themselves.”

One thing’s for sure, Kotick is never off duty. He has drawn the ire of core 
gamers with Activision’s endless cycle of money-spinning brands, the DLC packs, 
the vast number of Skylanders toys, the expense of keeping up to date with 
Destiny, but the monster rolls on regardless. You can bet when he sat across 
the table from those King executives three years ago, he wasn’t seeing two 
guys, he was seeing a new audience of many, many millions, in parts of the 
world even Call of Duty never reached. And right now, according to him, that’s 
all he cares about.


“Look, the way we see it, this audience is investing in our content right 
now,” he says. “Whether they’re paying for it or not is not really relevant. 
They’re investing a significant amount of time in our content. At some point, 
commercial opportunities will materialise for greater percentages of that 
audience.”

Time will tell if the numbers convert into revenue. But for Activision, 
whatever you think of the company, the numbers usually do.
 