
Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> can 
increase the chances of getting pregnant for women undergoing fertility 
treatment by 65%, a review of the evidence concludes today.

Acupuncture, which involves inserting fine needles under the skin at 
particular points in the body depending on the condition being treated, has 
long been used in China to help with a range of diagnoses, including regulating 
female reproduction.

To establish how effective the treatment is, doctors in the US collated 
evidence from all relevant, well-conducted studies and published their 
conclusions in today's British Medical Journal.

Eric Manheimer, research associate at the centre for integrative medicine at 
the University of Maryland school of medicine and colleagues looked at seven 
studies. All had been published in English since 2002 and conducted in four 
different western countries. The trials involved 1,366 women undergoing in 
vitro fertility treatment - where eggs and sperm are removed and mixed in the 
laboratory and one or more resulting embryos returned to the womb.

In the trials some women were given genuine acupuncture, others "sham" 
acupuncture, such as putting needles in the wrong places, and some no treatment 
at all. Overall the genuine acupuncture improved a woman's chances of pregnancy 
by 65%. All the acupuncture took place within a day or so of embryo transfer. 
Not all the pregnancies would have resulted in a live birth. In trials where 
the clinic's pregnancy rate was already high, there was a smaller, 
non-significant increase. Manheimer said the results were not necessarily a 
reason for every infertile woman to seek out acupuncture.

"I think the findings should be regarded as somewhat preliminary," he said. 
"Acupuncture can improve the rates of pregnancy and live birth. Some couples 
might want to choose acupuncture but others might want to wait until further 
research has been done."

But Edzard Ernst, professor of complementary medicine at the Peninsula medical 
school, Exeter, urged caution. "IVF may not seem to be 'placebo-prone' but it 
probably is: if women expect it to be helpful they are more relaxed, which in 
turn would affect pregnancy rates."

Manheimer argued a placebo response was unlikely, arguing that acupuncture may 
stimulate the body to produce neurotransmitters which influence the menstrual 
cycle, ovulation and fertility.
 