
Do you prescribe acupuncture?

I don't prescribe it per se, but I refer patients for a physiotherapist 
assessment with the expectation that acupuncture will be offered to them. I 
can't refer directly via the NHS provision in my area, and it's variable across 
the UK. It's available in a limited way and is usually accessed via chronic 
pain clinics or some physiotherapists.

What for?

The only recommendation we've got at the moment is to refer patients with 
lower back pain. There are certainly some pain clinics that use it for all 
other forms of chronic pain. That said, many of my patients ask my advice 
because they're contemplating trying a course of acupuncture privately for 
other problems.

Would colleagues prescribe more readily than yourself?

A lot of doctors think it's worth giving acupuncture a go for any sort of 
chronic pain but the evidence base isn't there for anything outside of pain 
management. You'll find GPs who practise acupuncture themselves, for all manner 
of things, but conversely a lot of GPs are more wary than I am of referring 
patients for accupuncture.

Have you always prescribed it?

No, it was not available a decade ago. Certainly over the past 10 years 
there's been more use of acupuncture for lower back pain. It's been available 
for seven or eight years in my area, I think, but only in a limited way. 
Because it's a grey area in medicine, provision is ad hoc across the UK. The 
Nice guidelines have given more support for people who want to get acupuncture 
but more patients are turned away than I would like.

Do you think it has an effect beyond placebo?

Yes, I do believe there is a benefit beyond that of the placebo effect. I have 
seen positive effects in some of my patients which support the findings of 
clinical trials that Nice used in making its recommendation. Not in everybody, 
however. Some people respond and some do not respond, and it is important 
people know that before they start.

Is there anything wrong with prescribing it merely as a placebo?

If all you will achieve is the placebo effect, then it's a very expensive way 
of getting it. We have to be fair to all patients, so to offer expensive 
treatments that don't have benefit is not a fair use of NHS resources. However, 
you can't tell for an individual patient whether it's placebo effect or a 
genuine effect. Homeopathic treatments are usually a placebo and I don't 
prescribe them, even though some people think they are beneficial.
 