
Scientists have performed acupuncture on mice with sore paws to pinpoint how 
the ancient Chinese medical practice might alleviate pain in humans.

After a half-hour session, the mice felt less discomfort in their paws because 
the needles triggered the release of a natural painkiller, say the researchers. 
The needles stimulated cells to produce adenosine, an anti-inflammatory and 
painkilling chemical, that was effective for up to an hour after the therapy 
was over.

The discovery challenges a widely held view among scientists that any benefit 
patients feel after having acupuncture is purely due to the placebo effect.

"The view that acupuncture does not have much benefit beyond the placebo 
effect has really hampered research into the technique," saidMaiken Nedergaard 
<http://www.urmc.rochester.edu/web/index.cfm?event=doctor.profile.show&person_id=1002438&display=for_researchers>
, a neuroscientist at the University of Rochester Medical Centre in New York, 
who led the study.

"Some people think any work in this area is junk research, but I think that's 
wrong. I was really surprised at the arrogance of some of my colleagues. We can 
benefit from what has been learned over many thousands of years," Nedergaard 
told the Guardian.

Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> was 
developed in China around 4,000 years ago. The procedure involves inserting 
fine needles at specific points around the body and then heating, twisting or 
even electrifying them.

Traditional practitioners claim acupuncture works by improving the flow of "qi 
energy" along "meridians", butthe latest research, published in Nature 
Neuroscience 
<http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nn.2562.html>, points 
to a less mystical explanation.

"I believe we've found the main mechanism by which acupuncture relieves pain. 
Adenosine is a very potent anti-inflammatory compound and most chronic pain is 
caused by inflammation," Nedergaard said.

The scientists gave each mouse a sore paw by injecting it with an inflammatory 
chemical. Half of the mice lacked a gene that is needed to make adenosine 
receptors, which are dotted along major nerves.

The therapy session involved inserting a fine needle into an acupuncture point 
in the knee above the sore foot. In keeping with traditional practice, the 
needles were rotated periodically throughout the half-hour session.

To measure how effective the acupuncture was, the researchers recorded how 
quickly each mouse pulled its sore paw away from a small bristly brush. The 
more pain the mice were in, the faster they pulled away.

Writing in the journal, Nedergaard's team describe how acupuncture reduced 
pain by two thirds in normal mice, but had no effect on the discomfort of mice 
that lacked the adenosine receptor gene. Without adenosine receptors, the 
chemical will have no effect on the mice when it is released in their bodies.

The acupunture had no effect at all in either group if the needles were not 
rotated.

Nedergaard said that twisting the needles seems to cause enough damage to make 
cells release adenosine. The chemical is then picked up by adenosine receptors 
on nearby nerves, which react by damping down pain. Further tests on the mice 
revealed that levels of adenosine surged 24-fold in the tissues around the 
acupuncture needles during and immediately after each session.

One of the long-standing mysteries surrounding acupuncture is why the 
technique only seems to alleviate pain if needles are inserted at specific 
points. Nedergaard believes that most of these points are along major nerve 
tracks, and as such are parts of the body that have plenty of adenosine 
receptors.

In a final experiment, Nedergaard's team injected mice with a cancer drug that 
made it harder to remove adenosine from their tissues. The drug, called
deoxycoformycin <http://www.mondofacto.com/facts/dictionary?deoxycoformycin>, 
boosted the effects of acupuncture dramatically, more than tripling how long 
the pain relief lasted.

"There is an attitude among some researchers that studying alternative 
medicine is unfashionable," said Nedergaard. "Because it has not been 
understood completely, many people have remained sceptical."

Although the study explains how acupuncture can alleviate pain, it sheds no 
light on any of the other health benefits that some practitioners believe it 
can achieve.
 