
Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> could be a 
useful treatment in some cases of chronic pain, according to a study that 
pooled the results of 29 clinical trials on almost 18,000 people. But the 
overall benefits were small, compared with no acupuncture or sham acupuncture.

The traditional Chinese treatment involves inserting needles into specific 
points in the body. Andrew J Vickers of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centre 
in New York led a team of scientists who collated data from previously 
published, randomised controlled trials on 17,922 patients from the US, UK, 
Germany, Spain and Swedenwith back and neck pain, osteoarthritis, chronic 
headache and shoulder pain. "We found acupuncture to be superior to both 
no-acupuncture control and sham acupuncture for the treatment of chronic pain," 
wrote Vickers in the September 10 edition ofthe Archives of Internal Medicine 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2012.3654>. "Although the data 
indicate that acupuncture is more than a placebo, the differences between true 
and sham acupuncture are relatively modest, suggesting that factors in addition 
to the specific effects of needling are important contributors to therapeutic 
effects."

The sham treatments used in the studies included needles that had not been 
fully inserted or devices where the needle retracted into the handle rather 
than puncturing the skin. Other shams included electrical stimulation.

Vickers found that patients receiving acupuncture had less pain with scores 
that were 0.23, 0.16 and 0.15 standard deviations lower than sham controls for 
back and neck pain, osteoarthritis and chronic headaches respectively. In 
comparison to controls, people who received acupuncture had pain that was 0.55, 
0.57 and 0.42 standard deviations lower. The scientists concluded that 
acupuncture was, therefore, a "reasonable referral option" for patients with 
chronic pain.

Edzard Ernst, emeritus professor of complementary medicine at the University 
of Exeter, said the study "impressively and clearly" showed that the effects of 
acupuncture were mostly due to placebo. "The differences between the results 
obtained with real and sham acupuncture are small and not clinically relevant. 
Crucially, they are probably due to residual bias in these studies. Several 
investigations have shown that the verbal or non-verbal communication between 
the patient and the therapist is more important than the actual needling. If 
such factors would be accounted for, the effect of acupuncture on chronic pain 
might disappear completely."

Ernst added that a potential problem with the trials in the meta-analysis was 
that, in all cases, the therapist knew whether he or she was administering real 
or sham acupuncture. "Arguably, it is next to impossible to completely keep 
this information from the patient. In other words, a trial is either both 
patient and therapist-blind, or not blind at all. Acupuncturists tend to tell 
us that therapist blinding is impossible, but this is clearly not true. I fear 
that, once we manage to eliminate this bias from acupuncture studies, we might 
find that the effects of acupuncture exclusively are a placebo response."

In an accompanying commentary article in the journal, Andrew Avins of the 
healthcare consortiumKaiser-Permanente 
<https://healthy.kaiserpermanente.org/html/kaiser/index.shtml> based in 
Oakland, California,wrote that 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2012.4198> while it was ideal to 
understand the mechanism of action of an intervention, the ultimate question 
was if it worked for the patient.

"At least in the case of acupuncture, Vickers et al have provided some robust 
evidence that acupuncture seems to provide modest benefits over usual care for 
patients with diverse sources of chronic pain," wrote Avins. "Perhaps a more 
productive strategy at this point would be to provide whatever benefits we can 
for our patients, while we continue to explore more carefully all mechanisms of 
healing."
 