
Acupuncture is no longer recommended as a treatment for low back pain on the 
NHS, according tonew draft guidelines 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/indevelopment/gid-cgwave0681> released today 
by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice).

The u-turn comes after a review of scientific evidence found that the practice 
was no better than a placebo in treating those living with low back pain and 
sciatica.

The draft guidelines report that there have now been a large number of 
scientific trials looking into the effectiveness of acupuncture but that, 
“there was still not compelling and consistent evidence of a treatment-specific 
effect for acupuncture.”

Acupuncture useful, but overall of little benefit, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/sep/10/acupuncture-useful-little-benefit-study>
Low back pain is thought affect one in 10 people, while its cost to the UK 
economy is estimated to exceed £12 billion a year in lost productivity.

Nice guidelines <https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg88> from 2009 on the early 
management of low back pain recommended that healthcare providers “consider 
offering a course of acupuncture needling comprising up to a maximum of 10 
sessions over a period of up to 12 weeks.”

But the new draft guidelines, now covering sciatica as well as low back pain, 
contain an unequivocal volte-face, stating: “Do not offer acupuncture for 
managing non-specific low back pain with or without sciatica.”

Professor Mark Baker, clinical practice director for Nice, said: “Regrettably, 
there is a lack of convincing evidence of effectiveness for some widely used 
treatments. For example, acupuncture is no longer recommended for managing low 
back pain with or without sciatica. This is because there is not enough 
evidence to show that it is more effective than sham treatment.”

Edzard Ernst, emeritus professor of complementary medicine at the Peninsula 
School of Medicine, University of Exeter, welcomed the new guidelines. “The 
previous Nice guidelines for low back pain were seriously out of touch with the 
reliable evidence. What is worse, they were used by alternative therapists to 
justify unproven practice,” he said. “ It is good to see that Nice have now 
caught up with the evidence. Neither spinal manipulation nor acupuncture are 
supported by good science when it comes to treating low back pain.”

All in the mind? How research is proving the true healing power of the placebo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/15/jo-marchant-mind-body-health-medicine-science>
After examining a large number of studies, including 30 randomised control 
trials that looked at the use of acupuncture without any other treatment, the 
authors of the draft guidelines concluded that although acupuncture could 
appear to be effective, the evidence overall demonstrated that it was no better 
than a placebo. “Although comparison of acupuncture with usual care 
demonstrated improvements in pain, function and quality of life in the short 
term, comparison with sham acupuncture showed no consistent clinically 
important effect.”

They also emphasise the use of tailored exercise for treating low back pain 
and sciatica, adding that psychological therapies and massage should only be 
used alongside exercise.


The draft guidelines also reveal that paracetamol is no longer recommended as 
“the first medical option” and should not be used on its own. Instead, they 
advise that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen 
should be considered. Codeine and other weak opioids are only recommend in 
acute cases and only if other anti-inflammatories cannot be taken or if they 
are not found to help. Electrotherapies such as ultrasound remain on the list 
of procedures to be avoided.

“I have to be disappointed because I think acupuncture is a useful technique 
that we should be using as much as possible,” said Dr Mike Cummings, medical 
director of the British MedicalAcupuncture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> Society. “It’s 
unfortunate that the methods used on this occasion have led to a negative 
recommendation.” He believes there are problems with the way the studies were 
assessed. “It is partly to do with the decision to put the biggest emphasis on 
the difference over sham,” he said. “That is a problem for all physical 
therapies because physical therapy shams tend to be active - because you have 
to touch patients.”

Open for consultation until 5 May, the final version of the guidelines is 
expected to be published in September.

 * This article was updated on 24 March to include a response from the British 
Medical Acupuncture Society
 