
"Ça va?" says the young actor to the wise, older director as he passes.

He smiles with twinkly eyes.

"You slept well?" she asks.

"Like a baby," he says. And on he walks.

"Ah, the master," she says.

You wouldn't think these two were at the heart of this year's biggest cinema 
controversies.Adèle Exarchopoulos <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2650819/> is 19, 
and recently madeBlue Is The Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-review>
, directed by French-Tunisian auteur Abdellatif Kechiche. The film is a 
three-hour love story between two young women in which very little happens. 
It is compelling, often brilliant, and contains two astonishingly naturalistic 
performances from Exarchopoulos andLéa Seydoux 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2244205/>.

The jury at this year's Cannes film festival, chaired by Steven Spielberg, 
awarded Blue Is The Warmest Colour the prestigious Palme d'Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/may/26/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-win>
 for best film. And, for the first time, the jury ruled that the two central 
performances were so remarkable that the director should share the award with 
his actors. There followed giddy photos ofthe trio celebrating an unprecedented 
triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/26/cannes-blue-is-the-warmest-colour>
.

And then things took a strange turn. The actors gave interviews in which they 
talked about Kechiche's tortuous process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/04/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-actors-director>
: how every scene had taken for ever, and how he had insisted on take after 
take until they felt they were cracking up. They said an explicit sex scene had 
taken 10 days and that they had to lie on the bed fumbling with each other, 
cold and naked, hour after hour. "Most people don't even dare to ask the things 
that he did, and they're more respectful,"Exarchopoulos told the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/09/01/the-stars-of-blue-is-the-warmest-color-on-the-riveting-lesbian-love-sory-and-graphic-sex-scenes.html>
. Seydoux said that at times she felt "like a prostitute". A heartbreaking 
separation and reunion was shot and reshot until they felt battered and 
delusional. Exarchopoulos complained that the director had made Seydoux hit her 
repeatedly across the face in a fight scene. No wonder she cries so 
convincingly.

Then the director fired back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/06/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-director-hits-back>
. He said the actors were spoiled, didn't know what real suffering was, that he 
felt "humiliated" and that he didn't want the film released because the 
audience would no longer be able to watch it objectively.

Yet here we are, a few weeks before the film is to be released, with 
Exarchopoulos promoting the film in one room, Kechiche in another, and the two 
engaged in a seemingly warm if brief exchange.

Exarchopoulos tucks into a huge bacon and chicken club sandwich, french fries 
and tomato and mozzarella salad, and tells me how lucky she has been to work 
with Kechiche. "I love Abdellatif's cinema. I love his movie. I love the fact 
that he starts from an ordinary story. I love that he's tried to be close to 
the truth. I love the humanity in his movie and the power he gave to women in 
this film."

Exarchopoulos's character is called Adèle, and she is in every scene; in 
France the film is called The Life Of Adèle, Chapters 1 & 2. Her range is 
immense, from the unguarded ecstasies of first love to the tear-drenched, 
snot-dribbling grief of loss. Every scene is so slow and organic that it feels 
as if you are watching the relationship unfold in real time.
 Exarchopoulos and Léa Seydoux in Blue Is the Warmest Colour 

When all three won the Palme d'Or, she says, they were delirious. "I spoke to 
Spielberg afterwards, and they said they chose to make an exception and give 
the actors the joint Palme d'Or for the first time. I was surprised we won. 
We were telling ourselves he's too puritanical, he's not going to like the 
movie, and in fact he loved it."

I'm confused. They had a wonderful time at Cannes, were widely feted, and 
everything seems hunky dory today. So was the row exaggerated for publicity?

"No, it was real, but it was not as big as it looks. For me, a shoot is a 
human adventure, and in every adventure you have some conflict. It is hard when 
you are young to be pushed to your limits, but for me it was the best school."

Was she misquoted as saying she felt exploited? She nods and shakes her head 
simultaneously. "No, it's more complicated."

Tell me. "The most important things are too private for me. In every shoot, 
between the actor and the director there is manipulation. I'm not saying that 
negatively. It's healthy. Abdellatif records a lot of takes so that you can let 
go." She says he wants his actors to be in a "second state", instinctive, 
holding nothing back. "It's extreme, and sometimes it was really hard and 
he didn't realise it because he has such passion for cinema, for reality, and 
sometimes it's devouring." She stops. "For me, every genius has their own 
complexity. And Abdellatif asks you to give him everything. You can trust him 
like a spiritual father. He will teach you anything, but yes, it was very hard."

Exarchopoulos, whose grandfather is Greek, was born in Paris; her father was a 
guitar teacher and her mother a nurse. At eight, she joined a dramatic 
improvisation class. At 12, a director came to watch her and she was cast in a 
short film. She had bit parts in a number of films, but this is her first major 
role. She gave up on her baccalaureate to make the film. She says she hated 
school; not the idea of learning, just the strictures, the mechanical nature of 
teaching. Was she academic? "No, I was mediocre. The less I did, the better I 
felt. I was lazy. I hate having things imposed on me. I hate it when people 
impose a certain rhythm."

Exarchopoulos couldn't be more French: her looks, her smoking, her emotional 
transparency. She has a lovely round face yet to lose its puppy fat, a sensual 
innocence that reminds me of a youngCharlotte Gainsbourg 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001250/>, and a refreshingly belligerent 
intelligence. When bored by a question, she'll look out of the window. When 
interested, she gives it her all.

I ask Exarchopoulos to describe Adèle's character in the film. "She's a young 
girl, a virgin of all experience in life, and she's got a crush on somebody, 
and it is her first love. She is pure. She doesn't know the rules of love, like 
you have to protect yourself. She wants to give everything. I was the same with 
my first love. I give everything, I want to believe everything, I want to live 
everything, eat everything." How old was she? "Fourteen."

I tell her that even middle-aged people don't know to hold things back, to 
protect themselves. "They should know," she says incisively. "They will learn." 
It makes me smile.

Would she say she was unusually mature for her age? "Maybe, I don't know. It 
depends on your experiences. For example, I've always spent time with older 
people, and that helps." At one point, she tells me that Kechiche, 52, was easy 
prey for journalists because he is naive.
 Exarchopoulos, Seydoux and their director, Abdellatif Kechiche, with their 
Palme d'Or at Cannes. Photograph: Getty 

Blue Is The Warmest Colour is superb on class (Adèle's parents are working 
class, her lover bohemian middle class); snobbery (her lover belongs to a 
patronising art elite); bullying (her fellow pupils pick on Adèle when they 
think she is having an affair with a woman); school (Adèle becomes a teacher, 
and the film has some of the most tender scenes you will see with 
young children); and, as you might expect from the man who directedCouscous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124448/couscous>, food (Adèle 
eats plate after plate of pasta, splattering it all over her face; her lover's 
family prefer oysters).

Every scene is languorous, as if the director has created a reality for his 
actors, and then filmed it over five months. For me, the one weakness is the 
extended central sex scene, when the film briefly descends into Confessions Of 
An Auteur, with lots of bottom-slapping and pinching. I tell Exarchopoulos I 
think it's too long, and that it looks like a man's projection of lesbianism. 
"I think you can't really judge sexuality. Sometimes, you see people in life 
and you can't imagine, 'Oh, she's going to have sex.' But I do agree that they 
are too long."

What about all the slapping? "Everybody gets slapped in sex," she says 
matter-of-factly. "It's a kind of highway to sex."

Adèle's two most powerful scenes are when she breaks up with her lover, and 
when she attempts a reconciliation. I have never seen an actor weep with such 
raw intensity. When she talks about the way Kechiche manipulated her, I think 
of these scenes. Surely she couldn't have broken down so completely unless he 
had driven her to the edge with retake after retake? Is this what she found so 
painful?

"You can't summarise a five-month experience around a hamburger. It is too 
intimate. These are things you don't discuss. It's just sometimes you were 
destabilised by the fact that he was pushing you to your limits. But that's 
what we loved, too. He's waiting for the greatest moment, and he would always 
take the best from you."

Does part of her emotion come from the exhaustion? "Yes, for sure. Yes, you 
lose yourself."

I ask if making the film has given her more confidence. "No. Because everyone 
has tried to judge me, to put something on my shoulders. Some people want me to 
be a gay militant. I have hate messages on Facebook, racist or homophobic: they 
talk about an Arabic man making two girls have sex. Then some people say, 
 'Will she be good in the next film or is it just Abdellatif Kechiche?' I'm 
only 19. Stop asking me what I'm going to do tomorrow. I don't know."

She throws back a couple of chips, takes another bite out of her sandwich and 
says that, despite everything, "This is the best thing I have ever done in my 
life."

Great, I say, so we'll set the record straight and say that you will work with 
Kechiche again. "I don't know. I have to prove myself with somebody else also. 
I was 18, I was suffering on this movie, nobody can understand because nobody 
was there. Maybe in two years' time, I will say yes." If he asked her now? "I 
will say I don't know. Please give me time to live my life, to discover myself, 
to work with other people, to learn."

If Kechiche had gone ahead with his threats not to release the film because he 
was so hurt by his stars' comments, would she have been upset? She deadpans, 
and tells me it's a daft question, because it is coming out.

Yes, I say, but what if he had withdrawn it?

She laughs. "What d'you think? I gave myself for five months, everything I 
can."

I think you would have been devastated, I say.

"Yes, of course."

• Blue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155325/blue-is-the-warmest-colour> goes 
on limited release on 22 November
 