
Adam Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> emerged from a 
dramatic third round of the Australian Open just one shot off the championship 
lead. Halfway leader Greg Chalmers ground out an even-par 71 in testing 
conditions to remain on top, with Brett Rumford and American ace Jordan Spieth 
carding 69s to join the two-time champion at five under.

Scott and veteran Rod Pampling shot 69s to be tied for fourth at four under - 
but world No.1Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> 
imploded mid-round to leave his title defence in tatters. The defending 
champion had a triple-bogey and double-bogey mid-round to plummet from the 
joint lead into a tie for 14th at one over after a uncustomary round of 76.

Only eight players ended the round in red figures as blustery winds and baking 
greens turned so-called moving day into grinding day at The AustralianGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club.


Long-hitting amateur Todd Sinnott (73) is outright sixth at two under, one 
ahead of rising star Jake Higginbottom (72) and Sydney touring professional 
Aron Price (69).


After only making the half cut right on the number, Queenslander Daniel Nisbet 
fired the round of the day in the easier morning conditions - a bogey-free 
four-under 67 - to surge up the leaderboard into equal ninth spot at even with 
the card.


Scott, though, will carry most momentum into the final round after clawing his 
way back into contention after a nightmare start to the tournament. The 2013 
Masters champion was five over par after his opening nine holes on Thursday.

Chalmers rebounded from a bogey-bogey start with birdies on the sixth and 14th 
holes to retain a share of the lead heading into the final round. Spieth, the 
world No.14 and 2014 Masters runner-up to Bubba Watson, showed his class to 
birdie the last to join Chalmers and Rumford on top.

Rumford mixed four birdies with two bogeys to give himself a shot at winning a 
maiden national championship, while 45-year-old Pampling ignited his round with 
a spectacular eagle two on the 401-metre par-4 10th. Holing out from 120 
metres, Pampling rode the momentum all the way through the back nine and into a 
share of the lead.

McIlroy’s title hopes suffered a hammer blow with a diabolical triple-bogey 
seven on the par-4 ninth. After blocking his tee shot into waist-high rough, 
his gamble to try to muscle it out backfired spectacularly.

The world No.1 looked like a weekend hacker as he chopped the ball less than a 
metre, submerging it under flaky matting and being forced to take a penalty for 
an unplayable lie. Even with the benefit of two club lengths’ relief, McIlroy 
still wasn’t out of the rough and could only manage to punch the ball about 100 
metres before finally finding the green with his fifth shot. But he was unable 
to hole his putt from less than three metres and suddenly dropped seemingly out 
of contention.
 