
It must be hoped that Rory McIlroy’s losing of the WGC-Cadillac Championship 
does not overshadow the wonderfully dramatic fashion in whichAdam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> won it, recording a second 
victory in two weeks. Any more of this and golf will be in danger of gleaming 
plaudits for entertainment. Even the appearance of Donald Trump, who 
glad-handed on the driving range, could not detract from what transpired over 
the subsequent four hours. The tournament was all the better for that.

On a captivating afternoon on the outskirts of Miami Scott recorded two double 
bogeys, shanked a bunker shot, flirted with a water hazard on the 72nd hole but 
finally, crucially, converted from 6ft 8in to claim the trophy. Relief – and an 
element of shock – matched Scott’s delight after a classy back nine contributed 
to a 69 and a total of 12 under par. McIlroy had started the day on that mark.

With this, added to his Honda Classic success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/28/adam-scott-sergio-garcia-honda-classic>
 seven days earlier, Scott has comprehensively dismissed fears over his 
enforced change from a long-handled putter. He holed out 18 times from 18 
attempts within 10ft on day four.

Rory McIlroy puts faith in reverse putting grip as trump card in Miami
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/02/rory-mcilroy-reverse-putting-grip-miami>
Scott is expected to rise to No6 in the world, which at least almost resembles 
what his status in this sport should naturally be. Marriage and fatherhood may 
have shifted Scott’s priorities for a while but he remains an immense talent; 
as now replicated by 13PGA Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> 
wins at the age of 35.

“I can’t really believe it. I haven’t processed what happened there,” said 
Scott. “It was ugly and good, all in 18 holes.

“I think you have this picture in your mind that you’ve got to play so 
beautifully to win all the time and sometimes, especially at a golf course like 
this, in windy conditions like this, it can’t be that pretty unless you play 
one of the rounds of your life.”

Something akin to an encyclopedia may be required to tell the full tale of how 
this all unfolded from the position where McIlroy seemed to hold an 
unassailable advantage. In seriously testing conditions he could score no 
better than 74.

“I didn’t take advantage of the holes I should have,” McIlroy said. “It’s 
frustrating because that’s two out of the last three weeks. I was leading the 
golf tournament with 16 holes to play at Riviera. I was leading here going into 
the back nine and to not get the job done in either two of those instances is 
very frustrating.

“So I’ve got two events left to try to get that win before going to Augusta 
and I’m hopefully going to get it.”

One thing McIlroy will not lack is motivation, by virtue of wounding 
experience. At its peak that lead was four with Scott, who had found water on 
the 3rd and 5th, seemingly well out of the equation. “I took a moment to think 
about gaining some traction on the round before it slips away and I shoot 80,” 
said Scott of his 6th tee thoughts.

Danny Willett wins Dubai Desert Classic to further Ryder Cup claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/danny-willett-wins-dubai-desert-classic-ryder-cup>
McIlroy’s wobble was unforeseen but the level of bruising it inflicted was 
apparent even at first glance as he stepped from the course. The Northern 
Irishman had played 40 tournament holes without a bogey before missing a 
lengthy par putt at the 7th. Another trip arrived at the 9th, where McIlroy 
could not get up and down from a greenside bunker. Suddenly we had a four-way 
tie for the lead.

McIlroy was never to rediscover his mojo, with his first birdie of the final 
round not arriving until the 16th. And yet, in endorsing the madcap nature of 
this event, repeats on the closing two holes would have forced a play-off. 
McIlroy’s effort on the 17th slipped agonisingly past, at which point his race 
was run – barring a Scott aberration.

It almost arrived. The 2013 Masters champion watched his tee shot at the last 
land behind a tree. Shot two was within a bad bounce of the lake with the next 
a genuine example of brilliance in high pressure. Scott lobbed a chip from a 
treacherous, sloping lie to within makeable distance. His fresh putting style 
held firm.

Others had played their part. Bubba Watson, who finished second, led by one 
after a birdie at the 12th. It will not be lost on the charismatic left-hander 
that on the two previous occasions in which he was the runner-up here, in 2012 
and 2014, he went on to win the Masters. “I have a lot of confidence but 
Augusta is still a long way away,” Watson said.

Phil Mickelson and Danny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett> had spells in a tie for the 
lead; the Englishman may be especially irked by the way matters played out, as 
he carved a tee shot on the 18th into water. Willett had to make do with a 
share of third with McIlroy at 10 under par, one ahead of Mickelson. “I think 
last year I hit that tee shot right, into the trees,” said Willett, who could 
at least smile.

This was Scott’s day. He might have illustrated just how difficult winning can 
be but it was winning all the same. His was a triumph that should linger long 
in golfing memory.
 