
An autumn line-up peppered with returning favourites including The X Factor 
and Downton Abbey, and a new drama on Lord Lucan, suggestsITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> is entering the most important 
period of the year for TV advertising in fine fettle. But it is not just 
viewers who have their eyes firmly fixed on the UK's largest advertiser-funded 
broadcaster.

Investors have been buying into chief executive Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, who is now more than halfway 
through a five-year strategic turnaround plan for ITV, which has seen the 
broadcaster's share price double in the last year to a record 175p, making ITV 
worth nearly £7bn. Previously at the FA and the Post Office, Crozier could bank 
£16m from ITV if he hits targets.

"We have invested heavily in the quality of the schedule, and the on-screen 
performance has been very good as a result," said Crozier. "We have also 
invested heavily in online. Our digital and pay-TV revenues have more than 
doubled, and on the content side we have had to start again over the last three 
years." That refers to ITV's previously under-performing production division 
ITV Studios – which makes and sells shows including Titanic, Come Dine With Me, 
Mr Selfridge and Dancing on Ice – whose turnaround is probably the biggest 
feather in Crozier's cap so far.

He has bolstered ITV Studios by acquiring eight production companies in the 
last year, including Graham Norton's So Television, Big Talk, which makes Rev 
for the BBC as well as films including Simon Pegg and Edgar Wright's The 
World's End, and Gurney, the US producer behind reality shows including Duck 
Dynasty.

ITV Studios has seen revenues rise from £554m to £712m in two years, and this 
year will deliver double-digit revenue growth and profits well over £100m.

It is all very different from the months before Crozier was parachuted in as 
Mr Fixit in January 2010. In the depths of the post-crash recession, ITV's 
share price hit a rock bottom 17p – a time previous executive chairman Michael 
Grade referred to as a "near death experience".

Gone is ITV's life-threatening £1bn debt and pension deficit, and the business 
has clawed its way back from a £2.7bn annual loss in the darkest days of the 
downturn to a healthy £348m profits in 2012.

There's nothing better than a lucky boss, and Crozier has definitely been 
lucky – his success is at least in part down to good timing: being appointed 
when the worst of the recession was over.

"There has been an element of luck," says Thomas Singlehurst, head of European 
media equity research at Citigroup. "There was a nice big old ad recovery 
between 2009 and 2010."

And while Crozier is keen to talk up diversification into areas such as 
subscription and online, revenues from these areas still account for just 5% of 
the £2.2bn ITV brings in annually.

ITV hoovers up almost £1 of every £2 spent by UK companies on TV advertising, 
with its portfolio of channels forecast to generate at least £600m in 
advertising and sponsorship revenues – 40% of the annual total – between now 
and Christmas. This means the company remains heavily reliant on the fortunes 
of the advertising market, despite Crozier's sterling work to reduce this 
revenue stream to about 60% of ITV's total.

"The overwhelming driver of the share price performance across the media 
landscape is the prospect of a European advertising recovery," said 
Singlehurst. "That said, you should not do down what management has achieved – 
there has been a lot of work in the background to bring things back into ITV's 
control.

"And the level of 'de-risking' is extraordinary. The way the content offering 
has been broadened – ITV is a lot less reliant on a few big franchises such as 
X Factor and Coronation Street – is a function of management having confidence 
to invest."

Crozier, a former Saatchi & Saatchi chief executive, insists the growth is 
coming from his successful strategy. "The turnaround has been achieved without 
any help from advertising. Our results last year were a record. We are ahead of 
plan [and] ITV's financial position has never been like this."

With ITV in rude health, and the prospect of an economic recovery buoying 
investors, the first whispers of the business becoming a potential takeover 
target have inevitably been heard. "I think not," says Crozier. "We have grown 
strongly and are in a good position. We are focused on our position in the UK 
and internationally." Any suitor would need to stump up well over £7bn, 
factoring in a premium on ITV's current performance, but nevertheless analysts 
consider the revitalised business to be a hugely attractive asset.

"When you look around Europe, listed content production assets of scale are 
extraordinarily rare," says Singlehurst. "ITV is unquestionably a strategically 
attractive asset, and you can't say we have hit the peak of the economic cycle."
 