
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> faces a 
fresh backbench challenge to his EU policy after a Tory MP said he would push 
for a Commons vote on holding an in/out referendum before the general election.

The prime minister's office roundly slapped down Adam Afriyie's plan to table 
an amendment to legislation paving the way for a promised vote in 2017, 
insisting it would not be allowed to pass "in any circumstances".

"The PM will not let it stand," a spokesman said.

The Windsor MP, once the subject of leadership bid speculation, said the 
public was "not convinced" that the prime minister would stick to his pledge of 
a vote if theConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> 
won the general election.

Writing in the Mail on Sunday, Afriyie said delaying posed "significant 
dangers", including building support for Ukip.

He claimed the support of "many MPs from across all the main parties" for an 
early referendum.

But he was warned by the fellow Tory MP attempting to steer the 
leadership-backed legislation through Parliament that the move would delay and 
even "kill" his private member's bill altogether.

James Wharton said: "This amendment would make it far more difficult to 
navigate the challenging procedural hurdles we need to overcome and I hope its 
sponsors might rethink their approach.

"We need to build as broad a base of support for the bill as we can if we are 
to get it through Parliament and the policy of a renegotiation, followed by an 
in/out referendum, is the right one to do that and the right one for the 
country.

"I hope MPs will decline to support it as the ultimate impact might well be to 
kill my bill, which would only help those who don't want any referendum at all."

The European Union (Referendum) Bill easily cleared its first Commons hurdle 
in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jul/05/labour-refuses-rule-out-eu-referendum>
 after Labour and the Liberal Democrats stayed away.

Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> and Nick Clegg 
have dismissed the bill as a stunt designed to shore up the prime minister's 
position with his rank and file – pointing out that it has virtually no chance 
of becoming law.

In May, 115 Conservative MPs backed a rebel amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/16/cameron-snubbed-tory-eu-referendum>
 to the Queen's Speech criticising the failure to include a referendum bill in 
the government's legislative programme.

Cameron said that was impossible because of being in coalition with the 
pro-European Lib Dems, but has thrown his weight behind Wharton's bill.

Afriyie said he would table an amendment bringing forward the referendum date 
to 23 October 2014.

"It's in our national interest to resolve this issue as soon as possible to 
create the certainty and stability our country needs for the future," he said.

"Only by setting an early date can we kick-start EU renegotiation talks and 
give the British people what they so clearly want – a say on our country's 
future with Europe.

"The political establishment are naturally hesitant but we have nothing to 
fear by giving people a chance to have their say, either way, on our future 
relationship with Europe."

Questioning Cameron's tactics of promising a 2017 vote following a 
renegotiation of the UK's relationship with Brussels, he wrote: "The fact is, 
the British people are not convinced there will be a referendum at all if we 
wait until after the next general election.

"So many things can change. They don't understand why we can't have one right 
away – and that makes them suspicious.

"Many people think delaying the vote is just a tactic to allow all the 
political leaders to kick the can even further down the road.

"In reality, the British people are unsure whether the Conservative leadership 
would be able to stick to its promise of holding a referendum after the 
election, especially if in coalition once again."

Even if the Tories did win in 2015 there would remain "uncertainty" over the 
implementation of the result of a referendum, he suggested.

"Many MPs from across all the main parties want an EU referendum in 2014. But 
for the Conservative party, I believe the dangers of waiting are significant.

"Mainstream politicians continue to underestimate and dismiss the power and 
significance of populism – currently expressed in the form of Ukip votes.

"Because at the heart of a populist movement is a legitimate concern 
unacknowledged by the political establishment.

"By holding an early EU referendum, we would have recognised, embraced and 
addressed those concerns."
 