
Adam Scott has highlighted the value of Steve Williams to him at the Masters, 
withthe 2013 champion  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/15/adam-scott-angel-cabrera-masters>
insisting the return of the veteran caddie to bag duties this week is normal 
and logical.

Scott enjoyed success with the English caddie Dave Clark earlier this year, 
including two wins on the Florida swing. That triggered inevitable questions as 
to whether Williams, as had always been the intention, would reappear with 
Scott at Augusta.

The Australian world No6 was unwavering regarding this alliance, just as was 
the case here on Tuesday. “I didn’t have any conversations with David,” said 
Scott of events after hiswin at the WGC Cadillac Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/adam-scott-rory-mcilroy-wgc-cadillac-championship-doral>
. “Back in September, when David came to work for me, he was coming on to do, I 
guess it’s known as a job-share agreement. That was what was outlined, so there 
was no need for any conversation. Some other guys out here do job share.

“I would see it, if I changed it from not bringing Steve here, that would be a 
change to the plan. So that would be the disruption.”

Williams, who was on the bag for three of the four Masters won by Tiger Woods, 
has also released a book in Britain this week called Out of the Rough that 
charts his 38-year career as a caddie.

“His experience is invaluable, isn’t it? I don’t know if any caddie has won as 
much as he has around here,” Scott said. “So he has an affinity with the course 
from his side of things and our results in the major championships since Steve 
started working for me in 2011 have been fantastic if you compare them to my 
results in major championships before that point.

Vaughn Taylor back at the Masters but this time he doesn’t need a ticket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/vaughn-taylor-masters-augusta-national-pebble-beach>
“Steve won’t be the influence in everything I do in my golf game but he’s 
certainly had a positive impact. Even coming back after nine months off the bag 
last year at the US Open, my form was very average leading into it and we got 
into contention and we ended up finishing fourth with a great Sunday round.

“I’m looking for that same kind of magic out of him this week, just like I ask 
out of David Clark any week he’s caddying and myself every week I’m playing.”

It seems incredible this represents Scott’s 15th Masters appearance. He has 
not missed the first major of the season since his 2002 debut. A curiously 
dismal run of Augusta form followed until a run of 18th, second, eighth and 
first from 2010.

“I remember the first one very clearly,” said the 35-year-old. “I finished 
ninth and didn’t really know what all the fuss was about. It was a great week 
for me. Then there was kind of a blur for a while of just playing and not 
getting anything out of it as far as results go. And then I really turned the 
corner in 2010, I felt, where I somehow just developed a high level of comfort 
playing around the course. Since then, the results have been good.

“I think I got very defensive five or six years playing the course, just being 
too aware of where all the trouble was and forgetting I could hit a good shot 
and not get near any trouble.”

Scott smiled when contemplating whether or not his major opportunities are 
being limited on account of age. “I don’t spend a lot of time thinking about 
it, which is probably a good thing because it means I’m not quite there yet 
that I have to worry about it,” he said.

“But it certainly seems like there are only a few players who have been very 
dominant over 40 years old and it’s probably going to be harder, too, as the 
young twentysomethings are better and better. That’s probably a trend that’s 
going to continue to happen.”
 