
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> chief executive Adam Crozier's 
total remuneration almost tripled to more than £8m last year, boosted by the 
award of shares worth nearly £6m under incentive schemes, as the broadcaster 
celebrated a year of programming successes.

Crozier earned £8.4m in 2013, up from the £2.9m he received the year before, 
according to ITV's annual report. The UK's biggest free-to-air broadcaster has 
been boosted by strong ratings and critical plaudits for shows such as Mr 
Selfridge, Broadchurch and Downton Abbey, which have prompted a financial 
revival at ITV Studios, the company's programming and distribution arm.

The figure rocketed last year because Crozier was awarded £3.95m in shares 
under a joining package agreed when he took up the role in 2010. He also 
received a further £2m in stock from the company's performance share plan and 
£2.4m in 2013 in cash and pension contributions, including a bonus of £1.4m and 
a base salary of £841,000.

Crozier, a former advertising executive who rose to become chief executive of 
the Football Association and the Royal Mail, was parachuted in to rescue a 
business that had struggled to find its feet since it was created by the merger 
of independent-network heavyweights Granada and Carlton in 2004.

ITV chairman Archie Norman, who also joined in 2010, got an overall pay 
package of £500,000 in 2013, which was up from £300,000 the previous year. 
Norman's pay package in 2013 was made up of salary of £300,000 and shares worth 
£200,000.

Crozier's remuneration reflects ITV's improved fortunes since he arrived in 
April 2010, when the broadcaster was still reeling from the post-credit-crunch 
recession, with a share price languishing at about 70p. Nearly four years 
later, ITV's share price is now nearly £2.

He arrived with a five-year turnaround plan that included building up the ITV 
Studios production operation and weaning the business off its reliance on TV 
advertising by developing new digital revenue streams.

Last month, ITV reported pretax profits up 30% year-on-year to £435m for 2013, 
fuelled by a 20% leap in profits at ITV Studios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/26/itv-profits-channel-5-bid>. ITV 
remains heavily reliant on TV advertising, but has benefited from the general 
improvement in the UK economy.

Alex DeGroote, media analyst at Panmure Gordon, believes the payout is a fair 
reflection of the job that Crozier has done.

DeGroote said: "Is £8.4m the right value? You have to say he has done a great 
job. His payment is consistent with a strong recovery in ITV's share price."

He has also been a "lucky" boss in that he joined ITV after the worst of the 
recession, DeGroote said, who also pointed to a strong executive team around 
him.

Crozier is not alone in being well-remunerated in the broadcasting sector. 
BSkyB's chief executive Jeremy Darroch took home more than £7m in pay and share 
awards in 2012, including an near-maximum cash bonus of £1.8m.

However, Crozier has hit the headlines for his pay packet prior to joining ITV 
– when his efforts to turn around two major organisations first alerted media 
headhunters.

In 2009 he became Britain's second-best-paid public sector employee, taking 
home almost £1m as Royal Mail's chief executive, a figure that attracted 
criticism during the recession as the organisation imposed a pay freeze on 
staff.

He joined Royal Mail in 2003 when it was losing £1m a day and set about 
turning into an operation capable of competing with private operators who were 
arriving on the scene as the postal market became liberalised.

Prior to that, Crozier was joint chief executive of advertising agency Saatchi 
& Saatchi aged just 31 and was a surprise appointment to run the Football 
Association in 2000, at the age of 35.

He was given the job of shaking up the fusty organisation and making it more 
commercially minded, able to exploit the huge sums being poured into football 
by broadcasters.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
on Twitter andFacebook <http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 