
Tory MPs were tripping over one another this week to pass wry comment on the 
news that one of their number, who is barely known at Westminster let alone in 
the country at large, is being lined up to replaceDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>.

"I am launching my campaign for prime minister – young cardinals vote for an 
old pope," one veteran quipped after hearing that backbencherAdam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie> was launching a leadership 
campaign. "I shall recommission the Royal Yacht Britannia and travel a great 
deal around the world in the style of Harold Macmillan."

The news of the Afriyie campaign prompted one loyalist – metaphorically at 
least – to "choke on his cereal", the same analogy the aspiring leader was 
advised to trot out on Sky News when news of his campaign leaked over the 
weekend.

"The Adam Afriyie stuff is completely mad," the loyalist said. "I heard about 
it before it broke and didn't bother telling central command because it sounded 
so barking."

The widespread derision that has greeted the disclosure of the campaign by 
Afriyie, 47, who struggled to rise beyond the position of shadow science 
minister before the last election, has confirmed the inevitable. The 
multimillionaire MP for Windsor, who made his fortune in IT after advising Lord 
Archer's failed campaign for London mayor, will never be a credible candidate 
for Tory leader.

The disclosure in the Mail on Sunday  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2268862/Adam-Afriyie-The-Tory-Obamas-stalking-horse-plot-oust-David-Cameron.html>
by the veteran reporter Simon Walters of the extent of Afriyie's plans, 
masterminded by former frontbencher Mark Field, means the pair will struggle to 
make any headway at Westminster in the coming years. Cameron loyalists were 
scathing about Field, MP for the Cities of London and Westminster who was two 
years ahead of the prime minister at Oxford.

But the Afriyie campaign highlighted an open secret at Westminster – a 
significant number of Tory MPs are plotting to remove Cameron. One government 
member said: "This is ongoing. It is quite serious. I heard about this last 
week and thought it was not serious. But actually it is."

The plotters are a disparate group. A small number, including some of those 
campaigning for Afriyie, want to remove Cameron immediately on the grounds that 
he failed to win the last election against a hugely unpopular Labour prime 
minister. Others, notably Afriyie himself, want to have a credible candidate in 
place in 2015 if Cameron is beaten by Ed Miliband.

Another group think it would be wrong to act now, but they say rebels will 
easily muster enough support for a challenge against Cameron in the summer of 
2014 if the economy and the Tories' poll ratings do not improve.

The member of the government said: "This is not necessarily about waiting 
until 2015 and seeing if David Cameron loses. This is about being ready for the 
moment when the party realises that David Cameron is not a winner. That is what 
does for leaders – if they are not winners."

Many members of this group do not believe Afriyie is a credible candidate, but 
they believe his campaign is right to try to build up support behind someone.

Under Tory rules, a vote of confidence in Cameron would be triggered 
automatically if 15% of the parliamentary party – 46 Tory MPs – write to Graham 
Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee. This means there is no need for a 
"stalking horse", unlike in 1989 when backbencher Sir Anthony Meyer wounded 
Margaret Thatcher after triggering a leadership vote.

But the rebels are talking of an "Anthony Meyer moment" because they believe 
Cameron will only be unseated if a candidate can pop up when the confidence 
vote is triggered and say he or she has the support of at least a third of the 
Conservative parliamentary party. This explains why Afriyie campaign members 
were working hard to secure letters of support from 120 Tory MPs to be placed 
in a safe until the moment Brady says he has received enough letters to trigger 
the vote. In fact they only have a handful.

One well-placed Tory expressed severe disappointment that the Afriyie campaign 
had been exposed. "Of course the Afriyie thing looks ridiculous. It is really 
annoying it got out because it is part of something serious – preparing for 
post-Dave which may come sooner than expected. The Cameron crowd have been 
educated beyond their abilities. We can see their limits in Technicolor."

The events of the past week have, at one level, heartened supporters of the 
prime minister who believe he is safe for one simple reason. "The problem for 
the plotters is that the only credible candidate who might think of unseating 
the prime minister is not an MP," one minister said of Boris Johnson.
 