
Aldershot Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aldershottownfootball> 
played Alive and Kicking before kick-off (a nod to their 
phoenix-from-the-flames act in 1992 after the folding of Aldershot FC). They 
remain just that in the League Two play-offs, but only just. Adam Le Fondre's 
late goal for Rotherham, capitalising on Aaron Brown's horrendous back-pass, 
means that the Shots will need to win in South Yorkshire if they are to fulfil 
their unlikely ambitions.

The Rec is an atmospheric place to watch football and the thought of sides the 
size of Sheffield Wednesday or, mouth-wateringly for Shot fans, Hampshire 
neighbours Southampton coming there is somewhat incongruous. Nevertheless, it 
remains a tantalising, if now unlikely, possibility for a side who less than 20 
years ago were a newborn club in the ninth tier of the English pyramid.

"There's no expectations. We were 25-1 outsiders when I came to the club," 
said Kevin Dillon, the Aldershot manager. "All the pressure's onRotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham>. They've got to finish the job 
off at their place. People will write us off but they might do that at their 
peril."

Dillon's team will have to improve drastically on this performance. The home 
side appeared edgy throughout, a tension not helped by the loss of goalkeeper 
Jamie Young to injury early in the first half. The Shots did, though, have the 
best chances of the opening period, with defensive confusion allowing Dean 
Morgan through on goal, only to be denied by Andy Warrington and a superb block 
from Gavin Gunning denying Marvin Morgan in time added on.

But it was Dillon's opposite number, Ronnie Moore, whose half-time call to 
arms seemed to have the desired effect. On the hour, Ryan Taylor headed wide 
from close range with the goal gaping, a miss entirely in keeping with 
Rotherham's run of only three goals in their past nine matches at the end of 
the regular season. And although Anthony Straker twice went close with two 
minutes to go, Brown's abberation and Le Fondre's composure ended the Millers' 
goal drought, providing the visitors with the advantage before Wednesday's 
second leg. "No one's getting over-excited," said Moore, who guided the Millers 
to back-to-back promotions in 2000 and 2001. "We defended well, but we're not 
jumping up and down in the dressing room. We've got to be nice and 
professional. We're 90 minutes from Wembley. It's a great opportunity."
 