
The wheels spectacularly fell off pre-tournament favourite Adam Scott’s 
Australian Masters charge during a shocking third-round performance at 
Huntingdale.

Scott started Saturday leading at eight-under but the close of play couldn’t 
come quick enough as he posted a six-over 77, including bogeys on the two final 
holes. The world No12 finished five off the pace and in a share of 11th, with 
Canberra golfer Matt Millar leading the field into the final round.

With six golfers taking turns at the top of the leaderboard, Millar ended the 
day at seven-under after a three-under par round to sit one stroke clear of 
Sydney pro Andrew Evans, who had to play in qualifying for entry into the 
tournament on Monday.

Adam Scott makes early charge to lead Australian Masters in Melbourne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/19/adam-scott-makes-early-charge-to-lead-australian-masters-in-melbourne>
Veteran Peter Senior, who won his last Masters in 1995, showed age was no 
barrier with a three under to share third with Michael Sim, John Senden and 
Matthew Guyatt.

The signs were ominous for the Scott, the 2012 and 2013 champion, when he 
opened with a bogey, although he immediately clawed it back with a birdie on 
the second. But wayward tee-shots and erratic putting saw Scott add three lots 
of successive bogeys at six and seven, 10 and 11 and then the closing holes.

With only eight golfers under par in the third round, the former world No1 is 
still a chance but only if he plays like he did on the opening day when he 
looked unbeatable with a 64.

Millar, who is a pro in Canberra, is 540 spots behind Scott on the world 
rankings but is in career-best form after recording eight top-10 finishes in 10 
tournaments this year, including a win at the New Zealand PGA and a joint 
second place finish at last week’s NSW Open.

In a strange twist Millar has been helping Evans with his swing, although he’s 
unlikely to be doling out any tips when the pair tee off in the final group.

The 39-year-old said he’d had a “kick in the pants” when forced to keep his 
tour card through qualifying school after he won just $18,000 last year. With 
his confidence riding high, he always felt he could challenge at Huntingdale 
which was something he dreamed of as a kid.

“This is probably a tournament that I’ve wanted to win,” Millar said. “In 
terms of Australian golf for me, I’ve grown up watching it here at Huntingdale. 
It would mean a hell of a lot.”

With such a packed leaderboard Millar said he would have to deliver in the 
final round to win the gold jacket.

“I can’t expect to turn up tomorrow and not play my best,” he said. “I’m going 
to have to play my best to win it, because no one’s going to hand it to me. 
You’ve got guys like John Senden, Pete Senior – he’s won a thousand titles – 
all these fellas are pretty hungry to have a crack as well.”
 