
Whenever Adam Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott>, a 
reluctant hero, tastes victory heads are nodded in widespread approval of a 
talent entirely matched by his character. When he is not involved in golfing 
competition the Australian hardly registers in global headlines at all. It 
seems a deliberate act of seeking peace.

In 2014, Scott invited close friends to a party at his Bahamas home; some 
dodged the offer, unaware that the occasion was his marriage to his architect 
partner, Marie. Justin Rose was among those who had thought better of 
attending, blissfully unaware of the gathering’s significance. Scott did not 
take Rose’s snub personally – in fact, he found it highly amusing, as is 
becoming of Scott’s wonderfully appealing nature.

At the Players Championship of that year, Scott bashfully admitted that he was 
a married man. This was not arrogance, weird secrecy or some act of anti-media 
protest. One of the finest sportsmen in the world, and one with fantastic human 
appeal, he simply revels in the non-spotlight or understated life. And yet his 
golfing demeanour is a recurring source of inspiration.

On Sunday evening in Florida, Scott had no choice but to see his name in 
lights again. Victory at the WGC-Cadillac Championship at Doral was not only 
relished by Scott but appreciated by a wider golfing audience who have watched 
this 35-year-old suffer some professional trauma. The Open Championship of 
2012, where the Claret Jug waseffectively handed over to Ernie Els, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/open-2012-ernie-els> represents 
a case in point.

Within 10 months, Scott was the Masters champion. If that garnered epic 
coverage, typically the birth of Scott’s daughter, Bo Vera, just over a year 
ago was a whisper. The former world No1 would not have it any other way.

“Her birth affected me in a huge way,” Scott said. “I hope only in a positive 
way. You know, absolutely my first priority becomes my family and whatever they 
need.

“It’s only been a good thing. I think both my wife and I put in a lot of time 
last year with our daughter; maybe that had some effect on my golf or maybe 
not. Maybe my mind was not as switched on. It’s hard to know. I don’t really 
care. But I’m happy we did. We were just like any first-time parents, had no 
clue what we were doing last year and I had no clue how to manage my wife or my 
daughter or my career at that point.

“I had some big sit-downs at the end of last year and planned this year out a 
lot better, so we all knew what we’re doing after nine or 10 months of having a 
child and how we’re going to manage that travelling around, and so far, it’s 
gone well.”

Through an understanding of parental responsibilities, scheduling progress or 
whatever, Scott is a golfing man possessed. Back to back wins on the Florida 
swing – he claimed theHonda Classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/28/adam-scott-sergio-garcia-honda-classic>
 at Palm Beach Gardens by a shot – trigger memories of Tiger Woods in his pomp 
and, more immediately, endorse the notion that Scott is a leading candidate for 
the 80th Masters. The Georgia extravaganza is now only four weeks away.

“No. I think Bubba Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/02/bubba-watson-enigma-golf-masters-augusta>
 is,” replied Scott when asked if he should now be regarded as the favourite 
for the first major of the year. “Even if I won every tournament I play before 
the Masters, if Bubba keeps finishing second, I’d still think he’s favoured. It 
just sets up so good there for him. Obviously his record there is amazing over 
the last couple of years. He’s got to be feeling great about his game.

“You know, I’m happy if my name is in the mix. I wouldn’t shy away from it. 
I’m not just trying to put the pressure on Bubba, but he’s obviously playing 
fantastic. He won in LA and was second to me in Doral. Augusta around the 
corner, he’s got to be thinking this is looking really good for him.”

Adam Scott wins back-to-back titles after Rory McIlroy collapse at Doral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/adam-scott-rory-mcilroy-wgc-cadillac-championship-doral>
Scott added: “I’d love to just bottle up where my game’s been at the last 
couple weeks and move forward a month. That’s going to be the hard thing for me 
to do, to manage my expectations and also manage my game to keep it right here.

“I can’t just keep pushing. I have to pace myself kind of so I don’t over-work 
it and try and get too prepared and do all that. It’s finding that balance the 
next month for me that’s going to be really important, but obviously the 
confidence is going to be high right now. So I just want to do everything to 
keep that there.”

The bigger, wholly logical, target is therefore: “I think probably a mini-goal 
starting the year or backend of last year was to try and get back to world No1. 
I think it’s a fair goal, because I’ve been there before and if you get to that 
point, I think I’m going to achieve what I want in the game.

“So that’s probably a bit of a long-term goal. I wasn’t thinking I should just 
get there by, you know, September this year or something. Over the next couple 
of years, I want to give myself a chance to play consistently well and move 
back up there, get back to No1, hopefully some wins and another major and 
another major comes along in that time. It would be amazing to get back there.”

By Scott standards, this represented effusive-speak. When his clubs do the 
talking, few in golf can compare. Two Sundays in quick succession, the good guy 
really did win.
 