
Seven seconds, eight seconds, nine. And he's off. It's like a Formula One pit 
stop. Within 10 seconds,Ade Adepitan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ade-adepitan> has hurled the wheelchair 
wheels out of his huge 4x4 BMW, followed by the chair and himself, attached the 
wheels to the chair, eased himself into it and pushed off. I'm not sure how he 
does it, just that it involves a lot of wriggling, and huge upper-body strength.

The former wheelchair basketball player, British junior powerlifting champion, 
tennis contender (he reached 69th in the world), leading face of the famous BBC 
ident <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=53b9vf3Ooqo> (featuring three wheelchair 
dancers, spinning and doing wheelies) actor and TV presenter is visiting the 
tiny terrace road where he grew up in Newham, east London. It's almost a 
quarter of a century since he stood outside his childhood home, a mile from the 
Olympic park. "It felt a lot bigger when I was a kid. It seemed there was a lot 
of space for adventure, and now it just looks really tight."

Adepitan has just made a powerful programme about polio in Nigeria, and it has 
left him both angry and nostalgic. "Oh my God, I haven't seen this place for 
years." He stares into a house whose front windows are lined with Bibles and 
Christian bric-a-brac.

Adepitan was three when his parents brought him over from Nigeria. He had 
contracted polio at 15 months, resulting in a useless left leg, and his parents 
thought that he would never thrive in Nigeria. It was a tough decision – they 
had to leave Adepitan's older sister, Omoyile, who has Down's syndrome, with 
relatives in Nigeria until they could afford to fly her over some years later.

He is giving me a guided tour of his childhood. This is where he would 
infuriate the neighbours by kicking the football over his house into their 
garden; this is Old Street, where his friends would wait in their car to whisk 
him off to basketball without his parents knowing; Pragel Street, where 
physiotherapists spotted him being wheeled in a Tesco shopping trolley by 
friends and suggested he took up basketball; the Housing Options Centre, where 
he sent a letter forged in his father's name saying he had thrown 16-year-old 
Ade out and he needed social housing.

His father had had such hopes for him – university, a good job, normality. 
Particularly normality. But young Adepitan wasn't interested. He just wanted to 
play sport.

One day he came home with a sports wheelchair presented by Frank Bruno's 
boxing club. It was worth £700, and he adored it. His parents were furious. 
After all, he'd managed perfectly well on callipers all his life. So what if 
callipers slowed him down, caused him pain and looked rubbish; they also made 
him relatively normal. "My parents thought me getting into a wheelchair was 
like me giving up on walking. And they were worried about the stigma. People in 
wheelchairs out and about was a completely new thing to most people." His 
father threw the wheelchair out of the house. Adepitan sneaked it back in and 
hid it under tarpaulin in the garden.

What his parents didn't understand was that Adepitan found his wheels 
empowering. For the first time, he felt mobile, secure, cool.
 Adepitan playing against the US in the quarter-finals of the 2004 Paralympic 
Games in Athens. Photograph: Brian Bahr 
Things had been coming to a head since he was 15 and selected for the junior 
world powerlifting championship in Miami. He had never left Britain since 
arriving, and he couldn't have been more thrilled. "I was going to compete for 
Great Britain. Wow! I told my dad and he said: 'No, you've got your mock exams, 
you've got to study, no chance.' I was gutted."

Soon after, Adepitan gave up on powerlifting to concentrate on basketball. He 
joined Newham Rollers, a local wheelchair team, and his life was transformed.

"The disabled kids were just cooler, wilder, got up to crazy things. We'd be 
out in the streets racing our chairs, playing basketball, travelling all over 
east London like a crew. It felt like I belonged. We all had the same problems, 
the same issues, we took the piss out of each other's disabilities." How? "The 
classic thing we'd do is tip each other out of our wheelchairs, specially if we 
were in public. If someone sees a pretty girl and they go, 'Look at that bird 
over there, wow, she's cute,' then the next thing you know you tip them out of 
the chair just to embarrass them. Then once they're out of the chair you'd pull 
the wheels off their chair and roll them down the road. Yes, we were up to all 
sorts."

Did he ever tip himself out of his wheelchair in front of a pretty girl for 
the sympathy vote? He looks horrified. "No! That was absolutely taboo. The 
thing you never wanted was sympathy. You wanted respect but not sympathy. No 
way. Sympathy pissed you off."

He tells me about some of his old mates. Roddy was told he wouldn't live 
beyond 30 and used to drive everywhere at full pelt while smoking exploding 
cigarettes. He died at 27. Paul used to stuff his artificial leg with cans of 
beer when they were in their mid-teens. He died when he was 40. Once he and his 
friends were stopped by the police in a Mini Metro – there were five boys and 
five wheelchairs squashed into the car. The police didn't know what to make of 
them, and let them go.

Wonderful days, Adepitan says. When he left home at 16 he told his parents he 
wanted to make a living as a basketball player. Yes, he says, of course he 
understands why his father went ballistic. "Imagine if your kids said to you, 
and this is back in the 1980s: 'Dad, I want to be a wheelchair basketball 
player, and that's how I'm going to make a living.' You'd think they were 
bonkers. That's what my dad thought. But he thought of it on an even grander 
scale because he was convinced I was ruining my life."

His father was all the more determined that Adepitan should make something of 
his life because he was disappointed with the way his own had turned out. Both 
Adepitan's parents had been teachers in Nigeria. But when they came to London 
in the 1970s they couldn't get teaching jobs. His father studied through the 
Open University and retrained as an accountant, but still couldn't get a job. 
He ended up working in security and cleaning, and felt he had let his children 
down.

We are strolling through a park in Plaistow, east London. Everybody seems to 
know, or at least recognise, Adepitan. They all greet him with warmth. "It's 
nice," he says. "It's like the area hugs me." We come across a basketball court 
where he used to play. Two boys are practising. I sense that Adepitan has got 
the itch. Should we, I say. Before the question is out, he's pushing himself on 
to the court.

"How you doing, guys? Show me your skills then, man, let's see what you've 
got. Take some shots. That's what the basketball court's there for. Good height 
on that! That's a nice shot, bro!"

Adrian and Amari, both 11, tell him to take a shot. He does – and it's in. 
Then he tries an audacious shot over the back of his head – that's in, too. The 
boys are impressed.

Now Adepitan is teaching me. "Imagine you're in a telephone box and if you 
shoot low it's going to hit the sides. Shoot higher than you think you have 
to." Great advice, but it doesn't do the trick. "Look, if you were good at it 
straightaway you'd make us look bad!" he says supportively.

He throws one last shot and it swishes through the net. "Ah, that sound is so 
thereapeutic."

We leave the boys, and I ask him if he managed to make a living from 
basketball. He laughs. No, of course not, he says. In fact, he struggled to 
have any impact, only making his Paralympics debut at 26. Throughout this time, 
he and his parents weren't in touch. It wasn't anger that kept him from going 
home, it was the feeling that he had to prove himself before he could. When he 
was picked to represent Great Britain at the SydneyParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> in 2000 he took a mobile phone 
that his mother had given him years earlier. "It was the opening ceremony and 
we were pushing round the track in our Team GB gear. It was one of the greatest 
moments of my life, and my phone started ringing, and I picked it up and it was 
Mum. 'I can see you on the TV, you are on the big screen.' And when I came back 
from Sydney Dad was crying and he gave me a big hug, and he realised this is 
what I wanted to do and that was it, we were mates again."
 Adepitan carries the Olympic Flame over the Millenium Bridge, 26 July 2012. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
The thing is, he says, despite all the years apart, and despite his father's 
strictness, he had always adored him – he was so funny, so warm, the type of 
man who could talk to anybody. Although his father never fulfilled his own 
hopes, in the end his children's achievements were enough. Adepitan's younger 
brother got a degree in sports nutrition while Omoyile worked for the Co-op. 
"She was one of first Down's syndrome kids in east London to get a City & 
Guilds in catering. Dad was so proud. That's what he wanted her to do; make 
sure she had an opportunity."

In 2004, he won a bronze medal as part of Great Britain's Paralympic 
basketball team, and in 2005scored the winning basket that clinched gold at the 
Paralympic world cup in Manchester 
<http://www.btparalympicworldcup.com/2005/results/basketball/basketball_results_20.php>
. A year later his father died after a long illness.

Adepitan might not have made money from basketball, but he has from 
television. The first time he appeared on TV, his charisma and communication 
skills were obvious. As an actor he has featured in EastEnders and asbasketball 
coach Baggy Awolowo in the children's TV series Desperados 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1039167/>. As presenter, he fronted C4's coverage 
of the Paralympic games alongside Clare Balding 
<http://paralympics.channel4.com/competitions/london-2012/the-team/index.html>, 
and has become increasingly involved in making documentaries. Earlier this year 
he made aDispatches programme about the scrapping of disability living allowance
 <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/dispatches/videos/all/britain-on-benefits> 
that questioned the credentials of Atos, the private company administering the 
replacement benefit. And now there is the polio film for C4.

The only previous time Adepitan had returned to Nigeria was to bury his 
father's body in 2006. As for polio, he had tried to put it to the back of his 
mind for most of his adult life. He didn't want to be defined by it. But over 
the past decade he has become increasingly interested in both the disease, 
which is spread by human faeces, and in Nigeria.

Alongside Afghanistan and Pakistan, Nigeria is one of only three countries 
that hasn't eradicated polio 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Infectedcountries.aspx>. In the film, he asks 
why – and then sees for himself. He visits a slum swimming in human sewage 
where the disabled are herded together ("3,000 people, leprosy in one corner, 
polio another, the blind another, in a place not much bigger than a basketball 
court"). He is even more shocked when he discovers why polio is still rife – 
many people in the mainly Muslim north refuse the vaccination because they 
believe it makes children sterile. The film ends bleakly with the vaccination 
programme suspended after rumours that it is being enforced, and nine female 
vaccinators dead. Adepitan concludes: "A toxic cocktail of terrorism and 
suspicion of outsiders allow for polio to thrive."

But it could have ended even more bleakly. "We only came home because the 
campaign had been suspended. We were cursing our luck, then the week we came 
back we heard that the vaccinators had been shot. We were supposed to be there 
filming with them at that time. There for the grace of God ..."
 Adepitan in Nigeria filming Journey of a Lifetime. Photograph: Channel 4 
Adepitan, now 40, lives in upmarket Putney, dates the Scottish 
singer-songwriter Linda Harrison, <http://lindabyharrison.com/home/> and 
post-London 2012 is best known as a TV presenter. He talks about the incredible 
impact the Paralympics had on our attitude towards disability. Not only were 
they almost as popular as the Olympics, but the fact that we have started to 
question the fairness of the categorisation system shows just how seriously it 
is being taken. Adepitan says it is a huge issue for disabled athletes. While 
many are classified as more disabled than they are, a few (including the great 
sprinterAnne Wafula Strike <http:>) believe they have been classified in more 
able-bodied categories than they should be, making it almost impossible for 
them to compete. "I always foresaw, as the Paralympics was getting bigger, that 
classification was going to be the big problem – people pretending they're more 
disabled than they are getting put in a different classification. There needs 
to be a universal system where there is clarity and it will happen once the 
sport starts getting more professional and there's more at stake to lose. Part 
of that is people cheating the system, and part of that is also that it's 
really difficult to classify people because they are never exactly the same. It 
is the bane of disability sport, the equivalent of drug-cheating in able-bodied 
sport, and something that the IPC will definitely have to tackle head on in the 
future."

As we've been chatting, I've noticed that other wheelchairs are conspicuous by 
their absence. Last summer, London was transformned in a wonderful way – you 
couldn't move for wheelchairs and amputees. Adepitan laughs. "They suddenly 
came out of the woodwork!" But now disabled people are invisible again, I say. 
Where have they all gone? "Well, it is very rare where you're going to get a 
situation where you have 3,500 of the best disabled athletes in the world in 
one area, so that is something that is just going to happen because of the 
Paralympics."

I know, I say, but now London feels just like it did pre-Paralympics. He nods. 
"Yes, things have gone slightly backwards." Look, he says, in one way, it's all 
positive. "The young diasabled people I meet are not the same as when I was 
growing up. We knew our life was an uphill battle, that we'd constantly have to 
prove ourselves to be successful, but these youngsters growing up, they feel 
the world is their oyster."

But, he adds, public transport is disastrous. "I lived for a period without a 
car and used to get the train to work and it was a bloody nightmare. And I'm 
fit and strong and have good skills in my wheelchair. Sometimes I've jumped out 
of my chair on to the train and grabbed my chair and thrown it on with people 
watching, thinking: 'What the bloody hell's going on?' They see a chair flying 
past them and me falling on the floor to get in. That should not be the way. We 
are one of the most sophisticated societies in the world. And rural areas are 
even worse." For most disabled people, he says, it's simply impossible to get 
around.

"I'd look at countries that have great facilities, that are really accessible, 
some of the Scandinavian countries. The first stage is to update the tube 
system. I know it would cost a lot of money, but in the long run it would get 
disabled people out there, independent and working, so it would bring in money."

We're back at the car, and he does his pit-stop trick again, this time in 
reverse – out of the chair, wheels chucked in the back, followed by the chair, 
and he's in his driving seat – 10 seconds. "There's probably millions of 
disabled people out there who could do more if they had the transport. Imagine 
seriously disabled people trying to get to work on public transport. By the 
time you get there you've probably done the equivalent of a marathon, then 
you've got to do a day's work. No wonder you're going to be pissed off and no 
wonder your productivity might not be as good as everybody else." As he talks, 
he's getting louder and more passionate. "So go on, give us a chance. Just give 
us a chance. And once you've given us a chance imagine the productivity you're 
going to get out of us."

He's thinking aloud now. "I don't understand why the government doesn't have 
someone advising them on transport. To me that's a no-brainer to have someone 
who experiences these day-to-day issues." Like a disability tsar? "Exactly," he 
says, "a disability tsar." Can he think of anybody who'd be good for the job? 
Well, yes, he says, as it happens, he can.

Journey Of My Lifetime 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/ade-adepitan-journey-of-my-lifetime> is on 
C4 at 8pm on Monday night
 