
A man who was shot by police in Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> after allegedly pointing 
a gun at his three-year-old daughter has been charged over the incident.

The 26-year-old is likely to face a bedside court hearing at the Royal 
Adelaide Hospital on Tuesday after he allegedly threatened and abducted a young 
woman and their children, aged three and seven months.

He has been charged with aggravated kidnapping, unlawful threats, acts to 
endanger life, using a firearm to commit an offence and dangerous driving to 
escape a police pursuit.

The shooting ended an ordeal that began nearly three hours earlier when the 
man allegedly assaulted the woman at a home in Cumberland Park.

The man suffered non-life threatening injuries after being shot once on Monday 
night. It’s alleged he also assaulted two other people who tried to help his 
23-year-old partner.

He then forced his family into a car. Police were called just before 9pm but 
they did not have a description of the vehicle.

They managed to identify the car an hour later and PolAir tracked its 
high-speed run through the city, including down Rundle Mall. Officers stopped 
the car in Hindley Street at 11.30pm after it was slowed down by road spikes 
and moved to arrest the man.

“When they were doing that it will be alleged that he threatened the 
three-year-old girl with a firearm and that’s when a decision was made for a 
police officer to fire at the offender,” Assistant Commissioner Paul Dickson 
told reporters.

Television footage shows police pulling the distressed woman from the car, 
then grabbing the baby and the girl and rushing them to safety.

Armed officers swarmed the car, with one scrambling over the hood, to secure 
the gunman.

“They come all together from everywhere, they surrounded every door, every 
window,” a witness, Ammar Hady, told Nine News “They are trying to open it, he 
wouldn’t open the car, like any doors or anything, they smashed with the 
smashing hammers and opened the door then they got the kid. I heard one shot.”

The children were physically uninjured but Dickson said “obviously there will 
be a whole lot of distress”.

The woman is being treated in another hospital for injuries from the earlier 
alleged assault.

“It’s a terrible incident,” Dickson said. “You could imagine how horrific it 
would be for the young mother and the two children.”
 