
So you’ve got an idea...hold it right there. First things first, what are the 
issues you’re trying to solve and who is your audience? In this one-day 
workshop for managers, business owners and decision makers, you will build your 
problem-solving toolkit and learn how to approach ideas creatively. You will be 
taught to apply design principles to find innovative, effective, and 
sustainable solutions and to test your approach. In this highly interactive and 
hands-on course, you will collaborate, connect and solve problems brought to 
the table.

Your teacher for the day will be Suzanne Boccalatte, a leading designer and 
communication specialist who places design, purpose and identity at the core of 
business strategy. Being creative is a wonderful thing, but not all ideas are 
equal or deserve investment, and it’s important to understand the rational 
behind decisions. Often referred to as design thinking, this course offers a 
framework to test and try ideas, tweak and align them to your customers’ needs. 
Prior design knowledge is not required, just enthusiasm to work on problems in 
a collaborative creative setting.

This course is for you if...

 * have a business issue you wish to solve

 * want to reinvigorate and reinvent your business

 * need a framework to examine complex problems

 * run a not-for-profit, arts or social organisation or a start-up and want to 
solve issues from your markets’ perspective

 * struggle to understand what your customers want and need

 * are struggling to get buy-in or funding for an idea

 * have identified a problem in your organisation but don’t know what to do 
next

Course outline

Your idea might be for a startup, a campaign, a website, a new business, or 
your brand might need a refresh, but what are the issues you’re trying to 
solve? Have you considered your markets and if they care? Have you thought 
through an approach? You could spend a great deal of resources (and 
enthusiasm)—but what if nobody wants it? Have you a plan to test it? Why risk 
guessing a solution?

Topics on the day include:

 * What kinds of issues have you or your markets been experiencing? 

 * What are the key priorities to success? How do you know?

 * What would the ‘solution’ allow you to do that you can’t do now?

 * What’s the pay off? How do you measure success?

 * If it’s created such a big problem for you what has stopped you from 
addressing it before now?

You will leave this Masterclass with the bones of a creative framework and 
implementation strategy.

Tutor profile

Suzanne Boccalatte is a designer, writer and business advisor. Her mission is 
using design to bring together people, business and culture. Suzanne has been 
Director of design consultancy Boccalatte for over 25 years and has a Bachelor 
of Visual Arts (First Class Hons), University of Sydney, qualifications in 
Communications Management (UTS) and Copywriting. Her passion for culture and 
creativity has led to her producing a series of books and events—includingTrunk
, an award-winning compendium with contributions from a global community of 
writers and designers. She has appeared on TV and radio, lectured at 
universities and sat on judging and advisory panels. In 2012 she was appointed 
to the NSW Government’s Creative Industries Taskforce—the industry-led body set 
up to develop strategies to drive growth and innovation in the creative 
industries. She sits on Supported Studio Network Advisory Board for people with 
a disability and presented a keynote address at Arts Hub Conference 2015, on 
how business needs to articulate brand to thrive in a changing world. She was a 
mentor in the Semi Permanent X Telstra Innovation Lab and Telstra’sImaginarium 
2015.

Book now

Details

ADELAIDE


Date: Friday 11 March
Times: 10am-5pm
Location: Windmill Theater, 2/234 Sturt Street, Adelaide
Price: $299
Event capacity: 20
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in

To contact us, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/about-guardian-masterclasses-australia>
. Terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
.

Returns policy
Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course 
start date. Please see ourterms and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
 for more information on our refund policy.
 