
Motor insurer Admiral has accelerated in a falling market on a positive 
outlook for the business and talk of a higher than expected payout to 
shareholders.

Its shares are up 12p to £19.56 as Nomura raised its recommendation from 
neutral to buy, partly on the prospect it could afford a capital return of some 
£300m to investors over the next two to three years. Nomura said:

We believe Admiral <https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> offers 
an attractive combination of: 1) defensive qualities; 2) growth given rising UK 
motor rates; and 3) attractive returns via special dividends, which could 
surprise to the upside.

The stock de-rated in the wake of reserve strengthening due to bodily injury 
claims in 2011 (which ultimately proved to be too conservative) and then 
additional regulatory headwinds and UK motor rate declines. Now we are seeing 
strong reserve releases, regulatory headwinds have subsided, and UK motor rates 
are rising again. We believe against this backdrop the stock should enjoy a 
good performance.

Admiral has indicated it could return £150m to £200m to shareholders, but 
Nomura said its solvency rates would still be adequate if it handed back £300m.


But esure has slipped despite a 30% rise in full year profits to £134m, 
boosted by the higher rates for motor insurance, but the insurer disappointed 
on its dividend. Analyst Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital said:

esure reported 2015 results which were broadly in line with our and the 
market’s expectations at the trading profit and underlying earnings level but 
yet again disappointed and confused regarding its dividend policy.

 A pay-out of 70% resulted in a dividend of 11.5p compared to our expectations 
of an 80% pay-out and a 13.1p dividend…consensus was at 12.9p. Although the 
group suggests that it has decided to retain capital to fund “profitable 
growth”, the Solvency II coverage ratio of 123% (post dividend) implies that it 
didn’t really have much room for manoeuvre.

Meanwhile the FTSE 100 is now down 44.16 points at 6138.24. Connor Campbell, 
financial analyst at Spreadex said:

It seems the longer investors have had to digest the morning’s dramatic plunge 
in Chinese exports, the worse they are taking it, the European indices 
sporadically widening their losses as the day continued.

Despite Brent Crude holdings its head above the $40.50 per barrel parapet 
(around halving its initial 1% decline) the FTSE struggled to gain any positive 
traction, lingering at a 40 point loss for most of the morning. That does, 
however, make it the best performing major indices, a few specks of green found 
in its commodity stocks (which are caught between oil’s continued recovery and 
the ominous signs out of China) anda 6% surge from Burberry, following some 
surprising takeover speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/mar/08/burberry-jumps-5-on-takeover-talk-but-ftse-falls-after-chinese-data>
, keeping the FTSE from the lows seen by its European peers.
 