
The colourful American businessman who set up Admiral insurance is to step 
down after building the firm into a £4bn company and amassing a personal 
fortune of some £500m. Henry Engelhardt founded the firm nearly 25 years ago 
and led its stock market flotation in 2004. It operates under the brandsAdmiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup>, Bell, Elephant and 
Diamond, and also runs the price comparison websites confused.com and 
compare.com.

Based in Cardiff from the outset as a result of a £1m local authority grant, 
it is the only Welsh business in the FTSE 100. Best known for its car 
insurance, Admiral has more recently moved into household insurance as well 
expanding internationally under brands such as L’Olivier.

As his resignation as chief executive was announced, Engelhardt, who will step 
down next year, issued a statement in which he said: “Don’t bury me yet, guys!” 
“I still have 12 months on the job and lots to accomplish in that time. But I 
see the wealth of management talent we have rising up in the organisation, and 
I think that in a year it will be the right moment to start the transition 
towards that younger, very talented team.”

Engelhardt is known for his quirky management style. He has created a ministry 
of fun at the Cardiff head office and carries around a piece of jigsaw to 
demonstrate he is part of a team.

The 57-year old is handing the helm to David Stevens, who started the business 
with Engelhardt and runs the UK arm as well as being chief operating officer. 
He is just six years Engelhardt’s junior and joined in August 1991, just before 
Admiral was launched in 1993. Neither of them take share options or long-term 
incentive payouts from the business because of the size of their stakes in 
Admiral. Engelhardt – who receives a £393,000 salary – owns 12% and Stevens 
3.5%.

The shares fell 1.5% after Engelhardt’s plans to leave Admiral – sponsors of 
the Welsh rugby union – were announced.

Writing in the annual report published in March, Engelhardt gave no indication 
of his intention to leave – or to hand more responsibility to Stevens. He 
referred to Stevens as being the best-qualified person to run the UK arm of 
Admiral, and lists the top 10 things to look forward to in 2015. “The number 
one thing I’m looking forward to: David taking the odd afternoon off because he 
has nothing to worry about because results from the UK are so good.”


He also lists his top 10 worries for 2015, including at number five: “My wife 
telling me she’s pregnant.” They have grown-up children. He lists his top worry 
as “irrational competitors”.

In the UK, the business competes with rivals including Direct Line, recently 
spun out of Royal Bank of Scotland, and Churchill, where Engelhardt worked 
before being hired by private equity firm Brockbank to set up Admiral.

Until last year, the group, which employs 7,000 staff, had reported record 
consecutive annual profits. Analysts at Peel Hunt said: “Arguably the 
international strategy has been led by Engelhardt, who has had ambitions of 
expanding into the US market. The key driver of profits has come from the UK, 
and Admiral has built an undisputed UK motor insurance track record since 2004, 
while the international strategy has required significant investment.”

Stevens said: “After working alongside Henry for the last 24 years, I will be 
very sad to see him no longer at the helm of Admiral. I am delighted that the 
board is offering me the opportunity to succeed Henry and build on his 
formidable legacy.”

The chairman, Alistair Lyons, said: “We are hugely fortunate to have someone 
of David’s capability and experience to succeed Henry, and I am very confident 
that Admiral will continue to go from strength to strength in the future”.
 