
The New South Wales education minister has called on universities to cap their 
intake of student teachers, labelling slipping admissions standards as a 
business model aimed at allowing them to “rake in money”.

With figures revealing that some universities are admitting students with Atar 
ranks below 50 into education degrees, Adrian Piccoli called on the federal 
government to act before Friday’s Council of Australian Governments meeting of 
federal, state and territory education ministers.


But the vice-chancellor of the Australian Catholic University has branded his 
comments “rampant elitism” and a “complete fiction”.


Piccoli accused universities of having a “business model of taking in as many 
students as they can into low-cost courses and they rake in the money”,the 
Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/call-for-universities-to-cap-teacher-training-places/news-story/45fa8f0e5a42991393597ab991ef05fa>
.

“A cap like they use for medicine degrees can lead to a higher standard of 
teaching,” he said. “I receive a lot of anecdotal feedback from school 
principals who are questioning the quality of education students at university.”

An Atar below 50 means a student performed worse than 50% of the students they 
studied with. It is estimated that just over 1,000 students with Atars below 50 
were accepted this year into education degrees.


The lowest publicised Atar cut-off in the country is 60, offered by the 
Australian Catholic University’s primary education and combined teaching 
degrees and the University of Canberra’s bachelor of secondary education.


Victoria may increase Atar ranking required for teaching degrees to improve 
quality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/victoria-may-increase-atar-ranking-required-for-teaching-degrees-to-improve-quality>
But universities frequently accept students below the publicised cut-offs, 
with the ACU and Macquarie University’s teaching coursesestimated to have 
admitted up to 34% and 55% of students below the cut-off 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/nsw-universities-taking-students-with-atars-as-low-as-30-20160125-gmdvr6.html>
, respectively.

The vice-chancellor of the ACU, Prof Greg Craven, has been a consistent critic 
of the attempt to cap admissions and said Piccoli’s comments were “a complete 
fiction that is politically useful”.

“Students need all sorts of things to be teachers, both academic and personal 
qualities,” he said. “You need to prove that people with higher Atars are good 
teachers and those with lower Atars are bad teachers. No study has been 
undertaken. There just isn’t any evidence.”

Craven claimed that ACU graduates had a 92% employment rate across the country 
and called Piccoli’s push “rampant elitism”. “If you close that kind of Atar 
down, Indigenous, rural and low-SES [socio-economic status] students are the 
kind of people who won’t become teachers.”

In Feburary the chief executive of Universities Australia, Belinda Robinson 
warned that capping “would reduce opportunities for people from disadvantaged 
backgrounds” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/atar-charade-bring-back-student-caps-says-nsw-education-minister-adrian-piccoli-20160214-gmu1v3.html>
, while the deputy vice-chancellor of the University of New South Wales said 
students from low socioeconomic backgrounds “tend to have an Atar ranking that 
underestimates their true academic potential 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/we-need-to-scarp-the-atar-as-the-main-judge-of-student-potential-20160127-gmf87v.html?cb1=1>
”.

Last year NSW became the first state to set minimum entry standards for 
teaching degrees, requiring students to achieve band 5 results in three HSC 
subjects.Victoria has followed suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/victoria-may-increase-atar-ranking-required-for-teaching-degrees-to-improve-quality>
 with a 75 minimum Atar.


This year the state also introduced a requirement that education students 
demonstrate they are in the top 30% of the population for literacy and numeracy 
before they can graduate. The test – to be rolled out nationally – can be taken 
again if students fail.

Piccoli described the minimum standard as “a bit of a blunt instrument but the 
best instrument we’ve got”. “The cleaner approach would be for the commonwealth 
to impose caps,” he said. “That way you get away from using Atar scores and 
universities can use an interview, aptitude test or whatever method they like.”

Prof Robyn Ewing from the Univeristy of Sydney said it was “problematic” that 
the minister’s comments ignored the process of teacher training.

“We definitely need high-quality teachers but only looking at the Atar is not 
the whole story and is not necessarily going to solve some of the issues that 
we have,” she said. “A large majority of those who go into teacher education 
don’t come straight from school with their Atar. Only roughly a quarter come 
through that way.”

Piccoli’s comments come days before a meeting of Coag’s education council. The 
federal education minister, Simon Birmingham, will meet the education ministers 
of every Australian state and territory


The minister confirmed he would be raising the issue at Coag as an area that 
requires reform.
 