
I was born around the same time as Adrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole> (who was 13 ¾ when he first 
appeared in 1982), and I began reading his diaries in my late teens, around the 
time my newly divorced mum discovered Germaine Greer. I shared his bafflement 
as the world of adulthood unfolded to both of us.

Young Adrian came with all the pretensions of a teenager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/apr/11/adrian-mole-my-kindred-teenage-spirit-sue-townsend>
, such as his aspiration to become a great writer despite his lack of talent. 
Somewhere in a cardboard box in an attic in Kidderminster lies my own 
adolescent poetry, written in the style of Pablo Neruda. Like Adrian I probably 
wrote about Margaret Thatcher's tears being like molten steel without really 
understanding why she was so bad. Though David Cameron is also of a similar 
age, he will never understand Adrian.

Adrian's everyday desires and ambitions in life are those shared by millions 
of people who haven't been born into wealth: the desire for financial and job 
security and to make a better life for yourself than that of your parents.

And, like many, they still struggle to achieve them when confronted with low 
wages and spending cuts – and the toxic promise of easy credit. I have no doubt 
that Adrian, right now, will be sitting at home recovering from cancer, 
worrying about the mortgage again and realising that nothing has changed.

The aristocrats always have the upper hand, no matter what you hope for in 
life. I imagine that Adrian probably served Cameron in the "fashionable" Soho 
restaurant he worked in as a poorly paid cook.

I cannot think of another author who portrays male adolescence in such 
meticulous detailas Sue Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/11/sue-townsend-dies-aged-68-adrian-mole>
. There's his fixation with the intellectual beauty, Pandora, who shuns him in 
favour of more exotic and alluring men. And despite his setbacks and 
humiliations he muddles through, making a life of what he has. Is there 
anything more quintessentially English than that? He is the embodiment of 
working-class pragmatism. In the end, his story is one of hope and optimism. No 
matter what the setback, you can find contentment.

Adrian would no doubt look at these foppish idiots who have doubled the 
consumption of champagne since taking office and think, "Even though Tony Blair 
betrayed me over Iraq, I will probably have to start delivering Labour leaflets 
again", but like most of my friends would never quite get around to it.

Townsend is up there with the greats who portray working-class culture in all 
its heroic inconsistency. She owns the 1980s along with Alan Bleasdale and Ken 
Loach. And her working-class characters with their gritty stoicism are an 
important contrast to the romantic caricatures portrayed in the plays and books 
of the time.

A lifelong socialist, Townsend never forgot what it was like to be poor, 
regardless of what her newfound wealth was able to buy her.

Adrian Mole is as authentic as Yosser Hughes, and perhaps more representative 
of his class. Even now I am laughing at the thought of him "helpfully" posting 
Pandora's dad's unsent letter of resignation from the Labour party as he 
struggled over whether to follow Roy Jenkins into the SDP. John O'Farrell made 
a career writing about these people.

And though it didn't fit the character, I admire Townsend for not being able 
to make Pandora, that New Labour zealot and MP for Ashby-de-la-Zouch, vote for 
the Iraq war. She just loved Pandora too much to do that to her.

The Etonians have tried to appropriate all the symbols of working-class 
culture from the 1980s. I understand why Cameron once wanted his photo taken 
outside Salford Lads Club, and take pleasure from the fact he will never be 
able to speak for the Adrian Moles of this world.

• This article was amended on April 12th 2014 to correct Salford Boys Club to 
Salford Lads Club.

 