
Adrienne Truscott <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/adrienne-truscott> 
apologises to me before our meeting: the video she sent of her standup routine 
invites a certain awkwardness when encountering her in person. In the 
five-minute clip she is outrageous, raucous and viciously funny. She is also 
naked from the waist down. "Sorry!" she says again, as we shake hands at the 
door of her apartment in Brooklyn. She smiles ruefully. "Was it too much?"

The show, Asking for It: A One-Lady Rape About Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy>, won her the Foster's comedy award 
at the Edinburgh festival this year and dropped a lot of jaws. Truscott, whose 
background is in cabaret, walks on stage in heels, bra, denim jacket, platinum 
blonde wig and nothing else. The terrified audience squeaks with laughter. 
"Anyone here been raped?" she calls cheerfully. "Or has anyone raped anyone?" 
She raises her own hand. The audience erupts.

It's not for everyone, including Truscott's own mother, who is English and 
rather gamely asked to see the performance before her daughter gently dissuaded 
her. Truscott's nudity is not designed to be alluring. In fact, it is 
incredibly aggressive, a subversion of how women are conditioned to perceive 
and use their own bodies. Her aim was, first and foremost, to be funny, and 
beyond that to confront the way rape is referred to by male comedians – in 
particular Daniel Tosh, a US comedian who silenced a female heckler recently 
with the zinger, "Wouldn't it be funny if that girl got raped by like, five 
guys right now?", a comment other male comedians failed to condemn. "No one 
said, 'Dude, that was a bad joke.' The response to criticism was, 'Oh, you 
don't believe in free speech?' Oh, for fuck's sake, it's not that black and 
white."

She also wanted to make a point about emphasis. "To show the flip side of the 
attention that's always on victims – the worst version of which is 'You asked 
for it', and the best version, 'That shouldn't have happened to her.' No no no. 
He shouldn't have done it. That was my whole thing: to bring that into the 
room."

The room, a bookstore in Edinburgh, was nerve-rackingly personal: no lights, 
no stage, no distance between Truscott and the front row. No one could leave 
without the entire room noticing – given the material, it amused Truscott to 
note that this acted as a powerful disincentive. "You can't get up because it's 
like," – sotto voce – "is that the rapist?!" She laughs.

Although it is more challenging, Truscott's preference is to perform before a 
mainstream audience, rather than a self-selected group of woman-friendly 
activists or supporters. (She is canny enough to know that being described as a 
"feminist performance artist", even though she is a feminist performer, "would 
be the death of it.")

The idea for the show came about after she spent a week as an entertainer on a 
lesbian cruise ship. "You go to sea for a week with 1,800 lesbians, and there's 
a philosophy of incredible sensitivity on the boat which, for a comic, can get 
to the point of ..." She mimes tearing her hair out. "It would elicit 
late-night comedic purges from a lot of the comics. I made a joke about rape, 
someone else made one back, and it felt like there was something cathartic 
going on. We were making jokes about how we feel the world treats it."

The morning after she won the award at Edinburgh, a TV journalist asked her 
where on Earth she thought she could perform the show, outside of fringe 
theatre. She was hungover, and replied without thinking. "I said, 'Well if you 
think about how everybody likes to laugh, and how many people get raped, it's a 
super-mainstream show.'" She smiles. "Too much?"

• Soho theatre <http://www.sohotheatre.com/>, London W1 (020-7478 6100), 12-31 
May
 