
"This is the most intimate interview I've ever done," whispers Adrien Brody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody>, which is exactly the kind of 
thing you want to hear when you're inches away from an Oscar-winning Hollywood 
actor who's interrupted his holiday to chat to you. And when the two of you are 
sitting on a baking-hot day in an upscale beach complex in Monaco that is part 
Stella Artois advert and part JG Ballard novel, without a PR person in sight to 
chivvy things along and prevent you from asking impertinent questions. So who 
are you to quibble if the sotto voce intimacy is down to your subject having 
lost his voice?

"I have laryngitis – did they tell you?" he'd mouthed when he first bounded 
down the steps wearing a trilby with a peacock-blue band and a huge smile.

Actually they did, but I assumed that was star-speak for a bit of a croaky 
voice and instantly wiped it from my mind. As it turns out, Brody really can't 
talk; not in any significantly audible – and therefore tape recordable – way. 
I experience a moment of excruciating anxiety followed by certainty that I am 
now sweating so profusely I will shortly resemble Dirk Bogarde in the closing 
scene ofDeath in Venice. Later I realise that it's unlikely that I've concealed 
this from the highly empathic Brody, who immediately cracks a joke. "It's not 
me being a strange actor," he promises. "'Adrien would only do the interview in 
mime'… Me and Daniel Day-Lewis, we do this, you know." I recover sufficiently 
to tell him that if I subsequently find out this is method-style research for a 
role as a mute, I will be really angry with him.

Though it's hard to imagine being so. Brody is terribly engaging: by turns 
solemn and funny, wise-cracking and serious. He is confident and relaxed, but 
with an air of vulnerability that is exacerbated, although I don't think 
created, by his slightly lugubrious looks; you feel that he's hiding nothing, 
but that there's a lot to get to.

Laryngitis or no laryngitis, we'd better crack on. "When I have something 
really great to say, I'll put a little voice in it," he reassures me. "Until 
then, I'll just whisper." I nod, and hold the tape recorder very close; at 
moments during our conversation, I realise I'm whispering, as well, and 
apologise. "You can whisper, too," he smiles. "It's nice."

We begin by murmuring about Detachment 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I-gS8OBt-yk>, in which Brody plays Henry 
Barthes, a substitute teacher who grapples with the shortcomings of the 
American public-school system by day and tries to turn round the life of a 
teenage prostitute by night. It is compellingly, harrowingly brilliant, but it 
is fair to say that it is also short on laughs; for those, one can go to 
another recently released Brody offering,High School, in which he plays Psycho 
Ed, a maniacal drug dealer whose weed gets a whole school stoned. It is hard to 
come up with two films more different; unless, perhaps, you think ofThe Pianist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/93955/pianist>, for which Brody won the 
Academy Award for Best Actor in 2002, and 2010'sPredators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137152/predators>. He is not, as we 
will see, an actor who intends to be typecast.

In Detachment, Brody plays contained angst to enormous effect: Henry Barthes 
tames unruly hordes of disaffected kids through a kind of charismatic distance 
while privately flipping out, sitting weeping on buses as he remembers his dead 
alcoholic mother or giving in to explosive bouts of fury. It's not that much of 
a surprise to discover that the film was directed by Tony Kaye, who also 
brought usAmerican History X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76453/american.history.x>. Both films 
have at their heart men who maintain their stoicism in a sea of distress and 
dysfunction; they are, in a sense, explorations of tortured masculinity. On its 
surface,Detachment is a film about the failings of state schooling; but Brody 
insists that it is also about "aloneness as a human condition; as a greater, 
graver issue".

"Tony would be the first one to tell you that his objective was not to make a 
movie critical of the education system, which obviously has flaws, we all know 
that," says Brody. "But I think the education of us, and our soul, and our 
being, comes from a much earlier place, you know, and is the responsibility of 
the parents and the loved ones in our lives. A little bit of attention and 
kindness can totally change a whole life, and a lack of that can do the same… I 
think a lot of children are not given the respect they deserve, and it's the 
one thing to which I can attribute my success as a person, my evolution, from 
my parents, from that upbringing – no other influence I think had that kind of 
profound effect on me."

His family life also had a more direct influence on his portrayal of Henry 
Barthes, which he describes as "an homage to my father and the contribution 
he's made, which is very generous and underappreciated by society". A teacher 
throughout his career, Brody's father even shot a scene for the film, in which 
he played Henry's estranged father. "I swear, he was fucking brilliant; my mum 
and I were, like, jaws on the floor," Brody grins. His dad didn't make it into 
the final edit, but Brody hopes the scene might become a DVD extra. In the 
meantime, however, he's just happy that he's been able to give his father equal 
billing alongside his photographer mother, whose "tremendous inspiration" he's 
often credited in the past.

He grew up in Queens, New York: outside was a "relatively harsh environment, 
neighbourhood-wise"; inside "a home that had love and creativity and respect". 
His mother used to take him with her on jobs, and was one day sent to 
photograph an acting school. "It's random. She may not have got that 
assignment. I may not have gone to an acting school at a young age." In fact 
he'd started performing even before that, doing magic tricks as a young child, 
and I ask him whether he thinks being an only child determined his career 
choice. He talks for a little about how his parents spoke to him as an adult, 
and how he was encouraged to develop his imagination, and then he says, very 
seriously: "I think it forced me to be mature, because I had to be accountable 
when I came home. I couldn't run off and blame it on my brother or sister. I 
had to be accountable."

Accountability is clearly a big thing for Brody, who rarely speaks of a role 
without using the word "responsibility". It makes perfect sense, of course, 
when he's talking about playing Wladyslaw Szpilman, whose fight for survival 
during the Second World War he depicted in Roman Polanski'sThe Pianist. Brody 
became the youngest ever winner of the Oscar for best actor, fending off the 
claims of Michael Caine, Daniel Day-Lewis, Jack Nicholson and Nicholas Cage; it 
was a particularly sweet success following the low point of a few years 
earlier, when what had started out as a substantial part in Terrence Malick's
The Thin Red Linewas virtually edited out of existence.

The Pianist, he says now, was "all consuming. For a good year after, I was 
probably seriously depressed". A year? "Easily," he replies. "There were severe 
transitions that I put myself through physically and emotionally… I shot it 
when I was 27, and that was my real awakening and entrance into adulthood, that 
responsibility, and awareness of my own good fortune that I had taken for 
granted."

The responsibility of playing a Polish Jew during the Holocaust is obvious; 
and Brody also speaks powerfully about his regret that more roles of that 
calibre haven't come his (or anyone else's) way during the decade sinceThe 
Pianistwas made. So what attracted him to capering around in blockbusters such 
asPredators or King Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/109736/king.kong>? Well, he explains 
carefully, his dislike of repeating things extends even to individual scenes: 
"The key is to somehow get yourself to a place where it feels as real as it can 
feel, and you can't repeat that… But it's so precarious, that place, it's so 
hard to find, and it takes all that work to get to it, and then it's not 
something you just turn on and repeat, and so, yes, I like things that are very 
different for me and cause me to have to stretch."

Hmm. Wasn't King Kong also just… fun? He laughs: "It was pretty fun! It was 
harder than I anticipated. I wanted to do it because I thought it would be fun, 
and kind of a departure from all the weighty things that I'm attracted to, but 
in order to portray fear, for instance, which you have to experience in a 
jungle running from a 25ft gorilla, you have to find things that frighten you, 
and it's much more challenging when there's no gorilla there and there's a 
tennis ball on a stick. You still have the same responsibility to feel. If 
I don't feel it, why should I expect you to feel it? I can't fake it."

Brody's immersion in roles is well-known – he lost vast amounts of weight for 
The Pianist(he was hardly chubby to start with), not to mention relinquishing 
his home and his relationship, he bulked up forPredators and took a part with 
virtually no words in M Night Shyamalan'sThe Village 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101785/village>. It is said that when 
he was filmingThe Jacket <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/106211/jacket>
, in which he played a Gulf War veteran sent to an institution and subjected to 
radical therapy, he asked to be left in a straitjacket in a morgue drawer even 
when the cameras weren't rolling. There is devotion to one's art, and then 
there is obsession.

Which is why I'm somewhat taken aback to find that his holiday is an 
open-ended one, with no concrete plans to return to work. "You're finding me at 
a very blessed time in my life," he says. "I'm embracing hanging out." His day 
job, he points out, requires material, and while he waits for something 
suitable to come along, he has a licence to relax; in his personal life, he 
says, he's "a free man". "I have a lot of discipline and I have a lot of self- 
control, and I think it's important to relinquish some of that at times, to 
surrender to whatever will be." Insofar as he has any plans, he thinks he might 
spend the summer in Europe, "then I'll buckle down". In any case, he laughs, 
"My level of irresponsibility is… not so bad."

It certainly isn't. I'm not sure very many other actors would have torn 
themselves away from the beach and lugged themselves, voiceless, to an 
interview to promote a small, relentlessly serious film. Of course there are 
some perks associated with being a film star – the bar where we've been sitting 
opened especially for us, and we've had the whole place to ourselves. "This has 
never happened to me before!" whispers Brody as we make our way out. "It's like 
being Tom Cruise or something!"

Detachment is released on 13 July
 