
The annual participation survey for Adult Learners' Week has proved a reliable 
barometer of trends in adult learning over the past 20 years. Last year, it 
showed a significant increase in people from the lowest socio-economic groups 
taking part – up by more than a third. Even allowing for statistical error, the 
figures were impressive. Even those who weren't studying expressed strong 
intentions to do so – reflecting a trend picked up by colleges, community 
groups and trainers everywhere.

However, 12 months on, all the signs in the latest survey, which was published 
on 13 May, are that fewer adults are doing some sort of learning, or intend to 
in the near future, than were doing so last year. Most disturbing, the number 
of adults in the lowest socio-economic groups who said they were in some sort 
of learning, or had recently been, fell this year by almost a quarter from 30% 
to 23% – the lowest reported total for 20 years – wiping out last year's gains.

So, why the sudden reversal? Trends identified in the annual survey, which is 
conducted by the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education (Niace), 
suggest that the wrong signals are emerging from the government on what people 
should learn, and from the way adult learning is funded.

Alan Tuckett, chief executive of Niace, believes a number of factors are 
responsible. First, increased spending on educating and training young people 
has come at the expense of people over 25. Second, employers, tightening their 
belts, have concentrated on essential business skills and management training, 
favouring people who are already "learning rich". Third, people generally are 
less willing to "invest" in learning as the government cuts spending and living 
standards drop.

"We know the problem," Tuckett says. "The first response of employers and 
individuals to the recession was to say 'I should retrain, tool myself up'. But 
the effect of the cuts has been a rapid reversal in expectations."

This could result in a double whammy for people with poor education and skills 
since their numbers are greatest in the older groups, where the decline in 
learning is greatest. Participation soared among 17- to 19-year-olds, from 58% 
to 71%, and for 20- to 24-year-olds it's up four percentage points. But from 
here, it's downhill all the way – from 50% to 43% for people aged 25 to 34, and 
down from 23% to 17% for the 65-74 age group.

"I accept that times are tough," says Tuckett, "but the report shows over a 
quarter of learning opportunities for adults have been lost, at a time when 
more learning opportunities are needed for people retiring later on smaller 
pensions and needing new learning and skills to stay in work longer." Beyond 
work skills, Tuckett says Niace's research has shown that learning has a 
positive impact on health, independence and wellbeing, drastically cutting 
welfare and health costs later in life.

John Hayes, further education and skills minister, accepts that the survey 
evidence is a cause for concern. "That is why we are putting more money than 
ever into apprenticeships – a quarter of them already for adults – and carrying 
out a full review of informal adult learning. We need to make sure that the 
£210m I secured from the Treasury to safeguard adult learning does reach the 
disadvantaged."

Disproportionate impact


But many people question his ability to deliver, since wider cuts of 25% to 
colleges by 2015, and changes to benefits rules under the work programme and 
welfare reforms, are already having a disproportionate impact on the most 
disadvantaged. The most high-profile example is the decision to cut fee support 
for English classes for speakers of other languages who are not actively 
seeking work and are on benefits, such as jobseeker's allowance.

Joy Mercer, director of education policy for the Association of Colleges, says 
the 187,000 adults enrolled on such courses were learning English to improve 
their job prospects, help their children with schoolwork and become fully 
integrated citizens. "It is hard to reconcile the likely impact of this policy 
with the government's stated support for social mobility and a fair society. 
Three-quarters of those affected are women, who will be disproportionately hit."

Ministers say that, while cuts have to be made, colleges have the freedom and 
flexibility to spend where needed, without the burden of red tape. But, so far, 
college leaders say this is not working out. Lynne Sedgmore, executive director 
of the 157 Group, which represents 27 further education colleges, says that 
while the government has dismantled Labour's planning controls "this has led to 
new barriers arising for adult learning, particularly around eligibility. 
Whether someone can get support from public funds now depends on a long 
criteria regarding their age, qualifications, what they wish to study and at 
what level."

Considerable claims are also made for David Cameron's "big society", where 
self-help and community action backed by the voluntary sector should replace 
state involvement. But charities and trusts dealing with the disadvantaged say 
they have experienced cuts. Many, including the National Bureau for Students 
with Disabilities, have been forced to close.

Tuckett commented that Niace, which always worked closely with the national 
bureau, would continue to fight for those with disabilities, but needs support 
from others. "The big question that our participation survey raises is how much 
more support will the government give. If we are to give some meaning to big 
society, learning has a key part to play. But here we are offering less and 
expecting people to do more."
 