
One of the most influential education reports to be published during Labour's 
13 years in government was undoubtedly Claus Moser's, A Fresh Start: improving 
literacy and numeracy. Published in February 1999, it revealed the stark fact 
that roughly one in five adults – perhaps as many as 7 million people – were 
functionally illiterate or innumerate.

The report provided a clarion call for a new approach to the teaching of basic 
skills to adults that for decades had been underfunded and often marginalised. 
It proposed a new national strategy to tackle what it called a "shocking state 
of  affairs".

In 2001, Labour launched an ambitious new strategy, Skills for Life, with the 
aim of improving the basic skill levels of 2.25 million adults by the end of 
the decade. Over the next seven years, £5bn was invested and thousands of 
teachers were taken on to teach literacy, numeracy and English for Speakers of 
Other Languages (ESOL).

The results have been impressive. By 2008, more than 2.8 million adults had 
gained a qualification in basic skills, enabling Labour to claim it had reached 
its target two years early. By that time, the former government had set its 
sights higher, with the 2006 Leitch review – Prosperity for all in the global 
economy – setting a new objective for 95% of adults to achieve the basic skills 
of functional literacy and numeracy by 2020. Achieving such a goal would mean 
reducing the number of adults struggling with basic literacy and numeracy from 
the current level, thought to be around 5 million, to fewer than 2 million by 
the end of the decade.

Literacy review


Despite these successes, the coalition government has ordered a review of 
literacy and numeracy skills provision to determine a new course for basic 
skills teaching over the next decade. Feeding into this policymaking process 
will be the reports of two inquiries led by Niace. The first, on adult 
numeracy, reported in March. It recommends a seven-point plan for improving 
adult numeracy that includes a new way of measuring how well adults use maths 
in everyday life to manage bills, make decisions about credit and estimate 
time. It also calls for adults with the poorest numeracy skills to be given 
priority.

"The main reason people do not go to adult education classes is that they tend 
to be scared because many of them have had negative experiences of maths 
lessons at school," says Niace programme manager Sue Southwood.

"We need to make sure that when they go into a classroom they are taught 
differently. A lot of adults see numeracy as trigonometry and algebra and think 
it is very difficult. We need to make numeracy relevant, not some abstract 
subject that's no use to them. We need to give them the skills to work out the 
best mobile phone package, make decisions about renting and buying property, 
budget for food and their electricity and gas bills.

"The other key thing is that teaching must be focused on developing conceptual 
understanding. Adults need to understand what they are doing when they use 
maths and why they are doing it. It's not just about doing a series of 
worksheets about fractions and getting the right answer. If you have got a 
recipe that is based on four people and you are cooking a meal for three you 
need to be able to use fractions to work out how much you need."

The second Niace-led inquiry is looking at adult and youth literacy provision. 
Chaired by the former Conservative education minister Lord Boswell, it is 
due to report in September to coincide with International Literacy Day 2011. 
One of its emerging findings is that the Skills for Life strategy, while 
successfully reaching "the lowest hanging fruit" – adults ready to study 
for qualifications – is not doing enough to persuade, encourage and support 
potential learners to engage in learning.

Weaknesses in the current strategy identified by the inquiry team include an 
over-emphasis on qualifications that often fail to match learners' needs and 
aspirations. Not enough is being done to reach those people whose literacy 
levels are least well developed.

While there are concerns about future funding in the light of the coalition's 
commitment to reduce the national deficit, many basic skills practitioners 
accept that it is time for a review of the Skills for Life approach.

"The facts speak for themselves. There are still many millions of people 
in this country who still have very poor literacy and numeracy and do not have 
the skills they need to perform in the 21st century," says Carol Taylor, 
Niace's director of development and research.
 