
"The learning has completely turned my life around," says Bob Wells, winner of 
the outstanding learner of the year award for London last year. His comment is 
typical of the hundreds of award winners over 20 years of Adult Learners' Week. 
What they have in common is that they all achieved something they thought 
impossible.

Charis Sebastian, a single mother who had never worked, got a placement with 
Carmarthen county council supporting disaffected 14- to 16-year-olds and is now 
taking City and Guilds qualifications. "If I hadn't taken this first step with 
Jobforce Wales, I don't think I would have done any of this," she said.

In England and Wales more than 130,000 people took part in over 4,000 events 
last year. Some 90,000 visited the campaign website and 80% of people who 
called the helpline enrolled on a course. In 1997 Unesco adopted the idea; now 
more than 50 countries have similar festivals.

Numerous further education organisations see benefits in the awards week. 
Lynne Sedgmore, executive director of the 157 Group, says: "We have seen, over 
the years, clear and increasing evidence that Adult Learners' Week inspires 
more people to take up learning." This view is shared by the Association of 
Colleges, whose spokesman added: "So many colleges are involved each year 
because their own research indicates that the week stimulates interest in 
courses."

Indeed, the week rapidly became a festival of learning as more and more 
organisations, from the European Social Fund to education publisher Pearson, 
signed up to sponsor awards. Saul Nassé, controller of BBC Learning, says: "We 
are proud to sponsor the digital participation award for the second year."

It's a long way from 1992, when Niace decided to spend £5,000 on a national 
festival. At the time, it was very much against the culture of adult education 
to single out individuals or groups, but the organisation wanted to use winners 
to show the public what learning could do for them.

The involvement of broadcast media helped fuel success as each ITV region 
showcased award winners, Channel 4 made a documentary and the BBC produced 
short plays to promote learning. Local authorities and other organisations 
supported the helpline. Another crucial feature was that partner organisations 
could offer whatever learning they liked to the public, from IT to cookery to 
horticulture to needlecraft, in places such as museums, libraries and even 
supermarkets.

"It's the mix of activities and media support that has helped make it more 
than the sum of its parts," says Alan Tuckett of Niace." And the annual 
participation survey has influence on policy makers.SJ
 