 The Taliban has a permanent presence in 54% of Afghanistan and the country is 
in serious danger of falling into the group's hands, according to a report by 
an independent thinktank with long experience in the area.
Despite the presence of tens of thousands of Nato-led troops and billions of 
dollars in aid, the insurgents, driven out by the US invasion in 2001, now 
control "vast swaths of unchallenged territory, including rural areas, some 
district centres, and important road arteries," the Senlis Council says in a 
report released today.

On the basis of what it calls exclusive research, it warns that the insurgency 
is also exercising a "significant amount of psychological control, gaining more 
and more political legitimacy in the minds of the Afghan people, who have a 
long history of shifting alliances and regime change".

It says that the frontline is getting ever closer to Kabul - a warning echoed 
by the UN, which says more and more of the country is becoming a "no go" area 
for western aid and development workers.

The council goes as far as to state: "It is a sad indictment of the current 
state of Afghanistan that the question now appears to be not if the Taliban 
will return to Kabul, but when this will happen and in what form. The 
oft-stated aim of reaching the city in 2008 appears more viable than ever and 
it is incumbent upon the international community to implement a new strategic 
paradigm forAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> before 
time runs out".

Its 110-page report coincides with an equally severe warning from Oxfam. In a 
report for the House of Commons international development committee, the 
humanitarian and aid agency warns that the security situation in Afghanistan is 
deteriorating significantly with the country's problems exacerbated by 
corruption in central and local government.

The report warns that urgent action is needed to avert a humanitarian disaster 
in which millions of Afghans face "severe hardship comparable with sub-Saharan 
Africa". Though the country has received more than $15bn in aid since 2001, the 
money is not getting to the people who need it most or to projects that could 
lead to sustained improvements in their lives, Oxfam says.

At least 1,200 civilians have been killed so far this year, it adds - half in 
operations by international or Afghan forces. There are four times as many air 
strikes by international forces in Afghanistan than in Iraq, Oxfam notes.

Senior British and US military commanders privately agree despite their public 
emphasis on short-term successes against Taliban fighters.

The insurgency is divided into a largely poverty-driven "grassroots" component 
and a concentrated group of "hardcore militant Islamists", says the Senlis 
Council, which has an office in Kabul and field researchers based in Helmand 
and Kandahar provinces in southern Afghanistan.

It says that the Nato-led International Security Force, Isaf, should have 
double the current number of 40,000 troops and should include forces from 
Muslim countries as well as those Nato states which have refused to send troops 
to the country or insist, like France and Germany, that they must not be 
involved in combat operations.

There is no sign, despite pressure from the US and Britain, of any move within 
Nato to send reinforcements to Afghanistan.

While western governments, like the Senlis Council and Oxfam, are increasingly 
concerned about the lack of effectiveness of President Hamid Karzai's 
government, there is no agreement about how to solve the problems.

While the Senlis Council wants Nato forces' provincial reconstruction teams to 
take on a bigger role distributing aid, Oxfam says the military should stick to 
providing security. And while the council says opium poppies should be bought 
by the international community and used licitly for medical purposes, Oxfam 
argues that such a project would be impossible given the current state of 
Afghanistan.
 