
In the early hours of 2 July last year, around 4,000 US marines landed in 
southern Helmand, Afghanistan's most violent province.Khanjar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jul/02/afghanistan-taliban>, or "Sword 
strike", was the first major military operation carried out under the 
presidency of Barack Obama, who announced it with aspeech 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/remarks-by-the-president-on-a-new-strategy-for-afghanistan-and-pakistan/>
 that could have been made by his predecessor. "Al-Qaida and its allies – the 
terrorists who planned and supported the 9/11 attacks – are in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan… I've already ordered the deployment of 17,000 troops. These 
soldiers and marines will take the fight to the Taliban in the south and the 
east… And to the terrorists who oppose us, my message is the same: we will 
defeat you."

As Lieutenant Colonel Christian Cabaniss, the commanding officer of the 
marines in Helmand, told it, the mission was simple – as the sun rose, the 
Taliban would "wake up to find marines everywhere". They would then call for 
reinforcements, only to be told that they, too, saw marines everywhere. They 
would have "no stomach to stand and fight, and disappear", enabling the marines 
to "target the population, not the enemy". Sadly, it's necessary to point out 
that in this case "targeting" meant winning over the local population so they 
would reject the Taliban altogether.

The first convoy I joined was hit by an IED 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Improvised_explosive_device> (improvised 
explosive device). I heard the boom, but when I looked out of the tiny 
rocket-proof windows, all the vehicles in front and behind looked fine. 
Eventually I realised that the lead vehicle had been hit. The front left tyre 
had been blown about 80 metres into a nearby field, and the bonnet was 
crumpled. But the main body of the truck, like the seven marines inside, was 
unscathed. Even Blue, the explosives-sniffing dog, jumped out wagging his tail.

The MRAP <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MRAP_%28armored_vehicle%29> 
(mine-resistant ambush protected vehicle), a huge truck with a V-shaped hull to 
deflect bomb blasts, was dragged back to a nearby base and I followed the 
marines on a foot patrol to recover any parts of the IED or truck from the 
bombsite. We passed one crater ("No, this is the one from three days ago") and 
eventually came to two craters, one right in the middle of the road, the second 
just past it, at exactly the spot a vehicle would pass in order to avoid the 
first. Barely 30 minutes had passed since the explosion, but every scrap of 
metal had been cleared.

"There are fresh motorcycle tracks here," said a marine from the other side of 
the crater. "Motherfuckers."

Alongside the road was a canal, built in the 1950s by USAID 
<http://www.usaid.gov/> (United States Agency for International Development). 
Across the water, two men on a motorcycle rode past staring at us coldly. On 
our side, a man and his wife approached on another motorcycle, and the marines 
went down on one knee and studied the couple through the sights of their guns, 
before ordering them to stop and dismount. The man lifted his shirt to show he 
wasn't wearing explosives, before walking toward the marines, who still had 
their sights trained on him. He said he didn't have any information about the 
Taliban.

"If you've finished with him, let him go," shouted someone behind us. "Just 
because we have to get blown up doesn't mean he has to as well."

"You think he'd be standing there if there were more explosives, you fucking 
idiot?" shouted the lance corporal crouching next to me. "He knows where 
everything is. They all know."

We walked back to the base and the convoy was ordered to return to Camp Delhi 
inGarmsir <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garmsir>, the operational headquarters 
that is now home to 2nd MEB, the 2nd Marine Expeditionary Brigade. We'd been 
trying to get to Echo Company, one of three platoons based farther south than 
any other foreign troops had been, in a town called Mian Poshteh. We would try 
again in a few days. By the time we did, five out of six convoys had been hit 
by IEDs, and the two roads from Camp Delhi to Echo Company were closed. This 
left the desert, where the massive MRAPs, which can weigh more than 30 tons, 
often sink into the powdery sand. This happened twice, and we had to wait for 
lorries to come to tow them out. The journey of 16km took 13 hours.

As we waited for the first lorry, I was ordered into a new vehicle. When I 
climbed into the back, I was surprised to see two Special Forces soldiers. I 
looked at their darker camouflage, elaborate weapons and long beards. No one 
was allowed to ask about what they were doing, so the conversation was awkward. 
The driver started talking about a house ahead that a few days before had been 
used by a sniper. "I hope he shoots at us again," he said, "then we can set you 
guys on him." He turned around and smiled. The two Special Forces soldiers just 
looked away.

It was dusk when we finally made it to Mian Poshteh. Echo Company had arrived 
a few days earlier and almost immediately been involved in a seven-hour 
gunfight. One marine was killed, the first American to die on an operation 
approved by Obama. By the time I arrived, the Taliban had realised the marines 
were there to stay and, although small teams were still launching hit-and-run 
attacks, they were mostly using IEDs. Convoys were finding at least one every 
kilometre.

Mian Poshteh is a small market town straddling the canal. Its shops had been 
abandoned hastily – goods were still on shelves, vegetables on display outside, 
now rotting in the sun. Marines helped themselves to cigarettes and sweets, 
leaving behind generous payments in dollars.

There was a government building, where most of the marines slept on the 
concrete floor. I was told to sleep with the medics, in a courtyard that 
I would share with about 15 others.

"Have you seen what's next door?" one marine said. "A gynaecologist's bench, 
with a dustbin at the end – how apt for this country."

There was one casualty at the medic's centre – a paraplegic boy who, despite 
being "somewhere between 16 and 30", can't have weighed more than six stone 
(38kg). He had been discovered in a nearby house, which was on fire after being 
hit by aHellfire missile <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AGM-114_Hellfire>. His 
family had fled, along with everyone else, a few nights before when the marines 
first landed. Unable to move, the boy had almost starved to death.

I couldn't sleep that night, and heard the medics asking for help to carry the 
boy to the helicopter waiting to take him toKandahar 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kandahar> hospital. Nobody moved, so I got up and 
grabbed one corner of the stretcher. We jogged outside, treading on several 
sleeping marines in the darkness. "Is that the cripple?" "Is he even alive?" 
"Is it true his family just fucking left him there?" "He probably crippled 
himself making bombs."

That afternoon, the Special Forces soldiers, who everyone knew had gone out on 
an operation the night before, appeared again, covered in mud and dripping with 
sweat. A few younger marines shouted out compliments, but they 
went unacknowledged. Soon, everyone was saying they had made 12 confirmed kills 
and many more unconfirmed. The hero-worship they inspired seemed to annoy some 
of the more experienced marines: "They're nothing but Rangers with a few skill 
sets and some extra assets," grunted one. "They ain't special."

Some of that resentment could have come from the fact that while the Special 
Forces got to go out and kill people within hours of arriving, Echo was now 
rarely even seeing its enemy, let alone fighting them. Locals were also 
starting to return to their homes, and most marines were sure that the Taliban 
were posing as civilians, and studying Echo's movements and positions.

The men finding themselves in this tricky position were often no more than 19 
or 20 years old. Mostly from Florida, and North or South Carolina, (their base 
is Camp Lejeune, North Carolina) many had never before left their home states. 
They had been trained to kill (and openly fantasised about "dropping" people), 
but were now being told to hold back and instead build relationships with the 
local community. This was made especially hard by the fact they'd seen a close 
friend shot dead within hours of arriving.
 Lance corporal Brady Bunch: ‘I wish the bad guys had uniforms.’ Photograph: 
Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
I joined Lance Corporal Brady Bunch (his real name) and 2nd Platoon as they 
went out on patrol to a compound from which they had been attacked. As they 
approached, they saw a man in dark clothes running out from behind the back 
wall with a bag on his back. Bunch got down on his belly and lined up the man 
in his sights. "That's the house that we keep getting shot at from."

After a few tense moments, Bunch's commander decided they would try talking to 
whoever was inside, so Bunch wasn't allowed to take the shot. The man with the 
bag crossed a footbridge and disappeared into another compound. "Fuck. Every 
fucking open shot I get. Fuck." Bunch stomped towards the house, then turned 
around grinning, "I could have waxed his ass."

As we approached, a boy of about 12 came out. "No, I don't want a kid – where 
is his father?" asked Bunch. The boy said he was alone, and he and the 
interpreter kept talking, without translating for Bunch, who was getting 
frustrated. He was told about suspicious activity on the road ahead, so looked 
through the sights of his gun again. Then another child appeared, a girl. Three 
men had gathered on the other side of the canal, and the boy kept changing his 
story. "This kid's about to cry and all these people are trying to talk to him. 
Something's definitely going on," Bunch said.

Believing the family and the suspicious man had all left, Bunch walked into 
the house, followed by the interpreter and the boy. There was a sudden 
movement, and the boy and interpreter darted back out. Another small girl had 
appeared, startling Bunch into a firing position. "That little girl almost got 
blasted."

"Now there's a woman in the house. What the fuck is going on? There wasn't 
supposed to be anybody here, now there's a whole family. Tell the kid to stop 
lying and tell us the truth."

Eventually the boy said there were three women in the house, that his brother 
had "escaped the Taliban" and his father was in hospital, sick.

The marines told him to get the women into one room, so they could search the 
others. They told the boy to go into the first room before them because "they 
won't shoot if he goes in".

The only place left to search was a side area where animals were kept, but the 
boy tried to block the entrance. "What's he so worried about?" Bunch demanded.

The marines pushed past, and one of them shone a light into the chicken coop. 
"I found a rifle, wrapped up."

"You did? You're fucked, kid." Everyone gathered at the doorway, but no one 
entered in case the gun was booby-trapped.

Bunch ordered the boy to go in and pick up the rifle, which he was reluctant 
to do. "Right there! I know you see the rifle, kid." Eventually he picked it 
up. "Don't fucking touch it, put it down, put it down. Get away from the rifle."

The interpreter picked it up, carried it outside and unwrapped it. Bunch took 
it. His shoulders dropped. "It's a fuckingBB gun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BB_gun>."

"I just use it to kill some birds. I can't kill somebody with it."

They told the boy not to cover things up, because it caused suspicion. "Tell 
him thank you for his time, we're going to leave now, sorry."

Outside, the three men by the canal were still watching. Then the man dressed 
in black, who'd earlier run away, joined them. One of the marines spat on the 
ground. They asked who the local elder was, and were given a name they hadn't 
heard before. "They give a different answer every time you ask them," Bunch 
said. He pointed subtly at the men across the canal and said to the boy, 
"Talib? Talib? Taliban?" The boy just stared.

"He ain't telling me shit," Bunch sighed as he turned back towards the men, 
who were being asked for help by the platoon commander. "If we help you," said 
one of the men through the interpreter, "the Taliban will kill us."

Bunch was sure the man in black was Taliban, and was intimidating the others 
into not talking. "I wish the bad guys had uniforms."

It was almost dark, so the men were told that if they had any information, 
they should come to see the marines, who then started the long patrol back. 
They didn't find out what was in the bag.

The following day I joined 1st Platoon on a patrol to an abandoned compound a 
few kilometres from the main base. While one of the marines was trying to talk 
to an old man using aDari 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dari_%28Eastern_Persian%29> phrase book, a few 
rounds from anAK-47 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AK-47> popped above our 
heads. Everyone moved in the direction from which the bullets seemed to be 
coming, and leaned up against a wall that was low enough to peek over, but no 
one could see anything. Staff Sergeant Funke studied his map while listening 
to someone on his radio who was identifying two men withRPGs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rocket-propelled_grenade> (rocket-propelled 
grenades) and AK-47s not far from the building we were in. Funke suddenly 
worked out where they were and laughed. "They're right fucking there, 
gentlemen, right there," he pointed to our right "they're about… Ha! Less than 
100 metres from us."

An RPG fizzed over our heads and everyone except the old man dropped to the 
ground. The grenade didn't explode, but everyone stayed down, which seemed to 
annoy Funke. "Can we fucking move on these people, God damn it."

Someone else screamed, "Does anyone see anything?" just as we heard a heavy 
and constant burst of gunfire coming from close by. The marines ran into the 
next compound, kicking in doors and searching rooms as AK-47 rounds continued 
to pop. We were all running and crouching, which further exasperated Funke. He 
was standing up straight, looking down at us impatiently. "The rounds are going 
to go over your heads. Let's go."

Everyone jogged towards the next compound except Funke, who walked casually 
behind, until they started going in the wrong direction. "Gentlemen, the enemy 
is to the south, we are to the north, we need to get through this" – he pointed 
to a compound that was in the right direction. "They are there, we need to kill 
them, let's go."

Someone shouted "Incoming" and we all went down, but, again, whatever it was 
didn't explode. We ran into the final compound, which had much higher walls and 
one door leading out on to a field. Beyond was a tree line from which we were 
being attacked. Nobody wanted to be first out the door because they would be an 
easy target. Funke marched into the middle of the courtyard. "Gents, listen up, 
they are waiting for us to expose ourselves. I need a three-man position on 
this corner, I need a three-man position on that corner, I need two marines at 
the door and one person doingoverwatch <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overwatch> 
on this fucking ladder. It does you no good being inside. This is what you 
wanted, you fucking got it, now go get it."
 Lance corporal Gomez: ‘I love this shit. This is what I re-enlisted for. You 
can’t keep me down.’ Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Lance Corporal Gomez was ordered up the ladder first. He climbed very slowly, 
expecting it to collapse under his weight, but also so that his head didn't 
suddenly pop up above the wall. I asked if he could see anything. "I see the 
weed, man." There was a huge field of marijuana on the other side of the wall. 
"I want to jump in. But I see nothing else."

Then he started firing, showering dozens of hot bullet cases down on to me. 
Other marines started firing as well, although when they asked for an exact 
location, all anyone said was "on the tree line".

Gomez fired a grenade. "Come on, baby, hit, hit." I heard it explode on the 
other side of the field. He fired another, but the grenade launcher came apart 
from his gun. "Motherfucker." He climbed down the ladder as marines around us 
kept firing. Funke ordered some men into the field. I ran out after them. The 
mud on the ground was so hot it burned my elbows. Marines either side of me 
looked through their sights to the tree line but I couldn't see any movement. I 
got up and ran back inside.

Gomez was drinking water and wiping sweat from his face. "I love this shit. 
This is what I re-enlisted for. Four deployments now, you can't keep me down."

All the marines sat in a small patch of shade and a few looked as though they 
were about to pass out. One started throwing up. He vomited three times, took a 
deep breath and jumped to his feet, strapping his helmet back on. "Let's go, 
y'all. Let's go, Bravo. GET ON YOUR FEET. LET'S GO."

"You sure?" his platoon commander asked.

"I got it." The two men bumped fists and ran back outside. "Let's go, 
gentlemen. ON YOUR FEET. FUCK THESE BITCHES."

But the battle was over. Our attackers had either been killed (at least three 
marines claimed to have hit them) or fired everything they had and vanished. 
They could have easily dropped their weapons and walked right past us. The 
marines searched the tree line for blood and corpses, but found neither.

All three platoons went out on daily patrols, and most of the time nothing 
happened. I started asking if this still felt like the"war on terror" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_on_Terrorism>, even though the phrase is no 
longer used, and some of the marines would have been just 11 or 12 years old on 
9/11. Some said it did. "And there are 3,000 reasons why; 3,000 names who 
aren't with us any more." One private, who had signed up the year before, five 
days after his 18th birthday, said, "I guess… I don't know. Where I was, the 
economy wasn't good, you couldn't get a job, my stepdad was suffering, he had a 
hard time finding a job. I knew this was a good organisation, regular pay 
cheque, they take care of you. Sitting here now, I'm helping out my parents a 
lot."

One of Echo Company's captains still believed he was fighting al-Qaida, but, 
more importantly, "We abandoned these people after the Russians pulled out, 
just like we abandoned the Iraqis after we kicked Saddam out of Kuwait, so we 
owe it to them to help now."

But even the strongest sense of moral obligation doesn't guarantee success, 
and I still didn't understand how this mission was going to succeed. Of the 
21,000 extra men Obama has already sent into Afghanistan, most were in 
supporting roles – engineers, medics, intelligence experts, military police. 
Only 4,000 were actually fighting, in a relatively small area of southern 
Helmand. And as one senior marine confided, "We control only as far as we see." 
So before I got a helicopter back toCamp Bastion 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camp_Bastion>, I sat down with the commanding 
officer of the entire battle group, Lt Col Cabaniss, and asked what he really 
thought his marines could √achieve.

Killing the Taliban, he said, was "almost irrelevant". What I'd seen in Mian 
Poshteh may have been the "end of the beginning, but it wasn't actually that 
decisive". What would be decisive was good counter insurgency. Cabaniss was 
evangelical about counter insurgency, which in military acronym is called 
"coin" (coin is a verb in Helmand; I heard one engineer say, "I'm gonna coin 
the shit out of these people", before heading out to work on an irrigation 
project).

"Some places here had brief periods where the British came into their villages 
and left, for a variety of reasons. What was going to be different about this 
was, where we went, we were going to stay. And now, 11 days in, we're still 
there, and that's where we start to gain some trust from the local population. 
They'll start telling us what's going on in their community. I think in the 
past they have not wanted to say anything out of fear. Because if somebody sees 
them, the Taliban will come back with a vengeance.

"I don't like the term hearts and minds, but their heart is – they have to 
believe it's in the best interests to be on the side of the government of
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. Their mind is – 
they know we're going to win. They can't sit on the fence any more. We're not 
going to build Jacksonville, North Carolina, in the next six months, but I 
think we can expect sustainable progress, the people connected to the 
government, the government connected to the people. Not shove the Taliban out 
completely, but marginalise them to the point that most of the locals look at 
them as common criminals." During an earlier conversation, he had described 
this as "armed social work".

Three years ago, Foreign Office officials and senior British soldiers said 
exactly the same things – only they called it the "comprehensive approach" 
(never mind that the Afghanistan Central Government, whose influence everyone 
wanted to spread, was seen almost universally as hopelessly ineffective and 
spectacularly corrupt) – and yet the British had just suffered their worst 
month so far and the Taliban were stronger than they had been since being 
overthrown. Why would things be different this time?

"The Brits had a good understanding of what was going on down here, but they 
never had enough combat power. My battalion, we're obviously larger, we've been 
able to position forces all over the central Helmand river valley and really 
get out amongst the people. They just didn't have the capability to do it 
right."

I said that while it was obvious the Taliban couldn't win a military victory, 
they could keep laying ever more sophisticated IEDs, and taking pot shots, for 
years to come, costing lives, billions of dollars and eventually bleeding 
foreign forces dry.

"If we can take a deep hold in the areas that we're in, by winter the Taliban 
are going to be on their heels, sitting in Pakistan, wondering what to do next. 
And we'll have the people." He smiled as if this had already been achieved. 
"When they come back, it's going to be a vastly different community that's 
ready to stand against them. Once the people decide they won't tolerate the 
Taliban's presence, there's no way they can stay."

I asked if this was the way the US now fought wars. "Not tooting the Marine 
Corps horn, but beforeGeneral Petraeus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Petraeus> went to Iraq, the marine 
battalions there had already come to this conclusion – that working closely 
with the local population, building relationships with them, had much greater 
impact on security than just going street to street, shooting. We learned that 
the hard way in Iraq, and we're starting the right way in Afghanistan."

At Camp Bastion I had a three-day wait until I could fly to Kabul, and bumped 
into some Afghan interpreters I'd spent a lot of time with. Many had become US 
citizens when their families fled either the Russian invasion or the Taliban. 
When I told one what I'd seen, he said, "Man, the Americans are being too soft 
down there. They need to go into the villages and say, 'If we see one Taliban 
here, or if you help them once, we'll flatten every building.' The problems 
would end that day."
 