
“This is your world, shape it or someone else will” – Rula Ghani, 
Afghanistan’s first lady

I recently attended a programme launch for women’s empowerment where 
Afghanistan’sfirst lady, Rula Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/rula-ghani-afghan-first-lady>, 
was the keynote speaker. She ended her speech with the powerful statement above 
that inspired many of us there.

However, it made me think. In the real world of Afghan women, how many are 
able to do this? How many have real opportunities and support for this from 
male family members and colleagues?

Women’s participation in and contribution to Afghanistan have improved. It is 
always pleasing to read how women’s rights have been boosted in Afghanistan in 
education, health and government. It is also very positive tha one of the 
reasons for the presence of the international community inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is to address women’s rights. 
But this progress has been limited to the big cities where people are fairly 
well educated and understand the concept of women’s rights. We have failed to 
address why men and women are not considered equal citizens in most of the 
country.

The London conference on Afghanistan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/london-conference-on-afghanistan-2014>
, on 4 December, is considered an important opportunity for both the Afghan 
government and international community to discuss their mutual commitment and 
collaboration after this year, when the majority of US and UK troops leave. 
While it is encouraging that the UK government will host civil society, 
including a side event for women, before the conference, there is little 
information on how many women will be involved in the official delegation of 
the Afghan government. Discussions and negotiations over the final communique 
are under way, yet women’s groups within the government and the women’s 
movement have not yet been consulted. There is also limited information on the 
Afghan government’s priorities for this conference.

In the past 13 years, women’s representation has been limited. Despite three 
female ministers in the cabinet, 27% in the parliament and senate, nine women 
in Kabul’s high peace council and two to three per province in 31 provinces, 
women’s participation is rarely seen in important national discussions, 
decisions, authority and leadership.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in these positions have failed 
to fully address the needs of other women.

The international community, particularly the UK government, has played an 
effective donor role to support women’s rights in Afghanistan. So far, the 
funding has supported the implementation of short-term projects by women-led 
organisations, but the absence of meaningful political and diplomatic pressure 
on policymakers to ensure women’s equal participation has always been felt.

It is promising that the UK Department for International Development (DfID), 
with the support of the UK-based British and Irish Agencies Afghanistan Group, 
plans to bring 50 civil society representatives to the London conference. But 
the women’s rights agenda seems to be missing. Past experiences have shown that 
the civil society delegations usually have a broader agenda to lobby for, which 
could see women’s concerns left to one side. As an activist, I was disappointed 
to hear that the visa applications for the women’s delegation – which had a 
specific agenda to discuss women’s concerns and recommendations – was not 
supported by the organisers.

Where both the Afghan and UK governments have priorities under their national 
action plans on women, implementation of these plans is a challenge. When 
female leaders are not engaged in national discussions and decisions, where 
international supporters do not prioritise women’s rights as per their 
commitments, it clearly shows a lack of interest and political will to address 
women’s rights.

We still hope to see a good representation of women in the Afghan government’s 
official delegation at the London conference. The UK government as co-host must 
ask for the meaningful participation of these women, a specific women’s rights 
event where they can make recommendations, and for these to be included in the 
final communique.

 Afghan women have the ability to think about their country’s development, 
contribute to it and lead positive change. Women should be given an equal 
opportunity to make a better Afghanistan.


Samira Hamidi is the former director of the Afghan Women’s Network in 
Afghanistan
 