
The military campaign in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> has been the focus of 
international attention over the last decade, but that is shifting markedly as 
Kabul tries to make sense of what will be left behind when Nato's combat troops 
disappear.

The country has 34 provinces and progress in each, on issues such as women's 
rights and counter-narcotics, is, so far, patchy.

A new sense of realism appears to be sweeping the civilian-led Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams (PRTs), along with a chilling recognition that their 
legacy will help shape the future of the country.

The feeling is particularly acute in Helmand, where the British-led PRT has 
broken new ground over the last three years and is desperate to preserve such 
progress as has been made.

Afghanistan's first local elections were held in Helmand, which now has 32 
councillors. It has recently adopted a more pragmatic drugs strategy, that 
could help to persuade poppy farmers to develop crops that are actually needed 
in cities such as Kabul.

But time is against them. The PRT, which has a team of 160, is being gradually 
wound down.

And Hamid Karzai's surprise sacking last week of Helmand's provincial 
governor, Gulab Mangal, is an undoubted blow at an important moment.

The British liked Mangal and hoped that if he had to be replaced, a 
progressive would be appointed. Instead, Karzai gave the province to an 
unknown: General Naeem Baloch, who used to work for the Afghan intelligence 
service.

It is too soon to know how this will affect the PRT, but it is hard to imagine 
that Baloch has been put in place because he is a liberal; or that he will 
instinctively support the head of the PRT, Catriona Laing, who wants Helmand to 
become a model, for other provinces, in aspects such as good governance.

This is the unsexy, below-the-line organisation that Helmand desperately 
needs. And with the unerringly punishing luxury of hindsight, the Foreign 
Office and the Department for International Development now believe the British 
spent too much time and money on "visible" changes in the province, such as the 
building of new schools, roads and health clinics, and not enough time putting 
in place the kind of checks, balances and controls that make governments be 
accountable, and function.

One of the key figures in Helmand is Jim Haggerty, a 58-year-old Geordie who 
has the ear, and the trust, of many of the village elders and tribal chiefs.

Working for the UK's stabilisation unit, Haggerty has been in Afghanistan for 
more than five years and in Helmand for more than four.

Few Britons in Afghanistan understand the country's people and its practices 
better than he. He is pragmatic, and cautions against being too ambitious in 
the time the PRT has left.

He believes the priority now is what he calls a "back to the future strategy". 
He says: "We need to take them back to the point where they were at 20 years 
ago.

Instead of comparing what they have now to what we have, we have to think back 
to what they had then. That should be the starting point.

"It may look ugly to us from where we are, but it might make sense here. There 
are going to be setbacks.

"It may not end up as we had hoped for, but when you look at the changes we 
have seen, and the people that have been affected, and the willingness of the 
Afghans to take the lead now, then that is progress.

"It is not going to be ideal, it may not be what we wanted four of five years 
ago, but this is a process that will be truly owned by the Afghans. We have to 
respect that."

The Afghans, he admits, want the British to leave. But not just yet.

"They don't want us here. But they are very pragmatic and they know that they 
need us to enable them to do what they want to do."

And though the PRT will disappear, Haggerty says, "there will still be some 
people here after 2014".

He adds: "The civilian side will evolve into something else. It is not as if 
we are walking away from here. We won't let it founder.

"There is unfinished business here. It is not the end of the book, just the 
end of a chapter in the book."
 