
The high court today imposed strict conditions on the transfer by British 
forces of suspected insurgents to Afghan detention centres, after hearing 
evidence of detainees' "horrible abuse" in breach of international law.

A moratorium already agreed by Britain on transfers to the National 
Directorate of Security (NDS) facility in Kabul had to remain in place, since 
there was a real risk detainees held there would be "subjected to torture or 
serious mistreatment", Lord Justice Richards and Mr Justice Cranston ruled.

Transfers to the facility would breach British government policy and would 
therefore be unlawful, the judges said.

However, the transfer of suspects to NDS facilities in Kandahar and Lashkar 
Gah, the provincial capital of Helmand, should be allowed provided existing 
safeguards are "strengthened by observance of specified conditions", they said, 
insisting that these safeguards must include the right of British monitors to 
get access to the detainees regularly.

The judges said Maya Evans, an anti-war activist who brought the case, had won 
just "a partial victory" since she had not succeeded in her attempt to stop all 
transfers.

Evans, arrested for reading out the names of British soldiers killed in Iraq 
during a protest at the Cenotaph in London, is to appeal against the ruling, 
said her solicitor, Phil Shiner, of the Birmingham firm Public Interest Lawyers.

The court heard that detainees taken to the NDS had suffered beatings, 
electrocution and sleep deprivation, and had been forced into stress positions 
and whipped with rubber cables.

Evans said after the ruling: "We are really pleased that there has been change 
in policy as a result of this case and that the court has said that there is a 
serious risk of torture and mistreatment."

Shiner said that changes to the legal aid system whereby, in future, only 
those directly having a potential "real benefit" from a case (being, for 
instance, a member of an abused family) would mean Evans' case could not be 
brought. Public Interest Lawyers is to challenge the legal aid changes in the 
high court next week.

The defence secretary, Liam Fox, said: "There is no place for the abuse of 
detainees. We have always recognised that this is a difficult and challenging 
area in which our people have to operate, and that is why we have specific 
safeguards and monitoring arrangements in place. These will be reinforced in 
line with the court's recommendations.

"The claimant in this case sought to end the practice of transferring 
insurgents to Afghan custody. She failed to do so. Bringing to justice those 
who seek to kill and maim British troops, coalition forces and Afghan 
civilians, including through indiscriminate methods like the laying of roadside 
bombs, forms an essential part of our current operations. It makesAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> a safer place for our service 
men and women, and it is our duty to do so."
 