
Buddy blows settle heavyweight bout

Sydneysiders and friends flocked to the SCG – 41,317 of them, the 
fourth-biggest crowd ever at the venue for a Swans game – for the
top-of-the-table clash against Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/14/sydney-swans-edge-port-adelaide-in-scg-thriller>
, and the protagonists didn’t disappoint. This was no flogging, as Sydney 
handed out to Geelong two weeks ago, but the four-point verdict was no less 
satisfying against the ladder-leading Power, who had set the competition alight 
with eight straight wins. It was an arm wrestle that really could have gone 
either way, and, as is often the case in closely fought affairs, it required a 
touch or two of individual brilliance to separate the sides. Lance Franklin 
booted the last five Swans goals, including a long bomb and a highlights reel 
special from the boundary line, and is fast becoming the talisman Sydney 
officials who signed him hoped he would be. Franklin helped offset the loss of 
Kurt Tippett, engineering a key triumph in the context of the season. Port were 
brave and lost no caste in defeat but their lead at the summit is now reduced 
to one game, while the Swans head into Friday’s game against Richmond at the 
MCG undefeated in eight matches. They also do it as firm Premiership favourites.

A Giant step for GWS

Expansion clubs go through many a horrid experience in their formative years, 
but as they mature boxes get ticked along the way. Greater Western Sydney 
ticked a pretty big one on Saturday night at the Gabba when they recorded their 
first away win, a rousing 45-point defeat of a woundedBrisbane Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brisbane-lions> outfit. The Lions are 
nobody’s idea of a yardstick (except, sadly this season for them, for 
mediocrity), but the Giants delivered with a performance they’d been promising 
for some weeks. Losing Jonathan Brown to a nasty head knock early in the third 
quarter no doubt worked in their favour, as did Daniel Merrett’s pre-match 
withdrawal, but it’s hard to envisage a different result to this game given 
GWS’s dominant second half. In addition to their first win on the road, the 
Giants also registered their greatest winning margin, their highest score (125 
points) and their first victory over Brisbane. They’re growing up before our 
eyes and will relinquish the wooden spoon this year (another box ticked), with 
the struggling Lions a serious contender to pick it up.

Glass half empty for West Coast … and Suns

The competition’s other start-up, Gold Coast, are also going the right way 
this year. Their form in the first half of the season has been admirable, but 
in three weeks (for three losses) they’ve gone from near certainties for the 
finals to staring into the abyss of the bottom eight. To their credit they gave 
the Eagles an almighty fright by overcoming a 35-point deficit at three-quarter 
time before narrowly going down, but no points are awarded for honourable 
defeats. The Suns’ run home is kind enough, but they’ll want something from 
their next three weeks – against Geelong, Hawthorn andCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> – to avoid disappearing from 
sight. For West Coast, this at least arrested a three-game losing run. But for 
a team thought of as knockout flag hopes at season’s start, their campaign 
remains stuck in second gear. There was a lot to like about the performance of 
Nic Naitanui in his 100th outing but injuries have taken their toll and the 
Eagles just can’t get their best 22 together. Against the Suns, Dean Cox, Scott 
Selwood and Luke Shuey were either injured or missed the game altogether. If 
they are to make a charge for the top eight they’ll do it without Darren Glass, 
their fearless captain who retired during the week. He mightn’t have been the 
most skilled player, as the man himself concedes, but there are few who stood 
taller in a contest than Glass. The competition’s key forwards will sleep 
easier for his absence.

One fewer contender for the top four

It’s a moot point whether Collingwood were ever a realistic chance for a 
top-four finish – or, for that matter, even looked like a top-four side in 2014 
– but aftergoing down to lowly Western Bulldogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/15/afl-sunday-round-up-results> on 
Sunday, the Magpies can safely be ruled out of the reckoning for the double 
chance. Mathematically, of course, they’re still in with a shout, but on all 
known evidence the Pies fall some way short of the standard set by Port 
Adelaide, Sydney and Hawthorn – even Fremantle and Geelong, the two teams 
destined to duel for fourth spot. This is the second time in five outings 
Collingwood have succumbed to a bottom-eight side – the Crows in Adelaide being 
the other – and they were arguably fortunate to come away with a narrow win 
over West Coast at the MCG in late May. It’s not the sort of form coach Nathan 
Buckley wants to be taking into the run home. The Magpies will still play 
finals footy, but they’ll need to find another gear from somewhere to ensure 
they aren’t September also-rans.

Just don’t mention Asada

The best – in terms of sheer drama – was saved for last on the weekend in the 
unlikely shape ofEssendon versus Melbourne at the MCG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/15/afl-sunday-round-up-results>. 
Sure, Swans-Power was a heart-stopping belter – but we expected nothing less. 
On Sunday, however, the Bombers and Demons left pre-match billing for dead with 
a contest that electrified one set of fans and destroyed the other, but 
enthralled all who witnessed it. Melbourne, so thoroughly outplayed in the 
first half but kept in it by inaccurate kicking from their opponents, slipped 
the noose here to win by a point; Paul Roos isn’t given to hyperbole, so take 
it as read when he says the Dees could have gone down by 70-80 points. Their 
progress under Roos continues to impress, but Essendon fell back to the pack by 
letting this one go. Typically, Mark Thompson refused to blame the show-cause 
letters handed to his players by Asada for the loss. But how can this
long-running saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/13/essendon-legal-action-asada-investigation>
, a dark cloud that follows the club everywhere, not be playing on the minds of 
his men? This week against fellow top-eight aspirants Adelaide is a big game.
 