
The Hawks kept their head and (mostly) kicked straight

What a difference a year makes. Twelve months on from a grand final 
performance blighted by poor kicking at goal, this time it was Hawthorn's turn 
to make the opposition pay for missed chances. Though lion-hearted all day, 
Dockers midfield star Nat Fyfe booted two gettable chances out on the full 
early and was joined by Danyle Pearce, Nick Suban and Hayden Ballantyne in 
failing to capitalise on forward entries. Bad kicking is bad football, as they 
say, and Fremantle were woeful in front of goal when they had the chance.

The Dockers had never played in front of a crowd of more than 61,000 before 
this game and the big stage seemed to get to them a little. They lost the sharp 
focus that had made them so impenetrable only a week prior against Sydney. It 
was interesting to note Dockers goalsneak Michael Walters walk out alone, ball 
in hand, to soak up the enormity of the task an hour or so before the first 
bounce. Walters acclimatised better than most and ended up with two goals, but 
too few of his team-mates settled into the game with such comfort.

Alastair Clarkson is now one of 'those' Hawthorn coaches

There was a beautiful moment at game's end when Clarkson bear-hugged former 
Hawks coach John Kennedy. It seemed like something significant, as though 
Clarkson knew he'd joined an exclusive club and that this is well and truly his 
era atHawthorn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn>. To have only 
claimed one flag in 10 years after so many near-misses would have felt like a 
minor failure but the smile of relief on Clarkson's face as the clock wound 
down was priceless. He now sits alongside names such as Kennedy, Parkin and 
Jeans in the hearts of Hawks supporters and no one in football would begrudge 
him that.

Having built his 2008 premiership side out of a slowly and carefully-developed 
group of early draft picks, Clarkson's 2013 group was put together with no less 
craft out of bits and pieces from other clubs; a disgruntled rebounding 
defender here, a promising leading forward there. Some coaches set themselves 
and their club on a path and then never balk from that singular vision, but 
Clarkson has learned to adapt and find new ways to field a winning side. These 
premiers are unrecognisable from their incarnation of five years ago but the 
side is unmistakably a Clarkson one. The Hawthorn faithful will be hoping that 
many more of these favourable turns await them on Clarkson's watch. You 
wouldn't bet against it, would you?

No dice for Ross. Or Pav

Poor Pav. He's 291 games in and for a while there, it looked as though he 
might never get a crack at a flag. Now that he's been there and seen it slide 
out of his grasp, the Dockers skipper needs to reload for next year. The Hawks 
couldn't keep him out of the game completely and he didn't disgrace himself 
with three goals after a very quiet start. He would have liked to have returned 
more than his 13 possessions and six marks, but at least knows his side remain 
in a premiership window in the twilight of his career. Barely anyone would have 
begrudged the champion his moment in the sun if the Dockers had gotten over the 
line.

It's fair to say that there is a little less love for Ross Lyon, who again 
fell frustratingly short on grand final day. You get the feeling that Lyon 
would rather be taken away in a straitjacket than give up in his relentless 
drive for a premiership, but he was philosophical about the loss and admitted 
that, "we sit here really frustrated and disappointed that we weren't good 
enough to take an opportunity." Lyon added, "I think the start will haunt us 
for a while, but it's a great lesson for our club." In the meantime Lyon will 
continue to have his knockers. Again there were unsavoury off-the-ball 
incidents but the fact remains; if the Dockers had scraped over the line this 
time it would be the victors writing the history books on the Lyon coaching 
aesthetic.

Winners and sinners for the Hawks
 Hawthorn players make their way through a sea of fans. Photograph: Robert 
Prezioso/Getty Images 
In a pleasingly even effort from the Hawks, Brian Lake was a stand-out, 
combining miserly defence with attacking flair in rebounding everything that 
came his way in the Hawks' defence. Who would have thought that Lake, a player 
often prone to disappearing in his darker final days at the Bulldogs, could 
rise to the occasion and win a Norm Smith medal? It's a great grand final 
story. His captain Luke Hodge was an equally relentless presence, winning 21 
possessions all over the ground and marshaling his troops. Jordan Lewis had a 
typical Jordan Lewis game, not doing anything particularly flashy but putting 
his body on the line throughout, subduing Fyfe when the young Docker threatened 
to break out. Cyril Rioli's chasing, tackling and vigour set the tone for the 
Hawks and not many had their colours lowered.

At the quieter end of the scale, ruckman Max Bailey was well-beaten by Aaron 
Sandilands but there was no bigger cheer than that which came when the 
injury-plagued big man took to the presentation dais to collect a premiership 
medal that must have seemed a pipe dream at many points in his stop-start 
career. Brent Guerra was similarly unobtrusive, as was Paul Puopolo, who made 
up for an off game with a crowd-lifting series of pressure acts to trap the 
ball inside his side's forward fifty in the final term. Not much was required 
of sub Jonathan Simpkin but the journeyman will be cock-a-hoop with his second 
premiership medal in as many weeks, having starred in a VFL flag for Box Hill 
last weekend.

The best and the worst for the Dockers

Dockers fans could take some comfort in the healthy returns from a handful of 
players who well and truly rose to the big occasion. Apart from his shanked 
attempts at goal early, Fyfe was superb in his first grand final, gathering 18 
possessions in the first half and posing a threat all over the ground. Michael 
Johnson belied pre-game whispers about his likelihood of running out the game 
on an injured calf and was everywhere across half back. David Mundy was 
tireless and drove countless Fremantle attacks throughout the day and along 
with his skipper Pavlich, never conceded an inch. Sandilands was typically 
dominant in the ruck, but often had his supreme tap-out work sharked by the 
Hawks on-ballers.

At the other end of the scale, Ballantyne had a shocker of epic proportions 
and sprayed countless scoring opportunities to finish goalless and not a little 
demoralised. For all his hard work and endeavour, Zac Dawson was outdone by 
Jack Gunston and the Hawk's four goals proved vital. Chris Mayne, Suban and 
Pearce will also not be running for the game tape with any urgency. Many of 
Pearce's 17 possessions were skittish or resulted in turnovers and the ex-Port 
player's fortunes were in stark contrast to Hawthorn's crew of recycled stars. 
Like so many Dockers, he was a long way from his best.
 