
Derby dazzlers

Statistical results don’t always support the common held theory that the derby 
– or d-aah-by or d-uur-by, depending on place of origin – has no respect for 
ladder positions, but that was certainly the case in two key games on the 
weekend. Out west, Fremantle dodged the bullet of a searching examination from 
the Eagles. Just seven points separated the state rivals in a contest that 
really could have gone either way – one straight kick and one behind that keeps 
the Dockers in the top four and further dents West Coast’s already faint finals 
hopes. Down south, there was no such escape for Port Adelaide against Adelaide 
– the Power losing a second match in their past three and the Crows’ remarkably 
consistent season of inconsistency continuing. Both games were fiercely 
contested – thatis something you always get in derbies –and both had profound 
ramifications with regards to the upper half and the lower half of the top 
eight (more on that below).

Hosting rights up for grabs

We all know the premiership season is a marathon, not a sprint, and hence few 
things can be taken for granted. But it’s safe to say that barely three weeks 
ago, with just one reversal to their name, a coveted top-two spot, and hosting 
rights in the first week of the finals, was the Port Adelaide’s to lose. Now, 
following an admirable loss in Sydney and a shock Showdown defeat, the Power 
are back with the chasing pack. Contributing factors to what has become an 
intensely tight tussle at the top is the continuing hot form of Hawthorn, 
Fremantle and Sydney. Of the quartet, Fremantle and Sydney have the kindest run 
homes – the Dockers’ next four opponents are Melbourne, GWS, St Kilda and 
Carlton; the Swans round out the regular season against St Kilda, Western 
Bulldogs and Richmond – while the draw looks marginally tougher for Port and 
Hawthorn. Unless the Power quickly return to winning ways, the odds are 
shortening of an unenviable road trip to Perth or Sydney in the first week of 
the finals. It’s just as tight in the lower half of the top eight, with 
Geelong’s win over Essendon keeping them out of the top four on percentage 
alone and Collingwood’s defeat of Carlton meaning they’re still around the 
mark. Losses for North Melbourne, West Coast, the Bombers and Gold Coast all 
worked in Adelaide’s favour, and the Crows could find themselves in the eight 
if they beat the Giants next week. The season has twists and turns in it yet.

Sunday night footy a cold and damp squib

Have you heard the joke about the game that attracted over 40,000 people … and 
was seen as a disappointing crowd? Magpies president Eddie McGuire was in no 
laughing mood after the Collingwood-Carlton ‘blockbuster’ was trialled in the 
Sunday night timeslot, witnessed by the lowest crowd between these two arch 
rivals at the MCG since a semi-final in 1921. McGuire wants compensation from 
the AFL – good luck with that, Eddie – arguing that administrators were foolish 
in using a key event as a scheduling guinea pig. "I'm sure I won't get a letter 
of an apology or anything else and I don't care – all I want is the cheque. You 
want to be entrepreneurs, you carry the downside,” McGuire said. In fact, the 
AFL was right in using a match such as this – if you can’t get a big audience 
for Collingwood-Carlton on a Sunday night, what kind of numbers would turn out 
for, say, North Melbourne-Western Bulldogs? The relatively poor turnout proves 
beyond all doubt that Sunday night is a graveyard slot for live footy. For 
starters, theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> – which prides itself 
on being family friendly – can rule out families from rocking up. The AFL’s new 
boss, Gillon McLachlan, is realising that sport has to fit around people’s 
lives (not the other way round), and has intimated that Sunday night is a trial 
on its last legs. Thank goodness for that. Thursday night, anyone?

• BREAKING NEWS! The AFL has just chopped off the last legs of Sunday night 
footy andscrapped the fixture for the future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/30/afl-chooses-to-scrap-sunday-night-matches?view=desktop>
.


Lions do it for JB

If any player deserves a send-off game, it’s the Brisbane Lions legend 
Jonathan Brown. Sadly, the triple premiership star was denied that when, acting 
on medical advice, he hung up his boots, effective immediately, during the week 
following yet another concussion. The advancing years, and a succession of 
injuries, have dulled Brown’s might in recent campaigns, but in full flight the 
power forward was a brutal and majestic technician: the closest thing the game 
has had to Wayne Carey since, well, Wayne Carey. He played the game with scant 
regard to his own well-being, and his loyalty should be a point not forgotten 
either. That Brown finished his career as a one-club player – when the go-home 
factor that seduces many could have seen him return to Victoria – speaks highly 
of him as a man, particularly when you consider Brisbane’s on-field travails 
since the giddy three-peat years. Though he didn’t play against North Melbourne 
on Saturday night, the Lions absolutely owed it to the big bloke to play their 
hearts out in his tribute game. In wintry conditions, and in front of barely 
more than 15,000 people, they did just that, holding on by the skin of their 
teeth to defy their ladder position against a team that some consider top-four 
material. So fairytales do exist after all. Thanks for the memories, JB.

Anyone got a rulebook?

Melbourne coach Paul Roos spoke for many a bemused fan when he said, following 
the Dees’ six-point loss to Western Bulldogs, that he no longer understands the 
rules of Australian football. “In terms of the laws, I don't really have a clue 
what they are any more,” Roos said, striking a chord with anyone who’s 
scratched their head trying to understand what is, and what isn’t, holding the 
ball, or what is, and what isn’t, a rushed behind. The varied interpretation of 
these two grey areas of arbitration worked against Melbourne at Etihad Stadium, 
and serve only to infuriate those of us who crave consistency. Carlton coach 
Mick Malthouse had strong words of his own during the week, when commenting on 
the overarching congestion that typifies the modern game. “If I wasn’t 
coaching, I’d hate the game,” Malthouse said. “We’ve moved so far away from 
what our Australian game was.” Ouch. It all adds up to the Laws of the Game 
Committee having its work cut out to get everyone – those who adjudicate the 
game, those who play it and those who watch it – on the same page. Sometimes 
locating the Yeti seems a more manageable task.
 