
The Power are coming, but there's nothing like experience

As great it was for Geelong to claw their way back and win Friday night's 
semi-final against Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/13/geelong-port-adelaide-afl-match-report>
, they cannot afford to give Hawthorn that kind of head-start next week. Though 
variously hobbled and misfiring, key forwards Tom Hawkins and James Podsiadly 
will have to lighten the load placed on the Cats goal-scoring midfielders, 
doubly so if Paul Chapman is missing through suspension. Down by 23 points at 
half-time, Geelong often looked slower and weaker than a Port Adelaide side 
seemingly unaware of their own limitations. In the end the Power's youthful 
spirit hit an immovable road block in Geelong's nerveless, confident 
counter-attack in the third term.

For the Cats Matthew Stokes stood firm in the second half finishing with 28 
disposals, as did James Kelly. They were ably supported by their captain Joel 
Selwood, Steve Johnson and Chapman, whose four goals served to reinforce the 
importance of grizzled veterans when you're in the harsh spotlight of finals 
football. Port gaveGeelong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> one 
final scare with a brace of goals in the closing minutes, but it was not a 
shattering loss for the hordes of supporters who'd made the trek down from 
Alberton. When the game was up for grabs, the sight of first-year midfielder 
Ollie Wines fearlessly barking instructions like a veteran drill sergeant was a 
pointer to the exciting times that may lay in wait for the Power.

Curses or not, the Cats will struggle to topple Hawthorn

Here's a hypothetical, if you were Alistair Clarkson, how hard would you have 
been barracking on the Power on Friday night? The Kennett Curse has been one of 
football's most entertaining hoodoos, but on both paper and following form, 
it's getting hard to make a case that the Cats can continue their streak next 
week. Their only consistency in the past two months has been their 
inconsistency and this week they betrayed previous form for fading late in 
games and instead forgot to turn up in the first half. There's four impressive 
quarters of football somewhere, Geelong have just rarely been able to string 
them together in the one game.

What the Cats have done is provide neutral footy fans with a genuinely 
engrossing finals series. Sydney's early blowout of the Blues aside, the 
evenness of the six games thus far has been a joy to behold. But what do you do 
if you're Clarkson? Do you acknowledge and address the curse by name in front 
of the players and risk amplifying its importance or do you leave it unsaid, 
knowing that your players shouldn't need any more motivation in a preliminary 
final? Geelong will no doubt fancy themselves against the Hawks and with good 
reason, but logic has to prevail at some point and this just might be that fork 
in the road.

Rotations be damned

One of Sydney's strengths over this commendable decade of sustained success 
has been the bedrock of cultural strength and camaraderie they've built within 
their playing ranks. When thing are going well, those are difficult qualities 
to tabulate or quantify and there's certainly no column for them in the 
Champion Data spreadsheets. Yet when you enter a final missing a host of your 
most valuable players, your key forward goes down in the opening minutes and 
you're down a vital midfield rotation, they certainly become abundantly clear. 
To be nine goals in the clear by three-quarter time against a fully fitCarlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> is testament to the bloody-minded 
determination of the Swans playing list, all of whom picked up the slack where 
it was required.

Jarrad McVeigh (42 possessions) thrived under the adversity in which his team 
found themsleves, gathering 20 disposals in the crucial second term as the 
Swans established a stranglehold on a game that Carlton had every right to 
seize control of. Three goals to Luke Parker and two to Harry Cunningham were 
symptomatic of the way Sydney's lesser lights grew into the considerable space 
vacated by their absent comrades. The Swans could be excused for their 
scoreless final quarter fade-out because they relentlessly expended their 
physical reserves in setting up an unassailable three-quarter time buffer and 
were understandably spent by game's end. How much further they can run on these 
fumes remains to be seen.

Carlton's slippery slide

If the talk of last week's opening quartet of finals was the suitability or 
otherwise of Simmonds Stadium to host September action, the yak-fest of 
semi-final weekend was the slip 'n' slide exhibition put on at Sydney's ANZ 
stadium. It was far from ideal of course, but you had to wonder what would be 
made of a Moorabbin mud-heap in such a precious and reactionary climate as we 
now find ourselves. Would Twitter actually combust if a player tripped over a 
sprinkler cover or rose from a pack muddied and indistinguishable from his 
team-mates? Are we all just going a little bit soft these days?

You know it's bad when you find yourself agreeing with Mick Malthouse. "The 
ground is slippery. So what?" hissed the Blues coach after the game. "You have 
just got to be equipped and you've got to be mentally tough enough and mentally 
prepared to play. There is nothing wrong with the ground." What Malthouse also 
might have pointed out was that it was an even, if unsteady, playing field. The 
Swans didn't sure-footedly pile up an insurmountable lead as Carlton players 
slipped and slid to their demise, it was an obstacle for both teams to 
overcome. Recast as a talking head, the recently departed Brisbane coach 
Michael Voss labeled the surface "disgraceful," but I'm sure he played on 
plenty worse in his own playing days. Maintaining a short memory is sometimes 
good for the sake of headlines.

The time is now for Freo

Here's the thing, it's fairly logical for us all now to convince ourselves 
that it's Hawthorn's premiership to lose. That's fine and on paper it's the 
smart call, but I just can't shake the feeling that if Fremantle are ever going 
to break through for their first premiership it has to be now. Aaron Sandliands 
is closing in on 31, while Matthew Pavlich and key tall Luke McPharlin near 
enough to 32. History would suggest that the injuries these guys have 
experienced over the past couple of seasons will only worsen in the next two 
years. They're big shoes to fill for a team within its premiership window so 
time is of an essence for the Dockers.

That's not to say that the rest of their list is otherwise shabby or that Ross 
Lyon couldn't use his devious coaching alchemy to turn the Fremantle janitor 
into a pesky defensive forward, but when opportunities like this open up you 
really need to take them. The fall from premiership contender to anonymous, 
injury-hit finals onlooker can be brutal and fast, just ask Brenton Sanderson 
and his Adelaide Crows. Freo will face a Sydney side that's starting to 
resemble the cast of Band of Brothers, such has been their casualty rate over 
the past month. The Dockers surely know that it's now or who knows when?
 