
Swans raise the bar

At the Sydney Cricket Ground on Thursday, the huge crowd in attendance and 
multitudes more watching on television were witness to one of the all-time 
great team performances in Australian Rules history. Seriously. There are 
contributing factors at play not to everyone’s taste – more on that below – but 
for now let’s just focus on the majesty. This was a near flawless exhibition of 
fast, direct, uncompromising footy that – with due respect to Port Adelaide and 
Hawthorn – cannot be replicated by other teams in the competition, not for four 
quarters straight. Sydney already had a solid defence and excellent midfield, 
but in Lance Franklin and Kurt Tippett alongside Adam Goodes – to name but 
three – they now have a forward line verging on unstoppable. The SCG result 
says more about the Swans than the Cats. Sydney had been building towards a 
monstrous showing like this for a few weeks, and they likely would have 
slaughtered whichever collection of poor souls put in front of them last 
Thursday. Yes, Geelong are not the team they were. But they‘re nobody’s 
punching bag. They will bounce back from this in the respect that they’ll still 
make the finals, maybe even the top four. And that’s what makes Sydney’s 
performance all the more terrifying. The Swans dismembered a very good side 
with laser-like efficiency, a cold-blooded assassination if you will. Flag 
favourites? As sure as night follows day.

Swans raise the eyebrows

This Wednesday, a meeting will take place in Melbourne that is destined to 
have profound ramifications on the future of the game – and a talking point 
between the AFL and club bosses will be Sydney’s shellacking of Geelong. 
Equalisation, the sport’s buzzword at the minute, is the No1 agenda item, and 
Sydney’s situation, specifically around the Cost Of Living Allowance, will be 
hotly debated. What the COLA has done is essentially inflate Sydney’s salary 
cap, allowing the likes of Franklin and Tippett to enter a team already laden 
with established, well-paid players. To be clear: the Swans have done nothing 
wrong. They’ve simply driven a stake through a gaping loophole, much like the 
one they drove through Geelong’s heart at the SCG. The allowance, and Sydney’s 
exploitation of it, has created an imbalance that isn’t quite right, and will 
be addressed. For starters, is there anybody on this planet who believes 
Franklin will be running around in red-and-white in 10 years’ time, the length 
of his contract? Sydney’s win offered a glimpse into a parallel universe where 
the AFL operates in a free market economy and the dollar is king. It was 
Fantasy AFL brought to life, the kind of performance, and Sydney the kind of 
team, that is associated with European soccer leagues. The rich clubs, the 
haves, buy the best players and are able to produce a level of excellence that 
poorer clubs, the have-nots, simply cannot aspire to match. That is not the 
AFL. The cornerstone of theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, for 
better or worse, is a salary cap and draft system that’smeant to provide a 
level playing field. In a competition supposedly built on equity and fairness, 
there will be a sour taste in the mouth if – perhaps when – Sydney win the 2014 
flag. They will have provided some lasting memories of brilliant football, but 
the impression will remain that they bought success.

Richmond are officially woeful

It’s possible the jury was still out with regards to Richmond, that they might 
rediscover the vivacity of 2013 and make a concerted bid for the finals. No 
longer. The jury has delivered its verdict: the Tigers are, to quote the club’s 
coach Damien Hardwick, guilty of being a very mediocre football side, and their 
sentence is exclusion from playing the game in September. On the evidence of 
their 50-point loss to Essendon, that punishment may continue for some time. 
There really were no redeeming qualities to Richmond’s feeble surrender to a 
team that aren’t going particularly well themselves. Dreamtime at the G was 
more like a nightmare for the Tigers’ long-suffering fans as their men made 
simple errors, were beaten to the ball time and again and then invariably did 
precious little about it when it was time to chase. For periods,Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> were exposed for a lack of effort, 
seemingly uninterested in the contest. A fortnight ago, Tigers players told 
Hardwick in a heart-to-heart session that he should be harder on them. The 
coach needs no warmer invite than this effort to find the biggest mirror he 
can, get the majority of his players to take a long look at it – and then smash 
it over their heads. Figuratively speaking, of course.

Sun sets on Gold Coast run

The Crows’ win over Gold Coast at Adelaide Oval on Sunday afternoon might not 
have made teams with genuine title aspirations sit up and take notice, but it 
was significant nonetheless. On the back of five straight wins, the Suns were 
comfortably in the top eight with the chance to make a home in the top four if 
they made it six on the bounce. Although they’d lost to Melbourne and Carlton 
in their three prior starts, the Crows in Adelaide presented arguably Gold 
Coast’s sternest challenge since their winning streak commenced. Adelaide, on 
the other hand, needed to show their victory over Collingwood a fortnight ago 
was no fluke, not least to keep their flickering finals hope alive. The result, 
a 32-point win for the home side, means the Crows keep tabs on eighth spot, and 
possibly puts the Suns’ development this season into context. With Gary Ablett 
held to 25 touches by the badgering Sam Kerridge, Gold Coast were rudderless at 
times and unable to ignite their running game. They were never terrible and 
will likely still play finals, but they’re not yet ready to bother the really 
good teams, and there are better around than the Crows. Still, this was a good 
showing from Adelaide. Taylor Walker was back to his best third-up from a long 
lay-off, kicking five goals, and he lifted all around him, notably forward 
companions James Podsiadly, Josh Jenkins and Eddie Betts. If Tex continues to 
inspire, the Crows are the ones most likely to grab that last play-off spot up 
for grabs.

A Giant peek into the future

Gold Coast’s improvement over the past year has been apparent, but the same 
can’t be said of the AFL’s other expansion team, Greater Western Sydney. The 
Giants have been, let’s be honest, mostly terrible in the two-and-a-bit seasons 
they’ve been with us. There’s been the odd unforgettable high – like this 
year’s round-one beating of the Swans – but like most adolescents you just 
don’t know what mood they’ll be in half the time. GWS started the season well 
but consecutive 100-plus point defeats was no kind of preparation to face the 
reigning premiers, in Melbourne to boot. You could have written your own ticket 
about a Giants victory against Hawthorn, but for most of Sunday’s contest at 
the MCG they were in with an actual chance of causing the upset of the season. 
The Hawks, still undermanned, were undoubtedly off colour, but there was no 
mistaking the desire and quality of Greater Western Sydney. They laid an 
incredible 104 tackles and matched the Hawks for contested possessions. There 
were positives all over the place – Lachie Whitfield and Will Hoskin-Elliott 
were standouts – but the sight of Jonathan Patton taking pack mark after pack 
mark forced you to wonder just how good this team could become. Chances are 
they’ll come out and get flogged at home next week by the Bombers, but the 
Giants are still teething. When they’ve reached full maturity, the rest had 
better watch out.
 