
Hawks hit top gear

The first match of the 2014 finals series was an appropriate occasion to make 
arguably the biggest statement of the weekend. Hawthorn have been very good 
this season in spite of their injury concerns, as you might expect the reigning 
premiers should. But an air of vulnerability still accompanied them to the MCG 
against their modern-day nemesis, Geelong. Not to worry. After an even 
first-half, the Hawks shifted through a set of gears as only the most 
exceptional teams can. They had winners everywhere in the second half – 
Mitchell, Hodge, Hale, Birchall, Burgoyne the pick of them – illustrating in 
clear definition the difference between contenders and pretenders. It goes 
without saying thatHawthorn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> are in 
the box seat now as preliminary finalists. Along with their fellow qualifying 
final victors, Sydney, the Hawks are comfortably one of the top two teams in 
the AFL, possibly still the best. Alastair Clarkson’s men can cool their boots 
for a week before getting ready for their preliminary final, a game in which 
they’ll be hot favourites regardless of the opposition.

Swans slip and slide to success

Of course, the one team Hawthorn wouldn’t be as good as over the line against 
is Sydney, who prevailed in a gruelling battle of attrition against Fremantle 
on Saturday afternoon. The contest would have been such had it been played on 
felt, given the defensive mindset of both teams, but on a drizzly day, and 
again on a questionable ANZ Stadium surface, it was always going to be hard 
work. Still, cream rose to the top with Sydney’s greater drive and polish in 
midfield proving the difference. The Swans had their colours lowered byRichmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> a week earlier, but when it 
counted their credentials were on show against another contender with 
legitimate claims to the title. Sydney’s richly talented forward line wasn’t at 
the fore but it didn’t need to be. The Swans’ grunt comes from their hunters 
and gatherers and the game was won on the back of the likes of the brilliant 
Luke Parker, Jarrad McVeigh, Kieren Jack, Nick Smith and Josh Kennedy, amongst 
others, not that there weren’t stellar moments for Lance Franklin and Ben 
McGlynn up forward. The Swans are the complete package and will be awfully hard 
to beat in their prelim on home turf. The Dockers get a pass mark in defeat 
against high-class opposition and live to fight another day, but this result is 
evidence that in 2014 the ultimate accolade is likely beyond them.

A bridge too far for Richmond

All good things must come to an end. Richmond journeyed to Adelaide Oval with 
a buoyancy that only nine wins on the bounce can supply. You’d think the 
accompanying momentum would be enough to carry them past most challenges, but 
in their elimination final the Tigers faced the twin towers of a home team on 
the rise and their own fatigue, both mental and physical.Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> packed far too much for the 
Tigers, in both quality and desire, effectively snuffing out the contest with a 
withering seven-goal burst while the opposition was still tying their 
bootlaces. Truth is, Richmond, with three wins from their opening 13 games, won 
their grand final simply by making the finals. It was a remarkable effort to 
advance beyond the regular season, a feat that shouldn’t be overshadowed by 
their meek September exit. If nothing else, coach Damien Hardwick has instilled 
a sense of belief in the playing group; to take the next step he’ll have to 
inject some more quality in the trade period.

Can Port keep powering on?

The Power were seriously good in front of their own fans on Sunday. Their 
mid-late season slump is now a thing of the past and they advance to week two 
of the finals with the requisite ingredients for success: momentum, form, 
self-belief. Never mind the fact Tigers captain Trent Cotchin elected to kick 
into a strong breeze after winning the toss; it’s hard to envisage the visitors 
doing anything to stop a Port Adelaide outfit in such electric touch. The big 
guns that had gone quiet as the Power dropped out of the top four - Wingard, 
Westhoff, Wines, Ebert et al - are now clicking again, and, with the confidence 
that comes from a big win in week one, the Power set their sights on Fremantle 
as a team on the way up. The question is: can they buck the trend and actually 
go on to win the flag? History is against them. In the current format no team 
has won the flag from outside the top four and you have to go back to Adelaide 
in 1998 for a club that’s won it from as low as fifth. Port seem likelier than 
the other elimination final winners,North Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne>, but surely they can’t go 
all the way. Can they?

Kangas come good in the end

Speaking of the Kangaroos, Saturday night’s victory over Essendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> is one that should be appreciated 
for what it was: utterly desperate and courageous. Trailing by as many as 33 
points early in the third term, North Melbourne delivered on their potential to 
vanquish the Dons and win their first final since 2007. The Kangaroos have 
flattered only to deceive for much of 2014, and in many ways this elimination 
final was true to form: a pedestrian first half followed by a second that made 
the Roos look like they’d belong deep into September. The contrast was no 
better illustrated than by Drew Petrie, who left behind an anonymous first 
three quarters to deliver the telling blows in the fourth. Geelong are next, 
and it would be as foolhardy to think North will be merely making up the 
numbers against the finals-hardened Cats. For their part the Bombers were 
commendable, as they have been throughout their annus horribilis. The rights 
and wrongs, the legalities and illegalities, of the Asada investigation are 
becoming more meaningless the longer the ordeal drags on. The Bombers, as do 
followers of the game, just want it over.
 