
We’re seeing something special 




This was a monumental grand final flogging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/27/afl-grand-final-hawthorn-destroy-sydney>
 – Sydney were, in truth, actually somewhat flattered by the 63-point margin. 
But it never felt like the Swans played especially badly. They were simply 
overwhelmed by what now has tobe counted as one of the great teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/sep/25/afl-grand-final-are-hawthorn-led-by-their-greatest-ever-coach>
 – not just of this era, but any. When Alastair Clarkson took charge of 
Hawthorn 10 years ago, they were nowhere. Under him, Hawthorn have played in 
four grand finals, including the last three, and won three of them, including 
the last two – and have played consistently inventive, attacking, entertaining 
football while doing it. Some of their grand final performance was so playful 
as to invite laughter – Matthew Suckling’s goal in the third quarter, which put 
Hawthorn 50 points ahead, followed an exchange of handballs between Mitchell, 
Hodge, Hill and Breust which was giddying to watch, never mind defend against. 
But Hawthorn remained, as they almost invariably do, coolly disciplined. Later 
in the same quarter, with the game all but won, Hill would have been forgiven 
for trying to crown his long sprint from midfield with a 50-metre 
rafter-raiser; instead, he picked out Roughead in a better position. Clarkson 
is now a triple premiership coach, and still only 46. Hawthorn’s next benchmark 
is the 80s-vintage Hawks, who played seven consecutive grand finals for four 
flags.

You play Sydney at their own game 




Sydney started the grand final as understandable favourites. After a slow 
start to the season, they had grown steadily more awesome, the gap they were 
establishing on the rest of the field demonstrated by the 110-point pasting 
they dealt Geelong in round 11. The combination of the Swans’ trademark press 
and pressure with the recently added firepower of Kurt Tippett and Lance 
Franklin was beginning to look insuperable. But in the first quarter especially,
Hawthorn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> out-Sydneyed Sydney: 
physical, menacing and ruthless. They deprived the Swans of what should have 
been their first goal with a desperate stand on the goal line, and when Jarryd 
Roughead memorably clobbered Dan Hannebery, the tackle count already stood at 
15 to five in the Hawks’ favour. Sydney not only never recovered, but never 
looked like doing so.

You always play Cyril 


Prior to the bounce, Leigh Matthews pronounced from the commentary box that 
Clarkson’s decision to include Cyril Rioli after three months out injured was 
“ballsy”. It would have been far more so to omit him. Even a semi-fit Rioli – 
though he did look pretty sharp – gives a team as solid as Hawthorn a vital 
element of unpredictability. The match statistics will recall that Rioli 
managed just nine disposals. Those who saw the game will remember that the 
first two of Roughead’s five goals were both set up by Rioli pickpocketing a 
bewildered Kurt Tippett – once with a reflexive interception of a handball, 
once with characteristically deft and courageous smother off the boot. You may 
never know quite what Rioli is going to do – but neither do the opposition.

A star is born 


The challenge that Hawthorn will face over the next few seasons is maintaining 
this standard as age begins to weary a few of them, especially that 
extraordinary midfield: Hodge, Mitchell, Lewis and Burgoyne now have just shy 
of 1,000 games between them. If they can find a few more like Will Langford, 
however, that 80s-style period of sustained dominance – during which Langford’s 
father, Chris, played in four premiership sides – is a possibility. Langford 
has been a revelation this year, and wasn’t remotely daunted by the big 
occasion, laying six tackles and scoring three goals, two of them certifiable 
classics: one glorious strike on the run at the end of a mesmerising cat’s 
cradle of handballs, one conjuring trick from an absurd angle in the forward 
pocket. If a single image summed up Sydney’s day, it was Luke Parker’s reaction 
to Langford’s (admittedly somewhat fortunate) needle-threader, gazing 
helplessly heavenward as if to ask what he and his team-mates had done to 
deserve this.

Ignore him, and he still won’t go away

Hawthorn are familiar enough with Lance Franklin to know that he thrives on 
negative attention – even before the game, they’d been suggesting that their 
fans refrain from booing their former talisman. Any temptation to wind Franklin 
up was largely resisted – Luke Hodge, en route to a second Norm Smith medal, 
even kissed him at one point, and while Josh Gibson did treat himself to one 
late whack at Franklin, it somehow had more the air of good-natured ribbing 
among friends than any real attempt to intimidate. As ever, it scarcely 
mattered what his opposition did. Franklin was by some distance Sydney’s best 
player, scoring four goals and pulling in one brilliant juggled goal-square 
mark which will comprise the few seconds of game tape that any Sydney fan will 
want to watch again.

Tipping competition results

And we have a winner. Congratulations to Brunswickistan, not only for the 
victory but for correctly predicting the result of every game in the finals. If 
you email tom.lutz@theguardian.com with your address we’ll send your prize. And 
we promise to do it this time (sorry, roof).

The final standings are:

9 – Brunswickistan, 

8 –Parishnikov

7 – myrtacae, downthewikihole, Jude McBain, roof

6 –Brendanjb, , DergNasty, keedyjackson, MrTroy, Radelaide, Geoff Foley, 
DrRudi, WinnieOfOz, Charles_Maine, CollaroyAl, whobroughtoranges

5 –GageExperience, Russell Jackson, TLutz, mcs_095, the_enthusiast, Viking17

4 –oxi1940, JSP0301, DingbatTheFirst, dickrow45, Heckle, Osman Kuyucak, Grant 
Hinner, Glambear, 0gopogo,

3 – DonaldHomer, theelsoms, B4Bear, fabulist2, Edward Harcourt, Freogal, 
MisterTom, Benjamin Charles Hider, mikem2, Emu666, ID2535894, Oshada 
Kurukulasuriya, nikki4noo, RohanPhelps, ozpuck

2 –Helen Connor, jezzadownunder, MelbourneTown, Bokhead, spelled3, flobadobb, 
Wheelspinner, James Minglis

1 –Aussiekiss, Robertiton, WAJohn

0 - EricNave
 