
Expansion clubs could not be in more different places

Due to the fact that they resemble McDonald’s trainees, I’ve been treating the 
Gold Coast side with genial condescension so far this season. “Oh look,” I say 
to myself, “they’re pretending they’re a real football team. Isn’t that sweet?”

After a win and a loss to start the season, round three saw them sneak into 
the top eight for the first time, in what seemed for all the world like an 
anomaly. But after they dropped back out, round five saw them get the spot 
back. Then they moved up to sixth, then fifth. All the while we kept chuckling, 
waiting for their bubble to burst or for captain Gary Ablett to spontaneously 
combust with the sheer effort of playing so well so consistently. But 
approaching the halfway point of the season, and with all teams back level on 
games played after the bye rounds, Gold Coast sit comfortablythird, four points 
clear ofHawthorn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn>, level on points 
with second-placed Geelong.

These are dizzying heights for a side we all saw as low altitude, and the thin 
air must feel good. Surely the expectation of a slide will come true soon, with 
the Suns facing Sydney, Geelong and Hawthorn in their next five games. But jag 
a win from one of those, and they also have a clump of the Western Bulldogs, 
Brisbane, St Kilda and Carlton, so they may not slide too far at all.

Travis Cloke has vanished

There was a time when Travis Cloke dominated Collingwood’s forward line as 
much as he dominated their contract news and their salary cap. For two quarters 
in the 2011 grand final he looked like he was going to win it off his own boot. 
Then he vanished, and hasn’t really been back since.

Cloke has played all nine games for the Magpies this season for a return of 10 
goals and 16 behinds. Four of those games he’s gone goalless. The weekend just 
gone, he managed six kicks, no handballs, and one goal, the first time this 
season his possession count has been in single figures.

Jack Riewoldt has not vanished

A much-maligned forward with apparently similar issues, Riewoldt doesn’t so 
much go missing as go hungry, starved by the boom-bustRichmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> midfield during their long 2014 
trading slump. But having bought as low as they could, the Tigers suddenly sold 
high on the weekend, splashing out to buy Riewoldt a family meal deal.

Eleven goals he kicked, his best return ever in a game, and was on course for 
one more before he blithely chipped a short pass to Trent Cotchin rather than 
shoot. That one would have been from the pocket, but then, so were most of his 
others, Riewoldt happily leading to whatever space was available, and 
converting all but two of his chances. For a week at least, Richmond found a 
happy place.

Hawthorn face hard work and hard times

Injuries affect every team, but Hawthorn have been hit with strategic 
precision, and the flag favourites of a few weeks ago may struggle to return to 
the top of the table once they get a side back together. Hawthorn were brave 
againstPort Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide>, 
rallying to get within seven points by three-quarter time, but ultimately the 
task was a bit too much for a depleted list.

 Their two best defenders, Josh Gibson and Brian Lake, are both missing for a 
few more weeks and will be well short of match conditioning. Their spark, Cyril 
Rioli, has been in and out. Midfield engine Sam Mitchell was a massive loss and 
faces six more weeks out, while useful players like Liam Shiels, Matt Spangher 
and Brendan Whitecross are missing. Jarryd Roughead will be a very welcome 
return from suspension this week.

Port need a Melbourne game – or do they?

Speaking of being flag favourite, you’d have to concede that Port Adelaide 
have assumed that title. Everyone has talked about their transition from the 
shambles of recent seasons, but now we have to talk about just how good they 
look in this one.

The Power have beaten three of their premiership rivals in the past four weeks 
– Geelong, Fremantle and now the Hawks – and they’ve done it with comparative 
ease. The only factor is that that all of those games have been played on their 
home ground at Adelaide Oval. With four of their next six against weaker sides 
at home, and another against Melbourne in Alice Springs, Port won’t be easing 
their grip on top spot any time soon.

But what would beating St Kilda or the Bulldogs in Adelaide really tell us? 
Port’s only difficult road trips until the season’s end are to play Sydney, 
Collingwood, Gold Coast and Fremantle. TheCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> game will be Port’s only match 
on the MCG this season, and the MCG is where premierships are won. Still, at 
the rate they’re going Port could enjoy two home finals, and if they did make 
it through, one thing they haven’t displayed this year is any lack of 
confidence.
 