
Hawks? Cats? There’ll always be a comeback

Not that it was new this week: over the past six years we’ve learned that the 
comeback is as reliably part of Geelong versus Hawthorn as blue hoops and 
poo-wee stripes. After modest returns on some early dominance, the Cats put on 
one of their bursts close to half-time to kick five goals clear. Hello, we 
thought, looks like they have this won. Must be time for aHawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> revival.

Duly provided. Every one of the games in this magnificent sequence has swung 
one way and then the other, sometimes several times. What was most striking was 
the shift in style. The first-half was all handball, the Cats using the quick 
flip-pass and constant movement to create angles and work around Hawthorn’s 
defensive congestion. They led the final handball count by 76. Hawthorn’s half, 
though, was about finding space to create set shots inside 50. They kicked 
eight goals from marks in the second-half and one from a free kick. It was high 
speed, high intensity, high quality, and barring disaster we’re only a 
fortnight from the finals rematch.

Ooh, ah, Ash McGrath

Brisbane officially farewelled the last survivor from their premiership era, 
as Ash McGrath played his last game at the Gabba. McGrath was a versatile 
forward and defender, a plain-speaking crowd favourites who extracted 
everything he could from modest natural ability. There was only a sound defeat 
against Fremantle to finish: perhaps McGrath had used up his fairytale points 
last year during his most famous moment, when he capped off the Lions’ 52-point 
comeback againstGeelong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> with a goal 
to win after the siren.

He did score a last-quarter goal to draw some cheers, and after 214 games was 
chaired off the field to a guard of honour from two applauding sides. Except 
Freo’s Matt de Boer, who couldn’t be bothered putting down his boots and gave a 
limp-wristed slap on the back of his arm. He’ll go nowhere in finals if he 
can’t lift his clap game. McGrath and his chairlifter Claye Beams formed a 
veritable wall of body ink reminiscent of that Paul Jennings story where the 
tattoos migrate from a dying man to the boy taking his pulse. McGrath will now 
be able to tell some tales of his own.

One-percenters actually could make a difference

Every coach in the league loves talking about one-percenters. In fact, so do a 
whole lot of middle-management drones who want to sound like coaches. As we 
come into range of the final round though, one percent could account for fourth 
spot on the ladder.

Port Adelaide’s monster win against Carlton on Friday night has them half a 
percentage point up on Fremantle, even though they sit four points behind. This 
is particularly interesting since the two meet in Perth next week. Had Port 
still trailed on percentage, they would have needed to beat Freo by a certain 
margin to take the Dockers’ spot in the top four. Now, they just need to win. 
So do the Dockers, though a draw would do them fine as well. Finals start a 
week early.

Further down the ladder, Adelaide and West Coast sit 10th and 11th, but are in 
best position to make the finals given Richmond andCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> should both lose. Only one can 
make it. The Crows need to win by about 90 points more than the Eagles to 
surpass their percentage, not impossible against bottom-placed St Kilda on the 
Adelaide Oval. It’ll make for fireworks.

Collingwood don’t have a team left

Instead they have a very expensive injury list. Round 21 cost them half a 
dozen players in a game of attrition against Brisbane at the MCG, and the 
weekend just gone added several more. Not that injuries can be blamed for 
dropping out of finals contention after being in the top four in round 12, but 
the current list makes a season-saving upset against Hawthorn impossible.

Against Greater Western Sydney this week they were missing, or lost, their 
entire first-choice midfield of Dane Swan, Scott Pendlebury and Dayne Beams; 
forwards Travis Cloke and Jamie Elliot; running defenders Heritier Lumumba, 
Marty Clarke and Paul Seedsman; backmen Sam Reid and Alan Toovey; number one 
tagger Brent Macaffer; and back-up midfielders Taylor Adams and Sam Dwyer. Yes, 
they limped to a gutsy win, but they’ll tackle the might of Hawthorn with half 
a VFL side, the cast of The Recruit and a few blokes they’ll pull off a tram.

Not everyone needs finals 

There was a inspired football moment that had nothing to do with wins or glory 
on Sunday. Losing by a distance to Richmond at the G, the camera cut to some 
scatteredSt Kilda <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> supporters 
behind the goals. “Not a lot of joy for the Saints fans, sitting in the rain,” 
said commentator Dennis Cometti as we regarded the assorted hats, raincoats, 
silly plastic ponchos, donned hoodies, open umbrellas and looks of resignation. 
But there were still quiet smiles and chats going on, and the display inspired 
Cometti’s colleague Jason Dunstall to launch into a mini soliloquy.

“That is staunch support though,” he said through the slight husky hint of 
emotion. “That is brilliant to see. You’re sitting on the bottom of the ladder, 
you’re not really in the contest at all, it’s Sunday twilight, it’s cold, it’s 
wet, and there you are supporting your team. That is… hats off to those people.”

“Indeed,” was all the loquacious Cometti replied, perhaps too moved himself to 
further respond.
 