
The footy world rallies in the face of tragedy

The footy world has always had a way of rallying around its own like no other, 
evidenced by the outpouring of grief shown after the passing of former 
Melbourne coach Dean Bailey or Port Adelaide player John McCarthy, or more 
recently the support shown towards Neale Daniher and his brave public battle 
with motor neurone disease. From the outside it’s clear – football clubs are 
like families, and like the closest of families they ride the good times and 
the bad times together. The days following the tragic death of Adelaide coach 
Phil Walsh early on Friday morning have been hard enough for fans emotionally 
invested in the game; let alone the hundreds of players, coaches and staffers 
Walsh impacted during his 30-plus year career in the game. With Sunday’s Crows 
v Cats game sensibly cancelled, the remainder of the league respected Walsh the 
best way it could. Players and coaches shared touching tributes via social 
media, flags flew at half-mast at clubrooms andAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> House and fans left flowers and scarves 
at the Crows’ West Lakes headquarters. On the field, subtle additions spoke 
volumes. Players of all 16 competing teams wore black armbands and paused for a 
minute’s silence pre-game. Team songs weren’t blared over PA systems; nor sung 
in change rooms by victorious players. The most poignant moment of the weekend 
was the sight of all 44 Collingwood and Hawthorn players, as well as coaches 
Nathan Buckley and Alistair Clarkson, linking arms in the middle of the MCG and 
bowing their heads post-match on Friday night. It was a gesture replicated 
after every other game over the weekend. Those images, as well as the sight of 
thousands pouring into an empty Adelaide Oval on Sunday afternoon to pay their 
respects, will be remembered for generations to come.

Phil Walsh tribute: 20,000 fans gather at Adelaide Oval to mourn AFL coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/05/phil-walsh-tribute-20000-fans-gather-at-adelaide-oval-to-mourn-afl-coach>
Swans revert to a premiership formula

Only those with the memory of a goldfish would have thought Sydney’s forward 
line would struggle against Port Adelaide with both Lance Franklin and Kurt 
Tippett on the sidelines. It was only three years ago that the Swans won the 
flag with neither Bondi Billionaire at the club – so with the suspended pair 
unavailable on Thursday night, the Swans simply reverted to a flag-proven 
formula. In that premiership year, Sam Reid and Adam Goodes combined for a 
total of 68 goals and played key roles in the finals. Against Port, they 
combined for six and some flashes of brilliance. Goodes turned back the clock 
with a burst out of the centre before burning off Ollie Wines and drilling a 
goal on the run, while Reid was close to best on ground in the first half when 
he kicked three and set up another to first-gamer Toby Nankervis. He’s an 
interesting case, Reid. When he signed a lucrative five-year extension at the 
end of 2011, he was seen as one of the game’s best young talents. But with 
Franklin and Tippett now commanding the forward line, Reid’s spent much of the 
past 18 months as a jack-of-all-trades, playing up forward, down back and on 
the wing. On Thursday, he was the main man up forward and reminded everyone of 
those assured hands and smooth skills. He’s contracted to the end of 2017 but 
clubs will surely come knocking before then. With Dan Hannebery, Luke Parker, 
Josh Kennedy and Kieren Jack also hitting the scoreboard against Power, the 
Swans certainly weren’t bereft of firepower. They’re equal second on the ladder 
but are flying under the radar more than any other contender. If Geelong 2009 
and Hawthorn 2013 taught us anything, it’s to never underestimate a vanquished 
grand finalist. The Swans are in this premiership race up to their eyeballs.

So close yet so far for Collingwood

For the second consecutive week, Collingwood took it right up to a premiership 
fancy only to fall short in the dying minutes. But while it felt like Fremantle 
owned the big moments last week, the Magpies will ultimately rue Friday night 
as a huge opportunity they let slip. Collingwood won most of the important 
stats – more scoring shots, possessions, clearances and tackles – except the 
one that matters most, on the scoreboard. The ball lived in their forward half 
for long stretches in the third and fourth quarters but they just couldn’t 
deliver the knockout blow. It was the third, when they kicked a wayward 2.9, 
which ultimately cost them. The flow of play suggested that Collingwood should 
have had a handy lead at the final change, but instead they found themselves 
narrowly in arrears to the reigning premier. Travis Cloke and Alex Fasolo were 
the main culprits, adding a combined 2.7 for the night while at the other end 
Cyril Rioli and Luke Breust contributed a blemish-free 8.0. Late in the game, 
Jesse White opted for a low-percentage pass into the pocket instead of shooting 
from 50m after taking a strong mark. In a game of inches, poor decision-making 
and inaccurate goalkicking mean everything. Cruelly for Collingwood, they’ve 
lost two on the trot despite playing arguably their best football for the 
season. As Nathan Buckley mused after the game, they’re a good team striving to 
become a great team. The last fortnight has proven they’re oh-so close to that 
turning point.

AFL: Dockers crush Lions, Bombers in freefall after Saints drubbing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/afl-bombers-in-freefall-after-saints-drubbing>
Gary Ablett must be the game’s best leader

His leadership was questioned during his injury-enforced three-month layoff, 
as his side endured defeat after scandal after defeat. But Gary Ablett simply 
must be the best leader in the game. How else can you reconcile the 1-11 Gold 
Coast Suns, clearly the most disappointing side of 2015, with the Suns that 
absolutely belted finals aspirants North Melbourne on Saturday evening? The 
game’s greatest player worked his way into the game after a tentative start, 
finishing with a team-high 31 possessions and kicking three goals despite 
wearing a tight tag by Ben Jacobs for most of the game. The magic was still 
there, evidenced by his trademark 50m bomb that was the final nail in the 
Kangaroos’ coffin with 15 minutes to play. Statistics aside, Ablett simply 
makes his teammates stand taller. The Suns have been completely lacking in 
confidence all season but rediscovered it this week – the run and carry was 
back, as was the play-on-at-all-costs attitude. With Aaron Hall and rookie Adam 
Saad running rings around North players, Kade Kolodjashnij and Steven May 
controlling proceedings down back and Charlie Dixon kicking a career-high seven 
goals, the Suns finally resembled the side many of us thought were finals-bound 
this year. And it all began with Ablett. The game was poorer for his prolonged 
absence, and as long as that shoulder holds up, the Gold Coast Suns may just 
become a real football club again.

The Western Bulldogs have a new cult hero

Fans in the cheap seats at Etihad Stadium could have been forgiven for 
thinking that a rogue Auskick kid had remained on the field after half time 
during Saturday night’s Western Bulldogs v Carlton game. But that pint-sized 
little fella in the helmet and the #35 Bulldogs jersey was debutant Caleb 
Daniel, subbed into the game at the main break. Taken at pick 46 in last year’s 
draft, the 167cm midfielder is the league’s shortest player since Tony 
Liberatore – proof that if nothing else, the Dogs’ recruiters over the decades 
have never discriminated based on height. In just two quarters of footy, Daniel 
cemented himself as a new cult hero. He buzzed around like a fleet-footed small 
forward while accumulating possessions like a midfielder, finishing with 14 
touches and nailing a set shot from just inside 50m. No doubt Daniel, like 
Brent Harvey, Mathew Stokes and Jarryd Blair among others, would have been told 
by many that he was too short to have a sustained football career. Perhaps with 
those critics in the back of his mind, on Saturday night Daniel scrapped and 
fought for every touch of the leather. It’s a mentality that seems perfectly 
aligned with what Luke Beveridge wants from his side.

If the 190cm Nat Fyfe – just two centimetres shorter than Matthew Pavlich - is 
the prototype of the modern-day midfielder, Daniel is a throwback to old-school 
football when a player’s ability to win the ball meant more than his GPS 
results.
 