
Kangas jump at the chance


 North Melbourne, despite their regular losses to inferior opposition this 
term, have in 2014 held pretensions to being a top-four team. They’ve taken the 
long road, via the elimination finals,but in beating Geelong on Friday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/12/afl-semi-final-north-melbourne-hold-off-geelong-comeback>
 the Kangaroos have finally arrived as such and are one of the four clubs still 
standing as the competition enters its final fortnight. It’s been a difficult, 
often tortuous year for the club and its fans, and North’s path to the prelim 
has been fittingly fraught: they needed a mammoth comeback to beat the Bombers 
before reversing roles and holding firm to withstand an onslaught from the Cats 
in the semi-final. Lindsay Thomas helped get the Kangaroos under way with a 
spritely opening in front of goal, while Nick Dal Santo and Sam Gibson were key 
run-and-carriers throughout. But B.O.G undoubtedly was ruckman Todd Goldstein, 
who ran rings around his Geelong counterparts to amass 54 hit outs, 15 
disposals and a goal. A rested and rampant Sydney await in what is a daunting 
challenge for North, but if there’s one area they could have the edge it’s 
through Goldstein.



 Courageous Cats can give no more


 This Geelong vintage is nothing if not courageous. Played off the park in the 
first quarter, the Cats showed tremendous resolve to almost pinch the game. But 
pinch it they didn’t, and that’s now five lost finals from six attempts since 
their 2011 premiership triumph. Though it’s something of a rarity for a 
top-four team to go out in straight sets – at least it was before this weekend 
– it shouldn’t come as a total shock that this was the fate met by Chris 
Scott’s men. The Cats won eight games this year by two kicks or under, which 
speaks volumes for their character and professionalism. But it also suggests 
the chasing pack weren’t that far behind.Geelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> have shown remarkable staying power 
to remain a force when many have been quick to write them off in their 
post-Mark Thompson days. But one wonders how long they can keep hanging on, 
like the last hedonist at the party, before the bottom falls out and, heaven 
forbid, a September passes without Geelong’s involvement. With almost half of 
Friday’s 22 aged 23 or under you could argue the rebuild has already begun, but 
surely the football department will take further action in the off-season. It 
could be a nervous few weeks for some of the club’s elderly statesmen.



 Dockers lose their kicking boots, and the plot


 Joining Geelong on the second-chance scrapheap are Fremantle, though the 
Dockers’ straight-sets departure must rate as the bigger shock. Certainly, at 
half-time on Saturday evening at Patersons Stadium – where, under coach Ross 
Lyon’s care, Freo had dropped just six of 37 games – it seemed a case of ‘how 
far’ as they ranPort Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> 
ragged with a brand of suffocating footy that has become Lyon’s trademark. Freo 
were a sight to behold in the first two quarters, disallowing the Power any 
latitude and conducting affairs on their terms. There was just one problem: 
horrid inaccuracy in front of the big sticks. In truth, the Dockers should have 
been as many as eight goals in front at the main break, not four. It would 
return to haunt them, as Port’s tactical changes, and sheer persistence, saw 
the game open up in the second half. In the end, Fremantle could not match 
Port’s class and polish. The Dockers will lick their wounds and surely be a 
force again next year, but the Premiership window doesn’t stay open forever. 
Equally, time waits for no man. The likes of skipper Matthew Pavlich, Aaron 
Sandilands and Luke McPharlin are getting no younger, and each will be pinning 
hopes 2015 can bring the ultimate reward.



 Mighty, mighty Power


 Comebacks, and bloody good ones, are almost de rigeur in the AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> these days, but Port Adelaide’s ascent 
from the ashes in Perth must go down as one of the absolute greats. The Power 
just couldn’t get moving in the first half, their slick running game retarded 
by Fremantle’s relentless pressure; when Port did get the ball, often the best 
they could do was a hurried kick back to the opposition. Utterly bullied, there 
seemed no way back – the only redeeming aspect was Freo’s inaccuracy. If the 
first half was an illustration of Ross Lyon’s coaching skills, the second 
proved how cool and astute Ken Hinkley is when facing a challenge. Port emerged 
after the big break a reformed team, eschewing the loose man in defence, 
playing man on man and taking risks through the corridor. It worked. It was an 
across-the-board effort, but quicker, more precise entry into the forward 50 
allowed, in particular, three men to shine: Robbie Gray, Ollie Wines and Chad 
Wingard. Each was brilliant, and any club in the land would like to have one of 
them, leave alone all three. Hawthorn next week is tough, but, with their sail 
dripping wet, you wouldn’t put it past the Power.



 It’s awards season too, you know


 Fremantle’s Nat Fyfe was a deserving recipient of the AFLPA’s MVP award 
during the week. Fyfe is one of the most electric, exquisitely gifted players 
in the game, perhaps second only to that bald bloke who plays for the Suns. His 
rare quality was on show against Port, most notably in the first and last 
quarters when he got the Dockers moving and then tried to get them back in it. 
He’s also a gritty competitor, always hard at it – so hard at it that he 
sometimes crosses the line. It’s why Fyfe’s ineligible to win the Brownlow 
Medal this year, which is a mighty shame for him as he’ll go very close to 
polling the most votes.
 