
North do the little things right

After a series of Friday night stinkers, round seven finally offered a decent 
contest, with the clash betweenNorth Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> and a spirited Essendon in 
the balance until the final minutes. When a game is on the line, every piece is 
play is amplified, analysed and dissected. Last time the Kangaroos found 
themselves in the same position, against Port Adelaide in round three, the 
Power made the winning plays. And, unfairly or not, North hasn’t entirely 
shaken the ‘flaky’ tag they picked up in 2013 when they found comical ways to 
blow what seemed like winning leads on the way to losing five games by less 
than a goal. But on Friday night, the Kangaroos called the shots late. Brad 
Scott made a match-winning move at three-quarter-time, sending Drew Petrie down 
back. Petrie took four intercept marks, the best a telling, towering pack mark 
to repel Essendon’s final thrust forward in the last 90 seconds.

North Melbourne hold off spirited Essendon to win by 11 points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/16/afl-north-melbourne-essendon-match-report>
There were other crucial plays in the dying minutes, like Scott Thompson 
outpointing Joe Daniher in a one-on-one contest in the Bombers’ forward 50m, 
and Sam Gibson outmarking two opponents on the back flank when a turnover would 
have led to anEssendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> shot at 
goal. To win the close ones, you need poise when it counts. And as the Bombers 
blazed away under pressure, new Roo Shaun Higgins coolly nailed a 50m set shot 
with a few minutes on the clock and his team’s lead less than a goal. With 
Daniel Wells and Nick Dal Santo largely unsighted this season, Higgins’ class 
has become even more vital than Scott could have anticipated. The best teams 
play with synchronicity and a trust in each other to get the job done. We’ll 
learn more about North when they meet the unbeaten Dockers this week, but 
Friday night was a step in the right direction.

Nick Riewoldt’s annus horribilis continues

It’s been a rough old start to 2015 for Nick Riewoldt. The Saints skipper 
tragically lost his younger sister Madeleine to a rare blood disease in 
February, and missed the entire NAB Challenge to grieve with his family. In 
round one, the Saints were within striking distance of GWS with a quarter of an 
hour to play before an off-the-ball hit by Tomas Bugg saw Riewoldt taken to 
hospital with whiplash. He missed a further three weeks with a niggling calf 
complaint, before returning to contribute well in round six’s comeback victory 
over the Western Bulldogs. On Saturday afternoon, the Saints silenced the 
Adelaide Oval crowd with the game’s first three goals before Riewoldt clashed 
heads in a sickening incident with Crow Brodie Smith. He was out cold before he 
even hit the ground, and taken straight to hospital where he was fortunately 
cleared of major damage. He’ll be long odds to play this week, but in the 
aftermath of a heavy hit, the Saints’ next game would be the last thing on the 
mind of Riewoldt’s loved ones.

The Crows’ 37-point win was overshadowed by the carnage – not just Riewoldt, 
but Smith and Saint Jack Lonie were subbed out with concussion, and Matthew 
Jaensch suffered a suspected ACL injury innocuously trying to change direction. 
The Riewoldt incident hammered home how seriously the industry treats head 
knocks these days – the day when a player would stagger back onto the field 
minutes after being KO’d are long gone – and a salient reminder of the harm 
these young men expose themselves to every weekend.

Don’t poke the bear

We footy fans are highly attuned to the way footballers speak; the 
“yeah-nah-good-to-get-the-four-points” rhetoric spouted by young men media 
trained to within an inch of their lives. So when a footballer speaks honestly 
and free of cliché, it raises eyebrows. Case in point: Melbourne forward Chris 
Dawes, who ahead of the Dees’ Saturday afternoon date with the Hawks described 
the reigning premiers as “really gettable” and said his team was “expecting to 
win”. On one hand it was refreshing, on the other neutral supporters were glad 
it wasn’t one of their players poking the bear.

AFL roundup: Swans fly, Hawks thump Melbourne, Adelaide account for Saints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/16/afl-wrap-hawks-thump-melbourne-adelaide-account-for-saints>
Coming off an unexpected loss, the Hawks had enough motivation. But you 
wondered what was going through Dawes’ mind by 5pm on Saturday when his team 
was trudging off the MCG after a 105-point hiding, the sort of beating that 
took Demons fans back to the type of dark days they thought they were over. 
Scarily, the Hawks rarely seemed to get out of second gear. By the third 
quarter they were trying Harlem Globetrotters-type stuff, Cyril Rioli 
toe-poking and then tunneling the ball between his legs to set up a Luke Breust 
goal.

And Dawes? The late withdrawal of Jesse Hogan didn’t help, but the forward 
managed just six possessions and was kept scoreless. The Demons have been so 
bereft of confidence for so long that you can’t begrudge Dawes for trying to 
pump his team-mates up. But the Buddy Franklins of the world can afford the odd 
moment of overconfidence because they expect their team to be in a winning 
position every week. Melbourne must first master the art of four quarters of 
competitive footy against top-shelf opponents, before they start dreaming of 
beating them.

West Coast goes for the kill

In an era where many teams are happy to build big leads and then rest on their 
laurels, West Coast is a breath of fresh air. Because when these Eagles smell 
blood, they go for the jugular. Having already belted the Blues by 69 and the 
Giants by 87 at home, it was the hapless Suns’ turn in the firing line this 
week. If the 92-point margin wasn’t enough, the wet and miserable conditions 
would have had Harley Bennell and his mates wishing they’d stayed on the booze 
for another week.

It’s exhilarating to watch the Eagles when they’re in this type of form. Their 
third quarter, in which they kicked a club-record 12 goals straight, was 
likened to “an air-raid shelter” by Suns coach Rodney Eade after the game. 
Usual suspects Josh Kennedy and Matthew Priddis were influential but the 
emergence of former Lion Elliott Yeo (29 touches and four goals) was a real 
bonus. Doubters will point out that the Eagles have only played one of last 
year’s top six, but the value of their comprehensive smashings is evident in 
their league-best percentage of 156.6, which could end up the difference 
between September action or an early holiday.

As for their crosstown rivals, Fremantle’s “anywhere, anytime” national tour 
rolled into Etihad Stadium where the Bulldogs made them work harder than they 
have all season to maintain their two-game buffer over the rest of the 
competition. The measure of a great team is one that lifts in the face of 
adversity, and the Dockers turned a level game with the crowd and momentum 
against them into a 13-point win in the blink of an eye. Their biggest concern 
in the aftermath was a report against Nat Fyfe for a clumsy trip. To lose one 
Brownlow through suspension is cruel, to lose two would be an injustice.

Port Adelaide’s 2015 is starting to look like Geelong’s 2006

There will be plenty of anger and finger pointing among the Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> faithful this week after the 
pre-season premiership fancies slumped to a 3-4 record, dropping their second 
successive game they were short-priced favourites to win. You can only hope the 
anger subsides enough for fans to remember Geelong’s 2006. Just like Port, the 
Cats started that season as flag favourites to many, having lost a semi-final 
and a heartbreaking preliminary final in the two seasons previous. For whatever 
reason – call it arrogance, complacency or simply being worked out by 
opposition coaches – Geelong missed the finals altogether but rebounded to win 
the flag the following year and thus a great team was born.

Fremantle cement hold on top spot after holding off surging Western Bulldogs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/17/afl-round-seven-match-report-roundup>
The way Port capitulated at the hands of the resurgent Lions on Sunday evening 
was nothing like the ruthless, skilful Power we all expected this year. In 
fact, save for that first quarter blast against the Hawks, they haven’t really 
looked like the Port we expected at all. The Power was sloppy, slow and beaten 
for endeavour. Their fabled “best fitness in the league” is simply non-existent 
this season, having been outscored in the final quarters of all four of their 
losses. And of Port’s big names – Travis Boak, Chad Wingard, Justin Westhoff – 
only Robbie Gray has delivered anywhere like his 2014 heroics this year.

Of course, there are still two-thirds of the season to go and Port is by no 
means out of the top four or premiership hunt. But they need to find something 
– and fast. At the end of the day, sometimes you need to take a small step 
backwards to take two big steps forward. The Cats learned this valuable lesson 
all those years ago, and maybe it’s Port’s turn.
 