
After picking up a galaxy of awards, the space thriller Gravity is tipped for 
further glory at the Oscars on Sunday. The film might look like classic big 
budget Hollywood, but has a starring role in the British film industry. Almost 
everything on screen, from the gorgeous images of light bouncing off the earth, 
the constellations of stars, down to the astronauts' space boots, was conjured 
up on computers at a studio in Soho. Stars George Clooney andSandra Bullock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sandra-bullock> filmed their space nightmare 
in deepest, darkest Buckinghamshire.

Tim Webber is the director of visual effects at Framestore, the studio behind 
Gravity's magical effects. Before he put Sandra Bullock in space, Webber 
created the rich worlds of Harry Potter and The Dark Knight. ButGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> was the most complex movie he had 
ever worked on. "Gravity was more of a giant leap than a small step," he says. 
"Everything about this movie was different to any movie any of us had ever 
worked on before."

Not only are the film's space scenes entirely computer-generated – only the 
actors' faces are real – but Webber and his team had to make weightlessness 
believable over the long shots favoured by directorAlfonso Cuarón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfonso-cuaron>. This meant the technicians 
couldn't rely on the usual "cheats" that work for a five-second shot. Webber 
and his team invented a new way of doing things and a new language.

Every move – a hand grabbing a tool, or a tilt of the body – was mapped out in 
a year-long pre-visualisation period before filming began.

The Bafta victory for outstanding British film may have raised a few eyebrows, 
but industry insiders are quick to point out that almost the entire team was 
from the UK – even the Mexican-born director is a long-term Londoner. "It is 
98% British, we should put a flag in the ground and we should take pride in 
that fact," says Ben Roberts, director of the British Film Institute film fund.

Film production was worth £1bn to the UK economy in 2013, up 14% on the 
previous year, according to BFI. With the government keen to show the UK 
economy is built on more than financial make-belief, chancellorGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> hailed the creative 
industries' contribution. On a recent visit to the set of Downton Abbey at 
Ealing studios in west London, Osborne praised the "fast-growing" sectors of 
film and television for their job creation record. Up to 44,000 people work in 
film production, making it a bigger employer than the hedge fund industry.

The industry has been a rare bright spot during the worst recession of modern 
times. Film-making has been growing faster than the rest of the economy, as big 
Hollywood studios turned the country into a giant film set. Guardians of the 
Galaxy, Marvel Comic's space blockbuster, opening this summer, was shot at 
Pinewood Studios. The Dorset town of Sherborne stands in for Thomas Hardy's 
Casterbridge in a version of Far From the Madding Crowd, also being released 
this year. TV is not far behind. Northern Ireland has doubled as Westeros and 
Essos for epic fantasy dramaGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, while fugitive 
agent Jack Bauer is on the run in London, with the next series of 24 shooting 
in the capital.

Behind all these dramas is the distinctly unstarry HM Revenue and Customs. 
Film tax relief, introduced in 2007 and extended to blockbuster TV and 
animation last April, has been heralded by the industry as a game changer. It 
was worth £202m to film studios in the last financial year; £227m to television 
companies. According to consultancy Oxford Economics, these subsidies mean it 
is now 38% cheaper to shoot a film in the UK than the US – while the generosity 
of the UK's regime has prompted gripes from the LA film world.

The tax credit has been "a tremendous success at attracting inward 
investment," says Andrew Smith, director of strategy and communications at 
Pinewood Studios.

Pinewood is turning away business at the moment, he says, as the studio 
battles with Buckinghamshire county council for planning permission to double 
the size of its studios by building on the green belt. Smith does not deny the 
project would damage the green belt, but contends that failure to back the 
studio would be a tragedy when the government is targeting film as a growth 
business.

Other industry watchers, such as former culture secretary Lord Smith, argue 
that British film is living through a golden period. To William Sargent, 
co-founder of Framestore, that kind of talk is the "kiss of death" that 
understates past successes. But he says: "This is a solid industry in which 
people come to work on Monday morning. If you went back 15 years it was really 
uncertain and up and down. You couldn't build a career in the film industry the 
way you can now."

It is not just the money flowing into government's coffers. Paul Greengrass, 
the celebrated director behind United 93 and Captain Phillips, recently said 
the industry was "nowhere near where we were in the 80s when we were trapped in 
low-budget British film-making with films no one wanted to go and see". Roberts 
thinks the UK industry is more confident than a decade ago when British 
film-makers sought to emulate Hollywood's crowd-pleasing gross-out comedies, 
with homegrown copies, such as Lucky Break and Sex Lives of the Potato Men.

But amid the hype about a £1bn industry, the number of independent British 
films has declined, while funding for homegrown films fell by 38% in 2013 on 
the previous year.

Some have disputed the figures, which are produced by the BFI. Producer Andrew 
Eaton has pointed out that Rush, a German-British co-production about a famous 
in Formula One 70s rivalry, wasnot included in the BFI's count of independent 
British films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/16/british-film-industry-andrew-eaton>
, casting doubt on the usefulness of the statistics.

Roberts, who oversees £26m in lottery funding for British films, disputes the 
claim that independent British film is in the doldrums. "We are at the coal 
face and my instinct is that it feels healthy. He points to "very characterful 
individualist films with a strong [sense of] place and identity" that will come 
to the screen this year. These include Posh, a film about the exploits of the 
Bullingdon Club, and Pride, the little known story of gay rights activists 
helping striking Welsh coal miners. "We are reaching the end of our financial 
year and we are likely to make more investment this year than we have ever done 
before."

Elliot Grove, founder of the British Independent Film awards, also thinks it 
is a vibrant time for grassroots film-makers, largely thanks to the massive 
fall in production costs. A decade ago, a budding film-maker needed at least 
£1m to make a film. Now, thanks to "cell phones and mum's video camera", they 
can make their masterpiece for a tenth of that price. The biggest problem for 
film-makers, he says, is getting their work into cinemas. He sees the intense 
competition to get on screen at the independentRaindance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/raindancefilmfestival> that he runs. Last 
year, he and his team sat through 4,300 films, but only 127 made it to the 
festival.

Gabrielle Tana, the producer behind the Invisible Woman and Philomena, 
cautions that it is hard for small film-makers, especially as so-called 
arthouse cinemas are less devoted to independent films. "It has become 
extremely competitive now. For the little guys it is hard to stay out there. 
Some films are on five screens and the little guy can't even be out [on screen] 
for two weeks."

Sargent at Framestore agrees that screen space is a problem when UK cinemas 
are dominated by big Hollywood studios. In that sense at least "we are in no 
different a place than we have been for 30 or 50 years."

• This article was amended on 6 March 2014 because the original said Alfonso 
Cuarón was Spanish-born. Cuarón was born in Mexico.
 