
As ever at The Oval, there is more than one contest going on out there. The 
main duel between England and Australia is, of course, pretty one-sided. Even 
though the majority of their batsmen have performed with spirit, England are 
still a long way from saving this match. A follow-on target of 442 remains in 
the middle distance.

Simultaneously a closer contest was taking place between England's 
middle-order batsmen. The touring parties are announced on Tuesday and it may 
well be - with the anticipated return of Graham Thorpe and Michael Vaughan 
after injury - that Mark Ramprakash and Usman Afzaal are battling for one spot. 
They spent an intriguing hour-and-a-half batting together yesterday. 
Fortunately they managed to avoid any unseemly run-outs.

Their innings could not have been more diverse. Ramprakash was in his stoic 
mood. Each run had to be eked out. For long periods he was forced to kick 
deliveries from Shane Warne that were pitching outside his leg stump. Glenn 
McGrath was typically mean. The Aussies, you sensed, were preying upon his 
reputation for crease occupation without significant run-gathering on the 
assumption that he'd crack in the end. To add to the strain Ramprakash has been 
around long enough to know that selectors can be swayed by one innings or one 
shot.

At the other end was Afzaal, restless and determined to be assertive. In his 
nervousness there was a hint of a swagger that was mildly reminiscent of Younis 
Ahmed, who really did get up his opponents' noses - and one or two of his 
team-mates as well. Afzaal had some luck. His first shot, an airy drive against 
Mark Waugh, went in the air but through the covers for four. He might have been 
given out stumped on 16 after flicking unsuccessfully at Warne, but the third 
umpire gave him the benefit of the doubt. His back foot may have crept back 
behind the line just in time. Such decisions at this stage of the season remind 
us of the fine line between success and failure, fame and obscurity. Another 
Afzaal edge from McGrath penetrated the slip cordon

And he played his shots. Warne was driven through the covers, Lee back past 
his outstretched hands. And each time he held his bat in its follow-through a 
millisecond longer than necessary, a foible that photographers appreciate 
rather more than bowlers. Soon he had raced past Ramprakash; at times he looked 
clumsy, out of his depth even, but he also looked as if he was enjoying 
himself. There's something there and the Oval crowd cheered his half-century 
merrily as Afzaal punched the air without any inhibition. But soon his 
exuberance led to an ill-conceived hook off McGrath and a skied catch, the end 
of a captivating, naive innings. A half-century against these Australians is 
not to be sniffed at, but it might not be enough to secure a passage to India. 
For Ramprakash soldiered on, gaining in confidence along the way. A sweet cover 
drive off Warne took him to his half-century and dreams of Ahmedabad.

Marcus Trescothick could only soldier on for two balls in the morning as 
Australia made their customary idyllic start to the day. Trescothick had batted 
sublimely on Friday night, but he could not lay bat on ball yesterday. He only 
tried once. He padded up to his first ball from Warne, who unsurprisingly 
unleashed a fierce appeal, which was rejected by umpire Willey, who has been 
ungenerous to bowlers of every hue in this match. To the next ball Trescothick 
shuffled across his stumps a long way, attempted to flick a quicker ball to the 
on-side and was then stunned when it thumped into his leg stump.

With McGrath reeling off a string of maidens, progress was slow, incredibly 
slow by the helter-skelter standards of this series, but there was a hint of 
stability in the way Mark Butcher and Nasser Hussain batted in the next 45 
minutes. Then Warne, on a wicket that had him alone salivating among bowlers, 
struck again as Butcher presented a straightforward bat-pad catch to Justin 
Langer. Butcher has a problem. In his heart of hearts he must know that he can 
never bat as well as he did at Headingley ever again. Perhaps he should 
consider retiring as well. But until his dismissal he had demonstrated his 
new-found confidence.

Now Hussain and Ramprakash steadied the innings. Since his latest return to 
the England side Hussain has looked in fine fettle. His driving of Gillespie, 
straight down the ground highlighted that his technique was in good order; his 
pulling of the same bowler showed his eye was sure and he dealt with Warne 
without too much fuss - apart from a concerted appeal for a bat/pad catch.

Clearly he fancied the bowling of his old Essex team-mate, Mark Waugh, who had 
been brought on to give Warne a breather. He scampered down the pitch to loft 
the off-spinner back over his head, one of his favourite shots. He was 
obviously minded to do it again. But occasionally he chose discretion with 
reluctance and once with fatal results. Back he went to a standard off-break; 
the ball hit the bottom of his bat and from there bounced back on to the 
stumps. This was the sort of dismissal that might have prompted some Hussain 
bat-throwing in his younger days.

There followed the Afzaal interlude. The spectacle of a brave young man 
acquainting himself to a foreign land was engrossing. This cricket was light 
years away from what he is used to on the county circuit. We marvelled at his 
spirit rather than his technique but knew it would not last for long. As for 
this match, it will last longer than most recent Tests in this country, but not 
long enough for England to secure a draw.
 