
Those who yearn to see Steffi Graf play again in a grand slam tournament will 
be hoping thatAndre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi>, 
who married her in 2001, emerges triumphant from his Australian Open semi-final 
against South Africa's Wayne Ferreira tomorrow and goes on to win the title on 
Sunday.

For Agassi has apparently struck a wager with his German wife, 22 times a 
grand slam singles winner before she retired in 1999, whereby if he wins here 
they will play mixed doubles in the French Open in May.

Graf, with Darren Cahill, Agassi's Australian coach, by her left side and Gil 
Reyes, her husband's trainer, to her right, displayed undisguised delight as 
Agassi swept aside France's Sébastien Grosjean 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 in the opening 
men's quarter-final, a victory that was not quite as straightforward as the 
scoreline suggests, although the result was never in doubt.

"He's hitting the ball very hard and it was tough for me, because I really 
never served very well," said Grosjean, who was a semi-finalist here two years 
ago when he won the first two sets against his compatriot Arnaud Clément and 
then had two match points before losing in five, with Agassi beating Clément in 
the final.

There has been much talk of Agassi's supreme fitness but what impressed 
Grosjean most was the 32-year-old American's motivation. "He brings such 
intensity to the court. He still wants it and his motivation out there is just 
fantastic."

Agassi might have expected to meet Spain's Juan Carlos Ferrero, the No4 seed, 
for a place in the final. Instead he finds himself up against the unseeded 
31-year-old South African Wayne Ferreira, who in a match which finished just 
before midnight defeated the Spaniard 7-6, 7-6, 6-1 to reach only his second 
grand slam semi-final, his first having come 11 years ago in Australia when he 
lost to Sweden's Stefan Edberg having beaten John McEnroe in the quarter-finals.

It is a quite remarkable achievement by Ferreira, play ing in his 49th 
consecutive grand slam, stretching back to the 1991 Australian Open. Only 
Edberg has topped this in the open era, with a run of 54. But whereas Ferreira 
has never reached a grand slam final, Agassi has won seven, including three 
Australian Open titles, and he holds a 10-0 career advantage over the South 
African, his first victory having been in 1994 and the 10th in San Jose last 
year.

A few days ago this tournament was being hailed as the changing of the guard 
as the youngsters gathered. Now two players, both playing in their 50th grand 
slam and with a combined age of 63, will fight it out for a place in the final, 
with Agassi aiming to become the third oldest winner of a slam title in the 
open era behind Australia's Ken Rosewall, winner of the Australian Open at the 
ripe old age of 37 in 1972, and Spaniard Andres Gimeno, who won the French Open 
in the same year as a 34-year-old.

"Andre has a certain game that brings out the worst in me, but this victory 
over Juan Carlos was one of my best and I have nothing to lose now," said 
Ferreira, whose double-fisted backhand was a telling weapon against the 
22-year-old Spaniard, last year's beaten French Open finalist.

Ferrero was a huge disappointment. After his straight-sets win over the 
18-year-old Croatian Mario Ancic in the fourth round he had suggested there was 
no real difference between the world's top four players, who currently are 
himself, Lleyton Hewitt, Agassi and Russia's Marat Safin. Last night the 
difference was all too obvious; the other three have all won grand slam titles, 
whereas he has not.

Hewitt's defeat by Morocco's Younes El Aynaoui deprived the tournament of the 
hoped-for match-up with Agassi, but it added to the growing feeling that the 
American's name is engraving itself on the trophy.

"Every slam has a different sort of rhythm to it, and some of them are filled 
with a bunch of curves when nothing feels like it fits," said Agassi. "There 
are a lot of variables that can work in your favour, depending on how you take 
care of the business once you are out there. Getting through is the first 
priority, but you need fuel in your tank. That's where I feel like it has been 
a good tournament for me up to now. I haven't spent any useless, unnecessary 
energy."

This is not true of Ferreira, playing in his 13th consecutive Australian Open, 
who was two sets and 4-1 down in the third round against Mardy Fish of the US. 
All in all, come tomorrow, Agassi will be the overwhelming favourite to reach 
his fourth Australian Open final.
 