
Whatever the outcome of Greg Rusedski's tribunal next month, there is no doubt 
that men's tennis has been greatly damaged by the constant talk of drugs and 
drug taking during the past seven months, and the past few days in particular. 
Suddenly the sport has found itself bracketed with athletics and cycling, and 
the pain is acute.

The players are frequently indignant, and officials of the ITF, the world 
governing body, are increasingly concerned about the way the ATP, the men's 
authority, is handling what Rusedski described as the sport's biggest scandal.

As yet nobody has been able to explain fully what the World Anti-Doping Agency 
director general David Howman has described as "the rash of nandrolone 
positives, or near positives" - a total of 47, of which eight, including 
Rusedski's, have been illegal. And this uncertainty is what is causing the most 
damage.

"What I've seen over the last number of weeks is that we have a real concern 
that leaves us only drinking water or certain bottled products [as safe] but 
yet wake up to the integrity of our sport being questioned. And that's the 
shame in it," saidAndre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi>
, the reigning champion who yesterday defeated the 18-year-old Czech qualifier 
Tomas Berdych 6-0, 6-2, 6-4 for his 23rd consecutive victory on the hard courts 
here.

"A number of days ago I had some sort of irritation on the back of my right 
hand, leaving me with some swelling. I needed to put on some sort of lotion, 
but in order for me to put on a basic irritant cream I had to fill out three 
pages of forms and get them faxed to confirm I was OK to put the cream on," 
Agassi went on. "That's how we live, yet we wake up to headlines suggesting 
that our sport is lacking in its ability to deal with the potential of drug 
cheats."

The brutal truth is that the ATP, from the failed $1.2bn business deal with 
the sports marketing firm ISL through to the admission that its own trainers 
may have drugged its players, has been demonstrably incompetent, and why its 
chief executive Mark Miles remains in his job is a mystery.

The current restrictions on supplements and drinks have clearly come as an 
unwelcome surprise to many of the players. "It's definitely a burden to bear. 
It's not easy to do what we do, especially with these sorts of strict 
regulations, but that's what we have to do," said Agassi. Yet, at least outside 
the United States, such restrictions have long been a way of life for most 
sports.

Before last May, when new rules were imposed because of the nandrolone 
positive tests, there was a huge amount of laxity concerning supplements on the 
men's circuit. Some of those holes have been plugged, and awareness levels 
raised. But until Wada completes its overview, and Rusedski's tribunal hearing 
is completed, the suspicion and speculation will continue.

An ATP spokeswoman yesterday played down suggestions that the British No2's 
fate might be influenced by the makeup and procedure of his tribunal on 
February 9. It was put to the ATP that Rusedski's hearing might be conducted 
via a telephone conference call between the parties, and that this implied he 
might be cleared because it was the method used last year when six other 
players were exonerated.

But the spokeswoman said that tribunals were not all conducted over the phone, 
and that it was also common practice to have a series of conference calls 
before a hearing.

Meanwhile, Bohdan Ulihrach has called for the entire testing system to be 
scrapped. The Czech, who was banned for two years and then cleared, has offered 
his help to Rusedski and could be called as a witness by conference call. He is 
playing in Milan when the hearing takes place in Montreal.

After losing to Andy Roddick yesterday, Ulihrach said the circumstances that 
led to his positive test made it impossible for the current screening programme 
to be trusted.

Agassi next plays Sweden's Thomas Enqvist, the 1999 runner-up, who is one of 
only three current players to have a winning record against the American, the 
other two being Lleyton Hewitt and Karol Kucera of Slovakia. Enqvist, who 
struggled badly in 2003, almost dropping out of the year-end top 100, defeated 
Slovakia's Karol Beck 7-5, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.

Roddick, the top seed, eased past Ulihrach in straight sets to set up an 
all-American third-round tie tomorrow against Taylor Dent, who won over five 
sets against Argentina's Juan Ignacio Chela.
 