
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Marvel's Agents Of SHIELD. 
Don't read on if you haven't seen episode three

Click here to read Graeme's episode two blogpost  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/04/agents-shield-recap-episode-two-0-8-4>

How do you top a post-credits cameo from Samuel L Jackson? How about a guest 
appearance byJohn Lennon? <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q57JzwAMxHI> Or at 
least Ian Hart, who was memorably chippy as Mr Imagine way back in 1994's
Backbeat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrLGwxh47pM> (and, more recently, in 
Sky Arts' alternate-universe Lennon biopic Snodgrass). Hart brought his 
distinctive ears and best Canadian accent to the part of Doctor Franklin Hall, 
a physicist and all-round brainiac deemed so valuable he was under SHIELD 
protection 24/7. Right up until he wasn't.

In an effective opening sequence <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lncRSnc6AQ8>, 
a SHIELD convoy transporting "the asset" was attacked, apparently by invisible 
monsters powerful enough to bat away jeeps like Matchbox toys and levitate an 
18-wheeler truck. The kidnapping was coordinated by mining mogul Ian Quinn, an 
old Cambridge pal of Hall's who was so sick of international laws impeding his 
rapacious progress that he'd relocated his entire multinational business to 
Malta – apparently one of the few places on Earth where SHIELD can't just barge 
in and take charge.

Quinn had freed his fellow alumni to help him monetise gravitonium, a 
ridiculously powerful and volatile sci-fi substance capable of putting a judo 
throw on gravity itself. Tiny globs of it had flipped SHIELD trucks into the 
stratosphere; now Quinn wanted Hall to finesse a wheelbarrow-sized dollop of 
the stuff, mounted in what looked like an old Stargate. Hall appeared to be 
into it, and they toasted their plan with presumably expensive but unlabelled 
whisky.

Meanwhile, on the Bus – all patched up since last week – hacktivist Skye was 
complaining about her gruellingagent training with Ward 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PDA6-7joiZc>, although she managed to wheedle 
some family history out of SHIELD's most taciturn specialist: apparently Ward 
learned to fight while protecting his younger brother from their bullying older 
sibling. Then labcoat double-act Fitz and Simmonds pinpointed the location of 
the missing Dr Hall, the Bus was diverted to Malta, andAgents of SHIELD went 
full Alias <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85qnnHEQqDM>.

Where Sydney Bristow would usually don a wig or ridiculous costume to 
infiltrate a lavish party at a mansion, Skye simply had a Q-branch compact, an 
earpiece and an objective: find some decent wi-fi so Fitz could shut off the 
ridiculous forcefield protecting a nearby beach. That would allow the two-man 
extraction team of Ward and Agent Coulson to swoop in and save Dr Hall. After 
catching the eye of Quinn at his shareholders party, Skye made like she was 
ready to defect, although almost everything she says sounds so sarcastic that 
even billionaire Quinn looked confused as to her actual motives.

Gunplay, fistfights, heavy-set henchmen, sexy double-crosses and an attractive 
young actress running around in an eye-catching party dress – this was pure spy 
escapism, even if half the team (Fitz, Simmonds and a fidgety Agent May) were 
stuck in a control room. But there was someone playing an even deeper game: Dr 
Hall, who had deliberately leaked his own convoy route to get close to Quinn. 
Hall was committed to destroying the gravitonium and was willing to sacrifice 
himself and everyone else in the process.

Agent Coulson – who, amusingly, Hall called "Mr Coulson" throughout – 
attempted to talk the scientist round, even as gravity fluctuations pinballed 
them round the underground lab. With the gravitonium just about to blow, 
Coulson needed an organic catalyst to neutralise it. He leveraged the only one 
to hand, shooting through a window and allowing Hall to fall into the writhing 
blob. Gravity-based disaster averted. But at what cost?

If Agents of SHIELD <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>
 hasn't been levitating your boat so far, this breezy episode probably didn't 
do that much to change your mind. If you're not in the mood, the endless 
quipping can seem exhausting, but at least there was some incremental character 
development. The antagonistic relationship between Skye and Ward veered a 
little more toward mutual respect, while after fuming on the sidelines during 
the Maltese wallopin', Agent Melinda May has now returned to full field duty.

But wait! A post-credits sting showed a humanoid hand flailing out from the 
gravitonium blob, suggesting that the Agents of SHIELD may have inadvertently 
created their first supervillain nemesis. The fact that Ian Hart has signed up 
for multiple episodes probably confirms it. Imagine all the people ... cowering 
before the might ... of GRAVITON!!

Notes and observations

• No shortage of science wibble in this episode. As well as gravitonium, the 
element that upends the laws of physics and allows for dancing and/or 
fistfights on the ceiling, there was also talk of a "neodinium laser grid" – a 
forcefield that looked slightly out of place on a Maltese beach.

• We got a glimpse inside Agent Coulson's wardrobe. Guy has a lot of suits.

• Despite taking care of business in the field, Coulson repeatedly struggled 
with a long-standing action hero flourish: popping the chambered bullet out of 
a handgun to make it safe. "I'm a little rusty," he admitted, twice, which is 
the equivalent of pouring gasoline on the flickering fan theories that yep, he 
really did die in Avengers Assemble and this incarnation is, in fact, aLife 
Model Decoy. <http://marvel.wikia.com/Life-Model_Decoy> (LMDs are uncanny robot 
replicas pioneered by SHIELD in the comics.)

• These extra post-credits scenes? According to writer/producer Jeffrey Bell, 
they're going to be a regular thing. "Sometimes it'll be funny, sometimes it'll 
be a mythology thing, sometimes it'll be self-contained," he said inan 
interview with Comic Book Resources <http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=>.

 Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

• "If we had a small monkey he could slip through the sensors and disable the 
fence power source with his adorable little hands." Fitz brainstorms possible 
infiltration techniques.

• "You forget, I saw plenty of action with the Avengers."

• "Then you died." Agent May questions Agent Coulson's decision to return to 
frontline duty.

• "They could be torturing him ... or worse, making him do strength training." 
(Skye apparently isn't enjoying SHIELD agent boot camp.

• "Kid's got balls."

• "Thanks ... but yuck." A random henchmen tries to compliment Skye's combat 
skills.

 The SHIELD music appreciation society

No literary shoutouts this week, but Drive All Night Til Dawn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEMupaTG0zg> by Aussie outlaws Wagons 
soundtracked the opening action sequence. Feel free to add it to your "Truck 
Attacked By Poltergeists" mood-setting playlist.

Comics callbacks

Doctor Franklin Hall first appeared in Avengers 158 in 1977, a scientist who 
was riddled with gravitonium during a lab accident. Taking on the identity of 
levitating bad 'un Graviton, he fought the Avengers multiple times, although in 
current continuity he's attempting to go straight. His appearance in Agents of 
SHIELD is not the first time Dr Hall has been reformatted for the small screen. 
In short-lived animated series Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, Graviton was 
the first major villain the team fought.

Uh, has anyone mentioned Hawkeye yet?

We're three episodes in and there have been references to Iron Man, Thor, the 
Hulk, Black Widow and even Agent Coulson's Captain Americatrading cards 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=esUv2KQF3u8> to hammer home the fact that 
Agents of SHIELD exists alongside the Marvel movie universe. As yet, no 
reference has been made to the sixth Avenger: Clint Barton, aka Hawkeye. Maybe 
next week?

Meanwhile, in the real world ...

Ratings for episode two in the UK were down by around 800,000 viewers from the 
premiere, with 2.3m tuning in last Friday night. Respectable rather than 
barnstorming.

Marvel announced a series of Agents of SHIELD alternative covers for their 
comics line in November 
<http://splashpage.mtv.com/2013/10/07/marvels-agents-of-s-h-i-e-l-d-variant-covers/>
. There's also an Agents of SHIELD panel at New York Comic Con this weekend, 
and the producers have brought along Coulson's classic Corvette Lola so fans 
can ... not touch her, I guess?

Also this week, US pop culture site Vulture argued Marvel's screen universe 
has a diversity problem 
<http://www.vulture.com/2013/10/marvel-diversity-problem-avengers-shield-comics.html>
, making some interesting points in the process.

What did you think of Agents of Shield episode three? Did you enjoy the 
espionage or are you still holding out for more superheroes? Let us know below.
 