
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people watching Agents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen episode 10

Click here to read Graeme's episode nine blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/29/agents-of-shield-recap-series-one-episode-nine>

As Agents of SHIELD episode titles go, The Bridge is not without metaphorical 
potential. Could this instalment – the first of a cliffhanging two-parter to be 
resolved in 2014 – be a pontoon between the show's initial, uncertain baby 
steps and its final, striding form? Or could it be another fan-friendly nod to 
the realm of Asgard – Thor and Heimdall hang out on some sort ofRainbow Bridge 
<http://marvel.com/universe/Rainbow_Bridge>, right? Or was it yet another 
definitive-article SHIELD facility to add to The Index alongside The Slingshot, 
The Hub, The Cooler and The Tuckshop (one of these is made up)?

As it turned out, The Bridge was just a bridge – the night-time location for 
the sort of rote hostage handover you've seen in a million movies and TV shows. 
Often, the goodies figure out a way to get the upper hand through luck or 
guile. Sadly for newbie SHIELD powerhouse Mike Peterson (returning guest star J 
August Richards), this wasn't one of those times. In fact, like any cliffhanger 
worth a damn, The Bridge left our SHIELD fringe team in a bad place: Agent 
Coulson in the clutches of many-legs-make-light-work terror cell Centipede, 
Mike P seemingly barbecued, Agent Ward perforated by machine-gun fire and the 
rest of the team looking on like terrified children. (Except Agent May, 
impassive as ever.)

The Bridge pulled together dangling plot threads from a clutch of preceding 
episodes: bringing backMike (and his son Ace) from the pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/agents-of-shield-recap-season-one-episode-one-pilot>
, reintroducing fashion-forward test subject recruiter Raina (Ruth Negga) from
The Girl in the Flower Dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/25/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-five>
 and suggesting that the head-wrecking cybernetic implants fromEye-Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/18/agents-of-shield-series-one-episode-four>
 were all part of the same overarching conspiracy. Centipede, of course, were 
the guys who had Magimixed gamma radiation, Captain America hero juice and Tony 
Stark's sizzling Extremis technology to create a volatile orange energy drink 
that – injected intravenously through a cool-looking forearm body mod – would 
create super-strong soldiers who could hopefully fight for more than ten 
minutes without exploding.

Progress seemed to have been made. A trio of super-tweaked Centipede dudes 
busted military strategist and stickler for manners Edison Po (Cullen Douglas) 
out of prison. I recentlycomplained that Agents of SHIELD doesn't do 
straight-up action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/06/arrow-vs-agents-of-shield-comic-superhero-tv>
 very well but this sequence was crisply staged. (Later on, during a fight 
where shipping containers were chucked around like Duplo bricks, we also got to 
see Agent May kick someone in the face – twice – so I take it all back.) 
Coulson's team were assigned to track down Po, who apparently had a hotline to 
someone important called "The Clairvoyant", and a now-stabilised Mike Peterson 
hopped onto the Bus, which mixed up the team dynamic a little, especially as 
Simmons was clearly crushing on him hard. Meanwhile, Agents May and Ward 
struggled to keep their extracurricular activities out of the workplace and 
Skye split her time between trying to identify the female SHIELD agent who 
dropped her off at an orphanage and braiding her hair, Hunger Games-style.

There were implied lessons about second chances and the importance of family, 
and when Centipede's three stooges somehow failed to beat Coulson's squad in 
combat, they took a sneakier route: kidnapping young Ace Peterson and demanding 
an exchange. We were supposed to think they wanted Mike, the better to 
understand how his body had stabilised the orange energy drink. But it was all 
a bluff: the real target was Coulson, who Centipede somehow knew had come back 
from the dead. Remove Coulson, and presumably Ward, from the teamsheet and the 
little SHIELD band look to be in real trouble.

Since this was a mid-season finale, it seems a good time to mark up Agents of 
SHIELD's report card. There have been naysayers from the start, people who 
seemingly can't stand UK tech spods Fitz and Simmons, those who find the show 
too vanilla, too bland, too isolated from the superheroes of the Marvel movies 
to be in any way satisfying. ButAgents of SHIELD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield> also has a 
dedicated, vocal fanbase who are rabid in their enthusiasm for the series, who 
adore the good looking cast and seem to enjoy nothing more than recasting the 
characters in various romantic permutations. The negative nellies and the 
starry-eyed cheerleaders just about cancel each other out.

It does leave the show a little becalmed. Can it ever really be any more than 
a vaguely espionage-themed caper round the outer reaches of the Marvel movie 
universe? The cast – built around the bedrock of Clark Gregg – is beginning to 
gel into a proper ensemble pulling in the same direction, but as long as 
Coulson's team remain under the umbrella of SHIELD, it might still feel more 
like a brand extension than its own freestanding entity. There have been 
ingenious moments of subverted narrative expectation, followed rapidly by 
inexcusably honking dialogue. But I'll be sticking with it. There are (at 
least) another 12 episodes to refine, rejig or even reboot. Anything can happen 
in the Marvel universe. Even on the fringes.

Notes and observations

• There was a lot of screentime for Lola, Coulson's Jolly Rancher-red Corvette 
that threatened to become the breakout fan-favourite character in the early 
days of the series. Being behind the wheel seems to put Coulson into a romantic 
mood; he opened up to Ward about his ex-girlfriend in the Portland 
Philharmonic. "To see a beautiful woman play the cello? It's something else. 
She laughed at my jokes too, which was a very nice bonus."

• Simmons's funnel-neck houndstooth sweater: practical yet sexy.

• I love that the Bus has a fully stocked bar, although there was a distinct 
lack of SHIELD-branded bottled water in this episode.

• Perhaps in part two, Po will reunite with the Centipede high council of 
Tinky Winky, Dipsy and Laa-Laa. It's not entirely out of the question: with a 
viewscreen in his chest, Captain America baddieArnim Zola 
<http://marvel.com/universe/Zola,_Arnim> was arguably the original Teletubby.

• It shouldn't really be notable, but The Bridge was written by Shalisha 
Francis and directed by Holly Dale, both female, and both veterans of Castle, 
another ABC show.

Biff! Bang! Quip-ow!

"Po doesn't look crazy ... I'm kidding, the guy's a walking mugshot." Skye: 
Agent Of SNARK.

"So these guys have super soldiers, an expert military strategist and a 
clairvoyant who can see the future. Anyone else thinking of switching teams?" 
Another Skye pep talk.

"Having powers is cheating. But the suit's pretty cool." Ward sizes up Mike's 
new SHIELD costume/outfit.

"We've been playing whack-a-mole with these guys since Ward first picked me 
out of my van. Shouldn't Big Shield be sending in backup?" Even Skye is calling 
it "Big Shield" now.

The SHIELD movie club

There was an early shout-out to Truffaut. The director once said "in love, 
women are professionals, men are amateurs", which pretty much sums up the Agent 
May/Agent Ward relationship.

Comics callbacks

"Did I beat Captain America's time?" asked Mike with adorable optimism, after 
pushing a bulldozer the length of a football field. (A bulldozer that, equally 
adorably, even had a little SHIELD insignia on it.) We also saw his son Ace 
playing with the "Heroes of New York" action figures last glimpsed in the 
pilot. For the most part, though, this episode was light on nods to the comics 
– filling out the show's own mythology seemed to be the focus.

Meanwhile, in the real world ...

The Agents of SHIELD cast took to Twitter 
<http://shieldtv.net/recap-cast-live-tweet-the-bridge> during the US broadcast 
of The Bridge, and while you could argue it was an orchestrated attempt to 
bolster live ratings, it does seem like Clark Gregg, Chloe Bennet and the rest 
of the gang really like each other. Or at least like teasing each other. (There 
was a lot of chat about Skye's braided hair.)

The next episode of Agents Of SHIELD goes out 7 January in the US; presumably 
Channel 4 will resume screening the series on 10 January, unless they've been 
infiltrated by Centipede.Here's a tantalising trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqNXrYvozXw>. 

What did you think of Agents of SHIELD episode 10? Will you be sticking with 
the show in 2014? Let us know below
 