
Idaho, the Aidan O’Brien-trained hot favourite for the St Leger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-leger-stakes> at Doncaster on Saturday, 
is likely to be joined in the race by two or even three stablemates. “We would 
definitely run three or four,” O’Brien said. “At the moment that’s what I’m 
thinking of.”

Placed in the Derby at Epsom and the Irish equivalent, Idaho was a comfortable 
winner of the Great Voltigeur Stakes at York last time out and is odds-on with 
Ladbrokes, the race sponsors, for victory in the season’s final Classic.

O’Brien can also call on the Royal Ascot and Curragh Cup winner, Sword Fighter,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/aidan-o-brien-glorious-goodwood-cup-sword-fighter-horse-racing>
 Housesofparliament, Kellstorm, The Major General, Triplicate and Unicorn.

“It’s gone well with Idaho and everything has been smooth since York. He is a 
clean horse and he has come out the race great,” the trainer reported. “We were 
happy with him going there. We were hoping he would have a nice race and come 
forward and we’ve been happy with him since.

“You can never be confident [getting the trip] but we always thought he would.

“Housesofparliament stays well and is a very straightforward horse. He ran a 
very nice race in the Voltigeur and won well at Newmarket. He would be one of 
our more likely runners along with Sword Fighter, Triplicate and Unicorn.”

A total of 15 were left in at on Monday’s five-day entry stage but Jim 
Bolger’s Twilight Payment is not expected to run.

John Gosden has already ruled out the Dante Stakes winner, Wings Of Desire, 
but still has a solid contender in Muntahaa, owned by Sheikh Hamdan al-Maktoum 
and second best in the ante-post market.

The trainer said: “I didn’t really want to take Idaho on in the Voltigeur. As 
trainers and jockeys know, races at York can start early on and you don’t get 
an easy race there.

“We went to Chester and, when you send young horses to Chester, they learn a 
lot. He has learnt a lot from Chester and he will get the trip. I just don’t 
know if he will get it quick enough. He is a big old Linamix stayer – he 
doesn’t look like a Dansili at all.”

Ed Dunlop’s Red Verdon has run a series of good races at the highest level 
this season, most recently when second in the Grand Prix de Paris. However, 
Dunlop, speaking at a Leger lunch in London, warned that his preparation has 
been far from straightforward. “It has been touch and go,” the trainer said.

“He has had one or two health issues, like most of Newmarket, but we are going 
there at the moment. It has not been an ideal preparation but he is a horse 
that has very much improved throughout the season. Without the hiccup we would 
have been very confident about running a huge race.”

Ventura Storm, who is trained by Richard Hannon, has been a revelation since 
stepped up in trip and was an easy winner of a Group Three in France last time 
out.

Laura Mongan’s Harbour Law, second in the Queen’s Vase at Ascot, will be a 
first Classic runner for his trainer. Mick Channon has meanwhile booked Graham 
Lee for Harrison. Andrew Balding’s Ormito and Pat Shanahan’s The Tartan Spartan 
complete the list. Along with Harry Dunlop’s Robin Of Navan, the David 
Simcock-trained Algometer was a notable absentee from the entry list.

Horse racing tips: Tuesday 6 September
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/horse-racing-tips-tuesday> 
David Williams, of Ladbrokes, said: “In betting terms the entire race is 
framed around Idaho and Ballydoyle running plans.

“Punters appear convinced the Great Voltigeur was undoubtedly the stand-out 
performance in the buildup to the final Classic. Since his York win, support 
for Idaho has been unrelenting and he has now gone odds-on.”

Jim Crowley strengthened his grip on the jockeys’ championship by riding a 
double at Brighton on Monday and extending his lead over Silvestre de Sousa to 
five.

Two winners at Kempton on Saturday and a winner at York on Sunday meant it was 
a good weekend for Crowley in search of his first title but it could still be 
dangerous to rule out a late charge by De Sousa, the reigning champion.

Early last week the Brazilian rode a four-timer at Epsom, so it remains a race 
likely to go right down to the wire.

Crowley’s title charge has been helped in no small part by his link-up with 
Hugo Palmer and it was the Newmarket trainer who provided his first winner as 
Colibri landed Brighton’s second race.

Fancied for stronger races at Newbury and Goodwood, Colibri looked in a 
different league down in class and bounded clear to a 12-length win from Sweet 
Zain.

When Palmer and Crowley team up they are operating at a strike rate of more 
than 30%. Another partnership worth noting is that with Lucy Wadham. She 
provided him with his 90th winner of the season when Buteo Bai saw off the De 
Sousa-ridden 2-1 favourite Masterson in the fourth contest on the card.PA
 