
The Barclays, by their own declaration, are 'no revolutionaries', and are 
unlikely to rush into big changes at the Telegraph. And they do not complete 
the deal until the end of next month, a deadline that may be delayed by Lord 
Black's continuing action in the US courts.

But there are some pressing issues the papers and their new owners have to 
face. This week Jeremy Deedes, the acting chief executive, will meet his new 
chairman-to-be,Aidan Barclay <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>, 
along with other senior news and advertising executives.

Some factors are not serious obstacles, such as the probable - but very 
perfunctory - examination of the acquisition by the competition authorities.

Others are outside their control, such as Black's legal threats. The private 
Barclay view is that he is seeking leverage over the board of Hollinger 
International, which has claimed $1.25 billion in damages from him, and will do 
a deal.

But there are some issues the new owners will have to address with urgency: 

· A new chief executive? Deedes wants to retire (again), though probably 
retaining some connection with the paper. A new chief executive, chosen by and 
answerable to the Barclays, and with newspaper as well as commercial 
experience, is a high priority.

· Tabloid or not tabloid? The Barclays are thought to want to retain the 
broadsheet format, but will look at new sizes and designs for the paper.

· The Westferry print contract? Under the terms of the deal with Richard 
Desmond, the Express has the right to take full control of the print business 
board. But again the Barclays - and Desmond - believe a deal can be done.

· The editor? Martin Newland, at the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, has already had one paper 
sold from beneath him in Canada. But the Barclays believe he has done a good 
job in difficult circumstances, and are unlikely to remove him in the short 
term.

· Executives and senior journalists? The Barclays believe there is room for 
cost-cutting at this level.
 