
Aidan O’Brien is having the sort of week that makes champion trainers, thanks 
to the Group One wins notched by Highland Reel and The Gurkha, not forgetting 
War Decree’s success in the Group Two Vintage Stakes on Tuesday. The Irishman 
has already won more prize money in Britain this year than in any previous 
calendar year and might improve his position again withSword Fighter (3.10) in 
Thursday’s Goodwood Cup.

The Gurkha beats Galileo Gold in Sussex Stakes at Glorious Goodwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/the-gurkha-galileo-gold-sussex-stakes-glorious-goodwood-horse-racing>
The first thing that needs to be admitted at this point is that Sword Fighter 
is a three-year-old in a race that is nearly always won by an older horse. Not 
since Lucky Moon in 1990 has a horse of his age come home in front, though John 
Dunlop and Willie Carson were achieving a double of sorts that day, having also 
won with the three-year-old Sergeyevich in 1987. But only a handful of 
three-year-olds have tried their luck in the past decade or so and Veracity 
might be called the moral winner in 2007, having been beaten half a length 
under 1lb overweight. He had previously run second in the Queen’s Vase at Royal 
Ascot, a race which Sword Fighter won last month.

Aidan O’Brien has won the Queen’s Vase four times in the past seven years, 
indicative of the extraordinary quantity of young staying talent available to 
him at his Ballydoyle stable. When he pitches a youngster into a race like 
this, we may be reasonably hopeful it will not be out of its depth.

My feeling is that the conditions of British races give three-year-olds an 
advantage against their elders at this time of year, provided they are 
sufficiently robust to show their best form. Sword Fighter will carry 17lb less 
than all his rivals here and could make it count. Since his Ascot success, 
Sword Fighter has followed up by landing the Curragh Cup, making all the 
running, just as he did in the Queen’s Vase. Those tactics could put him in 
control of this race and a steady early pace will make life difficult for most 
of his rivals, who are unlikely to produce much of a turn of foot on this fast 
surface.

Big Orange, another front-runner, will be a formidable opponent, having won 
this last year, when, as is also true this time, he warmed up by landing 
Newmarket’s Princess Of Wales’s Stakes. But the market sees his chance, whereas 
7-1 about Sword Fighter looks big.

2.00 Goodwood Fire Fighting and Yalta have given Mark Johnston a couple of 
winners already at this meeting.Ode To Evening could be the third. Fifth in the 
Coventry last summer, this chestnut seems to have gone off the boil since then 
but found his feet once more at Newmarket’s July meeting, winning a valuable 
handicap on his first try at this 10-furlong trip. The way he kept finding that 
day suggests there may be more to come and a 6lb rise doesn’t even take him 
back to his peak rating. His draw isn’t too bad for a prominent racer.

2.35 Goodwood Blue Point was undeniably impressive in victory at Doncaster a 
fortnight ago but that was only a novice contest which he was fully entitled to 
win, having been sent off at 30-100. It appears he will be odds-on again here 
but this Richmond Stakes will take a lot more winning and, at the available 
odds, it may be more sensible to side with the relatively experiencedMehmas. 
From the Hannon stable that has won this five times since 2008, he was beaten 
only by the top-class Caravaggio in the Coventry and has since won Newmarket’s 
July Stakes, beating Intelligence Cross, who lines up again here.

3.45 Goodwood Ralph Beckett took this last year with Simple Verse, who was on 
her way to St Leger success, and could follow up with Pamona. Third in the 
Ribblesdale last year,Pamona seemed to have lost her way but a step up in trip 
and a switch of stables seemed to turn things around for her, judging by the 
way she powered home in front in a Listed contest at York last month. Few of 
these rivals have given so much cause for optimism lately, though California 
improved to score at Ascot last time and is feared, even though jockey bookings 
suggest she is the less fancied of John Gosden’s pair.
 