
The man in charge of AIG's doomed Financial Products division in London has 
defiantly denied taking reckless risks on hefty derivatives contracts that were 
widely blamed for pushing the huge US insurer to the brink of bankruptcy.

Joseph Cassano, who ran AIG's financial products unit between 2002 and 2008, 
will tell the US Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission today that his division, 
widely derided as a hedge fund attached to a stable insurance company, took 
"prudent" and "appropriate" decisions but was undermined, in part, by an 
intervention from external auditors.

However, one of his superiors, AIG's former chief risk officer Robert Lewis, 
will offer a bleaker picture to the commission, admitting thatAIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> was "wrong about how bad things 
could get". In written evidence to the commission, Lewis says: "What ended up 
happening was so extreme that it was beyond anything we had planned for."

Largely working out of their Mayfair office, Cassano and his team wrote vast 
amounts of credit default swaps insuring financial institutions against default 
by counterparties to the tune of nearly $300bn. These blew up when the credit 
crunch began to bite, and many top officials, including the Federal Reserve's 
chairman, Ben Bernanke, have blamed the division for AIG's near collapse in 
2008.

In written evidence to the commission today, Cassano defends a now-notorious 
remark during a conference call in August 2007 when he said he did not expect 
any "realised economic losses" on the portfolio. Cassano insists he meant 
"realised" losses, rather than "unrealised accounting losses", adding: "I meant 
exactly what I said in August 2007."

Describing it as a "distinct honour" to manage "such a diverse business with 
so many talented employees", Cassano accepts no mistakes in his oversight of 
the division. He says every deal was subject to a "rigorous evaluation process".

Referring to one block of deals, named Maiden Lane 3, Cassano blames 
government intervention for losses: "I think there would have been few, if any, 
realised losses on the CDS contracts if they had not been unwound in the 
bailout."

When AIG's credit rating was downgraded in 2008, top banks such as Goldman 
Sachs, Deutsche Bank and Credit Suisse made $35bn in collateral calls related 
to their swaps with Cassano's division – an outflow of cash that forced the 
insurer to seek government aid. Cassano maintains that these calls could have 
been dealt with through a dispute resolution process that he refers to as a 
"dealer poll".

"During my tenure, no counterparty declared us in breach or threatened 
litigation, which shows our strategy was effective," says Cassano, who learned 
in April that he will face no criminal charges related to AIG's meltdown. "I 
believe this strategy was appropriate and in the best interests of the company 
and its shareholders."

He recounts that in February 2008, AIG's auditors disallowed a practice known 
as "negative basis adjustment" that allowed AIG to limit its reported losses – 
a decision that sparked market concerns about the financial products division's 
activities. Cassano defends the practice: "We believed then, and I still 
believe now, that it was a wholly appropriate adjustment."

Of the auditors' move, he says: "I disagreed with that decision, as did 
several others at AIG. It was, however, the auditors' final decision and we had 
to abide by it."

The lack of any mea culpa is likely to go down poorly with the US commission, 
which is chaired by Californian Democrat Phil Angelides. The commission has 
grilled a host of top Wall Street figures, including, recently, Bear Stearns's 
former boss Jimmy Cayne, and it has roasted Goldman Sachs for failing to 
co-operate adequately with subpoenas for information on its credit crunch 
dealings.
 