
Scotland Yard's former anti-terror chief Andy Hayman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/andy-hayman> has told how he and his senior 
officers were so sure they were on top of the liquid bomb plot investigation 
after months of gathering evidence during 2006, that he was on holiday at La 
Manga in Spain when the arrest of a probable British-born terror organiser in 
Pakistan forced UK authorities into moving against the London group.

However Hayman believed American unease over the threat the plot posed to US 
citizens and cities promptedPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> security forces to seize Rashid 
Rauf, suspected of being a key contact between al-Qaida and terror cells.

That arrest could have scared the plotters into accelerating their planned 
attack, meaning British police were forced into making their own arrests in 
moves that would normally have required days of planning and briefing.

Hayman, then assistant commissioner for specialist operations with the 
Metropolitan police, revealed, in an article intoday's Times 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/crime/article6825262.ece>: "At the 
very highest level, the Americans wanted to be reassured that this was not 
going to slip through our hands. I was briefing the home secretary, who was 
briefing Tony Blair, who was briefing George Bush …"

When news of Rauf's arrest came through, he said, "we believed the Americans 
had demanded the arrest and we were angry we had not been informed".

Hayman, who had been sitting down to a bottle of wine and dinner when he was 
alerted, quickly returned to London before intensive security at airports 
caused things to go "crazy". He raced from Gatwick airport, changing from 
T-shirt and shorts into a suit on a blue-light run, as officers "from a 
standing start" located and arrested suspects. "Two of the ringleaders were 
picked up as they met to discuss plans and throughout the night and the 
following morning officers were bursting through doors in east London and High 
Wycombe ...

"We were concerned to know why Pakistan had jumped the gun. Fearful for the 
safety of American lives, the US authorities had been getting edgy, seeking 
reassurance that this was not going to slip through our hands. We moved from 
having congenial conversations to eyeball-to-eyeball confrontations.

"We thought we had managed to persuade them to hold back so we could develop 
new opportunities and get more evidence to present to the courts. But I was 
never convinced that they were content with that position. In the end, I 
strongly suspect that they lost their nerve and had a hand in triggering the 
arrest. The arrest hampered our evidence-gathering and placed us in Britain 
under intolerable pressure."

Hayman revealed that at a 5am meeting of Cobra, the government's emergency 
committee, John Reid, the then home secretary, was "bizarrely" wearing 
sunglasses because of an eye infection. "It was also somewhat unnerving — you 
never quite knew whether or not you were under his inquisitive glare.

"The atmosphere was tense. The politicians' stress levels were rising as they 
saw television news pictures of irate holidaymakers waiting for delayed and 
cancelled flights."

Hayman said there was "huge pressure" on investigating teams, given the "vast 
scale" of the evidence. "We were also creeping closer to the detention limit, 
which had just been raised from 14 to 28 days. But the evidence came, charges 
followed and the process of presenting evidence to the courts had begun."
 