
The Indian-American writer Akhil Sharma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/akhil-sharma> has been named winner of the 
second Folio prize for fiction for a novel which took him 13 long and painful 
years to complete, charting one emigrant family’s heartwrenching search for the 
American dream.

Writing it, he admitted after receiving the £40,000 prize, was a frustrating, 
difficult challenge, often “like chewing stones” with around nine wasted years 
when it did not go well. “I’m glad the book exists, I just wish I hadn’t been 
the guy who wrote it,” he said.

Sharma won the prize for his second novel, Family Life, an autobiographical 
work which tells the story of a young boy Ajay and his family who emigrate from 
Delhi to New York in search of a better life. All is turned upside down when 
Ajay’s older brother has a dreadful swimming pool accident and needs 
round-the-clock care from then on.

Sharma, a former investment banker, said he was professionally happy the book 
existed and that people were reading the story of care givers but he admitted 
he thought about giving up on a regular basis. He stuck with it: “I couldn’t 
bear the idea of having spent all those years and then nothing good having come 
out of it.

“In the end I feel the book itself is good, it does certain things that are 
artistically impressive so I feel good about that.”

His feelings on winning were mixed and the first emotion he felt was shame 
because compared to his late brother “I have received too much luck.”

Parts of the writing process were fun, he said, but much of it was not. “I’m 
43. I started writing this when I was 30 so I spent my thirties writing this 
thing ... I really feel like I shattered my youth.”

William Fiennes, who chaired the judges, praised the novel, currently a 
bestseller in the US, as “lucid, compassionate, quietly funny”.

He added: “Family Life is a masterful novel of distilled complexity: about 
catastrophe and survival; attachment and independence; the tension between 
selfishness and responsibility.

“We loved its deceptive simplicity and rare warmth ... This is a work of art 
that expands with each re-reading and a novel that will endure.”

Folio prize shortlist shows literary novel far from dead, says judge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/09/folio-prize-shortlist-literary-novel-not-dead-william-fiennes>
It was chosen from a shortlist of eight books which included what was the 
bookmakers’ favourite for the prize, Ali Smith’s novel How To Be Both.

Andrew Kidd, the literary agent who co-founded the Folio prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/folio-prize>, said: “In this second year of 
the prize our five judges have again lived up to every expectation, selecting 
from a glorious shortlist a heartbreaking and funny novel whose astonishing 
power is achieved in constantly surprising ways.”

He said the novel was already a huge success in the US. “We are delighted that 
the Folio prize will now help it to find many more readers, both in the UK and 
around the world.”

Sharma was presented with the prize, which comes with a cheque for £40,000, at 
a ceremony in King’s Cross, London, on Monday.

The humorist David Sedaris has called the book “outstanding”. “Every page is 
alive and surprising, proof of his huge, unique talent.”

The prize, sponsored by the Folio Society, was created last year with the aim 
of celebrating the year’s best English-language fiction, regardless of form, 
genre and geography.


Its first winner was the American short story writer George Saunders for his 
collection Tenth of December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/10/george-saunders-tenth-of-december-first-winner-folio-prize>
.

The Folio was born out of frustration at perceived weaknesses of the Man 
Booker prize and anger at what was described as the “dumbed down” shortlist of 
2011. One particular complaint was that it continued to bar US writers, an 
issue subsequently addressed by opening up the Booker to all novelists writing 
in the English language.


In a crowded literary prize calendar the Folio has tried hard to show its 
distinctiveness. It is, for example, a prize decided by writers and critics 
only, drawn by lots from an academy of 234 people who are “immersed in the 
world of books”. Unusually, it also lists the books that did not make the 
shortlist by revealing the80 titles that were read by judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/15/folio-prize-2015-80-titles>.

The other shortlisted candidates were 10:04 by Ben Lerner, All My Puny Sorrows 
by Miriam Toews, Dept of Speculation by Jenny Offill, Dust by Adhiambo Owuor, 
Nora Webster by Colm Toibin, and Outline by Rachel Cusk.

The judging panel chaired by Fiennes consisted of Observer writer Rachel Cooke 
and writers Mohsin Hamid, AM Homes, and Deborah Levy.
 