
He has only just discovered he’s won the world’s richest award for a single 
novel, butAkhil Sharma <https://www.theguardian.com/books/akhil-sharma> already 
has a plan for some of his €100,000 (£78,000) winnings: a new pair of shoes.

Sharma’s Family Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/10/family-life-akhil-sharma-review-novel>
, a mostly autobiographical novel that tells of how a family moves from Delhi 
to New York, where the older brother has an accident that leaves him 
brain-damaged and in need of 24-hour care, was named winner of the 
International Dublin literary award on Thursday. Judges, who included the 
novelists Ian Sansom, Juan Pablo Villalobos and Carlo Gébler, said that 
“closing the book, having known this mix of light and dark, you are left with 
the sense that while reading, you were actually at the core of human experience 
and what it is to be alive. This is the highest form of achievement in 
literature. Few manage it. This novel does. Triumphantly. Luminously. Movingly.”

The India-born American writer describes the almost 13 years it took him to 
write Family Life as “a nightmare – like chewing stones, chewing gravel”, said 
it had taken a few days for his win to sink in.

“I’m much more aware of pain than I am receptive to joy. When I got the email 
telling me I had won, my first thought was ‘thank God, another disappointment 
avoided’. It hurts when you don’t get something, so I was just relieved to not 
have pain. Two or three days after that, I began to feel happy,” he said, 
speaking from Dublin.

“I don’t believe that a prize means it’s the best book. All a prize means is 
that it is the book which has won a prize, that it’s the one judges agreed on. 
But it’s a great honour – it’s a prize I’ve known about for decades, and I 
admire the books that have won.” These include novels by Nobel laureates Orhan 
Pamuk and Herta Müller, as well as British authors Jim Crace and Jon McGregor.


Sharma’s immediate intentions for his €100,000 cheque include grand and 
ordinary ambitions. “I used to weigh an enormous amount. When I was writing the 
novel, I began to feel I had no control over my life. The one thing I had 
control over was my body, and I began exercising like a fiend, running 17 miles 
every day. I lost so much weight that even my shoe size changed, so I will be 
buying some shoes,” he said.

“And I’d like to start a scholarship in India in my brother’s name, to help 
young women go to school. I would have done that anyway, without this prize, 
but it makes it easier.”

The Irish prize is unusual in that contenders, which must be published in 
English or English translation, are nominated by public libraries from around 
the world, with Family Life put forward by the India International Centre 
library in New Delhi and by Jacksonville public library in the US. It was one 
of 160 titles up for the prize, with nominations spanning 43 countries. The 
Jacksonville library called the novel “beautifully hypnotic”, with Sharma’s 
“plain style, its gaps and fissures and mighty sense of lack … both proof of 
the inability of words to render grief and a demonstration that they can do 
exactly that”.

“I don’t know whether it is a good book, but people are treating it like a 
good book, and I presume people are not stupid. So it must have merit to it,” 
said Sharma. He himself has not reread it since he completed it, despite the 
acclaim it has received;last year it also won the Folio prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/23/akhil-sharma-wins-folio-prize-fiction-family-life>
. “It would make me queasy,” he said. “My wife has not read the book either – 
she is scared of reading it and seeing how much pain I was in as a child.”

His publishers, he said, were very supportive over the time he took to 
complete the manuscript. “My British editor said to me at one point: ‘Send me 
what you have and we’ll work on it together, maybe you’ve got lost.’” Then he 
said we can make this thing work as it is, and suggested certain cuts. I saw 
what he meant – the book would work but it would be a very, very dark book. It 
would be a … book for a reader looking to endure pain. And I wanted the book to 
be full of life, full of light. But the fact he was willing to publish it gave 
me a lot of confidence, so I could keep going.”

There were still times, admitted Sharma, that “I didn’t think the book would 
end. The confidence comes from this belief that what you’re trying to do is 
tell some type of truth, so you have something you’re aiming for”.

As soon as he finished Family Life, he began writing something new, a short 
story. “I kept telling myself: ‘Akhil, it doesn’t have to be a good story, it 
just has to be like a story,’ and to some extent that was freeing, engaging 
with fiction as purely a form. I wrote that story and I was astonished as I 
wrote it to realise how much I had learned through writing a novel,” he said.

He is now working on a collection of short stories, and has promised his 
editors that it will be completed by the end of the year. “To the extent that 
writing is ever fun, it’s fun again,” he said.
 