
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> is not the 
first party leader to suffer the indignity of having a self-confessed joke 
candidate running against him. Nor the first to face a sophisticated 
attention-grabber like Al Murray, the Pub Landlord. Elderly Tories still flinch 
when they hear the revered name of their former prime minister, Sir Alec 
Douglas-Home, mentioned in the same breath as the polymath humorist, Willie 
Rushton.

And David Owen, youthful Labour foreign secretary turned leader of the 
breakaway “Gang of Four,” would be less than human if the name of the late 
David Sutch, better known as “Screaming Lord Sutch, 3rd Earl of Harrow,” did 
not still bring a pallor to his handsome features.

After years of mucking about as a fringe candidate in election campaigns – his 
original purpose was votes at 18, but they were granted in 1970 – Sutch became 
the presiding genius behind the Official Monster Raving Loony party (OMRLP), 
which was launched to torment mainstream politics at the Bermondsey byelection 
of 1983.

Sutch got only 97 votes – nine more than two rival communist candidates – but 
this was a campaign where every lost vote mattered: Labour’s candidate, the 
campaigner, Peter Tatchell, not then a national treasure, lost a safe seat to 
the Liberal Simon Hughes, who still holds it.

A cursory glance at Wikipedia’s global list of “frivolous political parties” 
confirms that the joker candidate is not confined to Britain. Sombre Canada has 
an Extreme Wrestling party and a Rhinoceros party (now defunct) which 
campaigned on “ a promise to keep none of our promises,” a manifesto similar to 
Ireland’s Don’t Give a Feck party – unlike Italy’s self-evident Party of Love 
or the Vinegar party of Japan. It is less obvious why Hungary’s Two-Tailed Dog 
party wants to build a mountain on the Great Hungarian Plain.

But Britain boasts more than most, including Citizens for Undead Rights and 
Equality (Cure) whose four candidates got just 317 votes between then in 2010, 
so their promise ( satirical in intention) to raise the statutory retirement 
age beyond death is unlikely to be enacted soon. Its zombie angle (voters 
treated like zombies – geddit?) attracted support from Capcom, makers of the 
Dead Rising 2 video game, but not much else.

It may yet follow the Teddy Bear Alliance party into oblivion, or it may 
bounce back like the Church of the Militant Elvis party whose leader Lord Biro 
(David Bishop) had anti-capitalist attitudes as well as a sense of fun. In a 
2008 byelection he came 17th with 44 votes.

Why do they do it? At £500 for a lost deposit, standing is a relatively cheap 
form of publicity for extroverts (and the electoral commission is even 
suggesting that the fee be scrapped). But some – like Lord Biro or Bepe Grillo, 
the Italian comic whose success shook Rome’s political establishment last year 
– deploy humour for serious ends. Commander Bill Boakes DSC, a naval hero and 
cyclist, stood in elections for 30 years as a Trains, Boats and Planes 
candidate, later as a Public Safety Democratic Monarchist White Resident. 
Boakes’s worst result – five votes – stood as a record for 20 years. But he was 
deadly serious about road safety and died from injuries falling off a bus.

The cartoonist, satirist and comedian Willie Rushton died at 59 in his bed, 
but in the early days of Private Eye he made his name by imitating the 
scandal-hit PM Harold Macmillan on telly. When Macmillan quit and the 14th Earl 
of Home emerged to succeed him (no votes in those days), the Eye fielded 
Rushton in the byelection that made plain Sir Alec Douglas-Home an MP.

His slogan “Death to the Tories” won him media attention, but just 45 votes. 
At the last minute the satirist lost his nerve and urged protesters to vote 
Liberal.

And Screaming Lord Sutch? The rock musician activist (he stood in 40 
elections)peaked with 4.2% of the vote at Rotherham in 1994, though the OMRLP 
managed to elect several councillors. But Sutch, a depressive who took 518 
votes against Harold Wilson in 1964, had already achieved immortality of sorts. 
In the Bootle byelection of 1990 Sutch took more votes (418 to 155) than the 
rump SDP, led by Lord Owen. Despite Sutch’s offer to form a coalition, the SDP 
was wound up within days. Jokes can sometimes be fatal.
 