
Last week the world took another step towards succumbing to an existential 
threat. Again.

Speaking in the aftermath of the spectacular seizure and siege of an Algerian 
gas refinery by Islamist extremists 10 days ago,David Cameron warned 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/18/david-cameron-algeria-mali-eu)> 
of how "we face a large and existential terrorist threat from a group of 
extremists based in different parts of the world who want to do the biggest 
possible amount of damage to our interests and way of life".

There was little further detail, leaving it unclear if the prime minister was 
referring to al-Qaida, the group founded by the late Osama bin Laden 25 years 
ago. Or possibly al-Qaida-type groups in the middle of the Saharan desert. Or 
maybe other offshoots around the world. Or possibly the ideology of al-Qaida.

However, the broad thrust of what he was saying was obvious: if you thought 
the threat from al-Qaida, however defined, had gone away, you were wrong. It is 
here, and will be here for decades to come. And it endangers the very 
foundation of our societies. The intervening week, one imagines, replete as it 
was with a range of shootings, bombings, arrests and court judgments across the 
world all involving Islamist extremism, has not improved things.

Such rhetoric was once familiar. We heard much of it in the immediate 
aftermath of the 9/11 attacks and through the months before the invasion of 
Iraq in 2003. But as the years have passed however, such pronouncements of 
imminent danger became rarer. The public naturally learned to be suspicious of 
rhetoric raising fears that appeared unreasonable and unfounded. We all learned 
enough about the complex phenomenon of contemporary Islamist militancy to be 
able to challenge the sillier claims ourselves. Policymakers recognised that 
any exaggeration, particularly of the "global" nature of a threat that their 
own security services were increasingly seeing as local, simply played into the 
hands of the enemy.

So Cameron's words last week, echoed elsewhere, were unexpected.

Rather like al-Qaida's own rhetoric in the wake of the changes wrought by the 
Arab spring, they sounded dated; at worst, they were an indication of wilful 
ignorance, a nostalgia for simpler times when leaders could promise "iron 
resolve" against a threat without provoking widespread scepticism. They have 
however usefully provoked a new debate on two very old questions, both still 
urgent and important: what is al-Qaida? And is it more or less dangerous than 
it was?

Answering the first question is, for once, relatively straightforward. 
Islamist militancy is a phenomenon going back much further than the foundation 
of the group al-Qaida by Saudi-born Osama bin Laden in 1988. There have been 
waves of revivalism in the Muslim world since the days of the Prophet Muhammad. 
These have frequently come in response to external challenges, whether 
political, social, cultural and military. Intense and very varied reactions 
were provoked by European colonialism in the 19th century from Afghanistan to
Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, from Morocco to Malaysia 
and beyond. The end of European colonialism in the Muslim world in no way 
diminished the immediacy of that challenge nor the venality, brutality and 
incompetence of local regimes. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, scores of 
different violent extremist movements, in part products of a massive new 
interest in "Islamism" across the Muslim world, were waging armed struggles 
against local governments in the name of religion.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> (usually translated as 
"the base") was founded – in Pakistan towards the end of the war in Afghanistan 
against the Soviets – to channel and co-ordinate the dispersed efforts of these 
movements into a single campaign. It believed that striking at a universally 
accepted global enemy, the US, would lead to the destruction of "hypocrite" 
unbelieving regimes across the Muslim world in the short term and, eventually, 
the creation of a new ill-defined and utopian religious rule. This latter goal 
was long-term, a cosmic struggle, possibly indefinite and certainly undefinable 
in terms of time.

Aided by a range of external factors, al-Qaida was to some extent successful 
in achieving its less abstract aims, striking the US hard and drawing together 
an unprecedented network of affiliates in the late 1990s. This then helped – 
particularly by the response to the 9/11 attacks and other operations – 
disseminate its ideology further than ever before in the noughties.

The high point, however, was reached around 2004 or 2005. Even as it appeared 
to peak, the wave of extremism was receding. Since then, the central leadership 
of al-Qaida has suffered blow after blow. It is not just Bin Laden who has been 
killed or rendered inactive, but pretty much everyone else in the senior and 
middle ranks of the organisation.Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, the leader of al-Qaida 
central, may be an effective, utterly dedicated and experienced organiser but 
he lacks Bin Laden's charisma. Saif al Adel, the only other veteran leader 
remaining, lacks his stature and may not be at liberty at all but detained in 
Iran.

Key players who few, beyond specialists, had ever heard of – such as the very 
capable Libyan Atiyah Abd al-Rahman – have gone. British security officials 
describe "al-Qaida central" as being "hollowed out", largely by the 
controversial drone strikes. Equally damaging for the group, al-Qaida's 
training infrastructure is minimal, certainly compared with the dozens of fully 
fledged camps that were in use on the eve of the 9/11 attacks. Back in 2008, 
according to interrogation documents, handlers were forced to admit to new 
recruits coming straight from Europe that their facilities unfortunately bore 
no resemblance to those depicted inrecruiting videos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/sep/10/al-qaida-terrorism-bin-laden>.

Nothing has improved since. Volunteers are fewer than before. There are 
younger members rising up the thinning ranks, but this is promotion by default 
not merit.

Equally damaging has been the rejection by successive communities over the 
past two decades. Almost every attempt by al-Qaida central to win genuine 
popular support has failed – in Iraq, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere. 
Polls show approval ratings for Bin Laden peaking around 2004-5 and then steep 
decline. This is particularly true when communities have direct experience of 
extremist violence or rule. The al-Qaida brand is irremediably tarnished. Even 
Bin Laden was apparently thinking ofrelaunching the group under a new name 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/may/03/osama-bin-laden-rebranding-al-qaida>
, his correspondence reveals.
 The terrorist siege of Mumbai had no links with al-Qaida. Photograph: 
Sebastian D'souza/AP 
The two most spectacular attacks in recent years – in Algeria and the strike 
on Mumbai by Pakistan-based militants from the Lashkar-e-Taiba organisation – 
were carried out by entities that have, in the first instance, tenuous 
connections with al-Qaida's senior leadership and, in the second, none at all. 
This indicates the degree to which the remnant led by al-Zawahiri have become, 
at best, only one player among many.

The result is that the centripetal force the group once exerted has gone and 
we have returned to a situation similar to that of the old "pre-al-Qaida" days 
with a whole series of different local groups involved in local struggles with 
negligible central co-ordination.

There are major differences with the previous period, of course. Decades of 
violence have led to much higher structural levels of radicalisation and 
polarisation. The technology and tactics used by all protagonists in these 
current "shadow wars" has evolved. Then there are the consequences of the Arab 
spring – for the Sahel and Syria and elsewhere. But, nonetheless, the 
unthinking use of the term al-Qaida, as has so often been the case in the past, 
obscures rather than illuminate the real chaotic and fractured, if still 
dynamic, nature of modern Islamist militancy. This is something Cameron's own 
security services will have told him.

Of course a threat remains. But the big attacks – those that could potentially 
pose something a little closer to "an existential threat" – are unlikely. These 
would need to be in a major European or US city or involve at least one 
passenger jet. If British intelligence, despite having a team devoted for 
months to checking and rechecking every possible potential lead, could not come 
up with a single credible threat to the London Olympics last year and their US 
counterparts were confident enough to declare a similar lack of immediate 
danger during the recent presidential campaign, it appears fair to assume that 
bombs in London or New York are a fairly distant prospect for the moment. The 
biggest threat to airplanes comes from a single highly proficient bombmaker in 
the Yemen.

The location of the major spectacular attacks appears closely related to 
al-Qaida's ability to focus the dispersed energies of contemporary Sunni 
Islamist extremism. Through the 1990s, attacks were restricted to targets – in 
Pakistan, Algeria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere – which were distant from 
western populations, with the exception of the first abortive plot to bomb the 
World Trade Center in New York in 1993. US troops who were attacked in Somalia 
in that year in the famous "Blackhawk Down" episode had simply strayed into 
someone else's war.

By the late 1990s, US interests were being attacked, but in east Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> or the Yemen. It was only through 
the first six years of the past decade that the violence approached the west – 
first in Indonesia, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, then in Madrid and 
London. But since, the dynamic has reversed, tracking the new weakness of the 
al-Qaida senior leadership. The big attacks still come – but in Islamabad, 
Mumbai, Kabul, Baghdad, and now in the deserts of the Sahara. Nor do they 
strike targets that resonate throughout the Muslim world. A gas refinery in 
southern Algeria is not the Pentagon.

Partly this is due to vastly improved security precautions and competent 
intelligence services that co-operated much more effectively.

Intermittent attempts to down airplanes have been defeated, if only just. 
Hundreds of potential troublemakers have been stopped long before they even 
begin to contemplate actually perpetrating a violent attack. MI5 officials say 
that, in part due to closer collaboration with a range of other agencies and 
particularly the police, they are able to head off possible threats much 
earlier. One compared their operations to the famously tedious stonewall 
tactics of the Arsenal team 20 years ago. "It's boring but it works," he said.

There is, of course, the fear of a "lone wolf", a solo, self-radicalising 
extremist. The example most often cited is Mohamed Merah, the French-Algerian 
who killed three soldiers as well as three Jewish schoolchildren and a teacher 
last March.

A spokesman for Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the man who orchestrated the recent 
refinery attack in Algeria, told French media on Monday that France could 
expect "dozens like ... Merah and Khaled Kelkal"who would spontaneously rise up 
to kill and maim 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/actualite-france/2013/01/22/01016-20130122ARTFIG00476-belmokhtar-veut-des-dizaines-de-merah-et-de-kelkal8230.php>
.
 Islamist militia leader Mokhtar Belmokhtar, who orchestrated the Amenas 
refinery attack in Algeria. Photograph: AP 
But real lone wolves are extremely rare. Kelkal, who carried out a series of 
attacks in France in 1995, plugged into a broader network of militants run and 
recruited by Algerian groups active at the time. Merah did the shooting on his 
own but came from a family steeped in extremist versions of Islam and 
anti-Semitism, had been to Afghanistan and Pakistan to train and was, French 
and Pakistani officials say, connected to Moez Garsalloui, a high-profile known 
Belgian militant, now dead, who had been recruiting widely and was well-known 
to intelligence services. Merah was thus not only part of an old style of 
terrorism – recruits making their way to the badlands of Pakistan to get 
trained and then returning to carry out attacks – but was also much less 
effective than predecessors such as those responsible for the 7/7 attacks in 
London. The number of people making that journey is now a fraction of the 
levels of six or seven years ago. Back then, scores, if not hundreds, made 
their way to the Afghan-Pakistan frontier to fight alongside the Taliban or 
other groups. Now the number is in the low dozens, according to intelligence 
officials in Pakistan, the UK and elsewhere.

The other fear is of a new generation of veteran militants returning from the 
battlefields of the Sahel to wreak havoc in the US or, more realistically, 
Europe. There are some reports that Canadian or even French passport-holders
were among those who attacked the refinery 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-21126533>. However, there are two 
reasons to be relatively sanguine.
 Islamist fighters from the Islamist group Ansar Dine in Mali. Photograph: AP 
First, the facilities available for training in the region are minimal and 
there would seem to be no reason why extremists graduating in terrorist studies 
from there would be better able to carry out effective mass casualty attacks 
than men such as Merah.

Second, we are yet to see a wave of violence involving veterans of much more 
longlasting and extensive violence elsewhere in the Maghreb or the core of the 
Middle East. British intelligence officials pointed to the experience of the 
horrific conflict in Iraq when asked about the possibility of veterans of the 
current fighting in Syria, where extremist religious groups are playing an 
increasingly significant role, posing a threat to the UK. Only one attack – the 
abortive 2007 London and Glasgow strikes – has been definitively linked to 
someone involved in that previous conflict, and he was not a former fighter. 
Iraqi veterans have proved dangerous in Saudi, even in Afghanistan and in the 
Maghreb. But that is not the same as posing a direct existential threat to the 
west. There seems, the officials say, to be no reason why the Syrian theatre 
should produce a greater threat today than the Iraqi theatre has done. Nor, 
indeed,Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>.

Does this all mean that Islamist militancy will simply die away? Of course 
not. A phenomenon with such long and complex roots will evolve rather than 
disappear. That is what is currently happening in this new post-al-Qaida phase. 
Wherever the various factors that allow the "Salafi-Jihadi" ideology to get 
traction are united, there is likely to be violence. Extremists do, as Cameron 
said, "thrive when they have ungoverned spaces in which they can exist, build 
and plan" and the aftermath of the Arab spring has not just opened up new 
terrain but also exacerbated existing problems of lawlessness and criminality. 
Flows of arms from Libya have made a bad situation worse.

And if you take the fighting in Mali and the attack on the refinery, and add 
it to a list of all the incidents occurring around the globe involving 
extremist Islamist violence, it is undoubtedly a frightening picture.

In the last few days there were arrests in the Philippines, anti-terrorist 
operations in Indonesia, deaths in Pakistan (due to infighting between 
extremist groups), air raids in Afghanistan on suspected al-Qaida bases,battles 
in the Yemen 
<http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Middle-East/2013/Jan-28/204059-yemeni-troops-and-tanks-attack-al-qaeda-stronghold.ashx#axzz2JH5aCiZE>
, shootings and executions in Iraq following the release of a video showing 
brutal executions, reports of trials in the UK and Germany as well as fighting 
in Mali.

But does this all add up to al-Qaida 3.0, more dangerous than ever before 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/12/03/al-qaeda-3-0-terrorism-s-emergent-new-power-bases.html>
? There's a simple test. Think back to those dark days of 2004 or 2005 and how 
much closer the violence seemed. Were you more frightened then, or now? The aim 
of terrorism is to inspire irrational fear, to terrorise. Few are as fearful 
today as they were back then. So that means there are two possibilities: we are 
wrong, ignorant or misinformed, and should be much more worried than we are; or 
our instincts are right, and those responsible for the violence are as far from 
posing an existential threat as they have ever been.

• This article was amended on 29 January 2013. The abortive attacks on London 
and Glasgow took place in 2007, not 2006 as originally stated.
 