
Al-Qaida leader Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> has denounced what he 
said was a dishonest propaganda campaign by rival jihadist group the Islamic 
State against his organisation, in an audio message released Thursday.


In the message found and translated by US-based watchdog the SITE Intelligence 
Group, the Egyptian extremist accuses IS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi of 
slandering his group.

Obama administration places sanctions on bin Laden's son, citing terror risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/osama-bin-laden-son-hamza-terror-list-obama-administration>
Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida>, founded by the late 
Osama Bin Laden, is locked in a battle with the so-called Islamic State – which 
sprang from its Iraqi faction – for the leadership of a global jihad.

In his message, the 65-year-old Zawahiri complained that al-Baghdadi had 
alleged that al-Qaida opposes sectarian attacks on Shia Muslims and was 
prepared to work with Christian leaders.

“The liars insist upon their falsehood, to the extent that they claimed we do 
not denounce Shiites,” Zawahiri said, according to the translation of the 
message, which was released by al-Qaida’s media arm.

Zawahiri denied he had said that Christians could be partners in the 
governance of a future Islamic caliphate, having only said that they could go 
about their affairs within it.

“What I have said is that they are partners in the land, such as agriculture, 
trade, and money, and we keep their privacy in it, in accordance with the laws 
of our Sharia,” he said.

And he insisted he had not called for Shia Muslims to be spared, but had 
suggested focusing attacks on Shia-led Iraqi forces and not on random 
atrocities against civilians.

“I had told them several times to stop explosions in markets, husseiniyats and 
mosques, and to concentrate on military, security and police forces and Shiite 
militiamen,” he said.

A husseiniyat is a Shia place of worship and the Iraqi security forces, in 
their battle against the Islamic State group, are backed by Shia religious 
militias.

The Islamic State group and al-Qaida have both carried out hundreds of attacks 
on civilian targets, but some al-Qaida propaganda has called for less 
indiscriminate tactics.

Zawahiri also denied al-Baghdadi’s charge that al-Qaida had supported ousted 
former Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi, an Islamist who attempted to rule 
through the ballot box.

The al-Qaida leader, who took charge after Bin Laden was killed by US special 
forces in 2011, is thought to be somewhere in Pakistan’s unruly border region 
hiding from a global manhunt.

He communicates with the group’s remaining supporters through semi-regular 
video lectures, reiterating – as in his latest message – the need to target the 
United States.

But Thursday’s message did not include any footage of Zawahiri speaking.

The audio message restated the urgency of this goal – “Tell America, to other 
than Allah we do not kneel” – but also argued for a dialogue on tactics with 
other jihadists.

“We are not infallible, but we are human beings and we hit and we miss. We 
must listen to advice,” he admitted, while rejecting al-Baghdadi’s criticism.

“What we want is to manage a conversation between those who are working for 
Islam – and the people of jihad at their forefront – around the best method and 
wisest techniques to bring victory to the religion,” he said, according to SITE.
 