
A year-long public inquiry into the most serious allegations made against 
British soldiers inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> stalled 
dramatically on Thursday, when lawyers representing Iraqi families withdrew 
their claim that the troops had killed unarmed civilians they had captured and 
brought back to an army base.

In a statement, Public Interest Lawyers (PIL), said there was insufficient 
evidence to support the claim. "Following the conclusion of the military 
evidence and current state of disclosure by the MoD it is our view there is 
insufficient material to establish that Iraqi civilians were unlawfully killed 
whilst in the custody of British troops at Camp Abu Naji [the British camp 
north of Basra]," the law firm said.

It added: "There remain numerous allegations of violent and other 
ill-treatment of Iraqi civilians in British custody which the inquiry will have 
to consider." The families say it is still possible that ill-treatment occurred 
at the camp but outside of the medical centre.

Patrick O'Connor QC, representing the Iraqis, told the inquiry their 
concession did not mean they did not believe some Iraqis may have been 
unlawfully killed on a battlefield – although that would be out of the scope of 
the inquiry. Sir Thayne Forbes, the inquiry chairman, said the statement was 
"of very considerable significance".

John Dickinson, of PIL, said: "From the outset the families have had the 
simple objective of discovering the extent of any wrongdoing and if so how it 
came about and who was responsible."

The al-Sweady inquiry <http://www.alsweadyinquiry.org>, taking its name from a 
19-year-old Iraqi allegedly killed by British troops, was set up after the 
courts castigated the MoD for not conducting its own investigation into the 
allegations made over a fierce gunfight on 14 May 2004, known as the battle of 
Danny Boy after a British checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir, north of Basra.

High court judges accused the MoD of "lamentable" behaviour and serious 
breaches of its duty of candour.

Iraqi families' claims appear to have been prompted by an order from senior 
British army officers that Iraqis killed in the battle should be brought back 
to Camp Abu Naji. Nine Iraqis were also captured.

Army witnesses to the inquiry said they had never before heard of such an 
order. It was prompted, the inquiry heard, to learn whether a ringleader behind 
the massacre of six British military police officers nearby a year before was 
among the dead.

The bodies of the dead were taken to an Iraqi hospital the day after the 
battle – in which weapons ranging from high-velocity rifles to fixed bayonets, 
were used – the inquiry heard. Many of them were in a horrific state, so 
horrific that the inquiry has said it will not publish photographs of them.

Some of the families of the dead alleged that their relatives had been killed 
in the British camp.

The inquiry has also heard mounting evidence that some Iraqis captured after 
the battle were mistreated by British troops. Some soldiers admitted abusing 
their prisoners, some changed their evidence. The inquiry also heard that 
commanders of the 1 Battalion Princess of Wales Royal Regiment (1PWRR) 
obstructed attempts by the military police to conduct its own investigation.

The inquiry has sat for 167 days – over 42 weeks – and heard evidence from 281 
witnesses, of which 55 were Iraqi and 221 from the British military. It has 
cost £22m so far.

Closing submissions will be heard next month and Forbes hopes to complete his 
report by the end of the year. What happened during the battle of Danny Boy 
itself was outside the terms of the inquiry.

However, Wednesday's concessions may have serious implications for more than 
100 other cases involving allegations of abuse by British troops during the 
Iraqi insurgency.

Mounting allegations, many made through PIL, led the MoD to set up an Iraqi 
historical allegations team, which is currently investigating about 180 cases.

The inquiry has heard dramatic evidence, both of the intense fighting after 
the soldiers were ambushed and how unprepared the troops – from experienced 
sergeants to raw teenagers newly recruited to the army – were for the 
insurgency. Francis Myatt, 1PWRR's chaplain, told the inquiry: "I've never seen 
so many dead in one place."

Duncan Aston, an 18-year-old soldier, told the inquiry that his sergeant, Paul 
Kelly, fired around 30 rounds into a pile of Iraqi bodies from around 16ft-20ft 
away. "He put a full magazine of bullets into both bodies that had been 
twitching but he also fired into the bodies of the other dead gunmen in the 
ditch." Kelly later denied Aston's claims.

Lieutenant William Passmore described the experience of carrying a dead Iraqi 
to a Warrior armoured vehicle to be taken to the British camp as horrific. 
Kevin Burgess, the most senior medic at the camp – who, like Passmore, came 
close to breaking down as he gave evidence, described the experience of 
inspecting the dead bodies: "It was a complete mess the whole night." Referring 
to attempts to clean up the bodies, he added: "I was just working myself to the 
bone and just did what I could."

Stuart Henderson, a sergeant in the 1st Battalion Argyll and Sutherland 
Highlanders, described how he fired at two men no more than a foot away, whom 
he judged were about to kill him. Afterwards he ordered his men to load 10 
bodies "unceremoniously" into Land Rovers. He said: "I recall I put my boot on 
the head of the body and pushed it into the Land Rover so I could shut the 
tailgate."

Iraqi suspicions, and those of their British lawyers, were increased when 
James Rands, 1PWRR's intelligence officer, described how he threw his computer, 
containing original photographs of the bodies of the Iraqis killed, into the 
sea from a ferry. The photos still exist because copies were circulated before 
Rands threw the laptop into the English Channel in 2006.

Lawyers for the Iraqis have suggested that he got rid of the laptop to conceal 
that he had modified the original files to change the timing of the photos.

Rands dismissed that as an absurd conspiracy theory. He said by 2006 the 
laptop had broken and he was no longer sure if it contained the photos. He 
disposed of it because he had become uneasy about having broken army rules by 
storing sensitive material on a personal laptop, he said.

The MoD has always strenuously denied the allegations.
 