
Lawyers for Iraqi families, British soldiers and the Ministry of Defence will 
make their case for the final time on Wednesday after more than a year of 
public hearings about a fierce battle that took place in Iraq a decade ago. 
Closing submissions are due to take place before Sir Thayne Forbes, a retired 
appeal court judge and chairman ofthe al-Sweady inquiry <>.

The inquiry is named after a 19-year-old Iraqi killed by British troops on 14 
May 2004 during the battle of Danny Boy, a checkpoint on the main Amara-Basra 
road in south-eastIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. It was forced 
on the MoD after senior judges condemned the ministry's "lamentable" failure to 
disclose information about the battle, in particular about the handling of dead 
and captured Iraqi insurgents.

The Guardian first reported in June 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/jun/21/iraq.iraq> that the director of the 
nearby hospital in Majar al Kabir had signed death certificates describing the 
corpses of Iraqis handed over by British soldiers as showing signs of 
mutilation and torture. The claims were disputed by a senior doctor at the 
hospital.

Allegations that the soldiers had murdered 20 Iraqis at the UK army base, Camp 
Abu Naji, and abused five other detainees, were hotly denied by British 
military spokesmen. But the claims were pursued by Phil Shiner of Public 
Interest Lawyers. He successfully argued that the Human Rights Act imposed an 
obligation on governments to set up an independent inquiry when serious 
allegations were made against agents of the state – in this case, British 
soldiers.

Instead of explaining what happened on the battlefield, the MoD adopted such 
an obstructive stance that high court judges accused it of serious breaches of 
its duty of candour. They castigated Bob Ainsworth, then Labour's defence 
secretary, for signing a gagging order even though the information he sought to 
suppress had already been published.

Ainsworth was told that only an independent public inquiry, subsequently set 
up in 2009, would satisfy the courts.

Public hearings began in March last year when lawyers began questioning Iraqi 
and British army witnesses.

Much of the evidence to the inquiry – by both the Iraqis and the British 
soldiers – contradicted what they had originally said in their earlier written 
statements.

The inquiry heard from young, inexperienced British soldiers, totally 
unprepared for violent clashes including close-quarter fighting with insurgents.

It was told that the day before the ambush of British soldiers which led to 
the battle of Danny Boy, fighting in the Iraqi city of Najaf between loyalists 
of the Shia militant cleric Moqtada al-Sadr and US forces had damaged the 
golden-domed shrine of the Imam Ali, one of the holiest Shia sites.

A year earlier, six British military policemen had been massacred near Majar, 
a stronghold of Shia militants.

The most serious allegation was provoked by an attempt to see if the suspected 
perpetrator of that massacre, codenamed Bravo 1, was among the Iraqis killed 
during the battle of Danny Boy by bringing the bodies to Camp Abu Naji – rather 
than leaving them on the battlefield for relatives to take away and bury. This 
led to the allegation that British soldiers had murdered the Iraqis after the 
battle was over.

The inquiry, which has so far cost more than £22m, heard that British military 
police were prevented from conducting a speedy investigation into the battle 
and its aftermath by senior army officers who said they wanted to protect young 
soldiers traumatised by the bloody gunfight.

Lawyers for the Iraqis conceded last month there was insufficient evidence to 
show that any of them were killed while in custody at Camp Abu Naji after the 
battle. There is, however, evidence to show that captured Iraqis were badly 
mistreated, they claim.

The inquiry has also heard evidence about what happened during the battle 
itself, though this is excluded from its terms of reference. Witnesses said 
British soldiers killed wounded Iraqis on the battlefield who presented no 
threat, and that the bodies of some of the dead Iraqis showed signs of being 
handcuffed.

Patrick O'Connor QC, counsel for the Iraqis, told the inquiry last month: 
though there was no evidence prisoners were killed inside the British camp, 
"Unlawful killings may well have occurred on the battlefield or elsewhere 
outside the base camp."

He added: "That issue has not been fully investigated as part of this inquiry."
 