
Allegations that British soldiers killed 20 unarmed civilians and abused 
others detained after a battle with Shia insurgents north of Basra in 2004 – 
the most serious allegations made against British soldiers inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> – are the subject of a public inquiry 
that opens on Monday.

The al-Sweady inquiry – named after the family of Hamid, an alleged victim 
aged 19 – was forced on the Ministry of Defence in 2009 after high court judges 
accused it of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty of 
candour.

The judges said the MoD had failed to disclose crucial information relating to 
the allegations and to set up a proper investigation as required by the Human 
Rights Act.

Nine Iraqis say they were tortured after being taken to a detention centre at 
Shaibah base near Basra and held there for four months. They say they were 
taken, along with the 20 murdered Iraqis, to a British base, Camp Abu Naji, 
after a fierce firefight in what became known as the battle of Danny Boy, a 
British military checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir, on 14 May 2004.

The soldiers and MoD strongly reject the allegations. The Iraqi families and 
their lawyers accuse the troops of meting out "truly shocking" treatment to 
civilians.

Interrogations by British military personnel involved "young men of 18, 19, 
and 20, some seriously injured with gunshot wounds, being stripped naked, 
forced to stand, not given appropriate medical treatment, and threatened with 
violence whilst still under the shock of capture in the middle of the night", 
Patrick Connor QC, counsel for the Iraqis, told a pre-inquiry hearing last year.

The scale of the task facing the head of the inquiry, Sir Thayne Forbes, a 
retired high court judge, is reflected in the number of witnesses who will give 
evidence. They include 15 Iraqis who have been granted visas to testify before 
the inquiry in London. 45 other Iraqis will give evidence from the British 
embassy in Beirut.

Jonathan Acton Davis QC has said witnesses include an Iraqi who "was working 
at the local hospital on 14 May 2004 and travelled to Danny Boy in an ambulance 
whilst the battle was taking place".

About 200 British military witnesses will also give evidence, Cecilia French, 
secretary to the inquiry, has said. Inquiry investigators have identified more 
than 1,000 potential witnesses, some of whom have provided written statements. 
The inquiry has obtained more than 90 statements from Iraqis interviewed in 
Beirut and Istanbul.

The inquiry is still waiting to receive written evidence from the MoD, 
including emails relating to the incident. Some emails are known to concern a 
visit by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to the British 
detention centre at Shaibah in southern Iraq. The MoD is reported to have 
suppressed concerns expressed by the ICRC about the injuries they saw on the 
Iraqi detainees.

Colonel Dudley Giles was a key MoD witness in a military police investigation 
that dismissed claims that British soldiers mutilated and murdered civilians in 
Iraq, the high court was told in hearings that led to this public inquiry. A 
review by Greater Manchester police later concluded the investigation failed to 
collect forensic evidence and ignored key Iraqi witnesses.

The inquiry had been told the MoD was still searching for evidence held by its 
Iraq historic allegations team (IHAT). It has invested in a computer system, 
called the forensic data handling capability, which the inquiry has been told 
was "likely to be the largest storage computer currently in operation in the 
United Kingdom". It will be able to hold 110 terabytes of data.

Preparing the inquiry has cost £15.4m so far. It hopes to have completed its 
work by the end of 2014, French said.
 