
The father of an Iraqi teenager who was allegedly murdered by British soldiers 
has described injuries on his son's body as a bullet wound in the neck, a 
fractured right jaw, bruises to the chest, and marks around the neck 
"resembling a necklace".

Injuries to other Iraqis included "bodies distorted and mutiliated, eyes 
missing, tongues cut out, and noses cut off", he told a public inquiry on 
Monday.

Mizal Karim al-Sweady was the first oral witness at the inquiry named after 
Hamid al-Sweady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/04/iraqis-death-certificates-mutilation-inquiry>
, his 19 year-old son who is among 20 unarmed civilians allegedly killed, and 
five others allegedly tortured, by British troops after a fiercebattle with 
Shia insurgents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/jul/06/basra-deaths-independent-inquiry> 
north of Basra in May 2004.

However, his evidence was immediately challenged by lawyers for the soldiers 
and the Ministry of Defence – and questioned by Jonathan Acton Davis QC, 
counsel to the inquiry. The inquiry heard there were serious discrepancies in 
the evidence, particularly in statements al-Sweady gave to the Iraqi police, 
subsequently to the British military police, and later still, to the inquiry.

Al-Sweady said he went on a "frantic" search for his son who had left home to 
study for a physics exam in the family-rented farm. He denied his son was a 
supporter ofMoqtada's al-Sadr's Mahdi Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/13/iraq-hezbollah-daqduq-us-reaction>
, a Shia militia. "We keep books not guns", he said.

He told the inquiry he was told by the Iraqi police his son had been arrested 
by British soldiers, and later that he had been killed. "I saw a number of 
bodies, in body bags, transferred from British vehicles to a number of 
ambulances. My son's body was among these".

But under questioning he said he saw there only his son's face, not the rest 
of his body, in a bag outside the British base.

Acton Davis told the inquiry there was no reference on his son's official 
Iraqi death certificate to the bruises to the neck or chest. Al-Sweady did not 
mention such injuries in his statement to the UK military police.

Allegations that British soldiers tortured and unlawfully killed Iraqi 
prisoners after a firefight in 2004 are "utterly groundless" and were exploited 
in support of a propaganda campaign against the occupation of the country, 
lawyers representing the soldiers have told the inquiry.

However, they have conceded that there may be evidence of ill-treatment on the 
battlefield, and evidence of assaults after capture. Iraqi prisoners say they 
were subsequently mistreated before and during interrogation. The inquiry has 
heard that a number with gunshot wounds received no pain relief before 
interrogation.

The allegations arise out of a fierce firefight, known as he battle of Danny 
Boy, named after a British checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir on 14 May 2004. 
British commanders said they brought dead Iraqis into their base, Camp Abu 
Naji, to identify if any had been responsible for the deaths of six British 
military police in a previous violent incident in the area.

The inquiry was established after a number of former prisoners and relatives 
of the dead men brought proceedings in the high court in London, demanding an 
independent investigation in line with the requirements of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. The need for the inquiry was accepted in November 
2009 by the thendefence secretary, Bob Ainsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/jul/06/basra-deaths-independent-inquiry>, 
after high court judges accused the MoD of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious 
breaches" of its duty of candour during the court proceedings.

The inquiry will hear evidence from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and 
Beirut, and from up to 200 military witnesses. It is unlikely to report before 
the end of 2014.

• This article was amended on 25 March 2013 to clarify that lawyers 
representing the MoD made no concession that there was evidence British 
soldiers ill-treated Iraqi prisoners after capture, and that lawyers for the 
soldiers conceded only that there may be such evidence.
 