
In a little-noticed public inquiry, traumatised British soldiers have broken 
down as they recounted their experiences of a fierce and bloody battle with 
Iraqi insurgents and were asked about claims that they executed 20 unarmed 
Iraqi civilians and tortured others.

The inquiry, into the aftermath of the notorious battle of Danny Boy in May 
2004, named after a British checkpoint north of Basra, will resume on Tuesday 
with key evidence from a commanding officer whose decisions shaped the battle 
and what followed.

His men have described how they were ambushed, jumped out of their Warrior 
vehicles, fixed bayonets and engaged in close-quarter fighting with Iraqi 
supporters of the Shia militia led by Moqtada al-Sadr. They described horrific 
scenes as they killed and wounded Iraqis armed with machine guns, assault 
rifles and rocket-propelled grenades.

Though the soldiers vehemently deny they murdered any prisoners after they 
were captured, some have said they saw their comrades physically abuse Iraqi 
prisoners, who were blindfolded and handcuffed. The Ministry of Defence 
strongly denies that any of the soldiers committed abuses.

On Tuesday, in a featureless room on the third floor of an unremarkable office 
building in central London, their commander will be asked about a decision 
which, in the words of one of the officers involved, has haunted them ever 
since – the order to remove the bodies of the dead Iraqis and take them to a 
nearby British camp.

Brigadier Andrew Kennett will give crucial evidence to the al-Sweady inquiry, 
named after a 19-year-old Iraqi – there were teenagers fighting on both sides – 
who was killed in the battle on 14 May 2004.

It was Kennett who gave the order, described by soldiers of 1st Battalion The 
Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment (1 PWRR), the unit most heavily involved in 
the battle, as unprecedented and contrary to all their training. Never before 
had they heard of an order to remove the dead, as well as the wounded and 
captured, from a battlefield.

The inquiry has heard that Kennett gave the order to find out whether an 
insurgent known as Bravo 1, the codename given to Naseer Zachra Abd Rufeiq, was 
among the dead. Rufeiq was suspected of being the ringleader of a group of 
Iraqi insurgents who massacred six British military police officers in the 
nearby town of Majar-al-Kabir a year earlier.

Over the past four months, more than a hundred British troops, some of whom 
have left the army, have given evidence to the inquiry chaired by a retired 
appeal court judge, Sir Thayne Forbes.

Francis Myatt, the regiment's chaplain, told the inquiry: "I've never seen so 
many dead in one place." He said he was not told at the time that captured 
Iraqis were also being held at the British camp, Camp Abu Naji.

Duncan Aston, an 18-year-old soldier, told the inquiry that his sergeant, Paul 
Kelly, fired around 30 rounds into a "pile" of Iraqi bodies from around 
16ft-20ft away. "He put a full magazine of bullets into both bodies that had 
been twitching but he also fired into the bodies of the other dead gunmen in 
the ditch." Kelly later denied Aston's claims.

Modern weapons inflict horrific injuries, especially to the head, the inquiry 
has heard. But the chairman is not concerned about what happened during the 
actual battle. He has made clear his concern is the treatment of the Iraqis 
after they were captured and killed.

Lieutenant William Passmore described carrying a dead Iraqi to a Warrior 
armoured vehicle to be taken to the British camp as "horrific". Kevin Burgess, 
the most senior medic at the camp – who, like Passmore, came close to breaking 
down as he gave evidence, described the experience of inspecting the dead 
bodies: "It was a complete mess the whole night." Referring to attempts to 
clean up the bodies, he added: "I was just working myself to the bone and just 
did what I could."

Stuart Henderson, a sergeant in the 1st Battalion Argyll and Sutherland 
Highlanders, described how hefired at two men no more than a foot away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/03/al-sweady-inquiry-british-soldiers-abuse>
 whom he judged were about to kill him. Afterwards he ordered his men to load 
10 bodies "unceremoniously" into Land Rovers. He said: "I recall I put my boot 
on the head of the body and pushed it into the Land Rover so I could shut the 
tailgate."

The decision to take the dead to the British camp led to allegations by the 
families of the dead that their sons were killed by the British after they had 
been captured.

Their suspicions, and those of their British lawyers, were increased when 
James Rands, the PWRR's intelligence officer, described how he threw his 
computer, containing original photographs of the bodies of the Iraqis killed, 
into the sea from a ferry. The photos still exist because copies were 
circulated before Rands threw the laptop into the English Channel in 2006. 
Lawyers for the Iraqis have suggested that he got rid of the laptop to conceal 
that he had modified the original files to change the timing of the photos.

Rands dismissed that as an "absurd" conspiracy theory. He said by 2006 the 
laptop had broken and he was no longer sure if it contained the photos. He 
disposed of it because he had become uneasy about having broken army rules by 
storing sensitive material on a personal laptop, he said.

The inquiry was forced on the MoD in 2009 after high court judges accused it 
of "serious breaches" of its duty of candour, and failure to respond to initial 
allegations about the soldiers' conduct after the battle. The judges said the 
MoD had failed to disclose crucial information relating to the allegations and 
to set up a proper investigation as required by the Human Rights Act.

The inquiry has already heard from 55 Iraqi witness and more than 100 British 
soldiers. Forbes aims to publish his report by the end of 2014. It has so far 
cost nearly £20m.
 