
Alain Resnais, who has died aged 91, was a director of elegance and 
distinction who, despite generally working from the screenplays of other 
writers, established an auteurist reputation. His films were singular, 
instantly recognisable by their style as well as through recurring themes and 
preoccupations. Primary concerns were war, sexual relationships and the more 
abstract notions of memory and time. His characters were invariably adult 
(children were excluded as having no detailed past) middle-class professionals. 
His style was complex, notably in the editing and often – though not always – 
dominated by tracking shots and multilayered sound.

He surrounded himself with actors, musicians and writers of enormous talent 
and the result was a somewhat elitist body of work with little concern for 
realism or the socially or intellectually deprived. Even overtly political 
works, Night and Fog, The War Is Over and his section of Far from Vietnam have 
a distance from the wars that gave rise to them. But whatever social or film 
history makes of Resnais in the coming decades, he ensured a permanent niche in 
that history through two disparate works, at least.

On its release his 30-minute Night and Fog <http://vimeo.com/25815756> (1955) 
provoked the then critic François Truffaut to call it the greatest film ever 
made. Decades later it remains the single most important work to address the 
Holocaust, equalled only by Claude Lanzmann's monumental 566-minute Shoah. 
Resnais was justly criticised for omitting the hundreds of thousands of 
homosexuals who were also exterminated, but even this neglect cannot diminish 
the work's power.

It combines horrific archival footage by the Nazis with postwar colour images 
of Auschwitz. The haunted memories, the tracking shots, the juxtaposition of 
past and present, the elegant and distant commentary presage later works. 
Resnais avoids the presumption of overt pity and through his objectivity 
emphasises the true horror and inhumanity of his subject. The film was awarded 
the Prix Jean Vigo in 1956 and remains a masterpiece, possibly his greatest 
work.

A contrasted claim to screen immortality rests in his second feature film, 
Last Year in Marienbad (1961), which had the rare distinction of causing 
endless debate and controversy not on grounds of content, or lack of it, but 
for stylistic reasons and the ambiguities of character and narrative. Latterly 
we are used to debates about censorship, blasphemy, sexual and other violence, 
language and drugs. Marienbad caused outrage, admiration and condemnation on 
style and meaning alone – quite an achievement.

Resnais was born in Vannes, Brittany, to a well-off family. This comfortable 
background allowed him to indulge his childhood passion for cinema, shooting 
elaborate works on 8mm and later 16mm film. He chose the French film school 
IDHEC, in Paris, in preference to university, but left before completing the 
course to join the armed forces.
 Last Year in Marienbad, 1961, directed by Alain Resnais. Photograph: BFI 
After the second world war he made some self-financed shorts on 16mm and then 
remade one of these on 35mm. His study ofVan Gogh 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=illZf8AvF98> (1948) marked his professional 
debut, when aged 26. He continued making shorts for a further 11 years and 
among these are portraits of artists, including Gauguin (1950),a study of 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7SR7ov55k5s> Picasso's Guernica 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eDeBu8HwUOw> (1950) and finally a sponsored 
short – shot in CinemaScope – about plastic, Le Chant du Styrène (1958) with a 
poetical commentary by Raymond Queneau. In this period he edited Agnès Varda's 
La Pointe Courte (1955) and was artistic supervisor on William Klein's Broadway 
by Light (1958).

After this invaluable period of writing, directing and editing, Resnais felt 
able to make a feature and directed Hiroshima Mon Amour (1959), from a 
screenplay byMarguerite Duras 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-marguerite-duras-1340299.html>
. It became the most praised and controversial debut since Citizen Kane, 
winning critics awards in New York and at the Cannes film festival. The complex 
narrative, the intricate cross-cutting, the silent flashbacks, the audacious 
sex scenes, all contributed to the debate. As did the story of a French actress 
(Emmanuelle Riva) who – during an affair with a Japanese architect (Eiji Okada) 
– recalls her love for a German soldier during the second world war.

It was only slightly less of a sensation than its successor, Last Year in 
Marienbad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTg_knL4cks>, based on Alain 
Robbe-Grillet <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/19/culture.obituaries>
's avant-garde narrative, which received the best film award at the 1961 Venice 
festival and made Delphine Seyrig a star in her screen debut. She subsequently 
starred in Resnais' brilliantly successful Muriel (1963), receiving the best 
actress award at Venice that year. Although seemingly less complex than its 
enigmatic predecessor, the movie also concerned memory, ambiguous 
relationships, past and present, and had a shimmering surface and a rich 
soundtrack, not least by virtue ofHans Werner Henze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/27/hans-werner-henze>'s music. The 
editing is a tour de force and there are twice as many cuts as in a 
conventional film of its length.

By the mid-1960s Resnais had an eminent position within the left-bank cinema 
movement which included artists such as Varda andChris Marker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/30/chris-marker>. But his shorts and 
the initial trio of features – acclaimed by many as masterpieces – proved a 
difficult act to follow.

The War Is Over (1966) starred Yves Montand as a weary Spanish revolutionary, 
resident in Paris and realising that the struggle against fascism had achieved 
little for his country. Montand lends the movie pathos and dignity, but it 
remains a wordy, didactic work.

In 1967, Resnais and six other directors (Jean-Luc Godard, Varda and Marker 
among them) reflected on the tragedy of war in Far from Vietnam. His section 
concerns an intellectual unable to take sides in the war, and the piece strikes 
an intelligent, if distant, note. His next film, Je T'aime, Je T'aime (1968), 
was a commercial failure and has been much neglected. A love story with a 
characteristically complicated structure, it features a time machine in which 
the central character gets trapped, experiencing shifting periods in his life.

It was six years before Stavisky appeared, proving a welcome success not least 
because of Jean-Paul Belmondo's central role as the infamous financier whose 
dealing nearly brought down the French government. With a cast including 
Charles Boyer, music byStephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sondheim> and a stunning re-creation of the 
1930s, it returned Resnais to commercial success with what he chose to call an 
entertainment.

Critical esteem was rekindled in 1977 when he made his first film in English, 
Providence, from a mordantly witty screenplay by David Mercer and music by
Miklós Rózsa 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/07/28/obituaries/miklos-rozsa-88-composer-for-films.html>
. It gaveJohn Gielgud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> the screen part 
of his career as an alcoholic writer who is basing a novel around his family. 
Only at a birthday lunch do we realise that the characters, notably the two 
sons, are monstrous fictions. The movie led its co-starDirk Bogarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/may/10/guardianobituaries> to pronounce 
Resnais a poet-director. It also contains a statement, from the Gielgud 
character, that seemed a riposte to Resnais' critics: " ... it's been said 
about my work that the search for style has often resulted in a want of 
feeling. I'd put it another way. I'd say that style is feeling – in its most 
elegant and economic expression."
 Hiroshima Mon Amour, 1959. Photograph: John Springer Collection/Corbis 
In 1980, Resnais enjoyed his greatest commercial success with a satire on 
modern French life, My American Uncle. It received the grand prix at Cannes, 
and went on to receive six French Césars and an Academy Award nomination for 
Jean Gruault's witty screenplay. This was followed by an even more lighthearted 
work, Life Is a Bed of Roses (1983), again having fun at the expense of French 
intellectuals. There was a drastic change of mood with the sombre Love Unto 
Death (1984), which preceded possibly his oddest film, Mélo (1986), the fourth 
screen version of a 1929 theatrical melodrama by Henri Bernstein. Resnais 
adapted it himself and shot it in three weeks. The story, given some weight by 
the director, concerns a woman who kills herself as the result of a doomed love 
triangle. A fine cast, headed by Sabine Azéma, brilliant cinematography and the 
emotive story all contributed to its success.

Resnais' next project was I Want to Go Home (1989) from a screenplay by the 
cartoonist and writer Jules Feiffer. In 1992 he departed from narrative films 
to make a 60-minute television documentary about George Gershwin, whose work he 
had used in an early short.

None of the foregoing would have prepared us for his next project, the two 
feature films, Smoking/No Smoking (1993), adapted from Alan Ayckbourn's 
Intimate Exchanges. The playwright possibly turned to Resnais' elegant talent 
as a reaction to the only other screen adaptation of his work, a travesty by
Michael Winner <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jan/21/michael-winner> 
of his play A Chorus of Disapproval. However, the new work did little to 
enhance the reputation of either and the films largely disappeared after their 
Berlin film festival screenings.

It was five years later at the same festival that his film Same Old Song 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h2MhkajNVmo> received its international 
premiere. Already a smash hit in its own country, this elegant comedy of 
manners used memorable French chansons – mainly from the 1930s, 40s and 50s – 
within the story, the actors stopping to mime excerpts from famous songs to 
enhance the dialogue and action, with a blend of irony and comedy. Resnais was 
awarded a Silver Bear at Berlin, both for the film and for "his lifetime 
contribution to the art of the cinema".

The film seemed designed to appeal almost exclusively to the French and to 
Francophiles, and confirmed that while some of the genius of the earlier works 
that had so startled the movie world had been lost, Resnais could still be 
relied on to use great actors to provide entertainment of considerable charm.
 From left: David Warner, Ellen Burstyn, John Gielgud and Dirk Bogarde on the 
set of Providence, 1977. Photograph: Sunset Boulevard/Corbis 
There was a slight hiatus following that success and it was 2003 before Not on 
the Lips emerged with an original libretto by Andre Bard and once again using a 
group of stock players, headed, as so often before, by Azéma, Resnais' wife 
since 1998. This light-hearted musical, set in the mid-20s, concerned a woman 
who – despite loving her husband – cannot resist flirtations. This and the 
appearance of a previous husband provokes inevitable complications. Played as a 
stylish farce, it fared better with some critics and a select audience rather 
than with an international public.

For his next work, Resnais returned to Ayckbourn with a film based on Private 
Fears in Public Places, originally released as Coeurs ("Hearts", 2006) through 
nervousness at the prospect of an over-serious translation of the title. His 
familiar ensemble cast featured in this elegant love's roundabout, in which six 
characters (plus a cantankerous older man) move in and out of complex 
interwoven short scenes. The reaction was mixed, some viewers finding it 
beguiling, others trivial, though most applauded its style and finesse.

Following the now established three-year gap, a Franco-Italian co-production 
appeared, budgeted at over €10m. The story of Wild Grass (2009) was slight: a 
woman's purse is stolen, later found by a stranger and returned with ensuing 
complications. The dazzling surface and style found admirers, though not enough 
for commercial success, given the large budget.

His 50th directorial venture, You Ain't Seen Nothin' Yet, loosely based on 
Jean Anouilh's 1941 play Eurydice, and again with a star cast, was shown in 
competition at Cannes just before his 90th birthday. His final film, Life of 
Riley, was another Ayckbourn adaption and premiered at the Berlin film festival 
last month. By now Resnais's ability to astound was a thing of the past, but 
few considered the late works negligible, unless compared with the landmark 
features and the classic shorts which established his fame.

He was married first to Florence Malraux, who worked as assistant director on 
many of his films; their marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his 
second wife, Sabine.

• Alain Resnais, film director, born 3 June 1922; died 1 March 2014
 