
Alan Pardew believes Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> can bring the best out 
of England’s players and has urged his former Crystal Palace team-mate to prove 
he has “the X factor” to make his mark with the national team over his 
four-game interim stewardship.

Southgate, who has stepped up from the Under-21s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/gareth-southgate-england-caretaker-manager-sam-allardyce>
 followingSam Allardyce’s departure this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
, will name his first senior squad on Sunday evening for the World Cup 
qualifiers against Malta and Slovenia next month.

The 45‑year‑old, who is to retain Wayne Rooney as his captain, will also 
oversee the games against Scotland and Spain next month, giving the Football 
Association much-needed time to identify and secure a long-term appointment 
ahead of the resumption of the qualifying campaign in March.

Yet, while Southgate has admitted he lacks the experience to fill the role on 
a full-time basis, there is an opportunity to be grasped if he impresses and, 
effectively, convinces himself he can do the job. He has received support from 
within the game, with his candidacy championed by the Wales manager,Chris 
Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-coleman>, another former 
team-mate at Selhurst Park, and Pardew, who had appeared to be a potential 
rival for the position.

“The FA have a good manager in charge in Gareth. He has been through the 
system and knows the players coming through,” said Pardew, who played with 
Southgate, a youth-team graduate, at Palace under Steve Coppell in 1990 and 
1991. “I have respect for him as a player, a coach and as a manager. I played 
with him a few times after Steve had fast-tracked him in and he was a player 
who was always keen to learn.

“He had an intelligence that was above mine and the other players’. He had 
something like eight O-Levels which, at that time, was astonishing, especially 
for us who went to comprehensive schools and the mayhem they were. In all his 
career he has always handled himself and had an intelligence to grow as a 
player. He wasn’t that good a player, really. I can say that because I’m a 
friend. But it was his intelligence that made him an England international and 
it is that same intelligence he will bring to the managerial role.”

Southgate’s only spell as a club manager, with Middlesbrough, ended in 2009  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/oct/21/middlesbrough-gareth-southgate-sacked>
but he has made his mark at the FA with the Under-21s. “The one thing you have 
to ask about top managers is: is there an X Factor there when the game is 
tight?” Pardew said. “Can he make the right substitution, the right call? Can 
he tactically set a team up at that level? He has four games to try and show he 
can and I hope he does. He can certainly relate to players, he can speak their 
language. He understands their issues, and he understands the issues around the 
England team for sure because he has that experience. He can pass that on.

“There are not many England internationals who have done all the badges on the 
coaching side. Some of them are on the television saying they want to be 
England manager and they haven’t done a coaching badge. Gareth is a coach in 
his own right, he could coach anywhere in the world, and I think he has all the 
attributes needed.

“Gareth has experienced tournament football, he understands the chain of 
command at the FA and he isn’t ‘too nice’. He has a little streak in him. It 
doesn’t come out often but you play tennis against him. The players he knows 
from the juniors will trust him straight away. Players want to know the manager 
has their back. They don’t have to worry about that with him. I really hope he 
does well.”

Those sentiments were echoed by Coleman, who featured regularly alongside 
Southgate in the Palace team until the latter was sold to Aston Villa in 1995. 
“Out of all of us, he was the one I thought would become a manager,” said the 
Wales coach. “He is his own man, strong mentally, sensible and intelligent and 
serious about football. Will it work out? I don’t know. He already said he 
didn’t want the job before Sam got it. But I said that when I got given the 
Fulham job for five games. Once I had a taste of it, I did. That will be the 
acid test for Gareth. He is either going to love it, or realise ’no, it’s not 
for me’. He will be judged on results.”

Pardew, the most experienced English club manager currently coaching in the 
Premier League, was critical of the FA for not offering potential candidates 
for the position an opportunity to attend sessions at St George’s Park to 
observe the national team at work. “They keep talking about having a system,” 
he added. “I have a little criticism that surfaced in the summer when the job 
came up. Myself, Eddie Howe or any English manager as far as I’m aware ... 
we’ve never been invited to England as a guest. I think we should be.

“We should understand what goes on at press conferences for England and behind 
the scenes, otherwise how are we going to get experience? Eddie is at 
Bournemouth and I’m at Crystal Palace. We are not at Manchester United or top 
clubs. International experience is very difficult [to get] – I have got into 
Europe twice, so you could easily put against my name that I lack international 
experience. But how am I going to get it? I have got to jump through hoops to 
get this club into Europe, so that is an error the FA should look at.”
 