
Alan Garner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/16/fiction.alangarner>
'sThe Weirdstone of Brisingamen 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8034300/The-Weirdstone-ofBrisingamen-review.html>
 andThe Moon of Gomrath <http://www.sfsite.com/11b/gom45.htm> are classics of 
20th-century children's literature. Tracing the adventures of the children 
Colin and Susan as they battle the forces of evil and fall into the world of 
legend, the books ledPhilip Pullman <http://www.philip-pullman.com/> to 
describe Garner as "the most important British writer of fantasy since 
Tolkien". It's startling, then, to learn that the author, nearing the end ofThe 
Moon of Gomrath in 1962, was tempted to throw in the towel in disgust.

"I could not go on. The book was within a few pages of its end, but I'd had 
enough," says Garner. He had come to "loath" the characters, describing them as 
"zeroes", the novels as "drivel". He brought the story to a swift, unexpected 
conclusion. He pauses: "Wait, I think I can do it", and he recites from memory. 
"'We wins!' said the Morrigan from the rhododendron bushes. And when the moon 
came out and the house reappeared, she went up to the room where Colin was and 
wrung the little bugger's neck."

Garner twinkles ferociously as he recites the lines. But he forced himself to 
find a more suitable ending, finishedThe Moon of Gomrath by the age of 27, and 
vowed – despite entreaties from a publisher – not to cash in on his 
now-established name and turn the hugely popular novels into a series.

Why, then, more than 50 years since Weirdstone was published, is he returning 
to Colin inBoneland 
<http://www.harpercollins.co.uk/Titles/76491/boneland-alan-garner-9780007463244>
, the much-hoped-for, never-expected concluding volume in theWeirdstone 
trilogy? "I'd no idea that I was going to write the book at first. But I was 
thinking for a long time about what Colin would have done," says Garner. By 
then he was "too embroiled" in his adult novelThursbitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/fiction.alangarner> to do 
anything with it, but in 2003Thursbitch was done and he "realised that there 
was, 40 years on, unfinished business".

Boneland imagines Colin as an adult, a troubled, brilliant astrophysicist who 
can remember every single thing that has happened to him since the age of 13, 
but nothing before. From his job at Jodrell Bank, he searches endlessly, 
fruitlessly, for his sister in the stars: where is Susan, and what happened to 
her? Bringing together elements of his novelsStrandloper 
<http://www.amazon.com/Strandloper-Harvill-Panther-Alan-Garner/dp/1860461611> 
andRed Shift 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/book-of-a-lifetime-red-shift-by-alan-garner-2196201.html>
, twisting and twining through Colin's story is that of a man from an ancient 
time, The Watcher, whose lonely quest plays out in language redolent of myth. 
AlthoughWeirdstone contains one of the most disturbing images in all of 
children's literature – Colin and Susan crawling through a tunnel deep beneath 
the earth – Garner saysBoneland is the first of his novels genuinely to scare 
him. "I don't think I've ever frightened myself before when writing but there 
were areas where there was terror, as though I was looking into somewhere that 
I didn't know existed before, and it frightened me."

He admits the novel isn't likely to appeal to children. "Fourth Estate are 
trying to make it as clear as possible that this is not going to be full of 
elves and witches. I think inside the dust jacket it says it is an adult book. 
My attitude is that if anybody of any age wants to read a book, let them, but I 
do think that no child would want to readBoneland."

We are talking in his home in Alderley Edge, Cheshire, the landscape of which 
is important in his books. Garner sits on a comfortable, battered old couch in 
the cool of the 16th-century timber-frame apothecary's house he moved, piece by 
piece, from its original setting where it was about to be demolished.Neil Gaiman
 <http://www.neilgaiman.com/> says he is "in awe of [Garner's] use of small, 
simple words, the way he shapes the rocky crags and high tors and deep caves of 
plot and story with words that feel like he hewed them, or whittled them, or 
flaked them from flint". But despite his standing, the author is not usually 
recognised – even by the tourists who flock to Alderley Edge to tread in the 
footsteps of his characters. He recounts the story of the time he had his head 
down an intriguing hole (he is fascinated by archaeology) and heard a school 
party walking by, and a teacher spouting nonsense about his books. "I don't 
believe there even is an Alan Garner," a child at the back muttered. He was 
tempted to withdraw his head and prove otherwise – but decided it wouldn't be 
worth it.

Garner grew up in Alderley Edge and can trace his ancestors there back over 
four centuries. As a child he played on the hill under which local legend says 
an army of knights sleep, guarded by a wizard until they are needed – a myth 
that became the basis forWeirdstone. He was the first of his family to go to 
grammar school, and from there to Oxford. But it was a comment his grandfather 
Joseph made when he was a child that made him realise he was going to be a 
writer.

"My background is deep and set in deep time, and in a narrow space, oral 
traditions going back a long, long time, which I inherited by osmosis. But I 
would come home from school and start trying to explain my excitement over 
irregular verbs, and the family could not take that, and so the price of 
education was alienation. I was seen as someone who was just trying to make a 
fool of the rest of the family. I wasn't at all," he says. "I didn't drift away 
from the family, the family emotionally just cut me off. Apart from my 
grandfather, who was a smith, who said, 'if the other feller can do it, let 
him'." He meant find your unique quality, and pursue it, and the notion 
resonated – continues to resonate – with Garner.

'I realised there was no point in trying to bridge the gap. I was intelligent, 
my family was intelligent, but I was the one who had gone the other way," he 
tries to explain. "So I do remember thinking what on earth am I going to do, 
what have we in common? It was the landscape. Because my family knew the 
landscape and I knew it in the same way, but I also knew that landscape was 
Triassic sandstone, and it was 43m years old … It was the area where I could 
draw on all the richness that otherwise would be lost in me if separation was 
allowed to become destructive."

Weirdstone took him two years to write, one year to find a publisher, one year 
to publish: "four years of dole queues and national assistance", as he writes in
The Voice that Thunders 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Voice-That-Thunders-Alan-Garner/dp/1860463320>, a 
collection of critical and autobiographical essays. Today, Garner says it is 
clear that in his first two books he couldn't handle character or dialogue, but 
"I did know the landscape, and looking as objectively as I can at those first 
two books and trying not to cringe, that young man, me, had a keen eye for 
landscape, and the ability to convey it".

He went on to work as a freelance television reporter, which he credits with 
vastly improving the dialogue in his novels, and wroteElidor 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0106x1h>, the bleakly brilliant story of four 
Manchester children who win "treasures" in another world, and have to protect 
them in this one. His Carnegie-winningThe Owl Service 
<http://www.theowlservice.co.uk/>, a terrifying tale of possession and myth set 
in a Welsh valley, and the perplexingRed Shift followed; they cemented his 
position as an author at "the prickly edge of myth", says Gaiman – "someone 
whose children's books seemed peculiarly grown up, whose adult fiction seems 
timeless".

It took 12 years for his next novel, Strandloper – based on the true story of 
Cheshire man William Buckley, who was deported to Australia in 1801 – to be 
completed. Part of the reason the novels take so long is the sheer volume of 
research Garner does – learning Welsh forThe Owl Service, becoming 
knowledgeable in, variously, the thieves' language of Cant and the Celtic cult 
of the human head forStrandloper. Garner doesn't believe he has original ideas 
– just that he puts them together in a unique way. SoThe Owl Service draws from 
theMabinogion <http://www.mabinogion.info/> and from his wife Griselda's chance 
realisation that the flowers on a dinner plate could be re-combined to form 
owls,Elidor from the ballad Childe Rowland and Burd Ellen, Red Shift from the 
story ofTamlain and the Queen of Elfland 
<http://myths.e2bn.org/mythsandlegends/origins530-thomas-the-rhymer-and-the-queen-of-elfland.html>
.

Inspiration usually comes when he's "listening to music or just looking out of 
the window. I use the metaphor of a foot slipping off the curb and jolting, 
that I often used to have in dreams. So the ideas start to come, and words 
start to flow." Early on, though, they don't flow at all. "I've learned never 
to try and force words to come." At first he writes in short bursts, "dollops", 
moving from "this sort of intermittent period, it gradually accelerates until I 
can't stop. The last few days or the last week is really very stressful 
physically. I just eat sleep write eat sleep write, and the clock is nowhere in 
it, doesn't matter what time of day or night it is."

This frenzy of authorship is part of the manic depression Garner was diagnosed 
with in 1989 – "the best news that I have ever heard", as he writes inThe Voice 
that Thunders, as it explained years of mania and inertia, including a two-year 
period when he lay either in the kitchen or in bed, "12 months of 12 hours each 
day on the settle, my face to the wall, waiting only for the 12 hours in bed". 
Elements of the psychotherapy he received after he "went seemingly mad in less 
than three months" following the adaptation ofThe Owl Service for television – 
"Go to the pain," he was told by his therapist, "go to where it hurts the most, 
and say whatever it tells you" – weave themselves tightly intoBoneland, as 
Colin attempts to unpick his own tangled mental state. That part, he says, was 
very hard for his wife to read.

Coming to an end of a book can be a dark time for Garner, but he is upbeat 
today, even though he is almost sure thatBoneland will be his last work. "I 
can't imagine, being realistic, that at the age of 77, and taking about a 
decade to write a book even when I've got an idea – which I haven't got at the 
moment – that it wouldn't be foolish to engage in it," he says. "I don't think 
I've got the time or the energy to undergo things likeStrandloper, Thursbitch 
andBoneland."

And yet, and yet … "something's going on, and the shape it's taking is 
interesting in that it's complete at whatever stage I finish it. In other 
words, provided I get a few paragraphs down and then I just drop dead, it's 
still complete. It's intriguing me. It's making me think here we go again, 
perhaps, but in a quite different way," says Garner. "I cannot conceive of not 
writing. Because everything is so interesting. I've got lots of other things I 
could pretend to retire into, such as doing more on the academic side, doing 
more archaeology, doing more historical research, but there are other people 
who can do that. And I am actually quite haunted by this idea of having to do 
what only the individual can do."

• This article was amended on 20 August 2012 because the original said 
Alderley Edge is near Cheshire. This has been corrected to say Alderley Edge is 
in Cheshire.
 