
Seeing Alan Titchmarsh blaming 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2316788/Alan-Titchmarsh-fears-future-lack-young-gardeners-interested-horticulture.html>
 the bleak future of gardening on a lack of interest in horticulture by young 
people left me somewhat puzzled, especially considering my own experience of 
what happened after being crownedBBC Young Gardener of the Year 
<http://www.forestofbowland.com/younggardneraward>.

It's become more common to hear gardening figures on the television or the 
radio voicing their concerns about how the younger generation don't perceive 
gardening as "cool" nowadays, something that differs entirely from the reality 
that we see on the ground (pun intended).

In my work with children and young people, I've been encouraged by the sheer 
amount of enthusiasm that there is. All it needs is a little nurturing. I've 
been interested in gardening since I was knee-high to a grasshopper and part of 
the reason for that was my dad's interest in it. Gardening is in my blood. 
Similarly, a friend of mine got into vegetable gardening because of working on 
an allotment with his grandparents and, thanks to Jamie Oliver and modern 
"foodie" culture, we are seeing more interest in growing your own produce.

There is something of a stereotype of gardeners being uncool, but this is 
waning as we see more young people in supportive roles. I work with children 
and teenagers of all ages and they respond so well to being taught by someone 
similar in age to them. Sometimes it's as simple as coaxing them out of the 
house and away from their computer screens and games consoles, and the more 
young people I meet, the more I hope that the increasing interest in the 
outdoors marks the beginning of a trend.

Some of the responsibility also falls on schools. They need to push 
horticulture as a viable career option rather than sidelining it in favour of 
more prestigious-sounding jobs. One of the obstacles facing young gardeners is 
expense – it has cost me thousands of pounds to develop my own nursery 
business, and support from the older generation would really have helped.

They may say that we need to encourage younger people into gardening, but we 
need practical solutions. At my nursery, we've been sponsoring primary school 
classes, for example, by providing the kids with equipment to take part in a 
wildflower-growing competition. They go off with a bag of compost and some 
seeds and then we give a prize for the best results. We also lecture nationwide 
to gardening groups and associations, and have met many enthusiastic young 
people along the way, but more needs to be done.

These latest remarks about young people's indifference to gardening are pretty 
ironic, not only because of the lack of help and resources there, but also 
because of what happened to me after becoming the BBC Young Gardener of the 
Year. I decided to go and visit theRHS Chelsea Flower Show 
<http://www.rhs.org.uk/shows-events/rhs-chelsea-flower-show/2012>, and make 
myself known to the BBC office as I was keen to fly the flag for young people 
there. Their reaction to my presence makes Alan Titchmarsh's comments about his 
fears for the future of the show being "little more than a wistful memory" seem 
a little rich – they barely gave me the time of day. That they profess to be 
concerned about the lack of participation on the part of young people seems, to 
me, to be deeply hypocritical.

At my nursery we have also invested £500,000 into building a lecture room so 
we can work alongside local schools in providing gardening courses. We 
approached a well-known gardener from the BBC to help with possibly opening the 
building to the public, but their fees were simply unaffordable for a small 
business. This just goes to show that, if theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and other organisations were that 
interested in fostering horticultural talent among young people, they'd come 
and talk to us and encourage us, and others like us, not for cash but from the 
goodness of their hearts.
 