
I try to be a Sherlock Holmes of botany. It's not enough to enjoy plants – 
I want to know why they are wilting, to work things out. I was an 11-plus 
failure when I went to study at KewGardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> at 15 and discovered a 
natural feeling for biology. .

It's an insult to suggest this is Austerity Britain. The generation before us 
must be laughing like drains when they hear that. These are the people who went 
through food rationing. And here we have families with two cars, five 
televisions and 15 mobile phones.

Gardening teaches you patience, the kind of postponement of gratification that 
is totally unknown these days.

I wish school career advisers were more aware of horticulture. They imagine 
it's just going out into public parks and pulling weeds up, not a career. But 
there is garden design, horticultural research, conservation – a whole gamut of 
angles which are overlooked.

Men in television tend to last a bit longer at the end of their careers, but 
it is women who make hay at the beginning. They don't complain in their early 
days when they are disporting themselves on sports cars. I'd like to see a mix 
of all ages on TV and wish there could be less whingeing about it.

I'm not surprised by the growing popularity of Ukip. Most voters nowadays have 
great difficulty deciding who to plump for. Formulating concrete policies is a 
problem for every party, and there is a danger of homogenisation in Europe. We 
need to join together in the things we are comfortable doing and then celebrate 
our differences.

I'm a cryer. The family has a competition to see who can get me going at 
Christmas. The last time I blubbed was on my birthday, when my daughter gave me 
a framed photo of my 15-month-old grandson Hugo, but I have been known to shed 
a tear atThe Railway Children or Pretty Woman.

Specialisation leads to extinction. We are learning more and more but about 
less and less, and one day we will know everything about nothing. There is 
nothing wrong with being a populist. It does not have to mean dumbing down, as 
people think.

Like everyone else, I fail to go to the gym. I stretch every morning on the 
bathroom floor and find that going up and down the garden keeps you quite fit. 
I am more sedentary in my life now – I just want to keep it all working.

The woods are full of bluebells, not crime, as we so often hear. We should be 
going in to see the wood anemones, the lambs' tails, the hazel catkins, not 
languishing in fear.


Alan Titchmarsh's new show Love Your Garden 
<http://www.itv.com/alantitchmarsh/loveyourgarden/> starts on Tuesday 25 June, 
8pm, on ITV1
 