
Alan Pardew has admitted Yannick Bolasie can be “undefendable” when at the top 
of his game but is confident hisCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> side will find a way of 
negating their former team-mate in Friday night’s trip to Everton.

Bolasie, who had cost Palace around £300,000 from Bristol City in 2012, played 
a significant part in the south London club establishing itself in the Premier 
League over the past three years before departing for Goodison Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/yannick-bolasie-signs-everton-crystal-palace>
 this summer in a deal that could be worth £30m. The 27-year-old will confront 
his former team-mates on Merseyside with Palace, who are likely still to be 
without the hamstrung Scott Dann, braced for a difficult evening.

“I love Yala but I just hope he doesn’t have one of his super-duper games that 
he can have,” Pardew said. “Of course he’ll be looking to impress but he has 
nothing to prove to us or our fans. Our fans still love him. I suppose we do 
know everything about him. On his day he can be undefendable at times and he 
goes from nought to five yards as fast as any player I have ever worked with. 
But that is not to say we can’t deal with him. We hope to.”

The Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager, Ronald 
Koeman, who will be without the injured Leighton Baines, will stress to Bolasie 
not to allow the occasion to influence his approach. “Yannick is always very 
committed to the team, to his team‑mates, and working hard,” he said. “For him 
it’s a special game to play against his old team but [I will tell him to] do 
his job; don’t do things differently. That’s my advice to Yannick. We knew what 
type of player he is, that is why we signed the player. He can create a lot of 
problems to opponents with his pace and physicality, which brings something 
different to the team.”

Dann, who hurt a hamstring in Palace’s EFL Cup defeat at Southampton earlier 
this month, underwent a series of fitness tests on Thursday but may not be 
risked at Everton. Wilfried Zaha has recovered from his own hamstring problem 
while Palace, unbeaten on their last three trips to Goodison Park, hope to have 
Loïc Rémy, their loanee from Chelsea, fit and available by the beginning of 
December after he tore a thigh muscle in training.
 