
He was overlooked by the Booker judges last month, but the book trade has 
spoken and namedAlan Hollinghurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst> its "author of the year" 
for his novel The Stranger's Child.

An academy of 750 book industry experts voted for Hollinghurst as their writer 
of the year, ahead of Booker winner Julian Barnes and his short novel A Sense 
of An Ending and Carol Birch's Booker-shortlisted Jamrach's Menagerie. 
Hollinghurst, who failed to make the final Booker cut for his novel about two 
families, ranging from 1913 to 2008, also beat poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy's 
new collection The Bees.

His win was announced at the Galaxy National Book awards on Friday evening and 
reflects, said the prize's organisers, "the acclaim for Hollinghurst's novel 
and the support from many in the industry who were dismayed to see it omitted 
from the Man Booker shortlist last month".

"It's fantastic that he won. It would have been ridiculous if he had gone the 
year without winning a major award for that title, so it is wonderful he has 
been recognised," said Jon Howells from Waterstone's, which sponsored the 
author of the year prize. "Everyone was surprised and disappointed that he 
wasn't on the Booker shortlist … Everyone felt it was the one glaring omission 
so it is good he is getting this. It is the book trade saying, this is our book 
of the year."

Hollinghurst, who won the Booker in 2004 for The Line of Beauty, said that "in 
a year when so many exceptional books have been published" he was "especially 
thrilled to be named the Waterstone's UK Author of the Year".

As official figures reveal 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/physical-book-sales-slump-%C2%A312m-october.html>
 that sales of celebrity biographies have slumped this year, the awards also 
saw the book trade spurn celebrity non-fiction for the literary, choosing 
Claire Tomalin's life of Charles Dickens as its biography of the year, ahead of 
Keith Richards' bestselling memoir Life and Bear Grylls' autobiography of his 
adventures Mud Sweat and Tears. Food writer Simon Hopkinson, meanwhile, beat 
celebrity chef Jamie Oliver to win food and drink book of the year for The Good 
Cook.

Tomalin described herself as "completely thunderstruck" to win the award. "I 
thought Keith Richards would win – his book was popular and accessible, and 
although the Rolling Stones mean nothing to me I hardly know anybody who hasn't 
read his book," said the author, who has won a host of prizes for her 
biographies of Pepys and the actress Nelly Ternan. "At my age you don't expect 
to go on winning prizes, you expect them to go to younger people, so I am 
deeply delighted and moved to win."

Tomalin admitted that she had received "some stick for hurtling through" the 
life of Dickens. "I did want to do it at quite a good pace though – I didn't 
want it to be one of those enormous books you could only read if you cut into 
them with a bread knife," she said. "But writing about Dickens is terrifying: 
everyone knows about Dickens. [He] is one of our very great writers who is 
known all over the world, and a very complicated and extraordinary man. [This 
prize] is a lifetime achievement award for Dickens," she added.

The "inimitable" Jackie Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackie-collins> won an outstanding 
achievement prize for a career which has seen her 28 glitzy, scandalous novels 
sell over 400m copies to date, while Times columnist Caitlin Moran won the 
popular non-fiction book of the year for her take on modern feminism, How to Be 
a Woman, beating physicist Brian Cox's Wonders of the Universe. "Brian Cox may 
have the Wonders of the Universe to play with – but I had the contents of my 
bra and pants and, ultimately, they were obviously the more mysterious and 
awesome," Moran said.

The new writer of the year award went to Sarah Winman for her debut When God 
Was a Rabbit, while a debut novelist, SJ Watson, also triumphed in the crime 
and thriller of the year category, beating top names including Ian Rankin and 
Robert Harris with his amnesia thriller Before I Go to Sleep. Dawn French's 
first novel A Tiny Bit Marvellous, meanwhile, was voted popular fiction book of 
the year, seeing off Terry Pratchett's new hit Snuff.

Her Pulitzer-winning novel A Visit from the Goon Squad saw Jennifer Egan named 
international author of the year, while Patrick Ness's A Monster Calls, drawn 
from the late Siobhan Dowd's original idea, won the children's book of the year 
prize.

The Galaxy awards, which will be broadcast over six weeks on More4 from 13 
November, are intended to reward titles "that boast both wide popular appeal 
and critical acclaim". From Saturday 5 November, the public will be able tovote 
online for their book of the year <http:> from the 11 category winners. This 
top award was won last year by David Nicholls's romantic novel One Day, which 
is now the biggest selling paperback of 2011.

The awards in full:

Waterstone's UK Author of the Year: The Stranger's Child by Alan Hollinghurst 
(Picador)
Outstanding Achievement award: Jackie Collins 
Specsavers popular fiction book of the year: A Tiny Bit Marvellous by Dawn 
French (Penguin)
More4 popular non-fiction book of the year: How to be a Woman by Caitlin Moran 
(Ebury Press)
Crime and thriller of the year (available on iBookstore): Before I Go to Sleep 
by S J Watson (Doubleday)
Daily Telegraph biography of the year: Charles Dickens by Claire Tomalin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/claire-tomalin> (Viking) 
International author of the year: A Visit From the Goon Squad by Jennifer Egan 
(Corsair)
Food and drink book of the year: The Good Cook by Simon Hopkinson (BBC Books) 
WHSmith paperback of the year: Room by Emma Donoghue (Picador) 
National Book Tokens children's book of the year: A Monster Calls by Patrick 
Ness (Walker Books)
Audible.co.uk audiobook of the year: My Dear, I Wanted to Tell You by Louisa 
Young, read by Dan Stevens (HarperAudio)
Galaxy new writer of the year: When God was a Rabbit by Sarah Winman (Headline 
Review)
 