
The Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> 
co-owners will need to see evidence that Alan Pardew is willing to make radical 
changes to his own approach and to gauge the players’ reaction in training this 
week before determining whether he still has a future as manager of the ailing 
London club.

Palace lost their sixth successive league game, 5-4 at struggling Swansea City,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday to leave them outside the relegation places on goal difference 
only and Pardew’s stewardship hanging by a thread. Senior figures at Selhurst 
Park were taking stock on Sunday after the latest embarrassing defeat, the 
visitors’ 4-3 lead having been overhauled in the last six minutes at the 
Liberty Stadium. The co-owner and chairman, Steve Parish, has consistently 
backed the manager, secured at significant expensefrom Newcastle United almost 
two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/29/alan-pardew-newcastle-leave-crystal-palace>
.

Although there is still a desire within the set-up in London for Pardew to 
turn the situation round and hoist the team back into mid-table, patience is 
starting to wear thin. Two of Palace’s co-owners, the American 
major-shareholders David Blitzer and Josh Harris, have witnessed only six 
Premier League victories since each bought an 18% stake in the club a little 
under a year ago, and will need convincing that the 55-year-old is the man to 
haul the team out of their nosedive. All parties are acutely aware of Sam 
Allardyce’s availability as an alternative.

Crystal Palace’s shambolic showings leave Alan Pardew on the brink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/crystal-palace-shambolic-showings-leave-alan-pardew-on-brink>
The three major shareholders had envisaged Pardew overseeing a critical trio 
of games against Swansea, Southampton and Hull, matches which appeared to offer 
him a chance to revive the team’s form after their dismal run, but the chaotic 
manner of Saturday’s surrender has put even more scrutiny on his position. The 
hierarchy, having been told the players have been drilled extensively on 
defensive duties over the past few weeks, will seek evidence from Pardew that 
more drastic steps are being taken to tighten up a team who have conceded 26 in 
13 games this season, and 17 in their past five matches. Palace have not kept a 
clean sheet in the top flight since mid-April.

Those changes to the approach would have to extend further than Pardew’s 
intention to hold clear-the-air talks at the club’s Beckenham training ground, 
having accused some of his players of not putting their “heart and body on the 
line” towards the end of Saturday’s defeat. The recruitment of a defensive 
coach would appear to be a priority, with Palace having shipped 13 goals from 
set pieces this season, including four at Swansea. Where that would leave the 
current coaches, Kevin Keen and Keith Millen, remains to be seen.

Swansea City stun Crystal Palace as Fernando Llorente settles 5-4 thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
The board will also seek evidence that the players are still receptive to the 
manager’s instructions. Pardew has indicated the time may have come to make 
changes to his selection at the back after seeing his team concede late goals 
in each of their past three games. Asked whether he would respond to the latest 
chastening setback by punishing his players with extra physical work, he 
replied: “No good running them into the ground. No benefit in that. But I do 
see a benefit in having a major chat about those goals we conceded because we 
talked about it all week and I haven’t had the response I wanted, if I’m 
honest, in terms of a couple of those set-plays, so I need to address that. It 
might be I need to change some of the team.”

It was put to Pardew that his players lacked leadership on the pitch when it 
mattered and “wilted” in injury-time, when Fernando Llorente scored twice from 
close range to capitalise on some woeful defending. “That’s a word you use,” 
replied Pardew. “In terms of myself, the two situations we just needed to 
defend better and you have to put your heart and your body on the line at times 
and we didn’t do that for those two goals and there’s nothing more I can add. I 
am not going to hide from it. It is an awful defeat for us in the position we 
are in.”

To complete a thoroughly miserable day for Palace, Connor Wickham left the 
field on a stretcher in the second half after twisting his knee and Pardew 
fears the worst. “It looks a serious injury. We will have to wait for the scan 
but it doesn’t look good,” the Palace manager added. “His studs got stuck in 
the ground and his knee twisted.”
 