
Alan Titchmarsh <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh> 
calls a spade a spade – a puzzling phrase, what else would you call it? Having 
said that, they probably do have other names for spades at the Chelsea Flower 
Show – known for its pretentious flourishes as much as its high horticultural 
standards. Might Chelsea nowadays clash with Titchmarsh's hardy, down-to-earth 
Yorkshire approach? Apparently not: Britain's best-known television gardener 
has been covering Chelsea for the BBC for almost 30 years (he winces when 
reminded of this). And his enthusiasm, although professional, is unfeigned. I 
find myself, slightly to my surprise, warming to his sunny-side-up personality. 
He argues that the standard of gardening at Chelsea, always good, is better 
than ever and he reminds me ofThe Devil Wears Prada, where "Anne Hathaway 
laughs about the colour of a belt and Meryl Streep explains why it is 
important". Chelsea sets the trends and "pushes boundaries", he explains.

I have Titchmarsh to myself (a situation many a middle-aged woman would envy) 
in an oak-panelled room at Chawton House, Hampshire, where Jane Austen's 
brother once lived (Titchmarsh avoids interviews at home). I inquire about his 
waxwork at Madame Tussauds, which is apparently kissed so often (melting 
kisses?) that staff have regularly to clean the top of its head. Genuinely 
embarrassed, he says: "It is not in my interests to deny it."

He is married to Alison, a dance teacher, and has two grown-up daughters – 
Polly and Camilla. I ask which plants – or plant – have been like family 
members, old flames or a dependable wife?

"The old flame I've loved for 50 years is the humble pelargonium. You can 
neglect them and yet they are good, shapely plants." He and I go on to bond 
unexpectedly over "Attar of Roses" (a pelargonium with a gorgeous, 
old-fashioned talcum powder scent). And what of new loves? "My head has been 
turned by Annabelle, a summer-flowering hydrangea, with floppy heads of creamy 
white, fading to palest green." But like many new loves, Annabelle is 
high-maintenance: a prop is needed to keep her upright.

Titchmarsh has 40 acres of land surrounding his Georgian farmhouse in 
Hampshire, where he employs two gardeners and gardens every day. "I was pulling 
out nettles this morning." His greatest – and presumably rarest – pleasure is 
"pottering". He is super-energetic, producing as a second career a crop of 
bestselling books. The latest novel is out in September and his collection of
Gardeners' Worldcolumns, Tales from Titchmarsh, is out next month. On his ITV 
show, he has launched a competition to find the People's Novelist with 
HarperCollins. The goal is to make people "want to turn the page", he observes. 
He wonders aloud about popular fiction. What, after all, might "unpopular" 
fiction be?
 