
Alan Hollinghurst lives in a light and preternaturally quiet flat on 
Parliament Hill in north London. When his novelThe Line of Beauty won the 
Booker prize <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/oct/20/books.bookerprize2004> 
in 2004, he spent some of his winnings on revamping it, with the result that it 
has a new, large sitting room with a lush view out on to a corner of Hampstead 
Heath. Furniture is sparse (he likes to joke that the money ran out before he 
could stretch to armchairs), but there are pale carpets and good paintings and 
– what's this? – a strange plaster relief, in an elaborate gilt frame, of the 
face of a (presumably long dead) young woman.

I move towards it excitedly, as if I were the first visitor ever to notice it. 
Beneath her profile is written her name: Daphne. Crikey. Was this a source of 
inspiration for Daphne Sawle, one of the most important characters inThe 
Stranger's Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483278/the-strangers-child>
, his fifth and most recent novel? He smiles, indulgently. But, no. He bought 
it at auction just as he was finishing the book, by which time Daphne Sawle was 
every bit as real to him as this fine-boned, turn-of-the-century creature.

Hollinghurst is all indulgent smiles today, which is just as well because I've 
got the jitters.The Stranger's Child, a capacious and wonderful book that 
begins in one suburban garden in 1913 and ends in another in 2008, has many 
themes. It is about love, and the passing of time; it is, too, about ambition, 
taste and disappointment. But more than anything, it is about the unknowability 
of human beings, and the misunderstandings, even the danger, associated with 
trying to plug the gaps in our perceptions.

Its nastiest and perhaps most memorable character is Paul Bryant, an 
enterprising hack reviewer and the would-be biographer of Cecil Valance, the
Rupert Brooke 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/brooke_rupert.shtml>-ish figure 
whose short life and long but ever-shifting literary reputation crouches at the 
heart ofThe Stranger's Child.

Bryant, like me, makes a living poking around in people's lives – and I have 
the impression that his creator disapproves. When he goes to stay with Daphne 
Sawle, for whom, when she was a girl, Cecil Valance wrote a famous poem, she 
likens him to a "little wire-haired ratter"; she knows, even before he has 
lobbed his first question, that all he is interested in, basically, is "smut". 
When Paul asks her if he might tape their conversation, Hollinghurst writes of 
the recorder's "odd insinuations of flattery and mistrust". He then lists, 
highly accurately, the various ways interviewees respond to it: some made 
awkward, as if it were an eavesdropper; others reassured to a degree that 
results in a kind of verbal incontinence.

I place my own tape recorder down on the small table beside us. I half expect 
it to explode, like a grenade. So, does he loathe Paul?

"Well, I wanted to depict him changing," he says, carefully. "And one knows 
how sweet young people can turn into monsters and bores." They curdle. "Yes, 
exactly. They curdle."

What about biography? Does he disapprove of it? "No, of course not. I love 
biography. But as with the novel, there's a great range between the great and 
the crap. A great biography is like a great novel; it has a deep sense of 
wisdom about life. I'm quite amused, though, and sometimes frustrated, when 
someone ends up with the wrong biographer.

"I'm potty about Ronald Firbank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/ronald-firbank>, and the first 
person to have access to all his papers was this woman, Miriam Benkovitz. She 
was in a position to do something wonderful, and she wrote this utterly inane 
book – and, of course, a minor literary figure is unlikely to have their life 
written again, so it feels like a waste. The same thing happened withDenton 
Welch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/feb/07/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
 [the writer and painter, who died in 1948]. There was this very slipshod 
biography by Michael De-la-Noy."

The Stranger's Child came out last year (it is published in paperback this 
week) to almost universal praise; the only criticism anyone seemed to be able 
to level at it was that it isn'tThe Line of Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483216/the-line-of-beauty>
. But then... controversy! The novel was left off the Booker shortlist, and 
thus became the focus for discontent with the prize and its supposedly lowbrow 
leanings; soon after, the literary agent Andrew Kidd announced that he hoped to 
establish a new, more serious fiction award (although, so far, nothing has yet 
happened on this score).

How did Hollinghurst feel about this? "I didn't say anything [at the time], 
and it's hard for me to say anything about it now because it sounds like I'm 
saying: I should have been on the shortlist."

But? "But there were a lot of books that should have been on the shortlist – 
Teddy [Edward St Aubyn, author ofAt Last] and Philip Hensher [King of the 
Badgers] and probably a lot of other books I haven't read, too. One can take a 
position about the shortlist in almost an objective way. But I also learnt, a 
long time ago, to be aloof from these things. You realise how arbitrary they 
are. It's lovely if it works out for you, but it doesn't mean anything, really, 
except in commercial terms.

"The Booker made me a lot of money. I didn't realise that all over the world, 
people will read a book just because it won theBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>." A delicious pause. "Not 
something I would do myself... But then one goes into some quite other, private 
region to produce a book." He gives me a knowing look. "I think the Booker can 
drive people quite mad. That's why it's good to be detached from it."

Is he in that private region now? I hope so. "I'm in that rather unfocused 
phase, which is one of discontent with not writing another book. What I'm 
missing is sitting at my desk and getting into the large alternative space of a 
book. I've got quite a few bits and pieces, but I haven't quite had the moment 
of revelation where I see how they fit together. It's always like this: a blur 
of different things, and then a story emerges."

Does he ever think: I'm not sure I can do this again? "I have an underlying 
confidence that I won't suffer writer's block or anything. But I never think: 
oh, this will be a smash hit. I know there are things I can do, but an element 
of doubt is probably quite important." Is writing painful? For some, it's 
agony. "Perhaps we tend to overplay the agony side of it. But then, like any 
pain, when it's over, you can't remember it. So perhaps I'm wrong to say we 
exaggerate it. What I will say is that there are times when it's just the best 
thing: the high of things coming to you. You get a peculiar sense of elation, 
as if nothing else really matters. It's not a sense of smugness. But you're 
buoyed up. Your mind is wonderfully perceptive. It's a very beautiful feeling."

I can measure out my adulthood not in coffee spoons, but in Alan Hollinghurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst> novels. Partly, this is 
because he takes such an age to write a book; the anxious wait means that one's 
circumstances have inevitably changed by the time he delivers. Partly, it's 
because I read his first novel,The Swimming Pool Library, which came out in 
1988, during my first year at university, that exciting time when I felt life 
was just beginning to get going. I remember vividly both the deep surprise of 
it – all that sex! – and my complete inability to put it down, for all that I 
was supposed to be watching children (I was their nanny).

This is, I think, something the critics rarely point out. They will tell you 
that his first four novels compose an unofficial history of gay life in Britain 
(The Swimming Pool Library, which fleshed out – quite literally – the gay world 
before and after the decriminalisation of homosexuality, was followed byThe 
Folding Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099476917/the-folding-star>
, a study of romantic and sexual obsession;The Spell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099276944/the-spell>, 
a comedy of manners whose twin engines are ecstasy and a certain kind of 
narcissism; and finally, triumphantly,The Line of Beauty, perhaps the best book 
ever written about the 80s). They will also, inevitably, claim him as the 
greatest stylist of our age. But do they ever use the word page-turner? No, 
they most certainly do not.

He wasn't always going to be a novelist, though. Poetry was his first love. An 
only child, he grew up in Stroud, Gloucestershire, where his father was a bank 
manager (he poured this time intoThe Stranger's Child: Paul Bryant begins his 
working life in a bank in a small, country town, where he reads Angus Wilson in 
his lunch hour, and gets turned on by the angle of his stool at the cash desk). 
At school – his parents sent him to board at Canford in Dorset – Hollinghurst 
became fascinated by poetical forms.

"We had to do a competition," he says. "The theme was 'the pleasures of life'. 
I wrote three sonnets." And what were, in his then opinion, the pleasures of 
life? A low chuckle (Hollinghurst is the drollest, most quietly mischievous man 
I've ever met – though it's in his eyes and the cast of his mouth and the tone 
of his voice, rather than in anything he actually says). "I'm not sure I'd 
actually experienced the pleasures of life, then. So it was a case of.... going 
for a walk, having a cup of tea, er...a pint of foaming ale!" He laughs. "They 
were published, with some typos, in the school magazine. Being a poet at school 
had a certain prestige; it was a source of glamour. And if you could write 
modernistic poems, which no one could understand, then even more so."

Later on, as a young man, he published a volume of poems, Confidential Chats 
with Boys (1982) – "intensely rare", he once described it, self-mockingly – but 
then the muse left him, and he started onThe Swimming Pool Library instead. He 
was 33 when it was published.

Hollinghurst dates his interest in architecture from school, too – and thus, 
wary though we must be of conflating life and fiction, we can also trace the 
big houses in his books to this time. "I placed Corley Court [the Valances' 
home inThe Stranger's Child] almost exactly where my prep school had been," he 
says. "I'd never gone back into that world before [Corley Court later becomes a 
school], and I realised the memories were so abundant, I could easily have 
written a 500-page novel only about that – not that I'm going to! My prep 
school, an early Jacobean house, made a deep impression on me. I could draw an 
accurate plan of every floor, even now – and all the fireplaces, the 
plasterwork on the ceilings. I just absorbed it all. You're wonderfully open 
and suggestible as a boy, though one also goes through agonies. The emotions of 
adolescence are so extreme."

After a long period at Oxford – he wrote an MLitt thesis on Firbank, Forster 
and LP Hartley – he came to London, and began working as a reviewer, eventually 
joining theTimes Literary Supplement as an editor. "It was completely 
unanticipated," he says. "I'd applied for teaching jobs. I had an interview in 
Edinburgh, and perhaps I'd still be there if I'd got that."

The editor told Hollinghurst, sounding slightly embarrassed, that his salary 
would be £11,500. "And my father said: that's more than I ever earned, old 
boy." His parents were reassured by the fact of his working at theTLS – and it 
pleased him, too, to be able to jump dramatically into a taxi and shout: the
Times! (both papers were in the same place ). He went part-time after The 
Swimming Pool Library came out, and eventually was able to make a living from 
writing full-time – which is a good thing because he has a problem combining 
fiction with the rest of life. Hollinghurst is rather sociable. He has been 
known to go to parties. But once he's deep into a novel, he has to isolate 
himself. It's for this reason, too, that he has mostly always lived alone.

We talk, before I go, about literary estates. It is a horrible fact that while 
he was writingThe Stranger's Child, in which we see Cecil Valance's reputation 
wax and wane, different parties claiming him as their own at various times, 
Hollinghurst's dear friendMick Imlah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/27/alan-hollinghurst-on-mick-imlah>
, the poet, died of motor neurone disease at the age of 52. Hollinghurst, his 
literary executor, looked on as people wrote about Imlah, "each of them saying 
what they thought about him rather as the characters do in the book".

His own literary executor is Andrew Motion (the two of them shared a house in 
Oxford; Hollinghurst is also Motion's executor). "Oh, yes, I've kept 
everything," he says. "A couple of American libraries have suggested I might 
like to deposit things with them. But I don't like the idea of people rummaging 
about in my drafts. It's embarrassing. Why expose oneself to that? And I don't 
think you should be too concerned with posterity while you are living your 
life."

He will admit, though, to enjoying writing his will, when he finally got round 
to it ("Andrew was much more organised; he wrote his ages before me"). 
Specifically, he liked the bequest section. So who, I wonder, will get Daphne, 
with her marble eyes, and her well-bred nose? He laughs, a low rumble of 
delight. "Yes, that's something I really should think about. I probably need to 
add a whole new clause for her."
 