
My fellow adult education tutor Alan Petford, who has died of lung cancer aged 
61, was an inspiring local history teacher who will be remembered by every 
student he taught.

Born in Saddleworth, now in Greater Manchester, Alan was the son of Joan (nee 
Cryer), a landscape gardener, and Ken Petford, a grammar school teacher. His 
uncle,Bob Cryer 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-bob-cryer-1369763.html>, 
with whom Alan would share an interest in vintage vehicles, became Labour MP 
for Keighley and for Bradford South.

Alan attended Hulme grammar school in Oldham, where he became head boy. He 
read modern history at University College, Oxford, and gained an MA in local 
history from the University of Leicester. Alan taught at Blackburn, Hipperholme 
and Lancaster grammar schools until he grew so disillusioned with the narrowing 
curriculum that he resigned. Forgoing a teacher’s salary, he boldly gambled on 
the financial insecurity of part-time tutoring, initially for the Workers’ 
Educational Association (WEA). It was a gamble that worked. Alan’s brilliance 
as a teacher meant he never lacked classes.

I first met Alan about 14 years ago. I was working in the School of Continuing 
Education at Leeds University, and Alan joined our team of tutors on the 
certificate in local historical studies. To teach alongside Alan was, I always 
felt, a privilege. He invariably brought in freshly discovered documents, 
always placing local evidence in its widest historical frame, his scholarly 
fluency gripping students’ imagination. Indeed, he was a genius in the 
classroom.

Alan’s specialism was architectural history, and to go on one of his field 
visits was the ultimate treat. On one occasion, shepherding students around 
Norwood Green, a gentrified former mining village near Halifax, he paused 
outside a house where the owner was clipping his hedge. Overhearing Alan evoke 
the local industrial past, the householder dropped his shears and joined in at 
the back of the group.

Although a fairly private person, Alan was an excellent conversationalist and 
always good company. Unconventional, he was the only person I know to champion 
both the WEA and grammar schools. Old-fashioned in his schoolmasterly tweed 
jacket, Alan was noticeably tardy in his conversion to computers and email.

In 2005, the School of Continuing Education at Leeds closed, as did so many 
university adult education departments, and with them the opportunities for 
mature students to study for part-time degrees. Alan himself continued teaching 
through the many local history societies and groups. At his hillside funeral in 
Saddleworth, the church pews were crowded with hundreds of those whom he had 
inspired with his teaching, generosity, and gentle genius.

Alan is survived by his sister, Helen, brother, Martin, niece, Jennifer, and 
nephew, Jason.
 