
One line from Alan Hollinghurst's new book, The Stranger's Child, is lodged in 
my head as I arrive at his Hampstead flat. Daphne Sawle, a key figure in the 
book, whom we follow from a poetically inclined 16-year-old to a tough old boot 
of 83, is about to be interviewed by would-be biographer Paul Bryant. "He was 
only pretending to be a friend," Daphne tells herself, "something no 
interviewer, probably, had ever been."

Bryant duly writes his book and uncovers all sorts of secrets about Daphne's 
tangled relationship with Cecil Valance, the Rupert Brooke figure at the centre 
of the novel, whose memory is fought over for decades after his death. I rather 
like Bryant – a "little wire-haired ratter", according to Daphne – who becomes 
increasingly bombastic as the book proceeds. Hollinghurst is perhaps less 
enamoured of his character, and of biographers who confuse art with life. I 
ring the bell with trepidation.

Hollinghurst's large flat, spread over three floors, overlooks the southern 
edge of Hampstead Heath. He lives alone – he generally has, though there have 
been "periods of experiment" with live-in partners – and the flat feels 
monastic. "I'm not at all easy to live with," he says. "I wish I could 
integrate writing into ordinary social life, but I don't seem to be able to. I 
could when I started. I suppose I had more energy then. Now I have to isolate 
myself for long periods. It's all become more of a challenge. I find writing 
novels gets harder and harder, which is not what I thought would happen. I 
thought you'd learn how to do it."

The carpets are beige – I feel an urge to remove my shoes; the walls white; 
each picture, each object, has its place; a cleaner is doing her weekly rounds 
– young, dark-haired, Spanish perhaps, the most beautiful cleaner you have ever 
seen. There is absolute silence, broken only by a loud burst of the overture to 
Swan Lake on Hollinghurst's mobile phone when his mother calls. As well as 
Tchaikovsky's lush ballet scores, he has an enduring love of Henry James – 
there is a bookcase of Jamesiana in his top-floor study. James became his art; 
forswore life to write perfect fictions. My immediate suspicion is that the 
pupil is taking the same course as the master, though I accept it is a large 
thesis to hang on beige furnishings.

The Stranger's Child – the title comes from Tennyson's In Memoriam – is 
Hollinghurst's fifth novel, and his first since The Line Of Beauty won the
Booker prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> in 2004. His 
first four books, written over a span of almost 20 years, form a quartet that 
explore gay life in the UK, present and past. The Swimming-Pool Library, his 
sex-drenched first book, published in 1988, mapped the gay world before and 
after the 1967 Sexual Offences Act, which decriminalised homosexuality; The 
Folding Star (1994) was a disturbing study of pederastic desire; The Spell 
(1998) a sex-and-drugs-fuelled comedy of manners; The Line Of Beauty another 
dark comedy exposing the hypocrisy and cupidity of the 1980s.

Those four books seem like a set of themes and variations: hidden histories, 
young men's rites of passage, the compulsion of desire, the fragility (perhaps 
even the impossibility) of love. He accepts that with The Stranger's Child he 
has embarked on a new phase. "I did have a strong sense after The Line Of 
Beauty of having come to the end of what I rather pompously thought of as a 
sort of symphonic structure of four movements and coming back at the end to the 
time at which the first book was set. It did seem to seal something off. This 
is a book I would not have been able to write 10 years ago, a book about time 
and its workings, and memory and its failings."

Did he worry about having to follow a Booker winner? "Not consciously. I'm 
quite good at shutting out those worries and expectations. But perhaps 
unconsciously I was. In a way, I was in this marvellous position that I could 
have done anything I wanted, and I meant to do something much smaller and 
quicker." A cash-in book? He laughs. The seven-year gap since he won the Booker 
absolves him of that charge.

He initially set out to write short stories, but managed only one before 
another novel took root. "My first idea of it was that it would be a novel 
about the great war that didn't actually have the great war in it. I thought it 
would be a two-part thing: the prewar section, and then you'd jump in again 
some time after the war and you'd pick up these people and see how their lives 
had been altered. But then when I added the idea of literary biography into the 
mix, I realised that I wanted to pursue it through further episodes."

I wonder if, with the new novel done, he feels bereaved. "Normally, I do have 
a brief but acute sort of depression when I finish a book, which is to do with 
saying goodbye to this place you've been inhabiting. But I was so desperate to 
get this thing off that I seem to have escaped that." He has a deep, drawly 
voice – so deep he used to be known as Basso Profundo when he worked at the 
Times Literary Supplement in the 80s – and a hesitant, donnish manner, but his 
brown eyes sparkle behind his glasses, and he laughs a great deal, managing to 
take himself very seriously and at the same time not in the least seriously.

One reason he was keen to finish the book was that he was running out of 
money. "I handed it in at the end of September, which was two years later than 
planned, so I had absolutely no money left. It was really getting quite hairy." 
Winning the Booker netted £50,000, there were foreign rights, a TV adaptation, 
and then the advance for this book, but even a novelist as successful as 
Hollinghurst – producing on average a book every five years – is not earning a 
vast sum annually.

Many novelists do journalism to top up their earnings. Hollinghurst does the 
odd book review and literary essay, but he doesn't do punditry. Isn't he 
tempted? "No," he says, "I don't really have opinions. After The Line Of 
Beauty, I was always getting requests from newspapers, asking me what the 
election meant for Labour, that sort of thing. I said I didn't have the 
faintest idea what the election meant for Labour. I just happened to have 
written a book that had a Tory politician in it."

Hollinghurst's hero, Henry James, had three distinct writing periods – early, 
middle and late. He even seems to have imagined them in capital letters. Does 
Hollinghurst think in those terms? "No," he says firmly. "That would be 
insanely self-conscious and self-important. I've always felt I was going 
gropingly into the future." Yet The Stranger's Child, with its wider canvas, 
excavation of the past and rumination on whether we can ever really establish 
the truth, does mark a new chapter. It may not be Middle Hollinghurst, in the 
sense in which James would have understood it, but it is the work of a 
middle-aged writer, whereas the four earlier novels were the work of a younger 
man galvanised by his arrival in London and by exposure to a suddenly more 
assertive gay world after 10 years doing EngLit at Oxford in the 70s. If, as 
Schopenhauer said, the first 40 years of life supply the text and the next 30 
the commentary on it, Hollinghurst, at 57, is now well into the latter.

I like to think his text phase was as exciting as his early novels might 
suggest, but he gets cagey when I ask if he was indeed "living the William 
Beckwith life" – Beckwith, the narrator of The Swimming-Pool Library, is a 
25-year-old for whom any day without a new sexual partner is a day wasted – 
when he came to London in 1981. "Not entirely," he replies, with something 
halfway between a laugh and a sigh. "But coming to London was a new phase. I 
didn't have the capital to live the William Beckwith life, but I arrived with a 
feeling this was where I was going to be from now on."

The great game that journalists – me, in fact, in Paul Bryant mode – play with 
Hollinghurst is trying to imagine to what degree the characters in his books 
are based on him. It's absurdly reductive and he elegantly refuses to play 
along – all people really want to know, he once complained, is have I really 
fucked as many men as that? – but you can't help it. Beckwith is a libidinous 
aesthete with a taste for beautiful young men, Wagner and the novels of early 
20th-century gay writer Ronald Firbank (about whom Hollinghurst obsesses); in 
The Spell, the self-effacing, thirtysomething civil servant Alex Nichols 
discovers the drug ecstasy at about the same age Hollinghurst admits to having 
been captivated by it; in The Line Of Beauty, Nick Guest is an Oxford graduate 
writing a thesis about… you guessed it, Henry James.

Hollinghurst's own life has to be pieced together from shards of fact; not 
unlike the way lives gradually, reluctantly reveal themselves in his books. He 
says he has been "incontrovertibly" gay since he was an undergraduate in the 
early 70s, but prefers not to say when he first realised he was gay. He was an 
only child, the son of a bank manager in Stroud, Gloucestershire, which one 
imagines in the 50s as a sleepy, conservative country town. Just such a town is 
the setting for one section of The Stranger's Child; there is even a bank and a 
bank manager, who is married to Daphne's daughter and has been psychologically 
damaged by the second world war. I ask whether there is anything of his own 
father in that portrait. "They are very unlike my own parents, I'm rather 
relieved to say, but I spent the first eight years of my life living in a house 
above a bank and playing in the bank after everyone had gone home, so it was a 
plunge into memory doing all that, and I rather enjoyed recreating it."

In The Spell, Alex – who has "contracted the occasional ailment of the late 
developer, an aversion to his own past" – recalls his horror of the country 
town in which he'd grown up, with its "old outfitters selling brown and mauve 
clothes [and] photos of fetes and beauty contests and British Legion dinners in 
the window of the newspaper office, which might almost have been the window of 
a museum". He also tenderly recalls the solitary child's "taste for lonely 
places", playing hide and seek alone. "It can't be hide and seek if no one's 
coming to look for you, darling," his mother tells him. "It's just hide."

Hard though Hollinghurst tries to hide in public, he drops in clues about 
himself throughout his novels. He even appears in person at the end of The 
Spell, "a sympathetic-looking man with short grey hair and a darker goatee", 
spotted by Alex when he goes cruising on Hampstead Heath. Another character in 
The Spell, an unappealing antique dealer called George, is said to have "a 
delight in artifice and a mania for honesty". The same might be said for 
Hollinghurst.

Stroud might have been terminally inhibiting for the young Hollinghurst, but 
he escaped. At eight his "aspirational" parents took the curious decision to 
send him to prep school as a boarder. "Neither of my parents had been to 
boarding school, but they thought it was important," he says vaguely. From 
there, he went to Canford public school in Dorset, also as a boarder, and it 
proved an artistic awakening. "Being in a beautiful and interesting old house 
made a profound impression on me at an early stage." The decision to send him 
away was to be the making of the young aesthete, as well as the beginning of 
the remarkable voice.

The relationship with his parents is hard to fathom, and he is reluctant to 
speak about them – "I cringe from saying anything that might be used to make 
them into figures of curiosity or comedy," he tells me later in an email. It 
has sometimes been implied that his father reacted badly to The Swimming-Pool 
Library – he has been quoted as saying, "I believe that what they are doing is 
against the law" – but Hollinghurst says the remark has been taken out of 
context. "All my father said to me was that he supposed Will was breaking the 
law by having an affair with Arthur [his young black lover], who was under the 
then legal age. It was an oblique but coolly clever way of dealing with what 
both my parents must have found a rather shocking book. But they were both from 
the start delighted by the book's success, and movingly supportive of my 
freedom to write whatever I wanted." His father died in 1991, three years 
before The Folding Star was published, but his mother, though frail at 92, is 
making steady headway with The Stranger's Child and calling him with 
enthusiastic updates on her progress.

Hollinghurst enjoyed his time at Canford, and wrote enthusiastically about it 
in the old boys' magazine, the Canfordian, a couple of years ago, recalling 
with affection two teachers who had opened his mind to poetry, painting and 
architecture. The critic Peter Parker, who was at school with him, says he 
"never thought of him as a boy – he always seemed old". Parker recalls that 
Hollinghurst had a self-deprecating manner and even then his trademark bass 
voice, and that the poetry he wrote for the magazine Parker founded was mature 
and fully formed: "I am rather proud to have been his first publisher."

Parker stresses that Canford was not Eton, yet there is a sense in which 
Hollinghurst's parents' decision to place their serious-minded son among a 
certain class of boys determined all that followed. I ask whether he accepts 
his books exhibit a fascination with upper-class life – a recurring milieu that 
some critics suggest limits his work – and when we will get his great mining 
novel. "Don't count on it any time soon," he says unabashed. "I've always felt 
rich people have more scope for behaving badly, or for behaving amusingly badly 
perhaps. Some of those issues were addressed in The Line Of Beauty: the 
interest in lovely old houses and possessions, inevitably entailing some sort 
of consideration of the people who live in them and own them. There are habits 
that I haven't shaken off. Whenever I go to any place, I go and look at the 
church, and it's an interest I put straight into my book. I probably do too 
much of it. There have been big Victorian country houses in my last three 
novels. I had to be careful this book wasn't marketed as a Downton Abbey-type 
thing, and I hope it doesn't trade in easy nostalgia and fantasy about the 
past; rather the opposite."

Hollinghurst does indeed look tweedy and staid in the school photograph that 
accompanies his article in the Canfordian. He has described living his life in 
reverse: hemmed in in his teens and 20s, when he was at Oxford, living in a 
house with Andrew Motion and doing a thesis on three gay writers, EM Forster, 
Firbank and LP Hartley, working at a time when it was not possible to write 
openly about homosexuality; then flowering in his 30s after he came to London.

Though he always had a novel "on the go", Hollinghurst initially saw himself 
as a poet. He published a well-received volume of poetry with the provocative 
title Confidential Chats With Boys in 1982, but says the muse deserted him in 
1985 on the day he signed a contract for a book of poems with Faber. In any 
case, by then the novel that was to establish him was well under way.

He started writing The Swimming-Pool Library in 1984 and it appeared to 
general acclaim four years later. "It all looked rather dicey before it came 
out," he recalls. "No one would buy the paperback rights. People didn't quite 
know how to handle it." Publishers feared that, as a book by a gay author, with 
a gay protagonist and lashings of gay sex, it might attract only a niche 
audience, but it did astonishingly well in hardback and suddenly the paperback 
rights were a hot property. "It changed my life," he says. Having been deputy 
editor at the TLS, he went part-time in 1990 and left after The Folding Star 
was published in 1994.

One question he refuses to engage with is whether he is still pigeonholed as a 
gay writer. This was the canard that followed him on his promotional tour for 
The Line Of Beauty, when interviewers asked whether his gayness defined him as 
a writer and every news piece was headlined, "Gay writer wins Booker". "I have 
a feeling it's changed," he says. "I spent 20 years politely answering the 
question, 'How do you feel when people categorise you as a gay writer?' and I'm 
not going to do it this time round. It's no longer relevant."

Can he imagine writing a book with no gay characters or gay themes? Pause. "I 
still slightly feel there are a lot of those around already, and I'm not sure 
my heart would be completely in it." He has embarked on his next novel, and 
says it will "certainly have a gay strand in it, though the protagonists will 
all be more or less heterosexual." The "more or less" is significant: sexuality 
in Hollinghurst's world is fluid. "There's a lot in The Stranger's Child which 
is rather liminal," he says. "There's quite a lot of bisexuality. One of the 
ideas of the book is about the unknowability or uncategorisability of human 
behaviour, and I was rather tempted into those ambiguous sexual areas."

He was never a writer of manifestos, but his early novels were to some extent 
conscious efforts to bring gay writing and gay life into the mainstream. That 
phase is now over. "With the first book, I was deliberately choosing the 
subject of the homosexual world and history. Now books come upon me in a more 
sly and roundabout way. Themes emerge in the process of writing." But some of 
the old imperatives still assert themselves. "Sexual behaviour, sexual mores 
and sexual psychology are fascinating, and I will always write about them." 
Hollinghurst's mania for honesty means that intellect, the hankering for order 
and beauty, will always be subverted by the messy realities of desire.

• The Stranger's Child, by Alan Hollinghurst, is published by Picador at £20. 
To order a copy for £16 (including UK mainland p&p) go to
theguardian.com/bookshop <https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop> or call 0330 
333 6846.
 