
In the next few weeks, one of the British literary world's most keenly awaited 
events is due to take place: the publication of a new novel byAlan Hollinghurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst>. The Stranger's Child will 
be his fifth novel in 23 years, arriving seven years after his last and most 
celebrated book, the Booker prize-winningThe Line of Beauty.

Hollinghurst is not a writer who rushes his words. His exquisitely poised 
sentences and vividly realised scenes emerge from a stately process of 
refinement. He estimates that he completes on average between 300 and 400 words 
in a day of writing, although there are many days in which nothing is 
forthcoming other than gestating thought. He is said to have spent two years 
thinking aboutThe Line of Beauty before embarking on the first chapter.

Yet while the final result of this deliberation is unfailingly polished, it's 
very seldom precious. Instead, his novels are engorged with a playful wit and a 
powerful eroticism. Since his stunning debut,The Swimming-Pool Library, which 
Edmund White labelled "the best book about gay life yet written by an English 
author", Hollinghurst has been burdened with a reputation as an explicitly gay 
writer. If he finds the designation annoying, he has maintained a largely 
diplomatic stance in public.

"I only chafe at the 'gay writer' tag if it's thought to be what is most or 
only interesting about what I'm writing," he said following his Booker win. "I 
want it to be part of the foundation of the books, which are actually about all 
sorts of other things as well."

The Stranger's Child is indeed about all sorts of other things. It begins in 
outer-suburban Harrow in 1913, the last summer before the First World War, and 
spans the following century. At its centre are two families and a poem that is 
destined to resound with personal and social significance.

With its rarefied atmosphere, multi-generational timespan, depiction of the 
intrusion of war and the unfolding drama of a literary conceit and a disputed 
event, the novel is bound to be compared with Ian McEwan'sAtonement. The 
similarities, however, are superficial and what stands out is Hollinghurst's 
distinctively delicious style and acuity of social observation.

He notes, for example, the strange familiarity and alienation of a young valet 
in the presence of a distinguished guest. This beady-eyed ability to cut 
through to the defining peculiarities of social relations is something that 
Hollinghurst displayed right from the outset withThe Swimming-Pool Library, but 
it was often said that it was restricted to male characters. That criticism was 
comprehensively answered inThe Line of Beauty, a fabulously elegiac account of 
the 1980s that featured several compelling female characters.

And it is now been made still more redundant in The Stranger's Child, whose 
sustaining character and dedicatee of the all-important poem is a woman who 
grows old with the narrative. Even theSun would struggle to describe it a "gay 
book", as it calledThe Line of Beauty.

The other criticism expressed about Hollinghurst's writing is that it lacks 
warmth, that his characters are essentially unsympathetic, even unlikable. It's 
a judgment that serves to reduce the novel to a personality contest. What might 
be fairer to say is that Hollinghurst does not conceal the less appealing human 
qualities – vanity, selfishness, jealousy – and nor does he seek to delineate 
his characters according to their distribution. "I don't make moral judgments," 
he has said. "I prefer to let things reverberate with their own ironies and 
implications."

Yet he is absorbed by questions of morality, which is one of the reasons that 
he is not overly concerned with wholesome depictions of stoical strength. "The 
problem with nice people is that they're frightfully boring to write about," he 
told one interviewer. "What I've always been interested in is moral weakness. 
And, most of all, bad behaviour."

Hollinghurst has managed to avoid the distorting media exposure that tends to 
accompany literary success. Most of his readers would probably struggle to pick 
him out in a crowd. He has a loyal group of friends who are protective of his 
privacy. The writer Philip Hensher says: "He's a very likable person. He's very 
modest, he's very warm and a good friend. He has certain very strong values 
about culture and literature and he's just very good company."

Last month, Hollinghurst turned 57. He was born in Gloucestershire, the only 
child of a bank manager and his wife. He has said that his was "not the sort of 
family that spoke openly about feelings, but there was quite a deep sort of 
bond between us". He never announced to his parents that he was gay. "It just 
sort of seeped out, which seemed to me a perfectly satisfactory way of doing 
it."

He was sent to Canford school in Dorset and went on to Magdalen College, 
Oxford, graduating in 1975 and completing his master of letters (he wrote his 
thesis on Ronald Firbank, EM Forster and LP Hartley, three writers who were 
gay) in 1979. At Oxford, he shared a flat with the poet Andrew Motion. 
Hollinghurst was also a poet, winning the Newdigate prize the year before 
Motion – he is godfather to Motion's oldest child. He also befriended at Oxford 
the late poet Mick Imlah, of whose work and life he wrote a moving celebration 
last year.

The pair went on to work together at the Times Literary Supplement, where 
Hollinghurst was the deputy editor between 1985 and 1990. His introduction to 
London in the 1980s bore little resemblance to the cocaine nights that awaited 
Nick Guest, the protagonist ofThe Line of Beauty. "I spent most of my evening 
sitting at home, writing a novel," he later said. "I did go to publishing 
parties, but I rather hated the business of emerging on to the street at 
8.30pm, already drunk, wondering what to do next." According to yet another 
poet andTLS deputy editor, Alan Jenkins, it wasn't the most joyful period of 
Hollinghurst's life. "BeforeThe Swimming-Pool Library," Jenkins recalled in 
2004, "it didn't seem to me that Alan and being gay was particularly happy. A 
lot of it revolved around opera. After it, life became a sort of party."

The Swimming-Pool Library won Hollinghurst the Somerset Maugham prize and in 
1993 he was named in Granta's list of best young British novelists. The 
following year, he cemented his position as a leading voice of his generation 
withThe Folding Star, a beautiful meditation on love, sex and art that was 
shortlisted for the 1994 Booker prize.

Hollinghurst has described enjoying himself in a sort of chronological 
reversal, in which his 20s were his 40s, and his 40s his 20s. Aside from 
success, another pleasure lubricant was the drug ecstasy, which he has 
described with characteristic elegance. "I came to it rather late [at 40] but 
I'm very glad I did. It was fantastic, one of the most beautiful and memorable 
experiences I've ever had."

The image of Hollinghurst clubbing on ecstasy may sit rather awkwardly 
alongside his deep appreciation of Wagner, a love of National Trust houses and 
gothic architecture and the monkish dedication to writing. But perhaps it's 
part of what Motion has called his "extraordinarily compartmentalised" approach 
to life.

It's a phrase that doesn't exactly cry out for the proximity of a life 
partner. Although there have been long-term affairs earlier on in his life, 
according to Jenkins, Hollinghurst "could be depended on to like boys who 
didn't like boys". The dalliance with rejection does not appear to have left 
him lacking in company or in need of one companion. Motion has said that his 
friend once told him that he had never been lonely. "His sense of self is very 
centred," said Motion.

If there is longing, it's contained in the novels, where the pursuit of love 
is by turns comic and tragic and always far too dramatic for resolution. It's 
in this respect, as a genuine if unsentimental romantic, that Hollinghurst is a 
particularly unusual contemporary literary novelist. He may be coolly knowing 
but never bleakly ironic. For while his characters are often promiscuous with 
their affections, they tend to be in thrall to the idea of a true love that is 
tantalisingly out of reach. Yet it's not love that's the illusion but the 
notion of its permanence. What survives is what the search for love can 
inspire: art.

The meaning of the thematic poem in The Stranger's Child develops and changes 
over time, buffeted by love and death and fashion. The novel in which it is 
carried, like Hollinghurst's other works, will also doubtless undergo future 
reinterpretations. But there is something lasting in his writing that should 
outlive the tastes and vagaries of our time. History is more likely to see 
Hollinghurst for what he is – not a gay writer, but a great writer.
 