
Just at the moment I think Alasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray> is going to finish his answer 
to my main question – about the huge act of creative completion he is 
undertaking – he veers off, unprompted, into a disquisition on sex and his 
failures with women.

"I was brought up to identify sexual intercourse with matrimony, which made me 
almost incapable of it," the 77-year-old Gray hoots like a bagpipe chanter 
blowing jazz arpeggios. The improvisational emphases and tonality mark the 
unmistakable voice of Scotland's most important living novelist – trilling with 
hilarity one moment, plummeting into mock sonorousness the next.

"Sex in, shall we say, the experimental sense."

I wonder where he is going with this and why.

"Not that I didn't try!" Gray persists. "But I always tried to seduce women 
when I was drunk."

Finally, he seems to reach a conclusion: "I'm afraid, in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, that's all too frequent!"

We laugh and I primly seek to bring the conversation back to the main subject: 
his nearly 1,000 pages of collected short stories, which span 61 years of 
writing and have finally reached the printers after multiple extended 
deadlines. These were no surprise to his publisher, Canongate, whose history 
with Gray dates back to the publication in 1981 of his first and greatest novel,
Lanark (though he insists he prefers 1982, Janine), which had taken nearly 30 
years to complete.

It was worth the wait. A legend in Glaswegian literary circles long even 
before it was published,Lanark is the novel that, inarguably, changed the 
landscape of modern Scottish fiction.

Gray recalls his feats of deadline-juggling with relish, reciting from memory 
a letter he wrote to Canongate director Jamie Byng about a reworking of Faust 
he had agreed to write: "The good news is that the book is going excellently. 
The bad news is that it will certainly not be finished by August this year. Or 
August any year! You'll have to wait till I give you the deadline, and then you 
can believe in it." Gray's voice soars to a pitch of parodied grandiosity as he 
remembers offering to return his already spent advance.

Byng, apparently, remained sanguine with the proposed timeline and the book, 
Fleck, was eventually finished.

Not all publishers have been so patient. The last section of Every Short Story 
comprises "endnotes" which detail the publication history of his past 
collections. As much as his twin artistic concerns (the collision of the 
fantastic and the ordinary), Gray's twin material obsessions (broken contracts 
and financial crises) become comic-grotesque tales in their own right.

In 1992, while trying to finish his landmark literary encyclopedia, The Book 
of Prefaces, he approached a publisher at Jonathan Cape for an advance on a new 
collection of stories because, as he openly told him, he needed the money to 
complete the earlier commission. The next day, the publisher exploded down the 
phone to Gray's agent, telling her that he didn't see why he should give "a 
fucking advance for a book of stories to a fucking writer who needed the money 
to write another fucking book for a different fucking publisher". Gray 
gleefully related his reaction to Liz Calder at Bloomsbury, who duly offered to 
publish the stories herself.

Yet, as he approaches 80, Gray has finished almost everything on almost every 
front of his artistic life.Lanark is established in the canon of modern British 
fiction;The Book of Prefaces eventually came out in 2000; his pictorial 
autobiography,A Life in Pictures (which tells the story of his parallel life as 
draftsman, designer and painter) was published in 2010; his cosmic murals (on 
the former church ceiling of the Oran Mor pub and the Hillhead subway station 
in Glasgow) are now permanent testaments to his Michelangelo-esque 
productivity; the short stories represent a monumental body of work; rejected 
scripts have been recycled as new stories; and Canongate is preparing 
collections of his novellas, plays and poetry.

"All big jobs know better than their artists how long they will need to be 
properly finished," Gray writes inA Life in Pictures. Now they have been. 
Surely, I ask, this bringing of things to completion is a form of redemption 
granted to very few artists?

But Gray is not done with the subject of women, disappointingly few of them 
though there have been in his life. "They always sickened with me in the end," 
he digresses. "They all got somebody they preferred. Except for Morag!" His 
marriage to Morag McAlpine has lasted 21 years and will, he says, "definitely 
be till death do us part".

Suddenly, I get the point. Gray has not been digressing. He has been sticking 
faithfully to the theme. As in publication, so in relationships: job finally 
done?

"Delayed gratification!" Gray rejoices and refers me to Solzhenitsyn's 
description of the "law of the last half-inch" in the Soviet gulag. The law 
states that, as you come to within that final fraction of completing your work, 
you should pray you will discover some insuperable impediment that seems to 
make the job impossible so that, if you can just concentrate on finishing that 
last, impossible part, the work will finally be good.

"Of course," he adds, "the urge to complete things is associated with the 
greater proximity of death." Like a version of the episode inLanark in which 
the hero meets his own author, he takes up a mock-authoritarian tone with 
himself: "There isn't much time, Gray, better get on with it!"

And he breaks into a peal of unsettlingly hollow laughter, which somehow 
undermines his own declaration that he has been "lucky".

Gray's laughter can be many things. It can be delightful, infectious and 
brilliant; it can also be defensive, emptily madcap, even aggressive. "Ach, 
what's the point in saying anything," he gripes later, detecting that I haven't 
followed him all the way into an argument about Scottish culture suffering at 
the hands of a "self-appointed London cognoscenti".

We are talking in his modest flat in the West End of Glasgow which represents 
the only aspect of financial security he has achieved. The Fabian socialism of 
his father, reinforced by Gray's love of the British welfare state, is all but 
nostalgia now. His hopes for an independent socialist Scotland, outside of Nato 
have recently been abandoned by the Scottish National party. His political 
beliefs remain unchanged; the world is not what it should be.

And though he writes comically about his publishing history, it is clear that, 
beneath the retelling, his were dark creative struggles, shot through with 
affronts and humiliations. While he may have been responsible for liberating 
new writers from a postwar cultural hangover in Scotland (subservient to 
English culture, riddled with self-denigration), he is less pleased by the 
success of a writer such as Irvine Welsh (whose aggressive confidence would 
have been impossible without the space opened up by Gray and James Kelman) than 
he is haunted by the lack of recognition accorded to other artists and 
dramatists (namely, friends of his).

All of Gray's own work has, to varying degrees, been autobiographical – 
returning constantly to childhood, family, friends and Glasgow, transmogrifying 
the ordinary first person into a spectacular cosmos – and vice versa. It may be 
that old age and the imminence of completion are bringing him back to the 
agonies out of which he brought himself into being as an artist in the first 
place.

The work is nearly complete, but that last half-inch comes at the 
greatest cost.
 