
It is 30 years since the publication of Alasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>'s novel Lanark 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lanark-Life-Books-Canongate-Classics/dp/1841959073> – 
a masterpiece that, while perhaps still less well read than it deserves to be 
south of the border, caused Anthony Burgess to hail him as "the most important 
Scottish writer since Walter Scott", and more or less jump-started the nation's 
modern literary culture.

By way of a side-effect, that novel also wrote Glasgow into being as a city of 
literary possibility, coaxing its topography into imaginative life, bestowing 
on it that shadowy geography of the mind that all well-written cities possess. 
The art school-educated Gray literally inscribed himself upon the city, too, as 
a muralist for pubs, libraries and even a West End restaurant, for whose 
wall-painting he was paid in meals. Asked whether he prefers to write or paint, 
he said: "I find each a great holiday from the other."

The Edinburgh international book festival <http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/> 
wanted to celebrate the anniversary of Lanark, but Gray wasn't keen to look 
back. His concession, at this year's opening event in his honour, was to 
explain what had taken him so long about it: Lanark was written over a period 
of nearly 30 years.

"I wanted to describe a man's whole life, and in the earlier phase I felt, 
'How can I describe a man's whole life when I can't even get a woman to marry 
me, and I haven't got a child?'" he said. "However, as I worked on the book, 
slowly a wife and child were added to me – and then lost – and so I was able to 
finish it."

Instead, the 76-year-old writer consented to talk about his latest book, A 
Life in Pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/23/alasdair-gray-my-life-in-pictures>
, which brings together autobiography and images in a way that has always been 
natural for him since he realised, as a child reading fairytales, that "words, 
pictures or songs" are the "only dependable form of magic".

Gray then gave a slideshow: from family photographs to drawings he made at the 
Glasgow School of Art to the mural he painted for friends to cover up the blood 
he had splattered on their bedroom wall at a party (an accident with a 
wineglass, rather than anything more violent). Each image was accompanied by 
his deliciously delirious commentary, often tailing off into "Why am I going on 
about this?" and concluding with a high-pitched cry of "Next!"

Sometimes his remarks were gnomic, such as when he described his liking for a 
drawing with a ballpoint pen: "I wanted to work with something with a hard, 
definite line; my teachers wanted me to work in pencil with a soft, delicate 
line. But I have no use for delicacy.Next!" At other times they were excursive, 
especially his blow-by-blow account of the biblical book of Jonah. Mere prose, 
let it be said, is an inadequate tool with which to describe the sheer tonal 
range of Gray's voice, from its faux-doomy bass via its boomingly demonic laugh 
to its frequently alarming falsetto.

The demonic laugh will come in useful next week when Gray plays the Devil in 
the premiere of Fleck, his version of Goethe's Faust, which is the closing 
event of the book festival. Produced with the help of the National Theatre of
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, it will star, aside from 
Gray, friends and champions such as novelists Will Self, Ian Rankin, AL Kennedy 
and Louise Welsh.

And what of Lanark? "When people say they haven't read any of my work and they 
are thinking of reading Lanark, I say, 'No! It's too long, start with the 
shorter stuff.' I myself am only really interested in what I am doing at 
present, or in the future."


 