
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> hopes to 
create a new partnership with England's restored coach Peter Moores that can be 
as effective for England as Michael Clarke and Darren Lehmann have been for 
Australia, and has knocked back suggestions that Andy Flower will remain the 
power behind the throne.

Moores spoke of using his predecessor Flower as "a sounding board" following 
his move to a new job with the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board as the technical director of 
elite coaching, but Cook acknowledged the need to make a "clean break" from the 
Flower era which ended in a 5-0 Ashes defeat.

"Me and Andy get on very well, we have been in contact over the last couple of 
months working on things with my captaincy," he said. "Having him as an adviser 
on that is something he wants to do and I want to do. But me and Mooresy have 
to be totally clear on what we want to do, me and him will steer the ship. Andy 
won't be making decisions behind our backs.

"It's going to be our team. Certainly we have to work very closely together, 
and I think you see when two coaches work together very well and they build 
something over a period of time how successful something can be if they're on 
the same page. Obviously me and Mooresy have got to chat about it but I have 
been consulted throughout the interview process. I'm sure we pretty much sing 
off the same hymn sheet [Cook slightly more tunefully than Moores, it should be 
noted], otherwise I don't think he would have been appointed."

Cook referred to the Clarke-Lehmann partnership in the context of learning 
lessons from everything Australia have done over the 10 months since Lehmann 
was appointed, on and off the field. "There's certainly a number of things they 
did very well as a side, and I think it would be wrong not to look at it and go 
'Yeah, they got the whole country behind them'. Yes they played some very good 
cricket and all the other stuff was linked into that.

"You've got to give them credit for the way they suddenly changed their brand 
of cricket. They did it to their strengths. So there's no point us playing the 
way Australia played, because you need those kind of players to do it, and 
obviously Darren Lehmann and Michael Clarke had to be given a lot of credit. 
We're going to have to look at our side and play to their strengths. Mooresy 
said it's about people feeling comfortable enough to express themselves the way 
they want. I'm not going to bat like David Warner no matter how many people 
want me to, that's not going to work. But at the end of the day it's about how 
many runs you score."

Cook goes back almost a decade with Moores, who was running the National 
Cricket Performance Centre in Loughborough when he first entered the England 
system as a youngster. "When I heard it was Mooresy on Friday afternoon I was 
really excited by it," he said. "I've got on really well with Peter, not only 
the time where he was England coach, but we did quite a lot of work on the 
Academy together before that. I think he's a really good coach, a brilliant 
coach in fact, and a really good person."

He also agreed that the departure of Flower, who had formed such an effective 
double act with Andrew Strauss, would help him stamp his own mark on the team. 
"I certainly think I inherited a side from Straussy and Flower, and now it does 
seem a bit of a clean break with the new head coach," Cook said. "So to me it 
is the start of it – quite a good place to start, after winning in India and 
being an Ashes-winning captain as well. It hasn't all been doom and gloom.

"The crucial thing is making good decisions on the field and off the field, 
and creating a culture and an image of anEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> which I will be proud 
of. The way Peter described it as well, making people proud of the way we go 
about our business. Yes it is a results driven business, we know that. But the 
way we communicate with the public … that kind of stuff, the Englishness, the 
legacy you want to leave behind of the culture we want to create.

"As a captain I seem to have got rid of two coaches and an MD," he said, 
having expressed his sympathy forAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> after he had been overlooked. 
"So I'm not sure what has quite happened. It's been an amazing 18 months. I had 
Andy as the full-time coach, then Andy and Ashley as coaches and now Peter. 
Over 18 months that's quite a lot to deal with.

"We have been in limbo the last couple of months, coming back from Australia, 
devastated with what happened, and you start to think about how to turn things 
around.

"You have a lot of ideas, talk to a lot of people, but you can't actually 
follow through until the head coach came in. When I found who it was, it was a 
weight off my shoulders. I can now pick up the phone and talk cricket."

Giles has still to inform the ECB whether he wishes to retain the role as a 
selector that he has held since 2008. If he steps down, they would be left with 
only two official selectors – James Whitaker, who succeeded Geoff Miller as the 
national selector during the winter, and the Middlesex director of cricket 
Angus Fraser – with Moores also expected to contribute, as Flower had been 
doing before his resignation.

England remain confident of securing Paul Farbrace as Moores's assistant 
despite further criticism from Sri Lanka. Their chief selector, Sanath 
Jayasuriya, appeared to acknowledge the inevitability of Farbrace's departure 
when he said the World Twenty20 winning coach "has decided to move on without 
giving us adequate time to make the necessary adjustments".

Farbrace joined Sri Lanka from Yorkshire last December on a two-year contract, 
with a clause requiring him to give six months' notice before leaving, but 
there is thought to be a six-month probation period in which that does not 
apply. He is due to meet Sri Lankan officials in Colombo on Monday.
 