
It was billed at the time as his swansong. During a playback at his Baseline 
Studios in New York, shortly before its release in 2003, Jay-Z was adamant that 
after this, his eighth album in eight years, he was ready to pass the mic for 
good. But no one really believed him.

Hova's ambitious plans for The Black Album involved a dozen producers serving 
up a dozen different tracks. Ultimately this proved a little too ambitious even 
for him, but the finished productdid feature all the producers du jour – 
Timbaland, Just Blaze, Kanye West, the Neptunes, Eminem and even Rick Rubin. 
Many consider The Blueprint to be his greatest album – after which even Jay-Z 
admits he "dumbed down for my audience to double my dollars" – but with an 
unrivalled list of heavyweights behind him, The Black Album was the more 
rounded, polished beast.

From the opening interlude – "All things must come to an end, all things must 
conclude" – to the final word, it's a gloriously epic, self-celebratory album. 
Even Ma Carter makes an appearance on December 4th, waxing lyrical about her 
"special child". Jay-Z might boast that he's the "best rapper alive", but few 
would disagree on the basis of the inventive rhymes and free flow that power 
the narrative. The rhetorical What More Can I Say breaks down at the end, 
leaving him in full dextrous a cappella, the sound of a man (supposedly) 
stepping out at the top of his game: "Pound to pound I'm the best to ever come 
around here, excluding nobody ... I'm suppos'd to be number one on everybody's 
list, we'll see what happens when I no longer exist."

It closed with My First Song, which brought us back to Jay-Z's debut single of 
1996. Except it didn't, did it? He inevitably returned, and three albums later, 
has now overtaken Elvis as the most successful US solo star ever. On record, 
however, the encore has yet to match what was supposed to be his final word.

Buy this Sunday's Observer for the full top 50 countdown, plus an interview 
with the winner
 