
One observation you could make about music in 2010 was that rock stars – you 
know, those charismatic people who say ludicrous things and hold guitars in 
sexy ways – were pretty thin on the ground. Where Gaga, Kanye and Nicki Minaj 
provided retina-scorching entertainment, the indie scene threw up awkward 
teenagers making music on laptops and hiding behind faded pictures of palm 
trees.

Despite this, several alternative scenes – chillwave, lo-fi garage, 
nostalgia-pop – did share a godhead inAriel Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink>. Don't get me wrong, Pink is 
hardly a "rock star" in the conventional sense – that should be pretty clear 
from the fact he likes to make drum noises with his armpits. But as Pink has 
inspired a new generation of new musicians – from the hippy vibes of Girls (who 
have played in his band Holy Shit) to the nostalgia-sampling pop of How to 
Dress Well – he seems mysterious and weird enough to merit the description.

Before Today was Pink's first release on a big indie label after years of 
recording hundreds of songs on to cassette tape (his mini "break" came when 
Animal Collective signed him to their Paw Tracks label in 2003). Those fearing 
a "sell-out" could relax – Before Today was no big-budget production. Rather it 
remained defiantly strange and scruffy while littered with big, catchy bits. 
Following the trap laid by opener Hot Body Rub – skronking horns over a motorik 
beat and some ghostly post-punk yelping – the likes of Bright Lit Skies and 
Round and Round burst with choruses as joyous as anything on the Hair 
soundtrack.

From here it's a dizzying surf through fragments of pop history, be it 
fuzzed-up punk (Butt-House Blondies) or sonic references to underrated west 
coast group the Tyde (L'estat (Acc to the Widow's Maid)) and Joy Division 
(Revolution's a Lie). Amazingly, the end result remains coherent.

As a time-capsule piece to remember what alternative music sounded like in 
2010, this fractured, frazzled oddity was the go-to album. It left your head 
spinning. And naturally for Ariel Pink, it also left you with little idea as to 
what he might do next.
Free music - Before Today 
<http://www.we7.com/album/Before-Today?albumId=469760>  