
If Achtung Baby was the sound of U2 chopping down The Joshua Tree, Kid A saw 
Radiohead ripping the wires from OK Computer, setting fire to the motherboard 
and throwing the wreckage from a tenth floor window. The sound of a 
stadium-rock band dissolving and regrouping into something considerably less 
well-defined, the bold steps made on their fourth album liberatedRadiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead>, enabling them to approach each 
subsequent record free from the shackles of preconceptions.

Depending on your sensibilities, Kid A was the moment when Radiohead became 
either wilfully contrary and insufferably worthy (no single, no video, strictly 
no fun) or just about the only big band that mattered. Having suffered an 
allergic reaction to the conventions – both musical and personal – of stardom, 
they almost split up after OK Computer but instead settled on a "change 
everything" ethos, largely dispensing with guitars in favour of skittish rhythm 
and an electronic sound palette inspired by krautrock, free jazz and the more 
abstract end of hip-hop.

Released in October 2000, Kid A wrestled with key post-millennial themes: the 
application of technology, information overload, identity and alienation. 
Doggedly anti-corporate and often stubbornly anti-melodic, it sometimes seemed 
less a collection of songs than a prolonged experiment in sound and 
possibility. There were moments when the band second-guessed their own 
instincts to a ludicrously leftfield degree, but also moments of profound 
beauty and deep emotion. Motion Picture Soundtrack had the ache of a long 
goodbye; How to Disappear Completely sounded like a letter from a desperate man 
confronting the corrosive effects of fame. Like much of the album, the 
scrambled paranoia of Idioteque – "Ice age coming ... we're not scaremongering" 
– was a jittery premonition of the troubled, disconnected, overloaded decade to 
come. The sound of today, in other words, a decade early.

Buy this Sunday's Observer for the full top 50 countdown, plus an interview 
with the winner
 