
The evacuation of east Aleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> has 
resumed, with about 350 people able to leave a rebel-held pocket of the city on 
Sunday, according to medical officials.

The move came despite the official postponement of evacuations of civilians 
and fighters from the devastated Syrian city and as the UN security council 
prepared to vote on a resolution to deploy observers to the city, with 
Syria-allied Russia giving cautious backing to the measure.

“Five buses carrying the evacuees arrived from besieged parts of east Aleppo,” 
said Ahmad al-Dbis, who heads a team of doctors and volunteers coordinating 
evacuations to rebel-held Khan al-Assal, from where they can travel on to other 
parts of Aleppo and Idlib provinces.

Aleppo: Elegy for a doomed city whose history spans centuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/aleppo-elegy-for-doomed-city-syria-assad>
“They were in a terrible state,” he said.

“They hadn’t eaten, they had nothing to drink, the children had caught colds, 
they were not even able to go to the toilet.”.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the 350 were able to be evacuated 
after Russia and Turkey urged the Syrian regime to allow the convoy of buses to 
pass its final control point.

Earlier, a deal to free east Aleppo’s remaining civilians in exchange for sick 
and wounded people from two pro-government villages stalled after six buses 
sent to evacuate the loyalist areas were stopped and set ablaze.


The buses were intercepted in an area under the control of Jund al-Aqsa, a 
jihadi faction aligned to the Syrian opposition. The deal to partially lift a 
siege of the villages, Fua and Kefraya, had been opposed by the 
al-Qaida-inspired Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, which was largely responsible for a 
three-year siege of the majority-Shia enclaves.

The Syrian Observatory said on Monday morning that 10 buses had left Fua and 
Kefraya to take evacuees through rebel-held territory towards Aleppo.

Sabotage attempts have turned an urgent evacuation of up to 40,000 trapped 
civilians into a protracted series of negotiations, which allow trickles of 
refugees to leave before breaking down again.


Iran and the Syrian regime have been determined to use the fate of east Aleppo 
to settle accounts with the opposition elsewhere in the country, while jihadis 
who influence parts of the rebel movement have delayed the process to win 
concessions as their grip on northernSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> steadily slips.
Conflict News (@Conflicts) 
PHOTOS: Reports coming in that an "unknown rebel group" has attacked buses 
going to evacuate civilians from Kafraya and Fuah -@Ald_Aba 
<https://twitter.com/Ald_Aba> pic.twitter.com/7xMPhumeu5 
<https://t.co/7xMPhumeu5>
 <https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/810468938689740800> December 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/810468938689740800> 
Fua and Kefraya have been key bargaining chips throughout the conflict. Both 
have been besieged, but not with the same result as east Aleppo. For the past 
18 months, Iran has tried to broker a deal with the powerful Islamist militia 
Ahrar al-Sham which would allow the remaining villagers to be relocated to 
Zabadani and Madaya, between Damascus and the Lebanese border.

In return, Sunni residents of those towns would be sent to Fua and Kefraya, as 
part of a population swap that would change the geopolitics of the region and 
help build a Shia presence from the suburbs of Damascus into Lebanon’s Bekaa 
valley, and beyond to southern Lebanon.

The population swaps were not part of the original terms of the Aleppo 
evacuation deal, which were brokered between Russia and Turkey. However, soon 
after the deal was announced early last week, Iran made a series of its own 
demands.


In addition to the relocation of sectarian groups, Iran demanded the bodies of 
slain militia fighters that it had sent to Syria, including members of 
Hezbollah in Lebanon, and Iraqi militias. It also demanded information about 
any fighters that had been taken prisoner.


The chaos surrounding the evacuation deal underscores the stakes, with east 
Aleppo in its death throes and the six-year war beginning to lose steam for the 
first time. It also underlines how a splintered opposition cannot control all 
the elements in the fight against the Syrian leadership, even as tens of 
thousands of civilians remain cornered, many of them in the open with little 
food in the depths of winter.


A claim of responsibility was posted on social media, purportedly by a jihadi 
front group, which spoke of the trapped Shia communities in strident sectarian 
tones.


The Free Syria Army, an umbrella organisation of moderate rebel groups, said: 
“The people who resisted in Aleppo are paying the price of the irresponsible 
acts of a few. This was a reckless act endangering the lives of more than 
50,000 people. It is a crime and a humiliation against our revolution and the 
resistance of the beseiged Aleppo people.”

Meanwhile, diplomatic efforts to secure a lifeline to those trapped in east 
Aleppo appeared to inch forwards after the UN security council agreed a 
compromise draft resolution on UN monitoring of evacuations. A vote will he be 
held on Monday, diplomats said.

“We expect to vote unanimously for this text tomorrow at 9 am (1400 GMT),” the 
US ambassador to theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, Samantha Power, told 
reporters after more than three hours of negotiations.

The Russian ambassador to the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, had earlier 
vowed to veto a French-drafted resolution, arguing that it did not account for 
the preparation needed for UN officials to be able to monitor evacuations.

Russia, which began air attacks on rebel-held territory in September 2015 in 
support of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, has vetoed six security 
council resolutions on Syria since 2011.

“I think we have a good text, we agreed to vote tomorrow morning,” Churkin 
told reporters after agreeing the compromise draft.

The French-drafted resolution had asked for the UN to “redeploy … humanitarian 
staff already on the ground to carry out adequate, neutral monitoring, direct 
observation, and to report on evacuations from besieged parts of Aleppo and 
protection of civilians inside Aleppo”.

It also urged: “The evacuations of civilians must be voluntary and to final 
destinations of their choice, and protection must be provided to all civilians 
who choose or who have been forced to be evacuated and those who opt to remain 
in their homes.”


The fate of more than 500 men who were detained inside Aleppo, or arrested at 
checkpoints as they tried to leave remains unknown, and rights groups have 
expressed serious fears for their safety.


By some estimates, up to 80,000 people have left east Aleppo in recent days, 
most crossing into the regime-held west of the city. Around 8,000 people were 
evacuated to the north-west Aleppo countryside as part of the evacuation deal. 
Opposition fighters were among the first to leave the city. Such a move had 
been central to the drafted terms, but was also being seen by some of the 
trapped civilians as an abandonment.
 