
Alexander Skarsgård 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alexander-skarsgard> is describing 
the challenge of wearing fangs: "I had to practise hard, they're pretty big! In 
the beginning, it was difficult because you have a lisp. The fangs come out 
when you're angry, excited, aroused, so it's tough, when you want to look 
menacing…" Suddenly, he bares his teeth at me, momentarily assuming the 
trademark snarl and glacial stare of Eric Northman, the 1,000-year-old Viking 
vampire the Swedish actor plays in HBO's hit TV seriesTrue Blood. "Again!" I 
want to shout, briefly transported into the show's hedonistic world, "do itagain
."

Thankfully I don't. While friendly, Skarsgård oozes composure and 
professionalism, his sharp suit and slick hair befitting the London hotel where 
we've met. He's almost as ice cool in person as his two most famous characters 
to date: Sergeant Brad "Iceman" Colbert inGeneration Kill, the HBO mini-series 
about the US invasion of Iraq, and Eric inTrue Blood, currently into its second 
series on Channel 4.

Skarsgård was keen to work on True Blood before even seeing a script. "When my 
agents told me about it, I said, 'Viking vampire? What is this,Conan the 
Barbarian?' But then they said Alan Ball [the Oscar-winning screenwriter of Six 
Feet Under and American Beauty] was the creator of the show and I'm a big fan 
of his work. He's so smart."

The resulting show, set in Louisiana, didn't disappoint, "It's intelligent, 
but structured like a soap opera." It's also so lusty and bloodthirsty that for 
September's cover ofRolling Stone Skarsgård 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/17389/191809> and his co-stars were 
shot naked, dripping in fake blood. Does the sex and nudity ever bother him? 
"Not at all," he says, no doubt delighting his legions of fans. "I'm with 
friends and every time we get naked on the show, it makes sense. It's wild and 
crazy and fun."

The eldest son of Swedish actor Stellan Skarsgård, Alexander, 34, was raised 
in Stockholm but has lived all over, including a stint in Leeds, aged 20 ("a 
blast"). Now a hot property in Hollywood, we'll be seeing much more of him, 
with forthcoming roles in the big-budget movieBattleship and with his father in 
Lars von Trier'sMelancholia.

But despite the glamour and the jetsetting, Skarsgård is homesick. "I went out 
for a walk last night here in London. It was all wet streets, the smell, I miss 
that. I have a great life in LA, but we don't have the crisp air you have in 
October in London or Stockholm, the colour of the trees." It seems beneath the 
cool exterior and the fangs, Skarsgård's actually just a softy at heart.
 