
The intervention of French military forces in Mali and the apparent reprisals 
in the form of the hostage crisis at the In Amenas gas processing plant in 
Algeria have brought the threat of al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) to 
international attention. The drama of the hostage crisis has shot the hitherto 
unknown group Signatories in Blood and its leaderMokhtar Belmokhtar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/17/mokhtar-belmokhtar-algeria-hostage-crisis>
, variably referred to as an Islamist with ties to Osama bin Ladin and/or a 
senior al-Qaida leader, to notoriety overnight and has prompted western leaders 
to focus on the possibility of a growing threat of Islamist terrorism on 
Europe's southern border. Such tragic events are bound to provoke a strong 
reaction, yet, upon closer examination, it seems that the idea of a threat to 
mainland Europe is overstated.

Even at a glance, the nature of the attack – hostage-taking for financial gain 
– is not the kind we have come to associate with al-Qaida over the years. 
Rather than reflecting the "signature" suicide attack with mass casualties, the 
event fits more appropriately into the series of other hostage-takings that 
have taken place inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> in 
recent years but which have not been on so grand a scale and hence have not 
gained the same attention as events at In Amenas.

It is not only the events which are different: the particular branch of 
al-Qaida to which they have been ascribed, al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb 
(AQIM), formerly known as the GSPC (Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le 
Combat – Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat) stands out for its focus on a 
local agenda. Although it has allegedly claimed that it supports Bin Ladin, the 
group, which was found to be responsible for car bombings that took place in 
Algiers in 2007, as well as a number of other local incidents, appears to be 
more concerned with overthrowing the Algerian government and the institution of 
an Islamic state in its place than with Bin Ladin's vision of the 
reestablishment of the caliphate and global jihad against the west.

While it can be argued that the above is not entirely out of touch with 
al-Qaida's stated aims, it is nonetheless a return to the "near enemy" – the 
forces of occupation and secularisation – that have preoccupied Islamists for 
almost a century. While the AQIM's claim to be acting in the name of "al-Qaida 
central" feels very much like a convenient piece of flag-waving, current 
al-Qaida leader Ayman al-Zawahiri declared in 2006 that America andFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> were the enemies, indicating a 
pragmatic approach by which senior al-Qaida leaders aim to flatter their local 
affiliates, enabling one side to continue to maintain the impression of its 
global reach while the other benefits from association with the infamous name. 
The true extent of any link or cooperative strategy, however, remains open to 
question.

If there is little evidence to suggest genuine cooperation between AQIM and 
the senior leadership of al-Qaida, the connection between al-Qaida and 
Belmokhtar and his Signatories in Blood is even more tenuous. Sometimes 
referred to as "Marlboro man" for his cigarette-smuggling exploits, Belmokhtar 
has a wide-ranging and impressive criminal career which includes drug 
trafficking, diamond smuggling and the kidnapping of dozens of westerners, such 
as diplomats, aid workers and tourists, for ransoms of up to $3m each. Yet 
Belmokhtar's success and growing influence were to be his downfall as far as 
his membership of AQIM was concerned.

While his actions at In Amenas supposedly link Belmokhtar to al-Qaida in the 
eyes of the west, he in fact made the news on various jihadist forums for 
falling out with AQIM for his "fractious behavior", and either resigned or was 
formally dismissed from its ranks in late 2012. Such splintering is far from 
exceptional; indeed, it exemplifies the present state of al-Qaida.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> in the Arabian Peninsula 
(AQAP), operating in Yemen, and the recently formed Ansar al-Sharia are a case 
in point: despite their different names and agendas, the two groups are 
frequently referred to as one and the same and are conceived of as somehow 
representing a joint force. This bias amongst commentators towards presenting a 
united al-Qaida in various regions of the world is conducive only to 
resurrecting the popular, yet deeply flawed theory that al-Qaida operates on a 
global basis as a cohesive group, with all that this implies for the threat it 
poses to global security.

Today more than ever before, al-Qaida and its local affiliates are highly 
fragmented and in disagreement as to their priorities of ideology and strategy. 
Indeed, the lines of fragmentation only begin here: beyond the increasing 
internal debate, al-Qaida and its local affiliates find themselves in direct 
contest with other, often more established Islamist groups with radically 
different worldviews and agendas, many of which now enjoy greater popularity 
because they are not so ready to spill the blood of their fellow Muslims.

Whilst the existence of groups such as The Signatories in Blood and the 
dramatic, violent nature of incidents such as mass hostage-takings and 
car-bombings heightens fears in the west of a resurgence of the al-Qaida that 
caused so much death and destruction on 9/11, the truth is that most of today's 
al-Qaida franchises have a much more limited vision. Thus, whenDavid Cameron 
announces that Britain 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/21/terrorism-al-qaida-north-africa>
 must pursue the terrorists with an iron resolve, he unwittingly reinforces a 
notion of a unified Islamist threat that does not exist in that form. It is a 
convenient narrative which benefits both the propaganda machine of Islamists 
and the calls of those in the west who support military action, yet the true 
picture of those who claim to act in the name of al-Qaida – both in Africa and 
elsewhere – is far more nuanced, and much less of a threat to Europe, than we 
are commonly led to believe.


Christina Hellmich is reader in International Relations and Middle East 
Studies at the Department of Politics and International Relations, University 
of Reading
 