
Armed forces in Chad claim to have killed Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the commander of 
an al-Qaida-linked brigade which carried out a bloody assault to take western 
hostages at a gas plant inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> 
in January.

Belmokhtar died in a raid on an Islamist rebel base 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2013/mar/03/algerian-hostage-mastermind-killed-video>
 on Saturday, according to a military spokesman.

One of the world's most wanted terrorists, he had claimed responsibility for 
the strike on the In Amenas gas plant in which more than 60 people were killed 
after troops stormed the complex on 19 January.

In a statement read out on Chadian television, armed forces spokesman General 
Zacharia Gobongue said: "Chadian armed forces operating in northernMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> completely destroyed a terrorist base 
… The toll included several dead terrorists, including their leader Mokhtar 
Belmokhtar."

Belmokhtar's death, if confirmed, would be a major blow to Islamist rebels in 
northern Mali who have been pushed into their mountain strongholds by French 
and African forces.

The report of his death comes days after Chad's president, Idriss Deby, said 
soldiers in Mali had killed another leading al-Qaida commander in the Sahara, 
Adelhamid Abou Zeid. French officials said they could not confirm the killing 
of either Abou Zeid or Belmokhtar.

Chad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad> is among several African nations 
that have contributed forces to a French-led military intervention in Mali 
aimed at ridding its vast northern desert of Islamist rebels who seized it 
nearly a year ago, following a coup in the capital. Britain has provided 
logistical support to the military operation.

Western and regional nations are worried that al-Qaida will use the zone as a 
launchpad for international attacks and strengthen ties with homegrown Islamist 
groups, such as al-Shabaab in Somalia and Boko Haram in Nigeria.

In a speech on Friday, French president François Hollande said the Mali 
operation was in its final stage: "Terrorist groups have taken refuge and are 
hiding in an especially difficult zone."

Belmokhtar, nicknamed Mr Marlboro because of his involvement in cigarette 
smuggling, was born in Algeria in 1972 and claimed he gained combat experience 
in Afghanistan before returning to his home nation. The one-eyed gangster had 
also been dubbed "The Uncatchable" by French intelligence after being linked to 
a series of kidnappings of foreigners in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> over the past decade.

He was sentenced to death by an Algerian court in 2008 for the murder of 13 
customs officers.

Belmokhtar began a two-decade career of Islamic militancy, first as a member 
of Algeria's Islamic Armed Group in the country's civil war, then as a joint 
founder of the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat.

That faction evolved into al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, a group as 
interested in kidnapping and smuggling as building an Islamic caliphate. But 
his relationship with the al-Qaida leadership became strained and it was 
announced in October that he had been relieved of his command. He later formed 
his own group based in Gao, Mali, called the Khaled Abu al-Abbas Brigade, which 
claimed responsibility for the attack on the gas plant.

His group also uses the name the Masked Brigade.

Belmokhtar was believed to have remained close to his former comrades in 
al-Qaida.

"He is a pirate king of the Sahara," Jon Marks, a specialist in the region at 
the Chatham House thinktank, said after the gas plant attack. "But like most of 
these Algerian groups he mixes criminality with ideology, with the balance on 
either aspect depending on the circumstances."
 