
More than a week after the In Amenas gas plant in Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> was attacked by Islamist fighters, 
the precise numbers caught up in the bloodshed remain uncertain.

Earlier this week the Algerian prime minister, Abdelmalek Sellal, said 37 
foreign nationals from eight countries and one Algerian died in the siege, with 
five more people unaccounted for. However, totals released by individual 
nations come to a figure of 40 dead or missing from nine nations, excluding 
Algeria.

UK/Colombia 

Three British nationals are known to have died in the siege, with three more 
still listed as missing, although some of these have been confirmed by their 
families as dead.

Five names have been made public, whether by the Foreign Office or their 
families: Kenny Whiteside, 59; Paul Morgan, 46; Sebastian John, 26; Garry 
Barlow, 49; and Carson Bilsland, 46. Carlos Estrada, a Colombian national who 
worked forBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> and lived in London is 
also believed to have died.

Twenty-two British survivors were flown back to the UK.

Japan

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> suffered the biggest confirmed 
death toll with 10 nationals known to have died. They all worked for a Japanese 
engineering company, JGC Corporation. Seven other Japanese staff survived the 
siege.

Several Japanese victims have been named, including JGC's former 
vice-president, Tadanori Aratani, 66, who had been due to meet officials from 
his company's British partner, BP, on the day of the hostage crisis.

Another victim, 59-year-old Fumihiro Ito, comes from Minamisanriku, one of the 
towns destroyed by the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami. His mother, Fukuko, 
lost her home in the disaster and has now lost her only son.

Philippines 

According to the country's foreign ministry, six Filipinos are known to have 
been killed with another four missing. Four morePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> nationals were treated in 
hospital in Algiers, with more than 30 others flown home after escaping.

Norway 

Five Norwegian staff from the country's Statoil company remain missing, 
although none have as yet been confirmed as dead. They are: Tore Bech, 58; Hans 
Bjone, 55; Victor Sneberg, 56; Thomas Snekkevik, 35; and Alf Vik, 43.

US 

Three American nationals died and seven survived. The US state department 
named the dead as Victor Lovelady and Frederick Buttaccio, both from Houston, 
and Gordon Lee Rowan, whose hometown was not given.

France 

France's foreign ministry has confirmed the death of one national, Yann 
Desjeux, with three other French people escaping. Among the escapees was 
Alexandre Berceaux, a catering company worker, who spent 40 hours hidden under 
his bed.

Romania 

Two Romanians were killed; one during the siege and one dying later in 
hospital from injuries sustained during the attack, according to the country's 
foreign ministry, which did not name the victims. Three other Romanians are 
known to have escaped.

Malaysia 

Two Malaysians, who have not been named, were initially listed as missing, 
though the country's embassy in Algiers has since confirmed that one of these 
is known to have been killed. Three other nationals escaped.

Algeria 

Sellal said earlier this week that one Algerian national, identified as a 
security guard, was killed in the attack. However, it remains unclear if this 
number will end up being higher.
 