
The death toll from the four-day siege at an Algerian gas plant deep in the 
Sahara has risen to at least 81, with nine Japanese nationals also reported 
killed in an attack claimed by a veteran Islamist fighter on behalf of al-Qaida.

The Algerian prime minister, Abdelmalek Sellal, is expected to give details at 
a news conference on Monday about one of the worst international hostage crises 
in decades, which left British, American, French, Japanese, Norwegian and 
Romanian workers dead or missing.

A security source said on Sunday that Algerian troops had found the bodies of 
25 hostages, raising the total number of hostages killed to 48 and the total 
number of deaths to at least 80. He said six militants were captured alive and 
troops were searching for others.

That number climbed further on Monday when a Japanese government source said 
the Algerian government had informed Tokyo that nine of its citizens had been 
killed, the biggest toll so far among foreigners at the plant.

Veteran Islamist fighter Mokhtar Belmokhtar claimed responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/17/mokhtar-belmokhtar-algeria-hostage-crisis>
 for the attack on behalf of al-Qaida.

"We in al-Qaida announce this blessed operation," he said in a video, 
according to Sahara Media, a regional website. He said about 40 attackers 
participated in the raid, roughly matching the government's figures for 
fighters killed and captured.

The fighters came out of the desert and seized the facility on Wednesday, 
capturing a plant that produces 10% of Algeria's natural gas exports and 
residential barracks nearby.

They demanded an end to French air strikes against Islamist fighters in 
neighbouring Mali that had begun five days earlier. However, US and European 
officials doubt such a complex raid could have been organised quickly enough to 
have been conceived as a direct response to the French military intervention.

David Cameron has warned that the fight against terrorism in north Africa could
last for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/20/algerian-hostage-crisis-terrorism>
 as he confirmed that six Britons and a British resident were believed to have 
died.

The prime minister said the seizure of the In Amenas gas facility by a group 
of international jihadists was a stark reminder of the threat from terrorism 
the world over. He pledged a global response to what he described as a global 
threat.

"It will require a response that is about years, even decades, rather than 
months," Cameron said. "Tragically, we now know that three British nationals 
have been killed, and a further three are believed to be dead. And a further 
British resident is also dead."

He said the "whole country" would join him in sending condolences to the 
victims' families.

Cameron was speaking hours before the first of the British victims was 
identified on Sunday night as Paul Thomas Morgan, 46. In a statement issued by 
the Foreign Office, his family described him as a "true gentleman" who "loved 
life and lived it to the full" and "died doing the job he loved".

Morgan was reported to have been a veteran of the 1991 Gulf war and former 
French Foreign Legionnaire working as a liaison between workers and local 
security staff. Originally from Liverpool but living in Spain, he was said to 
have been in a bus going to the airport to return home following a one-month 
stint when the attack took place.

The prime minister's statement is a recognition that the Arab spring has 
irrevocably changed the dynamics of the wider region, ushering in new 
democratic possibilities but also dangers from unpredictable, ruthless and 
well-organised extremist groups.

Asked if the current al-Qaida threat to north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> was comparable to the threat in 
Afghanistan a decade ago, Cameron replied: "It is different in scale but there 
are similarities."

He added: "What we face is an extremist Islamist violent al-Qaida-linked 
terrorist group – just as we have to deal with that in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan."

A further 22 Britons involved in the crisis at the In Amenas gas facility have 
returned to the UK, the Foreign Office said. The Algerian authorities said they 
had captured alive six members of the militant group during a search of the 
complex.

Amid confusion about what precisely happened on Saturday, Algerian forces 
searching the refinery for explosives on Sunday found dozens more bodies, many 
so badly disfigured it was unclear whether they were hostages or militants, a 
security official said.

Speaking on Sunday, Alan Wright, who survived the attack, described how he hid 
in an office after the jihadists stormed the compound last Wednesday.

Wright, 37, a BP employee, said he eventually joined Algerian colleagues who 
fled by cutting their way out through a fence.

"If you have been captured, there's pretty much no escape and it is going to 
take a miracle to get you out," he told Sky News. He said the expatriates were 
surprisingly calm as word of the attack spread with everyone "going into safe 
mode".

The most chilling moment came when one of the hostage-takers walked past their 
building and said good morning in a friendly Arabic voice, trying to trick the 
foreigners out, he said. "That was the first moment when we thought we are in 
big trouble here," Wright said.

Speaking on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, William Hague, the foreign secretary, 
said it was "quite likely" some of the Britons were executed by the 
hostage-takers, who identified themselves as the Signers in Blood – a splinter 
group of al-Qaida in the Islamic Mahgreb (AQIM).

Communications minister Mohamed Said admitted the final death toll "strongly 
risked being revised to a higher figure". Earlier, the Algerian authorities had 
said 107 foreign hostages and 685 Algerian nationals were freed.

Among those reportedly shot dead was Abdul Rahman al-Nigeri, a terrorist from 
Niger, who is thought to have led the jihadist group that attacked the desert 
plant, initially ambushing a convoy of buses leaving with expats for the 
airport. The attackers came from six different countries, Said said. At least 
eight Algerian hostages died, together with nine Japanese nationals and one 
from France. One American was confirmed dead.

Statoil, the Norwegian company that runs the plant alongside Britain's BP and 
Algeria's state oil company, said five Norwegian staff were missing.

France's foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, also expressed solidarity with 
Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, which has battled a major 
Islamist insurgency since the 1990s. He said: "Faced with terrorism, we have to 
be unwavering. These are killers, they pillage, they rape, they sack."

The situation was dreadful, he said, adding: "The Algerians know at what point 
terrorism is an absolute evil."

Fabius rejected suggestions that he was being soft on Algeria because France 
needed – and had been given – permission by Algiers to overfly its territory 
during France's military intervention in neighbouring Mali.

President Barack Obama said the US would ask Algeria for a full explanation of 
what happened, but said: "The blame for this tragedy rests with the terrorists."

Cameron will chair a meeting on Monday of the government's crisis response 
committee, Cobra, to discuss Algeria, and will make a statement on the attack 
in the Commons. The National Security Council is meeting on Tuesday to discuss 
the threat posed by AQIM. "We have already been looking a lot at the threat 
posed by AQIM, but more work will need to be done," said a source.
 