
Words matter, particularly after the past decade of western intervention in 
Muslim countries, and particularly when uttered by a British prime minister. 
After such a history of sustained and repeated failure one would have thought
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> would choose 
his words with care in the aftermath of the attack on the Algerian gas plant. 
The guiding principle of any response, western or regional, to Islamic 
militancy should be clear by now: don't make it worse; don't talk about global 
wars, existential threats to "our way of life", conflicts that could last for 
decades, spreading to new continents. From invasions that triggered civil wars, 
from counter-terrorism that blundered into counter-insurgency, the twin follies 
of enlarging the battlefield and of swelling the ranks of potential combatants 
might finally have revealed themselves. After so many years of fruitless war, a 
British prime minister might have been expected to unpick the narrative of a 
clash of civilisations.

Mr Cameron's gut response <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-21112189> on Sunday to 
the Algerian attack bore the unmistakable echo of these Bush-era tropes. His 
second, in aCommons statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/jan/21/cameron-algeria-hostage-crisis-live-blog>
 on Monday, retreated rapidly, and wisely, from this terrain. He talked instead 
of patient, intelligent and resolute approaches. He acknowledged the existence 
of different insurgent groups in north Africa with local leaderships and 
agendas, not all suffused with the same ideology. He recognised how lack of 
governance, legitimacy and accountability fuelled these conflicts, and the key 
role that politics and mediation will play in isolating the groups that carried 
out last week's attack. We will wait and see which approach wins out.

The continuing failure of al-Qaida to achieve its aims in the Muslim world is 
a political not a military one, as Osama bin Laden himself realised. The cause 
was too global. It was fatally weakened by local specificity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/20/algerian-hostage-crisis-dark-days>
. If the tide turned against al-Qaida and its offshoots it was because local 
populations in Iraq, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia did. If the 
overthrow, which al-Qaida so assiduously worked for, of western-backed Arab 
dictatorships produced Islamist-led coalitions that rejected violence, drew 
their legitimacy from the ballot box and embraced religious pluralism – 
particularly in Egypt, the homeland of al-Qaida's current leader – it is 
because al-Qaida's most potent weapon, its ideology, backfired on home turf. It 
alienated even more Muslims than the foreign interventions did, which is saying 
something. Where counter-terrorism worked, it was usually done by levering the 
alienation that al-Qaida's methods created.

Before the borderlands of Algeria, Mali and Niger reverberate to the daily 
sound of CIA-operated drones, it is worth drawing some obvious conclusions: 
Mali remains the fulcrum, and the danger of the current crisis was well 
signposted by those who knew how important it was to the region. Its internally 
displaced refugees need protection from rebel reprisals. The coup leader Amadou 
Sanogo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amadou_Sanogo> should be pressed to stand 
down, and an interim legitimate government formed. A west African peacekeeping 
force should urgently be assembled. In the major urban centres of Gao, Timbuktu 
and Kidal, a referendum should be held on the future status of the region. The 
retaking of the north should not be allowed to degenerate into revenge for 
previous defeats of the Malian military. Tuareg civilians should not be 
conflated with rebels or Islamist groups. While the Malian military needs 
French and UN frontline support, this is exactly the time to be reinforcing 
these messages. An African intervention needs to impose a straitjacket on the 
Malian military, as the price for helping it defeat an extremist enemy.

The danger of a drones-based response is clear for all to see. The ranks of 
militants are easily replenished when the fire of the conflict spreads. 
Limiting its spread requires a different response. It remains to be seen just 
how many Somali, Afghani, Iraqi and Yemeni mistakes the international community 
is prepared to repeat in Mali.
 