
The names of the three Americans killed during a four-day siege at an Algerian 
gas plant were released by US authorities on Monday, as it was claimed that a 
Canadian had been involved in the planning the raid.

In a statement, the State Department confirmed that Victor Lynn Lovelady, 
Gordon Lee Rowan and Frederick Buttaccio were among the scores of international 
employees killed in the attack, responsibility for which has been claimed by 
al-Qaida linked terrorists.

Expressing "deepest condolences" to the families of the three American 
victims, State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said that officials were 
aware of a further seven US citizens who survived the attack.

The total number of hostages known to have been killed now stands at 48, with 
British, Americans, French, Japanese, Norwegian and Romanian workers among the 
dead. Dozens of militants also died during fighting with special forces tasked 
with bringing the hostage crisis to an end.

The Algerian government claimed the raid had been co-ordinated by a 
Canadian-Algerian jihadist and relied on extensive inside knowledge of the 
facility.

The deadly stand-off began last Wednesday when militants seized the facility 
at the In Amenas gas field in the Sahara.

It ended on Saturday, when Algerian forces mounted a final assault against the 
captors.

By that time, five Americans had already been taken out of the complex and led 
to safety. The remaining two US hostages survived Saturday's fighting and were 
flown to London.

Officials had already confirmed that Buttaccio, from Texas, was among the dead 
at the site.

Militants had offered to release Lovelady and Rowan in exchange for the 
freedom of two terror suspects being kept in the United States: Omar Abdel 
Rahman, convicted of plotting to blow up New York landmarks, and Aafia 
Siddiqui, a Pakistani scientist apprehended after shooting at two US soldiers 
in Afghanistan. The White House rejected the offer.

In the statement released Monday, the State Department reiterated the 
administration's belief that the terrorist assailants alone were responsible 
for the deaths. "As the President said, the blame for this tragedy rests with 
the terrorists who carried it out, and the United States condemns their actions 
in the strongest possible terms," Nuland said.

"We will continue to work closely with the government of Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> to gain a fuller understanding of 
the terrorist attack of last week and how we can work together moving forward 
to combat such threats in the future," she said.

No details were released concerning the circumstances in which the three 
Americans were killed.

Four of the British victims have been named: a former member of the British 
speed skiing team, Carson Bilsland, 46, an oil worker originally from near 
Blairgowrie, Perthshire; Paul Morgan, 46, a security expert; Garry Barlow, 49, 
a systems supervisor from Liverpool; and planning manager Kenneth Whiteside, 
59, from Glenrothes, Fife. Carlos Estrada, a Colombian BP executive who lived 
in London, is also believed to be among the dead.

The Algerian prime minister, Abdelmalek Sellal, said on Monday that the final 
decision by the country's special forces to storm the site on Saturday was 
triggered by an intercepted order to execute the remaining seven hostages and 
by the jihadists' plans to blow up the desert gas pumping plant which, Sellal 
said, could have spread debris across a 5km radius.

Sellal said 29 jihadists from the al-Qaida splinter group Signers in Blood had 
been killed and three had been captured alive.

He said the attack was orchestrated by a Canadian national known only as 
Chedad, who he said was now in Mauritania. Surviving hostages also talked of a 
militant at the scene with a north American accent calling on foreign 
contractors to come out of hiding.

John Baird, the Canadian foreign minister, said: "We can't confirm the 
accuracy of these reports. But our embassy in Algiers and our team in Ottawa 
are working to try to verify this information."

Sellal said the militant cell included men from Egypt, Mali, Niger, Mauritania 
and Tunisia, as well as three Algerians, and he claimed the plot had been 
hatched at least two months previously.

The attackers had driven hundreds of miles from Mali arriving across the 
Libyan border.

The jihadist operation "knew the facility's layout by heart" from a former 
driver from the plant from Niger, Sellal said.

Sellal said the Signers in Blood group – followers of a veteran Algerian 
jihadist called Mokhtar Belmokhtar – had planned to blow up the In Amenas gas 
field and take hostages back to Mali to use as bargaining chips.

"Their goal was to kidnap foreigners," he said. "They wanted to flee to Mali 
with the foreigners but, once they were surrounded, they started killing the 
first hostages."

He said a guard at the gate of the complex who was wounded in the initial 
attack had set off an alarm that stopped the flow of gas and warned workers of 
an imminent attack. "It was thanks to him that the factory was protected," 
Sellal said.

He said Algerian special forces had no choice but to intervene because the 
jihadists were going to flee the country with their captives and because they 
planned to kill the hostages and blow up the installation.

He said talks with the militant group had been "a real labyrinth" in which the 
hostage-takers made "unreasonable" demands. There was no choice for Algerian 
forces but to attack, he said.
 