
If anyone in Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> knows the 
full story of what happened at the In Amenas gas facility in the Sahara it is 
General Mohamed "Tewfik" Mediene. And he, characteristically, is not talking.

As the echoes of the hostage drama reverberate across north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, the mysterious head of the DRS 
intelligence agency is leading the effort to hunt down the jihadists who 
orchestrated the raid.

His deputy, General Bashir Tartag, commanded the assault that ended the most 
high-profile terrorist incident to take place on Algerian soil, threatening 
vital gas exports to the west. Tartag, known as "Le Bombardier", also has a 
reputation for brutality and ambition.

Mediene, 73 and in poor health, has stayed in the shadows. Described as "the 
God of Algiers", the spymaster is the most powerful man in the country after 
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika – and perhaps a candidate to succeed him; some 
say he is even more powerful.

"Algeria has long been governed, alternately more and less behind the scenes, 
by varying groups of men known collectively as 'le pouvoir' [the power]," US 
diplomats said in a 2007 cable released by WikiLeaks. "It has become 
increasingly clear that the "pouvoir" now consists primarily of Mediene and 
Bouteflika."

The 75-year-old president was absent throughout the crisis, undergoing medical 
treatment in Geneva. Mediene and the army, say well-placed sources, kept him 
out of the picture because they were angry that his agreement to let French 
planes fly over Algeria to attack Islamist rebels in Mali was leaked from Paris.

The Algerian regime is famously opaque. Photographs of Mediene are rare – 
duringat official ceremonies cameras systematically avoid his face. "Mediene 
meets other security chiefs. The French, the Americans, the Russians, probably 
the Saudis and maybe the Egyptians. But only the big boys," says a European 
analyst.

Born in Kabylie in 1939, Mediene served in the French colonial army and 
deserted after the start of the FLN revolt in 1954. Trained by the KGB, he was 
promoted after the 1988 riots and became head of the DRS in 1990 – which 
probably makes him the longest-serving head of any intelligence agency in the 
world.

Mediene was a tough and influential figure at a crucial moment in 1992 when 
the military cancelled elections that Islamists were poised to win, triggering 
a bloody civil war that claimed about 150,000 lives over the next few years. He 
was with the hardline "eradicateurs", not the "conciliateurs" who backed 
negotiations.

Under his command the DRS infiltrated armed groups and was accused of 
committing massacres to discredit its enemies – some of whom later morphed into 
al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). Allegations of torture were rife.

"Their operating manual was straight KGB," says Jeremy Keenan, an Algeria 
expert at London University. "That means creating your own terrorists, setting 
up parallel trade unions so nobody knows what's going on, and then atomise 
them. It's the most stunning form of control. Mediene is absolutely ruthless."

It is a backhanded tribute to Mediene's formidable reputation that some have 
suggested the In Amenas attack was another DRS dirty trick designed to "prove" 
the danger of jihadi extremism. Details about the raid remain confused and 
there is concern about the way that it was handled by the Algerian authorities. 
But there is no evidence that it was not a genuine terrorist incident. It looks 
much more like a cock-up than a conspiracy.

"The DRS is a powerful agency in Algeria but it is wrong to think that it can 
control everything," says Francis Ghiles, a Maghreb analyst at the Barcelona 
Centre for International Affairs. "This was a major failure for Algerian 
security. They would not have been complicit in something like this. Mediene's 
whole raison d'etre is to make Algeria secure."

In Amenas may well turn out to have weakened the veteran security chief. 

"Bouteflika got rid of a lot of people who opposed him but he has not been 
able to stop the DRS," says George Joffe, a consultant on Algeria.

"Tartag has been rather badly damaged. The system over which he and Mediene 
preside has been shown to be incompetent at a time that the succession to 
Bouteflika has not been resolved. People know there was a level of incompetence 
that is frightening and a level of brutality that was probably unnecessary. 
That raises questions about the competence of the DRS."
 