
How do you judge the success of a terrorist spectacular? A decade ago, it 
would have been enough for an organisation like al-Qaida to simply carry out an 
attack like 9/11.

Such an attack would have established not only that they exist, and that they 
are potent and dangerous, but to present their calling card to would-be 
recruits.

So how should one regard the attack on the In Amenas gas plant in Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> – as a success, or as an 
overwhelming failure?

That question is debated in the light of the comments by David Cameron made in 
the immediate aftermath of the siege, that we face "a generational struggle" 
against jihadi ideology, not least in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. Remarks – bizarrely – that seem to 
accept at face value the narrative of al-Qaida in the Islamic Mahgreb (AQIM).

And while much has been made of the fact that many of the attackers came from 
other countries – including Canada, it is alleged – that is not necessarily a 
sign of strength but an indication that such groups are struggling to find 
local support and have to rely on a tiny minority for whom jihadi extremism is 
a lifestyle choice.

The reality is the operation widely believed to have been ordered by the 
veteran jihadist Mokhtar Belmokhtar can be framed much more in terms of failure 
than success.

All the evidence is that it was planned long in advance, perhaps, according to 
some reports, two months ago, around the time that his group announced its 
split from AQIM.

It is clear too from the statements made by the kidnappers in the middle of 
the siege that their intention was to take large numbers of hostages and if 
possible remove them from the plant to use as a bargaining chip. Instead it 
ended with the deaths of almost all of the attackers – including some of 
Belmokhtar's most loyal and experienced lieutenants. While that must raise 
serious questions about the organisational capability and ultimately its 
long-term resilience, it is likely to have longer term consequences for the 
survival not only of his own unit, but AQIM.

In regional terms it has been Algeria that has been a stumbling bloc in terms 
of international co-operation against transnational groups with interests in 
both crime and terror in the Sahel region of north Africa.

When the first discussions were launched about an international military 
mission to reclaim northern Mali, it was Algeria that sought reassurances that 
there would be no spill over across in borders.

The escalation by Belmokhtar's group is also likely to have other 
consequences. While the aggressive pursuit of him and his followers by 
different agencies of different countries is now a given, In Amenas may quickly 
come to be seen as a serious strategic misstep for a figure who has 
long-survived in the Sahel's lawless margins through the joint tactics of 
building alliances and keeping his hostages alive.

In Mali, where he had interposed his group, the test for Belmokhtar and other 
allied organisations, is likely to be how many of the Tuaregs who joined the 
Islamist uprising last year are prepared to stick with al-Qaida affiliates that 
led the seizure of the country's northern towns or – faced with both a 
French-led military operation and hostility from many in the local population – 
peel off and press for negotiation.

Indeed the history, in the past decade, of jihadi groups is that wherever they 
have sprung up, the violence of their methods and extremism of their beliefs 
means that, unlike the Taliban for instance, they have always struggled to 
seize and hold power.

The biggest unanswered question, however, is likely to be found in the 
reaction to the raid within the uneasy and loosely allied constellation of 
jihadi groups in north Africa itself. Whether Belmokhtar's initiative leads to 
more cohesion, or exacerbates existing disagreements and splits in AQIM over 
the last few years will take time to emerge.

In the final analysis it seems likely that In Amenas will make it more 
difficult for jihadi groups in the region to operate rather than easier.
 