
The extremist gunmen who took over the In Amenas gas field last week used a 
British hostage to draw other foreigners out of hiding, it emerged on Monday.

An Algerian survivor called Chabene told journalists that the hostage was held 
at gunpoint and "they threatened him until he called his friend in English 
saying: 'Come out, come out, they're not going to kill you. They're looking for 
Americans'… A few minutes later, they killed him."

The chilling scene emerged as one of a number of accounts of the Algerian 
hostage ordeal that underlined the cold-blooded nature of the militant 
operation which appeared to have been planned with inside knowledge of the gas 
facility and which appears to have been focused on killing foreigners.

A Norwegian worker gave an account of the first attack, at 5am on Wednesday 
morning, on a bus taking him and other westerners to the airport. He told 
Norwegian journalists he had the impression the jihadist group was heading for 
the gas plant and was taken by surprise when they ran into the bus and its 
police escort, which fired back when the attack began.

"The bullets came in waves," the unnamed worker from Bergen said. The workers 
lay on the floor of the bus until an Algerian soldier arrived and led them to 
safety. "We crawled 100 metres through the desert to a military post. We were 
shot at the whole way," he said.

The attackers then split into two groups, one going to the main gas plant, the 
other heading for the living quarters two miles away.

Abdelkader, an Algerian BP employee in his 40s, was at a guard post when a 
jeep with seven people inside smashed through the barrier and came to a sudden 
halt. He said the gunmen got out of the vehicle, ordered the guards not to 
move, took their mobile phones and disabled security cameras.

Abdelkader told reporters that one gunman told him: "You are Algerians and 
Muslims, you have nothing to fear. We're looking for Christians, who kill our 
brothers in Mali and Afghanistan and plunder our resources." He said the 
militants shot one of the guards in the foot and led the others inside the 
plant. Abdelkader said he was freed after telling the gunmen he was a father of 
four.

His account is one of several that suggest the attackers were extremely well 
informed about the plant's layout. According to Riad, an employee of Japanese 
engineering company JGC, the jihadists appeared to know camp procedures and the 
sections of the living quarters run by BP and JGC, where most of the foreigners 
lived, even those foreigners' room numbers. "They had accomplices on the 
inside," said Riad.

He described how the Japanese workers were then hunted down and killed. "A 
terrorist shouted, 'Open the door!' with a strong North American accent and 
opened fire. Two other Japanese died then and we found four other Japanese 
bodies," Riad was quoted as saying on French news websites.

"They were brutally executed," said another Algerian worker who identified 
himself only as Brahim, who also witnessed the killing of the Japanese 
contractors.

A JGC spokesman, Takeshi Endo, passed on an account from an unnamed Japanese 
survivor to the Daily Yomiuri newspaper. He had been one of several workers 
about to leave the living quarters in a bus convoy at dawn on Wednesday morning 
when the first attack took place and the bus ahead of his was hit by intense 
gunfire. His driver braked and jerked the bus into reverse in an attempt to 
flee, but a wheel snapped off and the passengers fled across the desert back to 
their cabins.

According to Endo, the JGC employee was only in his room for a short time when 
the militants shot off the lock and dragged him out and handcuffed him. He was 
marched to a bright room where other hostages had been rounded up and the 
militants began speaking to Algerian workers in Arabic. Without warning, there 
was a burst of gunfire and two hostages alongside him fell to the floor dead.

"I was prepared to die," Endo quoted the employee as saying.

He and a Filipino colleague were then bundled into a pickup truck and driven 
off towards the gas plant, but the vehicle was sprayed with bullets as Algerian 
special forces opened fire, shattering the windscreen and forcing the hostages 
to lie on the floor. Their captors fled and the Japanese worker lay under the 
vehicle for two hours before darkness fell and he made a run for freedom across 
the desert, where he stumbled upon Algerian soldiers.

One of the Filipino workers at the site, Ruben Andrada, who appears to have 
been in the same vehicle as the Japanese JGC worker, said he was made to wear 
explosives on his body "like a necklace" before being herded on to the truck 
that appeared to be heading to the gas plant when it came under fire from 
Algerian soldiers.

Most vehicles in the convoy exploded and Andrada thinks the reason he survived 
is that the explosives in his vehicle failed to detonate. He lay in the 
wreckage with a gunshot wound in his right arm for two hours until he was 
rescued.

Speaking from his hospital bed in Algiers, he commended the Algerian troops 
for stopping the jihadist convoy. "I'm grateful for what they did," Andrada 
said in a telephone interview with al-Jazeera YV. "The [Algerian] defence 
minister came to see me and apologised for what happened. I said it is quite 
understandable, as it has to end here inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> and not spread into other 
countries."

Two French survivors described how they had managed to survive by hiding in 
the sprawling facility. Murielle, a nurse, toldEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 1 radio that as soon the attack 
started, she made the connection with the conflict in neighbouring Mali, where 
French forces had launched offensive against Islamic militants.

"I told myself they mustn't find me as I'm a woman and I'm French. With what's 
going on in Mali, it's better they don't catch me," she said. "At best, I'll 
get a bullet in the head. At worst, as a woman … I don't have to draw you a 
picture."

Her Algerian co-workers told her the jihadists were going from room to room 
breaking down doors looking for foreigners, but somehow overlooked the corner 
of the living quarters where she and three colleagues were hiding.

The four discussed whether to carrying on hiding or to try to escape across 
the desert. "I told them we had to take our chance. You can't submit to them, 
otherwise you are giving in to the terrorists," Murielle said.

It was only when the jihadists announced over the public address system that 
they were going to blow up the site that her colleagues were convinced. They 
dressed in work clothes and caps to blend in with a group of 26 Algerians and, 
at 7am on Thursday morning, Murielle used a pair of bolt cutters kept on board 
an ambulance to snip through the camp's perimeter fence.

The group then ran across the desert. "Out there, we saw some men in uniform 
in the distance. They could have been terrorists. We just didn't know. Either 
they were going to kill me on the spot or put me on a pickup to take me back to 
the site," she said. They turned out to be soldiers.

"To find out that all those who stayed behind were murdered is hard," she 
said. "I am devastated. I'm in a really bad way. I will never forget them."
 