
During the past few weeks, the terrible violence in Mali and Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> has shocked the world. The events 
have also reminded us how much of Africa is still French-speaking and how deep 
French influence still runs in those territories. More than this, the conflicts 
have reminded everybody else that the French still regard this part of their 
world as their backyard

The long French involvement in African affairs, from Rwanda to north Africa, 
has also been marked by bloody massacres and torture. This is especially true 
of Algeria, the largest country in Africa, first conquered by the French nearly 
200 years ago. Algeria gained its independence in 1962, after a hard-fought war 
against France, notable for the use of terrorist tactics and torture on both 
sides. Poverty and terrorism are still ever-present in Algerian life. At the 
same time, as the focus of the Arab Spring shifts to northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, it is also shifting nearer to 
France, which has the largest Muslim population in Europe.

It's hardly surprising, then, that the French are becoming increasingly 
sensitive to changing moods in the Muslim world and especially Algeria. Indeed, 
this is not the first time that events in north Africa have threatened to spill 
over intoFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. In the 90s, when 
Algeria became a slaughterhouse and tens of thousands were killed in the dirty 
war between the government and Islamist insurgents, Paris was the chief target 
of Algerian extremists. In 1995, Abdelbaki Sahraoui, a moderate imam, was 
gunned down in northern Paris by the terrorist Groupe Islamique Armé (GIA). His 
death was followed by a swift succession of bombings on civilian targets in 
Paris that left eight dead and more than 100 wounded.

More recently, France was convulsed by a series of murders over nine days 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/toulouse-shootings> last March including three 
French soldiers of north African descent killed in two separate shootings, and 
a rabbi, his two young sons and a third child in an attack on a Jewish school 
in Toulouse. The rage only intensified when it became known that the killer was 
Mohamed Merah, a young French citizen of Algerian origin. Before Merah was shot 
dead in an armed police siege of the block of flats where he lived, he declared 
that he wanted to "bring France to its knees".

Many ordinary Algerians wanted to pass the affair off as an internal French 
matter and did not want to be contaminated by association. There was much loud 
anger in the Algerian press about the way in which the murders were linked to 
Merah's Algerian origins: this was pure racism for many. But none of this 
stopped Merah becoming a hero, praised as "lion", in the radical mosques of 
Algiers. Fifty years on from their last real war, it seems that France and 
Algeria are still quite capable of tearing each other's throats out.

I first saw for myself the rawness of these emotions when I went to study in 
France in 1982. I ended up living on the outskirts of Lyon, which is where the 
first so-called urban riots kicked off – the precursors of the riots of the 
2000s. Throughout that summer – the "hot summer" – cars were regularly set 
alight by immigrant youths who called this kind of entertainment "rodeos" and 
who declared war on the police. The centre of the violence was thecité (housing 
estate) in Vénissieux called Les Minguettes.

At the time, I knew little about French colonial history and assumed that 
these were race riots not much different to those we had known in the UK in 
1981. But I was aware that most of the kids who were fighting the police were 
of Algerian origin and that this must have some kind of significance.

Thirty years on, the unresolved business between France and Algeria has grown 
ever more complex. That is why last year I launched a Centre for the Study of 
France and North Africa (CSFNA) at theUniversity of London Institute in Paris  
<http://ulip.london.ac.uk/node/250>(ULIP) where I am dean. The overall aim of 
the centre is to function as a thinktank, bringing together not just academics 
but all those who have a stake in understanding the complexities of 
Franco-Algerian history; this necessarily involves journalists, lawyers and 
government as well as historians.

At the same time, I am writing a book called The French Intifada, which is a 
parallel attempt to make sense of French colonial history in north Africa. This 
book is a tour around some of the most important and dangerous frontlines of 
what many historians now call the fourth world war. This war is not a conflict 
betweenIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> and the west or the rich 
north and the globalised south, but a conflict between two very different 
experiences of the world – the colonisers and the colonised.

The French invaded Algeria in 1830. This was the first colonisation of an Arab 
country since the days of the Crusades and it came as a great shock to the Arab 
nation. This first battle for Algiers was a staged affair. Pleasure ships 
sailed from Marseille to watch the bombardment and the beach landings. The Arab 
corpses that lay strewn in the streets and along the coastline were no more 
than incidental colour to the Parisian spectator watching the slaughter through 
opera glasses from the deck of his cruise ship.

The trauma deepened as, within a few short decades, Algeria was not given the 
status of a colony but annexed into France. This meant that the country had no 
claim to any independent identity whatsoever, but was as subservient to 
Parisian government as Burgundy or Alsace-Lorraine. This had a deeply damaging 
effect on the Algerian psyche. The settlers who came to work in Algeria from 
the European mainland were known aspieds-noirs – black feet – because, unlike 
the Muslim population, they wore shoes. The pieds noirs cultivated a different 
identity from that of mainland Frenchmen.

Meanwhile, Muslim villages were destroyed and whole populations forced to move 
to accommodate European farms and industry. As the pieds-noirs grew in number 
and status, the native Algerians, who had no nationality under French law, did 
not officially exist.Albert Camus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> captures this non-identity 
beautifully in his great novelL'Etranger (The Outsider): when the hero 
Meursault shoots dead the anonymous Arab on an Algiers beach, we are only 
concerned with Meursault's fate. The dead Arab lies literally outside history.

Like most Europeans or Americans of my generation, I had first come across 
Algiers and Algeria in Camus's writings, not just inL'Etranger but also his 
memoirs and essays. And like most readers who approach Algeria through the 
prism of Camus, I was puzzled by this place, which, as he described it, was so 
French that it might have been in France but was also so foreign and out of 
reach.

Part of this difficulty arises from the fact that the Algeria Camus describes 
is only partly a Muslim country. Instead, Camus sees Algeria as an idealised 
pan-Mediterranean civilisation. In his autobiographical writings on Algiers and 
on the Roman ruins at Tipasa, he describes a pagan place where classical values 
were still alive and visible in the harsh but beautiful, sun-drenched 
landscape. This, indeed, is the key to Camus's philosophy of the absurd. In his 
Algeria, God does not exist and life is an endless series of moral choices that 
must be decided by individuals on their own, with no metaphysical comfort or 
advice, and with little or no possibility of knowing they ever made the 
absolutely correct choice.

It is easy to see here how Camus's philosophy appealed to the generation of 
French leftist intellectuals that fought in the second world war, a period when 
occupied France was shrouded in moral ambiguity as well as in the military grip 
of the Germans. It was less effective, however, in the postwar period, as 
Algerian nationalism began to assert itself against France, modelling itself on 
the values of the French Resistance.

Camus was sympathetic to the cause of Muslim rights. However, like most 
Europeanalgériens on the left, Camus spoke no Arabic and had little patience 
with religion, including Islam. Most importantly, throughout the 1950s, as 
violence between the French authorities and Algerian nationalists intensified, 
Camus found himself endlessly compromised. His intentions were always noble but 
by the time of his death in a car crash in 1960 he had acknowledged that he no 
longer recognised the country of his birth.

During the 90s, it became all but impossible to visit Algeria. Reading Camus 
as a way in to this Algeria was simply a waste of time. This was a country 
dominated by terror as the hardline government fought a shadowy civil war 
against Islamist insurgents who sought to turn Algeria into "Iran on the 
Mediterranean".

Algerian Muslims were regularly massacred by Islamist and other unknown 
forces. Foreigners were declared enemies by the Islamists, targeted for 
execution. The government could not be trusted either. The only non-Algerians 
who braved the country were hardened war reporters such as Robert Fisk, who 
described disguising his European face with a newspaper when travelling by car 
in Algiers and staying no more than four minutes in a street or a shop – the 
minimum time, he decided, for kidnappers to spot a European. In Algiers in the 
mid-90s, in this formerly most cosmopolitan of cities, an hour or so's flight 
from the French mainland, for Algerians and Europeans kidnap and murder were 
only ever a matter of minutes away.
 Andrew Hussey, centre, at a north African cafe in the Parisian district of 
Barbes. Photograph: Franck Ferville for the Observer 
When I finally arrived in Algiers for the first time in 2009, the city I found 
was not like this. The ceasefire and amnesty had been in place for several 
years, although as recently as 2007 there had been a wave of deadly bombings 
and assassinations. But although you no longer had to hide your status as a 
European, the city was still tense. On the drive from the airport, I passed no 
fewer than six police or military checkpoints, all manned by heavily armed men. 
It was getting dark and Algiers was emptying out for the night. During the long 
nightmare of the 1990s, nobody had dared to be out of doors after dark and the 
habit remained.

As we drove against the rush-hour traffic towards my hotel in the centre, you 
could see that, along with Marseilles, Naples, Barcelona or Beirut, this was 
one of the great Mediterranean cities; in the dusk, I could still make out the 
pine forests of the surrounding hills and the magnificent dark-blue sweep of 
the bay. Unlike any of her sister cities, however, with maybe the exception of 
Gaza, Algiers went into lockdown at the first shadows of evening.

Over the next few days, I crawled all over the city, walking the boulevards, 
climbing steep streets and staring out at the sea from the heights. I spoke to 
everyone I could – teachers, shopkeepers, students, journalists, political 
activists. They were all remarkably frank, breathless and impatient to tell 
their stories to an outsider. Their suffering during the years of Islamist 
terror had been incalculable. An elegant university lecturer, a specialist in 
Marxism and feminism, told me how she went every day to classes at the 
university, driving past the headless corpses that were regularly pinned to the 
gates of the institute. A journalist recalled for me the vicious paranoia of 
everyday life in Algiers in the 90s, and how, as he walked down the street, 
bearded young men he did not know would hiss at him and make a throat-slitting 
gesture.

A young female student who had grown up in the "triangle of death" – the 
villages and suburbs controlled by terrorists just outside Algiers – recounted 
a childhood memory of washing other people's blood off her feet, having waded 
through the muddy streets of her village after a massacre. She delivered these 
facts in a cold, steady voice, obviously distancing herself from the nightmare 
for the sake of self-preservation.

Despite the horror stories, my exhilaration at first overcame fear. I had 
waited a long time to be here. In the past two decades, I had worked and 
travelled extensively in the sister countries of Morocco and Tunisia. All the 
time, I had been dreaming of visiting Algeria, of seeing Algiers, the capital 
of French north Africa.

Most of all, I wanted to see the Casbah – the old Ottoman city that runs from 
the hills of Algiers down to the sea. These days, the Casbah is a rotting slum. 
Its narrow and ancient streets stink of sewage. There are gaping holes left by 
unfinished renovation projects or by unloved houses that have shattered and 
collapsed from neglect. Many of the inhabitants mutter that the authorities 
would like to see the complete destruction of the Casbah, which they see as a 
haven for criminals and terrorists. There is talk, too, of property speculators 
who want to build hotels and shops on prime real estate. Still, this is the 
most iconic and historically significant space in north Africa.

Walking down through Algiers from the Casbah is an eerie experience. This is 
not because of the usual cliches about Arab or Ottoman cities – that they are 
"timeless", "medieval" and so on. These are meaningless European notions of 
chronology, urban order and modernity grafted on to the living reality of 
21st-century Muslim life. Rather, the sense of the uncanny you meet during a 
first trip to Algiers is classically Freudian: it is the dream-like sense that, 
without knowing it, you have already been here before. This is partly because 
of the myriad films, books and paintings about and of the city that have made 
Algiers probably the most known unvisited capital in the world. It is also 
because walking through Algiers is like walking through the wreckage of a 
recently abandoned civilisation, whose citizens have only just departed in a 
hurry, leaving behind them their most personal possessions which you 
immediately recognise.

As you step down to the packed streets leading towards Place des Martyrs, the 
ruins of the French city begin to reveal themselves. As you go down past the 
Turkish-style mosque and the city widens towards the sea, the arcades, passages 
and the streets are constructed with the geometric precision to be found in any 
French town. The centre of gravity of the French city was here, between the rue 
d'Isly (now rue Larbi Ben M'hidi) and rue Michelet (now rue Didouche Mourad).

The streets may now be named after heroes of the war against France, but 
Algiers here is as purely French as Paris, Lyon or Bordeaux. This much is 
revealed in the details of the street – the street signs, the lamps, the 
carefully constructed squares, the blue-shuttered balconies, the old tram 
tracks and the cobbled paving stones. At the dead centre of the city is the 
Jardin de l'horloge, a compact garden terrace that looks out directly on to the 
harbour, and where the monument to the French dead who gave their lives for 
"Algérie Française" has been covered up. As in Venice or down by the port in 
Marseilles, passing ships seem so near that you feel you could walk on to them.

This is the cityscape that is lodged deep in French cultural memory, 
persisting in paintings, books and films as the emblem of the city. One of the 
enduring images of this part of Algiers appears in the final part of the 1937 
moviePépé le Moko. This tells the story of Pépé, a Parisian gangster played by 
Jean Gabin, who is on the run from the Parisian police and holed up in the 
Casbah. Pépé falls in love with Gaby, a young Parisian tourist, who evokes in 
him a longing for the Paris he has abandoned for his imprisonment in the Casbah.

In the final scene of the film, he risks capture by the police by leaving the 
Casbah and running down to the French city and the port, down to the ship where 
Gaby has embarked to return to France. He is arrested and led away. In a final 
gesture of love for Gaby (and the Paris she represents), he calls out to her, 
pushing against the steel gates that he cannot pass. As Pépé calls out to his 
lover, she cannot hear him. In frustration, Pépé takes out a pocket knife and 
stabs himself in the heart. The scene closes with a shot of Pépé's corpse 
stretched on the gates that have kept him in Algeria and cut him off from the 
ship that we then see bound for France. The drama of this moment is heightened 
all the more as it is clearly set against the backdrop of the French city and 
the Casbah – two worlds forever locked in mutual antagonism.

On my latest trip to Algiers, I climbed for the first time the hill to Notre 
Dame d'Afrique. This church is visible practically everywhere in Algiers, but 
on all my journeys to the city I had never got round to visiting it. During the 
90s, there was a permanent police presence here and the priests were under 
24-hour protection. When I got there, I found the atmosphere relatively 
relaxed. It was a sunny day and the esplanade around the church was thronged 
with families, picnicking, enjoying the views (which are some of the best in 
Algiers), kids playing football. The terrace overlooks the district of 
Bologhine, which contains the football stadium and the Christian and Jewish 
cemetery. The seafront houses look like a small town from Brittany or Normandy 
that has been grafted on to a Mediterranean vista.

Inside the church, a handful of elderly pieds-noirs were at prayer. I chatted 
to a few, who told me that this was still their home and that they prayed for 
peace, which they hoped for but never expected to see. Over the altar is the 
rubric "Pray for us and the Muslims".

Outside in the sunshine, I chatted to the families and children at play. I 
asked them if they had ever been inside the church. I asked one kid, about 10 
years old, wearing a Chelsea shirt and kicking a ball, if he knew what the 
building was. "Eh bien oui," he said in perfectly accented Mediterranean French 
that could have come from Marseille, "ça c'est la mosquée des Roumis. Mais il 
n'y a plus de Roumis." Oh yeah – that's the mosque of the Romans. But there 
ain't no more Romans.

In Algiers in the 21st century, the French may have left but France is still 
the enemy. It also represents the promised land. By day, the streets of 
downtown Algiers are thronged with unemployed young men who dream of France but 
have no chance of getting the visas they need to get there. The visits by 
President Chirac in 2003, then Sarkozy in 2007, and, most recently, François 
Hollande at the end of last year have all been met by crowds chanting: "Give us 
our visas!"

The Algerians who have made it in France can find the atmosphere strange and 
unfriendly when they come back. Sinik, a rapper in Seine-Saint-Denis, came over 
and swore that he would never come again: he was met by heckling crowds and 
general indifference. For a whole generation, so-called democracy has made 
Algeria feel like a prison. They don't need to be taunted by those who have 
escaped.

No one really knows exactly when the last "war for liberation" ended. All 
everyone knows is that the rate of killing has slowed down but nobody feels 
free. The tension hangs in the air, waiting to be transformed again into an 
electric storm.

The French Intifada, by Andrew Hussey, will be published by Granta in the 
autumn
 