
The inaugural Ted Hughes award for new work in poetry, founded by Carol Ann 
Duffy, has gone toAlice Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald>
, a nature poet who writes "very much in the tradition" of Hughes, according to 
the poet laureate.

Oswald won the £5,000 prize, funded with Duffy's yearly stipend from the 
Queen, for Weeds and Wild Flowers, in which she has imagined the characters 
behind the evocative names of common plants and flowers. Judges considered 
radio poems, film poems, public art inscriptions and works for the stage for 
the prize, intended to reward "the most exciting contribution to poetry" in the 
past year. Oswald's collection, interspersed with etchings by Jessica Greenman, 
was selected ahead of shortlisted poets including former laureate Andrew Motion 
with his collection The Cinder Path, and Jackie Kay's bringing together of 
verse, music and theatre The Maw Broon Monologues.

Poet and judge Jo Shapcott said Oswald's collection crossed "artistic 
boundaries and age boundaries and is unsettling and unsettled in every good 
way"; Duffy, who was not involved with the judging process, agreed that the 
collaboration with Greenman was "unusual", and fit the award's criteria. "I 
think it was a fabulous shortlist anyway, but Alice Oswald of all poets working 
today is probably the most like Hughes, so it seems fitting that she gets the 
first award," the poet laureate added. "And I think Ted would have been bowled 
over by her collection."

Judge and director Tim Supple, who worked with Hughes on various theatrical 
productions, said the consensus among judges over selecting Oswald's collection 
as winner "was very swift". "What's startling is the sheer bravura, the 
idiosyncrasy, the uniqueness of the work. It's extremely rooted and almost 
unfashionably English and rural, and is something which is very right for a Ted 
Hughes award," he said. "The breadth and elasticity of her vocabulary is 
brilliant – she's playing with language, but not in a self-conscious way; there 
doesn't seem to be any self-consciousness about it at all. [And language] is 
something Ted himself was very insistent on – he was obsessed with breadth of 
vocabulary."

As well as the new award, which will be awarded annually throughout Duffy's 
10-year term as laureate, Hughes – a poet laureate himself – has also been 
honoured with the news last week that his life and achievements would be marked 
with a memorial in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. Duffy, at Buckingham 
Palace last week for the awarding of Don Paterson's Queen's Gold Medal forPoetry
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>, said the Queen had been "very 
pleased" with the attention Hughes had been getting. "'He was a great friend of 
my mama', she told me," Duffy said. "It was lovely."

Oswald, who was announced as winner of the Ted Hughes prize this evening by 
Hughes's widow Carol Hughes, said she was "deeply honoured to be given an award 
with Ted Hughes's name on it, and pleased that it's an award that dips beyond 
the mainstream into some of the more unusual poetic channels". She also thanked 
the poet laureate for establishing the new prize, which is run by the Poetry 
Society. "This is a really generous and revolutionary gesture by Carol Ann 
Duffy," she said. "I love the way she is re-inventing the laureateship."

Oswald lives and works as a gardener in Devon, and has previously won the TS 
Eliot prize for Dart and the Forward prize for best first collection for The 
Thing in the Gap-Stone Stile. In her introduction to Weeds and Wild Flowers, 
she says her hope is "that the experience of reading and looking at the book 
will be a slightly unsettling pleasure, like walking through a garden at night, 
when the plants come right up to the edges of their names and beyond them".
 