
Next stop for Alicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys>? NBA 
All-Star weekend. The superstar, fresh off her national anthem performance at 
the Super Bowl football championship, is set to be the half-time entertainment 
at the February 17 game.

She's just one of several musicians on tap. Ne-Yo will sing during player 
introductions, while John Legend will sing the national anthem. Singer and 
Lincoln actress Gloria Reuben will sing the Canadian anthem.

Nick Cannon is set to host festivities the evening before the game, which will 
include performances by American Idol Phillip Phillips, Ellie Goulding and the 
first live TV performance in three years by a reunited Fall Out Boy.

The Houston Rockets equaled an NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> 
record and set a club mark with 23 3-pointers in a 140-109 win over theGolden 
State Warriors.

Jeremy Lin <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jeremy-lin> scored 28 points, 
including a career-high five 3-pointers, and Chandler Parsons and James Harden 
hit four 3s apiece as the Rockets reached a season-high point total. They also 
tied an NBA record with 14 3-pointers in the first half and had a season-high 
35 assists on 46 field goals overall.

Jarrett Jack scored 20 points and David Lee had 18 for the Warriors.

The Los Angeles Lakers overcame the absences of Dwight Howard and Metta World 
Peace, and the loss of Pau Gasol to beat theBrooklyn Nets 92-83 on Tuesday.

Kobe Bryant had 21 points and eight rebounds, while Antawn Jamison, starting 
for the suspended World Peace, made the go-ahead basket during a closing 14-3 
run for the Lakers, who have won three straight and six of their last seven 
games.

Howard missed his third consecutive game with a torn labrum in his right 
shoulder and Gasol, his replacement, appeared to injure his right foot with a 
little more than 4 minutes remaining.

Paul George scored 29 points at Indianapolis to lead the Indiana Pacers over 
theAtlanta Hawks 114-103 for its 15th straight home win.

David West had 15 points and seven rebounds and George Hill added 15 points 
and eight assists to help the Pacers to their fourth straight victory overall 
and their longest home win streak in 13 years.

Jeff Teague had 24 points and eight assists to lead the Hawks, who have lost 
three of their last four.

Goran Dragic scored 15 of his 17 points in the fourth quarter to lead the 
Phoenix Suns past the Memphis Grizzlies 96-90.

After the score was tied at 88-88, Dragic scored six straight points to put 
the game away.

Marcin Gortat led the Suns with 20 points, while Jermaine O'Neal had 14 points.

At Denver, Danilo Gallinari and Ty Lawson each scored 22 points to help rally 
theNuggets to their seventh straight victory, 112-104 over the Milwaukee Bucks.

The Nuggets withstood Samuel Dalembert's career-high 35 points and trailed by 
17 points in the first half before coming back to beat the Bucks for the fifth 
time in a row and get their longest winning streak overall in more than two 
years.
 