
Alice Oswald's childhood resolution to become a poet was born out of the 
trauma of a single, sleepless night. "We lived in a big, creaking house," she 
says, "and I used to get really frightened. One night, I lay awake for hours, 
just terrified. When the dawn finally came up – the comfortable blue sky, the 
familiar world returning – I could think of no other way to express my relief 
than through poetry. I made a decision there and then that it was what I wanted 
to do. Every time I pulled a wishbone, it was what I asked for."

And sure enough, she went on to do it, taking a job as a gardener the day 
after finishing her degree at Oxford "because it would leave my mind free, I'd 
get a house and a wage, and it would be completely compatible with poetry". She 
was shortlisted for aForward prize 
<http://www.forwardartsfoundation.org/index.htm> at the age of 30 for her first 
collection, The Thing in the Gap-Stone Stile,took the TS Eliot prize with her 
second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/21/tseliotprizeforpoetry.awardsandprizes>
, a remarkable book-length poem about the river Dart, and is now, 15 years 
later, widely hailed as one of British poetry's finest, brightest voices. The 
quiet purposefulness with which she has shaped her own life is evident in her 
poems, too: delighted evocations of the natural world that express themselves 
through exquisite attention to detail and perfect, breath-like cadences.

Oswald lives in south Devon with her husband, the playwright Peter Oswald, and 
their three children. I've come to talk to her about her latest collection,
Memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review>, 
and she picks me up from Totnes station, a calm and formal figure in a 
singularly mucky blue car. Autumn has yet to reach here; the leaves are still 
green and unfallen, and when we sit at her kitchen table, the back door is left 
open for the cat, the dog and the breeze to blow in and out. On the surface, 
the book looks like a change of direction: the familiar, meditative poems on 
moonlight, plant life and water have been substituted for an extraordinary 
retelling ofHomer's Iliad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/feb/28/classics.homer>. But this is 
very much Homer via Oswald: there is a lilting river of back stories, from 
which the central narrative of Achilles's and Agamemnon's great quarrel has 
been lifted clean out.

"I've always felt, with The Iliad, a real frustration that it's read wrong," 
Oswald says. "That it's turned into this public school poem, which I don't 
think it is. That glamorising of war, and white-limbed, flowing-haired Greek 
heroes – it's become a cliched, British empire part of our culture. Every 
translation you pick up is so romantically involved with the main story that 
the ordinariness of Homer, which I love so much – the poem's amazing background 
of peculiar, real people, just being themselves – is almost invisible." Inher 
version <http://www.poetryarchive.org/poetryarchive/singlePoet.do?poetId=15354>
, the absence of the monolithic main characters leaves the histories of the 
footsoldiers who died in their shadows exposed and gleaming, like rocks at low 
tide.

What's more, Oswald says, Homer is anything but a diversion: her poetry has 
been haunted by his for as long as she's been writing. She first encountered 
him at grammar school, in snatches and snippets at O-level, and then throughThe 
Odyssey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/may/20/poetry.classics> in the 
sixth form. "I completely fell in love with it," she says. "I asked if I could 
forget about the rest of the syllabus and just do Homer, and amazingly, my 
teacher said yes. After I left school, I spent my year off reading The Iliad, 
which was almost better. Shockingly good."

Such an immersive experience proved formative. "All the poems I've written 
have been more or less responses to my initial delight at reading him," she 
says. "As an oral poet, he has a different way of putting clauses together: 
where a literary poet would strap them all to one finite verb, and make a line 
that's all plaited and twisted and controlled, an oral poet will grow the 
clauses out of each other. He'll have one rhythmical phrase and fit another to 
it, and another. There's a freedom between the clauses that means there's 
somehow more space for the things that are described to be themselves. A tree 
in a Homer poem really is a tree – not Homer's tree, but a green, leafy, real 
thing. The puzzle I've spent my writing life trying to solve is, how does he do 
that? Every book of mine has been an attempt to work out how you can put a tree 
into a poem."

The experience of returning to her touchstone text was both luxurious and 
painful. "Mentally, I never really left, but to read the whole thing through 
again was lovely. It was such a treat getting my dictionaries out and going 
back to it. And yet it was hard, too, because of the stories. I found myself 
both heartbroken and literally haunted by it: I couldn't sleep at night; I'd 
get bits of the poem and the soldiers' faces in my head."

Certainly, the passage of two millennia does nothing to soften the impact of 
all those lost lives, significant and unique and suddenly ended, which pile up 
as the poem progresses: "EPICLES a Southerner from sunlit Lycia" who was 
"knocked backwards by a rock/ And sank like a diver"; "AXYLUS son of Teuthras" 
who "so loved his friends" but "died side by side with Calesius/ In a daze of 
loneliness"; "POLYDORUS … who loved running/ Now somebody has to tell his 
father/ That exhausted man leaning on the wall/ Looking for his favourite son". 
The poem is structured like a lament, the soldiers' epitaphs interspersed with 
direct translations of Homer's extended similes, each of which is transcribed, 
lullingly, twice over. "One of the reasons I repeat the similes is that you 
need time off from the grief," Oswald explains. "My hope is that the similes 
will repair what gets broken by the biographies, in the same way that the 
natural world does. I think of simile as a healing art."

Was Memorial an act of translation or creation? "Both. In fact, I go about my 
other poems like a translator. I try not to invent; I try simply to translate 
the weird language of the natural world. And I'm not into absolute ownership of 
things. Homer himself is a collection of poets, one of many. Even when writing 
your own poems, you need to talk to people, you need to magpie around, getting 
words and things. I'm very against the celebrity culture that wants to say: 
this is a genius, this is one person who has done something brilliant. There 
are always a hundred people in the background who have helped to make it."

It's a seductively democratic position, which also serves as a pitch-perfect 
description of The Iliad that Oswald has created: not the single, towering 
legend of Achilles, but the many small stories of the people whose lives formed 
the fabric of the poem. In Oswald's view, this is atmospherically closer to the 
poem she first read as a teenager, and having revisited it so comprehensively, 
she feels she may, just possibly, now be able to leave it behind her.
 