
It's not long before I can't think how to frame a question. Alice Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/alice-oswald>, the poet, is 
taking us on her favourite walk – one she tries to do every day – to a point 
where two tidal rivers, theDart 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/devon/discovering/rivers/dart.shtml> and the Harbourne 
<http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2001784>, converge. The problem is we are 
walking along an enchanting path bordered with hedgerows thick with flowers, 
the bluebells are in bloom in the woods alongside and the pastures on the hills 
across the river are a heady spring green in the brilliant sunshine. But Oswald 
has firmly banned words such as pretty or idyllic. We find a compromise – I'm 
allowed to use the word "beautiful" because in Oswald's view "there's a kind of 
terror in beauty that I can cope with".

She concedes she is being dictatorial but, faced with the way in which this 
kind of Devon landscape has been romanticised, she argues she has no option. We 
are walking through the kind of picturesque nature used to sell dairy products 
and Oswald's response is fierce.

"I'm continually smashing down the nostalgia in my head. And I am trying to 
enquire of the landscape itself what it feels about itself rather than bringing 
in advertising skills. There's a whole range of words that people use about 
landscape. Pastoral? Idyll? I can't stand them.

"Yes, we were walking through stitchwort, wild garlic, campion, blue bells and 
buttercups. The most extraordinary colours, but I have to force my eye behind 
the flower. I have this exercise where I force myself to look out from the 
flower's point of view at these great walloping humans coming down the path, 
and try, just try and feel it from their point of view because it's a different 
world to them, a fascinating hard one."

Seen through Oswald's eyes, this gently rolling Devon countryside is a 
battleground for survival: each plant fighting for light in the crowded 
hedgerow; the trees whose roots cling to the river bank engaged in an epic 
struggle for life. A walk with Oswald is never going to be peaceful – she says 
she's allergic to the word.

"You say I'm fierce but I think you have to be. We are in the most 
extraordinary moment [of environmental crisis] and we cannot afford to be 
complacent. It is a kind of day-long effort to get your mind into the right 
position to live and speak well."

What irritates Oswald is that when we use a word such as "pretty" to describe 
it, we strip nature of its independence. "We're colonizing it. We're turning it 
into something human rather than what it is for itself. That spreads very 
quickly into the whole of your life and you then can begin to lead a kind of 
inert life of colonizing other people – colonizing everything. That's what I am 
working against."

Even the idea of mapping a landscape has become a suspect impulse, she argues. 
Naming becomes a form of "conquering a place"; once it is named, you don't look 
at it any more. She once spent time trying to learn the names of stars but 
realised that having named them, she stopped looking at them.

"This might seem like the river Harbourne but it's really a weird abstract 
alien stuff called water. I exert incredible amounts of energy in trying to see 
things from their own point of view rather than the human point of view."

When I point out the intellectual ambition of this and add that Oswald is 
deliberately trying to unpick over 200 years of the English tradition of the 
picturesque as the predominant way of thinking about landscape, she laughs.

"There's a lot of rage in my head. I like the friction that means there is 
nothing relaxing about writing a poem. I can't afford to relax in any area of 
life. You have to keep your senses awake to all the complacency that kicks in 
particularly for the English."

As Oswald drove us from Totnes station, we had been talking about this area of 
Devon's long association with a violent history of piracy and sugar 
plantations. Some of the surrounding estates were built on the profits of 
imperial exploitation. Now it's the preserve of the rich and privileged for 
holiday homes and weekend cottages.

"Peace here was quite often bought at the expense of smashing up some other 
part of the world. And these beautiful rich rolling estates that we think of as 
the English countryside are quite often based on illegal activities of some 
kind."

There was also the struggle of farmers and fishermen to make a living, often 
with considerable hardship and it's those "democratic voices" which interest 
Oswald. They echo the struggle of every other living thing from the blackbird 
hunting for food in winter to the oyster in the river mud.

Disregarding this struggle and hardship endemic in the landscape is the start 
of a slippery slope:

"I think it is the easiest mentality for a human being to be either colonized 
or to colonize. The structure of either the slave or the master seems to be the 
simplest and the most relaxing one to slip into. Either you are a slave and you 
don't have to think for yourself or you're a master and you don't have to work 
for yourself. And there's a tiny pinprick point in the middle where you're 
responsible for yourself, and you understand other people's responsibilities 
and rights. That is the point that I think you have to attain continually in 
your conscious mind …"

Oswald stops suddenly and laughs at herself: "I'm sounding pompous."

What's emerging in short, passionately intense bursts during the several hours 
we spend on the walk is a kind of political manifesto. She mentions that she 
travelled up to camp with theOccupy movement at St Paul's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/occupy-london> on London last autumn and is 
deeply admiring of the left-wing philosopherSlavoj Žižek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/10/slavoj-zizek-humanity-ok-people-boring?CMP=twt_gu>
. So how does all this feed into her poetry?

"I was first drawn towards this understanding of master and slave through 
being immersed in Homeric poetry. I think you can feel back through it into a 
much more democratic way of seeing the world where there is a kind of 
consciousness at the point of energy in each thing you come across."

Oswald describes discovering Homer as a teenager during lunch hours with a 
remarkable teacher. The inspiration now is as strong as ever – her most recent 
collectionMemorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571274161/memorial> is 
a "translation of the Iliad". She wants her poetry to be spoken rather than 
read so that it becomes an event rather than just words on the page, and as 
such it can have a physical effect on the listener. Oral poetry such as that of 
Homer, "exist as forms of breath, of sound".

"My ideal has always been to create a sound world. So I'm continually 
referring everything to the ears and the voice and the channels between. That's 
what language is really. The words are the sound recordings of whatever you see 
or smell or taste."

Her booklength poem Dart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571214105/dart> was 
about capturing the sounds of the river and its inhabitants; it is never about 
image. She says she has "done quite a lot of work trying to get away from the 
eyes and into the ears." Sound offers more depth and resonance than our eyes 
can offer.

We have reached the confluence of the river Dart and the Harborne and Oswald 
likens our short walk to the achievement of finishing a poem. It's an 
invigorating exposure to a constantly changing landscape of tidal mudflats, 
surging currents of water and its restlessness, Oswald, suggests makes her feel 
at home.
 