
The money spoke loud and clear before the Group One Falmouth Stakes here on 
Friday, adamant that Alice Springs would improve sharply on her third place at 
Royal Ascot last month, and it proved to be impeccably informed. Aidan 
O’Brien’s filly was a 13-2 chance on Friday morning, opened at 9-2 on course 
and was then backed to 5-2 by the off before crossing the line two and a 
quarter lengths clear of her field in a new track-record time.

A strong tailwind will have played a part in that achievement but the previous 
mark had survived for 18 years and Alice Springs bettered it by more than a 
second. She is clearly improving from one month to the next and it will be a 
surprise if this is the only Group One on her record when the season draws to a 
close.

Ryan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore> struggled to get a 
clear run on Alice Springs in the Coronation Stakes at the Royal meeting and 
she eventually finished nearly two lengths behind the winner, Qemah. On Friday, 
however, he was able to cruise behind the pace set by Very Special and, though 
he struck for home some way out, none of his main market rivals could close the 
gap as Alice Springs galloped on strongly to the line.

Usherette, an odds-on chance on Friday morning who drifted to start at 11-10, 
was the biggest disappointment of the race, as she had only a short-head to 
spare over Amazing Maria, last year’s winner, at the tail of the field. André 
Fabre’s filly was one of the most impressive winners at Royal Ascot in the Duke 
Of Cambridge Stakes but that was run on rain-softened ground and she was never 
travelling like a possible winner on the much quicker surface here.

Minding’s 1,000 Guineas superiority prompts talk of gatecrashing Derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/minding-1000-guineas-derby-aidan-obrien-ryan-moore-newmarket-horse-racing>
“She’s definitely improving. The trainer said that beforehand and he’s usually 
right,” Ryan Moore, Alice Springs’ jockey, said afterwards. “I was in front 
earlier than I would have liked but the way the race was run I had no choice.”

O’Brien, who was recording his fourth Group One win in Britain this year, was 
attending the funeral of Phonsie O’Brien, brother of the great trainer Vincent, 
in Ireland, but Kevin Buckley, the Coolmore Stud’s UK representative, can see 
Alice Springs being campaigned at both a mile and 10 furlongs over the 
remainder of the season.

“There is the Nassau [at Glorious Goodwood] but we also have Minding [the 
1,000 Guineas and Oaks winner] as a possible for that,” Buckley said. “She was 
terrific today and she’s improved physically from Ascot. It was a class 
performance and she really deserved that.

“She’s improving all the time, physically and in her attitude, the whole lot 
and Ryan was highly complimentary. We can keep her at a mile or we could step 
her up to a mile and two, so there’s lots of options from here on in.”

O’Brien and Moore were completing a double in the card’s two feature events 
following Roly Poly’s determined success in the Group Two Duke Of Cambridge 
Stakes. Four of the runners were almost in a line with a furlong to run but 
Roly Poly ran on best of all to beat Magical Fire, a 33-1 chance, by half a 
length with Nations Alexander another head away in third.

“She toughed it out really well,” Buckley said. “Ryan was pleased with the way 
she battled. She’s edged up the rankings at Ballydoyle now, so I would think a 
race like the Lowther [at York next month] ought to be on her radar.”

Godolphin went into the afternoon with strong contenders for the main events 
but Nasimi, their runner in the Duke Of Cambridge, was almost as disappointing 
as Usherette in the Falmouth. The royal blue silks did record a one-two in the 
opening maiden, however, as Dubai Hero outran his price of 11-1 to beat D’Bai 
by one and a half lengths.

“We were there plenty soon enough and I thought I would just give him time to 
get the hang of it,” James Doyle, who rode the winner, said. “After I gave him 
a couple of taps, he stretched away well. He felt like a proper horse and, if 
he had jumped and travelled in behind the leaders, how far would he have won? I 
think he’ll improve massively and the sky is the limit.”

Frankel’s impressive start to his career as a stallion continued on the card 
at Ascot, where Seven Heavens became his sixth winner from 10 runners to date.
 