
Leaving the Olympics in the past is not an option for Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> on Sunday as he returns 
to Hyde Park to try to win another global title. The 25-year-old cemented his 
dominance of the sport with victory in London 13 months ago and finds himself 
in pole position to be crowned world champion for a third time despite a 
niggling ankle injury.

The world title is decided over a series of races throughout the year, with 
this weekend's Grand Final the most prestigious event and worth the most points.

The standings are close, with the three Olympic medallists again the men in 
contention as Alistair heads his brother Jonny while Spain's Javier Gómez lies 
third. Victories for either Alistair or the reigning world champion, Jonny, 
would give them the title, while Alistair can afford to finish second to Gómez 
and still win.

Alistair has won three times in Hyde Park but he admits in some ways he would 
rather not have returned. "With the Olympics, you build up to it over a period 
of years and then it comes and it happens and you're not really sure how to 
react to it in the aftermath. When you wake up the morning afterwards, what do 
you go and do next?

"Coming back to this Olympic course is a bit like that. I never even thought 
when I was training for it last year that I'd be coming back and doing another 
race here. It is a bit strange. It would have been quite nice to draw a line 
under it last year and move on."

It is certainly not unusual for Olympic champions to struggle in the aftermath 
of achieving the biggest thing in their sport. But, strange though things may 
have been post-London, the competitive fire inside Alistair burns just as 
strongly. "I've achieved more than I ever set out to achieve or ever dreamed I 
would when I was an eight-year-old starting triathlon," he said. "That's 
fantastic but it hasn't altered my motivation at all. It's just made me a bit 
more content. But as soon as I start training or stick me on a start line, I'm 
still the most competitive person in the world."

Alistair is no stranger to injuries – an achilles problem almost derailed his 
Olympic dream – and this year has been no different. An ankle injury has been a 
persistent problem and has taken the edge away from his running, which is the 
third of the disciplines and the one where he normally has the biggest edge 
over opponents. In the last race in Stockholm he attacked on the bike, pulled 
away from Gómez and his brother and then held onto his advantage to take a 
third win of the season. "It's been a tough year. I wanted it to be a little 
bit more low key. In some respects it has been but in some respects it's been 
really hard because of everything that's gone on. This is my last race so I'm 
hoping to have one more good performance then I can have a rest and can reset a 
bit, get things right. I'll do what I can to win the race but you're dependent 
on so many other factors.

Alistair said: "Winning another world title would obviously be wonderfully 
special and even more so because it's in London. Without a doubt it would be 
the most satisfying one."

Alistair's achilles problem put him out of the reckoning for the world title 
last year, and Jonny took advantage to keep it in the family for the third time 
in four years.

The 23-year-old has also won three times this season but his only victory over 
his brother has come over the sprint distance rather than the Olympic distance 
they will be racing on Sunday.

Jonny said: "Alistair tends to beat me over Olympic distance but he's had a 
tough year. Hopefully he'll be fit but it's going to be hard for him. Hopefully 
I can beat him."
 