
Alistair Brownlee, Britain's Olympic triathlon champion, has been forced to 
abandon his audacious plan to compete in the 10,000m on the track and the 
triathlon at this year'sCommonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games> after missing a couple 
of key training sessions last weekend.

Brownlee's had entered for next week's Highgate Harriers Night of the 10,000m 
PBs, where he was hoping to run 28min 20sec – the B-qualifying standard for the 
English team for the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. But after a series of 
injuries over the past six months, Brownlee has decided to concentrate on his 
main goals – winning back his world triathlon title and taking gold in Glasgow 
at his main event.

"I had intended originally to aim for the 10,000m on the track in Glasgow but 
that's off for me now," he admitted. "I really wanted to do the qualifying race 
in London next weekend but the timescale just doesn't work for me.

"It has made me realise that the focus, for now anyway, has to be triathlon."

Brownlee first announced his intention to aim for the 10,000m at the 
Commonwealth Games after winning triathlon gold at London 2012. After a 1,500m 
swim and 40km bike ride, he ran the 10,000m in 29 min 07 sec, jogging down the 
home straight draped in a union flag.

Last year he ran a time of 28:32.48 on his 10,000m debut on the track despite 
little preparation because of injury, further fueling his hopes that he could 
make England's team for Glasgow. But after a few minor setbacks Brownlee, who 
has spent the past few months working with his brother Jonny on the Brownlee 
Tri – a race for amateurs in support of the Macmillan cancer trust – has 
admitted that he is not in quite in low 28-minute shape.

"I've had a very mixed last six months and I don't want to jeopardise my 
comeback as I look to regain the world championship crown," he said. "I've my 
ups and downs – some really good training, but also some mishaps. I pulled my 
calf a couple of times, I got sick and also cut my knee.

"I'm under no illusions as to how difficult it will be this season with Javier 
Gómez in the sort of form he's in, having won the opening two races."
 