
A few days ago Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> was sorting out his attic 
when he stumbled on something unexpected: his Team GB rucksack from London 
2012. “I hadn’t touched it since the Olympics,” he says, laughing. “My helmet 
was still in it, as well as a pair of shorts and a T-shirt I’d warmed up in. 
There was even a bar that I had half eaten and put back in.” A shake of the 
head. “It was just … there. Amazing.”

Vicky Holland: Team GB’s triathlon Fab Four must go down to three for Rio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/29/vicky-holland-triathlon-fab-four-rio-olympics-world-series-hyde-park>
And Brownlee’s Olympic triathlon gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/alistair-brownlee-olympic-triathlon-jonny>
? Well, that has pride of place in his sock drawer. “I’ve never been that 
bothered about medals,” he says. “Although that one is precious to me, the 
achievement matters more.”

Alistair’s younger brother, Jonny, is no showy sentimentalist either. He keeps 
his Olympic bronze medal in a pillowcase in his house.

On Sunday they retrace their steps – and strokes and pedals – on the Hyde Park 
course that made them household names for the final time. Next year the British 
leg of the WorldTriathlon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> Series 
moves to Leeds and, while so many of their memories of 2012 remain gloriously 
vivid – Alistair pounding clear of the Spaniard Javier Gómez to claim gold; 
Jonny turning puce then puking up after holding on to bronze; the perforating 
cheers of 250,000 motivators – they are ready to move on. “I’m glad to leave it 
behind,” says Alistair. “We’ve raced there a lot of times. We’ve had some good 
days and bad days. It will be nice to draw a line under it.”

The Brownlees also hope to leave behind the niggles and injuries that have 
interrupted their careers too often since that day. There used to be a golden 
rule in men’s triathlon: when a Brownlee raced, they won. Coming into the last 
Olympics, Alistair was the reigning men’s world champion and had won 12 of his 
previous 15 world series races. Jonny, meanwhile, had finished on the podium in 
his previous 13 races at elite level, winning six. Now, though, that golden 
rule comes with a caveat: provided they are also 100% fit.

There are encouraging signs. Jonny has won two of his three world triathlon 
series races in 2015, in Auckland and the Gold Coast, while Alistair – who 
started his season late because of injury – won in Cape Town and came second in 
Yokohama despite feeling the worst he has ever felt in a race. “It was 
horrific,” he says. “I got out of the swim and I just felt awful. I’m normally 
the one shouting at people to do stuff on the bike but I just couldn’t. But on 
the positive side I have no injury problems and the two races I have had so far 
haven’t done my fitness justice. I’m a bit better than that and hopefully I can 
show that in London.”

Their primary aim this year, though, is to qualify for next year’s Olympics as 
quickly as possible, something they will achieve if they make the podium in the 
Rio test event in August and at the grand final in Chicago in September. And 
they are already licking their lips about the punishingly hard course in Rio, 
with its choppy 1,500m sea swim and a brutal 40km bike circuit, before a 
flatter 10km run to finish.

“It’s likely to be a beach start, so people will be already a bit tired when 
they hit the water after running in the sand,” says Jonny. “The bike, from what 
we’ve heard, contains a very steep hill and it’ll be eight times up there. I’m 
very excited about that. It suits us because it wipes quite a lot of people out 
straight away. The harder the better for us.”

Alistair is determined to become the first man to defend his Olympic title but 
he has fresh challenges on his mind, too: doing a marathon and an ironman. 
“I’ve done triathlon since I was eight years old,” he says. “It’s been Olympic 
focus up to now but also I’ve always been very aware and followed the longer 
distance side of the sport,” he says. “That’s very important to me. So after 
Rio I intend to have a bash at a marathon and that might be a nice way to lead 
into an ironman.”

When it comes to the marathon, Alistair reckons he could run somewhere in the 
2hr 10m – 2:15 range, which would be a deeply impressive time. Only Mo Farah 
has run under 2:10.30 in the past decade. “Going under 2:10 is probably a bit 
quick,” he says. “I’ll be going for a nicely paced marathon on a flat course 
with a tailwind. That said, I might cross the line in Rio and be fourth and 
think flipping hell, that’s it, I’m carrying on with triathlon. Who knows?”

It is perhaps wise to add a qualifier. Last year Alistair won individual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/24/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-commonwealth-games-glasgow-2014>
 andteam gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/26/england-triathlon-relay-gold-commonwealth-games-2014>
 at the Commonwealth Games but his audacious plan to run the 10,000m on the 
track, too, was scuppered because he missed the qualifying race through injury. 
“If I had been in any kind of shape in the trial I probably would have just 
sneaked in,” he says. “It is a massive career regret.”

For now, though, the focus remains on the day job. The biggest challenge over 
Sunday’s race, a shorter sprint triathlon (750m swim, 20km bike, 5km run) than 
the Brownlees would like, is likely to come from the Spaniard Mario Mola, who
won last year’s race in Hyde Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/mario-mola-world-triathlon-series-london>
, but the Brownlees believe Gómez – who will not be in London – is still their 
main rival.

“I have a lot of respect for Javier but I wouldn’t call him a great friend,” 
Jonny says. “We race on the same French team together but we keep each other at 
arm’s length. I can tell you he always has pizza thentarte tatin before a race 
but I don’t know what sort of training he does or what races he is going to do. 
It is incredible what he achieved in the sport. Although the big thing he is 
missing is an Olympic gold medal – hopefully we can stop him getting one.”

Fifteen months out from Rio the pair are confident they can again deliver over 
the full distance in the Olympics. “I don’t think there has been a run as fast 
as London 2012 in the past three years, to be honest,” says Alistair. “And if 
we are both fully fit, we are still the ones to beat.”
 