
Alistair and Jonny Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee> 
have called for an overhaul of the international triathlon calendar as they 
prepare to take some respite from an exhaustive summer schedule.

The Olympic and Commonwealth Games medal winners will be the star attractions 
at the second Macmillan Brownlee Tri, which this year takes place at Harewood 
House, within jogging distance of their base in Leeds.

Of all the London 2012 success stories, triathlon can boast a more vibrant 
legacy than most and Sunday’s sprint triathlons are designed to attract 
hundreds more debutants to the sport.

But its global rise in popularity has come at a price, with an increasingly 
expanded ITU WorldTriathlon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> 
Series calendar bringing high-profile races but also sapping the energy of its 
star attractions.

Growing from its original format of a one-off world championship in 2008, next 
year’s competition will see 10 World Series races with the European 
Championship, the inaugural European Games in Baku, and the Rio 2016 test event 
also jostling for space.

Jonny Brownlee said: “I think it’s definitely the case with the World Series 
where if you’re not careful with training and travelling you are not going to 
have any good performances over the year.

“It could come down to a situation where the world champion is the one who has 
got the best travel agent and can do well over the whole season, rather than 
have great performances.

“That’s not what I want to do as an athlete. I want those one-off events and 
that’s why the Olympics and the Commonwealth Games are so good.”

Despite dominating on the Olympic stage, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/olympic-triathlon-alistair-jonny-brownlee-live>
 Alistair Brownlee has not finished in the top three of the World Series since 
he last won the overall title in 2011.

And while the Olympic champion acknowledges that the World Series has done 
much to capitalise on the new-found popularity of the sport, he has also urged 
caution over the increasingly busy annual calendar.

“An event like Sunday will show how big the Olympic legacy has been,” Alistair 
Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> said. “Four or 
five years ago people still thought of it as an extreme sport that nutters do, 
but now there really is that opinion that anyone can enter it to challenge 
themselves or raise money for charity.

“A lot of that interest has been down to the World Series and it’s a big step 
forward for the sport that all these major cities across the world want to have 
a World Series race - but it’s tough to expect athletes to race so much over a 
season that runs from March to September all over the world.”
 