
Earlier this year, Matt Groening spent a weekend at Butlins. "I really 
couldn't get my head round the notion of chalets," chuckles the creator ofThe 
Simpsons <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>. "The idea of 
a 'holiday camp' is nonexistent in the United States. Everyone was trying to 
warn me." Nevertheless, his fears proved ungrounded. "It was actually very 
civilised and sweet and fun. Everyone was charmingly drunk. It wasn't degrading 
in the slightest."

Groening is talking about his stint curating last spring's All Tomorrow's 
Parties <https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties>, the cult 
music festival that takes place at Butlins in the Somerset town of Minehead. In 
2007, GZA of New York rappers the Wu-Tang Clan had been less convinced by the 
event. "He left the camp and found a big American sports bar in Minehead," 
recalls Geoff Barrow, of Portishead. "That was the only thing that made sense 
to him: burgers and boxing."

For the last 10 years, chalets and crazy golf have provided the backdrop for 
ATP, which has stood apart from other festivals by steadfastly championing the 
alternative and the arcane: Iggy and the Stooges, Nick Cave and Patti Smith 
have all performed, but so have Casiotone for the Painfully Alone, Jackie-O 
Motherfucker and Hair Police. Each event is curated by a single band or artist, 
meaningPortishead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/portishead>, Mogwai and My 
Bloody Valentine have been able to invite their favourite acts to play, as have 
Vincent Gallo, Jake and Dinos Chapman and Groening (who was approached after 
being spotted enthusing about Captain Beefheart in a documentary). The 
resulting festival is like a mixtape: you're not always familiar with every 
band, but you're usually pleased someone has bought them to your attention.

"ATP is probably the most important festival of our generation," says Sonic 
Youth's Thurston Moore, who has both played and curated. "The idea of an 
artist-run enterprise continues to serve the legacy of a post-punk, independent 
music scene."

This month, ATP concludes its 10th anniversary celebrations with an event 
programmed byBelle and Sebastian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/belleandsebastian>, initiators of the 
festival's forerunner: the Bowlie Weekender, held at the Camber Sands Pontin's 
in East Sussex. From that small seed grew an event that has gone global. In 
February, Barry Hogan, who organised the Bowlie with Belle and Sebastian's 
Stuart Murdoch, will stage his first ATP in Tokyo, having already exported it 
to Australia and America. Rolling Stone deemed the New York event "perfect", 
while Village Voice called it the state's best festival. "That's quite nice, 
seeing as they stage their own festivals," says Hogan.

These days, festivals are so heavily commercialised – from banners on stages 
to logos on beer cups to branded wellies – that they can feel less like a 
weekend escape than a wander through a shopping mall. But ATP has stayed true 
to the independent ethos of its acts by forgoing all sponsorship. Hogan 
explains: "I don't want to have to say to Fuck Buttons, 'You guys can't play 
because you've got swearing in your name, and Evian doesn't like it.'"

ATP, which Hogan co-runs with his wife Deborah, works because everyone 
involved – bands, curators, punters – are as fanish about the music as each 
other. Hogan operates a "no arseholes policy": everyone mucks in, there's no 
VIP area. US rock band Cheap Trick once insisted on hypoallergenic pillows – 
they've not been asked back. "We're all in the same accommodation," says Sonic 
Youth's Moore. "There's no velvet rope outside Iggy's chalet. The fact that 
you're all milling around, with all these musicians and artists, breaks down 
the barriers."

Film director Jim Jarmusch curated an American ATP this September, at a 
dilapidated, century-old country club in the Catskill Mountains called 
Kutsher's. "It's one weekend of super-concentrated music with bands you rarely 
get to see," he says. "It would take years to see them all come through New 
York. The fans and the bands have excellent taste, so it's a win-win situation."

This inclusiveness was captured last year on an ATP documentary that featured 
songwriter Daniel Johnston performing to a crowd outside his chalet window, 
folk rockers Grizzly Bear leading a dawn sing-a-long across Minehead beach, and 
the musician Warren Ellis observing dozens of festival-goers shambling around, 
and declaring: "This is pretty whacked out." This from a man who has spent the 
last 15 years adding violin and bouzouki to Nick Cave's gothic rock, and whose 
previous bands numbered Fungus Brains and People With Chairs Up Their Noses.

You can probably guess Hogan's thoughts on more mainstream festivals. "They 
treat their fans like cattle, overcharging for everything," he says. "They get 
all that sponsorship, then charge £15 for a programme. They should be ashamed 
of themselves. It's a disgrace." And he's got little time for freeloading 
celebrities, wincing at the memory of Peaches Geldof turning up at one of his 
sold-out My Bloody Valentine shows. "Her manager said, 'What can I do to get 
her in?' I said, 'Get in a DeLorean and go back in time to when the tickets 
went on sale and do what everyone else did – get her credit card out.'"

What happens if a curator chooses a band Hogan doesn't like? "There have been 
some strange choices," he says. "I personally never want to see Blur at ATP. 
But if someone picked them, I would have to respect that. We could never afford 
them, though, so I don't have to worry."

ATP hasn't all been plain sailing, though, with Hogan losing "a six-figure 
sum" at Kutsher's last year. And you could argue ATP has been the victim of its 
own success: it helped broker the idea of the "boutique" festival, events with 
a 6,000 capacity – and now the UK is crowded with them. Hogan is considering 
cutting back on the number of events, but with music business models collapsing 
all over the place, ATP's belief in staying small and looking after a faithful 
fanbase suddenly looks rather prescient. "Those record labels regarded as 
'indie' – Sub Pop, Domino and XL – have now got the strongest promotion, the 
best teams working for them, they're really great at what they do," Hogan says. 
"You're better off working for them than EMI."

Hogan still has acts he would like to bring to Butlins: he's after Neil Young 
and Kraftwerk, and dreams of Wes Anderson curating. Certainly, performing at 
ATP does have unusual perks. Groening drew some of his acts, leading to 
speculation they might appear on The Simpsons. "Joanna Newsom graciously denied 
the rumour," he says. "But now I'm going to make it happen." He also booked 
Jackie-O Motherfucker. Room for them on The Simpsons? "That," he says, "would 
be pushing it."
 