
Low growth and delayed recovery are the predictable results of prolonged 
policies of austerity and should not cause a surprise. Economic theory, 
experience and detailed analysis suggests nothing better. Keynes, in the 1930s, 
set out how insufficient demand leads to unemployment and greater poverty, as 
Robert Skidelsky authoritatively summarises (The cutting fantasy's over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/cutting-fantasy-over>, 
30 November). In the 1980s, many African and Latin American countries adopted 
austerity policies to cope with debt. By the mid-1990s, 57 of them were poorer 
in per-capita income than 15 years before, and many poorer than 25 years 
earlier. In the mid-2000s, various economists analysed this experience of 
austerity-led adjustment and found a strong statistically significant negative 
effect on economic growth in the long run. Where is the evidence to suggest 
that prolonging austerity will lead to more rapid recovery today? All 
experience suggests that a lost decade lasting only six years is overoptimistic.
Professor Richard Jolly
Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex

• Deborah Hargreaves and her High Pay Commission have done an excellent job (
We can't afford the costs of bosses' crazy unearned pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/22/cut-executive-pay>, 22 
November). However, she writes that "we need to effect deep cultural change" 
and "we do not expect anything to change overnight".

In fact, there is something government can do almost overnight to tackle these 
gross and morale-sapping inequalities – an idea that can supplement those in 
the commission's 12-point plan. Why not bring in compulsory bond purchase (CBP) 
for high earners to supplement the income tax they pay? The maturity dates and 
(zero or suitably minuscule) fixed interest rates, along with the 
taxable-income thresholds that would trigger CBP in specified amounts, could be 
set annually in the same budget as the income-tax thresholds and rates.

CBP satisfies the commission's principles of transparency, accountability and 
fairness, and can ameliorate sovereign debt crises at a stroke. All these 
patriotic high earners will at last able to do their bit, and relatively 
painlessly too, since they will all get their money back at maturity. In 
addition, by significantly reducing the possibility of sovereign default, CBP 
will reduce the previously relentless downward pressure on the prices of 
voluntarily purchased bonds and the concomitant upward pressure, to 
unsustainable levels, on the corresponding interest rates for new government 
borrowing. The possibility of default is thereby reduced even further.

This is something within the power of government to implement without waiting 
for "deep cultural change". Perhaps Vince Cable may have such practical ideas 
in mind when, once again, he promises to act? If not, one can only empathise 
with Professor Walton (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/20/real-victims-benefit-system>, 
21 November) in wondering just what government is for.
Dr John Shepherd
Exeter

• As I watch the never-ending posturing of David Cameron and George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, earnestly insisting that 
we are all in this together as we tighten our belts for six more years of 
austerity, I am increasingly reminded of the first world war generals, 
cheerfully sweeping model soldiers off a map as they sent another regiment over 
the top.

George Osborne's announcement that the public sector and those on the lowest 
incomes will bear the cost of (as yet) uncurbed bankers' excesses reinforces 
this image. We all know that the gap between rich and poor is increasing. 
Surely the government should be trying to reduce this inequity rather than jump 
on the bandwagon.
Justin Strain
Portsmouth

• As the government's latest nasty trick is to pit the public sector against 
the private one, maybe it should consider to what this might lead. "Divide and 
rule" is a bully's agenda. Does this government really want a country whose 
inhabitants are driven to hate each other, the caring and teaching professions, 
the poor, lined up against those perceived to be making a fast buck or two (or 
million if a member of the present cabinet)?

Inequality breeds contempt and anger and further disintegration of an already 
failing and deeply unhappy society. Why would the government want to promote 
such a policy? Perhaps because the Conservative party was originally formed in 
order to conserve the landed gentry's status quo and this government shows 
little aptitude for changing this dearly held philosophy. Why else is it still 
in thrall to the banks and multinational companies which have completely 
wrecked the world's economy?
Lorna Wright
Colchester, Essex

• Once again police officers have been used, in effect, as strikebreakers, not 
only at emergency call centres but as Border Agency staff too (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/nov/30/heathrow-airport-queues-strike>
, 1 December). What effect this will have on future staff relations we can only 
guess at, but it will probably be negative. The rank and file in the police 
would do well to consider their own situation regarding pay, pensions and 
conditions, most of which have already been attacked. After the Olympics they 
can be certain they will be in line for attention again by this awful 
government.
Philip Chambers
Molesey, Surrey

• George Osborne insists that if the deficit is not reduced, the long-term 
prospects for the British economy are poor. Ed Balls asserts that if government 
expenditure is not increased then the economy will not revive. Perhaps they are 
both right and the British economy is likely to have negligible growth for a 
long time to come whether the deficit is reduced or not. In that case the most 
important political and economic question becomes one which both Conservative 
and Labour parties have avoided considering: how are the limited proceeds of 
the British economy to be distributed?
Anthony Matthew
Leicester

• John Harris's observation that taking money out of public workers' pay 
packets will further depress the demand upon which growth will depend (Britain 
needs a big push but the Tories can only nudge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/28/britain-economy-needs-push-tories-nudge>
, 29 November) points towards another truth which is equally underreported.

There is indeed demand in our economy leading to goods being manufactured to 
meet that demand: it exists in that privileged 1% of society who have taken 
unto themselves such an increased proportion of our wealth that the 
manufacturers of luxury goods are experiencing boom times. The trouble is, we 
are governed by a set of politicians who would rather we did not remember these 
truths of their form of redistribution.
Ian Bayley
Harefield, Middlesex

• George Osborne, no doubt preening himself this morning as an Iron 
Chancellor, is worthy of another soubriquet. He is surely now the Dennis Moore 
of British politics – theMonty Python highwayman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLkhx0eqK5w> who "steals from the poor and 
gives to the rich". Older readers and Python fans will be able to complete the 
refrain.
David Quinn
London

• Henry Gillett (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/nov/29/untidy-sums-local-government-pensions>
, 30 November) asked for examples of jobs that require no physical or mental 
effort. Osborne's performance on Tuesday comes to mind
Ian Ragan
London

• Your coverage of the autumn statement shows how our political leaders are 
out of their depth. Their playground-name-calling parliamentary culture, with 
its adolescent bravado, will do nothing to solve the mess our economy is in.

I have one, clear message to our political leaders, regardless of party. 
Britain is in state of impending economic depression as a result of both 
excessive debt and lack of aggregate demand. It is your responsibility to get 
together and find solutions to this mess, involving all key stakeholders.

It is their opportunity to show that party politics has a true relevance.
Jeremy Ross
Ashtead, Surrey

• Zoe Williams claims (Comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/23/public-sector-cuts-tactics>
, 24 November) that if as a Tory government minister you have dirty work to do, 
you get a Lib Dem to front it. This misses one important fact: the Lib Dem 
ministers concerned are not innocent and unwilling victims in all of this.

Despite lots of highly spun angst and agonising every time their government 
announces another regressive policy aimed at the most vulnerable people in the 
poorest areas, Lib Dem MPs and ministers troop through the Tory lobby en masse 
time after time. It's the same in the Lords.

Zoe Williams mentions Lynne Featherstone. This Lib Dem MP has the gall to 
campaign against police cuts in her north London constituency. Meanwhile, she 
is actually part of the Home Office ministerial team driving through these 
police cuts!
Diana Johnson MP
Labour, Hull North
 