
Now they all need a Plan B. When George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> stood before MPs to 
confess officially that his sums didn't add up, it was not just his 
deficit-reduction plan that had to go back to the drawing board. Conservatives, 
Lib Dems and Labour alike are compelled to recalculate their political 
strategies. Each has to rethink how it will fight a 2015 election most likely 
to be fought in a continuing atmosphere of austerity.

Let's start with what this means for the coalition. When the Tories and the 
Lib Dems struck their power-sharing deal 18 months ago, at the absolute heart 
of it was the Osborne master plan to eliminate the structural deficit by the 
end of this parliament. That was the grand bargain between the parties. It was 
also the compact they offered the voters to justify all the pain. The 
assumption that they would have the job done by 2015 has been what one Lib Dem 
strategist calls "the glue" of the coalition. Both parties hoped to go into the 
next election being able to claim credit for clearing up "Labour's mess" and 
promising a sunnier future if given the chance to govern again.

"It was the Osborne story," says one cabinet minister. "We do the tough stuff 
early, things come right in two to three years, then we sell off the banks and 
have tax cuts and everyone will live happily ever after. I never believed in 
it."

Well, if that minister didn't, I'd say he was in a minority among the cabinet. 
A lot of people on the Lib Dem side also bought into this story. It is not that 
many weeks ago that senior Lib Dems were telling me that the two coalition 
parties would reassert their different identities as the next election got 
closer by using "the dividend" from resumed growth to fund promises to their 
target voters. The Tories would naturally want to emphasise tax cuts; the Lib 
Dems would promote different tax cuts and spending boosts for progressive 
causes. As one cabinet member puts it: "That's now for the birds."

The coalition parties will not go into the next election having cleared the 
structural deficit, as they had previously promised. Years of pain will not 
have produced that gain. They will, instead, have to fight the campaign from a 
position of prolonged austerity, extending on the chancellor's revised 
projections into 2017.

That means the Tories are unlikely to be able to offer much more than the most 
meagre reductions in tax, not if they are to stay consistent with George 
Osborne's mantra that he will never offer "unfunded tax cuts". The Lib Dems can 
likewise forget about making any lavish promises in their next manifesto.

Given that the government has just had to tear up its original fiscal plan, a 
mere 18 months after it was first trumpeted as the miracle cure, Conservatives 
remain remarkably sanguine about their longer-term prospects. One reason for 
their equanimity is the opinion polls, which are fairly negative about the 
coalition but more so about the Labour alternative. Broadly speaking, committed 
Conservative voters think the government is doing the right thing and have been 
thinking that since the election. Core Labour supporters agree with their party 
that the coalition is doing utterly the wrong thing and have believed that 
since the election. The key group are swing voters who, at least at the moment, 
continue to give the benefit of the doubt to the coalition.

Many Tories even believe it is likely to suit them if the next election is 
dominated by the deficit on the grounds that it will enable them to argue that 
they are the only ones who can be trusted to finish the job. Conservatives can 
already be heard repeating their successful slogan from the 1983 election: 
"We're on the right track. Don't turn back."

This may work for them again. It may not. Frankly, only a fool would claim to 
be certain about anything very much at the moment. There are simply too many 
wild variables: the eurozone; whether George Osborne's new austerity plan with 
added pain is more successful than his old one; the coalition not falling apart 
under the stress; and those swing voters continuing to give the government the 
benefit of the doubt through an extended period of stagnation, rising 
unemployment and spending cuts. I'd say it is rash for Conservatives blithely 
to assume the future will be a repetition of the past. Unemployment was still 
terribly high when they went into the 1983 election, but the economy had 
finally turned for the better in the six months beforehand. While some areas of 
the country were suffering badly, in the swing seats there was the reality or 
prospect of resumed prosperity for many voters. Victory in the Falklands war, a 
Labour manifesto correctly described as "the longest suicide note in history" 
and the SDP split also had something to do with the Tory victory in 1983.

The next election will not be like that. The impact of this age of austerity 
will be spread more widely and for much longer. After running the chancellor's 
numbers through its calculator, the Institute for Fiscal Studies concludes that 
middling Britons will suffer a squeeze on their living standards lasting no 
less than 13 years.

Even more so than the Tories, the Lib Dems are having to rethink their 
strategy. Shortly before the next election, there will be a spending round 
which means the two parties will have to agree to a fiscal plan that rolls over 
into the next parliament. WhenDanny Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander> spelled this out on 
Newsnight, the chief treasury secretary triggered fears in his party that he 
was anticipating an unlimited period of Con-Lib coalition as in the 1930s. "I 
don't think that's what Danny meant, but it's been interpreted that way," says 
one senior Lib Dem.

Their original plan for the life of this parliament was set out at a meeting 
just before last Christmas at Chevening, the deputy prime minister's 
grace-and-favour house in Kent. A select group of senior ministers and their 
advisers was addressed by Nick Clegg's chief strategist, Richard Reeves. He 
mapped out what he identified as the five "phases" of coalition. Phase 1 was 
"Formation": putting the coalition together. Phase 2 was "Stabilisation": 
making coalition work. Phase 3 was "Differentiation": once the coalition was 
stable, the Lib Dems would start to be more assertive about where they 
disagreed with the Tories. Broadly speaking, the first three phases have 
unfolded along the lines suggested by Mr Reeves at that Chevening conclave. 
What's now much harder for the Lib Dems is how they approach the endgame of 
coalition when they will have signed up to a spending plan extending beyond the 
election. Phase 4 was "Identification": in the second half of the parliament, 
the Lib Dems would reassert their independent identity. Phase 5 was 
"Separation": in the election year, the Lib Dems would begin to divorce 
themselves from the Conservatives.

Decoupling from the Tories will now be much more difficult and complicated – 
"No question it gets harder," says one of them – than the Lib Dems had 
foreseen. It is also likely to be much more abrasive. "If it can't be about 
spending, differentiation will have to be about different things," says one Lib 
Dem cabinet member.

Another hung parliament in 2015 is quite conceivable. The formula that Nick 
Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> used during the last 
election was to say that he would negotiate first with whoever out of Labour or 
the Tories had won the most support. The way things are evolving, it is 
increasingly hard to see how he could sustain that line at the next election. 
Labour's economic strategy – to lift borrowing in the near term in an attempt 
to boost growth – is the stark opposite of the extended austerity programme to 
which the Lib Dems have signed up. "If we think Labour's plan going into the 
next election is fiscally irresponsible, then we will have to say it is 
fiscally irresponsible," argues one Lib Dem. But if they do so, Mr Clegg is 
going to have a hard time explaining to interviewers – and voters – that he 
would be ready to form a coalition with Labour when he has repeatedly called 
them economically reckless. So another consequence is that the chances of a 
Lab-Lib coalition after the next election have just grown a bit dimmer.

This is not good news for Labour, which has an almighty challenge to overcome 
in order to win a governing majority on its own. The prospect of the next 
election being fought with the cupboard still bare sharpens the big question 
which faces social democratic parties the world over: how do they credibly 
promise a better future when there is no money? In recent speeches, Ed Miliband 
has been raising this question himself. He has advanced arguments for a more 
responsible and balanced capitalism, which chime with the thinking of Lib Dems 
such asVince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>. The 
Labour leader has also acknowledged that his party will not be able to promise 
better public services or social justice paid for from higher public spending. 
This does not yet amount to anything like a fully formed answer to the big 
question for social democrats. That is forgivable since no other centre-left 
party in Europe has found it yet either. But Labour will need an answer, and a 
very persuasive one, by 2015.
 