
Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>, the Texan 
financier, knight of Antigua, Washington power player and billionaire 
benefactor of English cricket, has been found guilty of orchestrating a $7bn 
Ponzi scheme.

After a six-week trial in Houston, Texas, a jury found him guilty of 
conspiracy and 12 other criminal charges including obstruction. He was 
acquitted of one wire fraud charge.

Stanford, who turns 62 on 24 March, faces up to 20 years in prison when he is 
sentenced.

The jury of eight men and four women had appeared to be deadlocked on Monday 
and had to be given instructions by the judge, David Hittner. Outside, family 
members had gathered to offer their support.

"I'm hoping for the best," Stanford's 84-year-old father, James, told the 
Houston Chronicle as he waited for the verdict. "We support him 100%. In fact, 
150%."

During the trial prosecutors argued that Stanford used his clients' money to 
fuel his "lavish lifestyle and his loser companies" in a massive Ponzi scheme 
that spanned two decades. Stanford, they argued, conned investors into buying 
certificates of deposit, or CDs, from his bank on the Caribbean island nation 
of Antigua, telling them they were a safe investment. Instead the bank was "his 
own personal ATM", the prosecutor William Stellmach said.

By 2008 Stanford's bank owed depositors more than $7bn that it did not have 
and Stanford had blown huge chunks of that cash on luxury yachts, private jets 
and cricket sponsorship.

In damning testimony James Davis, Stanford Financial Group's former chief 
financial officer, told jurors his boss was "the chief faker" – a man who 
threatened to fire anyone who questioned the $2bn prosecutors say he pocketed 
from his Antiguan bank.

The picture that emerged during Davis's testimony was one of a long spending 
spree to disaster. By the end of December 2008 Stanford International Bank had 
only $88m in cash, but claimed to hold $1bn in assets.

As worried investors pulled out their cash, Davis told the court Stanford 
tried to use his beloved Antigua to bail him out. He cooked the books and 1,500 
undeveloped acres Stanford had bought on the island for $64m were set to be 
valued at $3.2bn, Davis told the court.

Stanford's attorneys argued that the bank would be solvent today if the US 
government had not shut it down in February 2009. They did not put the 
businessman on the witness stand, although Stanford had reportedly wanted to 
testify.
 