 The retaking of Musa Qala was completed yesterday, with soldiers from the new 
Afghan national army leading Nato troops into the centre of the town.
A statement from Nato's international security assistance force (Isaf) said 
troops were met by cheering locals after four days of fighting in whichNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> troops, including a British contingent 
of more than 1,000, and the Afghan forces fought the Taliban and their 
supporters.

Nato commanders made it clear they wanted Afghan, rather than foreign, troops 
to lead the way into the centre of the town in Helmand province, southern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

"The people of Afghanistan should be proud of their fellow countrymen's 
exceptionally brave and professional military action," Brigadier General Gul 
Aqa Naibi, the Afghan army commander, said in a statement released by Isaf.

Nato troops were reported to be consolidating their position on the outskirts 
of the town and searching for any remaining Taliban fighters.

The Taliban still controlled three remote districts around the town and the 
joint Afghan-Nato force would continue operations throughout the winter to 
target those areas, General Mohammad Zahir Azimi, the Afghan defence ministry 
spokesman, said. The next two days would be crucial in completely securing Musa 
Qala and starting to provide governance and services for its citizens, he said.

It is not known how many Taliban and civilians were killed in the operation, 
which left two British soldiers dead. Taliban militants overran Musa Qala in 
February, four months after British troops left the town following a 
controversial peace agreement with local Afghan elders.

Afghanistan's president, Hamid Karzai, said the decision to enter the town 
followed reports of brutality there by the Taliban, al-Qaida and foreign 
fighters. Karzai said the successful attack was aided by some local Taliban 
leaders switching allegiance to his government.

In neighbouring Kandahar province, Taliban fighters ambushed a convoy of Nato 
supply trucks, setting off a two-hour battle that killed five police officers 
and eight militants, the provincial police chief said. In nearby Panjwayi 
district, a suicide car bomber blew up his vehicle near a Nato convoy, killing 
an Afghan man and child and himself, he added.

In Washington, Robert Gates, the US defence secretary, told the House armed 
services committee he hoped the search for an individual to coordinate aid and 
development programmes in Afghanistan - and coordinate military and civil 
operations - would be completed within weeks. Lord Ashdown, the former Liberal 
Democrat leader and UN high representative in Bosnia, is a prime candidate.

Gordon Brown is due to make a Commons statement on Afghanistan today, 
emphasising the importance of reconstruction alongside continuing military 
operations.
 