
It was a tearful Amanda Knox <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox>
, flanked by her family and new fiance, who stepped out on her mother’s porch 
to announce she was “still absorbing the present moment, which is full of joy”.

The 27-year-old said she was “grateful to have my life back” after a 
labyrinthine court battle in which she was convicted, imprisoned, acquitted and 
then convicted again.

Asked what she would say to the Kercher family, she answered: “Meredith was my 
friend. She deserved so much in this life. I’m the lucky one.”

At nearby Salty’s, a West Seattle seafood bar, a group of supporters agreed 
with her. They had been nervously awaiting the verdict for hours. Several 
fortifying themselves with wine, one with a pint glass of margarita. This 
disparate group of believers, some of whom have stood with Knox from almost the 
very beginning of her ordeal, had barely allowed themselves a glimmer of hope 
that the decision would go this way after eight years of legal twists and turns.

When the announcement finally came, their joy was unconfined. They jumped to 
their feet, whooping and enveloping each other in bear hugs of triumph.

Salty’s, which overlooks downtown Seattle across the wide waters of Puget 
Sound, has strong Knox family links. One of her sisters, Deanna, worked here; 
the owner’s children went to school with Amanda, and the family are regulars.

It was here that the campaign began, when two locals, Al Semple and Julie 
Rogers, held the first fundraiser for a legal fund after she was imprisoned in 
2009. Semple was at Salty’s to hear the ruling. He jumped from his seat and 
punched the air in triumph when it was announced. “Thank God it’s over,” he 
said, grinning. There was cheering from the restaurant and, somewhere inland, 
fireworks exploded.

Her innocence was never in doubt here. “The Knoxes are west Seattleites, we 
have a lot of love for them,” said Chris Darst, manager of Salty’s. “Knowing 
the family as long as we have – we’re very happy for her.”

Charlie Harger, a presenter with Seattle radio station Komo 1000, said 
listeners who called in – as well as people on the street – felt “an 
overwhelming sense of relief”.

“People here for years have believed in Knox’s innocence,” he said, “and this 
is certainly what people in Seattle were hoping to hear today.” Knox supporters 
are a cohesive group, intimately familiar with events and characters in 
Perugia, and the detailed operations of Italian courts. Sitting waiting for the 
result – which was delayed by several hours as the judges deliberated – they 
swapped jokes about the Italian prosecutors in the case and their 
“eggshell-fragile” egos.

The decision may also bring to an end an online trolling battle, in which Knox 
supporters have locked horns with those convinced of her guilt – many of them 
from the UK. Knox’s supporters say they have been harassed online, and 
sometimes in person, for professing a belief in her innocence. “The nastiness, 
the vitriol, the ignorant, logic-resistant, fact-averse bile heaped upon a 
20-year-old college student was simply stunning,” said Bob Owen, from Long 
Beach, California. Owen is on the board of the Injustice Anywhere forums, which 
grew out of the campaign Injustice in Perugia. “For many, it had become simply 
fun to pop open a comment prompt and let fly with whatever nastiness came to 
mind. They had come to draw such entertainment value from excoriating Knox that 
the thought she might be innocent was actually upsetting to them,” he said.

“It was as though the whole world had given itself permission to despise, 
belittle, denigrate and demean a kid who, quite frankly, reminded me very much 
of my own college-aged children.”

Colleen Conway, another supporter at Salty’s, said there was a difference 
between the “organised haters” and the “haters-at-large”. “The organised haters 
– those with the websites – have a variety of pathological motivations, while 
the haters-at-large – those who spew random venom – are filled with rage toward 
women,” she said.

But yesterday, underneath the story of Knox’s acquittal in the Seattle Times, 
the comments were mainly from people decrying the Italian justice system that 
pursued “innocent American citizens” and calling for a boycott of tourist 
travel there.

In a statement Knox singled out those who had believed in her for special 
thanks. “Throughout this ordeal I have received invaluable support from family, 
friends, and strangers. To them, I say: Thank you from the bottom of my heart. 
Your kindness has sustained me.” Her family said they were “grateful beyond 
measure” for the support Knox had received.

“We want to express our profound gratitude to all of those who have supported 
Amanda and our family,” the statement continued. “Countless people – from 
world-renowned DNA experts, to former FBI agents, to everyday citizens 
committed to justice – have spoken about her innocence.

As jubilant supporters continued their celebrations in Seattle, one spotted a 
bald eagle soaring over Puget Sound, out beyond the terrace. “That,” said one 
of them later, “was a sign from the universe saying ‘Amanda you’re free!’”
 