
Your Britain's Got Talent fans might be surprised that you're playing Princess 
Fiona inShrek the Musical, which starts previewing in the West End this week. 
But you were Olivier-nominated for your last West End turn weren't you?

Yes, for Millie in Thoroughly Modern Millie in 2002. But I'd say Princess 
Fiona is probably my favourite role out of those two because it's funny, feisty 
and camp. It's also a much easier part. ForMillie I didn't leave the stage at 
all.Shrek is more of an ensemble piece and much less demanding. I might even be 
able to catchEastEnders between scenes.

Were you looking out for a part like this?

Yes, I was. My husband recently tracked down a clip of me playing Millie, and 
it reminded me of how much fun it had been. So when my agent asked me if I 
fancied doing another musical because they were seeing people forShrek, I said 
"Yes" straight away, not least because it's a massive franchise in our house, 
as you'd expect with a five-year-old daughter. I never usually tell people when 
I'm going for an audition but I stupidly said to her, "Mummy's going to see if 
the man wants me to be Princess Fiona today," and every day after that for 
weeks she kept saying, "Oh Mummy, when will the man know if he wants you to do 
it?" We eventually got the news when I was rather glamorously having drinks 
with Daniel Radcliffe in LA. We both have the same agent. She popped open 
champagne at 10 in the morning.

Who, your daughter?

No, my agent. My daughter Lexie does occasionally dip her finger in my bubbles 
but she says she prefers wine, which is a bit worrying. God, I sound like Katie 
Price. But she – my daughter – is truly delighted about me being Princess 
Fiona. Every picture she draws now is of me in the role with a green face and 
horns.

Are you happy being back on stage?

Next year it is going to be 20 years since I have been in the business, can 
you believe it? I was always singing when I was little, always. I had a little 
tape machine and I'd join in with Julie Andrews. Doing this has brought back 
that kind of joy for me again.

You're also back on TV in Britain's Got Talent and are now the 
longest-standing judge on the show following the departure of Simon Cowell and
Piers Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan>. How does that 
feel?

I'm the old bag in the middle. That's how everyone sees me, isn't it? But it's 
been a completely different experience and it is a completely different show 
this time withMichael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-mcintyre> and David Hasselhoff. It 
is so much more relaxed. Because as much as I am dear friends with Simon and 
Piers it has almost been more fun without them. I'm the boss now and I don't 
have two egos to tiptoe around. Piers has such a command of the English 
language that he had already used every blinking adjective I had in my head 
before I opened my mouth. And Simon used to make his bitchy remarks so that all 
that was left for me to say was, "Yes, I loved you, you're through". And I was 
left thinking, "What's the point?" But now I finally have a role, and the other 
two are coming to me for advice. Michael is very funny and I'm extremely fond 
of the Hoff. He's good to look at, even if it is in disbelief most of the time.

Has the show been harmed by Cowell's departure? 

I honestly don't think it has. Last week we killed everything else on telly. I 
imagine that's a kind of double-edged sword for Simon because he wants us to do 
well, obviously – he's the producer. But I don't know how he feels about us 
doing quite so well without him on the panel.

Are you in touch with him often?

Oh, yes, we talk all the time. He's so sweet. He is thrilled with the ratings 
and is very kind about what I am saying and how I'm looking. And it is so 
lovely when a man gives you a compliment. Especially when it comes from God.

Are you looking forward to Cowell's return for the finals?

I can't wait. I keep suggesting ways for him to make his entrance. I think he 
should be dressed in a toga and descend from the clouds like a deity.

The show has turned you into a national treasure. It's a big change from the 
negative press after the break-up of your first marriage to Les Dennis, isn't 
it?

That was part of Simon's plan. Before the first series he said to me, "You're 
a very likable girl, Amanda, and I think people will be able to see who you 
actually are when you're on the show because there is nowhere to hide." That's 
been the greatest gift he has given me. People have been able to see that as 
cheeky and as flirty as I am, I am not the dreadful slapper that the press used 
to portray me as. But it will probably all turn around and people will hate me 
again in a couple of years.

Were you aware of people warming to you?

Yes, and I've noticed it especially in the past few months.

Do you mean since losing your baby 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-12375556>?

Yes, people have been amazing. The letters and messages from friends and 
strangers alike have been such an enormous help. As much as there is a downside 
to it – sometimes you don't want to be watched, or for all your business to be 
in the public eye so that you can't even go for a private walk because 
everybody knows what's happened to you – the flipside is that everybody does 
know and they are behind you. They care. It's been a gift.

Has it also helped being busy rehearsing for Shrek?

My family are my priority but I've always had a strong work ethic and I like 
to be busy. I'm in the lucky position financially where I don't have to do 
things I don't want to do. ButShrek in particular is something I genuinely 
wanted to do for my daughter and for me personally, and it has turned out to be 
the best therapy. Without wanting to sound glib, if you're ever feeling down 
just paint yourself green and start tap dancing. It works for me.
 