
Amanda Knox <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox> was en route to 
Seattle from Rome – a free woman whose conviction for murder had just been 
overturned – when David Thorne, the US ambassador to Italy, sent a cable to the 
State Department declaring that the case was officially over.

Thorne’s relief seemed palpable. Knox’s arrest, trial and imprisonment for the 
brutal slaying of her British housemate, Meredith Kercher, had dominated 
headlines all over the world, and was closely followed by American officials in 
Rome, diplomatic cables would later reveal. “Post considers this case closed,”
he wrote in October 2011 
<http://thefreelancedesk.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/FOIA_KNOXCASE_AV_EMBCABLE_OCT112011.jpg>
.

It turned out to be premature, but the depth of the ambassador’s 
miscalculation will only fully be known next week, when a highly-anticipated 
ruling in the ongoing case by Italy’s highest court could open the door to a 
whole new legal battle over Knox’s potential extradition from the US, a 
decision that would have significant diplomatic and political consequences from 
Rome to Washington DC.

Amanda Knox: I feel stranded and trapped since new guilty verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/07/amanda-knox-guilty-verdict-meredith-kercher>
Knox – who has been portrayed both as a maligned and naive innocent and as a 
sex-crazed psychopath – has already said she would have to be dragged “kicking 
and screaming” back toItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. Many 
factors could influence the outcome of a potential extradition request. Even 
the decision of whether or not Knox wishes to have a child – she plans to marry 
a schoolfriend called Colin Sutherland – could become a factor in her forced 
return to thebel paese because American officials might delay the extradition 
of the mother of a small child. But the final decision – Italy’s to seek the 
extradition and the US’s to grant such a request – could ultimately hinge on 
politics, legal experts say.

The case has been long and complicated so far, with a series of drawn out 
decisions, appeals and reversals that are common in the notoriously slow and 
backlogged Italian justice system. Knox and her former boyfriend,Raffaele 
Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito>, were 
convicted of Kercher’s murder in 2009, then freed on appeal two years later 
because of doubts about the veracity of physical evidence, including the 
alleged murder weapon found at Sollecito’s apartment. Both Knox and Sollecito 
have always maintained their innocence.

That acquittal was then thrown out of court in 2013 because the appeals court 
was ruled to have been inconsistent in its judgment of the evidence. A year 
later, after a retrial, the pair were found guilty – again – of murder, with 
Knox sentenced to 28 and a half years in prison, and Sollecito to 25 years.

Under Italian law, that decision will not be considered final unless and until 
it is upheld by the court of cassation in its ruling this week, which could 
come as soon as Wednesday. That is why Knox has been able to live freely in the 
US, even though she is currently considered guilty of murder in Italy. 
Sollecito is also free in Italy right now, but would be arrested immediately if 
the conviction were upheld.

If it does not uphold the conviction, the court could also decide to send one 
or both defendants back to trial, but it does not have the power to acquit Knox 
or Sollecito outright.

The pair knew one another for seven days prior to the murder. Their public 
canoodling shortly after Kercher’s body was discovered aroused suspicion at the 
time and fueled the perception – among those who believe they are guilty – that 
Knox, in particular, was a psychopath.

Though they are no longer a couple, the pair have faced justice together since 
their first interrogations by police in Perugia. That, too, could change this 
week. Sollecito’s attorney hinted last year that she would seek to exploit 
differences in their cases. “They’re not Siamese twins,” Giulia Bongiorno told 
reporters last year.

The court’s latest conviction relied on a written confession Knox made – and 
then later retracted – after being questioned by police, in which she said she 
had been in the house when the murder occurred but not participated in the 
crime, and that her boyfriend was not there. A third man, an Ivorian named Rudy 
Guede, was also convicted of murdering Kercher in 2008 after a fast-track 
trial. He has almost served half of his 16-year sentence. Although Sollecito 
has long maintained that both he and his former lover are innocent, his defence 
will now rely on the truthfulness of a confession that Knox has said was made 
under duress.

“If you believe in the confession, Sollecito is extraneous to the facts,” 
Bongiorno told the Guardian. “The words of Amanda Knox … exonerate Sollecito.”

Even if their convictions are upheld, the wheels of justice will continue to 
move slowly. After the court releases its legal rationale for the decision – 
which could take up to 90 days – the Italian minister of justice would then 
have up to six months to determine whether to demand Knox’s return from the US.

Michael Scadron, a former lawyer for the US Department of Justice and a keen 
observer of the Knox case, predicts the Italians would not seek extradition 
under pressure from the US. “They will use back channel diplomacy to prevent a 
request,” he says.

If such a request was nevertheless made, the US would technically have to 
abide by it under the strict terms of an extradition treaty between the 
countries.

“If the Italian supreme court sustains the conviction, it will be nearly 
impossible for the US – despite the political uproar that will occur among 
those who believe she is innocent – not to extradite her to Italy,” says Steve 
Clemons, a senior fellow at the New America Foundation and foreign policy 
expert. “Emotions may run high, but in the end the relations between Italy and 
the US are deep, strategic, complex, and are designed to respect each other’s 
laws, even in controversial cases,” he added.

Relations have not always been rosy, however. In 2001, diplomats from both 
sides had to duke out an agreement over a woman called Silvia Baraldini, an 
icon of the Italian left who had been convicted of bank robbery and kidnapping 
in the US but was released to Italy under the condition that she serve nine 
more years of her prison sentence. Baraldini was released early to be treated 
for cancer following tense negotiations in an episode that insiders say created 
mistrust between the parties.

Under US law, if an extradition request is made, it would be scrutinised by 
the State Department and then the Justice Department, and would then have to be 
approved by a US court, where Knox could appeal the extradition. If the courts 
approve of the request, the final decision rests with the US secretary of 
state, John Kerry.

It is far from clear on what grounds the US government could ultimately 
challenge a legal request. Some lawyers have said the fact that Knox was once 
acquitted of the crime, and then convicted, smacked of “double jeopardy”, the 
concept that a person cannot legally be tried twice for the same crime. Double 
jeopardy is specifically outlined as an exemption in the US-Italy extradition 
treaty, though it has never been tested in court.

Italian legal experts flatly reject that argument. They say Knox has not been 
charged in separate legal cases. She has gone through a single process that has 
not been particularly unusual in the multi-tiered Italian justice system, which 
the US agreed to respect.

Back in her home town of Seattle, Knox has begun tentatively to try to return 
to some semblance of a normal life. In the face of immense attention from 
journalists and paparazzi, she has kept a low profile. Last year, she started 
working for a local newspaper, the West Seattle Herald, writing features and 
theatre reviews. Her editor, Patrick Robinson, told the Daily Beast that he had 
approached her “to give her the opportunity of a normal life”.
 