
Viewers in 200 countries and territories will be to be able to watch The Grand 
Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-grand-tour> from December 
after Amazon announced plans to use Jeremy Clarkson’s new motoring show to 
expand its video service.

Clarkson and fellow presenters James May and Richard Hammond announced the 
expansion in aYouTube video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wRkNMvK8UEE> on 
Wednesday, amid a marketing blitz that includes billboards, print, radio and 
television ads.

The Grand Tour’s first episode, to be downloaded or streamed on Friday 
morning, will be available toAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Prime subscribers in the UK, 
US, Germany, Austria and Japan. The international rollout will bring The Grand 
Tour to almost as many territories as used to watch the BBC’s Top Gear 
programme fronted by the trio, including all the locations where Clarkson and 
the team have previously caused controversy, notably Argentina.

The plans for an international expansion came as a surprise, as Amazon Prime 
is available in just 10 locations. It comes as Amazon seeks to justify the 
£160m over three years it is estimated to have spent on The Grand Tour.

Since the US online retailing giant announced its deal to produce a new show 
with the old BBC Top Gear team, the figures have bedazzled viewers and analysts 
alike. At £4.5m an episode, the cost dwarfs the £650,000 or so spent by the BBC 
on each show.

With huge amounts spent on overseas travel for the first series, from Whitby 
to Lapland via California and South Africa, as well as two vast and complicated 
tents to film in, The Grand Tour underlines how television budgets are 
approaching those of movies.


An opening sequence described as “spectacular” by Amazon insiders – featuring 
6,000 extras in the Californian desert, according to some reports – is 
estimated to have cost £2.5m alone.

In an interview with the Guardian, Amazon’s European TV boss, Jay Marine, 
said: “We look at these decisions with the data and I can tell you that we love 
this deal. Since working with these guys I love it even more than the day we 
did it. Was this an expensive show? You bet … But is it worth it? Yeah, it’s 
worth it.”

When a Clarkson-fronted BBC Top Gear made the Guinness Book of Records  
<http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/news/2012/9/top-gear-drives-its-way-into-into-guinness-world-records-2013-edition-44693/>
 in 2013 it was watched by 350 million people in 212 territories.

Asked if Amazon could get a return on its investment 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2081909/jeremy-clarksons-globetrotting-new-show-the-grand-tour-cost-whopping-276-5million-and-this-is-how-he-spent-it/>
, Clarkson said: “Yeah, they will. Do the maths.” He indicated that if just 1% 
of the previous audience signed up to Amazon Prime’s £79 annual subscription to 
watch the show, the broadcaster would recoup about £276m.

Consumer Intelligence Research Partners estimated there were 63 million Prime 
members this July, <http://fortune.com/2016/07/11/amazon-prime-customers/> up 
19 million in a year. Other analysts estimate that just 2 million of them are 
in the UK.

Tom Harrington, at Enders Research, is one of several analysts to believe that 
achieving the same number of viewers is no longer what matters. This makes The 
Grand Tour a “loss leader” for Amazon Prime, the subscription model that offers 
advantages such as free 24-hour delivery as well as television content.

“One of the strengths of Amazon’s whole video access system is that once 
you’re there you’re one step away from buying something else,” said Harrington.

Roger Parry, chairman of several marketing and media companies, said Amazon 
had by far the best business model of the relatively new entrants into the 
television market, such as Netflix.

“It’s basically a shopping site with video thrown in … Once on Prime, 
subscribers get hooked on fast, free delivery and get Jeremy Clarkson thrown in 
on top.”

Amazon’s own research suggests that when a Prime customer watches its video 
content, they are more likely not only to start paying after the free trial 
period ends but also to renew their subscription at the end of the year.

Amazon spends millions on original, award-winning content such as The Grand 
Tour or Transparent because it is “additive” to the main business, which is 
making people buy things. The company’s founder, Jeff Bezos, calls this the 
“Prime Flywheel”, which posits Clarkson as a large spider in the middle of the 
worldwide web.

Consumer Intelligence Research again suggests Prime shoppers spent about 
$1,200 on average last year, 
<https://www.statista.com/statistics/304938/amazon-prime-and-non-prime-members-average-sales-spend/>
compared with about $500 for non-members.


Marine said his confidence in The Grand Tour’s success was not just based on 
hoped-for viewing figures but on social media buzz and the quality of the show.

“I’m not trying to be boastful but it really is a TV moment with these guys 
coming back on air. There’s so much interest and anticipation in the UK market 
especially that I think it can be a game changer for Prime Video.”

When Netflix agreed to spend £5m an episode on The Crown, its new biopic on 
the Queen, it had a specific global audience in mind – older views who like 
dramatised history.

Amazon believes Grand Tour is not just attractive to male petrolheads or even 
young men used to streaming services. Marine says more than 40% of its audience 
are women, “and then you get into kids and families! There’s a reason this is 
the most widely watched factual show ever … It’s not just a car show, it’s 
really an entertainment show, a buddy comedy. And cars just play a role in 
that.”

When Clarkson left the BBC, after assaulting a member of the production team, 
there was speculation about his health. This week, the Sun splashed on his 
run-in with an airport worker. How will Amazon deal with any future controversy 
or meltdowns in a tent?

“I’m not going to speculate,” said Marine. “Jeremy is a big boy. He’s talked 
about that stuff. It’s not a concern.”

• This article was amended on 17 November 2016 to clarify a reference to 200 
countries and territories.
 