
Amec is hoping to build up its emerging markets business with the proposed 
£1.9bn purchase of Swiss-based Foster Wheeler.

The UK engineer has added 17p to £10.96 after it announced the deal, which Amec
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> said would more than double its 
revenues in fast growing regions. The cash and share deal would mean Foster 
Wheeler investors holding 23% of the enlarged company.

The £968m cash component of the offer will be met from Amec's existing 
resources. The company, which supplies services and equipment to the oil, gas 
and mining industries, has been on the lookout for acquisitions for some while. 
Amec chief executive Samir Brikho said:
 As well as positioning us across the whole oil and gas value chain and 
providing scale in our growth regions, we would expect double digit earnings 
enhancement in the first twelve months.

But the company added that the full benefits would not be realised in 2014 and 
it did not expect to report adjusted earnings per share of more than 100p in 
the year.

It also announced that while 2013 trading was in line with expectations, the 
recent strengthening of the pound against the dollar meant it would take a £10m 
hit on earnings.

Liberum Capital said the trading update was disappointing, and was also less 
than enthusiastic on the deal:
 Initial reaction is that the greater emphasis on lower growth mid- and 
downstream oil and gas markets and the power equipment business is unhelpful. 
This negative impact should be at least partially offset by the synergies.


Overall, markets have shrugged off the worse than expected US jobless figures 
from Friday, mainly on the assumption that the US Federal Reserve may now be 
reluctant to trim its $75bn monthly bond buying programme in the immediate 
future.

The FTSE 100 has edged up 6.58 points to 6746.52, with Morrisons leading the 
way. The supermarket group has added 7.5p to 243.6p following reports an 
activist US investor, Elliott Associates, was pushing for it to sell off some 
off its property assets. But Clive Black at Shore Capital said:
 Whilst there can be short-term gains for shareholders from a comprehensive 
property sale programme through distributions, we question whether such 
activity is in the interest of the company in the long-run; will the 
shareholders that may seek short-term radical action be there for the duration? 
Morrisons is a low margin business and the desirability of intensifying 
operational leverage from a major property programme is highly questionable in 
our view. 
Meanwhile Morrisons' online partner, Ocado, continues its recent gains, up 
another 32.5p to 548p. But HSBC repeated its underweight rating onOcado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado>, albeit raising its price target 
from 200p to 235p. The bank said:
 The core business should deliver growth broadly in line with the industry – 
growth via click and collect is not an option for Ocado. The deal with Morrison 
has proved a "life saver" for Ocado, and will help improve cash flows and 
returns.

We remain underweight as we believe the current valuation (estimated 2014 PE 
of 112 times) anticipates international deals we regard as unlikely.


Still with retail, Debenhams has added 3.7p to 85.25p on news Sports Direct 
International, down 8.5p at 747.5p, had bought a 4.63% stake in the department 
store group.

Banks are benefiting from news the Basel Committee proposes to loosen its 
definitions of leverage ratio. Liberum said:
 In theory relaxed capital should not impact valuation but in practice these 
definitional revisions reduce pressure onBarclays to rapidly shrink its 
investment bank balance sheet which is helpful for valuation.

Ian Gordon at Investec repeated his buy recommendation on Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>, saying:
 On capital, nothing (helpful) comes along for ages and then three doses of 
(surprisingly) good news arrive in quick succession. The UK's PRA led the way 
with its reassuring "key decisions on capital standards" in November and Policy 
Statement 7/13 in December, while yesterday's apparent easing in Basel 3 
leverage ratio requirements offers further comfort, albeit against measures 
where Barclays' compliance was not, in our view, in doubt. Expect a continuing 
relief rally as the Barclays "capital arbitrage" plays out.

Barclays is up 8.4p at 292p while Royal Bank of Scotland has risen 7.3p to 
364.2p andLloyds Banking Group is 0.82p better at 83.86p.
 