
Engineering group Amec is topping the FTSE 100 risers following news it had 
withdrawn from the bidding for oil and gas specialistKentz.

Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> had an approach worth between 
565p and 580p a share rejected by Kentz last month, and had until 16 September 
to decide whether to proceed. In the event it has decided there are better 
options elsewhere. It said it had a strong pipeline of opportunities, and would 
also consider returning cash to shareholders in the fourth quarter, depending 
on the progress of any acquisitions. All that helped send Amec's shares 27p 
higher to £10.85.

German group M+W had also approached Kentz, but had so far made no further 
approaches. The 16 September deadline still applies in this case.

Kentz shares have dropped more than 10% to 490.1p, and Arden analyst Daniel 
Slater said:
 Of the two bidders Amec was always the more likely acquirer of Kentz given 
its existing oil and gas industry presence and now that the company has walked 
away it makes a deal look unlikely in our view not least given that no other 
bidders for the company have appeared other than M+W.

While the bid interest looks like coming to nothing this time it does lend 
industry endorsement to our long held view that Kentz has been undervalued by 
the market.

Meanwhile the FTSE 100 has lost its earlier, rather tentative, gains and is 
now down 20.32 points at 6568.11. Poor industrial production figures from 
Europe have taken the shine off things, while investors still remain uneasy 
about Syria, especially with the odd rumour of rockets being fired in the 
region.

Ahead of next week's US Federal Reserve meeting there is also concern the 
central bank may start turning off the money taps, the process which has been 
supporting the markets for some time.

Elsewhere Aggreko is leading the FTSE fallers, down 55p at £15.96 as Deutsche 
Bank cut its price target but kept its buy rating. The bank said:
 Contracts in power projects have been hard to come by over the past 12 months 
but we are still of the view that the lack of contract conversion is an issue 
of timing rather than anything structural. Although we have no precise 
visibility on the timing of contracts being signed, we think it is right to 
take a cautious stance given emerging market GDP and foreign exchange weakness. 
We therefore move to a scenario whereby underlying pretax profit is broadly 
flat in 2014 versus 2013, implying an 11.6% cut to our 2014E earnings per share 
which now sits at 83.3p. Our target price falls to 1870p from 2100p, but we 
retain our buy recommendation as we expect better contract conversion in 2014.

 