
Amec Foster Wheeler has lost more than a fifth of its value after the oil 
services group slashed its dividend and forecast a fall in margins. The news 
has wiped more than £600m off Amec’s market value.

With oil companies cutting capital expenditure after the crude price slump, 
services companies have been struggling in recent months.Amec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> said it expected second half 
margins to fall compared to the first six months, as it reported a 3.4% like 
for like drop in nine month revenues to £3.87bn.

The company said it had raised its cost cutting target by $55m to $180m by 
2017 and would reduce its final dividend by a half compared to last year, to 
14.2p a share.

The news has sent its shares down 162p to 585p, a decline of nearly 22%. Chief 
executive Samir Brikho hailed the company’s “high quality and diversified 
business” and its resilient financial performance but added:

However, we are not immune to the ongoing tough market conditions and we are 
managing the business on the assumption of an extended period of weakness.

For more than a year..we have seen customers reducing capital expenditure and 
putting more pricing pressure on the supply chain. We see no sign of these 
trends changing.

In the light of the ongoing market conditions, we are taking the prudent step 
of cutting our ordinary dividend payments by fifty per cent, starting with the 
final dividend for 2015.

Investec analyst Neill Morton said:

Covering the oil and gas sector feels like being punched in the face every 
morning. Today’s windmill comes from Amec, with a hefty profit warning. Given 
its diversity, both geographically and by industry, it is rightly regarded as 
an industry barometer. But its asset-light, cash generative business model 
means the surprise is all the greater when it warns. 2016 looks tough, 2017 
likely also, with any rise in the oil price no guarantee of a pick-up in 
customer activity.

Others in the sector have also seen their shares slide. Hunting is down 11.1p 
at 361.8p as it too reported difficult trading conditions, saying profit from 
continuing operations could fall by 90%.Petrofac has fallen 57p to 816.5p and 
Wood Group is off 25p at 602p.

Oil companies are falling too, with Tullow Oil down 15p at 218p and Premier Oil
3.85p lower at 84.15p.
 