
With her twin roles as Kay Hope, the prickly head of sustainability in the 
BBC2 Olympic satireTwenty Twelve <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00yw1t9> and 
the glorious DCI Gill Murray in ITV1's excellent police drama seriesScott & 
Bailey <http://www.itv.com/scottandbailey/>, Amelia Bullmore is currently one 
of the most inescapable faces on television. Yet barely a head turns when she 
slips into a lunchtime bar in Soho.

She's wearing the kind of bright casual outfit that neither Hope nor Murray 
could get away with, but you'd think that her distinctive features – she looks 
like Kristin Scott Thomas's impish younger sister – would draw attention. But 
she tells me that she's hardly ever recognised.

"I like to think – and I know it sounds stupid – that I don't look like those 
people," she explains. "It would be different if I was wearing a suit and 
ordering people around. But I'm not, I'm on the bus."

Perhaps the secret of her success is that she melts into her characters, 
leaving little impression of herself. Faultlessly modest and decidedly 
unstarry, she comes across as serious without being earnest and amusing without 
sounding false. In short, much more a civilian than a celebrity. In a TV career 
stretching back more than 20 years, she's been a comedy stalwart in countless 
series, includingI'm Alan Partridge, in which she played Sonja 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xytOtEDPaGA>, the wayward Ukrainian girlfriend, 
and Chris Morris'sBrass Eye. 

She's also had plenty of straight roles, from Steph Barnes in Coronation Street
 to a reporter inState of Play – both of which were written by Paul Abbott. "He 
could write an episode ofCoronation Street between his evening meal and going 
to bed," she recalls. "The speed and confidence of it was fantastic."

It's said with respect of a fellow writer, because, aside from all the acting, 
Bullmore is also an accomplished playwright and scriptwriter. She started out 
writing for the hit 1990s dramaThis Life and has since written with some 
distinction for radio, stage and television.

She also wrote an episode of the current series of Scott & Bailey. 

Which one, I ask.

"Episode seven," she says. "The one about gang girls." 

As a devoted fan – particularly of Bullmore's sharply persuasive performances 
– who watched the whole series in advance, I am bemused to hear no bells 
ringing. So she leans forward and confides in a careful whisper. "A guy's 
killed. His penis is pushed down his throat."

Ah yes, that one. What creative inspiration, I say. But with typical 
self-effacement she attributes the idea to Sally Wainwright, the show's creator.

She hopes to write more if there's a third series, which seems a certainty. 
For surely the failure to recommissionScott & Bailey would be a crime so 
perplexing that not even Gill Murray could solve it. 
 