
Like most Americans, I envy the British system of royalty. I sometimes wonder 
if the Queen reads my column. Hello, Your Majesty! Sorry if any columns have 
offended you. Honestly, some of them have offended me. I guess we're alike in 
that way. Yet another reason for you to knight me. That would be so cool. 
Everyone here in Syracuse would be like: "Hey, who's in that suit of armour?" 
And I'd be, like: "Get out of my way or I shall slay thee." This would be 
especially useful at the post office.

Although actually we do have a form of royalty: our pop princesses, ie Britney 
Spears, Lindsay Lohan, Miley Cyrus, et al. To enter this group, one must follow 
a precise trajectory: 1) Start out in show biz very young; 2) Urged on by your 
management, prematurely start exuding sexuality; 3) Begin partying in public; 
4) Be brought down by a spiteful, suddenly puritanical media; 5) Enter rehab. 
By this time, you're ancient - like, 17 or 18 - your life basically over. But 
ah, the memories!

Sadly, our princesses keep getting younger and younger. Earlier this month, a 
singing/dancing/rapping foetus known as MC Fetuz HQ entered rehab while still 
in the womb. Some say she'd started partying out of depression over a recent 
weight gain (her weight had more than tripled in the preceding trimester). MC 
Fetuz HQ doesn't give interviews, because she can't speak, because her face 
isn't fully formed yet. But my feeling is, cheer up, kid, you've got your whole 
life ahead of you: making your first rudimentary noises, rolling over, scoring 
that first record contract, etc.

Do we have princes? We do. These are our pro athletes, also peaking earlier 
and earlier. One of our great basketball players, LeBron James, went pro when 
he was only 19. He was followed by Jack "Tiny Man" French, who went pro while 
still part sperm and part egg, about a week before his parents met. The New 
York Yankees recently gave a million-dollar advance to a single strand of DNA. 
In an effort to "court" the DNA strand, they even had a tiny uniform made for 
it. But it ended badly: the strand was photographed trying to take steroids, 
which was doubly tragic since, a) it had no discernible mouth and, b) the 
steroid pill was approximately 3,000 times its size.

I long for the good old days, when our pop princesses had to at least be born 
to host the MTV Awards, and our gifted DNA strands played sports simply for the 
joy of it, in neighbourhood parks, radiant smiles of joy on their nucleotides. 
But, then again, I'm old-fashioned. I believe in the traditional values: hard 
work, honour, being knighted by a Queen of a country not yours, just because 
you mentioned Her in your column.
 