
About 10 years ago Amitav Ghosh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/amitav-ghosh> began work on a new novel 
about departures. His experience of moving from India to Britain in the 1970s 
had been “wrenching” and set him wondering what it was like for Indian people 
travelling to England in the 19th century. “So I began to write about some 
characters who might have been among the first people to leave India, and 
immediately I came up against this immense canvas that lies behind relations 
between India, Britain and China. It was essentially all about opium and it was 
clear this was not a story I was going tell in a single book.”

So Ghosh set about writing a fictional account of the period leading up to the 
first opium war (1839-42), in which UK and China clashed over the British 
importation of opium, grown on their Indian plantations, into China.Sea of 
Poppies <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sea-of-poppies.html> was published in 
2008 and was shortlisted for the Booker prize. It was the first part of what 
has become the 1,600-page Ibis trilogy, named after the schooner that ferries 
both opium and human traffic. In 2011River of Smoke, the second part, was 
shortlisted for the Man Asian prize and the series culminates this week with 
the publication of the final volume,Flood of Fire, Ghosh’s eighth novel in a 
career that has seen his work translated into more than 20 languages. This week 
his entire body of work was shortlisted for the International Booker prize, 
which was awarded toLászló Krasznahorkai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/19/man-international-booker-2015-laszlo-krasznahorkai>
.

Ghosh, who was about to turn 50 when he embarked on the trilogy, says he found 
it daunting: “For the next 10 years, this was what I was going to do. But I 
also knew that I had to set myself something really difficult and ambitious. 
And that has proved to be the case. I was determined that the individual books 
should stand alone – it’s indefensible, aesthetically, for it be just one huge 
book chopped into three. One of my favourite experiences was reading Lawrence 
Durrell’sAlexandria Quartet 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/alexandria-quartet.html> in Alexandria. I love 
his writing and it is strange how he is kind of forgotten now. He had an 
incredible range and the books capture all aspects of a cosmopolitan life in 
the eastern Mediterranean. They do articulate with each other so that you get 
glimpses of characters across books, but they are not all meshed together. If I 
had a model, that was it.”

Despite the darkly cynical and violent subject matter, Ghosh’s trilogy is 
funny, sexy and rip-roaring. “The material is so grim for so much of the time I 
had to have some leavening. But I also think there is a contemporary 
sentimentality that assumes people living difficult lives are always gloomy. 
That is just not the case. I’ve spent a lot of time in very difficult places, 
and I can tell you that people in desperate circumstances can also be 
incredibly cheerful and good-natured, often more so than people on the streets 
of London, for instance.”

The co-option of Indian labour, and soldiers, by the British empire underpins 
much of the trilogy. “The indentured system was self-consciously a replacement 
for slave labour,” he explains. “It is strange that people don’t put together 
that India was to the 19th century what Africa had been to the 17th and 18th: a 
global sink of labour.” There are obvious echoes of the conditions endured by 
some migrant workers today, and while Ghosh does not labour the point, there 
are also inescapable parallels between the opium and Iraq wars. “British 
merchants were saying in the lead-up to the opium war that there will be joss 
sticks lit in the streets and the people will be grateful for the overthrow of 
the Manchu tyrant,” he says. “It is a complete echoing across two centuries and 
was eerie to see. The other striking thing was the degree of corruption. You 
have to read between the lines, but the opium war was one of the first to be 
fought in a complete public and private partnership. The merchants were given 
contracts to provide services and provisions to the soldiers and they made out 
like bandits. Paying off British generals, and bad provisions probably killed 
more soldiers in China than did the Chinese army.”

The book jacket for Flood of Fire features an admiring quote from the 
historian Christopher Clark and Ghosh has been acclaimed for providing a 
plausible account of events that had previously been underexamined. 
“Puzzlingly, there is no military history of the first opium war,” he says, 
“although it saw the first major use of steam-powered warships which 
revolutionised naval warfare forever. So I found myself piecing much of the 
battlefield details together from primary sources. But the difference between 
writing fiction and writing history is that fiction doesn’t commit you to one 
view. That is why I was never a historian or an academic. I don’t think 
theoretically. What interests me about history is that there are so many 
alternative ways of telling it. I have had my life and experiences and I have 
my opinions. But I have also forced myself to see the world through, say, the 
eyes of an opium trader, and that is one of the great strengths of historical 
fiction. It encourages you to step out of your skin and see the world from 
other points of view.”

Ghosh was born in Calcutta in 1956 and was brought up in India, Bangladesh and 
Sri Lanka as his family moved around with his ex-soldier father on various 
secondments to the Indian government. The peripatetic life meant that books 
became particularly important to him – one early childhood favourite was 
Richmal Crompton’sJust William 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/22/just-william-richmal-crompton>
 series before he moved on to the novels of Sir Walter Scott, for many the 
inventor of the historical novel as we know it today. “Scott had a huge 
influence on many early 19th-century Indian writers and I found his books 
utterly absorbing and remember curling up in bed with them at boarding school”. 
He was at the prestigious Doon School where Vikram Seth, a pupil a couple of 
years ahead of him, came back to teach and they talked a lot about writing to 
each other. “Not long ago I went back there and looked at those same editions 
of Scott in the library. I was the last person to have checked them out.”

As a teenager, Ghosh enjoyed Indian classical music as well as Deep Purple, 
Bob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>, Simon and Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simonandgarfunkel>, “all the stuff my kids 
still listen to” – he is married to the writer Deborah Baker, they have two 
children and live in Brooklyn and India. “We also had the radical politics of 
the 1970s. I came of age in the middle of the Naxalite-Maoist uprising. But 
even then I was much more interested in Gandhism and thought Naxalism was a 
fetishism of violence of a very ugly kind. Yes, I was sympathetic to many of 
their aims, but I was not a joiner.”

He completed an MA in social anthropology in Delhi before going to Oxford for 
a PhD in the same subject. “It was all a bit of an accident. I was reading a 
lot ofNaipaul <https://www.theguardian.com/books/vsnaipaul> and James Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesbaldwin> and all I really wanted to do 
was travel. In those days it was difficult to get visas, unless you were an 
academic.” He lived in Egypt where he studied village life, travelled to 
Tunisia to learn Arabic and hitchhiked across the Sahara. “That DPhil was my 
equivalent of writing school in that I read a lot and wrote a lot. I also think 
I hold the world record for one of the fastest DPhils in that it took two years 
and three months. When I finished, in January 1982, I went back to India and 
literally that day I started writing my first novel.”

Historically, writers in England or France may have been frozen in their 
garrets, he says, but he was boiling in one in Delhi. “I got by for three years 
doing little jobs, but it was scary. In my late 20s all my friends seemed to be 
getting good jobs and I was just labouring away on a book. People don’t tell 
you that about the writing life. A lot of it is about risk. I didn’t tell 
people I wanted to be a writer as they would have laughed. Delhi was a city of 
politics and bureaucracy. Even after my book had been accepted by Hamish 
Hamilton in the UK, I had to go around Delhi showing it to publishers, and when 
I said it wasn’t a textbook they weren’t interested. Now there is this 
flourishing and vibrant literary world in India. It is marvellous. I think it 
really began with Naipaul. He was the pioneer who created an audience for 
himself and for others that followed.”

The Circle of Reason, Ghosh’s prizewinning 1986 debut novel, featured an 
exuberant blend of phrenology, weaving and appalling violence. It was reviewed 
in the New York Times by Anthony Burgess, who asserted that “Mr Ghosh writes at 
least as well as Mr Rushdie” and praised a novel that “smells of cow-dung 
fires, and tastes of chilies”. Ghosh followed it up two years later withThe 
Shadow Lines, set against a backdrop of vicious communal conflict and which, he 
says, “remains far and away my most popular book in India. But writing it was 
emotionally draining. I’d lived through those terrible conflicts. When I 
finished I just wanted to do something different.”

He changed tack in his next two books. In an Antique Land (1992) was a broadly 
non-fiction study emerging from his studies that investigated the relationship 
between Egypt and India, alternating his experiences of living in villages and 
towns in the Nile Delta with an imagined history of an 11th‑century Jewish 
trader and his slaves. Different again,The Calcutta Chromosome won the 1997 
Arthur C Clarke award, but Ghosh says he never thought of the book “as being 
science fiction. It is in many ways a historical novel that is projected into 
the future as well as the past. And what does such labelling achieve anyway? It 
just separates what is called the literary mainstream from this other kind of 
writing. Who are among the most memorable writers from the mid to late 20th 
century?John Wyndham <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnwyndham>, Arthur C 
Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke>, Ursula Le Guin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ursula-k-le-guin-contributor>, Doris 
Lessing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing>. And from the supposed 
mainstream who reads Angus Wilson today? To the literary establishment 
Lessing’s later books, about planets and so on, were a kind of embarrassment. 
But she very strenuously resisted that sort of partitioning and these writers 
have staying power because they were saying things about society that was in 
many ways more perceptive than what the literary mainstream was saying.”

Since 1999, Ghosh has spent more time in New York, where he has taken a series 
of university teaching posts, but the focus of his fiction has remained on 
Indian life and the implications of its history. His 2000 novel,The Glass Palace
 emerged out of stories told by his father and uncle who had fought with the 
British-Indian army in Burma in the second world war. “It began as a family 
story but I was led into something bigger.” The multi-generational history went 
on to win awards in Burma and to be translated three separate times, “although, 
of course, none of them told me they were happening,” Ghosh laughs.The Hungry 
Tide, described as both Conradian and Forster-ish by one critic, brought him 
even closer to home, to the Bay of Bengal in the form of a 400-mile river 
journey in search of a rare dolphin. The vast and complex web of salt and fresh 
waterways, partially submerged forests and precarious lives are at the heart of 
the novel, and in recent years Ghosh has become an outspoken commentator on 
climate change.

“If you are from my part of the world, climate change hits you in the face. In 
front of my eyes I’ve seen islands disappearing. I’ve seen saltwater invading 
deeper and deeper. This is the most vulnerable part of the world apart from the 
low-lying islands, and unlike the low-lying islands, Bengal has 250 million 
people. What is of much interest to me is why the arts, which are meant to be 
in the avant garde, have been so slow to recognise this. It is a profound 
challenge to all our procedures, and while I don’t primarily think of myself as 
an activist, if I did I would be very depressed.”


So should fiction be a way of educating, or warning people about such issues? 
“I don’t think that fiction should be didactic and I’m not there to teach 
anybody a lesson. For me, writing the trilogy has been an incredible voyage of 
discovery and when I find something that is new to me and excites me, it finds 
its way into the book. I hope it excites the reader, too.”

Flood of Fire closes with a list of historical sources so long it is easy to 
imagine there is still plenty of material to explore. Is this really the end of 
the story? “It is certainly the end of the Ibis trilogy. These books now stand 
on their own and I wouldn’t want to disturb that. But yes, there are a lot of 
unfinished stories, a lot of threads that I thought I would pick up but was 
unable to, and so I think I almost certainly will revisit it at some point. But 
that will be a different book.”

Flood of Fire is published by John Murray at £20.
 