
It was no shock to see Michael Haneke's Amour on the best foreign film list 
for this year's Oscars. What did surprise pundits was Hollywood's recognition 
of this unflinching Austrian film about ageing as a candidate for best picture, 
among such expected contenders as Steven Spielberg'sLincoln, Ben Affleck's Argo 
and Tom Hooper'sLes Misérables.

Academy voters appear to be hinting at a new openness to other cultures and 
the growing acceptability of subtitled entertainment. "It really is unusual for 
a foreign language film to do this well and to be nominated in two other main 
categories too, for best adapted screenplay and best director," said Charles 
Gant, film editor ofHeat magazine.

Not since Clint Eastwood's Letters from Iwo Jima, shot almost entirely in 
Japanese, was nominated in 2007 and Ang Lee's action-packedCrouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon in 2001 has a work in another language stood as an equal next to 
the best of English language cinematic storytelling.

Audiences in Britain in particular are responding to the growing accessibility 
of high-quality foreign films, which are easier to access at home now.

Critically rated television shows such as the French series Spiral, Hatufim – 
the Israeli showHomeland is based on – the Sicilian Inspector Montalbano, and 
BBC Four's smorgasbord of Scandinavian shows,The Killing, The Bridge and Borgen
, have allowed British audiences to appreciate foreign entertainment. Home 
delivery services such as Love Film, Apple TV's iTunes, Netflix and Curzon On 
Demand mean that viewers can download and stream new and classic foreign titles 
on a whim, rather than seeking out a DVD. "There was previously a real access 
problem for this kind of film," recalls Gant. "There was a short run at your 
local cinema, and that was your only chance."

Changes in technology have helped at the cinema as well as at home, Gant said. 
"Digital projection now means cinema programmers have a lot more flexibility. 
They don't just have to run a film for a week now. And with Curzon on Demand 
they are actually offering people the chance to see foreign films at home on 
the day of release."

Parents are no longer marooned at home, waiting for cultural news to reach 
them several weeks later. "People with kids can put them to bed and then run 
the new foreign language film on their television in the same week their 
friends are talking about it. In the past they would have had to wait four 
months; the usual window after a theatrical release before the DVD came out."

Lorraine Sullivan, a Frenchwoman living in London and curator of the Institut 
Français's season of international television this month argues that home 
consumption of TV series has helped. "The idea for a long time around Europe 
was that British television audiences didn't like anything in a foreign 
language. Now that has changed," she said. "It is funny, because on the 
political side Britain is getting perhaps more conservative, yet its attitudes 
to Europe in terms of an audience for culture is growing." Her festival of 
television, at London's Ciné Lumière, will celebrate the best TV series around 
Europe – a French show,Rebound, about the return of the dead, and the world 
premiere of Jean Reno inJo.

The new appetite for foreign fare might have started with the mass popularity 
of translated Scandinavian thrillers, from Stieg Larsson to Jo Nesbø, or it may 
have been the accidental result of cash-strapped public television schedulers 
searching for new quality drama with a reasonable price tag.

For Gant, the surge of interest has an "oddly cyclical feel". He said: "Before 
the multi-channel era, foreign language films were regularly shown on the main 
television channels and this is how many people my age will have seen their 
first subtitled films.

"Now the film programming of the four main channels has become much more 
ratings-oriented and mainstream and all the foreign language films have moved 
out to specialist channels. An average kid today is not exposed to the same 
kind of wide range of films."

Gant suspects the increasing use of computers and phones for social media 
means that resistance to reading type while relaxing has disappeared, making 
subtitles less frightening.

The success in Hollywood of a genre-defying film like Haneke's Amour may still 
prove a one-off fluke and could be the result of recent changes to the 
nomination system.

"Amour is a film that had a lot of very vocal cheerleaders," said Gant. "To 
get a best picture nomination now you need to have 5% of the first nominations 
of all those voting. So as long as you have some people who absolutely love 
your film, you are in. And this means that highly arty films can now win a 
nomination," he said.

This helps to explain the other surprise nomination on the best picture list 
from a first time director: Benh Zeitlin'sBeasts of the Southern Wild, a 
fantasy response to the devastation of the Katrina flooding.
 