
For a film in which a husband murders his wife, Amour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour> has been shown a lot of 
love. It was nominated for five Oscars, including best actress for Emmanuelle 
Riva, andbest foreign language film, which it won 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/25/amour-oscar-foreign-michael-haneke>.

But the manner in which the movie ends, and the apparent inevitability of such 
an ending, have gone largely unexamined. The reasons why euthanasia plays well 
with arthouse audiences – gendered euthanasia at least – have also gone 
unnoticed. If Riva's character, Anne, had been the carer, and murdered her 
bedridden husband, Amour's critical embrace might have been considerably less 
warm.

One of the implicit convictions of the film is that a carer – even one as 
assiduous as Jean-Louis Trintignant's Georges – will crack under the strain of 
caring for a stroke victim. Georges is so devoted for so long that only two 
scenes prepare for his emotional breakdown. One is when he slaps her. The other 
is a dream, foretelling violence. Georges is walking down his hallway, which is 
filling up with water, when he is attacked from behind by a hand over his nose 
and mouth. Who would not retaliate to such a brutal home invasion (which is 
what Anne in her changed state now represents)? This scene even foreshadows the 
way he will kill her, smothering her rather than letting her die in her own 
chosen way, by refusing food and water.

How can the audience object when they have admired him for so long? They can 
see where he's coming from.

Yet the circumstances shown in Amour are highly unusual. Money is no object 
for this couple. The carer has no pressing health issues of his own. He is also 
a man. And, though highly educated, he is a man who apparently has never 
received any advice about caregiving.Carers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/carers> are now advised to arrange respite 
care: to get out, eat properly, enjoy a social life. It's understood that their 
own health and mental wellbeing is at stake. As well as this, Georges could 
easily have secured more help from other agencies.

Every stoic bid for "independence" makes Georges' burden, and Anne's, greater. 
We never see him confiding in a friend. Staying at home alone – on the grounds 
that Anne refuses to be "shown" – is behaviour many experts would deem 
ill-advised. The couple become isolated, even rejecting offers of help from 
their daughter. For her part, a daughter better educated about disability might 
have said words of love to her mother, and persuaded her – while it was still 
possible – to go out for tea, out in her wheelchair, to visit a friend. The 
family doctor, who makes house calls, could certainly have provided adequate 
pain medication for Anne; morphine could have eased her passing. Georges had 
more compassionate alternatives available to him than smothering his wife with 
a pillow.

Even a casual viewer should be shocked that Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> ends as it does, with a murder-suicide 
as Georges disintegrates. He seals her room, stalks a bird, puts on his 
overcoat – vanishes. The fact is that however stressful caregiving may be, this 
is the outcome in just 0.001% of cases, in the US anyway. While Georges' 
breakdown might scare watching caregivers about the possible consequences of 
their devotion, the film's largely adulatory reception has implications for 
people with no knowledge of living with disability.

Amour raises cultural risks in a western world that is already ageist, and in 
which stretched medical resources are meted out to older patients much less 
generously than to the young. Conventional wisdom, that we should avoid 
prolonging the final phase of our lives, needs to be reassessed in the era of 
longevity. Says Felicia Nimue Ackerman, an ethical philosopher at Brown 
University: "Many seriously ill people find the 'morbid phase' of their lives 
well worth prolonging."

Yet, instead, we have a film detailing Georges' protracted caregiving so 
respectfully and Anne's decline so cruelly that it becomes hard to disagree 
with Georges' masochistic choices, or even notice that he has broken down. It 
presents a nonconsensual termination of life as a solution for the carer: it 
justifies euthanasia. That such a film has been so widely acclaimed while 
remaining so ill-examined is a dangerous thing.

Margaret Morganroth Gullette is Resident Scholar, Women's Studies Research 
Center, Brandeis University and author of Agewise: Fighting the New Ageism in 
America
 