
Art house cinemas attract a clientele that is fairly advanced in age. This is 
especially true during the day and during the winter when everyone else is 
still at work. Given the type of fare that art houses specialise in, patrons 
take in a steady diet of films about foundering string quartets, courageous 
Afghan songbirds, iconoclastic pedagogues, the French.

But because they shun the trashy fare at multiplexes, and because not all 
foreign or independent movies are life-affirming paeans to mysterious 
folksingers and lovable pickpockets, art house patrons also end up seeing a 
fair number of movies about socially maladjusted wrestlers, murderous tyrants, 
incompetent drug dealers, and young women who lose their lower legs thanks to 
the hijinks of frisky orcas. Sometimes these audiences get more than they 
bargained for.

A case in point: last week I went to see Amour, Michael Haneke's lavishly 
praised new film. In it, the superb, vastly underappreciated Jean-Louis 
Trintignant plays Georges, an octogenarian nursing his dying wife Anne 
(Emmanuelle Riva) through the final stages of her stay on this planet. The 
movie, which meticulously chronicles Anne's descent into paralysis, periodic 
catatonia and dementia, is incredibly moving and incredibly sad, shot in such a 
way that you feel you are in the room with these people. Georges and Anne are 
music teachers, and the life they have made together has been filled with joy 
and beauty. The joy and beauty are now gone, as the film makes clear, 
inexorably wending its way toward its devastating conclusion.Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> is a love story, yes, and a very 
beautiful one. But it is graphic, wrenching, and ultimately heartbreaking. No 
one comes out of the cinema with a bounce in their step and a song in their 
heart.

At the end of the movie, as I have been doing since I was a little kid: I 
applauded. Usually when I do this, people join in. They do so because they are 
drawn back to a time in their lives when they did not take motion pictures for 
granted, when going to the movies was absolutely thrilling. But this time, 
nobody joined in. When I got up and turned around, I saw row after row of 
stunned, silent seniors. They looked shell-shocked. No one was talking. A woman 
sitting two rows behind me seemed to wonder what I was clapping about. Had I 
actually enjoyed seeing an old woman go down for the count like that? Did I 
find this amusing?

All this falls under the general rubric of Caveat Emptor, or Think About 
Reading a Movie Review Or Two Before Taking in Your Next Film. I am still only 
62, not yet being actively stalked by the grim reaper, yet Amour depressed the 
hell out of me. Luckily for my wife, I expect to die before I reach the age of 
80 so she probably won't have to worry about taking care of me for any extended 
period of time. Nor will I have to worry about taking care of her. Which is a 
relief, because the movie underscores what I have long believed, that if there 
is anything to look forward to on the other side of 80, I sure haven't seen it.

I have always been fascinated by audiences that wander into the wrong film. 
Teens at a Kristin Scott-Thomas offering. Hipsters at a presentation of The 
Horse Whisperer. Refined, sensitive, mature women at a showing of The Passion 
of the Christ. I always wonder whether the string of violent, idiotic trailers 
previewed before the film might not be a giveaway that these folks have bitten 
off more than they can chew. This is something that fascinates me about art 
houses: their reliable role in providing their mature and heavily female 
clientele with a steady stream of films that won't make them feel good. Films 
about concentration camps. Films about paedophiles. Films about death.

As you study their expressions of distress or discomfort when they emerge from 
the cinema, you cannot help asking yourself: "Seriously, ladies, what were you 
thinking? Did you honestly expect a Mel Gibson film about Jews to be 
thoughtful? Uplifting? Fun?"

Which brings us back to Amour. A great film. A courageous film. The kind of 
film that young people should go to see, as it will teach them compassion and 
respect for those who have gone before them, and will also teach them the 
meaning of love. Be that as it may, Amour is the kind of film that people of 
advanced years should go to see only if they know what they're letting 
themselves in for. I myself am already making a note to myself to start 
exercising more caution when going to the movies. Pay attention to the reviews. 
Listen to friends' comments. One thing I know for sure: if I do live to be 80, 
I am definitely not going to spend my afternoons watching French films about 
intellectuals succumbing to the ravages of dementia. I'm more likely to go see 
the French film about the woman who loses her lower legs to a rambunctious 
orca. It's sad. It's unnerving. But it's a lot less likely to happen to me.
 