
Now that you know what it feels like to be us, we're starting to realise what 
it feels like to be you.

Australians, historically unable to separate national self-esteem from prowess 
at competitive sports, have suddenly found other grounds for pride. As our 
cricket team was put out of its misery this week, Sydney psychiatrist and 
author Tanveer Ahmed pointed to our "11 Nobel prize winners, the cochlear 
implant, Google Maps and internet Wi-Fi", not forgetting our economy and 
currency that are, in the local patois, crapping all over yours. (Of all the 
Barmy Army's songs, most noticeable is the deleted one: "We're fat, we're loud, 
three dollars to the pound.")

It may be hard to credit, but there is a plurality of acceptance in Australia 
about the Ashes defeat, as there has been in recent years about our decline in 
tennis, Olympic sports and the rugby codes. Only in Australian Rules, which the 
historian Manning Clark once called "the ballet of the working class", do we 
still rule (take that, Ireland!)

Have we outgrown not only the narrowly Anglo-Australian pacifier of Ashes 
cricket, but our reliance on sport itself? There would be something epochal in 
it if so. Australians, a materialist people, have loved sport because it's 
based on numbers. Now our chest-thumping goes to other numbers: our 3% GDP 
growth, our US101-cent dollar, our squillion-dollar mining companies.

Something is changing in the Australian physiology, and it is a growth in what 
might be called vigorous pastimes. The fastest growing sports in Australia are 
running, cycling and gym – for exercise, not competition – recreational 
surfing, snowboarding, mountain-climbing and skateboarding. Men are not 
deserting their families on Saturdays to play cricket; rather they are taking 
them on walks, swims and rides. Traditional team sports, in terms of popularity 
and participation, are flatlining.

But humility, from us, is hard to trust. Vince Lombardi was an American, but 
he might have been referring to Australians when he said, "Show me a good loser 
and I'll show you a loser." We're not really good losers. Not for long, anyway.
 