
A for art and artists

There are those who believe that delving into the biography of artists ensures 
a deeper perception of their art. I am not one of them. The notion that a work 
of art has to mirror the person of the artist, that man and work are an 
equation, that the integrity of the person proves the integrity of his 
production – such a belief seems to me to belong, particularly in the area 
of music, to the realm of wishful thinking. Beethoven's frequently chaotic 
handwriting in his letters and musical autographs reminds us of his domestic 
disarray as we know it from pictures and descriptions. In complete contrast, 
there is the enduring order of his compositions. The person of a great composer 
and his work remain to me incommensurable: a human being with its limitations 
facing a well-nigh limitless musical universe.

There are exceptional cases where events from the composer's life can be 
traced in the music. Beethoven, in his Sonata Op 110, composed the experience 
of returning to life after a severe case of jaundice. Similarly, Schoenberg in 
hisString Trio turned a major health crisis into sound. And Brahms conceived 
his D minor Piano Concerto under the impact of Schumann's plunge into the 
Rhine. Generally, however, the desire to link tendencies and incidents in an 
artist's life to his compositions will lead us astray. The notion that a 
griever longs to compose his grief, a dying musician the experience of dying or 
a person overwhelmed with joy his gaiety, belongs in the realm of fairytales.
Music <https://www.theguardian.com/books/music> is full of counter-examples. 
Works of happiness, joyfulness, serenity, and even lightness have emerged from 
periods of great personal distress. Let us rejoice at that.

B for Bach <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jsbach> and Beethoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ludwig-van-beethoven>


When Beethoven exclaimed that to do him justice, the master's name should have 
been notBach (brook) but Meer (the sea), he spoke not only of the surpassing 
abundance and diversity of more than a thousand compositions, but also of the 
creative power embodied in this supreme exponent of the most widely extended 
family of professional musicians ever.

I see Johann Sebastian Bach as the grand master of music for all keyboard 
instruments: the initiator of the piano concerto, the creator of theGoldberg 
Variations, the master of the solo suite and partita, of chorale preludes, 
fugues, and cantatas. When, in the postwar years, Bach's piano works were 
assigned exclusively to the harpsichord or clavichord, young pianists were 
deprived of the main source of polyphonic playing. To most of us, the 
assumption that Bach doesn't fit with the modern piano is outmoded. On 
present-day instruments one can individualise each voice and give plasticity to 
the contrapuntal progress of a fugue. The playing can be orchestral, 
atmospheric and colourful, and the piano can sing. To restrict a composer who 
was himself one of the most resolute transcribers of works by himself 
and others in this way might seem misguided even to practitioners of 
"historical performance".

Alongside the boundless wealth of Bachian counterpoint, the free-roaming 
creator of fantasies and toccatas must not be forgotten. In the spectacular 
A minor Fantasy ("Prelude") BWV922, to give just one example, no bar 
reveals where the next one will go.

Grand master of chamber music, sonata, variation and symphony – what other 
composer has covered such vast musical distances as Beethoven? We pianists are 
fortunate to have the chance to follow the path of his 32 piano sonatas all the 
way to his late quartets, supplemented by the cosmos of hisDiabelli Variations, 
and the Bagatelles Op 126. A distillation of his development is presented by 
the five piano–cello sonatas. Who else offers the range from comedy to tragedy, 
from the lightness of many of his variation works to the forces of nature that 
he not only unleashed but held in check? And which master managed, as Beethoven 
did in his late music, to weld together present, past and future, the sublime 
and the profane? Some prejudices have prevailed: the image of a thoroughly 
heroic Beethoven, or of a Beethoven who, in his late works, has become 
downright esoteric. Let's remember that he could be graceful in his own 
personal way, and that hisdolce, his warmth and tenderness are no less a 
feature of his music than vehemence and high spirits.

C for coughing


In Chicago, I stopped during a very soft piece and told the public: "I can 
hear you but you can't hear me." For the rest of the recital, nobody stirred. 
Have you noticed that in a fine hall the perception of music is good 
almost anywhere – as long as you don't sit right next to the brass? The same 
applies to coughing, sneezing, clearing one's throat, rustling, clicking the 
tongue, or babbling. If you really can't help coughing, be sure to do so during 
soft passages and general pauses: the "Coughing Rhinemaiden", a tag worn 
dangling around your neck, will be handed to you in due course by one of the 
ushers. PS – during funny pieces, laughing is permitted.

D for dolce


A famous visiting conductor once said to the string players of a German 
orchestra during a rehearsal of Mozart's Piano Concerto K595: "Meine Herren, 
spielen Sie dolce! Dolce ist süß." (Gentlemen, play dolce! Dolce means sweet!) 
Forty years ago, orchestras consisted almost exclusively of men. Another 
well-known musician confessed to me that, when facing Beethoven'sdolce, he was 
all at sea. "What on earth does he mean?" He wasn't the only one to ask. 
"Sweet", however, doesn't get us very far. "Tender", an Italian meaning of the 
word, is more helpful. But in Beethoven'sdolce, there is also warmth and 
introspection. Whileespressivo is directed more to the outside, dolce aims 
inward. The Germaninnig comes nearest. Warmth, tenderness, introspection are 
important hallmarks of Beethoven's lyricism. These days they have become a 
rarity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fw5ZUnbHhCJk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fw5ZUnbHhCJk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fw5ZUnbHhCJk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w5ZUnbHhCJk>

E for endings


The end of a piece reaches the borders of silence. Endings can bring the piece 
to a close, but also, in some cases, unlock silence. This happens 
in Beethoven's Opp 109 and 111. The Sonata Op 110 does something different: it 
liberates itself from musical shackles in a kind of euphoric self-immolation. 
The end of Liszt's B minor Sonata leads back into the silence of its beginning. 
There are many kinds of endings – triumphant and tragic, poetic and laconic, 
funny and melancholic, majestic and expiring. We find endings that present a 
final conclusion and others that leave things open. Open endings, as in 
Schumann's "Kind im Einschlummern" or Liszt's "Unstern" (Disaster) point into 
the unknown and the mysterious, unseal an enigma.

F for form

According to Hugo Riemann, form is unity in diversity. Aestheticians shortly 
before 1800 had applied the same formula to musical character. To me, form and 
character (feeling, psychology, atmosphere, "expression", "impulse") are 
non-identical twins. The form and structure of a piece are visible and 
verifiable in the composer's text. The other twin has to be experienced. The 
visibility of form leads some to see the invisible twin as its subordinate. It 
is relatively simple to analyse a composition with the help of the written 
text, more difficult to feel the form, and even more demanding to enter into 
the psychology of a work.

G for gorgeous


In Los Angeles, a lady greeted me after a concert and implored me to arrange 
Wagner operas for piano and orchestra. In her day, she had been a well-known 
coloratura soprano. An LP record with a colourful sleeve bore the titleMiliza 
Korjus – Rhymes with Gorgeous.

H for harmony


If we decide to call singing the heart of music – at least of the music of the 
past – what then is harmony? The third dimension, the body, the space, the mesh 
of nerves, the tension within the tonal order, but also the tension in the 
apparent no man's land of the post-tonal. The performer is expected to reveal 
such tensions right into their tiniest ramifications. Transitions, 
transformations, changes of musical climate, and surprises all resist 
calculation. We need to feel them. I preferplaying harmonic events to explaining
 them.

I for ideal


The perfect blend of control and insight, of pulse and flexibility, of 
the expected and the unexpected – is it utopian to hope for this? After 
thorough preparation, the ideal performance may be around the corner, or so it 
seems. Let's leave open the possibility that there might at least be moments or 
minutes when the right wind stirs the strings of the Aeolian harp. The 
performer, as if by chance, arrives at a superior truth. With uncanny 
immediacy, our heart is touched. Listen to Edwin Fischer's playing of the coda 
of the Andante of Mozart's Concerto K482.

J for jest


The Austrian Emperor Joseph II did not enjoy Haydn's "jests". Plato wanted to 
ban laughter. There are people for whom sense, seriousness and accountability 
are everything: to laugh, they feel, is to make oneself ridiculous. Some of us 
listen to music as if all of it was written for the church. Test your sense of 
comedy in the face of Beethoven'sDiabelli Variations. Recently, an eminent 
biologist said: "If you cannot laugh at life, then how in hell are you going to 
laugh at death?" Let us keep a few laughs for the end.

K for Klunz


Jakob Klunz embodies the tragic case of a composer living in the wrong 
place at the wrong time. Under the relentless regime of Bismarck he was 
considered out of step when writing 389 waltzes for two to six hands. 
Imprisoned, he was coerced to compose hisMarches to Fail Victory, posthumously 
published in a version for wind ensemble by Mauricio Kagel. The waltzes were 
sent anonymously, as a gesture of abasement, to the Austrian emperor. To make 
things worse, they were subsequently destroyed by the Strauss family.

L for Liszt <https://www.theguardian.com/music/franz-liszt>


Romantic sovereign of the piano. Creator of the religious piano piece. 
Chronicler of musical pilgrimages. Ceaseless practitioner of transcriptions and 
paraphrases. Radical precursor of modernity. Musical source of César Franck and 
Scriabin, Debussy and Ravel, Messiaen and Ligeti.

Familiarity with Liszt's piano works will make it evident that he was the 
piano's supreme artist. What I have in mind is not his transcendental pianistic 
skill but the reach of his expressive power. He, and only he, as a "genius of 
expression" (Schumann), revealed the full horizon of what the piano was able to 
offer. Within this context, the pedal became a tool of paramount importance.

Liszt's outstanding piano works – among which I would like to mention only the 
B minor Sonata,Années de Pélérinage, the Variations on "Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, 
Zagen",La Lugubre Gondola and the finest of the etudes – are for me on a par 
with those of Chopin and Schumann. His B minor Sonata surpasses, in 
originality, boldness and expressive range, anything written in this genre 
since Beethoven and Schubert.

Much of Liszt's music is nowadays played at overheated speeds. The last thing 
Liszt deserves is bravura for its own sake. Likewise, he should be shielded 
from anything that sounds perfumed, or what used to be called effeminate. 
Wilhelm Kempff's 1950 recording of theFirst Legend ("St Francis of Assisi 
Preaching to the Birds") presents us with poetic Liszt playing of unsurpassed 
quality.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkZOjT-p1xMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkZOjT-p1xMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkZOjT-p1xMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kZOjT-p1xMg>

M for Mozart <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mozart>


Grand master of opera, the piano concerto, the concert aria and the string 
quintet. His piano sonatas seem to me, with few exceptions, underrated. Artur 
Schnabel has splendidly summed up why: they were too easy for children and too 
difficult for artists. For the most part, the sounds they suggest are those of 
a wind divertimento; others, like the famous A major Sonata K331 and the 
C minor Sonata K457, are distinctly orchestral. So, too, is the C minor Fantasy 
K475. Orchestral versions of the two latter works emerged soon after Mozart's 
death. Mozart's relatively rare works in minor keys are particularly precious: 
the A minor Rondo K511 and the B minor Adagio K540 are soliloquies of the most 
personal kind. Stupendous in their chromatic boldness are the Minuet K355/576b 
and the Gigue K574. Wagner admired Mozart as a great chromaticist. Mozart – to 
quote myself – is made neither of porcelain, nor of marble, nor of sugar. The 
cute Mozart, the perfumed Mozart, the permanently ecstatic Mozart, the 
"touch-me-not" Mozart, the sentimentally bloated Mozart must all be avoided. An 
important key to Mozart playing is operatic singing. The grown-up Mozart said 
what he intended to say with a perfection rarely encountered in compositions of 
the highest order. More commonly, the minor masters smooth out what may sound 
rugged, bold or odd in the music of their great precursors. In Busoni's 
beautiful "Mozart Aphorisms" we find the sentence: "Along with the riddle, 
he presents us with its solution."

N for notation


Being able properly to read, and grasp, the written text of a composition 
ranks among the performer's supreme skills. The difficulty of the task should 
not be underestimated. Besides taking in the written letter the performer needs 
to put it into practice.

For any pianist, the use of the best urtext editions ought to be mandatory. 
Wherever possible we should, in addition, consult the original sources. Where 
the text is incomplete, as sometimes in Mozart, we are entitled to complement 
and ornament – in proper style.

O for orchestra


Nothing could be more gratifying for a pianist than to feel a high-class 
orchestra on his or her side, an orchestra that listens with open ears, 
breathes the same breath, and joins the music in sympathy. The sound of the 
orchestra, the multitude of its timbres, the scope of its dynamics, but also 
its rhythmic discipline are, for our playing, the required reference point. The 
other supreme model is singing, the human voice, the connection between singing 
and speaking.

Great conductors can demonstrate to us what an orchestra is capable of, how 
one deals with it, which nuances of tempo may be suggested and demanded. Piano 
music of an orchestral character was not an invention of Romanticism. As early 
as Bach and Mozart, orchestrally inspired movements can be found, while Haydn 
in his late E flat Sonata suddenly turns towards an orchestral style. Among 
Mozart's piano sonatas, there are also some that clearly indicate an orchestral 
imagination. In his A minor Sonata K310, the first movement is symphonic, the 
second a soprano aria with a dramatic middle section, while the third can be 
easily identified as wind writing. A majority of Mozart's sonatas share this 
predisposition for the sound of wind instruments. Schubert, not only in his
Wanderer Fantasy but also in most of his sonatas, was firmly on the side of the 
orchestra. And in Schumann'sSymphonic Etudes, the frustrated piano virtuoso 
conjured up an orchestra in his own personal manner, unleashing all of the 
instrument's orchestral glories.

P for piano


A glance at the scope and wealth of piano literature makes us realise: this 
instrument works wonders. But the piano must be an instrument, not a fetish. It 
serves a purpose. Without the music, it's a piece of furniture with black and 
white teeth. A violin is, and stays, a violin. The piano is an object 
of transformation. It permits, if the pianist so desires, the suggestion of 
the singing voice, the timbres of other instruments, of the orchestra. It might 
even conjure up the rainbow or the spheres. This propensity for metamorphosis, 
this alchemy, is our supreme privilege.

To accomplish it we need an instrument of superior quality. What may the 
discerning pianist expect? The piano should have an even sound from treble to 
bass, and be even in timbre and dynamic volume. It should be brilliant enough 
without sounding short and clanky in the upper register, or drowning out the 
singing upper half with its lower one. The soft-pedal sound shouldn't be thin 
and "grotesque" but round and lyrical, its dynamics reaching up to mezzoforte. 
Its action should be well measured in key depth and key resistance. And it 
should, ideally, be suited for a concerto no less than for a Lieder recital. 
For the noisiest piano concertos, however, a particularly powerful concert 
grand may be the only answer.

There are pianists who are content just to play the piano. Their ambition 
stops at what the instrument has to offer if it is only played in "the 
beautiful and right way". In contrast, the most important piano composers 
– apart from Chopin – have not been piano specialists; they enriched music in 
its entirety. The piano is the vessel to which a multitude of sounds are 
entrusted, the more so since one single player is authorised to control the 
whole piece. In his solo playing, the pianist is independent of other players. 
But he bears sole responsibility as his own conductor and singer.

For these reasons, it is not my most pressing concern to take, 
for authenticity's sake, a certain harpsichord, hammerklavier or Pleyel piano 
of 1840 as a yardstick, simply because the composer may have favoured such an 
instrument. What matters more to me is to make manifest the sounds that a piano 
piece latently contains. The modern piano with its extensive dynamic 
and colouristic possibilities is well equipped to do this. The pianist 
should make himself acquainted with the orchestral, vocal and chamber works of 
the masters. A well-known musician has advised young pianists to spend two 
years browsing through the entire piano literature. I'd rather spend the time 
dealing with theother music the composer wrote. Such an extension of one's 
horizon might enable the player to differentiate the first movement of Bach's
Italian Concerto as an orchestral piece that alternates tuttis with solos, the 
second as an aria for oboe and continuo, and the third, for once, as 
a harpsichord piece.

Concert grands of recent decades have progressively tended towards the harsh 
and percussive – or so it seems to me while writing this today. (The great old 
pianists would have turned away in despair.) Pianos of the past displayed an 
inner resonance that gave the sound length and warmth. Yet even now it 
is possible to find, once in a while, a wonderful, magnificent instrument. 
Frequently, it has been monitored by one of the leading concert technicians. My 
collaborations with the finest exponents of this trade count among the happiest 
experiences of my musical life.

Q for querflügel


A rare keyboard instrument, to be played diagonally, built in 1824 by 
Broadwood ("Traverse Piano") for the exclusive use of Prince Karl von 
Lobkowitz, who sported one longer and one shorter arm. The only surviving 
specimen, kept in the basement of Vienna's Palais Lobkowitz, bears an 
indecipherable dedication by Beethoven.

R for repertoire


It is no accident that piano music boasts the biggest solo repertoire. On the 
piano, one single player can "master" the complete work with all its parts 
without the interference of partners. This is a bonus as well as a danger. 
Thanks to the complexity of the task, the development of a pianist is slower 
than that of violinists, who play a single voice or doublestops. While 
violinists can already achieve excellence in their early years, pianists will 
more likely reach their peak between 40 and 60. The danger consists in a 
high-handedness that does not do justice to musical responsibility. To be sure, 
piano literature will, in its more fantastic, improvisatory or recitative-like 
passages, present the player with the opportunity to live out his spontaneity 
to the full. In such situations, the inner baton comes to rest. Generally, 
however, our interior conductor will be the bearer of our standard. 
Even in comparatively unbuttoned performances, the listener should be able to 
write down the printed rhythm.

In planning their future, young pianists would be well advised to consider 
whether they want to build a comprehensive repertoire or seek specialisation. 
Which works are, thanks to their quality, worth spending a lifetime with? Which 
should we dare to take on? And which somewhat minor ones can we afford to 
include as a luxury? The question of musical quality will start to present 
itself early on. Even if we cannot assess things properly right away, we ought 
to attempt to divide the wheat from the chaff to the best of our abilities. 
Studying composition, and becoming familiar with a wide range of music, will 
both contribute to recognising a work's originality, its novelty within an era. 
During some decades the repertoire will expand, in later years it may need to 
be reduced. The pianist who presents important new music in an accomplished way 
and spreads its gospel is worthy of the highest praise.

S for silence


Silence is the basis of music. We find it before, after, in, underneath and 
behind the sound. Some pieces emerge out of silence or lead back into it. But 
silence ought also to be the core of each concert. Remember the anagram: listen 
= silent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3aMs2dHNXVs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3aMs2dHNXVs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3aMs2dHNXVs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3aMs2dHNXVs>

T for tempo


I distinguish between metronomic, psychological and improvisatory time. The 
metronomic one applies to certain dances and other pieces of a strict 
character. In the psychological one, tempo modifications appear to be so 
natural that we get the impression of a piece "remaining in time", while 
improvisatory tempo should be deployed in passages resembling fantasy, 
recitative or cadenza. The music of Chopin, and sometimes that of Schumann or 
Liszt, calls for greater freedom. With few exceptions, Chopin's works are 
written for the piano alone. We shouldn't forget that his rhythmic gamut 
reaches from the strictest (C minor Prelude) to the freest. The basic tempo of 
a piece can only be determined once the performer has taken into account all 
its components: tempo indications, characters, dynamics, articulation, rhythmic 
subdivisions and pianistic feasibility. Only then can metronome markings, 
if there are any, be considered and, when necessary, modified.

U for unity


In music, the call for "unity in diversity" has been applied to both form and 
character. Unity without diversity tends, in most cases, to become tiresome. 
Diversity without unity is lively but aimless; or at least it used to be until, 
in the 20th century, so many aesthetic rules started to shift, and accidental 
music became one of the options. It would, however, be quite misleading to 
treat older music in such a random fashion. Even where the appearance of 
spontaneity is conveyed by the performance, we should have the impression of 
coherence, and completeness.

V for variation


Works in variation form are the performer's supreme school of 
characterisation. Admittedly, there are also works where the variations 
maintain the character of their theme. In general, however, the composer 
will aim for variety. The player is expected to command a veritable theatre 
filled with characteristic types, and to control it with assurance. But he 
should never lose the overview. A neatly separated, side-by-side coexistence of 
the variations will not be an adequate solution unless we are dealing with 
Bach'sGoldberg Variations. Variations are dependent on the structure of 
their theme. In his Diabelli Variations, Beethoven has loosened this dependence 
in an astonishing way. Variations may now comment on the theme, mock it, put 
it into question and even lead itad absurdum.

Within piano music variations are of special importance. They extend from 
Bach'sGoldberg Variations via Haydn's lovely double variations in F minor to 
the second peak, theDiabelli Variations. Sublime sister works that we hold in 
awe are the final movements of Beethoven's Sonatas Opp 109 and 111.Franz Liszt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/franz-liszt> renewed the form chromatically 
and psychologically: hisBach Variations entitle the player to "weep, lament, 
worry and despair" until the concluding chorale redeems the listener, and 
himself.

W for wail


"Prolonged plaintive inarticulate loud highpitched cry" (Concise 
Oxford Dictionary), known to be uttered by Johannes Brahms after playing the 
piano at his ghostly nocturnal appearances.

X for x


Conlon Nancarrow's astonishing music for player piano offers performance 
without interpretation. As the results are fixed, the pianist can lean back 
and say: "What bliss! I don't have to break a finger."Canon X is one of his 
finest pieces.

Y for yuck!


Exclamation of displeasure. A natural reaction to memory lapses, blurred notes 
and fainting fits.

Z for Zvonimir


Legendary medieval king of the Croats. His connection to music, and to this 
alphabet, is, at best, peripheral.
 