
Both Andrew Lawrence <http://www.andrewlawrencecomedy.co.uk/> and Russell Kane 
<> are now probably deserving of that double-edged epithet "Edinburgh 
stalwart". They are two comics from the south-east of England who made a full 
fringe debut in 2006. Each has performed here every year since and been 
nominated for the Edinburgh comedy awards. In 2010, they're back again – and it 
might just be a defining year for both.

In the last five years, it's fair to say that both men have established 
themselves here. They have identifiable onstage personas and are more likely 
than not to sell out every night of a run. They have similarities in style: 
both are in possession of an expansive vocabulary and share a penchant for 
soaring flights of invective. They like doing funny voices. At the same time, 
they have crucial differences: Lawrence is aggressive, angry, depressive and 
nihilistic; Kane can be furious, but he is more generally a bundle of gay 
energy whose natural tendency is towards optimism.

This may be why Russell Kane hosts a programme on ITV2, while Lawrence's show 
is called the Too Ugly for Television Tour. What's more, Kane has this week 
been hailed by The Times (paywall avoiders, you'll have to take my word for it) 
as the funniest man in Edinburgh. Lawrence has to make do witha five-star 
Mirror review 
<http://blogs.mirror.co.uk/festivals/2010/08/andrew-lawrence---too-ugly-for.html>
 ending: "This is proper, uncompromising outsider comedy [that] may never 
appeal to the mainstream."

While a desire for mainstream success seems apparent in almost every comedian 
performing in this city, it could be that neither of these comics wants it. Nor 
indeed a lucrative, glamorous career in TV, then film, and ultimately as a UN 
goodwill ambassador. It may be that their shared ambition is to continue 
playing Edinburgh until their health fails them. If so, I wonder if one might 
have more legs than the other.

I enjoyed Kane's show more than Lawrence's this year. The latter's material 
often seemed flat and he fell back too often on the aforementioned invective. 
Kane, meanwhile, spends an insightful, touching, funny hour talking about his 
relationship with his dad. My only concern is that he might be about to hit a 
wall. Kane has always talked about his father and this year's show is the best 
distillation of these observations I have seen. But when Kane isn't talking 
about the people he's closest to, his material doesn't resonate in the same 
way. Lawrence, on the other hand, has created a character who can respond (with 
fury) to almost anything in the world. While much of this year's material is 
forgettable, one bit in which Lawrence expresses his disgust at Kellogg's for 
marketing Coco Pops as an after-school snack is truly wonderful, trenchant 
satire.

Kane has one of the best shows on the fringe this year, that's for sure. But I 
think that Lawrence, should he so wish, could be the defining standup comic of 
his generation. And I'm not just saying that because his second best bit is a 
tirade against the Guardian.

• This article was amended on Monday 23 August 2010. We said that Russell Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/russell-kane> did not perform in Edinburgh 
in 2007. Kane completed a full run that year so this claim has been removed
 