
Every day, tens of thousands of marine animals struggle and die, tangled up in 
fishing gear. They aren't the intended targets for fishermen, but because they 
dwell in fertile fishing grounds, they often become the victims of fishing 
practices that aren't selective enough to screen them out. These casualties, 
called bycatch, represent a serious threat to biodiversity.

"Bycatch occurs throughout the world in all fisheries and involves many, many 
millions of animals," explains Timothy Werner, director of the marine 
conservation engineering program at the New England Aquarium. "It's simply the 
most immediate conservation concern for many species and populations of marine 
animals."

Balancing biodiversity against business needs isn't easy, but the Consortium 
for Wildlife Bycatch Reduction <http://www.bycatch.org/about>, an alliance of 
fishermen and scientists, is working to find a solution. The nonprofit, which 
counts the New England Aquarium as a member, supports research to find ways to 
reduce bycatch. It has combined these studies, which explore a variety of 
visual and acoustic deterrents, into an online library that it makes available 
through its website.

As a nonprofit, the consortium doesn't commercialize its research, but its 
work could have a massive impact for fishing companies. This balance of 
conservation and commercial potential has already drawn attention: the 
consortium won the 2013 "ecosystem conservation award" fromKaterva 
<http://katerva.net/home/accelerate/>, which recognizes innovation in 
sustainability.

Fishing for sustainability – and profitability

The consortium's approach – and its recognition of the need to protect both 
fisheries and fishermen – is grounded in a unique partnership. Founded in 2004, 
the consortium brings together fishermen and scientists, two groups that 
historically share more antagonism than a common cause. Both sides had concerns 
about the alliance. Fishermen worried that research about bycatch reduction 
would lead to tighter regulations that would choke off their livelihood. 
Researchers, on the other hand, viewed the industry as unwilling to change its 
techniques.

Distrust aside, fishermen and scientists both also realized that they needed 
each other. The fishing industry must be a central part of any successful 
maritime conservation effort. And, at the same time, if fishermen hope to avoid 
restrictive regulations, they need to find effective ways to reduce bycatch 
without compromising their ability to make a decent living.

In some ways, bycatch reduction could help fishermen become more profitable. 
To begin with, bycatch is expensive: As Werner points out, finding a turtle in 
the net instead of, say, a tuna, means "that's not money in the bank for you". 
Industry-wide, the economic impact is staggering.According to research 
<http://seagrant.uaf.edu/conferences/2014/wakefield-bycatch/wakefield-2014-program.pdf>
 by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, bycatch in the US 
reduces potential fisheries revenue by $427m. In terms of seafood sales, the 
impact is even greater: bycatch could cost up to $4.2bn annually.

To make matters worse, bycatch can also be destructive - both to the animals 
and to equipment. Large creatures, such as whales, can cause massive damage to 
fishing gear. Thus, bycatch reduction could also reduce equipment expenses.

But the biggest concern may be regulation. If fishermen can't find and adopt 
good bycatch solutions, they may face regulations that could simply curtail the 
amount of time that they can fish, said Patrice McCarron, executive director of 
the Maine Lobstermen's Association, which is a member of the consortium. (Case 
in point:Palau aims to ban all commercial fishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/palau-sharks-ban-commercial-fishing-tuna-industry>
 once its current fishing contracts expire.)

"We were trying to solve a problem that, at its core, we didn't understand," 
said McCarron, explaining the reason the lobstermen group teamed up with the 
scientists. "Our industry was facing with making gear modifications or 
adjustments to fishing which may or may not help at the end."


Measuring and monitoring


The nature of the fishing industry makes it hard to quantify the extent of 
global bycatch. Werner, who is also director of the consortium, notes that 99% 
of fishermen are small-scale businessmen - often a man with one boat and a few 
nets.

Estimates for bycatch range widely, from 15%-40% of all catch, depending on 
the fisheries, Werner said. Some species are more prone to become entangled in 
nets and other gear because their habitats are fertile fishing grounds. Blue 
shark bycatch, for example, can reach tens of millions of sharks per year, he 
explained. More than 80% of the North Atlanticright whales 
<http://animals.nationalgeographic.com/animals/mammals/right-whale/> alive 
today have been entangled with fishing equipment at least once.

Whales, in particular, represent one area in which the consortium has 
benefited both sides of its odd partnership. Werner recalled one of the early 
meetings of the consortium, in which one fisherman asked how whales could get 
entangled with fishing ropes in the first place: "There was a stunned silence 
because nobody [had] really observed this except maybe once or twice," Werner 
said.

That prompted the consortium to support research into how whales see 
underwater, and to learn how fishermen use their gear. From there, scientists 
plan to try different methods that might deter the whales from swimming into 
the nets. Recent research showed that colors could play a role: Whales appear 
to see colors in the red or orange spectrum sooner than they do green, black or 
white, Werner said.

McCarron said the color study is promising also because it could allow 
lobstermen to use their usual equipment - in this case ropes - instead of 
switching to new gear that might not work as well. Low-cost solutions, such as 
changing the color of the ropes, are understandably welcome.

Other research that the consortium has supported includes devices that use 
low-decibel sounds to discourage marine mammals from approaching fishing gear. 
This method seems to work with species such as harbor porpoises.

After collecting evidence that a particular method could work well, the 
consortium enlists researchers in other parts of the world to help carry out 
more field work. The idea is to work concurrently in multiple areas to collect 
good data as quickly as possible. This multiple-site research method speeds up 
the process of finding solutions.

"The scale of the threat outpaces our progress with solutions," Werner said. 
"If we can make this process a lot more expedient and bring fishermen in right 
at the beginning, then we'll have a better chance of not taking 20 to 30 years 
to make a change."

The supply chain hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/supply-chain> is funded by 
Fairtrade Foundation. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 