
Those of you who indulge in Twitter, as well as this blog, will be aware that 
I've spent the time between my last piece and this being mainly in bed and 
feeling like someone who really does need to take things more easily. Several 
people have, in fact, shouted at me to that effect and I am taking their 
advice. April may be the cruellest month, but I am planning to render it 
civilised and to take my antibiotics in a regular manner.

Meanwhile, let us progress – if that's the right word – from last time's 
little sketch of the writer's Very Early Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/22/a-l-kennedy-writer-beginning-good-reader>
 to the Less Early Days. One might expect that these bring with them inrushes 
of professional assurance, public acclaim and cash.

Well, no. Not unless your first book is not only accepted for publication, but 
also instantly taken up as a soul-clattering work of genius that should be sold 
to every sane and able citizen. Which is unlikely.

Your Less Early Days will bring you – if all goes well – into contact with 
your first agent, your first editor and your first advance. These are all fine 
things which you will need, but they will also be at least a little terrifying. 
Back in the Precambrian era when I was a neophyte scribbler, publishing houses 
weren't quite the fortresses they are today and you could almost get by – or 
rather in – without an agent. (And editors eager to save cash could almost 
persuade you to do so.) Nevertheless, even I had worked out that signing a 
contract without assistance was something I should never do. My first "agent" 
was entirely self-appointed and had a habit of accumulating injuries while "not 
drunk", or providing the inadvertent floorshow at social/literary occasions by 
– for example – igniting a whole box of matches while fumbling to light her 
cigarette. As I am inept enough at social/literary occasions without additional 
chaos, I sought to divest myself of her attentions – especially as I hadn't 
asked for them. And, believe me, there are few things more embarrassing than 
writing to an editor who has just rejected your first attempt at your first 
novel, in order to explain that the manuscript was sadly returned to someone 
only claiming to be your agent ... My second agent was more successful, up to a 
point, but managed to let my foreign rights rest with my publisher. Allow me to 
begin a new, important paragraph about that.

Never, ever, ever sign away your foreign rights. Foreign rights allow you to 
be published abroad and in translation. They give you to the world and the 
world to you. And they mean you earn more money without doing more work. Unless 
you are the Archangel Gabriel with new instructions for mankind, your UK 
publisher won't particularly have the time or focus to promote your work 
elsewhere. Your agent needs to do that for you. Really.

Of course, choosing an agent is tricky – and horribly important, as they 
represent your only path to an editor and a published life. On the one hand, 
you need to select someone who will suit you, who will be about the same age as 
you (this is a long-term business) and who will support you in the ways you 
need. And yet, at the start of your career you probably have no idea how best 
you should be supported, what kind of person you would get on with best in this 
capacity and – above all – you will be pathetically grateful if anyone even 
replies to your begging letter, opening chapter and synopsis. Happily, someone 
who likes your work will probably be a good fit for you: the person who 
produced it. Likewise, the editor who is excited by your writing will probably 
share many of your interests. Still, I think it's a good idea to avoid 
compromising too deeply, too soon. If your agent can't remember your name and 
doesn't listen to you, or seems anxious to rework you into someone else, then 
perhaps go elsewhere. With your editor, you'll have no choice – unless they're 
flirting with you, but not committing to a contract – so an amount of grinning 
and bearing may have to take place.

Through a combination of accident and design, I have ended up with a male 
agent and a male editor – I work better with men. They're both roughly my age – 
the way things are going, I'll probably die before both of them, which will 
save any inconvenient rearrangements. My agent is willing to suffer and assuage 
my voluminous range of fears, will catch some of the hassle and madness that 
can accrue when working with others and can handle the full range of writing I 
produce. My editor is someone whose judgment I trust absolutely and I work on 
texts with him. That suits me. But it took about 15 years for me to feel 
comfortable with either party as a collaborator, rather than someone who was 
putting up with me as a charity project. This would be why it is also very 
important that my agent also negotiates my fees.

Talking of which – back to that first advance. Miracles aside, if you weren't 
a sexy-looking unknown during the late 1980s or early 90s, the chances of your 
first advance being anything other than frighteningly tiny are slim. Try to be 
happy that you're about to be published, that you'll have free copies with 
which to amaze your family and hit your friends. Don't stand there holding the 
cheque and thinking, "I'll never earn a living, will I? This is a joke. I will 
never up give my day job and write, write, write."

Yes, there you'll be, still working to subsidise what you want to do and 
perhaps feeling tired and unappreciated. But, then again, your day job will 
keep you connected to the real world and no one – not even me – can write, 
write, write all the time. That would kill you – trust me on this, it really 
would. And maybe you'll want to get reviewed, which is a necessary thing. But 
then again, being reviewed badly, or oddly, or even well, is quite 
disconcerting and weirdly irrelevant – it all refers to work you did so long 
ago. You may begin to realise that exposure isn't called exposure for nothing. 
For a while – if all goes to plan – you may feel both pestered with fame and 
utterly and permanently invisible. You may despair of your work ever finding a 
little niche where it can grow and flourish. You may wonder if you're any good, 
if it's worth the bother, if you'll be able to manage it all over again with 
the next one. Of course.

And yet: you're a writer. You have written. There's a book out there with your 
name on it. Imagine that. You did imagine that. Every word of that. And in the 
moments when you're undistracted, you can feel that the other books are 
waiting, the ideas that will come to you to be expressed. This is a vocation – 
it called to you and you answered and now it calls in you. If you are quiet 
enough to hear, it always will. You have that and you are lucky, beyond lucky. 
Which is – I often have to remind myself – nothing to complain about. Onwards.
 