 Anita Roddick embarked on a new campaign last week - in an intensely personal 
fashion. Rather than watching the creator of the Body Shop talking aloe vera 
with Guatamalan tribes, we are now witnessing her as the campaign chief for 
hepatitis C. She was diagnosed with the disease three years ago, but decided to 
go public as her health worsened; she has cirrhosis of the liver and will need 
a transplant.
Casting aside Cleopatra's assertion that 'It is never good to bring bad news', 
the famously energetic and vociferous social entrepreneur is typically on a 
profile-raising mission for the disease she contracted through a blood 
transfusion in 1971 when she gave birth to her youngest daughter, Sam.

Despite the fact that she hasn't told her mother about the diagnosis - Gilda 
Perilli is 92, happily living in sheltered housing and Roddick doesn't want to 
worry her - her new mission to rid the UK of its 'air of indifference' towards 
hepatitis has all the hallmarks of a classic Roddick campaign. For starters, 
she wants to know why the government spends £40m a year promoting the switch 
from analogue to digital television and just £2m on her disease. It's another 
example of Roddick turning personal questions into political activism.

In any case, Roddick is hardly one to wallow in her own predicament. She has 
previously attributed her upbeat disposition to being 'Italian and eating a lot 
of tomatoes'. Born in 1942 in Littlehampton, Anita Perilli was the third child 
to one of just two Italian immigrant families in Littlehampton - the other, the 
Perellas, were cousins from Naples. Her parents, Gilda and Donny, ran a cafe 
mainly catering for fishermen.

Gilda divorced Donny, prone to violence and alcoholic, when Anita was eight, 
later marrying his cousin, Henry, whom everybody adored. So much so that when 
18-year-old Roddick found out that her real father was actually Henry and not 
Donny (her mother had an affair throughout her marriage), she was delighted and 
claimed her DNA made sense.

Roddick claims that campaigning is in her DNA, too. By the time she was 
introduced to Gordon Roddick, a Scottish poet, by her mother - 'it was an 
arranged marriage'- she was already into environmental and social justice 
issues. At 26, she gave birth to Justine, who now lives in the US, followed two 
years later by Sam, the London-based founder of upmarket sex shop Coco de Mer. 
Somewhere along the line, Gordon felt the need to leave for a couple of years 
to go and ride a horse from Buenos Aires to New York.

The Body Shop was famously born out of pure necessity of supporting two 
children during Gordon's equine adventure. In 1975, Roddick began cooking up 
moisturisers from Bedouin recipes in her Brighton kitchen, opening her first 
shop in the Lanes in 1976.

She once said: 'How can you ennoble the spirit when you are selling something 
as inconsequential as a face cream?' But there was a certain inevitability that 
the young woman who blagged a £2,000 bank loan pitching up in a Bob Dylan 
T-shirt would end up retailing soap from her soapbox.

In 1985, Roddick used the shop windows of her by-now burgeoning Body Shop 
business to promote Greenpeace's Save the Whales campaign. It was the first 
explicit tie-in between products and causes. Mango butter, jojoba cleanser and 
brazil nut conditioner were to become inextricably entwined over the next 
decade with staving off destruction of the rainforest, preserving the Human 
Rights Act, resisting nuclear power, sticking two fingers up at corporate greed 
and promoting pacifism.

Roddick is routinely considered to be the originator of almost all the 
different facets of ethical consumption and business, but she was certainly an 
important pioneer of fair trade in the UK. Instead of buying ingredients such 
as brazil nuts for shampoo from commodity markets, she went straight to the 
source and set up development projects all over South America and Africa. The 
overriding message was that a business could be good and consumers could be a 
force for change. 'If Anita can whip up an empire, you can too,' ran a Body 
Shop slogan of the time.

Roddick is part of an elite group of social entrepreneurs that created the 
'vigilante consumer' keen to buy brands that reflected their belief system, 
alongside Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield of Ben & Jerry's and Craig Sams and Jo 
Fairley from Green & Black's. She has remarked that they were all guilty of 
being 'incredibly serious and po-faced', herself included, at the time, but all 
brought a certain flair to this new, counterintuitive form of consumerism.

'Anita took on the idea of what Greenpeace called "mind bombs", publicity 
stunts that were a visual representation of political messaging,' says John 
Elkington, who got Roddick to write the foreword to his million-selling Green 
Consumer Guide in 1988. 'Through her Body Shop campaigns, she managed to mix 
social, ethical and environmental strands and give them all equal air time.'

'She was the first Brit to be a true social entrepreneur,' says PR consultant 
and long-time friend Lynne Franks. 'She actively sought out people who needed 
development help in Guatamala for example, where they were being ignored, and 
set up proper fair trade schemes. But she broke the mould on business generally 
because she has been enormously successful by working collaboratively, 
particularly with other women. She was always of the opinion that there were 
enough slices of cake to go round for us all and for that reason she's my hero.'

She is, however, not everybody's hero and has frequently been attacked by 
critics on the left with charges of hypocrisy. This could be considered an 
occupational hazard for the queen of social business. After all, she battled 
alongside anti-globalisation protesters during the Seattle riots, prompting 
many commentators to ask how exactly the anti-multinational stance fitted with 
a company with 2,000 outlets across 49 countries.

A 1992 Dispatches documentary alleged that the Body Shop made fraudulent 
claims about animal testing (Roddick successfully sued) and in 1994 US 
journalist Jon Entine questioned the Body Shop's environmental standards, 
community trade project and ecological standards. To rub salt in the wound, he 
wrote it all in Business Ethics, a magazine Roddick had championed.

In fact, none of the elite group of social entrepreneurs of her generation is 
a stranger to this type of backlash, not least because one by one they have all 
sold out to multinationals: Ben and Jerry's was annexed by Unilever and Green 
and Black's went to Cadbury's. By the time Gordon andAnita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> sold up last year, it 
should have been routine. Except, that Roddick sold her campaigning baby to 
L'Oreal, a multinational with a long history of animal testing and a close 
connection to the chemical industry.

In fact, Roddick had wanted to get out for some time and in more dramatic 
moments dates the beginning of the end to 1985 with the initial public offering 
of the Body Shop. 'I should never have gone public,' she has said. 'But you 
couldn't know that at the time. It was so heady; it gave us the capital to 
pursue vertical integration and to take care of families in the villages we 
operated in.'

Going public certainly threw her and the business into a corporate, 
City-driven world which was a match made in hell. She disagreed vehemently with 
Patrick Gournay, brought in as CEO; meanwhile, the Body Shop failed to break 
the States. Both Roddick and her husband were accused by 'the suits' of 
neglecting the core business, in favour of their hippy green notions.

Roddick appears to retain a deep dislike of the corporate business world; it 
is perhaps the only time her 'pathological optimism' slips.

'My biggest critics are financial journalists who are very unimaginative,' she 
has remarked, 'who use a one-dimensional form of measurement, namely profit. 
They just don't like the language I use; the language of responsibility and 
human rights.'

This campaigning social lexicon remains unaltered, despite selling to L'Oreal 
for £625m. Friends and business associates are at pains to point out that it 
was never about the money; in fact, in 2004 (admittedly before selling up) she 
announced she was giving away her £51m fortune via the Roddick Foundation that 
supports a number of ethical entrepreneurs.

As evidenced by her plans to put hepatitis C on the political agenda, Anita 
Roddick isn't about to stop campaigning for change. A handful of consumers will 
never forgive her for L'Oreal, but she seems to be of the opinion that it was 
worth it.

The Roddick Lowdown

Born Anita Perelli, 23 October, 1942, Littlehampton. She was the third child 
of Italian immigrants who ran a cafe.

Best of times From opening one shop in Brighton in 1976, the Body Shop was 
voted company of the year in 1987. Five million consumers sign Body Shop 
petitions against animal testing and 12 million call for action on human 
rights. Awarded the OBE in 1988. In 2006, she sold the Body Shop to L'Oreal for 
£625m.

Worst of times In the early 1990s, Roddick began to feel the effect of turning 
the Body Shop public, with interference from City investors. Later, her ethical 
stance met with a backlash.

What she says 'I'm not a good businesswoman - most entrepreneurs aren't. We're 
delinquents. Everything these days is to do with economics - people speak as if 
you were put on this earth to keep the economy going. Well, I'm sorry, no 
f***ing way. I'm here to be a good mother, wonderful friend and an activist. 
End of story.'

What others say 'Twenty years ago, the business community said to Anita, "What 
in god's name are you doing?" Her fair trade ideas were peripheral. But she 
created the space where it's acceptable to set up an environmental business. 
Now everyone's doing it. That's a huge achievement.'
·John Elkington of Sustainability, the ethical business consultancy
 