
In the end it was appropriate that Luis Suárez should administer the last 
rites toAndré Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> at Tottenham. Here was 
a player Liverpool had fought tooth and nail to retain last summer, dismissing 
firm offers from Arsenal and overtures from Real Madrid, to convince the 
striker, against his better judgment, that his immediate future lay on 
Merseyside.

Spurs had faced a similar dilemma over Gareth Bale, whose instinct was to up 
sticks for Spain. They eventually relented and cashed in to the tune of £86m. 
At the time the reinvestment of those funds in seven signings seemed exciting, 
even shrewd, though the sight of Suárez ripping the new brigade to shreds on 
Sunday told a very different story.

Villas-Boas has time now to ponder if this all boils down to Bale. Relieved of 
his duties at White Hart Lane, his reputation in the Premier League about as 
persuasive as Tottenham's backline, the Portuguese retreats scarred by another 
brush with management in this country.

At Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> he had failed to 
convince seasoned performers there that he was the man to hoist them back into 
Premier League and other contention. At Spurs he was ultimately undermined by 
an inability to coax immediate form from a swath of recruits, talented players 
with no experience of English domestic football. The sheer scale of the 
overhaul was overwhelming and the "dramatic changes" to which he referred on 
Sunday all stemmed from Bale's sale.

The chairman, Daniel Levy, clearly thought Villas-Boas had constructed a squad 
capable of challenging for the title, though the Portuguese might argue the 
transition was too radical, the upheaval too dramatic. He had spoken of the 
"culture shock" being endured by Erik Lamela, at £30m the third of three record 
signings last summer and a player whose first Premier League start was that 6-0 
trouncing at Manchester City. The same might apply to Roberto Soldado, at £26m, 
whose style of play did not appear to fit easily into the approach Villas-Boas 
pursued. These players needed time while their presence ensured many of the 
existing squad felt usurped and undervalued.

"We've worked hard to build a strong team, we have a strong team and we are 
happy with the signings ... We have to work with them, to bond them together 
into the team," the manager had said when asked if he considered this to be 
"his" line-up, though by that stage his response to the question had lurched 
into full-scale PR mode.

More revealing had been his stuttering opening. "Well, we had … obviously this 
… I'm not sure if I can make it public …", which hardly suggested he was about 
to endorse the club's transfer policy. Perhaps it was born of frustration that 
Bale had left, particularly as Villas-Boas himself had waived Paris 
St-Germain's interest over the summer apparently in the belief that the Wales 
forward would remain at his disposal.

More likely is that he had dropped his guard to reveal tension at the top. The 
36-year-old had endorsed Franco Baldini's appointment as technical director and 
had even actively championed it, though any implied criticisms he had 
concerning the summer recruitment would, by definition, have indicated his 
relationship with the Italian had already become strained. Were Lamela – 
formerly at Roma with Baldini – Nacer Chadli and Christian Eriksen the 
manager's choices or were they imposed on him?

Those who would more readily doubt Villas-Boas's credentials might suggest 
this was merely the latest instance of passing the buck. At Chelsea he had 
apparently been undermined by the senior players. At Spurs it was any 
combination from the medical staff to anxious fans, under-performing first-team 
players to the recruitment policy. That seems harsh but there were members of 
the hierarchy who had tired of his perceived blame culture.

Other criticisms were more familiar: there was a stubbornness in tactics which 
did him few favours, an unwillingness to bend towards the more flamboyant style 
Spurs demand and with which his players might have been more comfortable. The 
high defensive line which had not worked with John Terry at Stamford Bridge did 
not look convincing with Michael Dawson, the last of the fit recognised 
centre-halves, at White Hart Lane. And, in truth, his side very rarely appeared 
anything but a team geared towards life on the counterattack. They had 
struggled to break massed opponents down last season, leaning heavily on Bale. 
Their 15 goals in 16 games this term suggest those issues were ongoing.

Villas-Boas still departed having secured Spurs' highest points tally of the 
Premier League era, and with the best win percentage, at just over 53%, of any 
Spurs manager in the past 20 years. Yet there was no sense of surprise at his 
sacking. The embarrassment endured against City, Liverpool and West Ham could 
not be tolerated by a chairman who had envisaged a title pursuit and, by the 
end, Villas-Boas cut a rather lonely figure on the sidelines as all semblance 
of authority seemed to drained away.

Steffen Freund, like Roberto Di Matteo at Chelsea a former club stalwart 
appointed from on high to assist Villas-Boas, did not always appear a natural 
foil. Without Baldini to back him up forcibly, the manager looked isolated and, 
as results deteriorated, the haunted look he had worn at The Hawthorns in the 
spring of 2012, just before the axe fell at Chelsea, had returned.

He had arguably been fortunate to be offered such a swift route back with an 
elite English club in the first place. It is safe to assume that, if he ever 
does choose to return, it will be after reinventing his reputation abroad.
 