
As if he had never been away? Perhaps not quite but Andrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> had every reason to be 
satisfied with his return to county cricket after five years of pursuing other 
opportunities. The big man – and he is still very much a big man – was not 
required to bat but sent down his four overs with something of his old 
belligerence, glimpses of his old skill and every bit of his old enthusiasm, 
taking two wickets as Lancashire crushed their T20 table-topping rivals 
Worcestershire by 50 runs.

Some of his younger team-mates looked distinctly starry-eyed afterwards. Jos 
Buttler, for one, could not stop smiling. “It’s something I never thought I’d 
say, that I played in the same team as Andrew Flintoff,” he said. “It felt 
slightly surreal, he’s a legend of English cricket after all. He was definitely 
a hero when I was growing up – the 2005 Ashes is something I’ll always remember 
watching. He’s obviously quite a sociable character too, he’s very well liked, 
and he seemed happy to be back in the dressing room.”

Lancashire’s South African former Test batsman Ashwell Prince, who at 37 has 
been around rather longer than Buttler, said: “He’s obviously a crowd favourite 
and he should be happy with his performance, getting a few wickets. He may have 
been a bit nervous starting but he dragged it back well. He’s an experienced 
player and he’ll only get better as the competition goes on. He’s a character 
and the game needs characters. He’s also put in the hard work. It hasn’t just 
come about because someone has come up with the idea.”

Flintoff confined his reaction to social media but his tweets to his 1.5m 
followers did not appear uncharacteristic. “Even better 2nd time round and a 
touch harder!” was his first effort, followed shortly by: “It’s a bit like sex 
always better 2nd time!”

The rumour beforehand was that the 36-year-old, whose comeback had been mooted 
for at least a month, would once again miss out, that he needed more cricket 
and so would play for the seconds at Old Trafford the following day. When his 
name was read out ninth of theLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> 11, the cheer from the sizeable 
New Road crowd was affectionately mild.

Having rather touchingly posted a picture of his Lancashire kit hanging on his 
dressing-room peg, Flintoff did indeed look a touch pale as he took his seat in 
the dugout. His presence alone was clearly an inspiration, though: Lancashire, 
through Buttler and Prince in particular, racked up 229 for four, their 
highest-ever T20 score, and with two balls to go Flintoff stood up, removed his 
pads, posed with a couple of excited kids taking selfies and headed up the 
stairs of the Graeme Hick Pavilion.

The nerves were definitely there when he came on to bowl. His first delivery, 
short outside the off-stump, almost resulted in a lucky wicket, Richard Oliver 
slashing a short ball close enough to backward point for the diving Steven 
Croft to get his fingers to it as it flew past on the way to the boundary.

The second was less ambiguous, Oliver smashing an over-pitched delivery high 
over long-on for six, but the crowd’s pleasure was mixed with a touch of 
apprehension: no one, it seemed, wanted to see a once-great cricketer 
humiliated.

Theree was no need for concern. While 15 runs came off the over, the sixth 
delivery had been a short ball of sufficient hostility to hurry the batsman 
and, though Tom Kohler-Cadmore – who was less than one year old when Flintoff 
made his Lancashire debut – dismissively pulled the first ball of his following 
over for six off the front foot, the fourth defeated him, clattering into 
middle stump.

Flintoff’s second wicket, Alexei Kervezee, was caught at long-on in the 
returning hero’s third over and, returning to long-leg at the end of the over, 
Flintoff was greeted by applause. Capless, he smiled and mimed touching the 
brim.

After the match, having politely declined to share his thoughts with the 
media, he spent 15 minutes signing autographs and smiling, allowing people he 
had never met before to put their arm around his shoulders while their mates 
took a photograph.

There was no question he was happy to be back, the more so because he made a 
contribution, and it is surely there that the explanation for his unlikely 
return lies. High-diving off cliffs, indulging in a spot of lucha libre 
wrestling or biking through the Amazon rainforest cannot give one that.
 