
André Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> has 
accused the Tottenham chairman, Daniel Levy, of not keeping his promises over 
signing new players during the Portuguese’s tenure at the club.

A year to the day since he left Spurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/tottenham-sack-andre-villas-boas>
, the former Chelsea manager spoke in detail about the circumstances 
surrounding his departure but admitted “it was an experience I needed to have”.

Villas-Boas, manager of the Russian side Zenit St Petersburg, spent 18 months 
at Spurs before being replaced by Tim Sherwood. He claimed that the club failed 
to sign any of the players he had earmarked to help replace Gareth Bale after 
the Welshman joined Real Madrid for a world record £85.3m and hinted that the 
director of football, Franco Baldini, is set to leave in the near future.

“The chairman proposed a challenge to increase Tottenham’s competitive level, 
but immediately [Luka] Modric left and we didn’t get any of the targets I had 
identified such as João Moutinho, Willian, Oscar or Leandro Damião,” he told 
Portuguese television. “These were promises that were not kept. I had a group 
of players I had not chosen. In two years I lost [Rafael] van der Vaart, 
Modric, Bale, and all the promises made were unfulfilled.”

Villas-Boas added: “Tottenham set a points and victories record in my first 
season, missed out on the Champions League by one point and had a great run in 
the Europa League. In the second season, at the time I left we had more points 
than in the previous campaign. I ended up leaving by mutual agreement – I 
wasn’t sacked – because I gave full support to the football director Franco 
Baldini despite him having other ambitions, meaning that I ended up with 
players that did not fit the profile I wanted.

“I speak of Franco Baldini, who came from AS Roma and is now in a down 
position, exiting the club. But I don’t look at my time at Tottenham as a 
negative experience. It was an experience I needed to have.”

Villas-Boas has guided Zenit to a seven-point lead in the Russian Premier 
League, although they failed to qualify for the last 16 of the Champions 
League. He insisted he has no intention of returning to English football 
despite claiming to have held talks withLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>.

“I chose Zenit also to get away from the media glare. I’ve had my fill of 
media sensationalism and false promises,” he said. “I had talks with Liverpool. 
Returning to England is definitely not in my plans, although life takes many 
turns.

“Coaching in England was a positive experience but also many negative things 
happened. I was surprised and I still am by theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> chairman changing his 
intentions. When I went there in 2011 the idea was to reformulate the team.”

On Wednesday night a Tottenham spokesman accused Villas-Boas of rewriting 
history. “It’s unfortunate that André has felt the need to pass comments like 
these,” he said. “Not only has he attempted to rewrite history, he has clearly 
forgotten the facts.”
 