
The most immediately striking thing about your new book, Far from the Tree: A 
Dozen Kinds of Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/feb/10/far-from-tree-solomon-review>, is 
what a doorstopper it is [976 pages]. It's massive! Did it really take you a 
decade to write? And what did it feel like when you'd finished?

It took 11 years and it was both a source of enormous relief and enormous 
anxiety when I finished it. Though the fact that I actually did still feels 
like a daily miracle because there was a long time when I thought I'd never 
reach the end.

You explore how families cope with having children who are in some way 
different from them – whether they're autistic, schizophrenic, incredibly 
gifted or conceived in rape – by interviewing them, 300 in total. Did you not 
get to 150 and think, "Oh, that'll do."

I think the detail is necessary. The tension of the book is what all these 
experiences have in common but I also wanted to describe what each of them 
individually is like. I felt that I couldn't write about the experience of 
families dealing with deafness if I only interviewed four families. I felt that 
you would only be telling the stories of four families. Whereas if you have 15 
families and have also done a great deal of other research, you can make a 
claim that it's a representation of the deaf experience.

The very first line of the book states that reproduction is "a euphemism to 
comfort prospective parents". This is ruptured very abruptly for parents of 
children with disabilities but do you think that all parents are forced to face 
this eventually?

Yes, that's exactly what I think. In the same way that we test flame-retardant 
pyjamas by putting them in an inferno, so I think these cases are extreme 
versions of parenting as a way of illuminating a universal reality. At some 
point everyone who's a parent looks at their child and thinks, "Where did you 
come from?" And the more extreme circumstances that these families have gone 
through and their ability to rise above them seems to me to be a role model for 
how we all need to love our children, rather than trying to turn them into our 
own image.

You say that writing the book addressed a profound sadness in yourself but 
that somehow the act of writing it cured it. How?

The framing story of the book was what it was like for me to be the gay child 
of straight parents and what it was like for me to become a parent myself. I 
had managed to find some sort of peace with being gay but I still felt some 
sort of legacy of disapprobation that had been attached to my coming out, and 
it had lingered really throughout my adult life. It was a relief to discover 
that many families struggle with having children who are different. And the 
fact that a family takes a while to get to the point of acceptance does not 
mean that the family does not also experience love.

People who are different are constantly dealing with families who don't 
understand them. I suddenly felt that it's almost everybody's experience at one 
level or another, and that was really amazing.

Did it also inform your decision to have a child yourself?

People kept saying to me: it's so extraordinary that you would decide to have 
a child when you are writing a book about everything that can go wrong. And my 
response was to say it's actually not a book about everything that can go 
wrong, it's a book about how well things can be pulled together, even when 
everything goes wrong. How much love parents can experience, even when facing 
these difficulties. I thought, "Gee, I see, even in these terrible cases, how 
profoundly rewarding parenting is for all these people." And it drew me toward 
that experience.

You've spoken about how you've created a new sort of "composite" family, and 
how it's a bit like being Christopher Columbus discovering the wilder shores of 
love – but that sometimes it would have been nice to get there when the luxury 
hotels had already been built.

My now husband is the biological father of two children with some lesbian 
friends in Minneapolis, and he had already had one of them at the time I was 
working on the book. I have a daughter with a friend from university and they 
live in Texas. And then my husband and I decided that we wanted to have a child 
together, and we now have a son, George, who is here with us now at this very 
moment, running in and out of the room. He'll be four in April. It's five 
parents and four children in three states.

Does that present some challenging logistics?

Practically, yes. But not emotionally. There were some challenges in the 
beginning but not now. We really do all get on incredibly well and it's very 
nice having this extended family around us, to be part of this real web of 
people all connected to one another. When I was growing up I kept hoping that I 
wasn't really gay because I wanted to have children. I went through a long, 
tortured period so the fact that I have been able to be true to myself and have 
a family has been the nicest surprise of my adulthood.

One of the most striking interviews is with the parents of Dylan Klebold 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/apr/25/dave-cullen-columbine>, the 
teenager killer in the Columbine massacre. You actually say that of all the 
families you interviewed, it's probably the one you'd have most liked to be 
part of.

I thought that if I really got to know them I could understand why things had 
gone so horribly wrong, and how they could have had a child who committed such 
a heinous crime. And the more I got to know them, the more bewildered I felt. 
They were just really lovely people: kind, intelligent, generous. And I 
thought, you know what? Criminality is just like any of these other things. 
It's an affliction. It reflects on you but it isn't something that you've 
necessarily caused. The Klebolds showed me that this thing of having a child 
who is broken in some way and is wantonly destructive could happen to any of us.

You live in Britain part-time – what's the great attraction?

I did my graduate studies here and then lived here full-time for a bit 
afterwards, and I have a lot of friends here, including seven godchildren. It's 
a big piece of my life. I like the relative literacy of at least some of 
England. I mean, I didn't come for the food or the weather!
 