
In the 1780s, the corpses of Les Innocents cemetery in Paris were bursting 
their bounds. The graveyard was centuries old, and the weight of the bones, the 
mass burials, the dead stacked metres deep and rising above street level, had 
left the ground so exhausted that a morbid rota was in train – bodies buried 
until decomposition, then dug up to make room for others. A skeleton army 
breached the cemetery wall, cascading into a neighbouring building, and the 
pungency led to fear of airborne disease. It was time to take action, the 
authorities decided. Time to raise the dead.

Andrew Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-miller> first read 
about the clearing of the cemetery (in the area known as Les Halles) – the 
transport of skeletons to the catacomb tunnels beneath Paris – 10 years ago, in 
a book by French historian Philippe Ariès, called The Hour of Our Death. The 
Ariès book, a study of western funerary customs, made only brief mention of the 
graveyard's destruction, "but I was taken by the theatricality", says Miller. 
"It was done mostly at night, with fires burning to purify the air, and this 
terrible job was going on right in the middle of this very populous quarter of 
Paris. And then, of course, the bones were taken across the city in these 
processions, with chanting priests, to a quarry on the other side of the river. 
So that appealed to me as being interesting, visually interesting, but it was 
when it all happened that made it stand out. It's the 1780s, a few years before 
the French revolution, and it seemed to me there was some attempt here to erase 
the past, erase history."

Ariès's short reference formed the basis for Miller's sixth novel, Pure, which 
this week won the Costa book award. The chair of judges, Geordie Greig, 
described it as "a morality tale that engrosses with its vivid rendition of 
pre-revolutionary France", as well as praising its "extraordinary scenes of 
corpses and cemeteries and sex". And while Miller still seems to be blinking 
with surprise when we meet an hour after the announcement, the award is highly 
deserved. Pure is a compelling, timely novel – with its throb of revolution, of 
ordinary people arising in anger – a narrative that takes death as its subject 
yet races with life. Central character Jean-Baptiste Baratte is a young, green 
engineer from Normandy, summoned to Versailles, and ordered to oversee the 
grave clearance, which tips him into a world of antic characters; people who 
live and work so close to the graveyard that it taints their breath, and 
possibly their minds.

Part of the joy of the novel is its fleshiness, bone crunch, gristly, meaty, 
stinking metaphors, its rich sense of the human body as both abstraction and 
animal entity. So an alley full of cheese sellers is "a curious clogged vein of 
a street", a man pulls ruminatively "at the lobes of his ears as though he were 
milking a pair of tiny udders", a priest's guts rumble, a chair has "blooms of 
human grease", a calf's head tastes as though "pickled in its own tears", and a 
loaf of bread is "small, blood-warm". The tone echoes the gory autopsy that 
opens Miller's first novel, Ingenious Pain, also set in the 18th century, in 
which a body is slashed from sternum to pubis, its scalp jerked away from the 
skull and laid "over the corpses's face in an obscene bloody pile".

Miller's father was a doctor; does this have a bearing on his interest in the 
"fleshly casket", as he has called the human body? "I'm sure it does," he says. 
"I grew up looking at these things – my Beano and Dandy were the BMJ and the 
Lancet. There were piles of these, with the funny, blurry pictures of boys with 
terrible deformities, these poor characters who get photographed, written 
about, and shuffle off to die somewhere." His parents split up when he was 
small, and he moved with his mother, stepfather and older brother to a flat in 
Bath, a city he suspects influenced his interest in the 18th century. Bath was 
in "one of its vaguely shabby periods", he says, "and the buildings were all 
quite black from smoke … You'd take the wallpaper off inside the flat, and see 
generations of decorators had signed their names. We found hand-painted playing 
cards beneath the floorboards, a little set of three. And things like this are 
really suggestive."

A spare, serious figure in his brown corduroy suit, hair bluish in the light, 
voice strong and careful, it's hard to believe Miller's description of himself 
as a "slow developer". He is now 51, and his intelligent, inventive novels have 
been widely lauded; his third, Oxygen, was shortlisted for the Booker. But 
Miller is insistent. He was always a big reader, but he failed his 11-plus, "in 
a way few people ever do. I plumbed new depths … I was very dreamy, and I just 
genuinely didn't get the idea of school." This failure led to him, aged 11, 
being sent off to board in Wiltshire, where he "suffered homesickness on a 
grand scale. There was a lot of bullying, a huge amount, and so it was a 
miserable beginning." Eventually the school realised, and there was a purge of 
the bullies, "these great big, lumpy, bored boys. There was no real malice in 
them. And after that it was actually quite a nice little school."

His academic outlook didn't improve much. Miller's initial ambition was to 
join the military, and specifically, "a Napoleonic, grand army. I wanted a 
great uniform. I wanted to join an 18th-century army, or at least an 
early-19th-century army." Then he saw the military camps in Wiltshire, and "I 
recognised, of course, that I was completely unsuited to it".

His love of reading continued through secondary school – he left with one 
A-level, in English – and at 18, he says, he had "a little, you know, epiphany. 
I don't want to dress it up too much." He realised he wanted to be a writer. 
"It was an afternoon in a sunlit room, and I'd just finished reading The 
Rainbow for a second time and I thought: of course, what else would you do? DH 
Lawrence appeals so much to young, would-be writers, because he makes the whole 
business of writing novels feel revolutionary." His mind made up, he began 
writing stories and poems.

There was no immediate path to university; instead, he looked after people 
with learning disabilities. His first job involved living on site at a respite 
home in Cheshire, where people would come "and stay with us, and it was 
absolutely wonderful". He moved on to a big hospital outside Bristol, looking 
after a similar range of people, "but in a totally different circumstance. It 
was a Victorian hospital, which had had some scandals, and we used to wear 
white coats, which was a very different set-up. There was a locked ward I 
worked on sometimes, called Sunshine Ward, because of these huge, unbreakable 
perspex windows." The people there "had been forgotten" he says. "There was a 
guy called Filthy George, who was in his late 80s, and he'd flashed in a park 
on a couple of occasions in his 20s, you know? And there he was. That used to 
happen. The hospital is closed now, and it's odd to drive past and see things 
growing out of the windows. But I think it's good that it's gone."

At 22, an essay on Lawrence gained him a place at Middlesex Polytechnic, as it 
then was. On finishing his degree, he had the delicious task of calling his 
father and telling him the news: "One, I got a first at university. Two, I'm 
getting married. And there was this lovely silence. He was completely lost for 
words." He laughs. His father died a couple of years ago, and was never 
thrilled by Miller's decision to become a writer. "His way through life had 
been a very structured, professional kind of progress, and the idea that 
somebody wouldn't do that, would just trust to the [prevailing winds] seemed to 
him foolish. I think he thought not a lot of it, and the truth is he was not a 
supporter. I don't know that he ever expected me to do anything very much. He 
was a lovely man, a very bright man, but a man of very little imagination. So 
the fact I wanted to do something that had imagination right at the centre was 
already a big leap for him, and this remained an unbridgeable gulf."

There were years of teaching English as a foreign language, his marriage 
ended, and then at 30 he secured a grant to study creative writing on Malcolm 
Bradbury's famous University of East Anglia creative-writing course. Afterwards 
he wrote Ingenious Pain, a book that confirmed his talent when it won the Impac 
prize, one of the world's biggest literary awards in financial terms, 
triumphing over a shortlist including books by Don DeLillo, Ian McEwan, Cynthia 
Ozick and Haruki Murakami. He looks back on the book's writing, and its 
reception, as a halcyon time. "I had this curious nine months of living in a 
period of grace, and I knew that's what it was. I knew I could do nothing wrong 
– in my personal life too. I knew it would end, of course, and there was this 
sense of the hammer swinging towards the side of your knee, and sure enough, it 
did, but that doesn't take the time away. There was this little period of 
living, at that point, in Somerset, on the Mendips, and I imagine that with my 
last flickering memories, as I fade into the great hereafter, perhaps some of 
those days will be the last to go, because they were very lovely."

He lives in Somerset again now, with his cat Fatboy (who's bereft of his 
sister Slim), looking after his beloved seven-year-old daughter Frieda at the 
weekends, teaching writing, and not worrying about what writing of his own 
might come next. We return to the subject of graveyards, and I ask if he would 
choose burial after all his research for Pure. "Well no!" he says. "I've opted 
for the fire. I've always liked that idea. I want funeral games. I want chariot 
races, ideally. We may be pushed to do that in the village – but it might be 
possible to make some cows run past."
 