
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> has joined a 
select band of England captains who have won the Ashes home and away and, at 
the age of 33, there is no obvious reason why he could not surpass Sir Leonard 
Hutton and match Mike Brearley by supervising a third series win over Australia 
in 2013.

Hutton was born in Pudsey, a Yorkshireman through and through. Brearley was 
educated at City of London School and Cambridge University, where he first made 
his name as a cricketer. Strauss has had a more eclectic upbringing, featuring 
South Africa, Australia and England. As he and his jubilant players celebrated 
on a wild Friday night in Sydney, Strauss was surprisingly close to some of the 
venues that proved pivotal in both his personal and professional life.


Mike Selvey's report of England's fifth-Test victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/07/the-ashes-2010-11-england-australia>
Kevin Mitchell: Barmies rejoice, Australia mourns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/07/ashes-england-australia>
Read Andy Bull's over-by-over report of the climax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/06/ashes-2010-australia-england>
In pictures: The final day at Sydney Cricket Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2011/jan/06/ashes-australia-england-gallery-sydney-day-five>
Give us your Ashes player ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/06/ashes-england-australia-player-ratings>


Having spent 18 months of his childhood in Melbourne, Strauss was not a 
complete stranger to Australia when he headed out for a stint in grade cricket 
with Sydney University in the autumn of 1998. But no one who had encountered 
him at Radley College, Durham University or Middlesex claims, even with 
hindsight, to have identified him as a future England captain at that stage – 
variously describing him as "chaotic", "scatterbrains", "gullible" and in one 
case barely capable of tying his shoelaces.

Instead they suggest a number of significant Australian influences on the 
transformation of Andrew John Strauss into one of England's most celebrated 
leaders of men, already an MBE as a result of his contribution to the 2005 
Ashes victory with who knows what further recognition to come.

A summer contract with Middlesex in 1996 had already made a major impact on 
him and Ben Hutton, his childhood friend and the grandson of Sir Leonard. They 
had opened the batting together at both school and university and Hutton would 
later be best man at Strauss's wedding.

"It was very much a case of both of us coming down from Durham after a year of 
frivolity and arriving in a pretty unforgiving Middlesex dressing room," Hutton 
recalls. "Suddenly we were surrounded by people like [Angus] Fraser, [Phil] 
Tufnell, [Mark] Ramprakash, [Mike] Gatting, and Don Bennett as the coach. 
Straussy was very determined to prove he wasn't some jazz-hat public schoolboy, 
that he could play."

"We did take the mick out of them a bit," Gatting concedes in his new role as 
the last captain but one to win an Ashes series in Australia. "But you only do 
that if you know the boys can take it. It was a hard dressing room but a fair 
one. They both handled it really well."

It was shortly after Strauss graduated with a 2.1 in economics two years later 
that those Australian influences began to help him down the path that would 
lead to their Ashes humiliation last week.

Strauss joined Luke Sutton – the former Somerset and Lancashire wicketkeeper 
who will resume the Derbyshire captaincy next summer, and who had been another 
member of an outstanding Durham University side – for a summer in Sydney that 
was to transform his life.

"We were bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, straight out of uni," Sutton recalls. 
"We were staying in a top-floor flat in Randwick, about half a mile from the 
SCG. I'd fixed up to play for the University of New South Wales, who were 
great, but Straussy was at Sydney Uni where he had a much harder time. They put 
him in third grade and kept him there even though he scored hundred after 
hundred, and when he finally got up to second grade and failed, they dropped 
him straight away.

"He was so annoyed he went to see the coach and asked him what was going on. 
The reply was basically that English county cricket was a load of rubbish and 
all the guys at the club were better than that. I would just love to know where 
that man is right now, watching Straussy's England team winning the Ashes so 
emphatically. That's why what he and the team have achieved means so much to so 
many of us."

Off the field Strauss made much more significant progress – thanks to a chance 
meeting in the Bourbon and Beefsteak, one of the late-night bars in Kings 
Cross, the Sydney district that never sleeps. It is the same bar where Ricky 
Ponting landed himself in the spot of bother 12 months later that jeopardised 
his ascension to the Australia captaincy. "It's bizarre," Hutton admits, "not 
the sort of place you'd find Straussy – he's not exactly a party animal or the 
sort you'd see schmoozing with the ladies."

But without dwelling on any details, Sutton confirms it was in the Bourbon, in 
the early hours of the morning – "You don't go there early in the night, do 
you?" – that Strauss first met Ruth McDonald, the actress from rural Victoria 
who is now his wife and will be celebrating her husband's second successive 
Ashes win for England.

"I certainly think him meeting Ruth was a very important step in the right 
direction," Hutton says. "He was the youngest of my peers to get married and it 
gave him that stability that perhaps he needed – Ruth is quite a bit older than 
him and, although he wasn't necessarily immature, it certainly speeded up the 
whole development."

The cricket, though, left Strauss in no doubt about Australia's low opinion of 
English cricket. He decided to take up a two-year contract with Middlesex 
rather than a job offer from the accountancy firm Pricewaterhouse, and started 
getting changed next to the county's new overseas signing, the Australian 
batsman Justin Langer, who was to provoke a further reassessment in his 
approach to the game.

Mark Chilton, the Lancashire batsman who was a contemporary at Durham and 
captained Strauss in his second year, identifies Langer's famously disciplined 
approach to training as "another key influence" from Australia on Strauss. "He 
[Langer] is without doubt the most disciplined cricketer I have seen," Strauss 
has said. "He [Strauss] stood out as someone with a bit extra to offer," Langer 
responded in his autobiography. "Not only did he work hard and have plenty of 
natural ability but he was intelligent and prepared to listen and learn. It was 
no surprise to me when he became England captain. He has that British Bulldog 
mentality and the determination to plough through the disappointments that come 
with a sporting career."

Chilton was stunned by the transformation of his old student mate. "When 
Middlesex came to play us at Old Trafford, he had just gone up to a different 
level. It was a flat deck but he got 150 without breaking sweat. That's when I 
first realised what he was capable of and I'm made up by what he's gone on to 
achieve. Having captained Lancashire myself I know how difficult it is and how 
important the captain's role is and you can see that Straussy's way has been 
the right way for England."

Not that his international career got off to a flier. Strauss made his debut, 
in a one-day international against Sri Lanka in Dambulla, not long after he 
married Ruth in Ballarat in October 2003. "What a shocker," Strauss has written 
– about the cricket. "What an absolute bloody shocker." England were all out 
for 88 and lost by 10 wickets.

His Test debut could not have offered a greater contrast. Six months later at 
Lord's a knee injury to Michael Vaughan afforded Strauss the chance to open 
with Marcus Trescothick in the first Test against New Zealand. He became the 
fourth England player to score a century on his debut and at the ground he had 
grown to love with Middlesex as a bonus. He was on course for another in the 
second innings until he was run out by Nasser Hussain.

It is well-known, and for some a sore point, that the Strauss story began in 
Johannesburg, where he was born in March 1977. That may make him one of four 
members of this Ashes-winning team who were born in South Africa – and the only 
one of the quartet without even one English parent. But for the dwindling 
number of Australians who still make an issue of that, it must be even more 
irritating to discover that his first cricketing experiences came in the early 
1980s in Caulfield, a suburb of Melbourne where, according toWisden, his 
father, who works in insurance, had taken the family "in search of a less 
politically charged environment".

Fortunately for English cricket, within 18 months Strauss Sr had decided that 
Beaconsfield in Buckinghamshire would be at least as suitable, so Andrew and 
his three elder sisters relocated again – this time for good.

Strauss was not an outstanding schoolboy cricketer. "It was his temperament 
that really stood out," says Andy Wagner, still the cricket master at Radley 
College, the public school in Oxfordshire whose old boys include another former 
England captain, Ted Dexter, in addition to more recent professionals such as 
Jamie Dalrymple and Robin Martin-Jenkins. The latter's father Christopher is 
the writer, commentator and current president of MCC.

"Whereas I think Alastair Cook got seven hundreds in his last year at Bedford, 
Straussy got two, possibly three, in his whole school career," Wagner says. "He 
was still the prize wicket and I think he got 650 runs at 60-odd in his last 
year. But he just had that mental toughness at a very early age and I think 
that continues now. You won't know the next day whether he's made a big score 
or a duck. If you can dismiss failure and be in control of success like that, 
it's a lovely trait to have."

"He's always had that built-in competitiveness," Hutton adds, without straying 
as close to Kipling territory. "When he first arrived at Radley he got on 
people's nerves because he was ridiculously good at everything – people called 
it nervy, which I suppose meant slightly cocky, or cocksure."

But there was still no sign of a future England opener, never mind captain, 
when he headed north to Durham. "He was quite … I'll have to choose my words 
carefully … out there, I suppose," says Chilton. "Quite scatterbrains, always 
doing silly things."

"I would describe him as a bit accident-prone, and slightly gullible," says 
Hutton, confirming anecdotes that involve his friend throwing bats through 
windows and blowing up loudspeakers but stressing that any damage was always 
unintended. In a less discreet moment Chilton has suggested that the 
undergraduate Strauss "could barely tie his shoelaces, never mind lead a 
national team".

"The talent was always there, that was unquestionable," Chilton adds now. "But 
maybe then he didn't have the organisation to get himself sorted out. Chaotic 
would be quite a good word, to be honest. Messy, disorganised. He would get 
really good 40s and 60s but then the next day do something totally daft."

Not boozy, boorish or unpleasant. "People say there must be a murky side, 
spill the beans, but there isn't," Wagner says. "He's just straightforward, 
he's never been high maintenance but with single-minded determination."

"I wouldn't say he was a typical rugby lad," says Nathan Smith, a Yorkshireman 
who spent his three years at Durham with Strauss at Hatfield College and wanted 
him to play fly-half in the 1st XV. "He wasn't the one who was always out, he'd 
just be out on special occasions, but he would primarily stick with his own 
mates rather than the rugby crowd."

Strauss did have the sense to reject the advice offered to him by Smith in the 
Hatfield bar. "He had started in the thirds, moved up to the seconds and he was 
talented enough for me to make a commitment I couldn't really keep and tell him 
he would be in the firsts in his final year," Smith says.

"He had a prodigious left boot, a real howitzer, and a silky set of hips for 
the big guy he actually is, plus great hands, and you could see the leadership 
skills in the way he commanded his team around the pitch even though he wasn't 
the captain. But he ignored me and stuck with cricket."

In the summer of 2005 Strauss finally got the chance to prove himself as a 
cricketer against Australia. "In that 2005 series [Shane] Warne had a bit of 
the wood on him at first, didn't he?" Hutton says. "But then he got that 100 at 
Old Trafford where he played Warne absolutely brilliantly, and ever since then 
he's been convinced that he's good enough to really stand up against the 
Aussies."

Now they must be thoroughly sick of the sight of him. In four Ashes series 
Strauss has been on the winning side three times. He is a very English hero, 
though one of South African stock who has been shaped in many ways by 
Australia. The series win Down Under is an achievement of which the England 
captain will be justifiably, if discreetly, proud.
 