
It was around the eighth year of working on his book about childhood and 
parental love, still wading through the 40,000 pages of interviews he'd 
conducted with over 300 parents and children, some of which were so painful he 
could hardly bear to read them, thatAndrew Solomon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-solomon> began to worry that his book 
was simply unwriteable. And in those moments, he felt something close to 
despair.

What kept him going were the two things that underpin Far From the Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/23/review-far-from-the-tree>: 
first, his deep connection with the families who shared the most intimate and 
painful moments of their lives with him. Second, his belief in the message 
of his book, which is that differences unite people in the way that sameness is 
assumed to.

"I felt as though one seldom has anything to say and I thought I had something 
to say about this. If I gave it up what was I going to do?" And so, he 
continued to work at it for another three years.

The result of this decade-and-then-some of emotionally exhausting work has 
already won Solomon the National Book award in the US and, this week, the
Wellcome book prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wellcome-book-prize> in 
London (I was one of the judges).Far From the Tree details in 12 sections what 
it is like to be a parent of an exceptional child, whether they are deaf, 
schizophrenic or transgender. If this sounds depressing, Solomon would 
sympathise with that assumption as he, too, expected when he set out with his 
research to find "unconditional tragedies". But one of the most surprising 
things about the book – and there are so many surprising things; every other 
sentence seems to contain a subtle revelation – is how joyful it is, and no one 
was more surprised than Solomon himself, "by the joy I found [in the families], 
and that's because the families were surprised by the joy. It's not that it's 
fun having Down's syndrome, but you can figure out ways of constructing joy out 
of that, and that takes work and discipline. So I was surprised by the joy and 
also admiring of it," he says.

But he has not written a "Lemons? Make lemonade!" book: there are also stories 
of terrible pain, and some of the interviews were so sad that they triggered 
depressive episodes in Solomon, who has suffered from depression in the past. 
The chapter on transgender children, which is written with real tenderness, 
includes one particularly awful story in which the transgender daughter of a 
lesbian couple in Kansas is taken away by social services because they 
disapproved of the mothers encouraging their daughter's female identity.

"Part of what was so sad about that experience was I felt they wouldn't have 
been in this situation if they were richer and better educated. I recognise 
that we live in an unequal society, but the ability to keep the child you love 
should not be contingent on being adept at working the system and knowledgeable 
about how to deal with intrusive social service operators," he says, his jaw 
setting a little.

Although Solomon does not include this in the book, he later introduced the 
couple to people who he thought might help them, and the girl is now back with 
her mothers. "I am not a great believer in the idea that journalistic 
neutrality means you have to abandon the people you talk to," he says firmly.

Far From the Tree is Solomon's fourth book, and all have elements 
of autobiography. His first,The Irony Tower: Soviet Artists in a Time of 
Glasnost, was about artistic communities in 1980s Russia who Solomon met while 
on a journalistic assignment. His novel, A Stone Boat, tells the story of a 
young man coping with his mother's impending death and her difficulty in 
accepting his homosexuality.The Noonday Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/may/06/booksonhealth.medicalscience>, 
which also won the National Book award and was shortlisted for the Pulitzer 
prize, is an evocative account of Solomon's battle with depression after his 
mother's death. He spent five years writing it, interviewing hundreds of 
experts and devastated sufferers, and comes down very much on the side of the 
pharmaceutical industry, praising it for making the drugs "that have saved so 
many lives". But in classic Solomon style, he, in the interest of fairness, 
gives new‑age treatments a go too, such as going to a ranch in Arizona where he 
is covered in crystals and peppered with interpretive Sanskrit chants. The 
experience, he concludes, probably did not "inscribe antidepressant virtues 
into my meridians". On the other hand, he adds dryly, "four days of being 
handled by beautiful women in an opulent resort did a great deal for me".

Far From the Tree emerged from similarly autobiographical roots, but grew into 
something more varied. In 1994, Solomon was asked to write an article on deaf 
culture for the New York Times. He learned from deaf children what it was to be 
like to be raised by hearing parents who think that the way to make their child 
happy is to "fix" them, and the children's sense of relief on discovering a 
deaf identity, and the conflicts their parents felt about this. To Solomon's 
surprise, he found the situations of families with deaf children "arrestingly 
familiar" because they echoed his experience of growing up as the gay child of 
straight parents. This led him to think about what he called vertical identity 
– which is the identity you share with your parents, such as race, class and 
religion – versus horizontal identity, which is the identity that separates you 
from your parents and makes you instead part of an outside community, such 
as, in Solomon's case, sexuality.

Far From the Tree looks at whether a child's especially strong horizontal 
identity – such as a physical or mental disability – can be integrated within 
the family's vertical identity, so that the child still has a strong bond with 
its parents. It is, in short, a debate about how parents can best make their 
children happy: by encouraging their individuality but risking their 
alienation, or by incorporating them into the world familiar to their parents, 
but risking their self-loathing.

"Parenting involves two separate activities. You have to change your child, in 
that you need to educate your child and instil moral values in them. But you 
also need to celebrate your child for who he or she is and make them feel 
really good. Then there's a vast fuzzy middle – is this something we should 
accommodate? Is this something we should be helping them not to do any more? I 
think the book is about what to do when you find yourself in that middle 
territory," he says. Although Solomon insists that he didn't set out to write
Far From the Tree as a "therapeutic exercise", it was only through writing the 
book, he says, "that I ended up forgiving my parents".

Solomon was born in 1963 and grew up in Manhattan, on the moneyed Upper East 
Side. He has one brother and was always very close to his parents. As an adult, 
Solomon has a charmingly anachronistic manner – it is easy to imagine him in a 
velvet three piece suit, holding a monocle – so it is not surprising to learn 
he was an unusual little boy, one who would recount the plots of operas on the 
school bus (this, he writes, did not make him popular). His parents celebrated 
most of his differences, but not all: when he displayed signs of what was 
deemed effeminacy, such as choosing a pink balloon when he was six years old, 
he was hastily corrected by his mother ("Your favourite colour's blue!"). This 
was, Solomon now sees, "a protective gesture". After a somewhat lonely school 
life, Solomon was much happier at Yale, followed by an equally happy time at 
Cambridge University. But he felt deeply conflicted about being gay for years, 
even subjecting himself to "surrogate therapy" as a young man, and the 
descriptions of his encounters with female sexual surrogates inFar From the Tree
 are both amusing and sad. He finally came out to his parents in his 

early 20s "and they professed to be surprised, which seemed most implausible 
to me", and is now happily married to journalist John Habich.

Solomon, by anyone's standards, lives a rarefied life: he has homes in the 
poshest neighbourhoods in Manhattan and London, and he and Habich celebrated 
their civil partnership at Althorp, the Spencer family estate in Northampton. 
After coming out, Solomon decided he would never keep anything about himself a 
secret again, and inThe Noonday Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/may/19/booksonhealth> he is extremely 
self-exposing, detailing his occasional enjoyment of class-A drugs in the past 
and, during one suicidally depressed period, his attempts to catch HIV through 
unprotected sex. But the only real fallout from these revelations is that he 
was turned down for membership of a swanky private members' club in New York 
"which was kind of an unpleasant experience". One of Solomon's interviewees from
Far From the Tree, William Davis, told the New York Times that he was somewhat 
surprised when Solomon turned up at his house in a chauffeured car. ("It was a 
car service! It's not like I arrived in a Rolls Royce!" Solomon protests.)

"He's living in a different world from the one I'm used to, but it's not 
a problem … You can tell he cares. You just want to hug him," said Davis.

To talk to Solomon is to understand why he elicits such trust from 
interviewees. He is a warm and deeply engaged listener, with large sympathetic 
eyes that make you want to tell him your own history. "I really felt the things 
I had in common with [the interviewees] were at least as significant as the 
things I didn't have in common. I think if I'd been straight I would not have 
been able to write this book," he says. He later adds: "The business of 
figuring out how to love someone who often seems to be unlovable is very 
familiar to me."

Soon after Far From the Tree was published in the US, Solomon was contacted by 
Peter Lanza, the father of Adam Lanza, the 20-year-old behind the terrible 
shooting at Sandy Hook elementary school in 2012. Lanza had read Solomon's 
interviews with the parents of Dylan Klebold, one of the teenagers behind the 
Columbine shooting, in his chapter on children who commit crime, and trusted 
Solomon to tell his story,which he did in a long New Yorker piece 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2014/03/17/140317fa_fact_solomon?currentPage=all>
. But where Klebold's mother says her son remains one of "the greatest joys of 
my life", Lanza says he wishes his son had never been born. Solomon does not 
look for easy conclusions in his book, and he wishes he could have included 
Lanza's story alongside that of the Klebolds, who have had more time to come to 
terms with their child's crime: "He loved his child, and he wished he'd never 
been born. It was the pain and ambivalence that spoke to me in that story," he 
says.

The biggest surprise of Far From the Tree, a book that involved Solomon 
immersing himself in the most painful family situations, is that it made 
Solomon want to have a family himself. "The work I did awakened me to the way 
that taking care of one's child is a way of building the intimacy one wants 
with them. It does not need to be only an onerous responsibility," he says.

Solomon's husband already had two children with a friend who was raising them 
with her partner, and Solomon followed suit. In 2007 he had a daughter with an 
old friend who lives in Texas, and in 2009 he had a son, who lives with Solomon 
and Habich in New York.

Solomon is already working on another book about the changing shape of 
parenthood. But aside from having to cross out "mother" on school application 
forms and replace it with "father number two", the most striking thing about 
his family life, he says, "is how much it is like other families. We deal with 
exactly the same issues as all families." Because sometimes what makes us 
different is also what connects us all.
 