
Sin City childhoods were never meant to be dull, as Susan Berman, daughter of 
the notorious 1950s mobster, Davie Berman, realised when a man approached her 
at her father's funeral to say: "Susie, your dad was the greatest gangster that 
ever lived. You can hold your head up high."

From Literary Las Vegas, a sublime collection of writing about Nevada's 
post-moral outpost, you see that anyone brought up in Vegas is wired 
differently to the rest of us. So it arrives as no shock to learn that Andre 
Agassi's incurably rage-fuelled father once held a gun level with his son's 
nose as he jabbed it at a driver who had annoyed him.

From that teasing cameo you might extrapolate that Agassi's autobiography, 
Open, would fit snugly into Literary Las Vegas, and you would be wrong, because 
it's hard to recall a more risible attempt to spin dark melodrama from a 
sportsman's life.

There is no comeback from the gun-pulling set-to, no police knock on the door. 
Then again, this is Vegas, where life is a dice-roll, a sun-baked land-grab, so 
it was perhaps natural for Agassi's ghostwriter to cast the father, Mike, as a 
Joe Pesci clone, always ready with the "piece" to put you six feet under red 
rock canyon if you so much as scratched his fender.

By now you will know that Agassi used crystal meth in 1997 partly because he 
was worried about his impending marriage to Brooke Shields. Yeah, that's the 
kind of dilemma that could break any man. Should I marry Brooke? Better take 
this gear, lie about it to the ATP, wait for the eight-year statute of 
limitations to kick in and then make a ton more money from a confession 
streaked with the usual tear stains of contrition.

Only celebrities employ drugs to make you feel sorry for them, as victims of 
success, victims of pressure, which is why book shops now have sections headed: 
"Tragic Life Stories" and "Troubled Lives". You never see any bus-driver 
memoirs on those shelves. Dressed up as confessionals, these tomes follow a 
familiar plot: someone famous had a good time, overdid it a bit, got themselves 
in bother and then demanded a literary hug from the reader while picking his 
pocket for 20 quid.

Agassi's contribution to this oeuvre starts with a Larkin-esque declaration 
that your parents mess you up. At some sure point in American celebrity lives 
the star will go to his Mom or Pops and say: "You hurt me, you weren't there 
for me, can we do the closure thing now?"

To escape the wrath of the ATP – not difficult, it would appear – Agassi 
claimed to have drunk a spiked soda belonging to his assistant, "Slim", who is 
at once fingered and not named in the book: a reprieve that allows the 1992 
Wimbledon champion to go on with his career while simultaneously hating it, the 
blame for which, you need to understand, rests with the pushy dad.

"I play tennis for a living, even though I hate tennis, hate it with a dark 
and secret passion, and always have," Agassi writes.

He hated it so much he ended up winning eight grand slam titles and $31m. 
Sorry, but you can't win eight grand slam titles if you hate tennis. It's quite 
hard to do it if you absolutely love tennis. But hate it? Not a chance. You 
wouldn't get past the Roehampton qualifiers.

There is, though, on the part of a man who now has the pleasure of being 
married to Steffi Graf a commendable willingness to inject a tone into the 
prose that is redolent, say, of James Ellroy's The Cold Six Thousand, of Vegas 
noir.

An example: dad shoots hawks, because he dislikes the strong preying on the 
weak (why, then, didn't he shoot Pete Sampras when he splayed Agassi in the 
1999 Wimbledon final?). "Our house is blanketed with his victims, dead birds 
that cover the roof as thickly as tennis balls cover the court." Does anyone 
believe this? A Vegas house with a roof of dead raptors? Did they all drop 
conveniently on the tiles? Did the neighbours not complain?

Another favourite anecdote is the handful of salt and pepper the older Agassi 
carried everywhere in case he got in a fight and needed to blind someone. An 
alternative interpretation is that casino food was pretty bland in those days, 
and old Mike liked to carry his own seasoning.

I sympathise with Agassi's ghostwriter. If you write an authentic memoir, 
people call it boring. If you juice it up, people call it fake. The ultimate 
author of Open was profoundly lucky that the ATP believed his explanatory 
letter and threw out the positive dope test. My advice is to do the same to his 
book.
 