
André Villas-Boas has set his sights on adding the Russian championship to his 
cvafter taking charge of Zenit St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/18/andre-villas-boas-zenit-st-petersburg-coach>
 on a two-year contract. The former Chelsea and Tottenham manager formally
replaced the long-serving Luciano Spalletti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/luciano-spalletti-sacked-zenit-st-petersburg-manager>
after the club were eliminated from the Champions League by Borussia Dortmund.

Only nine games of the Russian Premier League season remain and Zenit trail 
the leaders Lokomotiv Moscow by three points. The clubs meet in the capital in 
May, however, and Villas-Boas believes a maximum return of 27 points will 
deliver Zenit their fifth Russian championship.

The 36-year-old Portuguese said: "The first step is to win the Russian league. 
That's the main thing now.

"If we win all nine matches, Zenit will be champion. My goal is to bring Zenit 
to the top. That's what I want to do."

Villas-Boas had a watching brief in Dortmund as the caretaker manager Sergei 
Semak oversaw Zenit's 2-1 victory on Wednesday night. Hulk – a star player 
under Villas-Boas during his successful Porto reign – and José Salomón Rondón 
scored for the visitors while Sebastian Kehl replied for last season's 
runners-up.

The result on the night was not good enough to guide the Russians through as 
Dortmund won 5-4 on aggregate.

Villas-Boas thanked Semak for restoring a winning spirit to the team, but 
expects to bring in his own backroom staff. "It was an excellent result for 
sure," he said. "The main thing is that Zenit played as a team: I saw the 
team's spirit.

"I would like to thank Sergei Semak for his work during these days in the 
interim period. Obviously I need assistants who suit my philosophy of the game, 
who can build team play from my point of view. I'm thankful to the people who 
worked during the interim period, but changes have to be made."

Villas-Boas, who had been out of work since leaving Spurs in December, did not 
hesitate to accept Zenit's offer.

He added: "To be honest, there was no difficulty in taking this decision for 
me, because Zenit is a well-known club in Europe. The ideas that led to this 
decision suit my own ideas about football. This is an important step for me, 
that suits my ideas, and my career."

Villas-Boas faces a more immediate problem after Zenit were charged with 
"setting off of fireworks and improper conduct of supporters" by Uefa.

Russian fans were pictured burning a Dortmund banner made from a black, red 
and gold Germany flag and Uefa's disciplinary panel will hear the case on 14 May
 