
The big open skies and wide vistas of rolling farmland that surround novelist 
Andew Miller's Somerset home offer plenty of room for a writer's imagination to 
roam. He's certainly travelled a fair distance forhis latest novel, Pure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781444724257/pure>, set 
in a morbidly crowded Paris on the eve of revolution in 1785. But the second 
half of the 18th century is a kind of home turf for the author. His spectacular 
debut, Ingenious Pain, an unsettling tale of a young man innately numb to 
physical suffering, was set in this period and Miller returned to it for 
Casanova in Love, a heady dramatisation of the legendary sensualist's 1763 
sojourn in London.

His subsequent novels, Oxygen and The Optimists, were set in the present day, 
and although his last book, Quite Early One Morning, edged back in time to 40s 
Japan, Pure is a return to full-dress historical fiction for the first time in 
more than a decade.

Somerset, too, is something like native ground for the startlingly boyish 
51-year-old, who was born in Bristol. "When I came here I thought I could 
somehow claim to be local, but as far as they're concerned Bristol is quite a 
long way away, and actually they think I'm from Poland or something," he says 
wryly, in a hard-to-place accent that speaks of his wandering adult life, 
living in Spain, France, Ireland and Japan before settling near the small town 
of Bruton.

Sitting in a cafe converted from a local chapel, Miller explains the 
experience of writing historical fiction is much the same as writing a novel 
set in the modern world.

"The day to day experience of writing a book set in the 18th century is not 
very different from the experience of a book set in the 20th or 21st," he says. 
"But I remember a review ages ago which said that when I was doing historical 
fiction I was in kind of holiday mood. They said there was an extravagance and 
buoyancy to the whole thing. Whereas when I was writing books such as The 
Optimists or Oxygen they had quite a different feel; perhaps a little darker, 
stiller in some way. And that's true. I suppose the historical novels are a 
little more theatrical. It's as though someone gives me a wonderful theatrical 
space and I can just build huge sets. I can make a complete world."

The stage is set for Pure in the claustrophobic precincts of Les Innocents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/24/pure-andrew-miller-review>, a 
cemetery that has been accepting the city's dead for centuries and is now so 
choked it has begun to present a serious health hazard. Miller paints it with 
gothic relish, revelling in descriptions of tainted food, noxious cellars that 
send people into "dangerous swoons" and otherwise inexplicable "moral 
disturbances". Arriving from provincial Bellême, Miller's hero Jean-Baptiste – 
an ambitious young man of the Enlightenment who has trained as an engineer and 
tinkered privately with grand utopian schemes – is charged with demolishing the 
cemetery, dispatching centuries of accumulated corpses to a new burial ground 
outside Paris. He takes lodgings with a solidly bourgeois family in a house 
overlooking the site, into which its strange moral contagion inexorably seeps.

Despite the dark subject matter, Miller is clearly having ghoulish fun with 
his story. "Some books just are slightly more fun than others, but Pure … just 
had a kind of energy, certainly in the first couple of hundred pages, that I 
really enjoyed riding. I don't know whether that's apparent in the reading but 
it was there in the writing."

The judges of the Costa prize – dedicated to rewarding the year's "most 
enjoyable" books – certainly seem to have picked up on Miller's fun,
shortlisting Pure alongside Julian Barnes's Booker-winning The Sense of an 
Ending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/nov/15/costa-book-awards-2011-shortlists-in-pictures>
 for this year's best novel prize.

Miller, who began his career by winning the Impac award and the James Tait 
Black prize, and has since been shortlisted for both the Booker and the Costa's 
ancestor, the Whitbread, is distinctly phlegmatic about this latest nod, 
suggesting "it's a good move to try to win one", but "it doesn't matter which".

"For the rest of your writing life you can be called (and by your publisher 
will be called) a prize-winning author," he says. "With literary fiction it 
does – I fear – help to be noticed now and then by a prize jury, though there 
must have been many fine writers over the years who were simply overlooked."

His contemporary novels came after three years "writing about quills and 
cobblestones and wigs and stagecoaches and so on", at a time when he says he 
worried that another historical novel would mean publishers would never "let 
[him] do anything else". But it was a French historian, Philippe Ariès, who 
lured him back to the 18th century, with a study of attitudes towards death in 
the western world called The Hour of Our Death.

"I don't know why I was reading it," he says, "I guess I have a slightly 
unhealthy interest in such things. Anyway, there was just a very small 
paragraph about the cemetery of Les Innocents, which had been cleared in the 
1780s, and I remember thinking, that's interesting – one just imagining them 
doing it, this square in the middle of the city in which they kept the fires 
burning and these men having to dig, but also when it happened, in the 1780s. 
Some idea that they were going to clear away the past, just literally get rid 
of history in the form of yellowed bones.

"Obviously the Revolution starts a few years later and quite soon people are 
talking about Year One and Year Two, this stubborn fantasy you can just start 
again. People have it individually, of course, it's a very seductive idea, and 
societies have this fantasy too."

It is a dangerous fantasy, of course, and in Pure the attempt to purge this 
rotten corner of Paris is a deeply unsettling enterprise that is driving many 
of Miller's characters out of their minds.

"Reason is a kind of target in this book as it has been in other books of 
mine," he explains. "I remember writing a scene between Casanova and Dr Johnson 
talking about reason, and Johnson arguing in a sense for the possibility of 
clear thinking of rational thought and Casanova believing it was rarely thus.

"There was – I think quite briefly – some notion we would indeed become 
creatures who would have beautiful, lucid mental lives, and we would control 
ourselves and our society by having strong, free, lucid thoughts. I think it 
was – even then – fairly brief, they knew it wasn't really going to be like 
that. And yet I suppose it was an exciting notion – the perfectibility – that 
we would suddenly climb out of the mess of ourselves and live in the clear air 
of our own lovely thinking. And, of course, then the Revolution comes and 
everybody's up to their knees in blood and the whole thing is rapidly descends 
into something terrible and elemental, yet with this awful veneer of 
rationalism."

As Pure's young hero, "the engineer" Jean-Baptiste, sets out to implement this 
micro-Enlightenment of Les Innocents, he finds himself drawn into ever more 
irrational exploits, and becoming a stranger to himself.

"I'm interested in the way we know so little of what we are," says Miller. 
That so much of what goes on in our lives just goes on while our understanding 
is flickering and intermittent … I mean obviously psychoanalysis has tried to 
make sense of this – but still the common human experience is much of the time 
we are onlookers at the slightly mysterious business of what we're doing in our 
lives."
 