
One of Andrew Lansley’s failings as health secretary was his apparent belief 
that the only reason he was under attack from all sides for hisNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> reforms was because people had not 
grasped what he was trying to do. The solution was not to listen to their 
concerns, but for him to explain it all one more time.

Four years later he is still explaining, and still not listening. Delivering 
theNHS Providers’ annual lecture 
<https://www.nhsproviders.org/news-blogs/blogs/a-new-covenant-for-the-nhs> this 
week Lansley failed to demonstrate any understanding that theHealth and Social 
Care Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/7/contents/enacted> he drove 
through created huge disruption and enduring difficulties.

One vignette during his speech was illuminating. He wittily deployed the Zhou 
Enlai line “It’s too early to say”, in relation to judging the impact of his 
reforms, but then bludgeoned any amusement out of it by deconstructing the 
precise circumstances in which the phrase had originally been used. One of his 
flaws is that he can never see the big picture for the detail.

He never recognised the fact that each discrete part of his system may have 
had virtues, but when you put it all together it didn’t work. Competition has 
its place but not at the expense of collaboration. Autonomy for clinical 
commissioners sounds a powerful concept but they need organisations with the 
resources and geography to have clout. Having a maze of central bodies with 
sometimes conflicting priorities creates confusion and holds back change. 
Patients desperately need a louder voice in the system but Healthwatch is 
demonstrably not it. Trying to commission primary care centrally was never 
going to work. The NHS needs to make sense regionally as well as nationally and 
locally.

Lansley proudly reminded the audience that he had introduced a requirement to 
integrate services – as if all that was needed to make it happen was a new law, 
rather than creating the conditions to encourage it. Meanwhile the labyrinthine 
structure and hugely complex commissioning system, particularly around primary 
and specialist care, drove the service in the opposite direction.

He dismissed the notion that the structural upheaval to implement reforms had 
created massive cost and disruption, claiming it has saved billions of pounds. 
He is oblivious to the two years of distraction from the NHS’s productivity 
drive – the “Nicholson challenge”– which was intended to prepare the service 
for leaner economic times after the 2008 crash. The folly of that is now 
apparent.

He does not seem to realise that a huge industry has grown up in and around 
the NHS to find ways round and through his reforms – time, energy and money 
that could have been spent driving improvements to care.

But Lansley still landed some punches. He compared the BMA with “real trade 
unionists” such as Unison, whose goal is to find a solution, and questioned why 
it is that the NHS never has quite the right amount of funding to promote 
reform – when it has plenty it doesn’t see the need, and when cash gets tight 
it can’t afford to change.

He highlighted how the autonomy of NHS England and the devolved powers for 
clinical commissioners had given the system the freedom to respond to the 
current difficulties with new structures and approaches.

A central plank of his reforms was moving public health to local government to 
join it up with other services such as education and housing, while turning the 
focus of the Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
towards public health. It is not his fault that public health funding has been 
cut, and that Hunt has not read the script about keeping politicians out of 
day-to-day NHS decision-making.

Lansley’s passion for the NHS is undiminished. He seized the opportunity of 
the lecture to restate his intentions behind the reform programme, such as 
greater autonomy from politicians and the NHS high command, championing 
outcomes over process and giving clinicians a greater voice.

But failing to acknowledge the serious flaws in the structures and systems he 
introduced, which from the very beginning seriously impeded the running of the 
NHS, was naive and complacent.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 