
The tennis authorities are have been asked to investigate "the possibility of 
perjury" or a "breach of the law" byAndre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> following the former Wimbledon 
champion's admission that he lied in a letter to the ATP after he tested 
positive for crystal meth in 1997.

David Howman, the director general of the World Anti-Doping Agency, is to 
write to the ATP and the ITF because he believes "this is not a dead issue".

The move comes after more damaging revelations emerged last night in which 
Agassi declares that his father, Mike, asked him to take the illegal 
amphetamine, speed, before playing and that he took it.

In an extract from his autobiography Open, Agassi says that his brother, Phil, 
warned him that the pills their father was giving the player were not simply 
caffeine, but speed.

"One night, Phil asked me to promise him something: 'Don't ever let Paps give 
you any pills to take'," writes Agassi of his brother's advice in an extract of 
the book which is being serialised in the German newspaper Bild.

"The pills are something else...speed. They are really tiny, white and round. 
Don't swallow them, no matter what happens. "

Agassi, however, still took the tablets handed to him by his father before a 
national tournament in Chicago. "This will help you. Swallow it. He puts the 
pill in my hand. Tiny, white, Round. I swallow it and I feel good. Not much 
different. A bit more alert."

Agassi writes that his father was giving him caffeine pills before every match 
to boost his performances.

The player says he had believed that he was taking Excedrin, a pill high in 
caffeine. Above normal levels of caffeine were on Wada's banned list until 2004 
and the drug remains on the agency's monitoring list.

"We take it extremely seriously if anyone has taken anything on the banned 
list of drugs, whether it is believed to be performance-enhancing or not," 
Howman told the Sunday Telegraph.

Last week's admission by Agassi that he took crystal meth and then deceived 
the authorities by declaring that he had fallen prey to "spiked soda" will not 
be allowed to rest by Wada.

The agency has an eight-year statute of limitations and cannot punish the 
player now he has retired, but Howman is demanding that the ATP and ITF take 
action. He wants the governing bodies to investigate whether he "lied on oath" 
after he failed the drugs test in 1997.

"Wada's position is simple," said Howman. "The tennis authorities should 
investigate a possible breach of the law by Agassi, if he lied on oath about 
this, and also a possible breach of the law by his lawyers. If his lawyers knew 
at the time he was lying, then that is extremely serious.

"There are limitations over what he can do, but we don't believe this is a 
dead issue. We believe the authorities should be investigating the possibility 
of perjury."

Wada are due to send out letters to the authorities this week.
 