
Andrew Flintoff’s Twenty20 comeback is gathering pace after the Brisbane Heat 
coach, Stuart Law, revealed he expects to sign him forthis winter’s Big Bash in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/13/andrew-flintoff-brisbane-heat-big-bash-australia>
.

After five years in retirement the 36-year-old all-rounder made a surprise 
return to competitive action during this season’s T20 Blast.

It looked as though it would be a damp squib as injury struck after just two 
outings for Lancashire, but in typical Flintoff style he picked the perfect 
moment to grab the limelight.

An injury to Kabir Ali saw him drafted in for T20 finals day, where a 
first-ball dismissal of Ian Bell and a couple of mighty sixes reminded everyone 
of his natural talent.

His former Lancashire team-mate Law was clearly paying attention. “We’ve had 
discussions with Freddie,”Law told the Manchester Evening News 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/sport/cricket/stuart-law-confirms-andrew-flintoff-7931070>
.

“If things go well, hopefully we will be able to confirm next week that he 
will play some part in the Big Bash for us.

“I am really excited by the idea. We get on really well and have had plenty of 
good times down the years during my time with Lancashire. He will be the 
biggest signing Brisbane Heat has made.”

Flintoff could only realistically be termed the franchise’s biggest draw in 
celebrity terms, but Law has made it clear he will not be coming merely as a 
gimmick.

“I have spoken to Fred and made it clear that this is not a holiday, but he 
told me cricket is No1 for him, and that it is not about collecting cash, it’s 
about winning trophies,” said Law.

“I am sure Fred will do the right thing for this team. He is a proud man. He 
is not after the cash, he wants to contribute to the team.

“We know we will not be getting Freddie at his best from 2005, but if he is 
anywhere close then he will be great for us.

“The Australian fans will love him. They won’t get on his back. He will create 
a following here and will love it in Brisbane.”
 