
André Villas-Boas won the Russian Premier League title in his first full 
season withZenit St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg> but the Portuguese 
manager has yet to win over all his critics.

The team from Russia’s second city were crowned champions on Sunday, after a 
1-1 draw with Ufa, but his team’s style of play still drew a high-level rebuke.

“Zenit play boring football,” said Boris Chukhlov, who won the Soviet title 
with Zenit in 1984. “A team full of star names is going out on to the pitch, 
however the tactics are too cautious. The side is showing anti-football, which 
basically boils down to giving the ball as quickly as possible to Hulk or 
Danny.”

Villas-Boas took over at Zenit in March 2014. In his first season in charge he 
helped the club finish second, trailing the eventual winners, CSKA Moscow, by 
one point. A year on, the team from St Petersburg have wrapped up the title 
with two games to spare. However, Zenit were disappointing in the Champions 
League and failed to get out of the group stage.

“We are such a strong squad and when faced with such weak opponents, they 
should have wrapped up the Russian title two months ago and should have 
performed much better in the European competitions,” Chukhlov said.

“Villas-Boas says he is an admirer of José Mourinho. However, teams under the 
latter play a more aggressive type of football. Zenit on the other hand score a 
goal and then the defenders start hoofing the ball. It is boring and 
nauseating.”

Chukhlov also slated the Portuguese for his post-match press conferences, in 
which he would criticise various parties. “He is always whining,” said 
Chukhlov. “The referees are aiding the opposition with their mistakes, the 
conditions for playing football are poor, and so on. However, we have a lot 
more questions towards this manager.”

A number of observers have also expressed concern that foreign players are 
playing the leading roles within the team: Ezequiel Garay, Axel Witsel, Javi 
García, Hulk and others.

“I want to ask the head coach – where are the players from the youth teams?” 
said Chukhlov. “We have a talented 22-year-old midfielder Pavel Mogilevets, who 
has already been capped by Russia. However, he is not needed by Villas-Boas, 
just like the other young players.”

Villas-Boas, whose contract runs until 2016, has set his own goals. “We should 
be one of the top 10 clubs in Europe,” said the former Chelsea andTottenham 
Hotspur manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/17/andre-villas-boas-tottenham-daniel-levy-broke-promises>
.

There were reports in the Spanish press that Villas-Boas is of interest to 
Real Madrid. “Why would Real need him?” asked Chukhlov, adding: “I read an 
interview from the president of Tottenham. He thanked his lucky stars when they 
got rid of Villas-Boas, as they were so fed up of him. I don’t think he is able 
to work with top clubs.”
 