
Andrew Flintoff, the Ashes-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/06/2005-alternative-history-greatest-ashes>
 former England all-rounder turned television personality, has been elected the 
president of the Professional Cricketers’ Association.

Test cricket farewells: they didn't always do it their way like Brendon 
McCullum | The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/23/test-cricket-farewells-brendon-mccullum>
The 38-year-old, who was voted in at the PCA’s annual general meeting in 
Birmingham, succeeds fellow Lancastrian and Sky Sports commentator David Lloyd 
in the role. Flintoff’s term of office runs until the end of 2017, the union’s 
50th anniversary.

“This is a huge honour, especially as it will be the golden jubilee of the PCA 
in 2017,” he said. “I have been a PCA member for more than 20 years now and it 
is an organisation I am proud to be involved in. The PCA has carried out 
pioneering work on mental health and wellbeing for past and present players 
through the Mind Matters series and the PCA Benevolent Fund does outstanding 
work in looking after players, past and current, and their dependants who fall 
on hard times.

“We have a small but dedicated team of professional staff who I look forward 
to working closely with during my time as president.”

Lloyd said: “I’m delighted to hand over the reins to Freddie, who I know will 
be as thrilled as I was to become PCA president. It’s an honour that is 
bestowed on very few and to head an organisation that does so much to help so 
many is a huge privilege.”

Flintoff, who will carry out ambassadorial work in the role, becomes only the 
seventh PCA president since the representative body was founded in 1967, with 
John Arlott, Jack Bannister, Mike Gatting, Sir Ian Botham, Chris Broad and 
Lloyd his predecessors.

Jason Ratcliffe, the PCA assistant chief executive, said: “Fred has always 
offered his help freely down the years, so it’s fantastic that he will take up 
this prestigious honorary role. He has transcended cricket since finishing and 
as the last terrestrial cricketing hero, he has earned respect and universal 
popularity. We’re all looking forward to having him o board, especially over 
our 50th anniversary.”

The PCA, which represents first-class cricketers past and present, will also 
have a new chief executive starting in March, with the former Worcestershire 
batsman David Leatherdale due to replace the outgoing Angus Porter.
 