
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> was 
preoccupied for just 20 balls on Saturday night at Edgbaston. Yet there is now 
the assumption that his career might swerve dramatically from being a celebrity 
back towards being a cricketer, or at least a celebrity cricketer. With the 
likes of Flintoff it is folly to rule anything out.

There was a surreal element to Flintoff’s remarkable return to the big stage 
in the T20 final. First it required a routine shoulder injury to Kabir Ali 
towards the end of Lancashire’s semi-final against Hampshire. In the 45 minutes 
between games there was suddenly Lancashire’s number 26 bowling with purpose 
out in the middle and the murmur grew ever louder “Freddie’s playing”; colour 
writers changed their plans for an early exit from Edgbaston.

Five years to the day since he ran out Ricky Ponting at The Oval in his last 
Test it was, perhaps, inevitable that Flintoff should return with a bang. His 
first ball was on target; Ian Bell tried something ambitious and the ball 
looped towards mid-on, where Karl Brown ran back to hold a superb catch. But 
all eyes were on Flintoff – the arms were outstretched for long enough for the 
snappers to catch his famous triumphant pose once more.

He was removed from the attack after two overs and 20 runs, figures dented by 
a hip-high full-toss, correctly deemed a no-ball and smitten over the square 
leg boundary. Ah well, no disgrace in those figures. Humiliation had been 
averted.

But then he came out to bat at number nine, surely too low for a man who in 
the past has managed to tinker with the cricketing fates. Thirty were required 
byLancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> off 13 balls.

It was a practically impossible task but after Flintoff had struck Oliver 
Hannon-Dalby for two consecutive straight sixes, no one in the Warwickshire 
side or among an entranced capacity crowd was taking anything for granted. 
Lancashire fell four runs short.Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> were triumphant but their 
victory had almost been hijacked by Flintoff.

So where next? It seems as if Lancashire have been a little lukewarm about 
Flintoff’s plans to return to cricket this summer. The impetus came from the 
player rather than the club; they batted him at number nine, for heaven’s sake, 
and he was only selected, in between various niggles, for two matches before 
the final. But they might be more interested to have him on board next summer.

Then there is the Big Bash in Australia. Flintoff’s old mate, Stuart Law, is 
in charge in Brisbane. There could be overtures from there. Moreover, Graeme 
Smith in South Africa has been charged with finding some high-profile players 
to boost their T20 competition. He has just wooed Kevin Pietersen successfully, 
not a task he would have relished a few years ago. Why not Flintoff as well? In 
the extraordinary world of T20 anything is possible after 20 balls.
 