
As Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> begins his 
clay-court season here on Wednesday his focus will be, or at least should be, 
on his tennis and nothing else. The Scot has endured a slump since the 
Australian Open final and when he takes on Radek Stepanek, the experienced and 
slightly eccentric Czech, in the second round of the Monte Carlo Masters, he 
will be trying to snap a four-match losing streak that includes first-match 
defeats in Rotterdam, Indian Wells and Miami.

He will do so without a full-time coach after his decision at the end of last 
month to end a three-year arrangement with the Spaniard, Alex Corretja. He 
wants someone who can commit to 30-35 weeks a year but the logic of a crowded 
calendar over the next two months suggests that he will probably have to wait 
until after Wimbledon to find his man.

In the meantime, Murray is to take advantage of the Adidas player development 
programme. Now in its eighth year, it employs a number of experienced coaches 
who offer assistance to any of its players. It is not a long-term fix, as 
Murray admits, but he plans to consult them in tournaments in Madrid and Rome 
next month and in the build-up to the French Open in Paris.

The coaches in question are Darren Cahill and Sven Groeneveld. A fine player 
in his own right and nicknamed "Killer" thanks to his tendency to upset 
bigger-named players, Cahill coached a fellow Australian, Lleyton Hewitt, to 
the world No1 ranking and then took onAndre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> towards the end of his career.

Groeneveld, a Dutchman, is well known as the former coach of Greg Rusedski and 
worked with several grand-slam champions, including Michael Stich and Monica 
Seles.

The women's No1 Caroline Wozniacki, another of Adidas's players, believes 
Murray will be able to learn from both. "Andy is such a great player himself 
and has been on the tour for a while and knows how to play tennis, so they're 
not going to teach him how to hit a forehand or a backhand," Wozniacki said. 
"But they're going to just try to give him a few small inputs that maybe can 
make a big difference in the game.

"They have been on the tour for a long time so they have the experience. 
Obviously they need to get to know the player a little bit but for me, Darren 
is great. He's a very positive person and he can help, especially with the 
serve and with the volleys as he was good with that himself. "He's very good 
[tactically]. He's very good at the small things that can make a big 
difference."

Groeneveld may have spent more time working with some of the leading female 
players of recent years, notably Ana Ivanovic, but Rusedski credited him as a 
major reason behind his success. Both Groeneveld and Wozniacki were in the 
Murray box to watch the Australian Open final in January and Murray used his 
assistant, Mats Merkel, as a hitting partner before several of his matches 
there.

It is not an arrangement that suits everyone – they cannot sit on court when 
Murray plays another Adidas player, like Fernando Verdasco or Fernando González 
— but that is unlikely to bother him too much.

Cahill is contracted to the US broadcaster ESPN during the French Open so most 
of the work they do is likely to happen in the preceding weeks.

In an ideal world, Cahill would seem to be a perfect fit. As well as being 
widely respected, the Australian brings a link to Agassi, Murray's favourite 
player as a youngster.

The American is an occasional hitting partner at their training camp in Las 
Vegas and Murray last week said he would be willing to compromise by travelling 
himself. However, Cahill's existing coaching commitments, TV work and a young 
family make a full-time role impossible for now, so Murray will have to glean 
all he can from him in a short time.
 