
What an exit by Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick>. 
He was not always the most popular player in the world, especially among 
terrified ball-kids and not a few journalists, but it would be churlish to 
ignore his contribution to the game or the dignified manner of his leaving.

After fighting as hard as he could against Juan Martin del Potro, he 
surrendered to tired legs and the consistency of his opponent's power tennis, 
and departed with tears in his eyes.

Before he left the tournament and the game for good, the last American male to 
win a slam title, here in 2003, Roddick was afforded a rare honour: a standing 
ovation in his final press conference.

The venerable Bud Collins <http://www.budcollinstennis.com/>, who has been 
around the game since Henry VIII played it, called for a suspension of protocol 
and a round of applause for Mr Grumpy, who looked as if he might start crying 
all over again.

"Thanks, Bud," he said, maybe for the first time in his life.

Never visibly haunted by self-doubt, Roddick struggled when asked what he 
thought his most rewarding moment was. "The thing that is certain is I didn't 
take any of it for granted. I think I went about things the right way. The 
umpires might disagree with me. I was consistent, and I don't feel like I left 
a lot on the table on a daily basis. When I look back, that's probably what I'm 
proud of."

He was reminded of the time in Delray Beach when he was 17 and he declined an 
offer to sign a woman's breast after winning. " I had just never seen a boob 
before, to be honest. It was overwhelming for me. This is the second time I 
have been overwhelmed."

He provided rare insight, too, into his hard-faced motivation and his often 
volatile reactions in a 13-year career in which he probably lost as many verbal 
battles as he won, on court at least.

"It was emotional tonight, but not emotional like we normally have it. It's 
normally a very selfish emotion for us. If we do badly then it costs us 
something; if we do well we get great things. This was about something bigger. 
It wasn't about ranking points or pay checques or anything else. It was fun. 
This week I felt like I was 12 years old playing in a park. It was extremely 
innocent."

With that, he took his leave, but not before admitting, "I'm probably not 
going to be opposed to a beer or ten. We'll see how that goes."

Rain, rain go away

As boring as rain can be, it could determine the winner of this US Open, where 
the forecast over the next couple of days is fair to ordinary.

The only slam tournament without a roof is as much a television event as a 
sporting event yet, perversely, year after year, the schedules, which are 
overwhelmingly determined by the demands of ESPN and CBS, run to the rhythm of 
the storms that lash this part of the east coast every August and September.

A roof has been talked about for years, yet, despite the considerable revenue, 
increased prize-money, record crowds and disgruntlement in the locker room, 
there is a stubborn reluctance to invest in change.

What the tournament ends up with is a mish-mash of compromises, as some 
players go two, or even three, days without court time and others have to play 
maybe four days in a row, especially towards the final weekend. This is almost 
wholly down to the way the draw is organised, with seeded players (usually the 
only ones left at the end of the second week) not appearing early, creating a 
log-jam that is exacerbated by weather that, for the past four years, has been 
dire. In the second week, we have the absurd prospect of the women's 
semi-finals finishing before some men's fourth-round matches.

Happily for Andy Murray, he has largely dodged the weather, although the Scot 
was on rain-watch on Wednesday, as unfinished matches from the previous evening 
– Maria Sharapova's quarter-final against Marion Bartoli and the men's 
fourth-round match between Andy Roddick and Juan Martin del Potro – formed a 
disorderly queue ahead of him on Arthur Ashe Stadium.

Then Murray was switched to the smaller, thinly-peopled Louis Armstrong, where 
the lack of energy might well have contributed to his low-key start to a match 
he could have easily lost, but for Marin Cilic's inability to resist his 
stirring comeback over four sets.

Day nine of the last major of the year began with seven matches waiting to 
resume. Several others were in the traffic jam building up behind them. At 
least two of these matches, Sharapova-Bartoli and Roddick-del Potro, could have 
been wound up on Tuesday had one of the courts had a roof.

As it happened, when the rain arrived late in the afternoon on day eight, 
organisers decided to suspend Sharapova-Bartoli and, when the weather cleared, 
put Roddick-del Potro on Arthur Ashe, because that is the match ESPN wanted for 
its night-time session. So, instead of at least one match being finished, there 
were two unfinished.

Thus is the integrity of competition undermined.

The weather will always be a factor in sport but, as Wimbledon and Melbourne 
have already demonstrated, with Paris to follow suit, there are ways to 
accommodate it. But roof is a four-letter word at the US Open.

In June, the United States Tennis Association confirmed it would spend $500 
million over the next 10 years to build a new Louis Armstrong Stadium, a 
grandstand on unused land at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, and a 
double-deck viewing area for fans to watch players practise. But there would be 
no roof, on either Armstrong or Ashe, the main court. It is thought engineering 
problems on the steep-seated Ashe, which is built on swamp land, make a roof 
impractical. "It's five times larger than the span that covers Wimbledon," 
Gordon Smith, the USTA's chief operating officer, told the New York Times.

The arguments for not putting a roof on the smaller Armstrong – apart from 
parsimony and pig-headedness – are less convincing. One of those was voiced by 
Daniel Zausner, managing director of the site: "The tournament does not 
function with a single roof being anywhere but the main stadium. You can't tell 
23,700 people to move to Louis, which will have 15,000 seats. That leaves 
8,000-plus without a seat."

It did not occur to anyone, apparently, to put another 8,000 seats on the new 
"Louis", which currently seats 10,000 people. Actually it probably did – until 
they checked their sums.

Around 1pm, John McEnroe looked out of his commentary window and declared, 
"Holy mackerel, is that sunshine out there?"

It had been a little while.

Bartoli dialled 99

When Sharapova and Bartoli finally got on court, they brought contrasting 
service skills to the contest – won in three sets in the end by the Russian.

Sharapova, going for power, hit 10 aces – and 11 double faults; Bartoli 
managed two aces in just over two and a half hours, but struck six double 
faults.

The winner made a keen observation later: "She was going a lot for her second 
serves. I think she probably had 30 serves that were 99 miles per hour second 
serves. It's like she worked consistently to get 99 miles an hour. Every time I 
looked at the clock it was like 99, 99. [I thought] if I lose this match, I'm 
going to have nightmares."
 