
Andy Murray not only stunned the often taciturn Andy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> into pleading, "Keep it 
social!" in mock surrender towards the end of their semi-final in the Aegon 
Championships, but held Queen's spellbound with the sheer brilliance of his 
tennis.

Jo-Wilfried Tsonga – conqueror of Rafa Nadal on Friday night, but who, believe 
it or not, had to fight nearly as hard to beat the lowly ranked Londoner James 
Ward in the other semi-final on Saturday – conceded: "For the moment he's 
better than me, so I have nothing to lose." Except the final. If Murray 
reproduces anything like his form in winning 6-3, 6-1 with barely a shot out of 
place, the Frenchman might as well phone his game in. This was as near to a 
perfect exhibition of grass-court tennis as a player can deliver, at any level.

In two sets of slaughter, Murray hit 13 aces, no double faults, chipped and 
passed like John McEnroe, defended like Bjorn Borg (Roddick got an astonishing 
83% of his first serves in, yet was barely in the contest) and generally played 
as if he could fly if he put his mind to it.

Murray's mastery of the drop shot, not always a strong suit, perfectly matched 
his long game, as time and again he dragged Roddick to the net before passing 
him left or right. He lobbed well, too, and was alert to the American's 
dangerous first serve. "Unbelievable," was all John Lloyd could say of a second 
set that rushed by before Prunella and Tarquin had returned, late again, from 
the bar. (Try controlling two pints of Pimm's and a girlfriend while not 
treading on your friend's Church brogues in the posh seats. It is no picnic.) 
"Everything he touched turned to gold," said Roddick.

Most present on Centre Court will have seen nothing to match the 58 minutes of 
tennis Murray produced to demolish Roddick, who has just returned to the top 10 
after eight weeks searching for his game. Veteran members of the press corps 
shook their heads in admiration. In the paid-for seats, oohs and aahs followed 
intakes of breath, as if Murray were single-handedly controlling the oxygen 
levels of west London.

And the player himself? He reckoned he "got lucky". Did he not think he was 
doing himself a disservice? "It was one of those days where everything is going 
your way," he said in self-deprecatory overload and clear denial of his own 
afternoon of inspiration.

"If there was a net cord, it would have gone my way today. If he hit a good 
shot, it would miss by just a little bit. Everything I was trying, every 
passing shot I hit, was always in the right spot. I hardly gave him a chance on 
anything.

"Sometimes against Andy you guess on the serves. I guessed right every single 
time today. I don't really remember him acing me hardly in the match [he put 
three through him]. I was just seeing the ball really early and it's difficult 
to do that every day. So it was a little bit of luck involved, but it's taken 
many years of practice to be able to play like that."

He allowed himself a smile. He knows he hit heights here that arrive rarely in 
anyone's career. This was tennis to match that which he produced against Nadal 
in the semi-final of the World Tour finals in London last November, when he 
lost yet won because of the sheer quality and intensity of the exchanges. That, 
by general consensus, was the best single match of 2010. This was different, 
because there was no real contest. It was not that Roddick played badly. He was 
just not allowed to play at all. He had no answer to the power and placement of 
Murray's first serve, which the Scot cranked up, knowing his second effort 
would also carry a threat.

Later he explained the dramatic transformation of his serving since Roland 
Garros, where he was nowhere near as potent. "The way you approach the serve 
changes on grass because, on the clay, if you miss your first serve, the second 
serve is a lot easier for guys to attack. You have to use the first serve a lot 
to get a higher percentage, to build the point.

"Here, I want to go for my first serve. I don't want to think, 'Oh, don't miss 
it'. I'm going for aces every time I throw the ball up for the first serve. 
That's a good attitude on the grass."

And Murray's attitude and demeanour was first class all week after the ankle 
and tooth problems that plagued his weird Parisian odyssey. A semi-final place 
there was encouraging, in light of the nightmare he endured after the 
Australian Open final, and his disposition is much sunnier now.

He was happy to celebrate the deeds of compatriot Ward, who fought hard 
against Tsonga in the other semi-final before losing in two sets. "I was 
getting a little bit jealous of all the attention he was getting," he said. "I 
had to put in a good performance today to try to get some of the spotlight 
back."

That was humour that undercut the image many people still have of Murray. He 
is in "a good place", as he says, perfectly prepared for another assault on 
Wimbledon.

Can he win there? Patriotism has led some to predict the breakthrough this 
year, in front of a home audience so starved of success they are prepared to 
believe almost any forecast of glory.

First he has to beat Tsonga here. He should. Easily. He really is playing 
tennis from somewhere else right now. Then we will know more about his 
Wimbledon chances.
 