
Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> chose his 30th 
birthday to announce his retirement from tennis last night, 24 hours before he 
plays Bernard Tomic in the second round of the US Open. So, barring a 
theatrical flourish to a career that has rarely touched dullness, the American 
rebel without a pause button will probably leave town as he arrived: loudly.

If Tomic does to Roddick what Laura Robson did to Kim Clijsters on Wednesday 
night and sends him into retirement with a loss, it is likely to be a glorious 
one. Roddick has never been less than a wholehearted competitor and, for a long 
time, one of the most dangerous players near the top end of the game.

His only major came here, in 2003, after the departure of Pete Sampras, but, 
like everyone of his era, he then had to cope with the rise of Roger Federer 
and Rafael Nadal, not to mention the later challenges of Novak Djokovic and 
Andy Murray. On his day, he frightened all of them.

Nevertheless, ball boys everywhere might spare themselves an expulsion of 
relief. Roddick's edge carried itself from the court to the press conferences 
without apology or misunderstanding. If he was rude, he usually meant it, 
whether snatching at a towel or barking at a reporter.

"I'll make this short and sweet," he said at a hastily arranged press 
conference towards the end of day four. "I've decided that this is going to be 
my last tournament." He chose this moment because he didn't think his body 
would get him back to Flushing Meadows in 12 month's time, and this is where he 
wants to go out. He also has other business interests, including a radio 
station in Texas, and his form has dipped, sometimes alarmingly, over the past 
couple of years.

Roddick never wanted to be just an opponent. Meanwhile, others went about 
their business, including Murray who so famously embarrassed Roddick in the 
semi-final at Queen's last year, the American was driven to scream: "Keep it 
social!" It is something Roddick himself did not often bother with.

While Murray is fine-tuning his tennis on the practice courts ahead of 
Saturday's third-round match against Feliciano L贸pez, not much more could go 
his way at Flushing Meadows short of waking up today to discover Roger Federer 
had lost overnight to the 32-year-old German long- shot Bjorn Phau.

With only a minimal nod to caution, it is reasonably safe to assume the world 
No1 - who before last night's match had won 22 straight under lights here - did 
not succumb to the wiles of a player 82 places adrift of him in the rankings. 
Only a year older than the Swiss, Phau caught him off-guard when they first 
played, in Washington 13 years ago, but it is odds-on that Federer will be 
around long enough to meet the Scot in the semi-finals. If not, well, you read 
it here last.

However, fifth seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, a prospective threat to Murray in the 
quarters, is gone, losing to the unfancied Martin Klizan (beaten this year by 
Dan Evans) with all the quirkiness he could muster, 4-6, 6-1, 1-6, 3-6. Fitting 
four sets into two hours and 12 minutes takes some doing - and a lot of crazy 
tennis.

On Court 7 L贸pez, the 30th seed, almost blew a two-set lead before earning the 
Saturday match against Murray by beating his fellow Spaniard Pablo Andujar in 
four hours and 15 minutes.

If there is much left of L贸pez, Murray will seek and destroy it; the third 
seed, who played brilliantly to dismiss the Croatian Ivan Dodig in three quick 
sets on Wednesday night, should be too strong and sharp against a player who 
has taken only one set off him in six matches.

L贸pez reckons Murray's three-set win at Wimbledon last year was his best 
performance against him, but memories of the Scot's devastating form in 
conceding only seven games when they met in the third round here last year are 
just as strong.
 