
If Andy Murray's season really is over, he is not leaving us clutching our 
sides. Nobody does gloom quite like Murray. Cut down by a gluteal injury in 
Basel and inconvenienced in defeat on Monday by the flare-up of a groin strain 
picked up in training after his exit in Paris a week and a half ago, he views 
his chances of continuing in theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> this week with all 
the Christmas cheer of Ebenezer Scrooge.

He may decide when he wakes up on Tuesday, he said. If not, he could leave it 
until a minute before his next scheduled match on Wednesday. Either way, he 
will not enter the O2 Arena in a red suit on a sled singing Jingle All The Way.

It was the groin rather than the buttock that went on Monday, as the 
pugnacious David Ferrer – long considered (affectionately) a pain in the 
backside by his peers – beat him 6-4, 7-5, the first proper shock of the 
tournament. Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal each dropped a set on the first day 
but won. Murray faces the prospect of spending the rest of the week in an ice 
bath with needles in his hip as his main rivals scrap over first prize-money of 
$1.6m (£1m) and end-of-year bragging rights. Federer may even reclaim the No3 
ranking Murray took from him recently.

The Scot received courtside treatment between sets yet moved well enough in 
the concluding session. It was a frustrating, perplexing performance by Murray, 
of a piece with efforts when he is at a low ebb. His answers to gentle 
interrogation were mostly monosyllabic.

"Disappointing," he said. "Didn't feel great." Asked about his body language, 
which approximated to that of Robespierre being led to the guillotine, he said: 
"Don't know. I mean, I felt flat, in the second set especially. And, yeah, I 
don't know, whatever … however I was feeling contributed towards that. Yeah, I 
don't really know what else to say."

He did say he would have pulled out before the start of the tournament had it 
not been this one, or one of the majors. For someone who rarely walks away from 
tough challenges, that was an admission that spoke loudly about the seriousness 
of his injury. And yet there is hope. As he pointed out, it is possible to go 
through with one early win – but highly unlikely.

This was Murray's first setback against Ferrer on a hard court in six matches. 
Indeed the Spaniard had taken only one set from 12 in those encounters and 
Murray was considered odds-on to add to the 16 wins he had collected in 17 
matches since the US Open. Only fleetingly did that look likely in the two 
hours the match lasted.

Ferrer is the Joe Frazier of tennis, favoured by fans of tenacity rather than 
those thunderstruck by glamour. Although he is ranked fifth in the world on 
merit, he suffers like the late Smokin' Joe from the perception of his 
strengths: a refusal to contemplate lost causes and an uncluttered, muscular 
game that can unsettle more flamboyant opponents on his better days.

Monday was one of those days.

It was a glum one for Murray, who was disabused of any fleeting temptation to 
regard himself as Muhammad Ali in this little contest. He was a break up in 
each set but his concentration wavered as mistakes mounted between some 
exquisite shot-making, anomalies that puzzled his opponent.

Ferrer said he felt the power of Murray's serve and added in halting English: 
"I think maybe he had a little problems, but not too many strong problems, no? 
Because he can play all the match."

Murray is a wounded prisoner of the odds. If fit to continue, he probably 
needs two good wins from his remaining group matches to have any hope of 
reaching the semi-finals – or for Novak Djokovic's right shoulder to fall off.

Ferrer thoroughly deserved his victory, in the last event of the season before 
they all go back to their warm-weather training camps and prepare for more 
well-paid punishment in the new year.

Adding not insult but at least hubris to injury, Federer took the arena 
microphone after Murray's defeat to accept the Stefan Edberg sportsmanship and 
ATPWorldTour.com fans' favourite awards, just a few days afterdamning the Scot 
with faint praise for winning three tournaments on a weakened Asian swing 
recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/19/andy-murray-roger-federer-finals>
.

Murray had responded with dignity, saying he would let his tennis do the 
talking. On Monday that on-court conversation was muted. If the tennis gods had 
conspired to make this a black day for Murray, they could not have done much 
better.
 