
The irony of Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> going 
through to the semi-finals of the Aegon Championships on a walkover because of 
Marin Cilic's withdrawal with an injured ankle provided weird symmetry to a day 
of sodden chaos and drama.

As the Croatian hobbles out, the Scot strolls on, healthier by the day and 
still smiling – although Murray said he would have appreciated a run-out 
against Cilic.

As the schedulers moved players between courts in a desperate attempt to beat 
the foul weather that has plagued the tournament on every day, Murray had the 
luxury of retiring to the comfort of the treatment room to do further rehab on 
his own dodgy ankle ahead of his match againstAndy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> on Saturday. The American beat 
Spain's Fernando Verdasco 6-2, 6-2 in yet another rain-spattered match on 
Friday and looks in good shape.

Murray said he learned of Cilic's injury when warming up for the match, and 
with James Ward still involved in his shoot-out with Sam Querrey. Cilic told 
Murray he had also hurt his knee when turning on his ankle the previous day 
but, whatever the extend of the injury, Murray was more focused on Roddick.

He spent the day hitting up briefly outdoors and then went inside for more 
practice and exercise on his own knee, which he says is holding up well.

Roddick, clearly, will be a step-up in class. "He's one of the best grass 
court players in the world," Murray said. "A good test to see where my game is 
at." He acknowledged that there had been a bit of edge between them at the 
start of his career, but was quick to add, "the last few years, I haven't felt 
that at all".

As they were coached, at different stages, by Brad Gilbert, Murray reckoned 
the rivalry was perhaps more intense than it might otherwise have been. "Both 
of us were more fiery a few years ago," he said.

Roddick said: "It's going to be tough. I don't think there's going to be a lot 
of surprises. We're probably in the two hands' worth of guys that really feel 
comfortable on this surface."

Recalling his win over Murray at Wimbledon two years ago, Roddick said: "It 
was obviously a great result for me, especially on the heels of the way he was 
playing at that moment. I remember people were talking about a Murray/Roger 
[Federer] final already. I had to play one of my best matches to beat him, 
though. That's a credit to his level, where it is consistently."

All is calm now, though, as Murray prepares for a match that will tell him how 
close he is to his best form two weeks out from Wimbledon.
 