
Andy Murray yesterday admitted his surprise at the recent revelations that the 
former world No1Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> 
had failed a drugs test in 1997 and then lied about the reasons to avoid a ban. 
As a child, the Scot idolised the American for his swashbuckling, 
non-conformist style, so it must have come as an even greater shock to him to 
learn his hero had taken crystal meth.

Murray was reluctant to talk about Agassi's revelations but said the news had 
not tarnished his reputation, at least in his eyes. "I don't think any of the 
players expected it, but you've just got to move on," he said in Valencia, 
where he is due to return to the ATP Tour tomorrow after six weeks off with a 
left-wrist problem.

"I loved Andre, met him numerous times. He was unbelievably nice to me. I 
practised with him quite a lot. I guess it's something he has to deal with 
himself. He's entitled to say whatever he wants and I wish him the best.

"I judge him as a tennis player, he was great, a great player, one of the best 
of all time. From the experiences I have had with him, he's been nice to me. No 
one wants drugs in sport but everyone makes mistakes."

Murray has been one of many top players critical of the nature of drug testing 
in the sport. Under the whereabouts rule, tennis players have to give the 
sport's authorities a one-hour window, every day, when they will be at a 
certain place. Murray has said previously that the system is too intrusive and 
yesterday he said he did not believe that drug-taking was rife in tennis.

"I didn't play in those times [when Agassi failed a test] so I don't know what 
it was like. There are even cases now where guys get off, with failed tests and 
contaminations, mistakes, like with the [Richard] Gasquet case. Sometimes 
things like that happen. People get away with it sometimes but I just don't 
think drugs in tennis is a big problem like it is in other sports."

Fernando Verdasco, of the current players perhaps the closest to Agassi 
through his association with the American's former trainer Gil Reyes, yesterday 
expressed his support for Agassi. "He was my idol, all my life when I was a 
kid, and he will still be my idol," the Spaniard said. "Everyone can make 
mistakes. My thoughts about Andre will not change because of this. He is a 
great person, he is always trying to help me and that for me is more important."
 