
It was "unwise" of the senior police officer in charge of the original 
investigation into phone hacking to dine with News International executives, 
Sir Hugh Orde, president of the Association of ChiefPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Officers, has said.

Orde, a former officer of the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> who served as chief 
constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland for nine years, was asked 
to comment after Andy Hayman, the former Met assistant commissioner, defended 
his decision to accept hospitality from senior figures at News International 
while the phone-hacking investigation was under way.

Hayman told MPs on the home affairs committee on Tuesday that the dinners were 
"businesslike" rather than "candlelit affairs where state secrets were 
discussed".

But Orde suggested that such meetings were not appropriate in the context of 
an investigation.

And he joined his police colleagues in attacking News International for 
playing "legal games" and withholding information from the investigation, 
urging the company to "step up" and produce "any information" they still have 
to ensure corrupt police officers who took payments are "locked up".

Orde made his comments to the BBC Radio 4 Today programme as he discussed the 
grilling of senior officers by MPs on Tuesday. Asked if it was "seemly" for an 
officer to accept hospitality under those circumstances, Orde replied: 
"Frankly, no.

"In those precise circumstances it seems an unwise decision."

But he went on to say it would be a "very strange world" if the press and 
police did not have a professional relationship.

"Let's be clear – we rely on the press to ensure public information is given 
out and the press rely on us. And I would meet as chief constable of Northern 
Ireland routinely with senior people – with editors, with reporters – and we 
would give background briefings.

"What the press report is a matter for them, but we have a professional 
obligation to make sure they understand the complexity of our world."

Orde dismissed suggestions that the police were either naive or complicit in 
the failure to unearth evidence of widespread phone hacking practices.

Orde pointed out that the senior officers themselves told the home affairs 
select committee on Tuesday that with hindsight, and "with more information", 
they would have done things differently.

"They focused very much yesterday on the fact they could have done things 
differently if they had more information from News International, who, as 
described by Mr Clarke [Peter Clarke, the deputy assistant commissioner who 
oversaw the first investigation], thwarted his investigation," said Orde. "I 
think that is something very serious, which of course the public will be 
looking at."

Asked about News International's conduct, Orde said anyone being investigated 
does not always co-operate, but "this was not a burglar saying nothing. This 
was a global company that had some responsibility and what we have here is the 
police service of this country, probably one of the most accountable services 
in the world, standing up and being counted. What we don't see yet is equal 
transparency or explanation from a very large multinational company who should 
frankly be explaining why they withheld information from such a serious 
investigation."

He said the senior officers at the time were under "huge pressure", dealing 
with a number of challenges facing the capital and beyond.

"I think they should be respected and I have no doubt the inquiry will look 
into far more detail into the precise decision-making and all the documentation 
the police will supply, and I sincerely hope that News International now 
supply, including any information into what appears to be a small number of 
corrupt officers who were taking payments that started part of this ball 
rolling."

He urged the publisher to provide all relevant information now.

"Let's not play around with legal games here," he said. "If they have names, 
dates, times, places, payments to police officers, we would like to see them, 
so we can lock these officers up and throw away the key frankly, because any 
corrupt police officer does huge damage to the 140,000 officers who go out 
every day to keep people safe."

He added: "My sense of it is that it is not something that is endemic or 
cultural. I think the vast majority of officers would be absolutely outraged 
that someone in a position of authority with access to privileged information 
thinks it's right in any way, shape or form to give that information up."

• If you wish to comment on the phone-hacking scandal please go to our live 
blog <https://www.theguardian.com/media/series/phone-hacking-live>
 