
What to make of Andy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick>? 
The person who has to deal with that question in the most immediate sense is 
Fabio Fognini, whom he plays in the fourth round of the US Open today on Arthur 
Ashe, scene of some of his greatest matches.

Roddick surely is a conundrum. A day after announcing his retirement from the 
game on his 30th birthday, he produced his best tennis of the yearto embarrass 
the young Australian Bernard Tomic in three sets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/sep/01/andy-roddick-bernard-tomic-us-open>
. He won it, naturally, with an ace.

There have been times over the past couple of years when it was tempting to 
write Roddick off as a serious presence in big tournaments. He suffered a 
series of losses against much lesser players that made fans and doubters alike 
wonder why he was still on the circuit.

He had, after all, plenty of other interests. He can beat Fognini. Can he beat 
the odds and go further? One person who thinks so is Roddick. That's the way 
champions are – even when they've just turned 30.

Old, young and just hanging in there

Two of the eight thirty-something men through to third round play each other 
today on Louis Armstrong: David Ferrer andLleyton Hewitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lleyton-hewitt>, a former champion here who 
is, literally, on his last leg as he completes a grand slam of wild cards in 
majors.

Like Roddick, he has always been forthright – some would say arrogant. But he 
has mellowed, and the way he has battled injury shows his commitment to the 
sport. When the two of them leave for good, they will leave a pretty big 
vacuum. They are not claccisists of the court, more born fighters, more Jimmy 
Connors than John McEnroe.

Those old foes played on to an age past that of Roddick and Hewitt but the 
physical demands of the Tour and the game were not so intense then. The paradox 
is that players are emerging later at the top of the game than they once did, 
but probably will not last so long.

Not since 1974 have eight men over 30 got this deep in the tournament.

At the other end of the age scale, Laura Robson is the only one of the nine 
teenagers who entered the main draw to reach the fourth round after the defeat 
of the American prospect Sloane Stephens. For awhile, Stephens looked like 
causing a major upset but Ana Ivanovic found some of the form that once 
elevated her to No 1 in the world to win in three sets.

The lowest-ranked survivor? Wild card Steve Johnson (245 in the world), who 
goes against the Frenchman Richard Gasquet – who put out Steve's former college 
room-mate Bradley Klahn in the second round.

Not-Saint Bernard

After Roddick had embarrassed Tomic, young Bernard set about embarrassing 
himself. At the post-match press conference he got personal with one Australian 
journalist who pointed out to him, legitimately, that TV commentators had 
suggested he might have "tanked" against the American.

Certainly going under so meekly in three quick sets at least suggested he did 
not ever get into the match but when his inquisitor put this to him – ever so 
gently, it has to be said – Tomic went nuclear. He demanded to know who the 
journalist was and for whom he wrote. Thus informed, he warned him: "I will 
remember you."

Not, probably, at the going down of the sun but in some weird world where only 
Bernard is right and everybody else had better look out. If he's not careful, 
people will mistake him for Roddick.
 