
If Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> was the 
player nobody wanted to meet until they had to for much of the past year, he 
might now be considered wounded prey – and Andy Murray was on Tuesday handed an 
early shot at him ahead of the climax to the season in London next week.

The Scot, who recently moved past Roger Federer to No3 in the world, could 
hardly be lining up the world No1 at a better time. And theATP World Tour Finals
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at the O2 Arena in 
Greenwich, south-east London, is a place where Murray feels most comfortable: 
indoors on a hard court.

Tomas Berdych, who beat Murray in a tough quarter-final of the BNP Paribas 
Masters in Paris last week, is in the same round-robin group, along with the 
hard-to-beat Spaniard David Ferrer – Murray's opponent in his first match on 
Monday.

Murray said: "There are obviously no easy matches as it's only the top eight 
players in the world playing. That's what is so unique about this tournament. 
You have to be on top of your game from the very first match. I've been happy 
with my form. I've got some great memories from my run to the semi-finals last 
year; hopefully I can go even further this time round."

Sifting through these draws is always an exercise in clutching at straws, 
given the quality of tennis at the highest level, but Murray, Ferrer and 
Berdych will be happy to catch Djokovic at his most vulnerable.

The Serb quit in the second set of the final of the Cincinnati Masters against 
Murray and even struggled en route to winning the US Open against Rafael Nadal 
in September. He pulled out after two rounds in Paris last week with what he 
described as an inflamed right shoulder, but which has been troubling him more 
than he likes to admit for three months. He faces Berdych first up on Monday 
evening.

Group B has Nadal, whose uncharacteristic quietness must have his peers on 
edge, Federer (on a run of fine form after a rest and back to a smooth peak 
after winning in Paris), Jo‑Wilfried Tsonga and the American Mardy Fish, who 
limped out of his past two tournaments injured and must be considered doubtful 
– the rising Serb Janko Tipsarevic is standing by. Fish is scheduled to face 
Nadal on Sunday evening.

Tsonga, who will play Federer on Sunday afternoon, said: "Obviously it 
couldn't be an easy draw but it's a very good group for me. I'll be playing 
against Roger once again. I'll play Rafa on a surface that suits me really well 
and I'll be expecting to beat Mardy Fish. Having played there three years ago 
will help me, because I won't be looking around telling myself: 'Oh, it's great 
to be here.' I'm not going there just to participate."

Three titles on the spin in Asia and 18 consecutive match wins gave Murray 
hope of winning in Paris too, until Berdych beat him in a three-hour classic. 
The upside of that is it somewhat relieved the pressure on the Scot coming to 
London.

So, the parameters have shifted again. A year ago at this tournament, Federer 
and Nadal were favourites; the Swiss beat the Spaniard in the final and all 
seemed as it should be. However, Nadal, then No1, went into the final after the 
most electric semi-final against Murray, probably the best three-set match of 
the year.

The subsequent power shifts have lent tennis the uncertainty it needed after 
years of the Federer-Nadal duopoly; now Murray finds himself in the mix again, 
and he is playing his best since that semi-final against Nadal. The Scot has 
won five tour titles in 2011 – Queen's, Cincinnati, Bangkok, Tokyo and 
Shanghai. Victory at the end of his most consistent run for a while would put 
him in great heart for the next big test, the Australian Open in January.
 