
My late father, Sheng Lee, was a traditional Chinese authority figure. He and 
my mother moved to Taiwan following the Chinese civil war. My father 
represented the traditional Chinese patriarchal society. I was always living in 
his shadow; that was my big thing. I was shy and docile and never rebellious. 
But he taught me how to survive and how to be useful. He was a stately man who 
was very pragmatic, the headmaster of a high school – I don't know if that was 
a good or a bad thing.

When I was growing up [as one of four children] he made me study all the time; 
studying was all that was important to him. He was not much fun and he was kind 
of disillusioned in me in some ways. Artistically, I was very repressed. I 
never really got to express myself and wasn't exposed to much art other than 
watching movies once a week.

My father wanted me to have a respectable profession. Teaching was respectable 
to him. He said: "Get a degree and teach in university." When I wasn't working 
he would say: "What are you going to do? Are you going to set an example for 
your kids?" But I just wanted to make movies, so I never fulfilled the hopes he 
had for me. Even when I was successful, he would say: "Now it's time to do 
something real."

My mother, Se-Tsung, was very submissive with my father and obedient. I don't 
have many issues with her: she was a very good mother to me and my siblings. 
When I was growing up, women didn't matter as much. It was patriarchal, all 
about the father. Everyone tried to please my father.

As a kid I could not really concentrate on books or homework. I did OK to 
poorly at school because I would fantasise all the time, having a lot of fun in 
my head because I didn't have a lot of fun. It took 35 years to release all 
that energy. I was repressed and then that repression was released when I 
became a filmmaker.

When I had my own family I was different because I didn't want to do that to 
my own kids, so I am fun. My wife [Jane Lin, a microbiologist] is thetiger mom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/15/amy-chua-tiger-mother-interview>
 in the home, the wise one in the family. I am like the third kid at home. She 
makes all the rules. We [our two sons, Mason, an actor, and Haan, an artist] 
obey. Before I got work as a director, my wife worked. I was lucky, my wife 
provided for the family herself, and never asked me to find a job. I was 
picking up the kids from school and doing the cooking and writing. Most of the 
time I didn't do anything – there was a lot of anxiety because I couldn't 
invest in anything apart from filmmaking.

My kids are interested in what I do. Haan is very good at drawing. He wants to 
be a graphic artist or a graphic novelist. But he went through a period, which 
I went through myself, that on the surface looked like he was being inert and 
lazy. I couldn't figure out what he was up to, so I said, "Do some drawing for 
me." OnLife of Pi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/30/life-of-pi-review-film>, one of 
our concept artists dropped out of the production so my son stepped in and did 
some wonderful artwork for us – he designed Pi's life raft. He's 23, but he 
still has a kid kind of head, which was great because he just put some 
chopsticks and a ring together and made a triangular raft.

I left Taiwan to come to America to study drama and then returned home to make 
the biggest movie I've made. It was very emotional for me filming Life of Pi in 
Taiwan. Everybody wanted to help and make it happen. There was a lot of 
spiritual encouragement and financial help, and they invested a lot of love in 
me. It was like coming full circle, going back there. It was a visit and a 
homecoming. Taiwan is like my floating island. It is an island that's not 
recognised as a country; it doesn't have a definite identity. It's a very 
special political situation there: everything's undecided. Floating. It's an 
island, it's oceanic and I've been adrift, floating like Pi, all my life.

I think we all have to grow up and detach from our parents and become 
independent, whether we like it or not. We all have that moment of lost 
innocence and in other ways we refuse to grow up. We want to remain kids and I 
don't think anybody ever really grows up. They always have the kiddie part 
inside them even though they have to face the facts of life and mature.

People ask me why I make different types of film: Jane Austen, Brokeback 
Mountain, and The Hulk. If we had a choice, we'd have many lovers instead of 
sticking to one marriage. I don't get to do that in life [he laughs]. I have 
been married to the same woman.

I love doing different types of film.

My work is all consuming. Over the years we've become used to it. When I am 
working, my family have to see it not as selfish but that we are doing 
something together for the audience or for humankind, whatever – they have 
things in their lives too. But I think there are two types of family 
relationships. One is the physical time you're together. The other I think of 
as spiritual. We all believe in something that can bind us together. My family 
is interested in what I do. A work of art can be uplifting, and I think my 
family sees the value of that.

• Life of Pi <http://www.lifeofpimovie.com/> is out on Blu-ray and DVD from 29 
April
 