
It's great that a record number of women have been awarded Michelin stars this 
year, but if you look at the list and compare it to the men, we're not breaking 
down barriers. There are a lot more women coming in and the industry is 
changing, for the better. It's just that more needs to be done.

Some people have suggested that the increase is due to the fact that Derek 
Bulmer, the previous editor in chief of Michelin UK & Ireland, has been 
replaced by a woman – Rebecca Burr. That's just ridiculous. The Michelin 
inspectors judge on food, not whether or not the chef is a man or not. There 
are more women cooking, therefore, there are more women being judged, and by 
the law of probability, more women getting stars. Admittedly, there are just 11 
women receiving stars at the moment, but I don't think we should be given 
preferential treatment in order to try to even things out. You should be judged 
on how you cook – that alone.

As a female chef, I've been asked about sexism so many times I'm almost bored 
with the question. And to be honest, in over 20 years in the industry I've 
never experienced any kind of sexism. The male chefs I know are happy to have 
women in their kitchen. It's better to have a mix – it changes the atmosphere, 
and men work differently when they are with women, they behave better.

Anyway, there's inequality everywhere. Last year I filmed a TV show, and there 
was only one woman on the crew. The idea that it's just catering, or it's worse 
in this industry, is not right.

There are far more female head chefs out there than people realise – Rachel 
Humphrey at Le Gavroche, Clare Smyth at Royal Hospital Road, Lisa Allen at 
Northcote in Lancashire – you just don't necessarily hear about them, just like 
you don't necessarily hear about all the male chefs. People know me, but they 
don't know my head chef Diego. It's not 50/50 by any stretch, but there are a 
lot more female chefs than there used to be.

And I think we will continue to see that rise. Partly this is because the 
industry now has so much more exposure, with female chefs on TV or writing 
about food and their restaurants being more successful. Being a chef is seen as 
a skilled job. And the hours have become more approachable. You used to have to 
do five doubles – you'd start in the morning and finish late at night, and only 
get two days off a week. Now you get three days, though I think that was 
something that everyone wanted – it had to change, people wanted a life. The 
pay has increased as well, which has probably made a difference to the number 
of women entering the profession.

People are always saying that this industry makes it difficult for women to 
have a family, but I just don't think that's true. This country has some of the 
best maternity laws in the world. There are a lot of female chefs who have 
kids. Hélène Darroze, who has two Michelin stars, has two children, Sally 
Clarke has a child and has run a restaurant for the last 20 years, and Skye 
Gyngell, who has just won a star for Peterhsam Nurseries, has children. If you 
really want them, you make it work. It might be harder in terms of nights, but 
that's when kids are asleep. You have to be more organised, but that applies to 
women in every industry. It is interesting, though, that France and Italy have 
a lot more three-star female chefs, women such as Nadia Santini, Elena Arzak 
and Anne-Sophie Pic. They are often in family-run businesses – father and 
daughter, or husband and wife. I wonder if that makes things easier?

Being a chef is hard – you have to work long hours, late into the night – it's 
antisocial. Perhaps that's why it attracts fewer women? But I don't really 
think that's the case. I think you either want to do it, or you don't, and 
there's nothing standing in your way.
 