
Angela Hartnett <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angela_Hartnett> does not do 
precious. It's not what she is, not how she could ever be. "People get far too 
precious about far too much where food is concerned," she says. "A lot of it 
comes from the very male brigade of cooks. They are just too dogmatic." You 
will not get dogma from Hartnett, either in person or in the recipes she is 
going to be writing for G2 from next week. Yes, she says, she will be focusing 
on seasonal ingredients, but out of no greater principle than that when 
something is in season there's more of it about, and when there's more of it 
about, it's cheaper.

Hartnett – Ange to her friends – resists stuffiness like toddlers resist 
bedtime. We are talking in the drawing room of the fabulous Georgian house in 
Spitalfields, east London, that she has co-owned for the last seven years with 
her brother Michael (a financial whizz who lives in New York), and there is a 
glorious sense of lightly controlled chaos about the place. There are piles of 
magazines that need to be shifted off the squishy sofas before she can sit 
down. Her mad little terrier Alfie is bouncing around the room, barking at 
everything. Downstairs, Diego, the head chef at her Mayfair restaurantMurano 
<http://www.angela-hartnett.com/>, is working on some dishes that need to be 
photographed. She has a book project she must complete, though she can't quite 
recall the title (A Taste of Home, out in July), plus she must think about the 
menus at the nearbyWhitechapel gallery restaurant 
<http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/dining-room>, where she has just become a 
consultant. And, of course, there are her recipes for G2 to plan.

For all that, she seems very relaxed. Perhaps that comes with being her own 
boss. Now 42, she last year parted company with Gordon Ramsay, buying the 
Michelin-starred Murano from him, and on New Year's Eve, relinquished control at
York & Albany <http://www.gordonramsay.com/yorkandalbany/>, the boutique hotel 
and cafe in north London that had also been her responsibility. "It was all 
entirely amicable," she says, and there is no reason to disbelieve her. Almost 
alone among Ramsay's former employees, she has never once said a bad word about 
him publicly. "I worked for Gordon for 17 years, but you get to a point where 
you have to ask yourself, are you going to move on or stay for ever? Gordon's 
great gift is his relationship with his cooks, and I really do wish him well. 
But I simply wanted to be in a position not to have to answer to anyone." She 
does not want to put her name on a worldwide chain of businesses. She has 
Murano and the deal to oversee the food at the Whitechapel gallery. For now, 
she says, that's enough.

I wonder out loud whether she will move away from the kind of fine dining 
restaurants and Michelin stars that have made her name, now that she has left 
the restaurant company that specialised in them. "Absolutely not," she says. "I 
do care about Michelin. I'd love to be the first British-born woman to get two 
stars. You work damn hard, so it's nice for that to be recognised – though I 
don't run my restaurant for the guides." Recently, the Michelin inspectors told 
her she should remove a table to make Murano less crowded. She refused. "I told 
them that if I did that it wouldn't have the buzzy atmosphere I wanted."

So which is the real Angela Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/angelahartnett>? The one expressed 
amid the finery at Murano, or the one who will be sharing her ideas with G2? 
"They are both a part of me. You can do different things. You just have to 
define them well. But if you look at my home and what I do here, that 
throw-it-on-the-table thing, well, that's much more me." That, she says, will 
be the person we'll meet in her new column. "It's easy stuff that you can whack 
together. It's taking the fear out of food."

Are we really afraid of it? Yes, she says. The culture of glossy cookbooks 
full of gastro-porn double-spreads in sexy, backlit saturated colours has 
developed because consumers are desperate to know what the dish they are 
cooking should look like; they are, she says, fearful of it having the wrong 
appearance, when they just need to be far more relaxed. "It commodifies good 
food, turns it into part of a lifestyle for the affluent. I worry that we're 
moving towards a two-tier food culture in this country. I upset a lot of people 
by saying on Radio 4 that British food culture is too based around the south of 
the country, but I think that's true because the south is where the money is."

She wants to democratise things, pull recipe writing away from the domain of 
hard-nosed, kitchen-singed chefs and into the domestic realm. Asked for her 
heroes, she immediately names Delia Smith. "For me Delia is still one of the 
best cooks in the country, because her recipes always work. There's not a chef 
in this country who hasn't stolen a recipe from her." Has she stolen one? "I 
must have done," she replies with a big, throaty laugh.

The recipes in these pages, however, will be all her own. The column kicks off 
next week with mackerel, pickled fennel and harissa. "I love fennel and I love 
mackerel. It's an oily fish, so it can take big flavours, hence the harissa." 
And will she be brow-beating us into getting out the pestle and mortar and 
making our own spicy Moroccan condiment? She laughs again. "Well, you can if 
you like, but let's be honest – you might as well buy it."

And what of her much talked about Italian influences? "Richard Corrigan was 
having a go at me once. He was asking me what I was that day, whether it was 
Irish, Welsh or Italian. But I'm all those things. My father was born in 
Ireland and my mother was born in Wales to Italian parents. It gives me huge 
scope." She pauses. "Look, in my business, everyone's got a thing, a selling 
point. What sells me is the fact that I'm a woman."

It seems too bald a statement. Surely it's about personality; the fact of who 
Hartnett is rather than just the mere accident of chromosomes? She concedes the 
point. "What I'm saying is that while I'm a good chef, that's not necessarily 
what sells me." It's a moment of clear-eyed and rather customary honesty, which 
fades into rather customary modesty. We like Hartnett because of her generosity 
of spirit, her need to feed us. She may have won Michelin stars. She may be an 
expert technician with a famously pitch-perfect palate who knows how to do 
earthy things with fancy ingredients. But we also know that if she were the one 
in charge of our home menu, we would come away from the table with the unique 
feeling of pleasure that comes from having eaten well without breaking sweat in 
the kitchen. Happily for G2 readers, from next week, she will be.
 