
Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> says he’ll field his 
strongest side against fierce rivals Japan on Tuesday.


The Socceroos face Samurai Blue in Osaka on Tuesday in what will be 
Australia’s last outing before kicking off their Asian Cup campaign in January.


Tim Cahill <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tim-cahill> had been in doubt 
after copping a bad knock to his hip on Friday but Postecoglou said the veteran 
would rejoin team training on Monday and indicated he would be fit for the 
clash at Yanmar Stadium.


There is speculation that Japan’s coach Javier Aguirre may not start big name 
players Keisuke Honda, who plays for AC Milan, Borussia Dortmund’s Shinji 
Kagawa and FC Schalke’s Atsuto Uchida, who were all in action in their 6-0 
drubbing of Honduras on Friday.


But Postecoglou says he won’t be doing the same and will put his best XI on 
the filed.


“For us the most important thing is that tomorrow everyone’s available and 
we’ll put our strongest team out there and we also want to continue to give 
some opportunities to some players, even off the bench, to play some quality 
opposition.


“We’re using this as our final preparation and this game is an important part 
of that so we’ll field a strong team.”

The Asian Cup may be just around the corner but Postecoglou is in no rush to 
showAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> are genuine 
title contenders.

Despite Australia’s underwhelming performances since the World Cup, most 
recently against the UAE and Qatar, Postecoglou says he doesn’t feel the need 
to prove they’re realistic Asian Cup contenders on Tuesday.


“No, I think the time to show that will be the first game (against Kuwait),” 
he said.


“Regardless of what we do tomorrow night it’s still about being ready for that 
first game. That’s going to be the important one for us and we want to be ready 
for that tournament so everything in between is just preparation for that.


“Everything else is just a distraction. It’s got nothing to do with what we’re 
thinking or what our focus is. Our focus is to make sure that we’ve got a 
really strong pool of players ready for that first game on 9 January.”

Captain Mile Jedinak remembers all too well the Socceroos extra-time loss to 
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/japan> in the 2011 Asian Cup final 
and the tense draw in their World Cup qualifier in Saitama last year.


But despite Tuesday’s game only being a friendly he says there’s still so much 
on the line for both sides.


“Whenever we have played against Japan it brings out the best in both 
nations,” Jedinak said.


“Whenever we do play we always have that great rivalry and there’s always been 
something at stake, whether it be for three points in a qualifier or like in 
2011 in the Asian Cup final.


“But that doesn’t lessen the significance tomorrow night. It’s an important 
hit out for both teams and I think you’ll see both teams go at it and give it 
their all.


“So it should be another good, strong contest.”
 