
Before Australia's opening matches against Chile and Spain I thought Ange 
Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> should have 
abandoned his favoured possession-based, high-tempo, high-pressing style – 
because both nations execute that very same gameplan better than Australia do – 
in favour of sitting deep and compact and hitting the opposition on the counter.

It gives me tremendous pleasure to say that I have never been more wrong in my 
life. Postecoglou stuck with his ambitious Plan A and his team produced 
football as exciting and dynamic as any seen in Australia’s (admittedly brief) 
life on the world’s biggest stage.

Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> were brave.

But then, we should hardly have been surprised, for that has been true of 
their performance at everyWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> – yes, even the 
frequently and unfairly maligned 2010 campaign, when, apart from 60 minutes 
against an outstanding Germany side, Australia were excellent, bossing Ghana 
despite being down to 10 men for most of the match and eventually drawing 1-1 
after missing numerous clear-cut opportunities to win the game, and beating 
Serbia 2-1.

The group game against Holland last week was arguably the Socceroos’ bravest 
World Cup performance yet, as they excelled in playing a high and hard pressing 
game against a country that helped give birth to that attacking style. But 
Australia lost. Again. And, as Postecoglou acknowledged after that match, 
results matter: “We need to start winning games at this level. 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/news/y=2014/m=6/news=postecoglou-we-re-very-motivated-for-spain-game-2381029.html>
” The aggressive style of play he has taught the Socceroos is not an end in 
itself, but rather a means to an end – winning football matches.

Postecoglou, the first Australian-raised manager to take charge of the 
Socceroos at a World Cup, understands what the Australian public expect from 
their national sports teams: to win, and to do so in an attacking, exciting 
style. The Australian public is used to those expectations being met.


The Australia cricket team doesn’t just win a higher percentage of Test matches
 <http://www.espncricinfo.com/wisdenalmanack/content/story/561557.html> and 
more one-day World Cups than any other cricket-playing nation – they do so 
playing an attacking, crowd-pleasing style of cricket, scoring runs at a rapid 
rate and frequently risking defeat in the pursuit of victory. The Wallabies, 
despite having a tiny pool of players in just two of Australia’s six states to 
draw from, have won as many World Cups as any other rugby-playing nation, and 
have done so practising a style of play that abhors attritional set-pieces and 
tactical kicking in favour of flowing passing backline moves that end in tries.

Having lost, unluckily, to the progenitors of the style of football he is 
seeking to imprint on to the DNA of Australian football, Postecoglou now has 
the opportunity to defeat their most successful children. Spain inherited, via 
Barcelona, the high-pressing, possession-based style of football pioneered by 
Holland in the 1970s and took it to another dimension, using it to achieve what
Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> never could – consistent 
victories at major international tournaments.

This Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> side did what many 
thought to be impossible: they won three consecutive major international 
tournaments – Euro 2008, the 2010 World Cup and Euro 2012 – in an age when 
football has never been more global, more competitive and more professional. 
That they did so in the shadow of a half-century of chronic national choking at 
major tournaments and with a style of play that seemed quaint, if not downright 
naive, in the mid-2000s when it seemed that every team’s desire was a quartet 
of Claude Makéléles in the middle of the park and a giant Luca Toni or Didier 
Drogba up top to lump balls to on the counter, only makes their achievement all 
the more remarkable.

History will judge Spain kindly. I am certain of that. The debate that future 
historians will have is not whether they were the greatest international 
football team of all time, but whether they were the greatest international 
sports team of all time.

Throughout history every great collective human endeavour has been bound 
together by a common philosophy that the individual people who choose to join 
in that endeavour all believe in. With the benefit of hindsight, it is easy to 
see that Spain’s downfall was inevitable from the moment that they inexplicably 
stopped believing in the philosophy that took them to the zenith of the 
sporting world. One of the fundamental tenets of Spain’s possession-based style 
of play was the deployment of either technically proficient strikers capable of 
keeping the ball and fluently linking with the midfield – in Euro 2008 and the 
2010 World Cup that was David Villa and/or Fernando Torres – or, if such 
strikers were not available because of injury or poor form, the deployment of a 
converted midfield technician in their place as a false nine – in Euro 2012, 
that was Cesc Fàbregas.

Spain’s downfall began the moment they started chasing the international 
allegiance of the Brazilian born-and-raised Diego Costa, a tall, strong 
centre-forward of limited technical ability who resembles Luca Toni circa 2006, 
rather than David Villa or Fernando Torres in their prime. Costa has been 
magnificent for a counter-attacking Atlético Madrid side that regards ball 
possession in much the same way thatPope John Paul II regarded contraceptives 
<http://www.catholicsagainstcontraception.com/statements_by_john_paul_ii_1978_1996.htm>
, but his parachuting into a Spain side where ball possession is paramount was 
always going to be a case of a roughly hewn square peg being forced into a 
perfectly circular hole. And so it proved in this World Cup. Costa has not 
scored the goals his inclusion was supposed to deliver and his presence on the 
pitch as the supposed reference point for Spain’s attacks has hindered their 
ability to achieve what was always the sine qua non for the successful 
implementation of their playing philosophy: the retention and high-velocity 
circulation of the ball.

The irony, of course, is that Spain were dumped from the World Cup by a Chile 
side that practised Spain's footballing philosophy more faithfully than they 
did; Chile pressed high and hard from the outset, did their absolute best to 
ensure that the game was played in Spain’s half and were justly rewarded with 
victory. Postecoglou will, undoubtedly, stick to that very same game plan, 
which worked so well forChile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> 
against Spain and is clearly the right one for Australian football in the 
long-term.

The job of a senior football manager is threefold: (1) to devise an effective 
tactical system and teach the players how to implement it; (2) to 
psychologically motivate the players to perform to the best of their ability; 
and (3) to prepare and train the players so that they are in peak physical 
condition for the big games.


A football manager may perform all three of his primary duties to a high 
level, but still lose a game as a result of individual errors made by players 
during the course of a game, which are entirely beyond his control. That’s 
precisely what’s happened to Postecoglou in this World Cup. Every single goal 
Australia have conceded has been the result of a momentary lapse by an 
Australian player doing their utmost to implement Postecoglou’s game plan.

Holland’s first goal was the direct result of centre-back Alex Wilkinson, 
operating the high defensive line favoured by his manager, missing a tackle on 
Arjen Robben near the halfway line, thereby releasing the fleet-footed forward 
into a paddock of space. For Holland’s second goal, left-back Jason Davidson, 
beguiled by Robben’s dangerous diagonal run, broke from his own defensive line 
thereby playing the goalscorer, Robin van Persie, onside. Holland’s third goal 
– which turned out to be the winner – was the most disappointing of the three 
conceded, being the upshot of no less than three individual defensive mistakes: 
both holding midfielders, Matt McKay and Mile Jedinak, were absent from their 
defensive stations in front of the back four, which gave Memphis Depay time and 
space to measure and strike the swerving, inside-out long-range shot that 
keeper Mat Ryan deflected into his own net.

Similarly, in the opposition’s box, Australian players have committed 
individual errors that cost Australia goals, most notably, Tommy Oar’s decision 
to half-cross-half-pass the ball to Mathew Leckie, instead of shooting when 
clean through on goal with only the Dutch keeper Jasper Cillessen to beat.

The Socceroos have done Australia proud and I certainly do not mean to be 
unduly critical of a group of players who have done their absolute best for 
their country. However, it is fair to say that, at this stage in their ongoing 
development, it appears that some these young players lacked that final 
sprinkle of tactical awareness required to successfully execute Postecoglou’s 
ambitious game plan at the highest level. That will come with time and 
experience.

Thus, the challenge facing Postecoglou and Australia's football federation in 
the coming years is to ensure that the country develops players with the 
technical ability and tactical awareness to execute the gameplan they have 
rightly committed Australia to. I am confident that they will.

If they fail to do so, then Australia risk becoming the Rhaegar Targaryen 
<http://awoiaf.westeros.org/index.php/Rhaegar_Targaryen> of the football world 
– as one observer in Game of Thrones put it: “Rhaegar fought valiantly, Rhaegar 
fought nobly, Rhaegar fought honorably. And Rhaegar died.” Fortunately for 
these young Socceroos, the World Cup is not being played on the fictional 
continent known as Westeros and, hence, they will not be risking their lives 
when they walk out to face Spain at the Arena da Baixada in Curitiba. But there 
can be no doubt that they have, and will continue to fight valiantly, nobly and 
honourably. It’s about time they got the win their performances richly deserve.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>
• Follow SB Tang <https://twitter.com/sb_tang> on Twitter
• This article is provided by A Straight Bat 
<http://astraightbat.wordpress.com/>

 