
Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> is aiming to get a full 
90 minutes from skipper Mile Jedinak and hopes for some game time from Mark 
Bresciano in the final World Cup warm-up match against Croatia.


Postecoglou confirmed Jedinak would start the match in Salvador, Brazil on 
Friday (Saturday 9am AEST) – his first outing since suffering a groin injury in 
the last game of the Premier League season on 12May.


"If we can get as close to 90 [minutes] out of him as possible that'd be 
great, but we'll see how he feels," Postecoglou said.


Veteran midfielder Bresciano, who has been recovering from a back complaint, 
joined team training for the first time on Thursday.


A cautious Postecoglou was hoping to give him some minutes against Croatia, 
with theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
opener against Chile looming next week.


"If we can get him some game time tomorrow night that'll be good but as I said 
there are still seven days to go before the first game – and two games beyond 
that at least," he said.


Postecoglou said there were "absolutely" spots up for grabs in the side to 
line up against Chile.

"Hopefully tomorrow night we'll have a strong performance, but we'll still be 
tinkering with the side along the way.


"It's important that the side we pick for that game against Chile is the right 
one, and every training session as well as this game will give us evidence for 
that."


Postecoglou, eager to try midfield variations, will switch Tommy Oar from his 
usual left wing spot to the playmaker role, with Matthew Leckie taking Oar's 
place out wide.

The coach said he planned to keep changing his front third combinations 
throughout Australia's three group matches against Chile, the Netherlands and 
Spain.


"If we can mix things around a bit in midfield and up front, the less chance 
the opposition have to analyse us," he said.


"We've got some real options in the front third, players who can switch 
positions. Tommy is one of those, comfortable through the middle or out on the 
left.


"Well certainly be rotating through that area throughout this World Cup."


Postecoglou said he wanted to test the combination of Alex Wilkinson and 
Matthew Spiranovic in the centre of defence.


Full-back Ivan Franjic rejoined team training on Wednesday for the first time 
since copping a knock to his knee in the Socceroos' farewell game against South 
Africa on 26 May, and insists he is fit.

"I've only missed three sessions, but two of them I have been working with the 
physio and conditioning coach and I've still kept my condition up and still 
feeling very fit and now even fresher," he said.

Franjic is one of six players in Australia's squad with Croatian heritage.


He said once he got over the excitement of making the final squad, his 
attention immediately turned to playing the side he grew up watching.


"You can only dream of these moments and when it becomes a reality you don't 
know what to say," he said.


"Obviously my main focus now is on Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>, it's a big game being Croatian, 
so I'm looking forward to it."


Croatia boast several big names in Real Madrid star Luka Modric, Ivan Rakitic 
of Seville and Bayern Munich's Mario Mandzukic.


But Franjic can't wait to face skipper Darijo Srna, a veteran of 112 caps and 
scorer of one of Croatia's goals in the 2-2 draw againstAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> at the 2006 World Cup.


"Watching them over the years they have great technical players," Franjic said.


"They've got quality all around pitch. If you give them too much space they 
will punish you.


"It will be good to play against my idol, Darijo Srna, who I looked up to when 
I was younger."

Croatia are preparing to take on hosts Brazil in the World Cup opener on 12 
June.

 