
We've hit the season of diets, detox and guilt. But in my opinion, the same 
old adages apply: less is more, and eat everything but in moderation. However, 
salads are way past the days of lettuce, tomato, sliced cucumber and salad 
cream. So if you're after a healthy option, but still want to eat tasty food, 
this week's recipe should hit the spot. If you want to go fat-free, ditch the 
vinaigrette, and season with cumin and a touch of lemon juice instead.

Serves 2

20ml red wine vinegar
½ tsp dijon mustard
100ml olive oil
1 small red onion, peeled and thinly sliced
1 cauliflower
3 large oranges
1 pomegranate
50g raisins
1 tbsp chopped mint
Salt and pepper

Mix the red wine vinegar, mustard and olive oil in a large bowl, season and 
mix well and leave to one side. Add the red onion to the vinaigrette – this 
will allow the vinegar to slightly "cook" the red onion.

Put a pan of salted water on to boil, and prepare the cauliflower by removing 
the stalk and root, and cutting into florets. Add the florets to the boiling 
water and simmer until just cooked. When ready, drain well and immediately, 
while still warm, add it to the vinaigrette. Mix well.

Using a sharp knife, cut away the peel of the orange and slice into segments 
(or if easier, peel and segment by hand). If the oranges are lovely and ripe, 
don't worry too much about removing any of the pith. Prepare the pomegranate 
(it's not the easiest but it's well worth the hassle). Cut the fruit in half, 
then carefully scoop out the seeds. Add the orange and pomegranate to the 
cauliflower, mix well, and add the raisins and mint. Check the seasoning and 
serve.

If making for later, leave in the fridge but remember to remove 15 minutes 
before serving so that it reaches room temperature.

• Angela Hartnett <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/angelahartnett> is 
chef patron at Murano restaurant and consults at the Whitechapel Gallery and 
Dining Room, London

Twitter.com/angelahartnett <http://twitter.com/angelahartnett> 
 