
Angela Eagle and Owen Smith are closing in on a deal in which the MP who 
attracts fewer nominations in the Labour leadership contest will pull out, 
paving the way for a single candidate to take onJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>.

The Guardian understands that they could be preparing to run on a joint 
ticket, in which one would go forward as leader and the other take on a senior 
role such as shadow chancellor.

Sources revealed they have been meeting in an attempt to hammer out an 
agreement after coming under intense pressure from parliamentary colleagues who 
are desperate to avoid “friendly fire” between the candidates, and instead 
focus resources and energy on challenging the party leader.


The pair have made an effort to be complimentary about each other’s talents, 
with both planning a campaign against Corbyn that would focus on the idea of 
the strength of the shadow cabinet team they could build.

It came after Eagle, Smith and Corbyn attended a hustings of the parliamentary 
Labour party at which the MPYvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> asked the two challengers 
if they were prepared to step aside if they won lower levels of support from 
MPs.

Eagle raised a laugh by saying “the person with the fewest nominations is 
Jeremy”. But she then indicated that she was not willing to stand aside, 
arguing that it was about “courage” and not “backroom deals”, telling 
colleagues she had the guts to trigger the contest in the first place.


Owen Smith focuses Labour leadership campaign on tackling inequality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/smith-focus-labour-leadership-campaign-tackling-inequality>
Smith replied that everyone owed a “debt of gratitude to Angela”. He conceded 
that he would stand aside if he had fewer nominations, but is thought to be in 
the lead when it comes to MPs’ support.

Cooper’s intervention came as the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party opened the two-day window 
for non-members to sign up as registered supporters who would be allowed to 
vote in the contest if they pay £25. Members who signed up after 12 January 
will also have to pay £25 if they want to vote. The deadline for sign-ups is 
Wednesday at 5pm.


She is understood to be hoping that Angela Smith, the Labour leader in the 
House of Lords, or a high-profile figure such as Neil Kinnock, could broker a 
more informal ballot of MPs on Monday night or Tuesday morning that could then 
encourage one candidate to step aside, or help inform the formal nominations. 
However, that will be unnecessary if the pair reach an agreement.

“There is one candidate currently on the ballot with no nominations. There are 
two other talented candidates seeking nominations,” Cooper told her party’s MPs 
at the meeting. “I am worried there are too many divisions already in the party 
so we need a single unity candidate.”

Labour needs a debate that will put our party’s house in order | Angela Eagle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/16/angela-eagle-labour-must-save-itself-from-irrelevance>
Jess Phillips, the Birmingham Yardley MP, said she would only offer her vote 
to a candidate who was willing to step down if they attracted fewer 
nominations. “Saving the party is the only thing that matters and the only 
thing that will make a difference to people in my constituency. There can only 
be one candidate and both the candidates should agree that they will step down 
if they have fewer nominations,” she said.

 MPs have been able to nominate the leadership candidates since 7pm on Monday, 
and have until 5pm on Wednesday. However, either Eagle or Smith could come 
under pressure to pull out on Tuesday evening after an update of the names and 
numbers signed up so far is published. It comes amid fears within the 
parliamentary Labour party (PLP) that the issue is preventing MPs from focusing 
their attention on signing up £25 supporters.

A campaign called Saving Labour has been setting up street stalls in about a 
dozen cities and 11 London boroughs to try to persuade disenfranchised former 
Labour members to pay the money in order to vote against Corbyn. Their efforts 
have been supported by the author JK Rowling, who has retweeted supportive 
messages and newspaper articles linked to the campaign to her 7.71 million 
followers. It has also placed newspaper adverts encouraging people to sign up, 
including in Monday’s Guardian.

Corbyn is responding by taking out a full-page advert on the back page of the 
Guardian’s Tuesday edition with the words “I’d rather be fighting the Tories”, 
and saying he has forced the Tories back on policies such as tax credits, 
disability benefit cuts and Sunday trading, and urging his backers to pay the 
money.


Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said: “This advert is about standing up for 
those people who feel they have been wrongly denied a voice in the leadership 
contest by the national executive committee, while at the same time encouraging 
more people to sign up to help us fight to keepJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as Labour leader.”

The grassroots movement Momentum <http://www.peoplesmomentum.com/> is also 
mobilising its support.

At the hustings both Eagle and Smith were cheered into the room, but Corbyn – 
who has faced a vote of no confidence from three-quarters of his MPs – was met 
with silence. He said he had “reached out to the PLP”, which prompted some MPs 
to groan. He also said the party should be proud that under his leadership 
everyone had started to sign up to anti-austerity.

The three faced a series of questions starting from the Bristol West MP 
Thangam Debbonaire, who asked why Labour had never had a female leader. Meg 
Hillier asked if there should be a second EU referendum, while the former 
shadow Scotland secretary, Ian Murray, asked about policies north of the border.

The candidates were also asked about the NHS and junior doctors, and about how 
to reconnect with the working classes. Keith Vaz said there were no non-white 
candidates, and asked what more the party could do to attract the black and 
minority ethnic vote, arguing that it could not be taken for granted.

Asked about the report into antisemitism within Labour by Shami Chakrabarti, 
Eagle said: “I have never known a time when antisemitism, misogyny and hatred 
have been so high in our party. And it should shame us.” She said the 
referendum had opened a “Pandora’s box of division”.

Chris Bryant said he had seen two candidates who could lead the party and 
become prime minister, but said Smith would be the only one to unify the party. 
“Owen said there are no safe seats in Britain today, that majorities of 20,000 
or more were swept away in Scotland,” he said, arguing that the party faced a 
stark choice.

Stephen Doughty, backing Eagle, said: “It was an incredibly strong and 
substantial performance fromAngela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, which is reflective of her 
experience in leadership and serious roles but also her analysis of not only 
the economic challenges we face after the referendum but also how we reach out 
to working voters, especially in the north of the country.”

 * This article was amended on 19 July 2016 to make clear that members who 
signed up to the Labour party after 12 January will also have to pay £25 if 
they want to vote.  