
Dame Anita Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> died 
tonight after suffering a major brain haemorrhage, her family said.

The Body Shop founder died at 6.30pm at St Richard's Hospital in Chichester, 
at the age of 64.

Her husband, Gordon, and daughters Sam and Justine were all with her.

A statement released by her family tonight said Dame Anita had been admitted 
to the hospital's intensive care unit yesterday evening.

It said: "Gordon, Justine and Sam Roddick are very sad to announce that after 
suffering a major brain haemorrhage, Anita Roddick died at 6.30pm this evening 
at the age of 64.

"Anita Roddick was admitted to St Richard's Hospital in Chichester, close to 
her home, yesterday evening when she collapsed after complaining of a sudden 
headache.

"Mrs Roddick was admitted to the hospital's intensive care unit and her 
husband Gordon and two daughters, Sam and Justine, were with her when she died."

In February this year, Dame Anita revealed she was carrying the hepatitis C 
virus.

She said she had been carrying it for more than three decades, but only found 
out two years ago after a blood test.

She made the announcement as she called for hepatitis C to be taken more 
seriously as a "public health challenge"

She said: "What I can say is that having hep C means that I live with a sharp 
sense of my own mortality, which in many ways makes life more vivid and 
immediate.

"It makes me even more determined to just get on with things." 

John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace, said Dame Anita was an 
"incredible woman" who would be "sorely missed".

He said: "She was an amazing inspiration to those around her, not just in 
environmental and human rights issues, which were two of her passions.

"She was so ahead of her time when it came to issues of how business could be 
done in different ways, not just profit motivated but taking into account 
environmental issues.

"When you look at it today, and how every company claims to be green, she was 
living this decades ago.

"She was a true pioneer."

He added: "When you were with her, the energy she radiated was phenomenal. She 
just really stood out in a crowd.

"I will miss her."
 