
If I totted up the amount squandered on my hair over the last 10 years, I'd 
probably have an aneurysm. I've surrendered to the lure of extensions, 
colouring, and permanent straightening. I've bought into "miracle" products 
that promise the world and seldom deliver. My hair envy is so extreme I 
actually attempted to reach out to touch Kelly Rowland's silky straight mane on 
last week's X-Factor. Mine just hangs in a fine limp frizz, and my split ends 
are now starting to get split ends – it's not pretty.

Enter world renowned trichologist Phillip Kingsley, the go-to guy for anything 
follicle related. "It's overlooked, but diet is vital for healthy hair, 
especially protein which is a main part of the hair itself. Because your hair 
follicles are at their weakest first thing in the morning your breakfast should 
include at least one source of protein to replenish. If you go more than four 
hours without eating, factor in some snacks like fruit or raw vegetables into 
your day, because after this time the energy supply to your hair follicles 
depletes," he adds.

So with diet on course, it's over to Paul Edmonds, hairdresser to the stars 
(he's worked with Emma Thompson and Penelope Cruz) who began his career working 
with ethnic hair. "We know the main causes of damaged hair are over using hot 
styling tools, over-brushing, sun damage and over highlighting," he says. "But 
different types of hair are more prone to damage, than others. Afro hair, 
before it's even processed, is more susceptible to damage because the hair 
shaft is flat elliptical shape, which is responsible for the tight curls, 
meaning more opportunities for breakage. When you add relaxing or weaves into 
the equation, they can pull and damage hair if they're done too tight or left 
in for too long. Make sure you go to the best person you can afford for this 
very reason," he warns.

Paul tells me Indian and Middle Eastern hair is generally one of the best hair 
types to have, but I've committed all the cardinal sins with aplomb. "One of he 
main causes of damage with Indian hair is colouring or bleaching it too light a 
level, which strips the moisture or use of henna - although a natural product – 
which causes frizzy parched hair. Oriental hair, tends to be high in protein 
conversely, but low in moisture which is why it's spikier. But although it 
looks strong it will suffer from repetitive perming and over-colouring, so it 
needs nourishing."
 Mason & Pearson Sensitive Brush Sb3 in Dark Ruby Photograph: Product Shot 
Using a specialised conditioner several times a week is vital for anyone 
concerned about damage. Whether it's Cholesterol Cream, coconut or jasmine oil, 
the key is regularity and getting into the mindset of thinking as much about 
your haircare as you do skincare. I wish I'd had this revelation sooner; now 
after a month of intense conditioning, mine is saying three Hail Mary's. I 
honestly can't blame it.

My essential products
 Mizani Iron Curl Cream Photograph: Product Shot 
• Mason & Pearson Sensitive Brush Sb3 in Dark Ruby <> (£58.50) (above)
It's pricey, but a sound one-off investment if your hair needs a little TLC 
and you're prone to brushing too vigourously.
• Mizani Iron Curl  <>(£13.85) 
This heat protecting cream - formulated for afro hair and used in many 
high-end salons - contains rich coconut oil and xylose sugars to protect whilst 
you straighten or curl.
• Shu Uemura Essence Absolue  <>£39.50
Just one pump of this camellia oil pre-blow drying and my hair feels like 
finely spun silk. I'm completely hooked; it's worth every single penny.
 Shu Uemura Essence Absolue Photograph: Product Shot 
Thanks to:
Paul Edmonds <> and Phillip Kingsley <> 

Anita is Beauty Assistant at Stylist Magazine. Next time, Anita tackles this 
season's bright lip trend.
 