 Dame Anita Roddick, the ethical beauty pioneer and environmental campaigner 
who founded the Body Shop and turned it into a global brand, died suddenly 
yesterday after a brain haemorrhage at the age of 64.
Dame Anita, who combined a passion for social change with a natural business 
nous to become one of the leading figures in the environmental movement, died 
at St Richard's hospital, Chichester, surrounded by her family.

In a statement, the family said she collapsed after complaining of a headache 
on Sunday evening. "Gordon, Justine and Sam Roddick are very sad to announce 
that, after suffering a major brain haemorrhage,Anita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> died at 6.30 this evening 
at the age of 64," the statement said. "Mrs Roddick was admitted to the 
hospital's intensive care unit and her husband Gordon and two daughters, Sam 
and Justine, were with her when she died."

The prime minister paid tribute to Dame Anita last night, calling her one of 
the country's "true pioneers".

"She campaigned for green issues for many years before it became fashionable 
to do so, and inspired millions to the cause by bringing sustainable products 
to a mass market," Gordon Brown said. "She will be remembered not only as a 
great campaigner, but also as a great entrepreneur."

Tributes also poured in from activists, and environmentalists. John Bird, the 
founder of the Big Issue magazine sold by the homeless, called Dame Anita the 
mother of the publication, after she helped to set it up in 1990. "There is 
absolutely no way the Big Issue would have happened if Anita and her husband 
Gordon hadn't started a business that created a social engine that drove people 
like us to get creative," Mr Bird said.

It was also in 1990 that Dame Anita set up Children on the Edge, a charity for 
children in eastern Europe and Asia affected by conflicts, disabilities and 
HIV/Aids, after visiting Romanian orphanages.

In February, she called for hepatitis C to be taken more seriously as a 
"public health challenge", revealing that she had contracted the virus from a 
blood transfusion while giving birth to her youngest daughter, Sam, in 1971. As 
a consequence she suffered from cirrhosis of the liver. "What I can say is that 
having hep C means that I live with a sharp sense of my mortality, which in 
many ways makes life more vivid and immediate. It makes me even more determined 
to just get on with things."

A child of Italian migrants, Dame Anita said her sense of natural justice was 
stirred by reading a book about the Holocaust at the age of 10.

She opened the first Body Shop in Brighton in 1976 with the help of a £4,000 
loan, hoping to provide some income for herself and her two daughters while her 
husband was abroad.

Dame Anita, a former teacher who had also worked for the UN, said she had no 
training or business acumen, but had decided that the products should be 
natural, sold in reusable containers and bear handwritten labels. The shop was 
painted green because it was the only paint that would cover the damp, mouldy 
walls.

Her innovation chimed with the emergence of a global green consciousness. "The 
original Body Shop was a series of brilliant accidents," she said later. "It 
had a great smell, it had a funky name ... It was incredibly sensuous. We 
recycled everything, not because we were environmentally friendly, but because 
we didn't have enough bottles."

In 1984, when it floated on the London Stock Exchange, the Body Shop was 
valued at £8m, but that rapidly rose to £300m. By 2004, the chain had more than 
77 million customers across the globe and was the second most trusted brand in 
the UK.

In one of her last interviews, published earlier this month, Dame Anita made 
light of the idea of retiring, saying: "I don't even understand the word. 
Campaigning is in my DNA."
 