
In the windowpane above Ann Patchett’s desk is a small steel and enamel sign 
that reads: “What good shall I do this day?” This simple dictum is the engine 
of Patchett’s world, both on the page and off. In the Orange prize‑winningBel 
Canto, <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bel-canto-4.html> comradeship, love 
and creativity bloom among terrorists and hostages; in 2011’s artfulState of 
Wonder <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/state-of-wonder.html>, a sensible 
research scientist faces not just the snakes and other terrors of the Amazonian 
jungle, but the dragon of her former medical lecturer.

“I have been shown so much kindness in my life, so for me to write books about 
good, kind people seems completely natural,” Patchett says. “When people say, 
‘Oh it’s too nice, it’s naive,’ I just think: who killed your mother?”

It violates a literary taboo to write fiction that suggests people might be 
fundamentally good. For the 52-year-old Patchett, however, the real taboo was 
writing about her family.Commonwealth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/commonwealth-428577.html>, her seventh novel, 
published this week, spans 50 years and two families, the Cousinses and the 
Keatings, whose common fate is set in motion at a gin-soaked christening party 
where Albert Cousins kisses Beverley Keating.

Commonwealth by Ann Patchett review – it started with a kiss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/29/commonwealth-ann-patchett-review>
Today, the good that Patchett will do involves picking up a journalist from 
Nashville’s airport and devoting her whole day to zipping around town in her 
little silver Prius, showing said journalist her world. Even if she hadn’t 
published an essay, “The Mercies”, about her schooling with the Sisters of 
Mercy, you might guess that Patchett had been raised by nuns. She exudes that 
sleeves-rolled, get-on-with it capability, paired with the clarity and 
occasional ferocity of true righteousness. To watch her in action is to hear 
the Mother Abbess fromThe Sound of Music singing, “Climb Ev’ry Mountain”. 
Patchett climbs every mountain, but she will also mutter an occasional, and 
deliciously un-nun-like, “fuck!”

What do you do when the bookstores in your hometown all shut down? If you’re 
Patchett, you open one yourself. In 2011, she foundedParnassus Books 
<http://www.parnassusbooks.net/>, an idyll in a strip mall, with her business 
partner, Karen Hayes. She has since become a rallying voice for independent 
bookstores.

You cannot come in, then go home and buy the book on Amazon. If you do, I will 
hunt you down

“I feel that writers are treated like orchids: they keep us in the hothouse, 
they mist us and attend to our every need, but if this system is going to work, 
if we are going to survive, we need to come out of the hothouse and take 
responsibility for ourselves and for the health of the industry.”

She takes a firm line. When customers visit the bookstore and tell her Amazon 
is cheaper: “I’m like, ‘You cannot come in, soak up what we have, talk to the 
staff, get recommendations, then go home and buy the book on Amazon. If you do, 
I will hunt you down and smack you around.’ Somehow,” she adds with a grin, 
“Ann Patchett can say that in a way that your regular bookstore owner can’t.”

She leads the way to the offices at the back, where young women work with dogs 
at their feet and on their laps. One of the clerks pokes her head around the 
door and tells Patchett that there’s an Australian fan here who would really 
like to meet her.

“All right, here we go,” and Patchett heads out to the floor to sign four 
copies for her fan. Later, she tells me that when people tell her how much they 
love her books, “I’m smiling, and I’m grateful, but I almost don’t know what 
they’re talking about. It’s so far away, and what I am thinking at that moment, 
is: I hope I am fixing my face in a way that I look engaged and grateful.”

She and her husband, the surgeon Karl Vandevender, talk about “Ann Patchett” 
in the third person, as do her friends and colleagues at the bookstore. 
“They’ll say: ‘Oh, we needAnn Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> for something’, and I’ll go: 
‘I’ll see if I can conjure her up’. ‘Ann Patchett’,” she says definitively, “is 
the brand. I’ve got to put that away at the end of the day.”

All of her novels, she explains, are the same story: a group of people are 
thrown together and must forge connections to survive. “I’ve been writing the 
same book my whole life – that you’re in one family, and all of a sudden, 
you’re in another family and it’s not your choice and you can’t get out.” 
Finally, she asked herself: “I wonder if I wrote the story that I’m so 
carefully not writing, if I might be free of it?”

I wonder, if I wrote the story that I’m so carefully not writing, might I be 
free of it?

As soon as she began working on Commonwealth, the story of her own parents’ 
divorce and her subsequent life with stepsiblings, she announced her intentions 
to her family. That’s brave, I say.

“Yeah, it is. It was also really smart.” She told them: “‘I don’t want to cut 
off a part of my life any more. I don’t want to not have access to my own 
experience because I don’t want to put anybody out. I want to be able to grow. 
And, I feel, until I get this done, I’m not going to grow.’ And everybody said: 
‘You go, girl!’”

Patchett concedes that, until this point, she’d been “very 
self-congratulatory” over not having written a book about her family, which 
“seemed like the weak, easy thing to do”. Then she read an essay by Jonathan 
Franzen in which he insisted that the novelist has to do what scares him the 
most and, for him, that had been writing about his family. “When I read that, I 
thought: oh, nothing would scare me more. I would happily ride down the Amazon 
in a canoe and deal with snakes [as she did to researchState of Wonder] rather 
than face my family.”

In the title essay of her 2013 non-fiction collection, This Is the Story of a 
Happy Marriage 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-is-the-story-of-a-happy-marriage-2.html>
, she details the lineage of divorce in her own family, including her own at 
the age of 25, and her eventual marriage to Vandevender. There is a sense in 
that essay, which moves in steady, clear-eyed increments, of a writer willing 
herself into facing and articulating hard truths, of which this is paramount: 
“Divorce is the history lesson, that thing that must be remembered in order not 
to be repeated. Divorce is the rock upon which this church is built.”

She recalls sweat pouring down her face as she wrote it, while she experienced 
the distinct sensation that she was “sitting in the middle of the highway in 
the dark, with a legal pad, thinking: I’m going to get squashed by a truck”.

She writes candidly, for example, that she, her sister and their stepsiblings 
“weren’t the products of our parents’ happy marriages: we were the flotsam of 
their divorces”. InCommonwealth, that flotsam is the “fierce little tribe” of 
the six Cousins and Keating children, each of whom corresponds to her own 
stepsiblings.

“It’s like chess pieces,” she says, as she explains that each character stood 
in for a real family member. In this way, “it was very easy for me to keep 
track of everyone over 50 years. And really, I gave everybody a better life, by 
a large margin. The people in the book somehow represented my dearest wishes 
for all the people.”

It’s dedicated to Mike Glasscock, her stepbrother, reimagined here as Albie, 
the youngest, whom the others find so annoying that they drug him with Benadryl 
to make him sleep for hours. Years later, as a bike messenger and recovering 
heroin user, Albie chances upon a novel calledCommonwealth by a writer called 
Leo Posen. He realises it is about two families, his own, about “the 
inestimable burden of their lives: the work, the houses, the friendships, the 
marriages, the children, as if all the things they’d wanted and worked for had 
cemented the impossibility of any sort of happiness”. He wonders: “Isn’t that 
what everyone wants, just for a moment to be unencumbered?”

With every book I think: well, if this one’s really successful, maybe I won’t 
have to make dinner any more

“It’s certainly my selfish desire,” Patchett laughs. Franny, whom “the nuns 
had led to believe that God gave preference to people who did things the hard 
way”, is a cocktail waitress when she first meets the famous novelist Posen. 
(“Who wants to have a novel about a novelist?” Patchett groans. “But that’s the 
way it turned out.”) He becomes so drunk that she must help him up to his hotel 
room, where he has “only enough time left to ask for one more favor, which 
Franny thought was the deepest difference between women and men”. Later, that 
dynamic is amplified in scenes set in the Hamptons, Long Island, where Franny 
finds herself expected to single-handedly make dinner and drinks for growing 
hordes of Posen’s guests. They’re some of the funniest of the book.

“You wanna talk about which part of this book is autobiographical?” Patchett 
says. “That part. How exhausting it is, as a woman, to always be the one who 
has to make the food and change the beds. No matter how enlightened, how much 
of a feminist I am, I am still doing all of it. [With] every book I think: 
well, if this one’s really successful, maybe I won’t have to make dinner any 
more,” she laughs. “Maybe I’ll finally understand how to not do this any more, 
because it’s my fault. It’s not only gender, but the 12 years of Catholic 
school and being trained to be a good servant. I believe in this, I really 
believe that the greatest thing you can do is to serve.”

“Oh, if I could free myself from the tyranny of good deeds,” she mock‑laments. 
“Oh, there would be no stopping me. I could be Tolstoy without good deeds. I 
could really be something.”

Over lunch she tells me that she read a Charles Bukowski poem that morning 
that ends “those who/ succeed/ know/ this secret:/ there isn’t/ one.” It’s 
stayed with her, perhaps because writing, more than any other art form, is 
susceptible to “rules”, chief among them being to write every day.

“Don’t you think men are the ones that always say that?” she says. “I’m not 
sure I’ve heard a woman say you have to write every day. They’re too busy 
making dinner. I go through long periods of time when I don’t write, and I’m 
fine. Writing is an amazing place to hide, to go into the rabbit hole and pull 
the trap door down over your head. I want to have time in my life when I don’t 
have that cover.”

She also insists that “there are things that are a lot more important than me 
writing a novel”. For example: “If somebody said, OK, you can either write five 
more great novels, or you can make sure that the people who work in bookstores 
have health insurance and have some place to go if they need help because 
they’re broke. At this point I might really go for the good. Nothing fuels the 
good of the world like happiness, and the thing that makes me feel really alive 
is figuring out how I can frighten other people into doing good.”

• To order Commonwealth for £15.57 (Bloomsbury, RRP £18.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/commonwealth-428578.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 