
The boyfriend and psychiatrist of the late Playboy model Anna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith> have been found guilty 
of conspiring to give her excessive amounts of painkillers, antidepressants and 
other prescription drugs.

Smith's former boyfriend and lawyer Howard K. Stern was convicted by a Los 
Angeles jury yesterday of giving false names and acting by fraud to obtain 
prescriptions. He was acquitted of other charges.

Her former psychiatrist Khristine Eroshevich was convicted of conspiracy and 
unlawfully prescribing Vicodin by fraud.

A second doctor, Sandeep Kapoor, was acquitted on all charges.

The trio had all pleaded not guilty to multiple charges of fraudulently 
providing drugs and controlled substances to a known addict. The former topless 
model died of an accidental overdose in 2007 aged 39.

The prescriptions were issued between June 2004 and January 2007, just weeks 
before Smith's death.

When she died, investigators found more than 600 pills – including about 450 
muscle relaxants – were missing from prescriptions that were no more than five 
weeks old. Ultimately, it was a syrup, the powerful sleeping aid chloral 
hydrate, that was blamed with tipping the balance in the toxic mix of drugs and 
causing her death.

Stern and Eroshevich remain free pending a hearing on January 6 in which the 
defence can file a motion for a new trial.

If the motion is denied, the judge can sentence both defendants, but it was 
not immediately clear how much prison time, if any, they could face.

Smith was best known for having married the Texas oil tycoon J Howard Marshall 
II, who was 63 years her senior, in 1994. They met when she was 23 at Gigi's 
strip club in Houston where she worked as a dancer. After his death the 
following year she was drawn into a lengthy legal battle over the settlement of 
his $1.6bn fortune.

When she died on February 8 2007, her legal battle for a share of the estate 
was ongoing. It has been carried forward by Stern, the executor of her estate. 
The US Supreme Court recently agreed to hear another challenge in the case.
 