 Silly, isn't it? Even though, in many respects, Anna Nicole Smith was every 
bit the sorry slapper she was held to be, hearing of her death was a poignant, 
Marilyn moment.
Like the actress she modelled herself on, here was another American beauty who 
had graced glossy covers and trodden red carpets but, still, was felled before 
40; alone, a tawdry end and already, you can bet, the subject of fierce 
negotiations for horrid little biopics. For, as contemporary tragedies go, they 
don't go better than hers.

She was a Southern girl, a Texan, born never to stand a chance. I should say, 
here, that I love the American South - so much so that I live there part-time - 
but I nevertheless lament the deal it affords many of its young women.

On the face of it, it's strange that it is Bible-belt Texas that has the 
highest divorce rate in the US; in fact, it's all too obvious. The God-fearin' 
that disallows sex outside marriage leads directly to priapic young men 
dragging schoolgirls down the aisle, only to find that - guess what? - 'things' 
don't work out.

And so the Anna Nicoles, married at 16, mothers at 17, alone at 18 with two 
mouths to feed and a fiendishly limited choice: either the white-trash trailer 
park or the open road to try for better.

This Anna Nicole - or, as she was then, plain little Vickie Lynn Hogan - tried.

Her road took her to Houston, to the topless bars and the showgirl scene and, 
yes, to the drink and drugs that went with that. For all of which, no doubt, 
she would have been forgiven.

What would never be forgiven, however, was her marriage, at 26, to oilman J 
Howard Marshall, 89, who elected to spend much of his £800m on his bride before 
and, through his will, after his death.

'Gold-digging' plays badly, out there in Smalltown. The liberals like their 
courtesans to be victims, crestfallen, helpless; the Christian right doesn't 
like 'em at all.

Never mind that you might think, an old rascal with the wit to accumulate such 
sums is quite capable of a rational choice to blow the lot on going out with a 
smile on his face, Anna Nicole was bludgeoned with a hostility that worsened 
when he died 14 happy months later.

I thought then and still do that the root was envy; no man is too modern to 
wish he had Marshall's money to spend the same way, no women too modern to wish 
that at least she'd been asked, but the hypocritical fruit of the envy was 
relentless. When Anna Nicole gave birth, five months ago, her adored grown-up 
son, Daniel, visited them in hospital; there, as she held her three-day-old 
baby girl, he died of an overdose in front of her. Post-partum depression, 
anybody?

There was, even then, no sympathy. Within hours, lurid magazine covers flooded 
bookstalls; in the absence of any real ammunition, they settled for suggesting 
that she wasn't showing 'proper' grief.

Ten days before she died, Anna Nicole gave her last television interview. She 
said she was 'tired, really tired' and pleaded that all she had ever tried to 
do was 'make something' of herself.

And so she did, this not very bright, not very gifted, gutsy young woman; she 
tried harder than most of us ever will. RIP, y'all.

· Cristina Odone is away
 