
Anna Nicole Smith's boyfriend Howard K Stern and two doctors have been charged 
with giving thousands of prescription drugs to the former Playboy Playmate in 
the years leading up to her fatal drug overdose in 2007.

Stern and doctors Sandeep Kapoor and Khristine Eroshevich were yesterday each 
charged with three felony counts of conspiracy and several other charges of 
fraudulent prescriptions. Prosecutors said the doctors gave the drugs, 
including opiates and sedatives, to Stern, who then gave them to Smith.

The prescriptions were issued between June 2004 and January 2007, just weeks 
before Smith's death.

"These individuals repeatedly and excessively furnished thousands of 
prescription pills toAnna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith>, often for no 
legitimate medical purpose," California Attorney General Jerry Brown said in a 
statement.

Brown's spokesman, Scott Gerber, told The Associated Press that Stern and 
Kapoor surrendered last night and posted $20,000 bond, and that Eroshevich will 
hand herself in on Monday. An arraignment date was not set.

The medical examiner's office has said Eroshevich, a Los Angeles psychiatrist 
and friend of the starlet's, authorised all the prescription medications found 
in the Hollywood, Florida, hotel room where the 39-year-old Smith was found 
unresponsive shortly before her death in February 8, 2007.

Eroshevich's attorney, Adam Braun, acknowledged his client wrote some of the 
prescriptions using fictitious names for Smith, but said that the intent wasn't 
to commit fraud.

"It was done for privacy reasons," Braun told the AP. "She did the best she 
could under difficult circumstances in the best interest of the patient."

Braun said Eroshevich began treating Smith following the death of the 
playmate's son in September 2006. The doctor traveled on several occasions over 
a six-month period to the Bahamas where Smith was living with Stern and wrote 
the prescriptions.

The criminal complaint also alleges Kapoor wrote prescriptions for Smith under 
a patient alias Michelle Chase. Prosecutors allege the doctor gave her 
excessive amounts of sleep aids, opiates, muscle relaxants and methadone-like 
drugs used to treat addiction, knowing she was an addict.

Messages left with attorneys for Stern and Kapoor were not immediately 
returned.

Brown said Eroshevich and Kapoor "violated their ethical obligations as 
physicians, while Mr. Stern funneled highly addictive drugs to Ms. Smith."

The criminal complaint includes eight other felony charges, including 
obtaining fraudulent prescriptions and unlawfully prescribing a controlled 
substance. In all, Stern faces six felonies and the doctors each are charged 
with seven. Prosecutors did not immediately know how many years in prison they 
faced if convicted.

Rumors swirled for weeks after Smith's death, but police cleared those around 
Smith of any wrongdoing and the medical examiner's probe deemed it an 
accidental overdose.

Because the playmate was found unresponsive in a hotel on American Indian 
land, the case was handled by tribal police and their exemption from public 
records laws kept most of the investigation from being made public.

Documents obtained by The Associated Press after Smith's death showed 
Eroshevich authorized all 11 prescription medications found in the model's 
hotel room the day she died. Most of the drugs were prescribed in the name of 
Stern, her lawyer-turned-companion, and none were prescribed in Smith's own 
name.

More than 600 pills - including about 450 muscle relaxants - were missing from 
prescriptions that were no more than five weeks old. Ultimately, it was a syrup 
- the powerful sleeping aid chloral hydrate - blamed with tipping the balance 
in the toxic mix of drugs and causing her death.

Stern, who initially claimed he was the father of Smith's infant daughter, 
Dannielynn, appeared distraught as he spoke last year at a memorial marking the 
one-year anniversary of Smith's death.

"Few people who knew Anna might not realise how smart she actually was because 
unless she wanted you to know you didn't know," Stern said.

Stern, who came to the Bahamas with Smith during her pregnancy in 2006, gave 
up custody of Dannielynn in spring 2007 after DNA tests proved Smith's 
ex-boyfriend Larry Birkhead was the father.

Dannielynn has been named the sole heir of her late mother's estate, with 
Birkhead and Stern as co-trustees. Dannielynn could inherit millions of dollars 
if the estate wins an ongoing court fight over the oil fortune of Anna Nicole's 
late second husband, J. Howard Marshall.
 