 The former topless model and potential heiress Anna Nicole Smith died of an 
accidental overdose of prescription drugs, according to the results of an 
autopsy released yesterday.
The findings put an end to at least one area of speculation over the lurid 
life and death of the 39-year-old, who was found in a Florida hotel on February 
8. The release of the findings had been delayed after investigators found 
methadone and other drugs in the fridge of the hotel room where Smith was 
staying. There were also suggestions that police had found incriminating 
material on two computers.

But Seminole police chief Charlie Tiger told reporters in Florida: "This case 
is an accidental overdose with no other criminal elements present ... There was 
no evidence of illegal drugs. We found nothing to indicate any foul play."

Whether the findings will do anything to diminish the legal wrangling over 
Smith's potential estate and the plight of her baby daughter remains to be 
seen. The paternity of Dannielyn, who is nearly seven months old, is being 
contested by several parties in courts in the Bahamas and California. DNA was 
taken from Smith and from the child last week.

A tussle still continues over Smith's body. Last month a Florida judge ruled 
against Smith's estranged mother and awarded control of the body to a 
court-appointed advocate representing the interests of her daughter. That 
decision resulted in Smith being buried in the Bahamas, alongside her son. But 
lawyers representing her mother, Virgie Arthur, have said they intend to make 
further efforts to have the body reburied in Texas. Smith's son, Daniel, died, 
aged 20, in the Bahamas of an apparent drug overdose on September 10 last year. 
An inquest is pending.

Smith married the Texas oil tycoon J Howard Marshall II in 1994. They met at 
Gigi's strip club in Houston where she worked as a dancer. She was 23, he was 
89. Just over a year later, Marshall died, leaving a $500m estate and creating 
a legal battle between his son, E Pierce Marshall, and Smith. The US supreme 
court ruled in May last year that Smith did have the right to pursue the half 
of the fortune she claimed in federal courts. E Pierce Marshall died a month 
later. If Smith is granted a share in the fortune, it will pass to Dannielyn.
 