
Anna Nicole Smith's boyfriend and psychiatrist have been found guilty of 
conspiring to give the late Playboy model drugs.

After a two month trial, a Los Angeles court convicted Howard K Stern and 
Khristine Eroshevich for conspiring to give her excessive amounts of 
painkillers, antidepressants and other prescription drugs.

They were both acquitted of other charges. A second doctor, Sandeep Kapoor, 
was acquitted on all charges.

Stern, Eroshevich and Kapoor, had all pleaded not guilty to multiple charges 
of fraudulently providing drugs and controlled substances to a known addict.

The three were not charged over the death of Smith, who was best known for 
marrying an 89-year-old oil Texan oil billionaire, J Howard Marshall, when she 
was 26.

She died on 8 February 2007 at age 39 from an accidental prescription drug 
overdose. At the time of her death, her legal battle for a share of the $1.6 
billion fortune of her late husband was ongoing. It has been carried forward by 
Stern, the executor of Smith's estate.

The jury reached its split verdict after 13 days of deliberations following a 
trial that saw the judge criticise prosecutors for being overly aggressive and 
throw out some of the original charges.

Prosecutors said the three defendants conspired to provide Smith with a 
cocktail of painkillers, muscle relaxants, anti-depressants and anti-anxiety 
drugs by writing or seeking prescriptions using several false names.

Defence lawyers said their clients cared for Smith and would not harm her, and 
argued she used the drugs to help her sleep and control severe pain.

After his acquittal, Kapoor said: "This is not just a victory for me, but for 
patients everywhere who suffer chronic pain."

His lawyer Ellyn Garofalo said it also was a victory in some ways for Smith. 
"The jury found she was not an addict," Garofolo said.

The only conviction against Stern was for giving false names and acting by 
fraud to obtain prescriptions. Along with conspiracy, Eroshevich was convicted 
of unlawfully prescribing Vicodin by fraud.

Stern and Eroshevich now face a hearing on 6 January 2011 in which their 
defence lawyers can file a motion for a new trial. If the motion is denied, the 
judge can sentence both defendants, but it was not immediately clear how much 
prison time, if any, they could face.

Stern, 41, had been Smith's lawyer, manager, lover and friend since they met 
in 2001. Testimony showed they were inseparable, even when she was involved 
with other men. In 2006, Smith donned a wedding gown, and she and Stern had a 
commitment ceremony on a catamaran off the Bahamas. They exchanged rings and 
vows but were never legally married.

At the heart of the drug case was the question of whether Smith became 
dependent on opiates and sedatives after being diagnosed and treated for 
chronic pain syndrome and illnesses including seizures, migraines and spinal 
pain.

Superior Court Judge Robert Perry told the jury of six women and six men that 
a doctor who has a good faith belief that a patient is in pain is not guilty of 
a crime for prescribing controlled substances to relieve suffering.

While presenting their case, prosecutors displayed multiple prescriptions to 
Smith for heavy painkillers such as Dilaudid, Demarol, Vicodin and methadone, 
as well as anti-anxiety drugs and sedatives including Ambien, Xanax, Valium and 
Chloral Hydrate. In one month, they said, Smith received 1,500 pills.

The judge, however, warned that numbers of pills were not the measure of 
addiction.

"To violate (the law) a defendant must willfully and knowingly prescribe, 
administer or dispense a controlled substance to an addict for a 
non-therapeutic purpose," Perry instructed the jury.

The story of Smith's final years stretched from Los Angeles to the Bahamas 
with stops along the way in South Carolina and Florida, where her overdose 
death at the age of 39 was ruled accidental.

The two doctors also were close to Smith during her final years, and their 
lawyers portrayed them as angels of mercy trying to help her before and after 
she gave birth to her daughter by caesarean then quickly lost her 20-year-old 
son, Daniel, to a drug overdose.

He died in her hospital room after coming to visit his new half-sister on 10 
September 2006. Smith later named the baby Dannielynn in his memory.

Stern initially claimed the baby was his until DNA tests made clear the father 
was photographer Larry Birkhead, who now has custody of the child.

Defence attorney Steve Sadow, who represents Stern, said Smith was the love of 
his client's life and he would never harm her. He also stressed that Stern was 
not a doctor and was relying on medical professionals to do the right thing for 
Smith.

Stern's name was on a number of prescriptions which prosecutors said were 
intended for Smith.

Kapoor, 42, who was Smith's internist, wrote numerous prescriptions for 
opiates and sedatives during the period he treated her. His lawyer said he 
followed a drug regime originated by Smith's previous doctor who sold his 
practice to Kapoor.

Prosecutors Renee Rose and David Barkhurst argued that Kapoor blurred the line 
between patient and doctor when he was photographed kissing her at a party. 
They also pointed to a diary in which Kapoor discussed the "mesmerising" 
experience of riding with her in a gay pride parade and wondered: "Can she ruin 
me?"

Eroshevich, 63, was Smith's neighbour and friend before treating her as a 
psychiatrist. Prosecutors claimed the friendship was a violation of 
professional ethics and called a pharmacist who testified the amount of drugs 
Eroshevich requested for Smith at one point would have amounted to 
pharmaceutical suicide.

The pharmacist refused to fill the request, and prosecutors showed Eroshevich 
used other pharmacies to get most of the drugs and took them to Smith in the 
Bahamas.

They also showed jurors photos of Eroshevich naked in a bathtub with Smith as 
they contended the doctor also lost her objectivity about treatment.

Attorney Brad Brunon, who represents Eroshevich, said prosecutors were trying 
to prejudice jurors with something irrelevant.

"People on the ground saw her as caring for Anna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith>," Brunon said of 
Eroshevich. "And what is her reward? She's dragged through this, her name is 
ruined, and she's publicly humiliated."
 