
Anna Calvi And The Heritage Orchestra, London

From her beginnings as a kind of Polly Harvey/Jeff Buckley hybrid, Anna Calvi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/anna-calvi> is moving to a place that feels 
a bit more St Vincent-y, her songs now increasingly focused on her ability to 
shred hard on the electric guitar. The mixture of passionate vocals and 
resourceful playing displayed on her two albums to date has not only attracted 
the attention of Morrissey (who Calvi has just finished supporting on tour), 
but also Brian Eno and David Byrne, about as close as the world of avant garde 
pop gets to an old boys’ network. Undoubtedly Calvi is in the right place at 
the right time, with the right skills. All it seems like she’s in need of now 
are a few rather more memorable songs.

St John At Hackney Church 
<http://www.songkick.com/concerts/21832983-anna-calvi-at-st-john-at-hackney-church>
, E5, Sat

JR

The Game, On tour

Perhaps a leopard really can change its spots. Generally one of the most 
argumentative of rappers – beef for breakfast, lunch and dinner – The Game 
released a single called Don’t Shoot in the wake of the death of Michael Brown 
in Ferguson, featuring an impressive lineup of guest stars including Diddy and 
Rick Ross. All a bit of a change of pace for the artist born Jayceon Taylor; 
this is someone whose gruff delivery has for around 10 years sought to revive 
West Coast gangsta rap as Dr Dre first imagined it, falling out with nearly 
everyone he’s met along the way. In truth, he’s struggled to match his strong 
second album The Documentary, but has continued to do creditable business even 
so. With a sequel to the album slated for next year, a return to form may be 
possible yet.

Various venues <http://www.ticketmaster.co.uk/Game-tickets/artist/945450>

JR

The Who, On tour

Death and other issues notwithstanding, the Who have rarely lost track of what 
it is their fans want from them. Now, 50 years since they formed, the band 
sound completely engaged: celebrating their anniversary not only with this 
comprehensive tour, but also a new song in Be Lucky, their first for eight 
years. As well as quality Who tropes such as Pete Townshend’s vibrant guitar 
thrashing and Roger Daltrey’s customarily straining vocals, it features some 
idiosyncratic lyrics, mentioning AC/DC and - presumably to show they’re still 
paying attention - Daft Punk. The band have never been shy about revisiting 
their past material, finding new ways to reboot heavy concept albums from Tommy 
to Quadrophenia, so a trip down the memory lane of their greatest hits surely 
won’t be too taxing for them.

Various venues <http://thewho.com/tour/>

JR

Goodiepal, Colchester

Kristian Vester, AKA Faroese artist Goodiepal, has been making mischief in 
experimental art and music circles for years. He once used his work to declare 
intellectual war against the Royal Danish Academy Of Music (he used to teach at 
the academy’s electronic music department), and travels to shows on a homemade 
electricity-producing bike (which he sold to the National Gallery Of Denmark 
earlier this year). Whatever he performs at this annual Colchester show, be it 
a lecture or a set by his delicate self-built mechanical birds, you can 
guarantee it will be funny and illuminating, weaving in elements of spoken 
word, electronic manipulations, and curious DIY sound-making devices.

Colchester Arts Centre <http://www.colchesterartscentre.com/>, Fri

JA

Curtis Stigers, London

Even sworn enemies of smooth crooners mooching around Broadway ballads can 
have a change of heart when they hear Curtis Stigers, the one-time pop star who 
went back to his jazz roots in his 30s. Stigers’s voice has the right smoky, 
small-hours rasp for his favourite material, but he also has a sense of humour 
and no visible shred of vanity, foregrounding jazz both in his own bluesy 
sax-playing, and the space he grants his sidemen. Meanwhile, his 2012 album, 
Let’s Go Out Tonight, revealed just how soulfully authentic an interpreter of 
classic blues songs he can be. This year, he’s back with an upbeat show of 
classic Broadway songs from the album Hooray For Love, although a version of 
You Don’t Know What Love Is is proof of how unsentimentally moving this 
deceptively laidback artist continues to be.

Ronnie Scott’s <http://www.ronniescotts.co.uk/>, W1, Sat & Sun

JF

The Royal Opera: Un Ballo In Maschera, London

Before Verdi’s Un Ballo In Maschera even reached the stage in 1859, the 
composer had been forced to shift its historical setting to avoid falling foul 
of the Neapolitan censors. Originally set in Sweden at the time of Gustav III’s 
assassination, the action was moved to 17th-century colonial America. Since 
then, directors have relocated the opera as they fancied. Calixto Bieito’s 
notorious ENO production in 2002 transplanted it to 1970s Spain; the Royal 
Opera’s last production, first seen in 2005, set the work during the American 
civil war; while this new one will be set in the years before the first world 
war. The director is Katharina Thoma, whose production of Strauss’s Ariadne Auf 
Naxos at Glyndebourne last year caused a stir by shifting the opera to Britain 
during the blitz, and this Ballo is bound to raise some eyebrows, too.

Royal Opera House <http://www.roh.org.uk>, W2, Thu to 17 Jan

AC
 