
Anne Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson>, the 
dark lady of teatime television and mistress of the pointed putdown, is to be 
re-styled this spring as the presenter of a new celebrity chatshow about books, 
modelled onDesert Island Discs. Gone will be the black trouser suits and severe 
stares. In their place, Robinson will be smiling and dressed in approachable 
pastels.

The BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> programme, My Life in Books, 
will be a literary version of the long-standing Radio 4 music show, with guests 
such as crime writer PD James,Downton Abbey actress Elizabeth McGovern, former 
news anchor Sir Trevor McDonald and the last surviving Mitford sister, the 
Dowager Duchess of Devonshire, all invited to choose their favourite five 
books. Filmed in front of an audience, the show will run daily from the end of 
next month to herald world book day on 3 March and the first ever world book 
night two days later.

Chatty, personal interviews about the impact of much-loved books are a long 
way from 66-year-old Robinson's customary screen persona as the sharp-tongued 
inquisitor at the centre ofThe Weakest Link, BBC1's evening quiz show, and from 
her role as an uncompromising consumer rights champion on the same channel's
Watchdog. Any guest who chooses to talk about a book which Robinson does not 
like might well expect to be dismissed from the set with a single cutting 
remark.

Initial indications are that Robinson's transformation from the steely host of 
a quiz and a consumer affairs show into an Oprah Winfrey-style promoter of good 
writing will have its limits. Although she says that books – particularly 
political and literary biographies – have always been her "greatest pleasure", 
Robinson admits she has no great love of contemporary novels.

"I'm a reluctant reader of modern fiction because even recommendations by 
normally reliable sources are liable to be dodgy," Robinson said. She does, 
however, make an exception for one living writer. "That said, for my 
generation, I believe any Margaret Drabble novel taught you that however clever 
you were as a woman, your husband was likely to dump you for the au pair and 
leave you struggling with lots of little children and no money. She was 
precursor to Germaine [Greer] and a lot more useful."

In the US, Winfrey's popular bookshow established its presenter and producer 
as a key cultural influence, as well as one of the most powerful people in the 
television industry. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has 
developed Robinson's book show, which may see her emerge as Britain's answer to 
Winfrey, as the flagship intended to lead a whole year of programmes 
celebrating the printed word.

"Anne has already worked well at that time of night, of course," said Mark 
Bell, the BBC's chief of arts commissioning. "She is a passionate reader. She 
knows a lot about books and she's an enthusiast."

The corporation's "Books on the BBC" year, to be announced tomorrow, is being 
orchestrated by Bell, and will feature Stephen Fry inPlanet Word, a five-part 
series on language for BBC2.Faulks on Fiction, the long-awaited four-part 
documentary from novelist Sebastian Faulks, in which he tackles some of the key 
archetypes in British novels, will also be aired, starting with heroes 
including Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, Martin Amis's John Self and Monica 
Ali's Chanu, and using scenes from TV adaptations to illustrate his argument.

"Of course, we want to remind people that the BBC covers literature, but more 
importantly we want to reflect the fact that people talk more about books now 
than they ever did," said Bell, ahead of tomorrow's launch.

The season will also feature programmes about the King James Bible, presented 
by Melvyn Bragg and by writer Adam Nicolson, while children's writer Michael 
Morpurgo, author ofWar Horse, will give the prestigious Richard Dimbleby 
Lecture.

Filming on Robinson's series starts on Sunday, but those who have seen the 
pilot show suggest that lilac, not black, is a key sartorial theme for the host.

Other guests appearing on the show will include author Jeanette Winterson, 
actor Larry Lamb, comedians Sarah Millican, Sue Perkins and Hardeep Singh 
Kohli, and TV stars Clare Balding, Richard Bacon and father and son, Peter and 
Dan Snow. Each guest will make five choices, from fairy tales to biographies 
and poetry, which illustrate aspects of their childhood, as well as crucial 
moments of their personal and professional lives.

"We're always looking for distinctive programmes for daytime and this follows 
in the footsteps of other factual series, such asGreat British Railways with 
Michael Portillo," said Liam Keelan, the controller of BBC Daytime, who 
commissioned the show.

The BBC is also supporting World Book Night, when one million books will be 
given away en masse by an army of passionate readers to 20,000 members of the 
public.
 