
Free speech advocates in America have slammed a call to ban The Diary of a 
Young Girl byAnne Frank <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> from 
schools in Michigan because it contains "pornographic" passages.

A mother of a seventh grader in the Northville school district in Michigan 
said late last month that Frank's depiction of growing up in hiding as a Jewish 
teenager during theHolocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>, 
which has sold millions of copies worldwide, contains "inappropriate material". 
She pointed in particular to a passage from the "definitive" version of Frank's 
diary – which includes around 30% of extra material left out of the original 
1947 edition by Anne's father Otto – in which the young girl discusses her 
anatomy.

"Until I was 11 or 12, I didn't realise there was a second set of labia on the 
inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even funnier is that I thought 
urine came out of the clitoris," wrote Frank. "When you're standing up, all you 
see from the front is hair. Between your legs there are two soft, cushiony 
things, also covered with hair, which press together when you're standing, so 
you can't see what's inside. They separate when you sit down and they're very 
red and quite fleshy on the inside. In the upper part, between the outer labia, 
there's a fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. 
That's the clitoris."

The mother told local press 
<http://northville.patch.com/articles/school-should-have-asked-parents-about-unedited-diary-of-anne-frank-northville-mother-says>
 that this and other passages had made her daughter "uncomfortable", and that 
the school should have informed parents about the nature of the material. "It 
doesn't mean my child is sheltered, it doesn't mean I live in a bubble, and it 
doesn't mean I'm trying to ban books," she said.

"It's pretty graphic, and it's pretty pornographic for seventh-grade boys and 
girls to be reading,"she said 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/detroit-mom-objects-to-reading-of-anne-frank-s-diary-as-too-pornographic>
. "It's inappropriate for a teacher to be giving this material out to the kids 
when it's really the parents' job to give the students this information." She 
has now launched a formal complaint process asking for the unexpurgated version 
of the diary to be removed from the school, which iscurrently under review 
<http://northville.patch.com/articles/school-should-have-asked-parents-about-unedited-diary-of-anne-frank-northville-mother-says>
.

But the district is being urged not to ban the book by the Kids' Right to Read 
Project <http://www.ncac.org/p.php?rel=3929>, part of the National Coalition 
Against Censorship <http://www.ncac.org/>, as well as by Frank publisher Bantam 
Books, the National Council of Teachers of English and PEN America, among 
others. The organisations have come together to write to the school district, 
saying that Anne Frank's diary is "both relevant to today's students and 
pedagogically valuable", and that to "remove the book potentially violates the 
constitutional rights of other students and parents".

"The passage in question relates to an experience that may be of particular 
concern to many of your students: physical changes associated with puberty," 
they write. "Anne had no books or friends to answer her questions, so she was 
forced to rely on her own observations. Literature helps prepare students for 
the future by providing opportunities to explore issues they may encounter in 
life. A good education depends on protecting the right to read, inquire, 
question and think for ourselves. We strongly urge you to keep The Diary of a 
Young Girl in its full, uncensored form in classrooms in Northville."

Acacia O'Connor, Kids' Right to Read Project coordinator, added: "Anne Frank's 
diary is so valuable because it brings students into a world that is at turns 
very different from their own and extremely familiar. Anne was in fear for her 
life every day in hiding but at the same time she was experiencing the changes 
every adolescent faces and her descriptions of those changes are real and 
important."
 