
Anne Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> may 
like dogs – Ellie, her working cocker, lies curled in a basket, unbothered by 
the personnel (publicist, housekeeper, stylist, photographer, interviewer) 
traipsing through the small Kensington kitchen – but she is much more like a 
cat. After an hour or so of photographs, she submits to being interviewed, 
throwing herself on her sofa, feet up, can of Diet Coke in hand. Seemingly 
relaxed, but waiting to pounce. You can almost see a tail twitching.

Not that this cat doesn't need an occasional stroke. There's a revealing 
moment when she appeals to Barbara, her housekeeper of 10 years, with a playful 
"I'm not horrible, am I?" (All I suggested was that she might be a little 
controlling). "She's just looking for compliments," Barbara says fondly.

There is a level, of course, on which Robinson is playing up to expectations: 
the woman who, as a journalist on Fleet Street in the 70s and 80s, was known as 
Mrs Awkward; who graduated, nearly 12 years ago, to terrorising contestants on 
Weakest Link, earning herself the sobriquets "rudest woman on television" and 
"the queen of mean", as well as millions of viewers, a hit show in the US, and 
many millions of pounds. Who says now, proudly, "I think we've got much more 
daring. When you look at the very early ones it's incredibly tame. I mean, I 
never said things like 'Why are you so fat?'"

And "you mustn't think twice. I wouldn't have a job if I thought twice. Woody 
Allen always says that if it's real wit you hear it at the same time as you say 
it." It's a comment that betrays a certain hubris – "Why are you so fat?" has 
shock value, but it isn't wit. On the other hand, she is very quick, and enjoys 
proper verbal sparring. "What you're always looking for is someone to play with 
– a witty contestant who is up to you. It's fabulous [when it happens]." And 
she says she does keep a close eye on how her jibes are taken. "I occasionally 
come off and say 'Cut that out' – not often, but I did it the other week, 
actually. I said to a student, 'That dress must have looked nice when it fitted 
you', and afterwards I said, 'Don't put that in, that hurt her'. So I hope we 
have a bit of judgment about it."

Her persona on Weakest Link does not appear to be an act, but an exaggerated 
aspect of herself. In interviews she uses it as a kind of gate-keeping device. 
Don't want to answer a question? Pour scorn; pounce on any vagueness – then 
answer rather vaguely yourself. It's not that she isn't OK with information 
about herself being available – she did, after all, write a very personal, 
self-critical account of her childhood, disastrous first marriage and 
alcoholism in Memoirs of an Unfit Mother (2001); she has cheerfully talked 
about her facelift, her shopping habits, her divorces – it's just that she 
wants to control exactly how and why that information arrives.

And today she has an announcement to make: next spring, after 12 years, 1,693 
episodes, 15,000 contestants and 230,000 questions asked, she is leaving 
Weakest Link. She insists it was her decision; that reports of her salary being 
halved were incorrect: "My fee wasn't cut. I said I'd do 10 years and then, 
because we went to Scotland and they were brilliant, I did a year more than I 
intended to do." She is trying to write a second book (out of years of 
diaries), that she jokes will be called How Much Did Your Face Cost? but hasn't 
the time. As "Rosemary Verey [who landscaped her country garden] said – 'if you 
sell the house the garden isn't yours any more.' I was quite prepared if they 
had put someone else in." But theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
will not be replacing her, and so the programme will go off air.

This news is a kind of compliment to a woman who has (mostly) run her 
extremely successful career on her own terms. She knows she is unusual in this: 
she told a BBC4 interviewer that in another life she'd like to use the 
experience to "give classes to clever women, so they don't constantly feel hurt 
and upset". And what would she teach? How to ask for more money, for one thing: 
she is straightforward about wanting lots of it, spending it, enjoying it; but 
more importantly, that refusing to be bound by what others want to pay you is 
the quickest way to earn equality, and freedom.

Another lesson would be to always look your best. "I remember interviewing 
Edwina Currie years and years ago and I said, 'There aren't enough women MPs, 
how would you tell women to go about it?' and she said, 'Tell them to lose a 
stone.'" Robinson laughs. "And I can see the logic of what she was saying, in 
that you need to feel as good about yourself as humanly possible." Her own 
mother sent her off to her first print job in a mink coat, with instructions to 
get a facial once a month, and advice never to do housework when she could pay 
for it. These days her maintenance regime includes manicures and pedicures, 
eyelash tints, HRT implants, fortnightly haircuts, frequent lowlights, Botox, 
work-outs and bikini waxes. "I want to sound as frivolous as I possibly can, so 
your readers are incredibly annoyed. Oh, and I have to have my moles checked, 
because I had a melanoma."

She gets testy when I point out that she requested a stylist for the 
interview, while she says that she doesn't mind what people say about her – why?

"What it says about me is that I've probably been in television long enough to 
have learned the best way to get a decent photograph, and that it matters to 
me. What it says is that if by now my track record" – she was an investigative 
reporter on the Sunday Times in an era when newsrooms hardly ever had more than 
one woman; was assistant editor of the Mirror when the Falklands war began; and 
viewing figures for Watchdog rose from 3 million to 8.5 million in the five 
years after she took over – "has not given you an idea of what I can or cannot 
do, then it's beyond me to worry what your perception of me is – that's what it 
says."

We have an unhelpful wrangle about older women on TV: "Do you know that the 
average woman of my age is sized between 16 and 18 and has at least two chins?" 
she demands. "I've nothing against that, but you can't simply talk about age – 
you have to look at the restrictions of television." She does, in fact, have a 
more nuanced position – that "a lot of young women, very, very pretty, not 
over-bright women, just bright enough to know how dim they are, can get on 
television, whereas guys, who aren't too pretty at that age, couldn't get on 
television now"; that when she began it was just as important that she was a 
good journalist and could write; that TV presenting requires a set of skills 
different from those required for print interviewing; "the world changes".

Selina Scott (who sued Channel 5 for ageism, winning a settlement and public 
apology) recently said that Robinson has survived on TV by becoming a 
caricature of herself. What did she think of that? "I don't know that I thought 
very much about it, except that she was perfectly entitled to say it. She 
hasn't said much that's witty, has she?"

One must address the treachery – in her view of the working world, there is 
always treachery. But don't address it by being a victim, by claiming it's 
because you're a woman, by, God forbid, going to a tribunal. Work at your luck, 
and be unashamed of ambition.

But if she shies away from that word – "I never thought I was ambitious, 
I thought I was just impatient" – it's understandable. In 1973 she lost custody 
of her daughter Emma, not because of her drinking, but because of what the 
judge called her "undoubted ambition". The fact she had once said that she 
would rather cover the Vietnam war than vacuum the sitting room was largely 
what did for her. Much of her pride in her work now – and her doting love for 
her daughter and grandsons, who live just across Hyde Park – is underlined by 
the fact that she was able to stop drinking, and to come back from this blow.

For a long time afterwards, she could only mimic the outsize confidence she 
had inherited from her mother, a successful Liverpudlian market trader who 
bullied and cajoled and war profiteered (and also drank, heavily), but never 
failed to tell her daughter that she could do anything she put her mind to.

So she dealt with crippling fear, professionally, through full-frontal attack; 
but behaved with her new husband, John Penrose, like a "belligerent doormat": 
"I was only just learning to brush my teeth again. So it was hard for me to say 
to my husband, 'I really don't like having to go out and sit there while you 
knock off two bottles of wine,' or 'Why do we have to have people stay until 
2am?' – I think I was very, very frightened and unsure of myself. It took a few 
years to get back to who I was."

Things became more difficult when she was promoted, over her husband's head, 
at the Mirror to assistant editor. She earned more, was more powerful, and it 
only got worse when she started doing TV. "And where, oh where," as she put it 
in Memoirs of an Unfit Mother, "was my dilemma covered in Germaine's Female 
bloody Eunuch!"

"I'm going to have a chapter in my next book called 'There's no such thing as 
a happy househusband'," she says now. "I don't believe that women are that used 
to being the main breadwinner. I don't think they've adapted. There's a bit of 
a Barbie doll in all of us, to want a lovely, white wedding, and a man to look 
after us, and I think it's tough for both sides when it's the woman and the 
mother who's going out, and the guy's left, because his mother never ever put 
him on her knee when he was two and half or three and said, 'When you grow up 
you're going to marry someone who earns more money than you do'."

In 1990 they separated, for a few years, until one night, lonely and missing 
him, she called and he returned. The main discovery in her book seems to be 
that one of the most valuable things in life is a harmonious relationship, and 
that she was willing to do the hard work required to achieve it. What did that 
involve, day to day? How did she sort it out? "I don't think I did," she 
replies quietly. Four years ago they divorced; she is dating now, and is 
somewhat bafflingly surprised by the difficulty of finding someone who can 
punch at her own weight. "I think I learned you either accept how people are, 
or you get out. If you genuinely can't be happy with how they are, you have to 
throw in the towel." Her voice is quite low. "I couldn't make it work. I kept 
reading about people who'd got divorced, married and then married again – and 
I was still thinking, "Am I happy?'"

"I think it's really sad for both sides. And you know – my ex-husbands are two 
of my closest mates, and therefore the second marriage – it was very sad. I 
think we both came to a reasonable, regretful decision about it, and therefore 
I didn't really expect to go down into a great dip, which I did." And then she 
can't resist puncturing the seriousness: "But I'm not bipolar! I'm the only 
person who's famous who's not bipolar!"

I wonder whether something similar will happen when she walks off the set of 
the Weakest Link for the last time. Or will she be relieved? "No no – I'll miss 
it. It's been superb. So it is a hard decision. I've always tried to leave 
before you think you're going to be tired of doing something." She will still 
host Watchdog, and another series of My Life in Books, but neither is the same 
as being in two million living rooms every day. It will be like walking off a 
cliff, won't it? "Yes – I think [that's what happens with] all change, good 
change and bad change … [But] I've always been good at change. I mean my life 
has always been about change, up and down, I did 11 years as a columnist at the 
Mirror. I did 11 years of Points of View. I am not saying it will be easy, but 
easier than it might be for a lot of people."
 