
Gail Horalek, the mother of a 7th-grade child in Michigan in the US, has made 
international headlinesby complaining 
<http://jezebel.com/this-is-the-pornographic-anne-frank-excerpt-thats-ca-484571352?utm_source=feedly>
 that the unabridged version of Anne Frank's diary is pornographic and should 
not be taught at her daughter's school. At issue for Horalek is a section 
detailing Anne's exploration of her own genitalia, material originally omitted 
by Anne's father, Otto Frank, when he prepared the manuscript for publication 
in the late 40s.

I had to look up what age kids are in the 7th grade. They're 12 to 13! They're 
only about a year younger than Anne was when she wrote of her vagina: "There 
are little folds of skin all over the place, you can hardly find it. The little 
hole underneath is so terribly small that I simply can't imagine how a man can 
get in there, let alone how a whole baby can get out!" There cannot be a 
13-year-old girl on the planet who hasn't had a root around and arrived at this 
exact stage of bafflement. I mean, I was so distressed by my fanny's apparent 
minusculeness that I conducted a series of experiments with travel-size Body 
Shop shampoo bottles (too big) and hairbrush handles (still too big). I 
eventually came to the conclusion that, in the presence of an actual penis, 
some pheromonal reaction would kick in and my vagina would magically expand 
like a lotus blossom (an illusion of which, sadly, experience deflowered me).

Horalek, predictably, has been laughed out of town. Even commenters on the 
conservative Fox Detroit Facebook page, where the story "broke" last week, are 
disparaging. They say things like: "lmao ppl get mad about the stupidest shyt 
its history … maybe we should let our kids really know what happened at 
thanksgiving to", which, I think you'll agree, is an ideologically impressive, 
if grammatically troubling, observation. And so it's easy to dismiss the 
Horalek affair as just another mad utterance by a wacko zealot, who no one even 
agrees with, being whipped up into a media story so that the internet's eternal 
feedback loop has something to recycle. However, I think there's something 
slightly deeper going on.

Horalek is, of course, wrong to call the passages pornographic. Pornography is 
material intended to arouse sexual excitement, and I very much doubt that was 
Anne's intention when she wrote to her imaginary confidant Kitty about her 
journeys of self-discovery. But the reason Horalek gives for complaining in the 
first place is that the passages made her daughter uncomfortable. I can well 
believe this. I can imagine that if, age 13, I had been asked to read or 
discuss the passages in class, I would have felt deeply uncomfortable (my own 
nocturnal explorations notwithstanding).

Anne is going through puberty, and she describes her changed vagina in honest 
detail, saying, "until I was 11 or 12, I didn't realise there was a second set 
of labia on the inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even funnier is 
that I thought urine came out of the clitoris." (Oh Anne, we've all been 
there.) She continues: "In the upper part, between the outer labia, there's a 
fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. That's the 
clitoris." It's beautiful, visceral writing, and it's describing something that 
most young women experience.

And yet I can understand that the junior Ms Horalek would have squirmed and 
wished herself elsewhere when this was read in class. We live in a society in 
which young women are taught to be ashamed of the changes that their bodies 
undergo at puberty – to be secretive about them, and even to pretend that they 
don't exist. Breasts, the minute they bud, are strapped into harnesses, and the 
nipples disguised from view. Period paraphernalia must be discreet, with 
advertisers routinely boasting that their tampons look enough like sweets to 
circumvent the social horror of discovery.

For my generation, removal of post-pubescent hair on the legs and underarms 
was mandatory. For Ms Horalek's generation, it is mandatory for pubic hair too. 
Anne writes: "When you're standing up, all you see from the front is hair. 
Between your legs there are two soft, cushiony things, also covered with hair, 
which press together when you're standing, so you can't see what's inside." How 
must reading this feel for pubescent girls who've already internalised the 
message that they must spend the rest of their lives maintaining the illusion 
that their body hair doesn't exist.

This media event should do more than teach us that there are laughably prudish 
parents out there. It should encourage us to reflect on why, when confronted 
with the reality of the female body and female sexuality, girls can be made to 
feel uncomfortable.

Dealing with this discomfort only involves censoring Anne Frank's diary if 
you're quite, quite odd. For the rest of us, the answer might be a little more 
free-flowing boob, some brazenMooncup <http://www.mooncup.co.uk/> 
sterilisation, hairy legs sprinting through the summer grasses and, to use a 
pun that is intended as the highest compliment, Frankness about masturbation, 
sexuality and our bodies. Because it isn't just the Horaleks of this world who 
teach girls to be shameful rather than celebratory.
 