
For the 40-year-old ballerina, life can be cruel, as Margot Fonteyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/margot-fonteyn> discovered at the dawning of 
the 1960s. Challenged by younger rivals, physically exhausted and isolated from 
former friends by marriage to a sleazy and adulterous playboy, the Old Girl, as 
Fonteyn was known by her intimates, was thought to be on her last legs. Enter, 
in one of classical ballet's greatest evercoups de théatre, a blazing young 
Russian defector: Rudolf Nureyev.

The story of their partnership is a thrilling and poignant one. It's been told 
many times in literary and TV documentary form, and now, in Otto Bathurst's film
Margot, it unfolds as drama. Historically, the problem with ballet films has 
been that, for the most part, dancers can't deliver lines convincingly and 
actors can't do pirouettes and pointe-work. Anne Bancroft's performance as a 
"prima ballerina" in Herbert Ross'sThe Turning Point (1977) is a case in point, 
with the middle-aged actress allowed to flutter an arm or two but basically 
shot in tight close-up, fooling nobody.

So how did Anne-Marie Duff, star of Channel 4's Shameless and the BBC's The 
Virgin Queen, approach the explicitly physical role of Fonteyn? "With great 
respect," says 39-year-old Duff. "I'd done a wee bit of dance at drama school, 
but I was very much a ballet virgin." So the BBC placed her in the seasoned 
hands of Michael Nunn and William Trevitt, aka theBallet Boyz 
<http://www.balletboyz.com/>. "We nearly didn't accept the job," says Nunn, 
recalling the seeming impossibility of creating a ballerina from scratch in 
just a few weeks. "But in the end, we made her do a ballet class every day and 
sent her to watch classes with the Royal Ballet, to see how they walked and 
held themselves."

"I was like a magpie," says Duff. "I'd go to Covent Garden and steal things – 
looks, movements, gestures – from [principal dancers] Tamara Rojo and Leanne 
Benjamin." It turned out that, ballet virgin or no, the actress had a certain 
innate ability. "She's got nice arms," concedes Nunn. "A really nice port de 
bras. We didn't put her on pointe but we threw her around a bit and gradually 
she started turning into a dancer, disappearing for a quick weep when things 
got hard but then coming back for more. She was shocked, I think, at just how 
brutal it all was."

Brutal it might have been, but Trevitt and Nunn's tough love saw the magpie 
transformed into something like a swan. "My tootsies were sore but my body felt 
great," says Duff. "There's a kind of osmosis as the perfectionism of that 
world bleeds into you. You acquire a little of what dancers have, a confidence 
in the beauty you can create." In the end, she learned an entire mime scene from
Giselle and the death scene from Romeo and Juliet, and in the film carries off 
both very creditably indeed.

Duff doesn't look particularly like Fonteyn, but her delicate, large-eyed 
beauty is suggestive of that fragrant English starriness to which Fonteyn, 
Audrey Hepburn and the young Princess Margaret subscribed.

On the unresolved question of whether Fonteyn and Nureyev slept together, 
Bathurst's film – quelle surprise – decides that they did. The Dutch actor 
Michiel Huisman, also coached by the Ballet Boyz, plays the Russian dancer. 
"He's certainly fucked the Old Girl into shape," remarks Derek Jacobi's 
Frederick Ashton, watching the pair rehearseGiselle, and while it would be 
neither accurate nor tasteful to say the same about Nunn and Trevitt and
Anne-Marie Duff <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff>, it's fair 
to say that they've very comprehensively relieved her of that ballet virginity.
 