
Anne-Marie Duff holds out her hand – a shy shake. She is wearing what looks 
like a child's white vest, jeans and no jewellery. There is nothing to give her 
away, apart from her face. Even her feet are bare – maroon nail varnish 
excepted. It is a sunny day – warm upstairs at the Jerwood rehearsal space in 
south London – and we have two reasons to meet. She is about to star inStrange 
Interlude at the National 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/strange-interlude>, a Eugene O'Neill 
marathon. And the final episode of Channel 4'sShameless (now in its 11th 
series) is about to be aired, featuring Fiona – peroxide hair and tarty Gypsy 
earrings to the fore – taking a last stand. Anne-Marie's range is incredible: 
Elizabeth I, Margot Fonteyn, Saint Joan, Berenice, John Lennon's mum… and now 
Nina, complicated, ardent, neurotic war widow. "Interlude", incidentally, 
misleads. Uncut, the drama is four hours long. Anne-Marie tells me it is one of 
the plays that made Nicholas Hytner want to be a director. Michael Grandage is 
another of its champions. I run into Simon Godwin, director of this trimmed 
version for the Lyttelton and wish him good luck and he laughs, as if 
acknowledging he may need it.

Anne-Marie is one of those actors who is a chameleon and yet, unmistakably, 
herself. Her face is uncommonly expressive. It has a wicked gaiety but sorrow 
comes easily, too. "I am not precious about the way I look. Never having been 
defined as a great beauty makes that easier." How does she control the detail 
of what is going on in her face? Here is a test – O'Neill's confounding stage 
direction to Nina from scene two:

"She appears older than in the previous scene, her face is paler and much 
thinner… In her fight to regain control over her nerves, she has overstriven 
after the cool and efficient poise, but she is really in a more highly strung, 
disorganised state than ever, although she is now more capable of suppressing 
and concealing it. She remains strikingly handsome and her physical appeal is 
enhanced by her pallor and the mysterious suggestion about her of hidden 
experience."

Duff erupts into peals of laughter. "He is like a novelist, O'Neill, isn't he? 
Our characters are all described forensically at the beginning of these huge 
scenes. With screenplays, you are advised to ignore stage directions." But she 
is not about to ignore O'Neill. The trick, she explains, is to rise above 
literalness and "get the smell of it, breathe it in, see if you can exhale it – 
that is all you can do". Lashings of white makeup may also be needed to acquire 
Nina's pallor (Anne-Marie looks as though she spent the Bank holiday weekend in 
the sun). But the real challenge is to become "more yourself as an actor, 
visiting every corner". At first she felt unequal to the role, almost turned it 
down, asked herself: "How can I create this panorama of character? It is not 
just about charting the years. These people have extraordinary colours that you 
are trying to find every day in rehearsal. The fluidity of O'Neill's writing is 
like the ocean – he is obsessed with the sea – it seems to swell in his 
characters."

Duff almost turned down Shameless, too. This seems to be typical of her. She 
is careful and carefree – such a mixture. It was her mother who swung it, in 
the end, saying Paul Abbott's script rang true because "it is about what people 
have when they don't have anything except laughter, sex and the stars". Or, as
Shameless's Frank rephrases it, addressing us from jail: "It is the boredom 
that gets you. You miss the simple things – drugs and alcohol…"

Duff grew up in Hayes, west London. Her parents are from rural Donegal. Her 
father was a painter and decorator, her mother worked in a shoe shop. "They 
taught me many things. Most of all that it is vital in life just to turn up." 
How does she mean? "To turn up for people, to be present, to have the 
conversation. This has emboldened me, given me greater empathy." As she says 
this, her arms are folded and she has a resigned look – sad but in a funny way. 
She hopes, in time, to pass this "great lesson" on to her three-year-old son. 
His name is Brendan – after her father.

It is a subject that tends to be treated as if it were a non-issue but I want 
to know whether it has been difficult to move from one class to another? "My 
parents were of a generation of Irish people who came here because there was 
nothing there – out of necessity they came to England. They weren't able to 
fulfil their dreams." She describes growing up with no sense of "entitlement" – 
in one sense an advantage. "I knew if I wanted to do this for a living, I 
really had to pursue it. When I was auditioning for drama schools, the girls 
around me were from very different backgrounds. I remember thinking, 'Should I 
lie about my family?'"

She is 42 now, and looking back sees "a tomboy – androgynous until I was 19. 
Desperately shy. The only confidence I had was in drama." She had been at a 
comprehensive school in the 80s, "deeply affected by the state of the country: 
kids weren't interested in politics or the arts". And she adds: "If you had 
questioned me about anything to do with boys… I was a virgin when I went to 
drama school [the Drama Centre in north London]. I was naive with the 
self-righteousness of youth." What about? "It's biological, isn't it? You think 
you know everything."

The Drama Centre was run by Christopher Fettes and Yat Malmgren – "brilliant 
but terrifying men". It was a "masochistic" but "exciting" time. "It put me 
through my paces. I toughened up. I was by no means the star of the year. It 
taught me to be resourceful, to go away and do the work myself. Invaluable." 
She points out that it is easier to become an actor from a working-class 
background than, say, a barrister because "acting is a sublimely egalitarian 
world". What's more: "I don't feel I've left my parents behind because of the 
sort of family I come from."

It helps to be married to James McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy>. They met on Shameless's council 
estate 10 years ago (he played Steve – he and Fiona had to make passionate love 
against a Formica worktop). But he comes from a similar family: "Very 
encouraging and working class." As a result, neither of them has had to suffer 
"anger or confusion". But it is not a non-issue for her and sometimes it is a 
joke. She recalls a funny conversation with actor Robert Carlyle, also from a 
working-class background: "We were laughing, the two of us, saying, 'Just 
think: our children know what Parma ham is.'"

Anne-Marie Duff <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff> has a keen 
critical intelligence – plenty of sense and sensibility. But she has learned to 
be careful what she says – and reads – about herself. She avoids reviews: "It 
is better not to look at them; it is like reading someone's diary. What you 
think about me is none of my business. It's important to keep faith in the 
project you are working on." And then there is the question of what she says in 
public about herself. "My husband has an extraordinary ability to receive a lot 
of exposure and still maintain a sense of self without giving anything away. I 
think it's very powerful."

She talks eloquently about how "judgmental" our culture is, deploring its 
casual cruelty – especially online. She wonders: "How on earth do you teach 
your child not to be spiteful in the playground when online you can say 
whatever you like?" She is "no fan" of celebrity culture. She talks, too, about 
autograph hunters, commenting that it is a racket. (I check later: a photo 
signed by Duff – as Fiona – can be bought for £24 on eBay).

We talk about the insecurity of her profession. "It comes in waves. I bumped 
into Olivia Colman recently. She's riding high – she's a brilliant actor and 
one of the nicest people I have ever worked with [on Jimmy McGovern'sAccused]. 
She said, 'I'm worried I will never work again', which I thought was 
hysterical." It is important to "be grateful and keep going". She adds: 
"Nothing is more diminishing than trying to control success or hold on to 
things."

How does she let go – relax? What would be an ideal holiday? "Right now, as a 
working mum: Four Seasons, Bali! No, actually, my favourite would always be a 
muddy tent holiday. Don't get me wrong: there is nothing more delightful than a 
dirty martini by the pool but I like being in nature." She would pick New 
Zealand because "there are no natural predators there". She goes off into 
another of her peals of laughter.

She believes she has changed now she is in her 40s: "I didn't really inhabit 
myself until I was in my 30s. And motherhood is an epic event. You can't help 
but be altered by it – and it is important to be." She understands better with 
age that "just because you feel something, that feeling isn't always the 
priority. I guess that is being an adult, isn't it?" The ways she lives have 
changed, too. "Pre-baby, I was a real yoga bunny." Can she still bend in every 
direction? "I'm pretty loose…" More laughter. But she doesn't officially 
exercise now. No time – acting is sport enough, alongside running after 
Brendan. "But I'm always dancing in my kitchen. And I love to sing. I've always 
sung. My father was a lovely singer. Always sang Jim Reeves at parties. I sing 
to my boy and he sings too."

Spark – spirit – is the key to Duff. She illuminates even the darkest roles. 
(She giggles about being cast as demented women like Edith Duchemin in BBC2's
Parade's End – and hushes me before we can joke about whether this is 
typecasting. "She was bonkers, wasn't she? Like a mad racehorse.") As to 
spirit, she comments: "I am a sanguine individual. Most people are having a 
difficult time at the moment but still get up in the morning… As a species, we 
thrive. And I am interested in that ability to thrive. Things have to be about 
hope. On stage you need to convey hope or you'll lose an audience.

It is too soon to say how this will apply to Nina, but already the role is 
taking possession of her "as if drawing the calcium out of my bones". It is 
what director Howard Davies described as Duff's way of "throwing herself on 
parts as if bruising herself on them". She suggests she is "still that 
19-year-old masochist that goes, 'F-ing great.'" And meanwhile, offstage, how 
much acting is involved just in being herself? "You know what? I can only be 
who I am."

Strange Interlude is at the Lyttelton, London SE1 from 28 May. The final 
episode ofShameless is on C4 on 28 May

• This article was amended on 21 May 2013. The original referred to peels, 
rather than peals, of laughter. This has been corrected.
 