
We mothers of grown-up daughters tend to view them with a mixture of love, 
exasperation, irritation and awe. Plus a fair degree of terror. I've always 
thought it a great loss to this country, for example, that Emma, my daughter, 
is not home secretary, head of Scotland Yard and the forensic expert onSilent 
Witness <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007y6k8>. In anyone's book we are not 
ideal travel companions. Let us count the ways: I like flying first class, 
preferably British Airways, which is not much different from spending a day in 
intensive care atthe London Clinic 
<http://www.thelondonclinic.co.uk/?gclid=CO7L4pqz-bQCFWbKtAodMCEAGA>. There is 
a particular bonus at Gatwick, where Bob from special services always takes me 
to the aircraft last and does so in his trusty little white car. This is not 
only hassle-free but has the added advantage of pissing off the rest of the 
passengers at the front of the plane. Believe me, I've done my time travelling 
the world in cramped conditions and carrying my own luggage. Now my leisure is 
summers in the south of France or the Hamptons, walking in Connemara, and 
year-round shopping in Manhattan and Paris.

Emma, on the other hand, sees anywhere other than the back of the plane as an 
unnecessary extravagance. She commutes zoo class between London and New York 
with two small babies without blinking. She also has an unhealthy appetite for 
dangerous sports. She hunts, kayaks, skydives, leaps off cliffs to paraglide 
with eagles and so on. Last year she crossed the world presenting a travel 
series for Channel 5 calledHeaven On Earth 
<http://www.channel5.com/shows/holiday-heaven-on-earth>. The only small but 
satisfying chink in her otherwise uncompromising position of woman of the 
people was to note that in almost all locations she was wearing outfits 
borrowed from her mother.

And so to our trip, organised to reflect our differences and in a country well 
off my radar: Sri Lanka. First at a "luxury spa", then somewhere unpromisingly 
called the Mud House.

Typically, I arrive at Gatwick at exactly the hour Emma books her car to leave 
for the airport. Her carry-on luggage is a wheelie I threw out a decade ago. 
Although throwing out in our family is a loose term since Emma's need to go 
through waste bins and retrieve half the contents is legendary. I've never 
flown Emirates before, but I'd concede that business class is hardly a burden. 
Except to say in first class it's only ever a delight for the cabin crew to 
bring you your on-board luggage as often as you wish. In business, an 
ungracious daughter huffs and puffs, making heavy weather of hauling down my 
suitcase a couple of times after we're airborne.

Whatever class of transport, no woman is entirely sane following more than 14 
hours of travel, including a change at Dubai. By Colombo, the Sri Lankan 
capital, once we're through immigration, have dodged the dozens of locals 
inexplicably trying to sell us washing machines and have collected our luggage, 
I'm well past my best. In the circumstances, it's unhelpful of Emma to stand 
behind me barking orders while I take money from the ATM. The public spat that 
follows is made worse by our driver placing a ridiculous garland of bright 
flowers around my neck as a greeting.

The journey south to Wadduwa through the morning rush hour is foul. Think 
three hours of dust, potholes, crazy traffic, endless beeping of horns and no 
obvious signs of a highway code.

The Reef Villa & Spa <http://www.reefvilla.com/>, run by Brendan and 
Bernadette, is undoubtedly charming. Sadly, the weather falters between rain, 
overcast skies and bursts of sunshine. Even more distressing, the Guardian had 
decided that one room with a small double bed, albeit in the hotel's finest 
suite, would suffice. Brendan sweetly offers to install a second four-poster. I 
suggest a child's bed including mini mosquito net will be fine for Emma. Do you 
think I ever hear the end of this? Again, it is hardly Brendan's fault that the 
solar panelling directly above Emma's cot comes to grief and she spends two 
days lying next to a blue plastic bucket.
 The Reef Villa & Spa: 'There's nothing to do,' says Anne Robinson. 
Photograph: Angelo Samarawickrema for the Guardian 
The Reef's spa turns out to be one small Sri Lankan, offering massage and 
manicures – as long as I don't want colour. He's not very good at colour, he 
says. We try yoga with a beautifully calm instructor whose omming is so deep 
that I keep opening an eye to check the noise is her and not the hooting of a 
train on the track outside. That's the point about Sri Lanka – outside is 
another land of noise, badly beaten paths and rotting debris. In contrast, the 
Reef, with only seven bedrooms, is all about stillness. Not one of my hobbies. 
The rest of the guests are mainly quietly spoken, middle-aged Brits dressed 
much as I imagine Nigel Farage and his Ukip supporters might in a tropical 
climate. There's nothing to do except chill and read. Oh, and eat. 
Unfortunately, I like only plain food. I loathe Thai food, Indian food, 
Vietnamese food – in fact, anything Asian and spicy. The smell of coriander 
makes me throw up. So the daughter airily ordering a Sri Lankan curry breakfast 
can reasonably be described as mother abuse.

There's the nub of it. Grown-up daughters, once they have babies, cease to 
distinguish between their small charges and their mother. "Focus, look down, 
down,down. Now see the bolt," she instructs one afternoon when I fail to open a 
door quickly enough. At least the mosquitoes – an accepted part of life in this 
country – suffer even worse than me under Emma's watch. In fact, should you be 
considering a trip to Sri Lanka, now is a good time since, thanks to Emma's 
murder mission, the population has considerably decreased in the last month. 
It's the mosquitoes that decide for us that a visit tothe Mud House 
<http://www.themudhouse.lk/>, sleeping outside with no electricity, is beyond 
our skill sets. Instead, I book us into one of the five-star hotels in the 
capital,Cinnamon Lakeside <http://www.cinnamonhotels.com/CinnamonLakeside.htm>, 
where we can busy ourselves in the seven restaurants, the Balinese spa, the 
beauty salon and the navy blue-bottomed outdoor pool. But no. Emma insists we 
explore in a tuk-tuk taxi, a sewing machine with a hood and no visible signs of 
protection. The rides are nothing short of terrifying. Tuk-tuk drivers can be 
bargained down, never have any change and the messing around in the scorching 
heat in order to find the right money is ridiculous given the line of 
air-conditioned limos waiting to be hired outside the hotel.

Shopping with Emma is always an endurance test. Choosing a cabbage takes her a 
fortnight. We're hours in an admittedly wonderful emporium calledBarefoot 
<http://barefootceylon.com/>, an oasis along the main Galle Road, while she 
dithers and changes her mind. In another too-long outing to a mall in the Old 
Dutch Hospital, our driver narrowly misses a dog, which already has only three 
legs.

On our final night, again in a perilous tuk-tuk, we make it to the Liberty 
cinema to see the new Tom Cruise movie. Sri Lankan cinemas are small and the 
start time very approximate. Actually, the whole experience is not dissimilar 
to a drive in a tuk-tuk, since the audience tends to come and go randomly, with 
the ones behind yanking our seats back and forth to make their exit. Foolishly, 
a woman nearby takes a telephone call. Inspector Emma naturally turns and 
delivers a lecture on good manners. The woman, duly shamed, takes herself off, 
yanking my seat another half-dozen times between coming and going.

Did we enjoy our trip? Do I mind that Emma thinks I urghh and arrgh at every 
corner? Does it matter that she treats me like a child? And that, while her 
trusty striped holiday bag manages to contain every possible emergency item – 
fountain pen, ink cartridges, sewing kit, mosquito deterrent, notebook, plastic 
spoon, chopsticks, sugar, salt, pepper, paper clips, headache pills, rotting 
food – these are only grudgingly handed out? Like my grandsons, I am allowed 
only half a paper tissue at a time. Do I despair, when I've spoken sharply to a 
British businessman thoughtlessly standing in our way as we struggle to our row 
on the flight home and she feels the need to apologise? "I'm just here to say 
sorry after she's been rude. It's a full-time job."

Yes, to the first question. No, of course, to the rest. She makes me roar with 
laughter. I adore her company. Every mother and daughter should make time for a 
trip together. It's good for the soul.

How was it for you? Emma Wilson
 Anne and Emma: 'I’ve been filmed in a cage with great white sharks. Being 
confined with my mother is more daunting.' Photograph: Angelo Samarawickrema 
Travelling with my mother is not for the faint-hearted. As far as she's 
concerned, being in business class with a glass of champagne before takeoff and 
a fluffy white mattress that reclines to a bed is slumming it. Not me. I've two 
babies, 17 months apart. I barely pee alone. Fourteen hours trapped in these 
conditions is utter bliss.

We are greeted at Colombo with garlands of orchids. We're not very 
appreciative – too busy trying to negotiate the ATM. Mrs 
Don't-talk-to-me-I'm-concentrating manages to extract 400 rupees, roughly two 
quid.

We motor down the south-west coast to the sanctuary of Reef Villa. This is 
low-key to the nth degree. Colonial suites surrounded by tranquil ponds are a 
throwback to the days of Ceylon. There's a pink giant gourami fish called 
Rosemary, but she's pretty darned quiet. An iguana strolls across the garden, 
the equivalent of rush hour.

I've been filmed in a cage with great white sharks, but being confined in a 
suite with my mother is a more daunting prospect. Six days of rain doesn't 
help. There's no chance she'll be looking at temples or tea tasting – not 
unless Coco Chanel serves the Pekoe. This trip will require a woman who doesn't 
do "downtime" to embrace nothingness; sitting, reading and, of course, the spa. 
But by day three she's spa'd out. The young lad makes a fatal error. "When did 
you last have a facial? Your skin is very dry," he says. "No, it's not. Just 
get on with it." Similar charm is unleashed on the yoga instructor. "I'm old. 
Very, very old," she snaps, as if it's the girl's fault. It's a 90-minute 
session of eye exercises and neck stretches. No threat of breaking into a 
sweat. She bails on the second session. I'm given a rigorous workout. It's 
painful to laugh for the rest of the stay.

In the mornings, we sip coffee on her balcony. "Did you know these mosquito 
bands you bought are for children?" No, but I do find she's a child at times. 
"Make that bird go away." "I can't open my water bottle." "Emma, tell the man 
to leave me alone." "Am I in the shade?" You'd think a woman who's travelled 
through China with Thatcher and Cuba with Castro would know if she was in the 
sun.

The food is exceptional and the Sinhalese people are beyond gracious and 
gentle. I slowly work my way through the cocktail list, but I can't keep up 
with her Diet Coke habit. At dinner there's a young London spark who's yet to 
put down his iPhone. His redheaded girlfriend watches him or reads To Kill A 
Mocking Bird. He's lucky. We carrot-tops debate whether we'd stab him with a 
fork or throw the mobile in the pool.

We play Scrabble. It's utterly humiliating – 46 on a triple, using all 
letters: another 50 points. Come on! We're both wired to win. At least I can 
thrash her at table tennis.

In Wadduwa, the market isn't geared to outsiders. I buy an apple cutter, 
Tigger mugs, jigsaws and a child's cricket bat: total £2.95. Have I mentioned 
my cot has been displaced by a blue bucket? I might be over 40, but this 
arrangement makes me feel likeEdie from Grey Gardens 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edith_Bouvier_Beale>.

"If you've such a difficult relationship, why go away together?" Brendan asks, 
missing the nuance. Our relationship isn't difficult.She is difficult. We're as 
loving as any mother and daughter, with occasional sparks. She calls me 
"tricky". I find this rich. She hates spicy, loathes coriander – we're in her 
eating hell. In Colombo, where she eats chocolates for breakfast, cake for 
lunch and pastries for supper, I buy her a bag of oranges. She rolls her eyes 
and beelines for the mini-bar nibbles.

I explore Fose market alone. There's a limit to what I can make her endure. 
Even so, I suspect my mother secretly enjoys the buzz of street life. "Go 
slower, Mr Tuk-Tuk!" This, from a woman who lost her licence speeding.

My Mary Poppins bag is a constant source of ridicule. (Babies have sanctioned 
my squirrelling ways – you never know when you may need half an avocado, a 
toothbrush, or clean socks.) But she has no qualms asking for a needle and 
thread, pen, mosquito wipe, map, measuring tape or water. And that's just the 
stuff she knows about.

Cue shopping. We empty Barefoot. I manage to spend more than her, which is 
impressive. She needs to sit down with an espresso and carrot cake to recover. 
Wild rabbits do not breed tame ones.

• Emma Wilson's trip was provided by Experience Travel Group 
<http://www.experiencetravelgroup.com/sri_lanka> and Emirates Airlines 
<http://www.emirates.com/>; Anne Robinson covered the cost of her trip. 
Experience Travel Group offers tailor-made holidays in Sri Lanka and south-east 
Asia. A week at theReef Villa <http://www.reefvilla.com/>, including return 
flights and transport, starts from £1,999pp. Emirates flies daily to Sri Lanka 
from London Heathrow, London Gatwick, Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow and 
Newcastle. Prices start from £533pp from London Gatwick.

Win a Northern Lights cruise…
 Win a six-night Northern Lights Voyage for two 
Hurtigruten <http://www.hurtigruten.co.uk> is offering a six-night Northern 
Lights Voyage for two adults, including flights. The winner will travel from 
Bergen in southern Norway to Kirkenes in the north, visiting 34 ports along the 
spectacular, unspoilt Norwegian coast and hopefully experiencing the Northern 
Lights. Other highlights include a visit to Hammerfest (the world's most 
northerly town), crossing the Arctic Circle, the North Cape, and visits to 
Tromso and Trondheim. There is no dressing for dinner and no captain's table – 
this journey is about immersing yourself in the heart of the destination's 
culture. To enter, and for full terms and conditions, go to
guardian.co.uk/win-northern-lights-holiday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/win-northern-lights-holiday>.
 