
When Anne-Marie Duff turns up at her local café in Crouch End, north London, 
she apologises for being a little sleepy, having not long woken up. That may 
seem like slacker indulgence at 11 in the morning, but not when you consider 
that she has a nine-month-old baby boy (Brendan) to look after and a lead role 
every night in Terence Rattigan'sCause Célèbre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/apr/03/cause-celebre-rocket-to-moon> at 
the Old Vic to attend to.

Viewed with that knowledge in mind it's a wonder she seems so fresh-faced and 
youthful. The alarming fact is that Duff, who over the past decade has 
established herself as one of our leading young actresses, turned 40 last year. 
I tell her that I thought there'd been some kind of printing error when I read 
this, which, of course, is guaranteed to meet her approval – "Cheers love," she 
says, beaming with a flattered grin, "I suspect by the end of this job my age 
will be more evident."

Like many people, I first became aware of Duff in 2004, when she played the 
spirited Fiona Gallagher inShameless. The show, written by Paul Abbott, was 
wired with energy, a kind of breathless zeal and creativity that was 
mesmerising to behold. And at the centre of it was the preternaturally capable 
Fiona.

She was meant to be in her early 20s, but Duff was in her early 30s, yet 
looked about 17. Seven years and a child later, she still looks back-dated. 
She's got a slightly dreamy way of talking, which may be due to motherhood, the 
sleep she's just woken from, or her stage character, who's a kind of wafting, 
quixotic femme fatale. Along with the red woollen hat she's wearing, the effect 
is to make her seem slightly ethereal and artistic, but it's obvious that she 
has that protean gift of being able, with the slightest gesture or wardrobe 
change, to become anyone.

At the moment she's Alma Rattenbury, a rather posh, louche English musician in 
the 1930s with a high sex drive, a taste for alcohol and young men, and a much 
older husband who is murdered by her teenage handyman. Rattigan, that most 
delicate and restrained of English playwrights, completedCause Célèbre just 
before his death in 1977. It's based on a real-life murder case from the 1930s 
that had long obsessed the writer, whose illustrious theatrical career was 
effectively ended by the arrival of John Osborne and the Angry Young Men in the 
1950s.

Duff plays Alma as a life-loving, liberated spirit who wants to have maximum 
fun with minimum fuss. "She is just a very physical person," says Duff, who has 
a tactile way of expressing herself. "She's engaged with her nerve endings."

It's an intriguing anachronism of a play. Written in the era of punk rock but 
concerned with the suffocating morality of pre-war, provincial Britain, it 
feels at once almost parodically stagey and touchingly heartfelt. Duff is 
a delight, all blowsy flirtation and boozy frolicking. Without spoiling the 
ending of the play, there's also a tragic quality to the part. Still, while the 
audience seemed to love it, it's not a play that cries out for a new 
production. What did Duff see in it?

"Well the fact that it was the centenary [of Rattigan's birth] was 
interesting," she says a little unconvincingly. "The overt sexual language of 
the play is surprising and Rattigan writes brilliantly for women, he just does."

Duff grew up on a council estate in Hayes, an unremarkable suburb of west 
London, and she told one interviewer that she still feels "a bit common". I ask 
her if the choice of role had something to do with playing against type, but as 
she points out, she doesn't have a type. "I don't tend to get asked to do the 
same thing. I thought after I played Fiona, 'Here we go…' But it's like a fruit 
machine, I never know what's going to come out."

It's true: you'd be hard pressed to see a recurring pattern in Duff's CV. 
She's run the gamut from working-class heroine to Queen Elizabeth, from 
Cordelia (opposite Ian Holm's celebrated Lear) to Margot Fonteyn in the BBC 
dramaMargot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/dec/01/margot-the-queen>. It's 
an impressive list of roles, especially when you consider that Duff was a shy 
girl from a background that wasn't exactly steeped in the theatre.

She plays down the narrative of girl-from-modest-means-made-good, noting that 
her parents (Irish immigrants who worked in menial jobs) were keen readers and 
encouraging of her early interest in acting. Not many teenagers read books on 
Ellen Terry, but Duff did and she knew from a young age that she wanted to be 
an actress.

"I was conscious that I didn't fit in with all that Thatcherite crap," she 
recalls. "Suddenly in the 80s it was all about going to get a job in Barclays 
and I remember thinking I can't even swallow that, it tastes so foul. You're so 
self-righteous when you're young."

I asked how being self-righteous fitted in with being bashful and she says she 
was only self-righteous about what she wanted to be. About everything else she 
was timid; a mousey, withdrawn girl. "If you'd asked me to talk to a boy I'd 
have shat myself," she laughs. "Boys, friends, I didn't have any of that."

The social life came along when she won a place at the Drama Centre, the drama 
school in north London that produced near contemporaries such asJohn Simm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-simm>, Paul Bettany and Helen McCrory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/01/helen-mccrory-late-middle-classes>
. It was a formative, self-affirming time in her life. "I lost my virginity," 
she says matter-of-factly. "I fell in love. I thought, 'This is great. It 
fits.'"

But it was also an exacting atmosphere, disciplined and relentlessly 
demanding. "There were all these rules you had to obey, often for intangible 
reasons. I was always receiving these letters saying that if I didn't get my 
shit together I'd be out. We used to call Central [School of Arts and Drama] 
Butlin's and they used to call us 'the Trauma Centre'. It was very tough on 
women, but then it did produce actresses like Helen McCrory and Geraldine 
James, people with great emotional depth."

She left college in 1993, "just when that whole Brit cool stuff was 
beginning". The intervening years, she says, have seen a huge transformation in 
acting and the culture at large, in which celebrity has had a deforming impact 
on so much, not least the idea of how young women should look and behave. She 
doesn't envy actresses emerging into the business nowadays.

"It's a curious time for young women," she says. "There's this obsession with 
physical perfection. Jesus wept, what teenagers are putting themselves through! 
That's a terrifying development that luckily I didn't have to confront because 
one's so self-conscious anyway."

Although she has an attractive face, warm and animated, Duff does not conform 
to the model looks that increasingly dominate casting decisions. She's in that 
convenient position of being pretty enough to play the lead, but also blessed 
with enough imperfections to do character parts. That, and a large talent, 
should serve her well over a career that's shaping up to be long and 
substantial.

Not that she's immune to the contemporary focus on a very specific kind of 
beauty. She says reviewers have even written that she's not attractive enough 
to play certain roles.

"It's never enjoyable watching yourself," she says, "because you're never as 
good looking as you hope you are. You're not expecting to be Penelope Cruz… but 
I'm a female of the species. I have my hang-ups and all of that."

Nor has she entirely escaped the clutches of celebrity culture. She's married 
toJames McAvoy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> whose successful 
Hollywood career includes starring roles inAtonement, The Last King of Scotland 
and this summer's most anticipated blockbuster,X-Men: First Class. They met 
when they played lovers inShameless. "We were living with the young 'uns, in 
the same block of flats, and because I was playing someone younger, I felt a 
bit frothy. The four of us, James, Dean [Lennox Kelly] Max[ine Peake] and I 
hung out all the time. Manchester's a great city to be in, and none of us were 
married with kids, so we all had a ball."

Both she and McAvoy are studious about avoiding celebrity-couple questioning, 
taking care not to talk about their relationship and private life. It's an 
admirable stance in many ways and probably a wise one, too: some newspapers and 
magazines have been known to get a little over-excited about the fact that 
she's eight years older than McAvoy.

She takes a similarly disconnected approach to reviews, which she says she 
hasn't read since 1996, when she appeared inWar and Peace at the National. She 
says she's successfully avoided seeing or hearing anything aboutCause Célèbre 
by not reading newspaper art sections and only checking her emails on her 
phone, where there's "no temptation to massage the keys and find yourself 
somewhere…"

The system hasn't always worked, however. When she was appearing in George 
Bernard Shaw'sSaint Joan at the National in 2007, she was equally determined to 
banish reviews from her eyeline. "I thought, no, I love this, and it's about 
what we've been through as a company. Then I got in one night and put the telly 
on and theLate Review was on, and just at that moment Tim Lott and Jeanette 
Winterson were saying, 'Well, she's… all right.' My husband was filming away 
abroad – people are never there when you need them. And I called him and he 
said, 'OK, I'm going to have to tell you about a couple of nice reviews, just 
to cheer you up.'

The truth is that Duff, who has all the makings of a theatrical dame in the 
Judi Dench mould, has had almost nothing but nice, and very often rave, 
notices. This is partly because she is a fine and accomplished actress, but 
I suspect there's another reason, which is not unrelated. Somehow, without 
trying to be familiar or upstanding, she conveys a winning decency as a person, 
someone who has a naughty side, but is also fundamentally trustworthy. It's an 
odd mix of innocence and knowing, the girlish and the maternal. This quality, 
whether she's aware of it or not, can't help finding its way into her 
characterisations. It was there in Fiona Gallagher, and it's there in Alma 
Rattenbury. You could call it a kind of truth, even when the age she appears is 
such a persuasive lie. ■

Anne-Marie Duff stars in Cause Célèbre at the Old Vic until 11 June (
oldvictheatre.com <http://www.oldvictheatre.com/whatson.php?id=70>)
 