
Anne Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> is to 
leave the BBC quiz programme the Weakest Link and will not be replaced, the 
Guardian can reveal.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is to take the long-running 
daytime show off air next spring when Robinson's contract expires, rather than 
continue without "the Queen of Mean".

In an interview the 66-year-old presenter said the decision to leave, after 11 
years, was entirely hers. She wanted to quit while she still enjoyed the show, 
and to devote more time to other projects including finishing her second book, 
which is based on 10 years of her diaries.

"I'll miss it. It's been superb. So it is a hard decision," she said. "If 
there's anything about longevity in television, it's about knowing what to take 
and what to turn down, and what to stop. It's often about what not to do 
anymore. And I just simply haven't got time to do the book," she said.

Denying recent reports that her fee had been halved as part of BBC cutbacks, 
she said: "My fee wasn't cut. I originally said I would do [the programme for] 
10 years. I did a year more than I intended to. I think 11 years is more than 
enough."

She said she had stayed on because of the show's move to Glasgow, where she 
wanted to give it a proper shot. But working on it had become a "military 
operation". "Trying to write in the morning and start recording at 2.30 simply 
wasn't working. I have to leave enough time."

She had been prepared for the BBC to choose another presenter. "If you sell 
the house, the garden isn't yours any more. I was quite prepared if they had 
put someone else in."

Though it would be a wrench, she did not expect it to leave a big hole in her 
busy life. "I've always been good at change. I mean my life has always been 
about change, up and down. I did 11 years as a columnist at the Mirror. I did 
11 years of Points of View. I am not saying it will be easy, but easier than it 
might be for a lot of people."

The Weakest Link first aired on BBC2 in 2000, before moving to BBC1. By the 
end of its final series it will have broadcast 1,693 episodes with more than 
15,000 contestants asked more than 235,000 questions. Robinson will continue 
with Watchdog, and the series My Life in Books.
 