
Half her lifetime ago, Annie Lennox set out to write a feminist anthem. There 
came a point last year when she realised how far she had succeeded when 
hundreds of women, young and old, belted out the 1985 classic Sisters Are Doin' 
It For Themselves at aconcert 
<http://www.myspace.com/video/james/annie-lennox-sisters-are-doin-39-it-for-themselves-live-11-3-11/107604089>
 to celebrate International Women's Day.

"I thought they would think I was just an old girl," she says, "but really, 
they were singing from the heart." It was the highlight of celebrations that 
Lennox, in bringing together a coalition of women's groups under theEquals 
<http://www.weareequals.org/> umbrella, had done more than almost anyone else 
to promote.

The Eurythmics star is back this year with another Equals concert on Friday 
but this time she wants to act more as a host for younger artists. "I want 
people to understand me as a person with views, not just performing songs," she 
says.

Any conversation with Lennox makes it clear she has a lot of views, which she 
first publicised when she donned a man's suit, prompting gossip that she was 
gay. "It was about power and politics," she says of her look. "It was about 
saying: 'I'm the same as him' [Dave Stewart, her Eurythmics co-star and former 
partner]. I'm a female but I have a masculine side and I'm not going to negate 
that part of myself."

Her views expand to feminism and her opinion that men should be welcomed into 
the movement. "I don't think feminism is about the exclusion of men but their 
inclusion ... we must face and address those issues, especially to include 
younger men and boys," she says, before adding that she is particularly 
surprised that more gay men don't see themselves as feminists. "I would like to 
see the gay population get on board with feminism. It's a beautiful 
organisation and they've done so much. It seems to me a no-brainer."

Being "non-inclusive" can sound "strident and aggressive" and has probably 
hurt the feminist movement, she adds.

Indeed, for someone with strong views, she goes out of her way not to sound 
"strident", a word she uses several times to explain why feminism got a bad 
name in the 1990s. When she won theBarclays woman of the year 
<http://www.annielennoxsing.com/news/annie-lennox-named-the-barclays-woman-of-the-year-for-her-work-with-hivaids>
 gong in 2010, Lennox asked the audience to stand up if they were feminists. 
Half of the all-female audience stayed seated. "It made me wonder, what is 
wrong with the word," she says. "Maybe it had connotations of stridency ... but 
there's nothing wrong with the word feminist or feminism. It's a great word. 
The problem is that we have devalued it." The experience was instrumental in 
her launching Equals, which brings together at least 26 organisations.

In a debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/mar/06/feminism-debate-with-annie-lennox>
 that she hosted last year, Lennox said: "I'm appalled the word feminism has 
been denigrated to a place of almost ridicule and I very passionately believe 
the word needs to be revalued and reintroduced with power and understanding 
that this is a global picture. It isn't about us and them." Her campaigning, on 
HIV/Aids for example, has focused on difficulties experienced in the developing 
world.

She is more reticent when commenting on the vogue for female singers to 
perform scantily clad – a far cry from her own black campaign T-shirt, trousers 
and hat worn at last year's concert. "The world has become more sexualised. I 
thought the world was already sexualised when I was younger but it sells and 
sells and now it's just a marketing device.

"The display of sexuality is part of our nature but I think when it becomes a 
cliche and that's the only thing you are using to draw people's attention it 
becomes one-dimensional."

So, what does she think of Rihanna, the singer known for her skimpy clothes 
and suggestive dancing? "Here is a young woman who has been through domestic 
violence and she could become a tremendous spokesperson for that issue but the 
choice is hers. It's not up to anybody else to do that.

"Of course if she did choose to do that it would be so fucking powerful but 
it's her personal right to choose it or not. We all have our issues and we have 
to deal with them in our own way."

She has fiercely protected her own privacy, with a tight grip on press 
interviews – even for this one, her PR minder insists there are no questions 
about her private life. Her refusal to "force-feed" her views to others appears 
to extend to her now grownup daughters – one of whom is a model. "Having 
children, they're not your property. They need to figure out their own views. I 
think my daughters have a pretty healthy self-awareness but I can't speak on 
their behalf."

Annie Lennox will host EQUALS Live on 9 March, with Emeli Sandé, Katy B and 
Jess Mills, at the WOW Women of the World festival 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/wow>
 