
The City Gardens project is something I took up arms against a couple of years 
ago, but in the end I put them down again, because I felt – and stated – that 
it is ultimately down to the citizens ofAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> to take the final decision.

But when I went back up to Aberdeen a few weeks ago and saw the state of the 
streets, I had never seen the city look so dejected. I felt very saddened by 
that. I had never thought I would see Aberdeen look like this.

Experience shows that city councillors, planners and developers, come together 
and offer a bright vision of the future, as they did in Aberdeen in the 1960s 
when they razed huge swaths of the historic city. They thought that would be 
their modernity. What we got was a ruination of history, and something put in 
its place which was cheap, crap and concrete. I knew at the time, when I was a 
teenager, that this was going to be pretty disastrous.

I have nothing whatsoever against modern architecture, but when it is cheap 
and crappy you usually look back at it in a few years time and say: "What a 
monstrosity." I think they are applying the same sort of deluded vision with 
Union Terrace Gardens. Instead we should look at what really needs to be done 
there: it needs a collective civic response.

What I see in Aberdeen is that there has been a lot of money made, but that 
money has not trickled through. You see strata of wealth in Aberdeen; there are 
expensive cars and glitzy restaurants but I don't see that reflected in the 
general civic state of the city. I feel the oil industry lives separately to 
the town.

My father and grandfather worked in the shipyards and shipbuilding industries; 
people built up wealth and then people who made their money put it back into 
Aberdeen, building the art gallery, the music hall etc and it served the 
community very well. It was beautiful. But walking around Union Street today 
you get a sense of a broken place. It is kind of degraded. It seems to me 
Aberdeen thinks in terms of a consumerist society, where the solution is: 
"Well, put more shops in and get more business." I think it's a mistake; the 
same mistake they made back in the 60s.

I think this phenomenon can be found through the whole of the country. It has 
wrecked the towns of Great Britain. I think it is a symptom; we used to have 
different types of flourishing industry, people had skills and crafts, they had 
a work ethic and were proud of their cities. But now it is very different. In 
some places generations have lived with unemployment for decades. We have a 
recession and we have imported American corporate chains on our high streets, 
creating a consumerist society in which we've lost a lot of our culture and a 
lot of our skills.

It's endemic and downgrading, and I don't think Aberdeen is much different to 
many other places that have lost their heart and soul. I don't think that oil 
money has brought a tremendous civic pride back to the citizens of the city. 
It's the fast buck: there's money being made but it's just floating on the top, 
separated from the rest of Aberdeen's citizens.

If Sir Ian Wood wants to invest £50m into the centre of Aberdeen, that is 
fundamentally good, but I disagree with the way he's going about it. It is not 
because I'm a reactionary, it is not because I'm against modernity or change. 
It is the way that this was done; it is short-termism, it is short-sighted.

From what I am gathering, he is not saying: "I have £50m, I want to talk to 
you, I want to hear what you guys want." He's telling the city this is what he 
will do with it. I think it's very imperious. I think it is very, very 
important to listen to more people, the people who are living there, the 
citizens of the town.

I don't have a great respect for the aesthetic values or vision of city 
planners or city councillors; I don't think that they've often got it right. 
Building a concrete piazza across Union Terrace Gardens, in a city that knows 
rain very well, I don't quite get that. It's not Italy. They don't get tourists 
coming to Aberdeen, and if they did, wouldn't they want to see something more 
real and authentic?
 