
Spice Girls manager Simon Fuller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fuller> has revealed that Annie Lennox 
was secretly one of the architects of the group's success.

He said the Eurythmics star played an important but unheralded role in 
encouraging the chart-topping group to "ham up" their characters, which helped 
them top the charts around the world, generating millions of pounds.

Fuller pointed out in a documentary for BBC Radio 2 that Lennox may not be too 
happy to have her formative role in shaping the band – whose hits included 
Wannabe and Spice Up Your Life – made public.

The group had distinct personas when they burst on to the music scene and were 
eventually dubbed Sporty, Baby, Scary, Ginger and Posh by a canny pop magazine 
editor – nicknames which still stick today.

Fuller said: "Each of the girls knew who they were and in their own way tried 
to represent it but it wasn't strong enough and probably the most significant 
thing that happened was when they metAnnie Lennox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox>.

"I'm not sure this story has ever been told and Annie might not thank me for 
telling it. But I think we were flying to New York and I sort of brought up 
midway in the flight and said I've just signed this girl group. And Annie was 
very interested.

"She said "I want to meet them'. Almost directly, she was the one who got them 
to be louder and more brash and more specific. So Emma who was the sweet cute 
blonde girl became Baby Spice. She just played it and hammed it up – none of 
these names actually existed, but Annie gave them focus."

In the programme – The Fuller Picture: The Simon Fuller Story, to be broadcast 
on Wednesday at 10pm – he also tells how his "controlling" influence on the 
girls led to him famously being dumped as their manager when they were at their 
peak in late 1997.

"It was kind of somewhat out of the blue. My initial reaction was kind of 
shock, and, fine, OK, that's that. Sod them, I'm moving on. They're missing out 
on having the best manager in the world and that's the way it is, so I withdrew 
and stopped managing them instantly.

"I was the sergeant major, I was the parent, I ran everything. I was very 
controlling and I think that builds up some resentment. They were probably 
unhappy because they were missing their parents, missing their loved ones, they 
were tired, emotionally drained and I was probably the one responsible for that 
so we parted company."

He already had plans in place for a second Spice Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spicegirls> movie and a third album: "It 
would have set each of them up with solo careers beautifully. It wasn't to be. 
I completely understand how it happened." Fuller, who has gone on to manage 
figures such as David Beckham, Andy Murray and Lewis Hamilton and has made 
millions from the Pop Idol franchise, also talked about how he was on the verge 
of overseeing the career of Michael Jackson.

He said: "There was a minute there where I was going to become his manager. I 
had lots of ideas, and I think about it actually every now and again about what 
I was going to do with him and they were very different to anything he'd done 
previously and it wasn't about touring for sure.

"I actually advised him not to do touring because I felt that he'd already 
been seen touring and I felt there was more to offer in a different way.

"It was quite a complicated situation and complication isn't something I crave 
in life but the people around him would have made it challenging, if it had 
been just down to me working with Michael I think we'd have done something 
extraordinary but I just thought better to just let it go, it was a shame," he 
added.
 