 The suicide of Adam Rickwood, at Hassockfield secure training centre in County 
Durham, is the latest in a list of tragedies for children in the penal system. 
Adam, the 25th child to die since 1990, was 14 when he hanged himself, becoming 
the youngest person in memory to die in custody in Britain. There are many 
disturbing factors. His mother, and other family members who regularly 
travelled hundreds of miles to visit him, say they had asked that Adam, who had 
a history of self-harm, should be placed on suicide watch.
And yet he became the second child in four months to die in one of the secure 
centres supported by the Youth Justice Board. In comparison to much-criticised 
young offender institutions, the three privately run units, and a fourth, due 
to be opened next year, were designed to provide safe, productive and humane 
custody for a growing number of vulnerable children. A total of 2,637 under-18s 
are in secure detention, compared with 1,769 last November; the number of 
juveniles in custody has doubled in a decade.

Such statistics, and the alarming number of suicides, have too few official 
repercussions. In a week in which Michael Howard reheated his creed that prison 
works and ministers touted headline-grabbing legislation to stop rapists 
winning the lottery, worrying new rules covering children in prison caused no 
stir. The Howard League warns that, under an order to come into effect next 
month, youngsters can be routinely strip-searched and may be locked up in their 
cells for longer and get less education. It is time, instead, for children to 
be treated in full accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
and for the Children Bill going through Parliament to be amended according to 
tenets of redemption and humanity.

Children of 14 and under should not be tried in an adversarial system designed 
for adults. Those who need to be held securely should be placed in local 
authority care, not in institutions that mimic adult jails and whose location 
keeps young teenagers in despair miles from their families. The Home Secretary 
should bow to pressure to hold a full inquiry into the death of Joseph Scholes, 
whose suicide, at 16, in Stoke Heath young offenders' institution, raises many 
questions about child custody. When the divide between vulnerability and 
criminality is a hair's breadth, there can be only one guiding principle. The 
desire to punish children must never eclipse their right to life.
 