
While England's cricketers pondered the enticements of India yesterday 
morning, Steve Waugh was being interviewed by Channel 4 as though he was a 
visitor from the planet Krypton.

How did Australia's captain explain his staggering return to the colours in 
this Test, from what his interlocutor made sound like the brink of death, 
though was actually a calf injury? Waugh made it sound compellingly simple. 
"I'm a professional cricketer and I love playing for Australia," he said. "What 
else was I going to do?"

What indeed? Yesterday provided another reason why he does love it: a 
performance of aggressive bowling and out-cricket at concert pitch. When Adam 
Gilchrist preached the doctrine of attacking cricket after defeat at 
Headingley, it seemed a little guileless. When Waugh practised it at the Oval, 
it appeared intimidating.

Although the English batsmen looked peeved to have been called out on a bank 
holiday, it was another day at the office for Waugh, inhibitingly close at 
silly point throughout. Nasser Hussain drove his first ball off the back foot 
into his rival's ankle - Waugh did not move, let alone flinch. Mark Ramprakash 
did the same - Waugh this time barely blinked. Both batsmen fell with the 
surrounding convention of fielders very much in mind, Hussain playing pad 
first, Ramprakash trying to steer a leg-break to safety.

Alec Stewart later repeated the error, holding his bat from harm but 
neglecting his stumps. With others, there was justification for Homer Simpson's 
dictum: "Trying is just the first step to failure."

Usman Afzaal lit on the vaguest evidence of a half-volley and skewered it to 
slip. Occasionally, between overs as he swapped from helmet to cap, Australia's 
captain was seen bare-headed. It looked odd, like a clean-shaven Groucho Marx 
or Buddy Holly wearing contacts - but then the headgear, and the pressure, came 
back on.

So the Australians made a little more history. The Oval was English cricket's 
final fastness - Australia had not won here since 1972 - yet it fell like all 
the citadels before it. Rather as in the Perth Test of February 1995, where the 
euphoria of an English win in the previous match lingered no longer than the 
next Australian innings, the conclusion was sadly anti-climactic. Never mind 
that Stewart and Darren Gough are suddenly shy of going to India; a few others 
in this Test have made cases for a winter free of cricket employment.

Where there is history, there all summer have been Shane Warne (31 wickets for 
the series) and Glenn McGrath (32 wickets). They find it difficult to do 
anything these days without setting a record of some sort, especially with 
whole websites now devoted to instances of 
five-wickets-or-more-by-bowlers-favouring-floppy-hats and 
rejected-lbw-appeals-by-cricketers-with-surnames-containing-two-or-more-vowels.

Yesterday's landmarks, though, were not insignificant. By dismissing 
Ramprakash, Warne passed Curtly Ambrose's wicket total of 405, moving to fifth 
on the Test list. By dismissing Afzaal, McGrath left Dennis Lillee's 355 
behind, moving to second on the Australian list. It is strange that we think of 
bowling partnerships only in terms of new-ball attacks: Hall/Griffith, 
Lindwall/Miller et al. In fact, with both Warne and McGrath in his charge, 
Steve Waugh has had perhaps the ideal coupling, covering all possible 
conditions and contingencies.

Warne and McGrath have performed their prodigies, moreover, with little 
support. Brett Lee has been a failure and, after bowling skilfully for the 
first three Tests, Jason Gillespie has looked for the last two in need of the 
shade of a coolabah tree. More prolonged resistance from England's batsmen 
might have tested the robustness of the four-bowler formula, but it never arose.

The depth of talent in this Australian side is manifest. It may be stronger 
than the ensemble that Mark Taylor led here four years ago. Yet the difference 
between the contestants in this rubber, rather than being a question of 
man-for-man talent, seems rather to condense to Waugh's pre-play comment. He 
and his players are, paradoxically if you like, professionals who love what 
they do. For them, missing a Test is painful, missing a tour an ordeal.

This is their captain's creed, though he himself inherited it from his first 
skipper Allan Border, who in 15 years as a Test cricketer did not miss a single 
trip abroad and who played more consecutive Tests than any player in history. 
The spirit is now part of this team's DNA and destined accordingly to pass to 
the next generation.

Throughout this series, by contrast, England have projected an image of 
ambivalence about their objectives: in their faulty fielding, their plague of 
injuries, their coyness about responsibility and now their misgivings about 
touring. The Australians, who draw strength from the psychological frailty they 
perceive in others, have found them almost willing victims. In 18 months 
England and Australia meet again. Some of the faces will be different but it is 
difficult to see England uncovering a supply of kryptonite in the meantime.
 