
People who become very famous reach a point at which they no longer have to 
introduce themselves to anyone by name, or say what they do for a living. Most, 
however, can still remember a time when they were ordinary enough to open 
a conversation with, "Hello, my name is X and my job is Y." I askAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> when those words last 
passed their lips, and they are both floored.

"In this country?" Ant blinks. "God, I don't know. I honestly don't know. I 
haven't for so long." Dec thinks hard. "Honestly, I can't think of when it 
would have been."

Anthony McPartlin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/anthonymcpartlin> and 
Declan Donnelly <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/declandonnelly> have been on 
our screens for so long that, the first time we meet, I feel as if I've climbed 
inside my television set. Sheer ubiquity has a lot to do with it: child stars 
of the teen soapByker Grove <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byker_Grove> back 
in the late 1980s, they then graduated into a pop act,PJ and Duncan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m_sJmIQrH54>, in the 1990s, before presenting a 
new ITV Saturday morning show,SM:TV Live 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMTV_Live>, which was supposed to be for kids but 
turned into one of those surprise crossover hits that grown-ups fall in love 
with, propelling the pair into prime-time celebrity.

For the past decade, they have been the face of almost every ITV family 
entertainment blockbuster, fromPop Idol <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pop_Idol> 
toBritain's Got Talent 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> to I'm A 
Celebrity… Get Me Out Of Here! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/i-m-a-celebrity>, and even if you have 
never watched a single one of those shows, I bet you'd still know their faces. 
Now in their late 30s, they continue to look weirdly boyish, like middle-aged 
children.

By the laws of show business, at least one of them should have succumbed to 
the traditional hazards of child stardom – drink and drugs, sexual 
transgression, monstrous egomania. Yet, with the solitary exception of a 
drunken night involving Dec and a lap dancer, which ended up in the tabloids, 
the pair have been almost freakishly clean. Have they never even tried taking 
drugs?

"Years ago, yeah," Ant admits, "but we're not really druggy people, that's the 
thing. I think you either go into that crowd as a kid or you don't, and we 
didn't. We found the love of alcohol very early on and we stayed with it." 
Laughing, Dec adds, "There's a real pub culture where we're from in Newcastle, 
so we're just more boozy people."

If one had ever been at risk of self-destruction, though, who was the likelier 
candidate? Without hesitation, both point at Ant. "Probably me, yeah," he 
admits. Dec points out affectionately: "There's nothing like the love of a good 
woman, though."

Ant has been married for six years to his childhood sweetheart, Lisa 
Armstrong, a makeup artist – but I wonder whether the love of Dec has had a lot 
to do with it, too? "Yeah, I think that's exactly right," Ant says. "That's the 
handbrake. With us two, what we do affects somebody else – directly affects 
somebody else – and what that means is you've got a responsibility. And that's 
good to have."

I meet Ant and Dec on several occasions over several months, in production 
meetings, on film sets and photoshoots, and they are the only famous people I 
have ever known to be exactly –exactly – the same as their public persona. 
After a while, I become a bit obsessed with trying to work out what is real. Is 
their on-screen charm a telegenic invention, which they've trained themselves 
to keep up off-camera? In the end, there is only one possible conclusion: Ant 
and Dec owe their success in an industry built on artifice to – of all things – 
authenticity.

To viewers less cynical than me, this may not come as such a surprise. But 
even the presenters' most loyal fans probably don't realise how much more there 
is to them than likability – which is largely why they decided to let me watch 
them at work. "Most people assume that we turn up on a Saturday and make it up 
as we go along," Ant reflects. "That's quite a compliment, in a way."

Many of Ant and Dec's programmes are made by their own production company, and 
they are about to revive the one of which they have always been proudest –
Saturday Night Takeaway <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturday_Night_Takeaway>, 
a variety show they created and executive produced, which ran for nine series 
from 2002 to 2009. An anarchic comedy rollercoaster of stunts, sketches and 
competitions, it was both emphatically old-fashioned and ironically knowing. 
When I sit in on a production meeting, they talk through every tiny detail 
until I'm no longer sure how much of it comes down to decades of experience and 
how much to some sort of sixth sense for what an eight-year-old and his 
octogenarian granny would both want to watch.

"Saturday Night Takeaway is the show we always wanted to make," Dec says. 
"It's a direct descendant ofGame For A Laugh 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_for_a_Laugh> and Noel's House Party 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noel%27s_House_Party> and Russ Abbot's Madhouse 
<http://www.russabbot.co.uk/Russ_Abbots_Madhouse.html>, and they're all shows 
we grew up on as kids."

Saturday Night Takeaway may be their pride and joy, but it was also the show 
that very nearly destroyed them. In 2007 it emerged thatsome of the phone-ins 
had been rigged <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/oct/21/ITV.television>, 
and viewers had been calling premium-rate numbers to win prizes that had 
already gone. The presenters were cleared of any complicity in the deceit, but 
at the time they were both certain it was curtains for their career. "Yeah, 
God, yeah." Ant shudders. "Completely, absolutely, yeah, yeah, yeah," Dec 
agrees. "That was just the worst, worst period ever."
 Ant with a blond Dec in 1996. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Best friends since Byker Grove, for years they were flatmates, and even now 
they live just three doors apart in west London, constantly texting each other 
while watching TV and finishing each other's sentences like an old married 
couple. "Fundamentally," Ant says, "we've got the same relationship you see on 
TV, and I think that's what keeps us sane, because if we had pretended to be 
somebody else for this length of time, it would have all gone tits up by now."

Do they envy anything about each other? "I guess, for me, it's that he's 
married and settled with a wife," Dec says.

"Well, I envy your singleness," Ant teases, then feigns panic. "How's that 
going to go down when I get home?"

"Oh God," Dec groans in mock alarm. Ant grins and shrugs. "Oh well, I've said 
it now."

Such is their professional co-dependence that they have even taken out life 
insurance on each other, acknowledging that for all they know, as individual 
presenters, they could be out of a job for ever. I wonder whether the fear 
of what they'd risk if they were ever to fall out feels oppressive – like the 
golden handcuffs of being married to a millionaire? "I don't think so," Ant 
says at once. "No, I think it's more than that," Dec confirms. "I think if 
we were to row and to fall out, I'd miss having my best mate more than I'd miss 
my career. Genuinely, I do. I think almost everything that we do is built on 
our friendship, not on our career – so we have a career that's built on 
a friendship, not a friendship built on a career."

It's hard to see how their career could get much bigger in this country, but 
when I ask why they have never managed to make much of an impact in America, 
it's the only time their equanimity wobbles. "I'll tell you what's annoying 
about America," Ant launches in. "We could be here a while," Dec murmurs. "No," 
Ant goes on with feeling, "what's annoying is we've launched a lot of shows 
like Pop Idol, and then it goes to the States, and everything stays the same, 
yet they change the hosts. I'm A Celebrity has been done twice in America now – 
but they changed the hosts. America's Got Talent, we don't host – somebody else 
hosts. That becomes very annoying, because I'll tell you what: give us a fair 
crack at it." "Beginning to get a complex," Dec teases under his breath. "No, 
give us a fair crack at it and we'll do a good job. But we can't just keep 
traipsing over there and doing the odd shows."

In 2008 they made a prime-time celebrity gameshow for ABC, Wanna Bet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEBQmaZMexg>, which looked likely to work, but 
flopped. "For us to go over there again, I think it will have to be quite a big 
show, because it's a lot of work and we've got a lot of work on here. And the 
shows we love that we do over here, we haven't been given the chance." Why does 
he think they haven't? "I've got no idea." Could it be their geordie accent? "I 
don't think so," Dec says. "We have got offered some shows in America, but 
really dopey shows – like reality shows. Horrible. Well, not horrible, but…"

"Just shows we wouldn't do here," Ant says.

"Yeah." Dec nods. "And that was always our thing: if we wouldn't do it at 
home, we shouldn't do it there. We're notthat desperate to break America. And 
the problem is there's a fear culture there when it comes to their jobs: nobody 
wants to make the wrong decision, so therefore nobody makes a decision."

"It's not that everyone there lies," Ant adds, "it's just that there's an 
awful lot of bullshit. And we're not used to working like that – we're used to 
working with our instinct."
 On I'm A Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here! in 2006. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
Part of the problem could be that the Brits loved by America tend to be 
pantomime villains –Simon Cowell <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/simoncowell>, 
Piers Morgan <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/piersmorgan>, Jeremy Kyle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/jeremykyle> – and nastiness is the last thing 
Ant and Dec are cut out for. "Probably, probably," Ant agrees. "I think we're 
two working-class lads, which could go for us if you pitch the right show and 
you shoot it in the right place. In LA or New York, we don't fit. I think 
middle America could relate to us a lot, but we've never been given the 
opportunity to get out there."

"The thing is," Dec grins, "cool is just something we've never been." He's not 
wrong – but a lot of uncool stars suffer from what could be called Robbie 
Williams syndrome, despising the middle-market mass appeal to which they owe 
their success. Have they never hankered for the glamour of edginess?

"I'm trying to think about it and being as honest as possible," Dec says. "And 
I think, you know, no. I've never massively minded not being cool."

"Because it's so fleeting, anyway, if you get it," Ant goes on. Exactly, nods 
Dec. "There's no longevity in cool. So I never want to be cool."

They've never coveted the prestige of the BBC, either, nor longed for the 
status of grandee presenters who get to cover, say, a royal jubilee? "Not 
really," Dec says. "I think probably because we grew up on council estates in 
the north-east, we both kind of came from ITV families, so we never really had 
this inherent snobbishness that ITV is trashy. We're just… I guess we'll call 
it ITV heartland viewers, really."

They'd both always voted Labour until the last election, when for the first 
time Ant voted Conservative. "Which would make a lot of my family up north very 
angry. I haven't actually told them, so when they read this they'll go, 'What?' 
But they certainly couldn't give an argument for Labour for me at the moment – 
not a valid one. Then again, I'd struggle to give an argument for voting 
Conservative at the moment."

Both their families still live in Newcastle, and when they go back the poverty 
they see reminds them a lot of what it was like growing up in the 1980s. "It 
was bleak then," Dec says. "Yeah, it really was bleak, yeah."

Part of their popularity has always been the charm of working-class boys done 
good, but there was nothing romantic about the poverty Ant recalls. Dec is the 
youngest of seven children, while Ant grew up with a single mother. "And the 
one thing that kind of speaks, to my mind, was I rarely saw my mum because she 
had so many jobs. So when I would come home from school, me and my sister… I 
would cook for her, or we would kind of sort each other out, because Mum had to 
get another job to make ends meet. We would have people knocking at the door – 
money lenders, all that kind of stuff. Yeah, I remember all of that quite 
vividly and that sticks with you. That's probably one of the reasons we're 
never too flash with our cash. I think you can show off too much, and that 
would have been such a no-no from me growing up."

Even though they insist the reports that they are each worth more than £60m 
are wildly exaggerated, they're still two of the highest-paid presenters in the 
country. But Dec seems to mean it when he says, "There's that inherent belief 
that somebody's going to knock on the door tomorrow and say, 'Oh, actually, 
there's been a mistake and we need it all back.'"

"Yeah, God, aye," Ant agrees straight away. Seriously, they still feel like 
that? Dec looks amazed by my surprise. "God, yeah. Yeah. If you grow up poor, 
I'm not sure you ever shake that off."

The bigger surprise still comes when I ask about I'm A Celebrity. Their advice 
to everyone who asks if they'd recommend going on as a contestant is always the 
same: only do it if you're a nice person or you're going to be horribly 
exposed. So if they were minor-league celebrities instead of the show's 
presenters, would they consider it? Dec doesn't pause to think. "No. Because 
I'm not sure I'm confident in the viewing public seeing every side of me, and 
I'm not sure I'm confident enough in myself that I'd allow myself to be that 
exposed." He's being perfectly serious, and for a moment I'm thrown. Have I 
been wrong all along and in fact they're just better than anyone else on TV 
at faking authenticity? Then Ant points out, "Let's be honest: most people who 
are arseholes think they're nice people" and of course the converse is also 
true.

If all goes to plan, at 7pm tonight Ant and Dec will look like a couple of 
mates having a bit of a laugh on a Saturday night. "It's the whole swan 
analogy, isn't it?" Ant says. "It looks graceful on the top, but it's going 
like the clappers underneath." I believe him when he says they don't care what 
the TV critics say about it – "That's never really bothered us" – but when I 
ask if that means they don't suffer from nerves, they look at me as if I must 
be mad.

"Do I worry?" Ant says. "I shit my pants about it." Already, Dec is having 
sleepless nights. "Hairs on the back of my neck stand on end when I think about 
it. I get goosebumps. I'm shitting my pants, yeah."

• Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway starts on ITV1 at 7pm on 23 February
 