
Anthony McPartlin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and 
Declan Donnelly have signed a new two-year "golden handcuffs" deal with ITV, 
ending months of speculation that they might break their nine-year exclusive 
relationship with the broadcaster.

Under the new deal Ant and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> will stay with ITV 
exclusively until the end of 2011, fronting shows including a new ITV1 
peak-time entertainment format, which has a working title of Push the Button, 
to be made by their independent production company Gallowgate.

Push the Button could end up replacing Ant and Dec's long-running ITV1 show 
Saturday Night Takeaway,according to Broadcast magazine 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/commissioning/ant-and-dec-family-show-to-take-over-from-takeaway/5007680.article>
.

Ant and Dec first joined ITV in 1998 presenting the Saturday morning shows 
SM:TV Live and CD:UK. They signed their first golden handcuffs deal with ITV in 
2000 and successfully made the transition to being two of ITV1's biggest 
mainstream entertainment stars, fronting shows including I'm a Celebrity … Get 
Me Out of Here!, Britain's Got Talent and Saturday Night Takeaway.

The pair will also be developing exclusive content for ITV.com, including 
behind-the-scenes footage from their shows and blogs.

Earlier this year as the advertising recession took hold and ITV was forced 
into drastic cost-cutting measures, including hundreds of job cuts, there was 
speculation that the broadcaster might not be able to renew its exclusive deals 
with stars including Ant and Dec and Simon Cowell.

However, Ant and Dec's new deal is almost certainly worth less than their last 
ITV exclusive contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/apr/17/ITV.broadcasting>, signed in 
2007.

McPartlin said: "We are delighted to sign with ITV for another two years to 
continue to make the programmes we love like Saturday Night Takeaway, Britain's 
Got Talent and I'm A Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! – there is no better home 
for our shows."

Donnelly added: "We're particularly excited about the new media opportunities 
which will allow us to make fresh and exciting content for online, and also 
launching our brand new entertainment show Push the Button in 2010."

The ITV director of television, channels and online, Peter Fincham, said: "Ant 
and Dec are without question two of the UK's most talented television stars who 
have helped make ITV the home of entertainment. They have a unique appeal and a 
very special quality which means that they are loved by young and old alike.

"After more than a decade on ITV, I'm delighted that they will continue to 
exclusively work with us on our hit shows and in developing new programmes and 
formats."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".

 
 