
Publication of the first new Asterix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> album in eight years has brought 
the world's media to a small house in Cambridge. The Guardian is in the living 
room and BBC Northern Ireland is on the phone. It's the 35th adventure that 
translator Anthea Bell has undertaken with the world's most famous Gaul, and it 
has transported them to Scotland on a mission to save the Picts from 
imperialists and usurpers.

The political potential of the latest storyline was quickly grasped by 
the Scottish press, which breached a fortress of secrecy in the summer 
to announce thatAsterix and the Picts would be about the independence 
referendum. They were wrong, says Bell, not least because Asterix is on 
a royalist mission, to return a prince to his rightful throne. Though she 
managed to slip in a reference to "Pict Nats", she suspects the resonance was 
lost on the new writer/illustrator team of Jean-Yves Ferri and Didier Conrad. 
The days when Asterix could be mined for sly political in-jokes, and a thinly 
disguised Jacques Chirac flitted between Obelix's menhirs, are past. "I fear 
Alex Salmond would be mortified to think that the French, traditional allies of 
the Scots, know nothing about his wonderful party and its referendum."

Bell began translating Asterix with the university lecturer Derek Hockridge in 
1969, eight years after the books first appeared in French. She is responsible 
for some of its finest puns and was hailed by Conrad as "a star" at the Paris 
launch of the new album. It was she who changed the name of Obelix's small, 
evil-tempered dog from Idéfix to Dogmatix, and transformed Panoramix into 
Getafix, provoking decades of scholarly musing as to whether the druid was a 
dopehead. Bell has always protested her innocence. In her translation notes for 
the new book, she seized on one frame as belated evidence in her defence, 
writing: "Aha! At last we have a place in the text, and in the mouth of the 
druid himself, to justify his English name over all these years! Nothing to do 
with drugs … I mean, would I dream of such a thing? Never – I am as innocent as 
the driven snow. No, he was getting a fix on the stars …"

The Asterix mandate has made Bell into that rarity in translating circles, 
a celebrity in her own right, but she never sought fame, and the albums 
are only a fraction of a workload that shows little sign of lightening up in 
her late 70s. Three months before the brouhaha overAsterix and the Picts, she 
slipped quietly into the shops as translator of Eugen Ruge'sIn Times of Fading 
Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/06/times-fading-light-ruge-review> 
– the story of three generations of an East German family. That this was a 
debut novel by an unknown author makes it no less interesting to her than any 
other challenge of a career that has included collaborating withWG Sebald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>, rehabilitating the Austrian 
novelist and memoirist Stefan Zweig, and translating Kafka and Freud.

It all began with a passion for world literature and an aptitude for wordplay. 
She traces the wordplay back to her father, Adrian Bell, a farmer turned local 
newspaper columnist, and the first compiler of the Times cryptic crossword. Her 
sense of an international literary heritage was nurtured by a collection of 
Loeb classics that had been liberated by her grandfather Robert Bell from the 
offices of the Observer, where he worked as deputy editor. The faded red and 
green volumes of the famous "library" of Greek and Latin translations still 
dominate her bookshelves.

She grew up in Suffolk, the oldest of three children (her brother is the BBC 
journalist turned MP Martin Bell), and was sent to boarding school in 
Bournemouth, where she learned French and German, racing through the language 
to get to the literature. She went on to Somerville College, Oxford, to read 
English rather than modern languages, because the course was strongly 
historical and "I was very interested in history: I liked the beginnings of 
things".

She would have gone on to a second degree had she not married "far too young" 
and opted instead for a secretarial course. The pressure to do so came both 
from her own mother, "whose ideal was domestic – I loved her dearly but we 
didn't understand each other", and her inlaws. Her publisher husband, Antony 
Kamm, was from a Jewish family. "It must have been a shock to them that he 
married out, and they were so nice to me that I went off like a good girl and 
did my Pitmans."

It was "by complete accident" that she made her translating debut, after 
Antony was asked by publisher Klaus Flugge if he knew anyone who could 
translate a children's bookThe Little Water-Sprite, by the German writer 
Otfried Preussler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/otfried-preussler>. "It was my 
first translation and I did it with my first baby in a carrycot at my side," 
she says.

She went on to translate the whole Preussler oeuvre for Flugge, who now runs 
the children's imprint Andersen Press. Yet it wasn't until she got divorced in 
her mid-30s that she realised she didn't have to go back to secretarial work: 
she could earn enough from translating to support herself and her two children.

When her sons – Oliver, now a Times leader writer, and Richard, an academic – 
left school, she moved to Cambridge to be closer to her parents and to a good 
university library. She was an early adopter of the internet, which she 
discovered when she was hunting down an obscure reference to a 19th-century 
German poem singing the praises of the joys of hiking in Westphalia. "All I had 
was the poet's name and a few lines of the poem. I typed it in and the whole 
poem came up." It was a eureka moment. While many of her peers were sceptical, 
she became an early convert, embracing a technology that she realised would 
transform the translator's work.

Along with the technological change has come a new politics, with heated 
debate among translators as to how prominent the fact of translation should be. 
Though Bell is the doyenne of them all – with a raft of international awards 
alongside her homegrown OBE – she describes herself as "an unrepentant, 
unreconstructed adherent of the school of invisible translation".

Flugge points out a paradox: her limpid translation style has meant that her 
work travels, and her visibility in terms of international awards has been part 
of her service to literature. She has won the US's prestigious Mildred L 
Batchelder award for children's books in translation four times, and has been 
cited more often than anyone else, which has helped to establish a 
trans-Atlantic market for European children's books. She was, for instance, the 
translator ofCornelia Funke's Inkheart series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/22/featuresreviews.guardianreview31>
, a German young adult fantasy trilogy which reached number two in the New York 
Times bestseller list.

"Anthea has a talent that not every translator has for catching the mood of a 
book. Some are a bit more wooden and some try to take too many liberties. She 
has a knack of hitting the right style and atmosphere," says Flugge.

Bell herself laid out her position at a translation conference in 2004 
<http://arts.brunel.ac.uk/gate/entertext/4_3/bell_s.pdf>: "All my professional 
life, I have felt that translators are in the business of spinning an illusion: 
the illusion is that the reader is reading not a translation but the real 
thing." Nine years on, she still insists that "a translation is successful if 
it's invisible" – though that is not to detract from the creativity of a 
relationship that emerges clearly from her Asterix notes.

MacAroon, the wronged Pictish prince, has a large tattoo on his chest that 
causes some curiosity among the Gauls. In the French version, Obelix speculates 
that it may be a decalcomanian (from decalcomania, a method of using transfers 
to impose artwork on various basic materials). Bell was having none of it: 
"This term is all but unknown in English, so a substitute is necessary. 'Maybe 
a footballer … they do it with transfers.'"

It is one of a series of cultural negotiations that are most intense over a 
running gag involving famous song lyrics, which MacAroon spouts when he is lost 
for words. At one point she insists that Gene Vincent'sBe-Bop-a‑Lula should be 
replaced by a line from Coleridge'sAncient Mariner. "In the distinctly wet 
circumstances, I suspect theAncient Mariner is more apt." In the end, she says, 
copyright law came to her aid, ruling out many of the lyrics, "although I was 
sorry we couldn't have 'rock around the loch'".

While it's preferable to be able to consult directly with an author, it's 
not always possible. Her collaboration with Sebald is a case in point. She 
worked closely with him on two books, including his final novelAusterlitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/29/fiction.reviews3>. "It was a 
great privilege, and fascinating because his own English was so good that he 
could have written in it himself. It was very, very dense work. He wouldn't use 
email and said he'd never unwrapped the computer in his office. I would draft 
out a passage and send it to him and he'd send it back while I did the next 
one, so we were working together on it all the way through."

However, after his untimely death in a car crash, a series of essays was 
discovered on his desk which were collected into a posthumous book,On the 
Natural History of Destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/feb/22/highereducation.history>. The 
title appalled one academic who wrote that Sebald would never have agreed to 
such a loose translation of the German,Luftkrieg und Literatur. Bell argued 
that it was his own choice. "It was the title thatSolly Zuckerman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solly_Zuckerman,_Baron_Zuckerman> [British 
bombing unit survey director] wanted to give to a report he had been asked to 
write on immediate postwar Germany, but after what he had seen in the ruins of 
Cologne, he couldn't bring himself to do it."

As an article of faith to her authors, Bell will not work from a language she 
doesn't know – though she taught herself enough Danish over one Christmas to be 
able to add it to her core repertoire of French and German. She has only once 
translated from an intermediary language, taking Władysław Szpilman's memoir
The Pianist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/13/audiobooks.roundupreviews> from 
German rather than the original Polish at the request of Szpilman himself.

Though she has come to the conclusion that she likes working on fiction best – 
"It's all about finding the tone of voice in the original. You have to be quite 
free" – she covers a swath of what she calls literary translation (as opposed 
to the technical manuals that constitute the majority of translation work), 
toiling away "for peanuts" on theNew Grove Dictionary and dabbling in art 
history. "You don't have to be an expert as long as you can understand a text 
in your own language."

The only two genres she wouldn't attempt are science and poetry – she says she 
doesn't count Freud'sThe Psychopathology of Everyday Life and A Case of 
Hysteria (Dora) as science. Translating Freud was like a literary detective 
story "because he pokes behind slips of the tongue". In this context, the gap 
between comic album and psycho-analytic tract isn't so huge: "If you're trying 
to work out wordplay, you're trying to do on purpose what the Freudian slip 
does by accident: fishing up words from the unconscious."

And poetry? "I wouldn't trust myself with anything except for comic verse or 
bad-on-purpose verse: now you've met my cats you'll understand why I was very 
keen to doThe Life and Opinions of the Tomcat Murr …". This exuberant early 
19th-century novel by ETA Hoffmann is framed as a poetically pretentious 
tomcat's autobiography, which gets mixed up, due to a printer's error, with the 
biography of a composer.

"It's the ancestor of all books written by cats," she says – which brings us 
to her own feline family. When her sons left home and she found herself alone, 
Bell took up breeding cats "in a small way", but discovered that the kittens 
landed her in a predicament. She couldn't give them away because it would be 
undercutting other breeders, but she didn't feel comfortable about selling them 
for her own profit, so she gave the money to a Bosnian orphanage supported by 
her brother Martin. In pride of place on her sitting-room wall is a glamorous 
show photograph of Grand Champion Arcady Dorcas – one of six pedigree Birmans 
that continue to rule her household with an evident sense of entitlement in 
their old age.

The cat show circuit provided a very different outlet for a self-confessed 
workaholic, who spends most of her time at home alone, juggling texts 
and languages, but it had its own linguistic delights for the inexhaustible 
translator. "People get quite bitchy in the cat world," she says, "though the 
equivalent of bitch in catspeak is queen, which is a much nicer term."
 