
A British honeymoon couple murdered in Antigua were found lying in a bloodied 
scene in their luxury resort, a court has heard.

Ben and Catherine Mullany, both 31, died after an apparent botched robbery at 
their beachside hotel just over a fortnight after their wedding day.

Horrific details emerged as a medic recalled treating Ben Mullany as the 
injured man desperately tried to communicate with emergency workers. But those 
battling to save him were unable to make out his words, jurors were told.

The student physiotherapist died a week after the attack.

Describing the murder scene that met emergency workers called to the secluded 
spot on the morning of 27 July 2008, emergency medical technician Loretta 
Ephraim told how she found Catherine Mullany lying lifeless on the floor and 
her husband in a similar position on the bed in their chalet at 6.15am.

"When we got in, I noticed blood and mosquito nets over the bed," she told the 
court.

"There was a male on the bed and there was a female lying down on the floor 
next to the bed.

"The female was lying very still, on the floor. Her eyes were open, wide open, 
but there were no movements coming from her."

Speaking at the trial of Avie Howell, 20 and Kaniel Martin, 23, who both deny 
murder, she described how she had arrived at the hillside cottage to find armed 
officers and police standing guard.

Inside, she worked on Ben Mullany, attempting to place a brace around his neck 
and stem the bleeding from his head.

"While I was putting the bandage on ... he tried to say something but I 
couldn't understand what he was saying," she said.

He was moving slightly and had a large swelling on the back of his bloodied 
head. There was more blood on his pillow, the court was told.

"We placed a collar around his neck and we also placed him on a board to 
support his back," Ephraim said.

Once immobilised, Ben Mullany was taken to Holberton hospital.

"When we got into the ambulance he became very restless," the medic said.

"We checked his blood pressure, how he was bleeding, his pulse, everything at 
the time was OK and then we left for the hospital.

"On our way to the hospital he was even more restless.

"He was trying to speak but we couldn't understand what he was trying to say 
so I spoke to him to see how much I could give him some comfort."

On arrival, he became much calmer, she said.

Earlier the court heard how the couple had been shot by the same gun that was 
later turned on local shopkeeper, Woneta Anderson.

The 43-year-old was killed in an "almost identical" attack the next month, 
prosecutor Anthony Armstrong told jurors.

Opening the case, he said Howell and Martin could be linked to all three 
murders.

The Mullanys, from Swansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea>, south 
Wales, had been staying at the Cocos hotel and were on the last day of their 
honeymoon when they were attacked.

Ben Mullany, a former South Yorkshire police officer who had also served in 
the British army, was later transported back to Britain for treatment but died 
a week after the shootings.

On 8 August, Howell and Martin allegedly struck again, this time killing 
Anderson.

"The manner in which these three people were killed was almost identical," 
Armstrong said.

"All three victims were shot in the head. They were shot with a single bullet, 
no more, no less. All three victims were killed using the same firearm," he 
said.

The nature of the killings ruled out the possibility that either of the 
accused were acting in self defence or following provocation, the prosecutor 
told the court.

As the case against them began, nearly three years after the murders, neither 
defendant showed emotion. Both sat in the open dock at Antigua's high court in 
the capital city, St John's, with their hands clasped together, listening 
intently to the evidence.

The crown, which plans to call about 70 witnesses during the trial, will rely 
on ballistic, DNA, documentary, medical and mobile phone evidence.

Howell and Martin both deny three counts of murder.

The trial continues.
 