
The antisocial behaviour, crime and policing bill  
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2013-14/antisocialbehaviourcrimeandpolicingbill.html>
is currently working its way through the House of Commons and receives its 
second reading on 10 June. It is our contention that this bill, as drafted, is 
flawed and will lead to a host of unintended consequences.

Our first cause for concern is section 1 (2), which defines antisocial 
behaviour as "conduct capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to any person". 
With such a broad definition, it is tantamount to making everything illegal. At 
a time when police services are looking to utilise their resources effectively, 
this bill seems to be counterproductive as it is inviting those in dispute to 
seek the intervention of frontline police officers. The bill, however, does not 
just deal with events that have happened – as long as someone believes the 
potential for misbehaviour is there, he or she can seek a police officer's 
assistance.

Our other cause for concern is section 1 (3), which provides the courts with 
the power to: "grant [an] injunction for the purpose of preventing the 
respondent from engaging in antisocial behaviour". Without any kind of 
definition, this will lead to magistrates – and in the first instance police 
officers and PCSOs – making decisions on what they personally deem unacceptable 
behaviour. It is our contention that the provisions of the bill have the 
potential to be misapplied, if not abused, just because the person in the dock 
has a different belief.

Many naturists already have the perception that the Public Order Act 1986 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/64> – introduced as an anti-riot 
measure – are being misapplied against them. These instances are frequently 
overturned at a higher court. It is our belief that the potential for a 
miscarriage of justice is higher with this new flawed bill than is currently 
endured by naturists.

Edmund Burke said in 1780 that "bad laws are the worst sort of tyranny". We 
contend that this bill is bad law in the making, and would urge readers to 
inform their MPs of the need for amendment.
Reg Barlow
Chairman, Naturist Action Group
 