
HG Wells once said that "a newspaper is a device incapable of distinguishing 
between a bicycle accident and the end of civilisation". I fear George Monbiot 
has proved him right. His article (Comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/06/law-to-stop-eveyone-everything>
, 7 January) paints an apocalyptic picture of the antisocial behaviour bill as 
an evil measure to end our right to protest, our freedom of speech and our 
civil liberties. It is nonsense. If it was in any way true I would be the first 
to stand up and say so.

Although I have only been involved in the latter stages of the bill (I am not 
the architect, as George describes me), I'm confident these new powers won't 
stop people being able to sing carols or whatever else the scare stories say. 
That notwithstanding, since I took over the bill I have introduced further 
safeguards for reassurance. It will help protect vulnerable people in society 
from antisocial behaviour, which, if allowed to grow out of control, can cause 
enormous harm to our communities. For too long there has been a broken system 
for dealing with such behaviour. Labour's asbos failed, not only because they 
unnecessarily criminalise young people, but because they do not help address 
the causes behind the behaviour.

These reforms are the result of an extensive consultation process involving 
local authorities, social landlords, the judiciary and voluntary sector, and, 
most importantly, victims and members of the public who've told us they want a 
more measured and effective response. Our introduction of new injunctions to 
prevent nuisance or annoyance will not criminalise youngsters but address the 
underlying causes of antisocial behaviour, nipping such behaviour in the bud 
before it escalates. Use of these new powers will require a long-established 
test of proportionality, and courts will have to be persuaded of the need to 
grant these orders. Hardly the end of civilisation, is it?
Norman Baker MP 
Crime prevention minister
 