
T is 17 months old, right? You do remember that. Well, maybe I have gone on so 
much that it feels like longer, but take it from me, I remember, and he is much 
less than two.

You wouldn't believe how many arguments I've had since he was born about 
sodding schools. Honestly, I am not even an arse about this. I never start it. 
I never go on about my unflagging commitment to the state system. I am never to 
be found showing off that the schools round me seem fine. At least, there are 
never any seven-year-olds drawing blood on polling day.

I believe the fighty ones are given the day off; I think maybe they are all 
given the day off.

But I definitely do not storm into this conversational ground with any gusto. 
All I won't do is agree that the state system sucks everywhere but in Mayfair, 
and that it's only natural for all parents to move heaven and earth (or more 
probably, just house) to ensure that their children are educated with infants 
of the exact same class and colour. Oh, and I won't just roll over to the, "But 
they're your kids! Surely you want the best for your kids?" argument. It's 
fine, it's not lunacy, but it makes me feel inert and unenthusiastic. I would 
rather be arguing about something else. And it's totally stupid anyway; almost 
nobody involved could even afford private schooling, least of all now. It's 
like arguing all night about whether you deserve a nuclear capability before or 
after Iran.

The consensus among parents - a certain kind of parent - is that you might 
understand the issue, but you won't understand the feelings behind these 
decisions, until you have kids of your own. It's not that complicated, though, 
is it? "I want what's best for me and mine." It's not ... I've been sitting 
here about 20 minutes, trying to think of something more taxing and less of a 
cliche than rocket science, and I can't. All that money on my education ... 
what a waste. They could have shot me into space.

So anyway, say you don't have children and feel patronised and insulted by 
people who won't discuss this very simple issue with you until you have 
procreated. Can I just say, instead of feeling insulted, bask in this time, 
roll about like a cat in a sunspot. It is like a note from your mum to get you 
off swimming. Now that I've said that, I might actually get a note from my mum, 
saying: "Zoe has her period. Please may she be excused from this incredibly 
boring argument?"

It's always the same: probably if you (poor savage) had a state education all 
the way through, it goes slightly differently, but if, like me, you went to a 
state primary and a private secondary, you are accused of denying your child 
the opportunities you had. Ha! It's failsafe, you see, because you can't go 
back in time, to when you were 11, and even if you could, and you said, "I 
can't go there, I'm implacably opposed to the social apartheid caused by 
fee-paying education," your mum would say: "See how you get along for the first 
seven years, pet, and we'll talk again." Someone last night said to me: "You 
might have gone to a state primary, but your parents pulled you out and sent 
you private, because you were failing!" Which, technically, I was. I failed to 
defy the laws of the physical universe, and stay primary-school age for ever. 
If only Ofsted had been around in those days. I said: "But why does each 
generation have to shore up the privileges of the last? Why does this injustice 
have to ossify?" No, actually, I said: "Screw you! I did not fail. Eat my 
shorts."

The ideal is not to find the killer argument that ends all arguments; it 
doesn't exist. No, what I'm looking for is the line that makes you sound as if 
you're just not worth talking to about it. I have a friend, M, who says: "We're 
not really that bothered." Apparently that works. My sister goes: "I don't 
think it matters, they're not really ... [mouthing] academic." That is very 
amusing, but I think it might get on their nerves when they're older. With any 
luck, by then, their education will have been so unremittingly poor they'll 
have forgotten how to speak.
 