
Antisocial behaviour has been on the government's agenda for years. The draft 
antisocial behaviour bill is under early scrutiny by the home affairs select 
committee before being introduced in the 2013-14 legislative programme.

The rationale behind the bill is to speed up the process of tackling 
antisocial behaviour while cutting the cost of tackling nuisance neighbours. 
Home secretary Theresa May says she wants to "empower victims and communities" 
and will "introduce faster and more effective powers to stop the dangerous and 
yobbish behaviour of those who make victims' lives a misery".

The bill streamlines the tools available and introduces a new mandatory ground 
for possession. And if organisations responsible for tackling antisocial 
behaviour fail to act, there will be a "community trigger" – forcing local 
action to be taken.

The proposals are welcome but there are aspects that will lead to arguments 
within the housing sector. Where antisocial behaviour has already been proved 
by another court – for example when an injunction is breached – a possession 
order will be granted. This will remove the discretion from the county court 
judge to consider making an outright possession order and would remove the 
ability to suspend possession on terms. This sounds attractive in principle, 
but there are two compelling reasons why it will not result in the cost or time 
savings the government envisage.

Challenges on the grounds of human rights

Mandatory possession is not a new concept; it is already available to end 
introductory, starter and demoted tenancies. Judicial discretion is not 
applicable in other situations such as when seeking a possession order 
following the service of a notice to quit.

In all these circumstances, cases are delayed by challenges to the process on 
the grounds that it is not proportionate to evict the tenant. While the supreme 
court guidance says such challenges should not hold up the proceedings, in 
reality they docause delays and increase costs.

Cases are adjourned for summary determination of whether the tenant has a 
seriously arguable case and judges often allow the matter to proceed to trial 
rather than dealing with the issues. To introduce a further mandatory route to 
possession will add even more cost and uncertainty.

If it isn't broken, why fix it?

Discretionary grounds for possession have already been scrutinised by the 
appeal courts and largely work. Landlords know possession must be seen as a 
last resort and therefore regularly seek an injunction or an asbo before 
applying for eviction.

There is already, in many cases, a conviction or committal order that forms 
the basis of the possession claim. In these serious cases, the judge will be 
familiar with the "reasonableness test" and give a detailed judgement, which is 
rarely appealable. If it is a serious case, an outright order is likely to 
follow.

If, however, there has only been a minor breach of an injunction, then the 
court has the power to suspend possession on terms. Such a power would not be 
available under the new proposals.

A mandatory ground for possession would change little in practice. In place of 
a workable, familiar hearing on reasonableness, landlords and courts would have 
to grapple with the lengthy and costly public law and human rights arguments – 
fast becoming commonplace in all other possession situations.

The proposals, although well intentioned, do not reflect reality as faced by 
social landlords in tackling the scourge of antisocial behaviour in their 
communities.

Jane Plant leads the housing litigation and management team in the Midlands at 
Weightmans LLP <http://www.weightmans.com/> and is also a member of the Law 
Society's housing committee. She gave evidence to the home affairs select 
committee on 15 January 2013

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local 
government network <https://register.guardian.co.uk/local-government/> for 
news, views and the latest job vacancies direct to you
 