
Ben and Catherine Mullany died after being shot in the back of the head while 
on honeymoon in Antigua in 2008 – a little over a fortnight after they married. 
A month on from their wedding day, family members who witnessed their marriage 
would later be attending their funerals.

Here is an overview of the key events:

2008 


12 July


Ben and Catherine Mullany, née Bowen, marry at St John the Evangelist church 
in Cilybebyll.

14 July


The newlyweds leave south Wales for Antigua. The honeymoon is a present from 
family and friends, following a request from Mr and Mrs Mullany. The couple 
arrive at Cocos Hotel near the Jolly Harbour area of Antigua's west coast.

14-16 July


The Mullanys reportedly have a relaxing time in Antigua, going on a tour of 
the island as well as enjoying the beaches and warm weather. However, other 
holidaymakers staying at the resort report that the couple were keen to return 
home to south Wales. There is one report of Mr Mullany being anxious after 
witnessing a fracas between two men involving a machete on a beach.

26 July

On their last night, Mr and Mrs Mullany have dinner in Cocos Hotel's 
restaurant – where they meet the family of a fellow Briton, Beverley Stairs, of 
Surrey, who is staying in a chalet a few yards from the Welsh couple. The 
Mullanys talk about going home to start a family.

27 July


At 5am the sounds of gunshots comes from Mr and Mrs Mullany's chalet, cottage 
15. An American nurse, also on holiday at the resort, discovers the couple. Mrs 
Mullany dies instantly after being shot in the head. The nurse tries to 
stabilise Mr Mullany before the arrival of paramedics. The 31-year-old is 
initially conscious, but slips into a coma and is taken to Holberton hospital, 
near St John's, where he is placed on a life-support machine.

British Foreign Office staff are alerted to the shooting by authorities in 
Antigua. They contact a local travel company based in Swansea for the contact 
details of Mr and Mrs Mullany's families and they are told the news.

29 July


Mr and Mrs Mullany's parents – Cynlais and Marilyn Mullany and David and 
Rachel Bowen – arrive in Antigua. The Duchess of York, Sarah Ferguson, is on 
the same plane and tries to comfort them during the eight-hour flight.

31 July


The prime minister of Antigua, Baldwin Spencer,asks Scotland Yard to help his 
country's police force with the investigation.

1 August


Mr Mullany is flown home on a life-support machine. The journey takes around 
22 hours after the chartered jet is grounded in Canada because of a technical 
fault. Medics make several interventions to keep the 31-year-old alive on the 
flight.

2 August


Mr Mullany arrives at Morriston hospital, Swansea, in the early hours. Doctors 
say his condition remains stable and they will proceed with brain-stem testing.

3 August


Mr Mullany's life-support machine is switched off.

13 August


A joint and secret burial for Mr and Mrs Mullany takes place at St John the 
Evangelist church in Cilybebyll.

18 August


Avie Howell, then 17, and Kaniel Martin, 20, appear in court charged with 
murdering Mr and Mrs Mullany. Also charged is Georgette Aaron, accused of 
accessory to murder.

29 August


Antigua's Canadian-born police commissioner, Gary Nelson, said he had been 
"relieved of his duties" by the prime minister, Baldwin Spencer. Nelson later 
pursues a claim of unfair dismissal.

10 September

A memorial service for Mr and Mrs Mullany is held at Llandaff Cathedral in 
Cardiff. More than 1,000 mourners attend. The Duchess of York speaks at the 
service and says she will become a patron of The Mullany Fund – the charity set 
up in memory of the couple.

11 November

British detectives fly back to Antigua to help local officers investigate the 
island's other unsolved murders.

2009

8 March


Howell and Martin are charged with murdering three other people.

25 March


Howell and Martin's legal team win an adjournment to allow more time to review 
evidence. Case set to resume the following May.

16 June


Judge rules Howell and Martin will stand trial for the five killings. 
Tentative date of early 2010 is proposed.

2011

January

Assizes hearing in Antigua sets the trial for Howell and Martin for 23 May 
2011.

11 May


The defence barrister Maureen Payne-Hyman asks for the four murder cases 
against Howell and Martin to be tried separately, as she is unavailable for the 
entirety of a joint trial.

23 May


Judge severs the trial of Howell and Martin. Cases concerning Mr and Mrs 
Mullany, along with Mrs Anderson, are to proceed on 1 June.

June 1


Trial of Howell and Martin finally gets under way at St John's high court, 
with a jury of eight men and four women sworn in. Both the accused deny all 
murders.

19 July


Prosecution finishes outlining its case.

20 July


General summing up begins in Antigua's high court – with the trial set to 
conclude almost three years on from the murders of Mr and Mrs Mullany.

27 July


Jury returns guilty verdicts against Howell and Martin.
 