
The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, 
Sunday 7 June 2009.

The article below said Antony Beevor's new book D-Day: The Battle for Normandy 
was the first to reconsider the Normandy landings in 20 years, overlooking 
French historian Olivier Wieviorka's 2007 study, translated into English and 
published by Harvard University Press last year, Normandy: The Landings to the 
Liberation of Paris.

Antony Beevor <https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor>, the 
bestselling historian, has controversially asserted that the British D-Day 
bombing of the French town of Caen was "close to a war crime".

The claim, which comes ahead of next week's 65th anniversary of the invasion of
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, has been fiercely rejected 
by experts, who accuse Beevor of seeking publicity for his new book, D-Day: The 
Battle for Normandy.

Beevor, author of acclaimed histories including Stalingrad and Berlin: The 
Downfall, says in the first book for 20 years to reassess D-Day that numerous 
mistakes were made by the Allied forces in the Battle for Normandy.

When asked in the BBC History <https://www.theguardian.com/books/history> 
magazine whether the Allies could have reasonably reduced civilian deaths in 
Caen during the bombing of the town, Beevor replies: "Yes, I'm afraid they 
could. The British bombing of Caen beginning on D-Day in particular was stupid, 
counter-productive and above all very close to a war crime.

"There was an assumption, I think, that Caen must have been evacuated 
beforehand. That was wishful thinking on the part of the British. There were 
more than 2,000 casualties there on the first two days and in a way it was 
miraculous that more people weren't killed when you think of the bombing and 
the shelling which carried on for days afterwards."

In his new book, Beevor writes: "French civilians, caught in the middle of 
these battlefields or under Allied bombing, endured terrible suffering. Even 
the joys of liberation had their darker side. The war in northern France marked 
not just a generation, but the whole of the postwar world, profoundly 
influencing relations between America andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>."

Gary Weight, who runs Pegasus Normandy Tours, which specialises in taking 
Allied veterans on tours of the D-Day beaches, said he was aware of the 
mounting controversy over Beevor's new book. "What more is there to say about 
D-Day? The only way you can see him selling this book is by coming up with 
controversial claims. I'm a little bit saddened by it."

Weight, who has studied the landings extensively, said Caen was considered so 
important to the Allies that Sword beach was added to the list of landing sites 
because of its proximity to the town.

But despite weeks of heavy fighting, the Allies were unable to seize Caen and 
instead opted to carpet bomb it.

Weight said he knew of no one from Caen who shared Beevor's views. "I don't 
believe there was another way of doing it," he said. "It was not good what they 
did, but I don't think by any one's estimation you could come close to branding 
it a war crime."

Beevor also uses his interview in the magazine to attack Field Marshall 
Montgomery for his "puerile vanity".

"He had wanted to seize Caen, advance to Falaise and then break through to 
Paris," Beevor says. "That was always the stated objective and either he didn't 
really plan to do that or he got it badly wrong. I think he probably got it 
wrong and couldn't admit that when the British were blocked in by German panzer 
reinforcements."
 