
When you arrange to meet Antony Hegarty, you don't have to worry about 
questions like "How will I recognise you?" The singer is in London visiting his 
parents' home near Kingston upon Thames, so we've agreed to get together at a 
place on the river. At 11 in the morning, I'm standing outside the designated 
cafe – which is closed – among the inevitable joggers and retired couples on 
their constitutional and toddlers feeding the swans, when Hegarty comes 
striding along the boardwalk. He is well over 6ft tall, his bulky frame dressed 
in indeterminate numbers of layers of black, his moon-pale face and soft 
features and smile partly covered by strands of long, straight black hair. As a 
younger man he used to walk the streets of New York wearing a sheer silk slip 
and military boots with the words "fuck off" inked on his forehead. He's lost 
the stare-rejecting attire, if not quite all of the sentiment.

In search of coffee we head to the nearby Rose theatre foyer, which is full of 
latte-loving young mothers encouraging their offspring to let off some steam. 
When he was invited toedit the Guardian's music website 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/series/antony-and-the-johnsons-takeover>
 a couple of years ago, Hegarty suggested that what humanity urgently needed in 
order to survive was "a seismic shift toward the feminine in our empathetic 
systems of perceiving and interacting with the world". When he was making this 
claim I'm not sure that what he had in mind was the fecund yummy mummies of the 
royal borough of Kingston, but it seems appropriate anyhow, in the hour or so 
that follows, that his thoughts on the future feminisation of the planet should 
occasionally be threatened to be overwhelmed by women talking over voluble 
babies.

While he is in London, Hegarty is finalising some of his plans for the 
forthcomingMeltdown festival <http://meltdown.southbankcentre.co.uk/>, which he 
is curating, down river at the Southbank Centre. He has been dividing his time 
of late between his home in New York and a base in Madrid (where he has been 
working on a theatre project with the cultish performance artistMarina Abramovic
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/interview-marina-abramovic-performance-artist>
), but southern England, where he lived until the age of 10, remains a 
formative grid reference. Though he has been an important figure in the New 
York avant garde for 20 years, Hegarty grew up in Chichester, west Sussex. He 
is 41 now, but he is so curiously boyish in manner that you can well imagine 
him still as the awkward British chorister, developing a bit faster, and a bit 
more unconventionally than his fellow descants; he still looks both at home and 
not at home in these suburbs, a big man who has got used to projecting his 
inner hermaphrodite quite comfortably.

Hegarty's spoken voice, a warm conspiratorial whisper, only occasionally hints 
at the uniquely powerful and vulnerable sound that he is capable of making on 
stage and in recordings. When the range of that soul-charged tenor first fully 
unfolded with his band Antony and the Johnsons in 2005, you had the sense of it 
coming out of nowhere, emerging, as the title of his breakthrough Mercury 
prize-winning albumI Am a Bird Now 
<http://observer.guardian.co.uk/omm/10bestcds/story/0,12102,1416665,00.html> 
suggested, as if from another, more aery, species entirely.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS-NziGE6DVY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS-NziGE6DVY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS-NziGE6DVY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Hegarty himself doesn't quite see it that way. The creation of his androgynous 
persona, and the discovery of the possibilities of his voice, was a 
mix-and-match of influence and experiment conducted over many years. Meltdown 
works best when the curator approaches it as a kind of musical autobiography, 
and certainly that is Hegarty's intention this year. His first forays into art 
were collages and cut-ups of magazines, which he still makes and exhibits from 
time to time, cultural references spliced together to form vivid and unsettling 
wholes. He takes the approach into other areas of his life, too, he suggests. 
"I like arranging all my friends as constellations, and I do love the process 
of curation, so this is perfect for me." To prove the point he sets his 
smartphone on his knee and starts scrolling excitedly through the acts he has 
lined up.

First up in an eclectic list – "mainly ecstatic female voices with a few 
queens thrown in" – isMarc Almond 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/jul/18/marc-almond-interview-ten-plagues>
, whom Hegarty has persuaded to appear in his Marc and the Mambas incarnation, 
the side project of hisSoft Cell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/11/soft-cell-tainted-love> years. 
Almond has become a friend, but in his teens Hegarty was the obsessive fan. 
"Marc pretty much singlehandedly determined my future as a musician and the 
style of music I would pursue," he recalls. "I was about 13 when I heard him. I 
was living in America, a suburb in California and getting those records by land 
mail was really hard work. You would hear rumours about records in magazines 
which themselves were pretty hard to get hold of. But for all those reasons 
Marc and the Mambas were really important to me. I lived on the top of a hill 
in the middle of nowhere. And those records arriving through the door were 
really my lifeline."

Hegarty moved out to California in 1981. The family were following his 
father's work as an engineer; they had gone first to Amsterdam, before ending 
up on the west coast of the US. Hegarty is not keen on public psychoanalysis 
and pretty wary of sharing even the facts of his life, preferring mystery, but 
he hints that the abrupt shift across the Atlantic was not an especially happy 
one for him. In Chichester he had enjoyed singing with the choir but that 
opportunity was not available to him at school in the US, where singing was 
considered "effeminate" and "shameful" among the boys. As he reached puberty 
and his ambiguous gender identity became more defined, he suggests he wasn't 
bullied so much as left to his own devices. His reaction was, he has said 
elsewhere, to confront his identity head on: 'I started wearing more makeup. 
That's the honest truth. I started probably about 12… 13."

As he applied his eyeliner, Marc Almond made him feel as though he was not 
alone. Previously his only musical crush, inevitably, had been on Kate Bush. 
But he looked on Almond as something like a cross between a role model and a 
guardian angel. "I always felt he had kind of left a trail of breadcrumbs for 
me, to follow him into music," he says. "You know I would collect quotes and 
references that he mentioned in interviews, pore over them. He laid out the 
land for me. And I really learned to sing listening to him singing. Him and 
Nina Simone. As Nina would say in the studio, 'Don't put nothing in unless you 
really feel it.Let's do it again from the top please.'"

Hegarty likes his singers to embody different kinds of courage, "people who 
deliver a vision of the world they totally believe in". In his live 
performances he is a master of that kind of conviction: his most recent show, 
at Radio City Music Hall in New York, a staging of his latest albumSwanlights 
<http://www.swanlights.com/>, saw him bathed in the green glow of lasers, 
accompanied by a 60-piece orchestra while keening rapturously about a vision of 
"being dead, underwater and filled with crystals of light". It was described in 
theNew York Times as an evening of "wonderment" with "cries from the heart, 
crashing like waves".

Hegarty has always been drawn to voices that self-consciously channel female 
mythic power. His South Bank lineup will include not only the return to a 
mainstream stage of the ethereal Scots vocals ofLiz Fraser 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/nov/26/cocteau-twins-elizabeth-fraser-interview>
, once of the Cocteau Twins, but also the "Edith Piaf of Turkey", Selda 
Ba˘gcan, who took up the people's cause against the generals of Istanbul armed 
only with a guitar, andBuffy Sainte Marie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jul/31/buffy-sainte-marie>, who 
invigorated electronic and folk music with Native American wisdom in the 1960s 
and 70s.

Hegarty's father used to play tapes of Sainte-Marie in his car, and those 
songs retain an eerie nostalgia for Hegarty himself. "Little Wheel Spin and Spin
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/?ie=UTF8&keywords=little+wheel+spin+and+spin&tag=googhydr-21&index=music&hvadid=24493681794&hvpos=1t1&hvexid=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=16981809971062407165&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=b&ref=pd_sl_603ett877c_b>
 was so haunting and so frightening to me as a child," he says. "Buffy was very 
clear about what she saw as the crisis and very keen to spit it out, almost 
like a witch. I like singing that is not far short of a hex. Nina Simone did 
the same thing around race and the civil rights movement. All of that taught me 
how you can participate in culture as an artist."

In his own engagement with that "crisis", he defines it as "a crisis of 
spiritual issues, but also a practical crisis of ecology". Hegarty is an avid 
reader of theGuardian's environment pages and our conversation is salted with 
quotes from articles he has recently clipped. ("They said last month in the US 
it was 8.7 degrees hotter than it should have been… Every taxi driver knows 
something weird is happening with the weather. And everyone is waiting in vain 
for the institutions that are supposed to have our best interests at heart to 
come up with some solution…")

Some of the lyrics on his last two albums suggest a kind of transcendent 
Wordsworthian relationship with the natural world. I wonder if this was 
established in Hegarty as a child.

"Well," he says, "I think it was but in just in a very typical south of 
England way. I was raised walking around on the South Downs at weekends on my 
father's shoulders. And with a sense that nature was for ever. The critical 
shift that has happened in our lifetimes is the idea that we are actually 
undermining that whole belief. Can you imagine the burden on the psyche of our 
species that has involved? How can we possibly process that without massive 
global summits on what we should be doing? Instead we are being divided and 
conquered by this terrorism scaremongering and half the world, including most 
of America, is tied up in patriarchal religions that believes apocalypse is the 
climax of what we are waiting for."

Once he is into his stride on this theme, there is no stopping him. Hegarty 
was an ardent Christopher Hitchens fan, slayer of "sky god religions that 
destroy our connection with the natural world and promote the idea that 
paradise lies elsewhere". As a transgender person – and he has no wish to 
define the "meat and potatoes" of his sexuality any more precisely – he sees 
himself as having a small headstart on most of the rest of civilisation in his 
intimate understanding of the need for feminine power structures to restore 
imbalances created by "patriarchal religion, patriarchal economies and 
patriachal government". In this way he has moved from the deeply personal 
emotional conflicts and epiphanies of his earlier songs to what he sees as a 
more political message. In this vision the drag queens and trannies that he 
came of age among in New York are not only defiantly transgressive but also 
prophetic.

"There was another article I was reading in the Guardian," he says, with a 
grin, "about a year ago that declared there was no fundamental difference 
between men and women. I mean, are you off your rocker? The whole problem is 
this difference between men and women and our lack of self-knowledge about it. 
Our bodies are like computers with two different operating systems. One is 
called testosterone, one is called oestrogen. The same body, different 
software. And within the transgender community you see this very clearly. You 
watch people take oestrogen or testosterone and you see them change not just 
physically, but their whole way of thinking, their whole approach."

Has he ever experimented with that process himself?

"No, but I have seen it very intimately, and the changes are not subtle, they 
are fundamental…" Hegarty has perhaps always been aware that he has the 
capacity to shift between these two operating systems, to try them both on for 
size and communicate in his highly allusive way how it feels. "The future," he 
declares in his stagey whisper, "is bringing more understanding of how we make 
the decisions we make on a biological level, and then to step back from that 
and see what is going on. We need more oestrogen-based thinking, basically."

If Marc Almond helped him to understand this calling, it was watching the film 
Mondo New York <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093558/>, about the lives of 
Manhattan performance artists, when he was 17, that allowed Hegarty to see 
where he had to go to be himself. One star of that film, Joey Arias, "is my New 
York hero really," he says. "In the film I saw this queen dressed as Billie 
Holiday, singing in the voice of Billie Holiday A Hard Day's Night by the 
Beatles. It was like seeing a black swan made out of razor blades or something. 
So elusive, so threatening, so androgynous, so sexual. I was still living in 
California, but I knew I had to go and see Joey."

Not long after he arrived in Arias's New York, Hegarty formed the Blacklips 
Performance Cult <http://www.blacklips.org/>, a drag theatre troupe with whom 
he put on weekly shows at Mother, a club in the Meatpacking District frequented 
by drag punks and "gender mutants". The Blacklips performed a surreal burlesque 
during which Hegarty rehearsed his spellbinding laments, in a show that also 
occasionally involved throwing offal and buckets of blood at the audience. The 
Johnsons (the name a tribute to Marsha P Johnson, a transgender activist and 
leader in the Stonewall Riots, whose body was discovered in the Hudson river 
after a gay pride march in 1992) followed on from the Blacklips. The band was 
always a shifting group of collaborators for Hegarty's voice, and though the 
first Antony and the Johnsons album was released in 1998, it was not until 
2003, when an EP calledI Fell in Love with a Dead Boy (the cover of which shows 
Hegarty lying in supplication before a naked Japanese hermaphrodite) caught the 
attention of Hal Willner, the music director forSaturday Night Live, that he 
received any wider attention. Willner passed the record on to Lou Reed, who 
insisted: "When I heard Antony, I knew that I was in the presence of an angel." 
Reed invited Hegarty to join him as a backup vocalist on hisAnimal Serenade tour
 <http://observer.guardian.co.uk/omm/reviews/story/0,13875,1150784,00.html>, 
and the pair have been friends and occasional collaborators ever since (Hegarty 
is hoping that Reed and his partner Laurie Anderson, of O Superman fame, will 
both return the compliment and appear at Meltdown).

If for any reason they don't make it, there will be no shortage of friends 
from Hegarty's meat-chucking Blacklips days. He has, he says, of late helped to 
form a sort of political group called the Future Feminist Foundation, which has 
meetings in New York from time to time. They have been working on a manifesto, 
but it's not the most organised of groups, so they haven't quite drafted all of 
it yet. The basics are pretty clear though. "It's not a group that thinks women 
should just crawl towards economic equality in the way we have been engaged in 
since the 60s," Hegarty says. "That can't be the climax of feminism. It's like 
gay rights, as if gay marriage is the end point, as if we just want to be 
included in these business-as-usual institutions. That's not the point of being 
queer, just as mitigated reproductive rights aren't the point of being a woman. 
We want to move this forward. Do something great… overturn all these failed 
male structures of thinking, all this aggression in decision-making…" he pauses 
in his impromptu stump speech to the mother's union of Kingston upon Thames to 
laugh a little. "Sorry if I sound nuts," he says.

The unofficial leader of the Future Feminist Foundation, or at least the woman 
that Hegarty "would follow anywhere", is Kembra Pfahler. She fronts a glam-punk 
band called theVoluptuous Horror of Karen Black 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/oct/15/voluptuous-horror-of-karen-black>. 
"Kembra," Hegarty says, with a certain amount of jealous awe, is "the most 
hardcore future feminist really."

How so?

"Well, for example she does this one performance piece called Wall of Vagina, 
which is like seven girls spray-painted different colours and naked and they 
just pile up on top of each other and open their legs wide and create this wall 
on stage or in a gallery, this wall of vaginas, and you may not pass through 
the wall."

That does sound quite a hard act to follow, I say.

Pfahler will be coming to London to perform for Meltdown, though regrettably 
not with her painted fellow travellers. "I've asked her to do a lecture, and 
then she will do a concert accompanied by Vaginal Creme Davis, the 
quintessential LA Afro-American drag punk…"

Of course. You get half a sense that Hegarty sees Meltdown as a delicious 
opportunity to close the circle of his life, to bring his New York extremes 
back home to the norms of his childhood in a spirit of mischief as well as 
political commitment. He has learned a lot, he says, from Marina Abramovic, the 
self-harming godmother of performance art, about the possibilities of theatre. 
He has asked Abramovic to do a lecture that will only be open to women, part of 
his current project of finding ways to have men "understand the sacred humility 
of recognising a woman's space". This is the first step in what he sees as the 
necessary transfer of power between the sexes in order to save the species. 
"Many men," he believes, with wild optimism, "will be hugely relieved by that 
shift."

There is not a vast amount of evidence for that assertion at the moment, I 
suggest. Where does he look for hope?

"Well," he says with a laugh, "they are letting us do this festival. It's a 
start!" With that battle cry he heads out into the streets of Kingston, a man 
with a mission, which in the short term involves buying a loaf of bread to go 
and feed the swans.

Antony's Meltdown, 1-12 August, is part of the Southbank Centre's Festival of 
the World with MasterCard; www.southbankcentre.co.uk/meltdown. The Observer is 
media partner

MUSICAL HEROES: Antony on some of his Meltdown highlights

MARC ALMOND

"The work that Marc did was totally off the mark. It was so ambitious. He is 
very well loved, and he is interesting, because he did it the wrong way round 
as it were. He went from mainstream pop into subculture. Usually things go the 
other way."9 August

LIZ FRASER

"In my later teens I became intensely preoccupied with the work of Liz Fraser 
and the Cocteau Twins. Liz is the secret jewel of Britain. I would cry to those 
songs a lot, more than sing them. There is something so maternal in her voice. 
It's not just a melodic but a phonetic approach to singing which is totally 
intuitive, and which she invented herself. I get chills just thinking about it. 
She hasn't performed for a long time, so for her to sing is a centrepiece of 
the festival."6 and 7 August

DIAMANDA GALÁS

"Diamanda is the other great singer in the group. Just her ferocity as a 
singer – no one does what she does. She is the Maria Callas of art music. Again 
that ecstatic range and extraordinary courage."1 August

SELDA BAĞCAN

"Selda is like the Edith Piaf of Turkey, a tremendous political voice, a folk 
musician in the broadest sense. She has this tone in her voice that makes me 
cry my eyes out even though I don't understand the language, or really the 
tradition. I've probably listened to her more than anyone in the last two 
years."2 August 

LAURIE ANDERSON

"My mother listened to Laurie Anderson; one of the records we brought with us 
from WH Smith out to America was O Superman. My mum was a photographer – and 
Laurie is someone who names what she sees in bold language. She is also one of 
very few artists who will write about the future, which surprisingly few 
musicians do."3 August

COCOROSIE

"CocoRosie are a very inspired band of young women from New York, part of our 
Future Feminist Foundation group. They honestly don't give a shit what anybody 
thinks about them. They taught me so much about magical space. And it is 
amazing to be taught by people who are younger than you."4 August 

BUFFY SAINTE-MARIE

"Buffy is on another frontier, for the way that she merged folk music and 
indigenous music with new technologies. She was using electronic instruments in 
the early 70s. She had a certain moral authority on the basis of her indigenous 
identity. A real spiritual clarity."7 August

KEMBRA PFALER 

"Kembra, from the Voluptuous Horror of Karen Black, is one of the most 
important artists in New York. She is a true pioneer of avant-garde urban 
theatre. She just creates these art movements, availabilism, which is all about 
working with what you have. She is going do a lecture, and then she will do a 
concert accompanied by Vaginal Creme Davis, the quintessential LA afro American 
drag punk."10 August 

JOEY ARIAS 

"Joey is going to come and do his Strange Fruit. A whole night as Billie 
Holliday. It's the highest art punk has to offer. What Joey does is not female 
impersonation, it's as if he channels Billie. It's punk really in the way that 
Leigh Bowery was punk."8 August

MARINA ABRAMOVIC

"Marina recently did this huge piece at Moma, New York where she sat in the 
gallery for 700 hours and people queued up to sit one to one and look at her. I 
have asked her to do a lecture only for women. She said she would never have 
suggested that of her own volition but she has agreed to do it. I think it is 
very important, very golden that men understand the sacred humility of 
recognising a woman's space."5 August

Please note that Antony has responded to this article in the comments thread 
below. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/16214711>
 