
For a long time as a young man, Antony Sher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/antony-sher> – actor, painter, writer – was 
at pains to deny who he was. "I was gay. Jewish. A white South African," he 
says. "And for different reasons, I was ashamed of all those things." As a 
result, he suggests, the actors he most admired were those who best masked 
themselves on stage: "Olivier, Peter Sellers, Alec Guinness."

These days, he is more in thrall to the kind of performance that gives you a 
glimpse into the soul of the actor, lets you in on their true self – "Judi 
Dench would be the obvious example," he says.

These remarks have been prompted by my observation that Sher seemed to have 
spent the first half of his life trying to escape the roles he was born to and 
the second trying to understand them. He agrees up to a point. Curiosity about 
his own biography is in any case what drew him to take a part in Nicholas 
Wright's new play,Travelling Light, at the National theatre 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>.

The play, directed by Nicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner>, tells the story of a 
famous Hollywood director of the 1930s and 40s who looks back at his childhood 
in an east European shtetl. A couple of generations removed, and an emigrant 
himself, Sher is still fascinated by that kind of exodus.

"My grandparents all came from Lithuania to South Africa," he says in a break 
from rehearsing. "My first novel,Middlepost, is a fictional account of that 
journey. A few years after that was published, I managed to go to the 
particular village from which my grandparents had come in 1896. It was very 
moving. I had hoped to find some traces of the Shers but you have to remember 
that there was something called the Holocaust in between. All of which means, I 
suppose, that I have an investment in this play. It immediately made this role 
very attractive to me. I felt, I know about this."

Self-knowledge is extremely important to Sher. He looks for it in different 
places, in his writing and his painting, as well as his acting. He likes to 
paint the characters he plays. "I'll make them look how they look in my mind," 
he says.

For his role in Travelling Light, he would like to be bigger physically, 
powerful in the shoulders, so he might project that on canvas. There is another 
purpose to his art, though. "When I am on a long run in a play," he says, "I'm 
not sure how I would fill the days if I did not paint or write. On a basic 
level, it just stops me going crazy."
 