
Antony Hegarty has condemned the “genocide” of indigenous peoples in the US 
and Australia during an appearance at Dark Mofo festival inTasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania>, where she issued a 
powerful call to arms for action on Aboriginal rights and climate change.

“There is this secret embedded genocide to white people’s presence in the 
Americas and in Australia,” the singer said during the first of two sell-out 
concerts with the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra on Tuesday night. “It’s the 
truth.”

The British-born, New York based musician – of Mercury prize-winning Antony 
and the Johnsons <https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons> – 
performed for more than an hour at Hobart’s Odeon theatre without saying a word 
between her songs.

 But returning to the stage for an encore, she launched into an impromptu and 
impassioned 15-minute speech about her time spent with the Martu artists of the 
Parnngurr community in the Pilbara, Western Australia.

Marina Abramović: 'The planet is dying. We have to be warriors'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/18/marina-abramovic-the-planet-is-dying-we-have-to-be-warriors>
 “I know there has been a lot of conversation in Australia in recent months 
because of something the prime minister said,” Hegarty began, citing Tony 
Abbott’s comments that people wanting to stay in their own communities was a
“lifestyle choice” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/remote-communities-are-lifestyle-choices-says-tony-abbott>
.

 “It’s preposterous, so brutal, so violent, such a violent thing to say.”

 Australia’s Indigenous people were a “precious resource”, said Hegarty, 
noting that the Martu elders are among the last people with first-hand 
experience of precontact life.

“As far as I’m concerned those are the people we need to be asking, begging 
for education and advice from … people that have this reservoir of knowledge 
that we can barely comprehend, that I can barely fathom … We desperately – in 
an emergency kind of way – need their input.”

 In the US, she said, “there are just giant spots of the country where the 
genocide was so complete … there are places I can barely step on the land 
because I just feel it’s this freshly slaughtered country”.

 Australia by comparison still has a chance to act. “The genocide is so fresh, 
but also the voices are still living. There is a great, great hope.”

 Hegarty, who is a transgender woman, was invited to accompany Sydney artist 
Lynette Wallworth on a 10-day trip to the Pilbara in 2013 after the Martu 
elders were shown videos of her performances on YouTube.

 “They are just an incredibly luminous and incredibly powerful group of 
people,” she said of her hosts. “You guys are so lucky to be in a country with 
people like that.”

 On Monday, seven Martu elders will fly to Sydney to draw attention to their 
campaign against the new uranium mine that Canadian multinational Cameco and 
Mitsubishi are proposing to build near their community.

 Hegarty, who will sing at the Sydney event, announced on Tuesday that the 
proceeds of her two Tasmanian concerts would also go towards their campaign.

All generations must take responsibility for historic abuse. “We love to poke 
the finger, we love to think: ‘Oh I’m one or two generations removed from the 
impulse. So it’s not my problem, it’s not where I stand.’ But the land is 
screaming with dreams,” she said.

“If we’re not going to destroy the planet, we have to reckon with these 
stories ... we have to find a way to make more than just a cursory amends. We 
have to completely inhale the stories of our ancestors and take action from 
that place of truth and humility.”

To loud applause from the Dark Mofo audience, which included her friend and 
sometime collaborator, Marina Abramović, Hegarty added: “I know I sound a bit 
crackers but that’s the job of an artist.”


She went on to deliver a moving performance of her songs Enemy and Thank You, 
finishing the set with Antony and the Johnsons’ hit,Hope There’s Someone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8b5HHRT8xvw>.
 