
Malaysia's opposition figurehead Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> was formally charged with 
sodomy today, a move he dismissed as a fabrication aimed at derailing his 
political comeback.

The former deputy prime minister pleaded not guilty to the charge that he had 
sex with a 23-year-old male aide. He was bailed to appear again next month.

Anwar, 60, who was jailed on sodomy charges a decade ago, remains free to 
contest a parliamentary byelection later this month for a safe seat vacated by 
his wife.

Politicians of the resurgent opposition say he will be chosen as their leader 
after his likely victory, paving the way for him to challenge the embattled 
prime minister, Abdullah Badawi, and his ruling United Malays National 
Organisation.

More than 100 supporters gathered on the steps of Kuala Lumpur's sessions 
court chanting "reformasi" - the opposition battle-cry demanding reform - as 
Anwar emerged.

Riot police backed by water cannon provided heavy security for the appearance. 
Anwar maintains it is a politically motivated case meant to embarrass and 
discredit him with the electorate of the predominantly Muslim country.

Prosecutors accuse Anwar of sodomising Saiful Bukhari Azlan in June. All 
sodomy is illegal inMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and 
carries a prison term of up to 20 years. Saiful is under police protection but 
has not been charged, even though he allegedly consented to sex.

"This is a treacherous and malicious accusation," said Anwar after the charge 
was read in court. "I am not guilty."

Outside the court, Anwar accused Badawi of orchestrating the prosecution to 
stifle his growing political power, a charge denied by the government.

"This is clearly a political game," said Anwar. "The charge is meant to 
embarrass me and nothing else. It is the dirty politics of a man who has lost 
support and will very soon lose power."

The opposition People's Justice group scored a dramatic success in March's 
general election, dealing the ruling National Front coalition its worst result 
in the 57 years it has held power.

Anwar has said he believes he is close to persuading enough disgruntled 
members of the ruling coalition - which has a majority of 30 - to join the 
opposition ranks and bring down the government in a parliamentary confidence 
vote set for September 16.

Political analysts say the government is manipulating the sodomy case to shore 
up its support. It is a repeat of the case a decade ago when Anwar was 
convicted of sodomising his driver but eventually cleared after six years in 
jail.
 