
The trial of the Malaysian opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, on sodomy charges resumed 
today with his accuser due to take the stand in a politically charged case that 
government critics say is a conspiracy.

The trial was suspended in mid-February when Anwar sought to have the high 
court judge Mohamad Zabidin Diah recuse himself on the grounds that he was 
biased against the defence. Anwar later dropped his attempt to have Zabidin 
disqualified to dispel criticism that he was trying to delay the trial.

Today, Anwar's supporters packed the courtroom with the expectation that 
defence lawyers would grill his accuser, Saiful Bukhari Azlan. The 24-year-old 
former aide to Anwar has given graphic testimony accusing him of forced anal 
sex at an apartment block in June 2008.

If convicted, Anwar faces 20 years in prison. A lengthy sentence could end the 
career of the 62-year-old who has aspirations to become the prime minister of 
the Muslim-majority nation.

Anwar claims the charge was fabricated by the administration of the prime 
minister, Najib Razak, to undermine Malaysia's opposition alliance, which hopes 
to win power in national elections scheduled to be held by 2013. Najib has 
denied conspiring against Anwar.

The trial resumed with the defence lawyer Karpal Singh asking the judge to 
force the prosecution to provide a list of its witnesses "in the interest of 
justice". The request was denied.

"There is a political conspiracy to eliminate Anwar from the political scene. 
The prime minister is involved. There is no doubt about that," he said before 
starting the cross-examination of Saiful.

Anwar, who is married with six children, has insisted the charge is baseless 
because a hospital medical report found no evidence of anal penetration of his 
accuser.

However, the federal court ruled that a full trial would be needed to decide 
the matter.

It is the second time Anwar has been accused of sodomy. In 1998, he lost his 
post as deputy prime minister and spent six years in jail on convictions of 
sodomy and abuse of power. After being freed in 2004 when a court overturned 
the sodomy conviction, Anwar led a three-party opposition alliance to major 
gains in elections two years ago.
 