
Malaysian's opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, said today that he was on 
track to unseat the governing coalition by early next week, even as he battled 
sodomy charges that he maintains are politically motivated.

After being bailed at Kuala Lumpur's criminal court, Anwar, 61, said he was 
confident he could tempt 30 MPs to join the opposition from the National Front 
government and end its 51 years in power.

Anwar, a former deputy prime minister, has previously said he will secure a 
majority in parliament by Malaysia's national day, September 16.

But earlier this week 50 of the government's 140 MPs flew to Taiwan on a 
farming study trip set to last more than a week. Anwar said it was a government 
ruse to ensure they did not cross the floor of the house, a charge denied by 
the embattled prime minister, Abdullah Badawi.

Anwar pledged today to fly overseas to meet MPs if necessary.

"We're working on it," Anwar said of his efforts to win over the government 
MPs. "There are technical problems because [the MPs] have been shipped away. 
God willing, it will happen. If need be, I will fly to Taipei."

In March's general election, the government of Badawi's United Malays National 
Organisation (Umno) suffered heavy losses to the three main opposition parties 
that Anwar has crafted into a potent force.

Amid the backbiting and recriminations, Badawi came under intense pressure to 
resign - calls that intensified as the government was buffeted by spiralling 
food and fuel prices that caused hardship to ordinary Malaysians.

Anwar today repeated his accusation that the charges against him of sodomising 
a 23-year-old former male aide, Saiful Bukhari Azlan, were a transparent 
attempt by the government to halt his comeback.

"I am not guilty. This is a lie, this is malicious," said Anwar, as he entered 
the court flanked by his wife, Azizah Ismail, daughters and fellow opposition 
MPs. "This is trial by ambush."

The hearing was adjourned until September 24 for further arguments after the 
prosecution made the case that it should be moved to the high court because of 
the attention it will attract.

Anwar's lawyers argued the judge in the sessions criminal court is perfectly 
qualified to handle the charges, which mirror those of a decade ago when Anwar 
was convicted but later clear of sodomising his wife's chauffeur.
 