
Malaysia’s highest court has upheld a five-year prison sentence for opposition 
leaderAnwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> on a 
sodomy charge in a controversial decision that will crush the political 
ambitions of the man and the movement who pose the most viable threat to the 
government’s rule.


Anwar, who has consistently maintained the charge against him was politically 
motivated, spoke to the judges from the dock, telling them they had become 
“partners in crime in the murder of judicial independence”.

Tuesday’s judgment and sentence marked a bitter end to a long-running legal 
saga for Anwar. The former deputy prime minister and his supporters insist the 
sodomy allegations were murky at best and designed to derail his career.

Sodomy is illegal in Muslim-majority Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>. Anwar was first accused of 
sodomising a male political aide in 2008 but was ultimately acquitted of the 
charge by the high court in 2012.

The appeals court overturned the acquittal in March last year and sentenced 
him to five years’ jail. He remained free on bail while that decision was 
appealed.

Tuesday’s federal court decision to uphold the conviction – and the five-year 
sentence – exhausted Anwar’s last avenue of appeal. He will go to prison 
immediately.

Addressing the panel of five judges, Anwar said: “You have become partners in 
crime in the murder of judicial independence,” prompting the judges to get up 
and walk out of the room, with one of them saying: “I don’t need to hear all 
this.”

Anwar continued speaking from the dock. “Allah be my witness. I pledge that I 
will not be silenced. I will fight on for freedom and justice. I will never 
surrender.”

His speech came during what are known as mitigation proceedings during which 
both sides are given an opportunity to speak before the judges decide the 
prison term.


“I maintain my innocence. This to me is a fabrication coming from a political 
conspiracy to stop my political career,” Anwar said.

Earlier, Justice Arifin Zakat, who read out the verdict, said there was 
“overwhelming evidence” that Anwar sodomised an aide and therefore the court 
was upholding the five-year sentence imposed by the appeals court last year.

Anwar was the rising star of Malaysian politics in the mid-1990s before he 
fell out with then prime minister Mahathir Mohamad.


Since then the former deputy prime minister has been beset by legal problems 
and spent several years in prison after being convicted of corruption and an 
earlier sodomy charge.

But the charismatic Anwar, who heads a three-party opposition alliance, has 
remained the greatest threat to Malaysia’s political establishment.

Opposition gains in the 2013 general election raised the possibility of a 
genuine challenge to the Barisan Nasional coalition that has ruled Malaysia 
since 1957.

The rejection of Anwar’s appeal is expected to spark protests across the 
country, though the man himself has appealed for calm.

The ruling appears to disqualify the 67-year-old from political office and 
from contesting the next election, which must be held by 2018.

Gooi Hsiao Leung, an MP in Anwar’s People’s Justice party, told the Guardian 
the mood among Anwar supporters in the courtroom was one of disbelief at the 
verdict.


“We are very disappointed. His family was especially shocked, especially his 
wife, and his children and grandchildren, who were in court. They were in tears 
at the verdict.

“Based on the evidence and the case presented, we were hoping very strongly 
the case would be ruled in Anwar’s favour. There were so many holes and 
inconsistencies and doubts from the very beginning of this case.”

Gooi said the former aide who alleged he had been sodomised by Anwar had met 
with senior government politicians, and police officers, in the days just 
before making his complaint.

“Just on that alone there are serious suspicions about this case. From the 
beginning this has been a politically motivated case. For many years it was 
hoped the judiciary in this country would be seen as independent. This will 
reflect very negatively for Malaysia.”

The UN human rights office said it was “disappointed” by the ruling. 

“The bottom line for us is the charge in this case should not be a criminal 
offence,” said spokesman Rupert Colville.


Phil Robertson, Asia spokesman for Human Rights Watch, described the court’s 
verdict as a “travesty”.

“Prime Minister Najib Razak’s government has persisted in its politically 
motivated prosecution of opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim at the expense of 
democratic freedoms and the rights to non-discrimination and privacy for all 
Malaysians,” he said from Kuala Lumpur.

“Allowing this travesty of justice to stand will further undermine respect for 
rights and democracy in Malaysia.”

Razak’s government has rejected any suggestion of interference in the case, 
saying Malaysia has an independent judiciary and politics played no part in the 
court decision.

After the verdict a spokesman for the Malaysian government said the judges 
reached their verdict only after considering all the evidence “in a balanced 
and objective manner”.

“Malaysia has an independent judiciary and there have been many rulings 
against senior government figures.”

The spokesman said the charge against Anwar was brought by a private 
individual – Anwar’s employee and personal assistant – not by the government. 
“As the victim of a serious assault he had every right to have his case heard 
in court.

“In this case, exhaustive and comprehensive due process has been followed over 
many years. That process is now complete and we call on all parties involved to 
respect the legal process and judgment.”

Police called on Anwar’s supporters to maintain calm and security at the court 
was tightened. Last year he appealed to supporters to shun violence.

Anwar’s jailing could herald the disintegration of the three-party alliance he 
leads. It is paralysed with infighting and a meeting on Sunday to iron out 
differences and find a possible successor to Anwar was inconclusive.
 