

Malaysian police have arrested the eldest daughter of jailed opposition leader 
Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> for alleged 
sedition on Monday, in a move slammed by critics as a clampdown on dissent.

Nurul Izzah Anwar was detained to assist police in their investigation of an 
opposition rally and also for making “contemptuous remarks that those in the 
judiciary system had sold their souls to the devil”, national police chief 
Khalid Abu Bakar said in a statement.

A lawmaker and a vice president of her father’s People’s Justice party, Nurul 
Izzah was detained because of a speech she made last week in parliament, said 
Fahmi Fadzil, the party’s communications director.

He said the arrest was ridiculous and outrageous, noting that lawmakers have 
immunity over comments made in parliament. Fahmi said the move was intended to 
silence the opposition after Anwar was jailed for five years last month when he 
lost a final appeal against a sodomy conviction.

Anwar’s family said the arrest was “nothing short of intimidation and an abuse 
of power”. Nurul Izzah went to police voluntarily to give a statement about the 
opposition rally she participated in earlier this month, said her sister Nurul 
Nuha Anwar.

Sex claim shows desperation of Malaysia's rulers, says opposition leader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/20/anwar-ibrahim-malaysia-government-sodomy-charge>
“We maintain that the arrest of our sister is illegal and unconstitutional. We 
deplore the glaring selective persecution,” Nurul Nuha said in a family 
statement, calling for the release of her sister.

Khalid said she will be released once police complete their interrogation.

Anwar’s arrest was widely seen at home and abroad as politically motivated to 
eliminate any threats to the ruling coalition, whose popularity has been 
eroding since 2008 after more than five decades of unquestioned dominance. 
Anwar and his three-member opposition alliance were seen as the most potent 
political threat to prime minister Najib Razak’s ruling coalition.

Anwar led his alliance to unprecedented gains in 2008 elections and made 
further inroads in 2013 polls. Najib’s National Front coalition won with a 
slimmer majority and lost the popular vote to the opposition.

Human Rights Watch <http://www.hrw.org/> slammed Nurul Izzah’s arrest. “Prime 
minister Najib needs to recognise that every sedition arrest of an opposition 
political leader is another step towards the destruction of rights-respecting 
democracy in Malaysia, and bring this campaign of abuse to an end,” Phil 
Robertson, the group’s deputy Asia director, said in a statement.
 