
Malaysia’s top court has begun hearing a final appeal by the opposition leader 
Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> against a 
sodomy conviction widely regarded as a means to neutralise the threat he poses 
to the country’s ruling coalition.

Anwar was sentenced to five years in prison in March on charges of sodomising 
a male aide in 2008 after the appeals court overturned an earlier acquittal.

“I am confident of winning the case if we have judicial independence,” the 
67-year-old said before entering the federal court, where around 200 of his 
supporters had gathered. “I’m mentally prepared but I don’t have much hope.”

Critics and independent human rights activists say the case against Anwar is 
the latest salvo in a long-running campaign by Malaysia’s coalition government 
to silence its most potent threat. The US government and other western 
governments have expressed concerns over his treatment.

“This trial is so unjust,” Anwar’s wife, Wan Azizah Wan Ismail, said outside 
the courtroom. “We hope and pray that justice will be served, not just for 
Anwar but for all Malaysians.”

A verdict is expected on Wednesday.

Sodomy, even consensual, is a crime in Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and punishable by up to 20 years 
in prison. Anwar would also be banned from running for office for five years 
from the day he is released from jail.

Anwar was previously imprisoned for six years after being ousted as deputy 
prime minister in 1998 on earlier charges of sodomising his former family 
driver and abusing power. He was freed in 2004 after the federal court quashed 
that conviction.

Prime Minister Najib Razak’s political party has ruled Malaysia since 
independence in 1957 but faces declining support, while a guilty verdict on 
Wednesday could weaken the opposition and trigger tensions over who should head 
it.

Anwar led a three-party alliance to unprecedented gains in 2008 elections and 
made further inroads in 2013 polls. Najib’s National Front coalition won with a 
slimmer majority and lost the popular vote to the opposition.

“Malaysia’s sodomy law seems to exist chiefly to persecute Anwar Ibrahim,” 
said Phil Robertson, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch.

“This drawn-out political theatre has long been exposed as an attempt by the 
government to take Malaysia’s most senior opposition leader out of political 
contention.”
 