
He is the man many Malaysians love to hate. Once considered his nation's 
political tour de force,Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> has spent the greater part of 
the past two decades in jail, wrapped up in court proceedings and enduring what 
he calls a long-standing smear campaign – from being labelled a chauvinist and 
Zionist to facing accusations that he is homosexual, guilty of sodomy and 
anti-Muslim.

Now Anwar is fighting his last fight: to be Malaysia's next prime minister, a 
battle for which he has been preparing for a very long time. 

At speeches and rallies Anwar is vibrant, compelling, persuasive. In person he 
is slight, ageing and soft-spoken, sipping black tea with honey as he outlines 
why his opposition alliance expects to usurp the prime minister, Najib Razak, 
and the incumbent Barisan Nasional (National Front), which has governedMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> for nearly 60 years.

"The mood is there, the mood for change," Anwar says from his office at the 
multi-storeyed headquarters of his People's Justice party in central Kuala 
Lumpur. "I'm very optimistic that we will wrest control and make major inroads."

Anwar has long been a contender to rule Malaysia but his political career has 
suffered vertiginous highs and lows. The spectacular ascent that saw him grace 
the cover of Newsweek as Asian of the Year and become the heir apparent of then 
prime minister Mahathir Mohamad was met with an equally spectacular crash in 
1998, when the two fell out and Anwar was imprisoned for six years on 
corruption and sodomy charges, claims he repeatedly dismissed as politically 
motivated.

Times have not been easy since his release in 2004. Despite leading an 
opposition coalition to a famous result in the 2008 general election, when it 
stole one-third of the parliamentary seats and five states from the National 
Front, Anwar soon found himself facing new sodomy charges, accusations that 
were onlydismissed this January due to lack of evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/09/anwar-ibrahim-sodomy-dismissed-malaysian>
. 

But his movement is full of hope. Elections are expected to be called any time 
in the next nine months, and even those who do not openly back Anwar often 
support what he stands for: relief from an autocratic and out-of-touch 
government they say has ruled Malaysia for too long. In Aprilmany tens of 
thousands of Malaysians took to the nation's streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/28/malaysian-police-fire-teargas-protesters>
 to demand electoral reform at rallies organised by Bersih, an 
opposition-backed coalition of civil-society groups whose name means "clean" in 
Malay.
 
According to political columnist Art Harun <http://art-harun.blogspot.com/>, 
Bersih has thrown "a massive spanner in the [government] works" as increasingly 
informed activists point to numerous corruption scandals and police brutality 
as proof that government reform is necessary. But when it comes to voting they 
will have to contend with a determined ruling party that has been accused of 
playing dirty to win. "The electoral roll is our Achilles' heel and their way 
of winning," sighs opposition MP and Anwar's 31-year-old daughter Nurul Izzah 
Anwar, herself a participant in April's rally. "Before it was just small 
instances … Now we've unearthed a whole pool of data." She claims that in her 
constituency alone she has 10,000 voters who suddenly 'appeared' on electoral 
lists.

Anwar's greatest task will be proving that he can actually instigate the 
change Malaysians have long been calling for, says Malaysia expert Bridget 
Welsh of Singapore Management University. "Four months after Bersih there are 
two important issues: the management of the economy and who can manage the 
economy best, and who can offer more options in democratic governance," she 
says. "The third aspect is whether this election will be free and fair ... so 
what we have is a situation where the integrity of the [electoral] process is 
as important as the process itself." 

Matters are complicated by new charges that Anwar faces of opposing a court 
order at the Bersih rally. If convicted he would not be able to stand for 
office in the next election. He denies the allegations.

If elected Anwar knows that his will be a tricky balancing act in a nation 
that sells itself as "Moderate Malaysia", where even his own opposition 
alliance spans his People's Justice party, the Pan-Malaysian Islamic party and 
the ethnic Chinese Democratic Action party.
 
"We have discussed economic policies, social policies and religious positions, 
and we have come to agreements," he says of his own alliance. "But there's a 
big, huge internal battle" – he strikes every word with his finger on his desk 
– "among the [wider] Malaysian community between the fanatics and the 
extremists to petition broader, more liberal tolerance. We call ourselves 
liberals … [but] we must put in check, not through brute force, but through 
active and vibrant intellectual discourse, these [extremist] aberrations."

Voters may be hoping for change at the next general election but they know 
they can't expect it. "What we want to see is a multi-party democracy where, 
every two or three years, the [leading] party will change," explains Bersih 
leader Ambiga Sreenavasan. "We're not averse to Barisan coming back but if 
parties think they're going to lose power, they behave a lot better. [This] is 
about power coming back to the people. It's about us being in charge."

If Anwar is unsuccessful in what is very likely his last bid at the prime 
ministership, many of those on the ground expect his daughter to one day carry 
the torch. Young, articulate and popular, Nurul Izzah personifies all of her 
father's promise, without, perhaps, the residual baggage. "I think she'll be 
the first woman prime minister of this country," says Ambiga. "I've said it so 
many times, I hope it comes true."
 