
Malaysia's high court has ruled that prosecutors have established a credible 
sodomy case againstAnwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, forcing the opposition 
leader's lawyers to start presenting defence witnesses next month.

The ruling dashed Anwar's hopes of an immediate end to a trial that could lead 
to his imprisonment for up to 20 years. Anwar insists the government concocted 
the charge that he sodomised a 25-year-old male former aide. The prime 
minister, Najib Razak, and other officials have denied plotting against Anwar.

Further trial hearings will distract Anwar as he prepares his three-party 
opposition alliance for general elections that are widely expected within a 
year. Najib's ruling coalition is working to regain at least a two-thirds 
parliamentary majority and recapture several states that Anwar's alliance 
gained in 2008 polls.

The high court judge Mohamad Zabidin Diah said on Monday he believed that 
Saiful Bukhari Azlan, one of Anwar's former aides, seemed truthful and reliable 
while testifying that Anwar made him have sex in a Kuala Lumpur apartment in 
2008.

"I find a prima facie case has been made out against the accused," Mohamad 
Zabidin told a packed courtroom. "Therefore I call upon the accused to enter 
his defence."

Hearings were scheduled to run from 6-30 June. Sodomy, even consensual, is a 
crime in Muslim-majorityMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>.

Anwar's lawyer, Sankara Nair, said the opposition leader would be the 
defence's first witness. His team might also question the prime minister and 
dozens of other people, including foreign medical experts.

"We know this is a case of a major conspiracy involving the prime minister, 
his wife" and the former national police chief, Anwar told reporters.

Saiful wrote on Twitter that he was thankful for the court's ruling. He said 
he would remain patient and was praying that the rest of the trial would 
proceed smoothly.

The judge said prosecutors had presented sufficient evidence to corroborate 
Saiful's testimony, including DNA samples from semen found on his body that 
allegedly matched Anwar's. Defence lawyers insist authorities obtained some of 
the samples illegally and handled them wrongly.

Anwar said he considered his position "very precarious" because Mohamad 
Zabidin dismissed many of the defence's key arguments. The judge said he found 
it understandable that Saiful did not try to escape Anwar's alleged sexual 
advances or file a police complaint sooner because he had long idolised Anwar 
and was concerned about his future.

It is the second time Anwar has been involved in a sex trial. He lost his post 
as deputy prime minister in 1998 after being charged with sodomising his 
family's former driver and abusing his power to cover up his actions, both of 
which he denied. He was freed in 2004 after six years in prison when a court 
overturned the sodomy conviction.

The 63-year-old, who is married with six children, has recently denied 
allegations that he had sex with a prostitute after two former politicians and 
a businessman leaked a sex video they claimed featured Anwar.
 