
Australia is “deeply concerned” that the conviction of the Malaysian 
opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim for sodomy has been upheld, the foreign affairs 
minister, Julie Bishop, has said, as the independent senatorNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> called for sanctions 
against Malaysia.


Anwar’s long-running legal battle over a sodomy charge – brought against him 
by a former aide in 2008 – ended on Tuesday, when he wasjailed for five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/anwar-ibrahim-guilty-in-sodomy-case>
 by Malaysia’s apex federal court.

He has maintained the charges against him were politically motivated, designed 
to derail his political career. Anwar was a rising star of Malaysian politics 
in the mid-1990s before he fell out with the then prime minister, Mahathir 
Mohamad.

Since then the former deputy prime minister has been beset by legal problems. 
He was jailed for several years after being convicted of corruption and an 
earlier sodomy charge.

But the charismatic Anwar, who now heads a three-party opposition alliance, 
has been seen as the greatest threat to the Barisan Nasional coalition, which 
has ruled since 1957.

In a firmly worded statement, Bishop said Australia was “disappointed” by the 
court’s decision to dismiss Anwar’s final appeal against the sodomy charge.

“We are deeply concerned by the severity of the sentence and we have made our 
concerns known to the Malaysian government,” the statement said. “Australia has 
welcomed Prime Minister Najib [Razak’s] recent messages about moderation and 
tolerance.

“As a friend of Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>, 
Australia encourages the Malaysian government to consider the impact of recent 
decisions, including the Anwar verdict and the retention of the Sedition Act, 
on its international standing and its commitment to human rights.”

Anwar has been supported by human rights groups and several foreign 
governments, includingthe US 
<http://malaysia.usembassy.gov/pr_emb_statement_anwar-021015.html> and UK 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hugo-swire-concerned-by-imprisonment-of-malaysian-opposition-leader>
.

The independent South Australian senator Nick Xenophon said Australia should 
lead a coalition of Commonwealth countries in imposing sanctions on Malaysia.

Xenophon, who was deported from Malaysia in 2013 for criticising the ruling 
party and who is a friend of Anwar’s, said Australia was in a strong position 
to make the case for Anwar.

“I spoke to Anwar just before he was sentenced. He asked for Australia’s help 
to reverse this injustice. Australia has an obligation as a leading member of 
the Commonwealth, to which Malaysia belongs, to take action on this travesty.”

Xenophon said despite Najib’s “genial and bumbling demeanour”, the Malaysian 
prime minister was “the leader of a repressive and ruthless regime”.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, and foreign affairs spokeswoman, Tanya 
Plibersek, released a statement expressing “grave concern” at the court’s 
decision, saying the five-year sentence was “particularly harsh”.

“Malaysia is a good friend of Australia. On that basis we respectfully request 
that consideration be given to the human rights implications of cases like Mr 
Ibrahim’s,” it said.

Amnesty International said the Anwar conviction and sentence was an oppressive 
ruling that would have a chilling effect on freedom of expression in the 
country.

“This is a deplorable judgement, and just the latest chapeter in the Malaysian 
authorities’ relentless attempts to silence government critics. The ‘sodomy’ 
charges againstAnwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> 
have always been politically motivated, and he should be released immediately,” 
Amnesty International’s Asia Pacific director Richard Bennett said.

The US embassy in Kuala Lumpur said it was “deeply disappointed and concerned” 
by the court’s decision, while Britain’s minister for Asia, Hugo Swire, said: 
“His case raises worrying questions about the independence of the judiciary and 
rule of law in Malaysia.”


The deputy Asia director of Human Rights Watch, Phil Robertson, described the 
court’s verdict as a “travesty”.

“Prime minister Najib Razak’s government has persisted in its politically 
motivated prosecution of opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim at the expense of 
democratic freedoms and the rights to non-discrimination and privacy for all 
Malaysians,” he said from Kuala Lumpur.

From the dock of federal court, before being taken to prison on Tuesday, Anwar 
condemned the judges for their decision. “You have become partners in crime in 
the murder of judicial independence … Allah be my witness. I pledge that I will 
not be silenced. I will fight on for freedom and justice. I will never 
surrender.”

But a spokesman for the Malaysian government said the judges had reached their 
verdict only after considering all the evidence “in a balanced and objective 
manner”.

“In this case, exhaustive and comprehensive due process has been followed over 
many years. That process is now complete, and we call on all parties involved 
to respect the legal process and judgment.”

Section 377 of the Malaysian penal code, which criminalises “carnal 
intercourse against the order of nature” is a relic of the country’s days as a 
British colony.

The law was first put on the statute books of more than 50 British colonies in 
the 19th century. It remains, in some form, on the statute books in 42 
Commonwealth, or former Commonwealth, countries, including India, Pakistan and 
Bangladesh.

It originated, in a church law form, in a 1536 English law 
<http://qz.com/156409/indias-latest-ban-against-gay-sex-has-its-origin-in-a-five-century-old-british-power-struggle/>
 instituted by Henry VIII.
 