
When he joined AOL as chief executive in 2009, Tim Armstrong had to unravel 
“the biggest mistake in corporate history”, spinning the company off at a value 
of $2.5bn, not much more than a 100th of what it was worth when it merged with 
Time Warner at the height of the dotcom bubble. Last year, heoversaw its sale 
to mobile network Verizon for $4.4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/verizon-to-buy-aol-44bn-deal>
.

“It’s a climb up,” Armstrong told the Guardian during a trip to the UK before 
Christmas. “AOL was a company that went from a $150bn valuation down to a 
billion dollars overall. At the same time that was happening, when I was at 
Google, we went from sub-$1bn valuation up to $150bn.”

He has reason to be proud of the achievement, and talking about it is one of 
the few times he (almost) breaks out of the corporate speak he is notorious 
for. “The reality is that the team atAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> has … essentially taken something 
people perceived as low to no value, and turned it into something that offered 
tremendous value, tremendous value to our employees, tremendous value to the 
investors.”

The comparative straight talking is absent, however, when I ask what AOL, now 
nestled into the bosom of one of the US’s largest communications companies, is 
in 2016. “What we want to build is the most important media technology company 
in the world. That’s been the strategy and it remains the same.”

AOL’s purpose remains hard to define (even for its CEO) because it is a 
mish-mash of businesses incorporating surprisingly profitable dialup-internet 
subscriptions (you probably still have an AOL internet setup CD buried in a 
drawer at home), a web portal, search and email, technology businesses serving 
up digital and video ads, and content sites such asTechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/> and Huffington Post <http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/>.

It’s the latter component that gets the most attention, unsurprising given 
Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> is one of 
the bigger online news sites, with more than 180 million readers a month and an 
ongoing global rollout of regional spinoffs.

The $315m acquisition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/feb/07/huffington-post-sale-aol-ariana>
 of the digital newspaper founded (and still run) by Arianna Huffington was 
Armstrong’s second largest at AOL. But few believe it or any of AOL’s other 
sites was a big draw for Verizon. When the deal was done there was talk of 
spinning off Huffington Post, and a research note on the deal from analysts 
Forrester even titled a section on the sale “forget the media brands”.

Yet Armstrong says suggestions Verizon views the sites as mere baggage are 
“table talk” and part of the “rumour mill”. He points out the company has made 
investments elsewhere in content with web TV, and says the only people who 
question whether the sites are an important part of the deal are journalists 
from organisations that compete with HuffPo.

That’s all despite the fact that, as Armstrong effectively admits, Huffington 
Post isn’t currently profitable. “We are in expansion mode for Huffington Post, 
especially on the international front,” he says when asked if it makes money. 
“If we ran Huffington Post as a US blog site, or a US content site, it would be 
profitable. We have chosen to invest in video and we have chosen to invest in 
international because we think the markets are so big overall.

“We have a big opportunity to catch more monetisation up with the investments, 
and that’s really one thing we are working on. If you want to look at it on a 
global basis we are investing in it, we are not as focused on profitability, we 
are focused on growth.”

But while Huffington Post gets all the column inches, it is the ad tech 
business that most agree Verizon really wanted. In particular, it’s AOL’s 
targeted video ad operation, which with the $405m acquisition of Adap.TV in 
2013 became a big player in one of the more lucrative parts of online 
advertising.

Armstrong believes automated, targeted advertising is only going to grow, 
particularly in video where AOL has focused, and in mobile where the data 
Verizon brings will be invaluable. Yet ad tech itself is immersed in its own 
dark period. There are growing concerns about fraud, with many of the people 
advertisers pay to reach turning out to be fake. And then there is the rise of 
adblocking, which has been gaining pace for years but got a big boost when 
Apple announced it was allowing appsto block ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/27/ad-blocking-herald-end-of-free-internet-ios9-apple>
s in its Safari browser on iPhones and iPads. Apple’s announcement came in 
September, just four months after the Verizon deal. Does it worry Armstrong?

“Adblocking is the clearest signal for consumers that the advertising 
innovation cycle, that I think the entire industry got lazy on, needs to 
improve dramatically,” he says. “At our company, the adblocking rates have 
spurred a level of thinking that should have been around a couple of years ago.

“We have accepted the fact emotionally that adblocking is a signal from 
consumers that as great as we think all internet advertising is, it can be a 
lot greater. The consumer blocking of advertising is a very significant 
opportunity, and it is a significant risk if you choose to ignore it.”

Even if AOL can somehow turn consumer distaste for web advertising to its 
advantage, it still lacks the sort of monopolistic position on the web that has 
defined the companies that have overtaken it. Google has search, Facebook has 
social media. What’s AOL’s USP? “We are one of the only companies in the world 
that partners with every company in Silicon Valley. When you go to Silicon 
Valley there are many companies that won’t partner with each other.

“The benefit of our position in the marketplace is we can be maybe the best 
partner to the Silicon Valley companies and the global companies in this space.”

That promiscuous approach to partnerships, everything from selling ads into 
apps to putting content into Facebook’s Instant Articles programme, is a 
climbdown for a company that was the Google of the first dotcom bubble. But it 
is, as Armstrong says, a climb up from the doldrums the company was in when he 
took over. And he even hints that AOL could have some sort of revenge on the 
web giants that have supplanted it.

“I have been through multiple generations of the internet. If there’s one law 
of the technology space and the internet it’s nobody owns the future,” he says. 
“AOL was a company that was disrupted, then AOL got over the last five years 
into competing in areas that are disruption centres right now: programmatic 
advertising, video, content.

“When we invested in content brands that was probably for investors the least 
enthusiastic area. Now you look at the valuations in content and say ‘hey, 
smart investments’, but at the time you have to be willing to invest in things 
that are unpopular and don’t look like they have a clear outcome.”

Just don’t ask Armstrong to tell you exactly what that future is going to be. 
“I always say inside the company opportunities are opportunities because you 
can’t see them. If you can see something it’s not an opportunity.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 44

Education Connecticut College (double major in economics and sociology)

Career 2000 joins Google 2004 vice president, advertising and commerce 2007 
president, Americas Operations and senior vice president, Google 2009 chief 
executive officer, AOL2015 oversees sale of AOL to Verizon for $4.4bn
 