
On the day my twins were born, they racked up medical bills of $29,000 apiece.

They were delivered via emergency caesarean section at 24 weeks' gestation, 
meaning I was roughly five months along. Our daughter, Jaina, weighed just 
under a pound; her brother, Cade, weighed 1 pound, 5 ounces.

They couldn't breathe on their own. Their skin was so thin, their bodies so 
small, we could watch their hearts beat. They hadn't developed cartilage yet; 
their ears and noses were flaps of skin. We didn't ask how much it was going to 
cost to treat them; we just wanted our babies to live.

Our many doctors talked about day-to-day survival, not long-term payment plans.

My employer – a newspaper not far past a round of buyouts and cost-cuts – 
didn't ask me how much it was going to cost to treat them. My co-workers pooled 
money and bought us gift cards so we didn't have to cook as we drove back and 
forth to the hospital for months.

When I read AOL chief Tim Armstrong's comments 
<http://www.capitalnewyork.com/article/media/2014/02/8539961/armstrong-distressed-babies-figured-401k-roll-back>
 blaming his company's increased health-care costs on two "distressed" babies 
with million-dollar medical bills, I wondered if that's what everyone thought 
about our twins. Did we spend too much of someone else's money to try to save 
them?

I know my unplanned first pregnancy (at 41) cost a whole lot of money, much of 
which didn't come out of my pocket. Insurance and Medicaid picked up all but a 
few thousand dollars of the $2m we "spent" at the Harrisburg Hospital neonatal 
intensive care unit in four months.

Our Jaina lived only 49 hours. In that time, she had x-rays, blood 
transfusions, IVs, a ventilator, an incubator, a dedicated nurse. I don't even 
know what else. All I know is she was very sick and she died, and I would've 
paid $10m – any amount – to save her if I could have.

Cade seemed healthier at first, but had his first (of 10) surgeries when he 
was two weeks old. When he was three weeks old, struggling through his 
umpteenth infection, a doctor asked us if we wanted keep trying to keep him 
alive.

We did, no matter the cost.

Thanks to talented doctors and nurses who found the source of the infection 
and fixed it, Cade turned the corner after that day. He wasn't out of the 
woods, though. He couldn't breathe on his own until he was two months old. He 
had sight-saving eye surgery at three months.

At one point, we were told he likely had cerebral palsy and would be disabled 
in some way, maybe mentally, maybe physically, maybe both. Was a disabled child 
too expensive to keep? No one asked that question. My husband and I never 
considered it.

Cade was released from the NICU when he was four months old. His first week 
home, he had seven doctor appointments. He didn't have cerebral palsy after 
all, but got government-paid early intervention services to help him learn to 
walk and talk and catch up with his non-preemie peers.

Today, Cade is a happy, healthy two-year-old. He has mild asthma, but hasn't 
been hospitalized unexpectedly for more than 18 months, which is cause for 
celebration. He still sees a lot of doctors, but not very often. His last 
surgery was only a month ago, but his scars on his back, his belly and his arm 
don't seem to bother him. Mostly, he giggles and skips and asks to watch "Hi 
Elmo" (Sesame Street) all the time.

I wonder if AOL's Tim Armstrong, who has apologized for his statements 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/10/business/media/facing-criticism-aol-chief-reverses-change-to-401-k-plan.html>
, understands how dehumanizing they were. Some have even suggested his comments
violated America's healthcare privacy laws 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/danmunro/2014/02/10/did-aol-ceo-tim-armstrong-violate-hipaa/>
. Remember when Obamacare opponents were talking about grandma being subjected 
todeath panels instead of expensive care 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/01/09/why-talk-of-non-existent-obamacare-death-panels-wont-die/>
? It's the same thing. It's as if he wanted cost-benefit analyses to be done 
before our daughter's IV was put in or our son's cardiac surgeon called.

Thankfully, in our case, my husband and I were able to decide what was best 
for our child without worrying about the cost. We've always paid our insurance 
premiums and taxes without complaint, believing that the common good is worth 
sharing the pain. We've tried to give back what we've been given through work 
and volunteerism.

Should I feel guilty for having medically fragile babies? Was it worth it? Was 
it fair for others to help pay for them? Should my son feel pressured to have a 
better-than-average life because his start cost a lot more than everyone else's?

Unanswerable questions. I can't put a price on a priceless life, and neither 
can anyone else.
 