
Fifteen years ago, when AOL effectively took over Time Warner in a deal often 
described as the worst in history, the gamble was that the internet was the 
future of communication. That bet was right even if it costAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> and Time Warner almost everything.


Given AOL’s subsequent collapse, Verizon’s $4.4bn purchase of the fallen 
internet star is a terrific deal for AOL. Finally, proof that AOL has something 
to offer besides your grandmother’s email address, and it’s something Verizon 
needs as it competes with other telecoms carriers and cable operators: mobile 
ad technology.

As media goes ever more mobile Verizon is less developing a video service than 
piecing one together from acquisitions. Last year it bought OnCue, an internet 
TV platform Intel was developing. With the AOL purchase, it owns the 
third-largest online video ad content network in the world behind Google and 
Facebook. The company said last month it was launching a video service for 
mobile devices. Verizon will be building its business on TV and video services 
delivered over its own networks, and with the purchase of AOL, it owns the 
ready-made infrastructure to do so.


In an age of consolidation between telecom companies, the purchase seems 
forward-looking to Craig Moffett, industry analyst with MoffettNathanson, who 
contrasted it to AT&T’s $47bn stake in satellite service DirecTV. “AT&T will 
now be in the position of having to hold back the forces of change,” he wrote. 
“Verizon is to be commended for embracing them.” Moffett observed that the 
investment was tiny compared to Verizon’s capacity to spend, putting the 
company’s enterprise value at $350bn.


AOL has been experimenting with video content over the last few years, making 
cut-rate reality shows to air through their portal while competitors like Yahoo 
experiment with buying canceled broadcast sitcoms and employing stars such as 
news anchor Katie Couric.


Verizon is probably a lot less invested in unconventional investments like 
those shows and, for that matter, the Huffington Post. A number of names and 
sites associated with the company – TechCrunch, EndGadget, controversial 
chairman and chief executive Tim Armstrong – may or may not be a part of the 
company’s future as a Verizon subsidiary, depending on how well Verizon sees 
them driving traffic in its lanes of the information superhighway.


The decision didn’t sit well with everyone. “For the price it’s paying for 
AOL, Verizon could deploy its FiOS broadband service across the rest of its 
service area,” wrote Tim Karr of internet lobbying organization Free Press. 
“Instead, the company is spending a fortune to step outside of its core 
competency into the advertising and content production markets, the latter 
where it has already shown a willingness to block content and censor news 
coverage. It’s hard to see how this transaction is good for anyone but a few 
brokers and lawyers.”


Still, the $4.4bn price tag is a bargain compared to what AOL commanded 15 
years ago in its disastrous merger with Time Warner, which ended in a $99bn 
write-off. Verizon has $350bn in cash to play with, and the mobile giant is 
engaged in a high-stakes game for the future of communication. That this time 
around AOL is a penny-ante side bet just shows much that game has changed.

 