
Apes have a human-like ability to guess what others are thinking, even in 
cases when someone holds a mistaken belief, according to research that supports 
the view that other primates can empathise and have complex inner lives.

The findings, in chimpanzees, bonobos and orangutans, are the first to clearly 
demonstrate that apes can predict another’s beliefs – even when they know that 
presumption is false.

“This cognitive ability is at the heart of so many human social skills,” said 
Christopher Krupenye of Duke University. “I think our findings start to suggest 
that maybe apes have a deeper understanding of each other than we previously 
thought.”

Gorilla thriller: scientists direct short movies for apes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/animal-magic/2015/sep/17/gorilla-thriller-scientists-movies-film-ape-chimp-bonobo-cognition>
In a fresh take on a classic psychology experiment, the apes were able to 
correctly anticipate that someone would look for a hidden item in a specific 
location, even if the apes knew that the item was no longer there.

The ability to predict that someone holds a mistaken belief – which 
psychologists refer to as a “theory of mind” – is seen as a milestone in 
cognitive development that children normally acquire by the age of five.

The findings overturn the view that the ability to place oneself in another’s 
shoes is uniquely human.

Previously, primatologists have shown that apes are remarkably skilled at 
understanding what others want, empathising and even deceiving others to gain 
advantage for themselves. But when it came to predicting what someone else was 
thinking, even when they were wrong, apes consistently failed the test.

Krupenye and Fumihiro Kano, a comparative psychologist at Kyoto University who 
co-led the study, re-examined the question using a creative approach that 
involved showing the apes videos of a capering actor dressed in a King Kong 
suit.

“Our challenge was really in making TV that apes would want to watch,” said 
Krupenye. “Apes are obsessed with social information, and so we created social 
conflicts that would engage them and encourage them to track the key false 
belief information.”


The video features an actor dressed as King Kong, who hits a man holding a 
long pole before darting under one of two haystacks while the human looks on. 
In some scenarios, the King Kong character switches haystack while the human 
disappears out of view behind a door.

The nature of intelligence - Science Weekly podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/sep/13/the-nature-of-intelligence-science-weekly-podcast>
The man then reappears and smacks the haystack he thinks his assailant is 
hidden under – presumably to get his own back.

By using eye-tracking technology, the scientists showed that 17 out of 22 apes 
tested switched their gaze to show they had correctly anticipated when the man 
would target the wrong haystack.

“King Kong is somewhat ape-like but also unfamiliar and novel, and we knew 
that these elements would enhance apes’ attention,” said Krupenye. “The movies 
are silly and comical to humans, but they actually depict the kind of social 
information that’s really meaningful within ape societies.”

Having an insight into the beliefs of others is essential for getting along 
socially, predicting what people might do and even tricking someone. Being 
unable to infer what others are thinking or feeling is considered an early sign 
of autism.

Prof Frans de Waal, a primatologist at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, 
who was not involved in the study, said that the findings confirm that theory 
of mind is not an exclusively human ability. “Increasingly, we see their inner 
lives as very similar to that of humans,” he said. “This is hardly surprising 
given the brain similarity and the close genetic connection between humans and 
apes.”

De Waal said the latest findings build on a growing body of evidence pointing 
to primate cognition being closer to that of humans than once thought. “Our 
brains are bigger, true, which means that we have a more powerful computer, but 
its fundamentals, its hardware, is the same as that of other primates,” he said.

The findings <http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aaf8110> 
were published on Thursday in the journal Science.
 