 Fit young people are still dying of appendicitis because doctors sometimes 
fail to recognise the symptoms, according to an authoritative report into 
hospital deaths.
Twelve people with appendicitis died between April 2000 and March 2001 
according to the latest survey of the National Confidential Enquiry into 
Perioperative Deaths (NCEPOD). "What is perhaps more alarming is that two of 
these were in previously fit young men and another was a child of three," says 
the report.

One of those who died was a 21-year-old man who arrived in casualty with pains 
in the navel area and vomiting. "He was thought to have a urinary tract 
infection," says the report. After treatment, the young man was allowed home. 
When he came back five days later, he collapsed and suffered a heart attack.

The man was resuscitated and taken to intensive care and then to the operating 
theatre, where surgeons found a gangrenous appendix and widespread peritonitis. 
He died 24 hours later.

A second fit young man of 22 went to his GP with abdominal pain and vomiting, 
but the GP thought he had gastroentiritis. He arrived in hospital after seven 
days of symptoms, was operated on to remove the appendix but suffered septic 
shock. He died of a major heart attack the following day in intensive care.

"Appendicitis diagnosis requires skill and experience. Hospitals should ensure 
that those seeing potential cases either have the requisite skills and 
experience or are supported by those who do."

In the case of the three-year-old, her appendicitis developed so rapidly and 
she deteriorated so fast that little could have been done to save her, says the 
report. "Surgical trainees rarely see such severe cases but this acts as a 
reminder that small children can rapidly become desperately ill and indeed die 
as a result of appendicitis," it says.

NCEPOD received confidential reports of 21,991 deaths within 30 days of an 
operation in 2000/2001, but it says it continues to be concerned that not all 
deaths are reported to it, as they should be.

It found that teamwork was not all it could be. "We cannot simply blame the 
lack of resources for all the failures, although it often plays a part," says 
Ron Hoile, one of the report's authors. "Poor communications and a lack of 
integrated team working are also enormous problems."

Other causes for concern were mistakes in the drugs patients were given in 
hospital, too few recovery beds after operations and intensive care units which 
had no specialist consultant on hand.
 