
Blood pressure a little high? Need the lights turned off in your home? There's 
an app for that. Or there soon could be afterApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> unveiled the latest plans for 
its iPhone software on Monday at its developers' conference in San Francisco.

Chief executive Tim Cook heralded the new software, which will gather and 
store health-related data and also offer integrated control for "smart home" 
devices such as remote-controlled light bulbs.

It will be released in the autumn and run on iPhones and iPads, as "something 
only Apple can do", Cook said, as he pointed to statistics which said that 130m 
iPhone and iPad buyers in the past 12 months out of about 230m sold were new to 
Apple's platform.

The "HeallthKit" and "HomeKit" software are part of a concerted effort by the 
Californian company to position its smartphone as the hub of peoples' digital 
lives, much as it did more than a decade ago when it first launched its iTunes 
software for organising music files.

In a speech to thousands of software developers at the Worldwide Developers 
conference in San Francisco's Moscone West centre, neither Cook nor Craig 
Federighi, Apple's software chief, announced any new hardware for the health or 
smart home categories. But Carolina Milanesi, analyst at the research firm 
Kantar ComTech, suggested Apple was aiming to get developers to build apps for 
both sectors before making its own move into them. "Otherwise you get the 
Galaxy Gear effect where Samsung announced a $300 smartwatch but there weren't 
any apps for it, so people say 'what's the use of that?'"

Federighi was at pains to emphasise that the health and smart home systems 
will not share user data without explicit permission, as it seeks to position 
itself as an alternative to the datasharing approach used by Google, Facebook 
and other advertising-supported companies.

However the $3bn purchase of the Beats headphones and music company was not 
mentioned in the two-hour presentation although Federighi did jokingly make a 
call to "a new Apple employee" the Beats cofounder Dr Dre, who sent developers 
his best wishes.

Apple also showed off software called "Handoff" that will allow iPhone owners 
to answer incoming phone calls or texts on an iPad or Mac computer.

With new smartphone buyers becoming increasingly hard to find as the US and 
European markets become "saturated", Apple is looking to attract users of 
Google's Android to use its phones and tablets. Cook put heavy emphasis on the 
success that the iPhone and iPad have had in China, saying that half of its 
customers there had switched from Android.

Announcing HealthKit, Federighi said that presently apps retain their data 
inidvidually but do not interact or connect to make good use of it. "That 
information lives in silos," he said.

"You can't get a single comprehensive picture."

The news follows archrival Samsung Electronics Co Ltd's announcement last week 
of a mobile healthdata store called SAMI (Samsung Architecture Multimodal 
Interactions).

Samsung plans to market SAMI by hosting a developer challenge and setting 
aside a $50m fund for earlystage digital health entrepreneurs.

The update to the iPhone and iPad software will be released in the autumn, 
Federighi said. Though Apple made no mention of new iPhones or iPads, those are 
expected to be shown off just ahead of the software's release, and to ship just 
after it.

Among the expected updates are an iPhone with a larger screen to capture users 
who might otherwise shift to the increasingly popular "phablet" models, and to 
win back those who have moved away from the iPhone because they have preferred 
the larger screens available on Android. Presently the iPhone 5S has a 4in 
screen, measured diagonally, while products like the Samsung Galaxy S5 and HTC 
One M8 have screens measuring 5in or more, and analyst data shows that such 
larger screens are increasingly popular.

Apple also showed off new OS X software for its desktop and laptop computers 
that will automatically connect to an iPhone, so that it will show the identity 
of a caller, and let them reply to SMSs directly from the screen. Codenamed 
"Yosemite", it will be available as a public beta so that any Mac user can 
apply to test it.
 