 Chateau Latour has previously gone for as much as £2,000 Photograph: 
ValueMyStuff 
Do you have something precious in your attic? The news that a Chinese vase, 
discovered during the clearance of an elderly couple's house,sold for £53m at 
auction in November 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/nov/11/chinese-vase-breaks-sale-record?INTCMP=SRCH>
 undoubtedly sent thousands of people scurrying to their lofts, cupboards and 
mantelpieces to inspect household nick nacks that might just be worth a fortune.

It is unlikely anyone will find anything as extraordinarily valuable as the 
vase, but interesting and valuable items are often sent to online valuation 
serviceValueMyStuff.com <http://www.valuemystuff.com/>.

Recent discoveries include:

• A 16th-century metal chastity belt found during a house clearance in Wales. 
"At first it was overlooked as just a rusty piece of metal and the person who 
found it originally thought it was a part from a horse and carriage," says 
Patrick van der Vorst, a former director of Sotherby's and founder of 
ValueMyStuff. "Contrary to popular belief, women often elected to wear chastity 
belts – rather than being forced to by untrusting or fearful husbands – to 
protect themselves against harassment and unwelcome advances."Value: £1,500

• A rare early-Ming blue and white stem bowl sent in by a client who was, at 
the time, using it as a fruit bowl. Since the valuation she has removed it from 
the table in fear that one of her six cats might knock it over.Value: £200,000

• A 17th-century vizard – part of the Restoration fashion of wearing a face 
mask covering the entire face (held in place by a bead in the mouth). The masks 
were also very popular at playhouses with women attending a new comedy who 
wanted to protect their modesty.Value £3,000-£4,000
 Tudor Coin Photograph: ValueMyStuff 
• A Tudor coin dating back to 1553. Very few coins from this period 
remain, making this a truly remarkable piece, according to van der Vorst. 
During times of recession and economic uncertainty collectors revert back to 
secure values, hence the increase in prices of gold and coins. There is 
currently a very strong market for collectable coins.Value £20,000

• An Indian painting on cloth depicting Radha and Krishna. This would be of 
great interest to a museum or a private collector, and with the Indian economy 
performing well, more Indian collectors have started repatriating the very best 
of their country's art. Value £20,000

• A bottle of Chateau Latour, 1961 
<http://www.cellartracker.com/wine.asp?iWine=17907>. This is a very fine 
vintage with strong prices being achieved at auction for similar bottles. Six 
lots of Chateau Latour 1961 recently sold at Sotheby's in London, collectively 
raising £125,925, and they have been known to go for more. As with all wines, 
the condition of the bottle and the quality of the label is key.Value £2,000

ValueMyStuff normally charges from £4.59 for valuations, but van der Vorst has 
offered to value items of interest sent in by guardian.co.uk/money for free.

Readers who want to put their heirlooms forward for valuation should email 
photos of the items tohomes.guardian@googlemail.com 
<mailto:homes.guardian@googlemail.com>. Please try to send in a couple of 
pictures from various angles and a close up of a hallmark or signature if there 
is one.

In addition, please include any known information about the item, including 
details of how it was acquired, what it might be or where it has possibly come 
from. But don't worry if you have no idea – this shouldn't stop ValueMyStuff 
from being able to identify the object in question.

We can't promise to value all items sent in but the Guardian will select the 
most interesting objects to put forward for valuation.
 