
Kandahar is the likely arena for what is being billed as the decisive clash 
between Nato forces and the Taliban inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> this summer, with the current 
high-profile operation in Helmand province just a preparation for the showdown 
to come, officials have said.

Nato officials told the Guardian that the focus of international forces will 
shift from Helmand to Kandahar, which, with a population of more than a 
million, is the big prize for both theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> and the coalition. A senior Nato 
official said: "This moves to Kandahar. That's the next main objective."

Captain Scott Costen, a spokesman for the coalition's command in the south, 
confirmed that an operation for Kandahar was being designed. "The scale of what 
you will see in the Kandahar operation will be comparable to the scale you see 
in Helmand," said Costen. "We're still in the planning stages."

Coalition officers describe the offensive in Helmand centred on the town of 
Marjah as a "confidence builder" for Kandahar and other battles to come, now 
that extra troops have been committed.

The US general who oversees the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq confirmed today 
that Marjah was the opening battle in a long campaign.

General David Petraeus told NBC's Meet the Press that the campaign probably 
will last 12 months to 18 months and is part of the revised US strategy for 
fighting insurgents in Afghanistan.

Kandahar is Afghanistan's political powerhouse. It was the seat of the former 
Afghan royal family, and the base for Taliban founder Mullah Omar during his 
reign from the mid-1990s to 2001.

President Hamid Karzai's family also comes from Kandahar, where his 
controversial brother Ahmad Wali Karzai heads the provincial council.

The Taliban's top priority is to control Kandahar, which the Nato-led 
coalition has been slow to counter up to now, maintaining an under-manned 
presence in the city. Many experts believe this has been a strategic mistake.

"Kandahar means Afghanistan. If we have a peaceful Kandahar, we will have a 
peaceful Afghanistan," Tooryalai Wesa, governor of Kandahar province, said in 
an interview.

"Kandahar was the centre for Taliban at that time [during their rule]. I'm 
sure they'll be trying to focus the most here."

Yet, until recent months, a combat force of just 1,000 Canadian troops was 
left to defend the province, allowing the Taliban to control large parts of the 
region and embark on a step-by-step plan to capture Kandahar city.

Districts around the province such as Zhari and Panjwai, have Taliban 
presences, with shadow courts and other parallel extremist institutions.

The Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> troop deployment in Kandahar 
is being rapidly ramped up and should reach some 6,000 this spring.

Some experts believe that the Kandahar offensive would need to be even bigger 
than the current operation in Helmand.

The Taliban is more dispersed in Kandahar and more integrated into the 
community – unlike Marjah, where the fighters are concentrated in one spot – so 
the operation will have to be targeted over a much bigger area,.

There is likely to be fighting across much of the province and out in 
extending into the militant hideouts in the neighbouring province of Uruzgan.

Thousands more troops are expected to be deployed to begin a major offensive 
by early summer.

"Kandahar [military operation] is imminent," said Khalid Pashtoon, a member of 
parliament for the city. "If they [Nato] don't come to Kandahar, all the 
operations mean nothing.

"The Taliban are so proud of being from Kandahar. Once you demoralise them 
there, then automatically the Taliban will be compelled to reconcile."

Unlike Marjah, which was almost entirely in the hands of the Taliban, the 
situation in Kandahar is more complicated. Kandahar city is ostensibly in 
government hands but the Taliban are running a campaign of assassination and 
intimidation and periodically stage attacks.

"We're not going to see a Marjah-style operation in Kandahar because it's much 
more ambiguous. Kandahar city in particular is complex," said Carl Forsberg, an 
analyst at the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War.

"I get the sense that [Nato] commanders aren't really sure what they should do 
there."

He added that Nato had previously failed to give precedence to Kandahar over 
Helmand, perhaps because of Helmand's dominant role in the drugs trade.

In the districts around the city, a particularly violent group of young 
Taliban commanders terrorise locals and exert parallel power.

The extremists include the 23-year shadow district governor of Zhari, Mullah 
Esmat, also known as Mullah Zerghai, and the 22-year-old shadow district police 
chief of Zhari, Mullah Gul Mohammad..

"The younger generation [of Taliban] are very ruthless people," said Hajji 
Mohammad Khan, a tribal elder from Zhari district. "The Americans don't 
recognise them. They just stand there when the Americans pass."

The Marja operation has claimed the lives of a dozen NATO troops so far. The 
main points of the town are now under the control of NATO and Afghan troops. 
Over the weekend, President Karzai warned that NATO must do more to protect 
civilians there. The coalition force said today(Sunday) that there was 
determined resistance in some areas and the operation would take at least 30 
days to complete.
 