
The parents of the murdered five-year-old schoolgirl April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> can finally begin to plan their 
daughter's funeral after an inquest was held almost a year after she vanished.

April was abducted as she played near her home by former abattoir worker Mark 
Bridger, who murdered her and disposed of her body, which has never been found.

Bridger, who is serving a whole-life term, has refused to say what he did with 
April's body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/30/mark-bridger-life-sentence-april-jones-murder>
, though officers recovered a few fragments of bones – believed to be those of 
the child – from his fireplace.These formed an important part of the 
prosecution case against Bridger. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/21/april-jones-jury-bone-fragments>

Police and April's family believe they are pieces of the girl's skull, and 
following Bridger's conviction in May, discussions have been taking place 
between Dyfed-Powys police and the girl's parents about returning the remains.

April's parents, Coral and Paul, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/30/april-jones-murder-mothers-impact-statement-coral>
 have made it clear that not having a body or so far being able to hold a 
funeral for the little girl has exacerbated the agony of their loss.

They attended the brief inquest in Welshpool, mid-Wales, accompanied by two 
police family liaison officers. Although technically the file remains open, the 
Powys coroner, Louise Hunt, said there would be no further proceedings.

Following the conclusion of Monday's hearing, a death certificate can be 
issued and April's death can be officially registered – allowing her family to 
have an official funeral.

Hunt told the parents: "I want to extend my sympathies for your terrible loss. 
There will be no further formal proceedings and I hope the coming to an end of 
them will give you time to allow you to deal with your grief."

The inquest, which had been given special permission to proceed by the chief 
coroner in the absence of a body, was formally opened and adjourned. Detective 
Superintendent Andy John, who led the investigation into April's disappearance 
from her home in Machynlleth, mid-Wales, gave a brief outline of the case.

John said April's family reported she had been abducted at 7.20pm on 1 October 
last year, prompting a "significant police response".

He said: "This resulted in the arrest of Mark Leonard Bridger on 2 October. 
Following subsequent inquiries, Bridger was charged with the murder of April, 
child abduction and perverting the course of justice. This resulted in a 
criminal trial taking place from April 29 to May 30."

Bridger was convicted of all three counts and handed a whole-life prison term, 
meaning he will die behind bars. John said that April's body had never been 
found, but she suffered a "violent death". He said on the "balance of 
probabilities", the youngster died at Bridger's cottage, Mount Pleasant in the 
village of Ceinws, just outside Machynlleth, on the day she was abducted.

The trial judge ruled that Bridger's crime was sexually motivated. After his 
arrest police found images of children being sexually abused on his laptop.

Although no details were given of when or where April's funeral would take 
place, it is understood that mourners will be asked to wear pink, which was her 
favourite colour. It also became a symbol of hope in the wake of her 
disappearance, with scores of pink ribbons being put up by townsfolk.

Local councillor Michael Williams said: "I don't think it will be a final 
goodbye but it will be another step in remembering all the wonderful times that 
the family had together.

"It will bring people together again in one place to remember the life of a 
little child that was taken so savagely from the family and community."

April's disappearance sparked the biggest search in British police history. 
Following Bridger's conviction, Coral Jones expressed relief that Bridger would 
spend the rest of his time behind bars but said: "We still do not know where 
she is and this will always be a very painful thing for us to deal with."

John has previously said he believes the girl's body was dismembered and 
scattered in different locations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/30/april-jones-murder-final-hours>, 
possibly including a river. Bridger's skill as a former abattoir worker and his 
knowledge of the area would have helped him hide the remains.
 