
Almost a year after the schoolgirl April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> was abducted and murdered, her 
family is finally laying her to rest.

Mourners were asked to wear pink – the five-year-old's favourite colour – or 
something bright for the funeral of the child, who was taken from the town of 
Machynlleth in mid-Wales as she played on her bicycle and killed by the former 
abattoir worker Mark Bridger.

Despite the biggest search in British police history, her body has not been 
found, but police were careful to preserve tiny bone fragments found in 
Bridger's fireplace believed to be the only remains of April so that her 
parents, Coral and Paul, could give her some sort of send-off.

Hymns and prayers were to be sung and said at the funeral service at St 
Peter's church in Machynlleth on Thursday but no eulogies made. Donations will 
be used to sponsor a five-year-old girl in Africa.

April was abducted by Bridger on 1 October last year as she played with a 
friend close to her home. Earlier this year, Bridger was convicted of her 
murder and told he will serve the rest of his life behind bars.

At the end of his trial the girl's family appealed to him to say where her 
body was, explaining that they would find it hard to move on until they 
recovered it, but Bridger has insisted he cannot remember what he did with the 
girl's remains.

An inquest held earlier this month concluded the formal proceedings connected 
to the case and cleared the way for the family to organise a funeral just five 
days short of the grim anniversary.

The Rev Kathleen Rogers, who is officiating at the ceremony, said she hoped 
the service would give comfort to April's family and the community.

She said: "A funeral plays a significant part in the grieving process and the 
funeral of little April will be even more important for her family as the 
probability of such a service was very remote until the inquest two weeks ago.

"Our prayer is that it will be a starting point for them as they travel the 
long and painful journey of healing. It will also, I think, give the community 
permission to bring some sort of normality back to our town."

Pink ribbons adorned the town and, as requested, mourners wore bright colours. 
At the time of the girl's disappearance townsfolk, searchers and police 
officers wore pink ribbons as a sign of hope; now they are a symbol of 
solidarity with the family and a bright reminder that April will not be 
forgotten.

The service was to include a montage of images created by April's older 
sister, Jazmin, as part of GCSE coursework showing scenes of family life.

A picture of April on a beach decorated the front of the order of service, 
which was to begin with Psalm 23, The Lord is My Shepherd, and conclude with 
the Welsh language version of Blest are the Pure in Heart.

Also to be sung was Memories Sad and Beautiful (to the tune of All Things 
Bright and Beautiful) and the hymn O, Father, on Your Love We Call, written by 
the Scottish bereavement counsellor Jean Holloway in response to the Dunblane 
tragedy.

Two poems composed by a local writer, one called April, the other An Autumn 
Night, will be read out by teachers from April's school.

Not all well-wishers had heard that the parents had requested that no flowers 
be sent. One bouquet left at the church gates read: "April, star shining bright 
in the sky, sleep well." Another said: "Taken far too soon. Spread your angel 
wings."

One neighbour of Coral and Paul, who did not want to be named, said: "I can't 
really explain how I feel about today. It still feels unreal – everything that 
happened.

"In a sense, everyone around here feels a bit relieved that April can finally 
have a proper funeral. The fact that Coral and Paul have been denied that for 
so long has made their pain even worse.

"I'm hoping that today will help April's family gain a degree of closure – 
though they'll obviously never get over what happened. People here will never 
forget April and will always be here for her family."

April's parents have asked that donations go to a church project to sponsor a 
five-year-old girl in Uganda. Rogers said the girl would be sponsored until she 
finished her education and any spare money would be used to help other 
villagers.

In recent weeks a memorial garden has been created on the green close to where 
April lived. It includes a doll's house, cuddly toys and flowers – all pink. A 
wooden seat – dubbed "April's bench" – and a picnic table have been crafted by 
staff from the nearby Centre for Alternative Technology.

A horsedrawn hearse will carry April's coffin from the Bryn y Gog estate along 
the high street to the church for the noon service.

Among the mourners will be Detective Superintendent Andy John, who led the 
investigation into April's murder, along with family liaison officers and 
members of the search teams who combed the hills, rivers and fields around 
Machynlleth looking for the girl.

John told April's inquest that on the "balance of probabilities", the 
youngster died at Bridger's cottage, Mount Pleasant in the village of Ceinws, 
just outside Machynlleth, on the day she was abducted.

The trial judge ruled that Bridger's crime was sexually motivated. After his 
arrest police found images of children being sexually abused on his laptop.

John has previously said he believes the girl's body was dismembered and 
scattered in different locations, possibly including a river. Bridger's skill 
as a former abattoir worker and his knowledge of the area would have helped him 
hide the remains.

Donations should be sent to Sponsor a Child, C/O St Peter's church, Machynlleth
 <http://www.machynllethstpeters.co.uk>.
 