
Monday 1 October 2012 

7.15pm: April is playing on her bike with friends on the Bryn-Y-Gog estate in 
the mid-Wales town of Machynlleth when she is abducted. A seven-year-old friend 
tells police she was taken in a grey van. The friend says she had a "happy 
face" as she got in.

7.20pm: Mark Bridger's Land Rover is seen driving away from Machynlleth at 
speed.

7.29pm: April's mother, Coral, dials 999 and reports that her daughter has 
been kidnapped.

7.37pm: The first police officer arrives at the scene. She speaks to the child 
witness and a "critical incident" is launched by Dyfed Powys police.

8pm: Scores of Machynlleth people, some alerted by social networks, search for 
April. By the early hours the number has swollen to hundreds and the police 
have instigated the first UK child rescue alert, designed to alert police 
forces and the public across the country that a child has been taken. The 
biggest search ever undertaken in the UK begins.

8.30pm: Bridger's Land Rover is spotted arriving at his home in Ceinws, a 
village 3 miles from Machynlleth. Police do not know if this is the first time 
he has been home since abducting April or if he drove there directly after 
abducting her, killed her there and then went out again to dispose of the body. 
This sighting may not have been the first time he returned home. At this point 
Bridger does not know he was seen by the child witness.

Tuesday 2 October

Shortly before 9am: Bridger is spotted close to a river bank carrying a black 
bin bag. A witness is to tell police she thought there was something in the 
bag. Later he takes his Land Rover into a garage to be repaired and pretends to 
help look for April.

9am: Thanks to the seven-year-old's account, police are able to make the link 
with Bridger and he is made a person of interest. Detectives begin to work on 
his background.

Noon: Bridger is officially made a suspect and police try to find him, his car 
and his home (he had only moved there five weeks before).

3.03pm: Police smash their way into his home, Mount Pleasant cottage. They 
notice the cottage is unpleasantly hot and smell detergent. Traces of burnt 
bone, believed to be from a child's skull, are later found in Bridger's wood 
burner. They cannot see the blood from April's body as Bridger had done a major 
clean-up.

3.32pm: Bridger is arrested close to the river on suspicion of abduction. He 
tells the arresting officer the basic story he is to maintain during 13 police 
interviews and three days in the witness box: he had accidentally crushed April 
in a car accident , but had forgotten what he did with the body. That evening, 
police tell April's family she is probably dead.

Friday 5 October

Bridger is arrested on suspicion of murder after fast-track DNA testing 
establishes that April's blood has been found at Mount Pleasant – most 
significantly on the underside of the carpet in the living room in front of the 
wood burner. There is still no sign of April's body.

Monday 8 October

10am: Bridger appears at Aberystwyth magistrates court. A small crowd waits 
outside. One man throws a bottle at the van that brings Bridger to court, 
others shout abuse. Bridger is driven away to HMP Manchester – formerly known 
as Strangeways.

7pm: April's parents, Coral and Paul, release a Chinese lantern from their 
garden. Other residents gather to light lanterns, candles and release pink 
balloons – pink ribbons and balloons have become a symbol of solidarity and 
hope.

Monday 14 January 2013 

At Mold crown court, Mark Bridger pleads not guilty to abduction, murder and 
concealing, disposing of or destroying April's body. But it emerges that his 
case is that he was "probably responsible" for her death. April's parents see 
Bridger in person for the first time since he abducted their daughter.

Monday 22 April

Dyfed Powys police announce that the search for April is finally over. They 
have not found the girl. A "reactive team of specialist officers" remains in 
place to respond to any new information.

Monday 29 April

Mark Bridger's trial starts at Mold crown court. He denies abduction, murder 
and disposing of, concealing or destroying April's body.

Thursday 30 May

Mark Bridger found guilty of abducting and murdering April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones>, and of disposing of, concealing 
or destroying her body.
 