
The judge hearing the case against Mark Bridger, who is accused of abducting 
and murderingApril Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones>, has 
reminded the jury that her blood was found at the defendant's home.

Mr Justice Griffiths Williams told the jury that the five-year-old's blood was 
discovered in Bridger's living room, hall and bathroom.

Mark Bridger, a 47-year-old former abattoir worker and lifeguard, denies 
abducting April and killing her in a sexually motivated attack. He also pleads 
not guilty to disposing of, concealing or destroying her body.

The judge spent Wednesday morning going through the prosecution case against 
Bridger, who is accused of abducting April as she played on her bicycle near 
her home in Machynlleth, mid Wales, on 1 October last year.

He took time reminding the nine women and three men of the forensic evidence 
in the case. The judge told them that April's blood was found in the living 
room, hall and bathroom of Bridger's cottage, Mount Pleasant, in the village of 
Ceinws, three miles from Machynlleth.

He also reminded them that the prosecution claimed that fragments of bone 
found in the wood-burner in the living room could have been from a human skull. 
But the judge told them that Bridger's expert had said she could not be certain 
the fragments were human.

The jury and Bridger appeared to listen intently as the judge summarised 
evidence concerning material that had been found on Bridger's laptop. Found 
filed away were images of young girls being sexually abused, pictures of 
children's corpses and photographs of children killed in notorious murder 
cases. Bridger also collected pictures of local girls, including April, the 
jury was told.

Turning to the evidence Bridger gave from the witness box over three days, the 
judge reminded the jury he had insisted he was not a paedophile. Sending the 
jury out at 1.55pm, the judge said: "I'm here to give you any further 
assistance you may require.

"You're under no pressure for time. You must take as long as you need."

Earlier, beginning his summing up at Mold crown court in north Wales, the 
judge urged the jury to conduct a "dispassionate review of the evidence".

He told the panel not to speculate, adding: "No verdict should be based on 
guesswork."

Elwen Evans QC, prosecuting, said the case against Bridger was overwhelming. 
She said: "Some of you may have wondered how anybody could do what the 
prosecution allege this defendant has done and then concoct a story to cover up 
what he has done."

The prosecutor reminded the jury of Bridger's false claims that he had served 
in the military and said: "On his own admission, this is a man who over 20 
years ago decided to create a whole new life for himself, and a man who was 
prepared to live that lie."

She claimed he had continued to manipulate his account of what he said 
happened to April to "deal with evidence he cannot overcome".

April's parents, Coral and Paul, who have attended each day of the trial, 
watched the closing speeches and the judge's summing up from the public gallery.

Bridger claims that he accidentally hit April with his Land Rover and put her 
in his car and had forgotten what he did with her body.

Brendan Kelly QC, defending, urged the jury to put aside the "obvious 
emotions" attached to a case that had "appalled" the nation and decide their 
verdict on the evidence.

He said: "Mark Bridger denies these offences. He challenges the 'compelling' 
evidence which the crown advances."

Kelly went on: "You can only convict this defendant if you are sure on the 
evidence that is put before you.

"If you are sure, it will be your pleasure to convict Mark Bridger. But if you 
are not sure, it will be upon you to acquit Mark Bridger.

"Your job, and I can't state this enough, is to decide the case on the 
evidence. It is going to be difficult to ignore the obvious emotion attached to 
these allegations but that is what you are obliged to do."

Kelly drew attention to the evidence of a seven-year-old witness who claimed 
she saw April getting into Bridger's Land Rover willingly on the evening of 1 
October. The barrister claimed the witness, who gave her evidence via 
videolink, was honest but mistaken.

After deliberating for just over three hours, the jury was called back into 
the court and the judge sent the jurors home for the evening, telling them it 
had been a "long day". He warned the jury members not to speak to anyone about 
the case or do any research on it.

The jury will resume its discussions at 10am on Thursday.
 