
There is surely nothing any parent fears more than the murder of their child 
by a stranger or an acquaintance. Seeing that horror unfold for the family of
April Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> across the news can 
only amplify that fear.

Statistics can do almost nothing to assuage such emotive images and words on a 
topic – but what they convey is largely reassuring: child murders are very 
rare, and the profile of them often fails to fit what parents fear. While even 
one is too many – and a tragedy – here's some information on that wider picture:

Murders over time

Looking simply at the total numbers of homicides within each age group, it 
quickly becomes clear that most murder victims are adults, as the chart below 
shows.

People aged 30-49 make up the largest bulk of murder victims, followed by 
16-29 year-olds. The huge spike in murders of over-70s in 2002/3 was 
attributable to just one man: because of how the figures are calculated, 172 
deaths attributed to the GP Harold Shipman were classed in that year.

The three groups conveying children's deaths are at the bottom of the graph. 
We've pulled them out below to make them easier to see:

The broad trend over the decade is a gradual decrease in the number of child 
murder victims – though the figures have been largely stable in recent years, 
at around 50 victims in total each year.

It's worth noting, however, that there are far more over-70s than under-1s – 
so it's no surprise fewer of the latter become victims. For that reason, 
there's one final way it's worthwhile to consider such deaths: the number of 
homicides per million people in that age group:

This chart looks somewhat different – and distressing. The group most at risk 
of murder in relative terms is under-1s.

Each year, around one in 50,000 children under one are killed: tragically, 
almost always at the hands of a parent.

For older children, the risks are much lower: around one in 165,000 children 
aged one to four are killed each year, as is one in every 500,000 children aged 
5-15, making them the safest of all age groups.

Who kills children?

In the vast majority of cases, children who are homicide victims are killed by 
a parent. Looking at figures from England and Wales over the last decade, on 
average around 70% of child homicides where there was a suspect were committed 
by a parent.

Just over 16% were committed by another family member, a friend, or an 
acquaintance, while the remaining 15% were committed by strangers (figures are 
rounded).

Figures based on 10-to-15-year-olds show that those in the lowest income 
households were more than twice as likely to be homicide victims as those in 
the highest income brackets.

The online child abuse connection

Mark Bridger, April Jones' killer, was found to have numerous images of child 
sexual abuse on his computer.

High-quality evidence on the causal links between such material and violent 
acts is thin on the ground, as is evidence to support another theory that use 
of pornography depicting consenting adults acts as a 'gateway' to abusive 
material.

With regard to the latter, however, it is worthwhile to note that the previous 
decade has seen an exponential increase in the amount of available pornographic 
material, due to the rise of the internet, while both murder and sexual crime 
has consistently fallen.

However, there is little to no evidence on the full prevalence of images of 
child abuse. Some data, though, is available through theInternet Watch 
Foundation <http://www.iwf.org.uk/>, an industry-funded watchdog aimed at 
helping take illegal material offline as swiftly as is possible.

Any member of the public who stumbles across material they worry is illegal, 
or should be taken down, can report it immediately to the IWF, who claim to 
take more than 75% of material down within two hours, if it is found to be in 
breach of the law



The IWF's most recent report said it had more than 31,000 complaints relating 
to possible child abuse imagery online, and took down material in 9,000 of 
those cases. It also received abuse reports relating to more than 3,000 
pornographic films featuring adults, but took action in none of those cases.


 