
The jury hearing the trial of the man charged with abducting and murdering 
April Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> has been urged to put 
emotion aside in considering its verdicts on Wednesday.

The judge, Mr Justice Griffiths Williams, and prosecution and defence 
barristers reminded the nine women and three men that they must decide on the 
case against Mark Bridger solely on the evidence they have heard.

The prosecution alleges that Bridger, a former abattoir worker and lifeguard, 
abducted five-year-old April from near her home in Machynlleth, midWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, and killed her in a sexually-motivated 
attack before disposing of, concealing or destroying her body.

Bridger, 47, who denies the offences, claims he accidentally knocked April 
over in his Land Rover, put her into his vehicle then panicked and forgot what 
he did with her body, which has never been found.

Some members of the jury appeared upset as they heard how April's blood was 
found at Bridger's home, and bone fragments – which the prosecution claims came 
from a child's skull – were discovered in his wood burner.

Beginning his summing up at Mold crown court in north Wales, the judge urged 
the jury to conduct a "dispassionate review of the evidence".

He told the panel not to speculate, adding: "No verdict should be based on 
guesswork."

Earlier, Elwen Evans QC, prosecuting, said the case against Bridger was 
overwhelming. She reminded the jury that images showing children being sexually 
abused were found on Bridger's laptop computer, along with pictures of murder 
victims who had died at the hands of sex killers.

She asked the jury to consider how Bridger had reacted in the "spotlight of 
the witness box".

Bridger spent three days giving evidence.

"You have seen some glimpses into his mindset and some of those glimpses, you 
may have thought, are quite frankly shocking," Evans said. "Some of you may 
have wondered how anybody could do what the prosecution allege this defendant 
has done and then concoct a story to cover up what he has done."

The prosecutor reminded the jury of Bridger's false claims that he had served 
in the military and said: "On his own admission, this is a man who, over 20 
years ago decided to create a whole new life for himself, and a man who was 
prepared to live that lie."

She claimed he had continued to manipulate his account of what he said 
happened to April to "deal with evidence he cannot overcome".

April's parents, Coral and Paul, who have attended each day of the trial, 
watched the closing speeches and the judge's summing up from the public gallery.

Beginning his address, Brendan Kelly QC, defending, urged the jury to put 
aside the "obvious emotions" attached to a case that had "appalled" the nation 
and decide their verdict on the evidence.

He said: "Mark Bridger denies these offences. He challenges the 'compelling' 
evidence which the crown advances."

Kelly went on: "You can only convict this defendant if you are sure on the 
evidence that is put before you.

"If you are sure, it will be your pleasure to convict Mark Bridger. But if you 
are not sure, it will be upon you to acquit Mark Bridger.

"Your job, and I can't state this enough, is to decide the case on the 
evidence. It is going to be difficult to ignore the obvious emotion attached to 
these allegations but that is what you are obliged to do."

Kelly drew attention to the evidence of a seven-year-old witness who claimed 
she saw April getting into Bridger's Land Rover willingly on the evening of 1 
October. The barrister claimed the witness, who gave her evidence via video 
link, was honest but mistaken.

The jury is expected to retire at around lunchtime on Wednesday.
 