
The abduction and murder of five-year-old April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> was swift and slick, the disposal 
of her body chillingly efficient.

Just before 7.15pm on Monday 1 October last year April broke off from playing 
with a friend close to her home on the Bryn-Y-Gog estate in Machynlleth. She 
walked over to Mark Bridger's Land Rover and clambered in. Bridger drove the 
little girl away via a back road and sped out of town.

It was the last anyone ever saw of April. The only remains that have been 
recovered are spots of her blood found at Bridger's cottage and tiny bone 
fragments discovered in his log burner that the police – and April's family – 
believe are pieces of her skull.

The lack of a body means that April's family will probably never know the full 
story of what happened to the little girl in the minutes, or hours, before she 
died. However, the detectives that probed Bridger's background and studied the 
forensic evidence have reached a horrific conclusion.

Detective Superintendent Andy John, the senior investigating officer, said he 
believed April was probably sexually assaulted by Bridger either at a remote 
spot or at his cottage, Mount Pleasant.

John's hypothesis is that she went into the cottage alive and was killed there 
– possibly smothered – before being dismembered and her body parts scattered. 
Bridger's skill as an abattoir worker familiar with knives and as an 
outdoorsman with an encyclopaedic knowledge of the mountains and valleys around 
Machynlleth meant he was able to conceal most of April's remains with dreadful 
skill.

"I think the body has been dismembered and various parts have been placed in 
different areas," said John. "Possibly those remains would have been small and 
damaged. That's why we've had such difficulty locating them.

"We've got fast-flowing rivers close by. At the time this offence occurred the 
river was very high and we can't rule out that parts may have gone into the 
river; we can't rule out that parts could have been burned on the fire."

Police also discovered Bridger had driven 400 miles since his Land Rover was 
serviced two weeks before the abduction. John said it was possible he had 
travelled "significant distances" to dispose of body parts, "but based on the 
research and best advice, it would all point towards him going to areas he was 
comfortable with".

John said he thought the abduction of a child was "premeditated", though he 
did not believe April was a specific target. He said images found on Bridger's 
laptop – including pictures of sadistic child sexual abuse – suggested the 
killer was building up to the crime.

"For me the computer evidence points towards an individual who is evil, 
manipulative and has premeditated this," said John. "The unhealthy interest he 
has in indecent images of children for me is a clear indicator that this 
individual was going to commit something as horrific as he did."

Though he had a string of convictions for violence and deception going back to 
when he was a teenager, Bridger had no convictions for sexual offences against 
children or for having indecent images.

But John believes that at the time of April's disappearance he felt his life 
was spinning out of control. "I think Mark Bridger was losing control. He is 
someone who likes to be in control. He was losing that control on the day in 
question."

Bridger's relationship with a long-term partner had broken down, he had 
financial problems and was worried he was going to lose his home. "I think 
April Jones happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time."

A picture of a man on the edge did indeed emerge during the police 
investigation.
 Detective Superintendent Reg Bevan holds up a photo of Mark Bridger and his 
Land Rover following his arrest. Photograph: Rui Vieira/PA 
Bridger, 47, who had six children by four women, had just split up with his 
partner, Vicky Fenner. On the morning of the abduction they exchanged emotional 
text messages. "You were my love. I just can't do it," she wrote. Bridger 
replied: "You were my life babe. You were everything."

Bridger took the day off work and by noon was on his computer, asking women 
out on dates. "Do you fancy meeting up? No strings attached. Sorry I hurt you," 
he messaged one woman.

More disturbingly, at 12.11pm Bridger looked at a cartoon image from his 
collection of pictures showing young girls being sexually abused. This one 
showed a girl bound with gaffer tape being forced to have sex with an adult. 
When his vehicle was recovered later, there was a roll of gaffer tape on his 
dashboard.

He also viewed images from Facebook of a friend's teenage daughter and saved 
20 of them. Police later found he had images of local teenagers, including 
April's half-sisters, and eight of April herself.

Shortly before 5pm, Bridger drove his Land Rover the three miles from his 
home, Mount Pleasant, in the village of Ceinws, to Machynlleth to attend a 
parents' evening for one of his children.

He took his computer and a dongle with him and continued to browse the 
internet that afternoon, though it is not known what he was looking at because 
the device has not been found.

After leaving the school, Bridger began prowling Bryn-Y-Gog. He wound the 
window down and invited one of his daughter's 10-year-old friends to have a 
"sleepover" at his home.

Witnesses saw Bridger behaving oddly. One woman spotted him driving up and 
down the same stretch of road. Another saw Bridger walking near the garages 
dressed in camouflage trousers. He strode past her without acknowledging her, 
which she felt was "strange", as he was normally so polite. He appeared to have 
gone into a world of his own.

By about 7pm he was sitting in his car parked near the garages and at 7.20pm 
was heading out of town with April in the Land Rover. The next confirmed 
sighting of the vehicle is an hour and 20 minutes later, at around 8.30pm, when 
a neighbour saw his vehicle reversing on to the drive of Mount Pleasant.

John said it was possible that after leaving Machynlleth Bridger drove April 
to a "remote location" and sexually assaulted her there, though there is no 
forensic evidence of an attack taking place in his Land Rover.

But it was equally feasible that he drove straight back to Mount Pleasant and 
assaulted her in the cottage before killing her, dismembering her body and 
driving away with her remains soon afterwards. It is possible that the 8.30pm 
sighting was of Bridger returning home after disposing of April's body parts.

Police believe he spent the rest of the night trying to get rid of all traces 
of April from Mount Pleasant and sterilising the knives and other tools that he 
had used, including the boning knife that was found with a burned blade. As he 
worked he may well have thought he had got away with his crime. He did not know 
he had been spotted by April's seven-year-old best friend.
 The burnt knife recovered from Mark Bridger's property in Ceinws. Photograph: 
Dyfed-Powys police 
Back at Bryn-Y-Gog the hunt for April and her abductor was under way. The only 
police officer on duty in the town, Fiona Evans, reached the estate at 7.37pm 
and spoke immediately to April's seven-year-old friend, who gave a hugely 
impressive account of what had happened. She reported that April had got into 
what she thought was a grey van.

Crucially, the girl also told the officer that the brother and sister of 
another friend may have been in the vehicle the day before. She named the 
friend and the fact was recorded in the storm report – the police's running 
record of the investigation – at 8.27pm. It turned out to be vital.

The brother and sister referred to were two of Bridger's children, but his 
complicated family life meant it took hours for officers to work out the links.

John said the police investigation in the early stages was ironically hampered 
by the fact that so many people were out looking for April. People who may have 
been able to explain that the young witness was talking about Bridger's 
children were not in when police knocked on their doors.

Dyfed Powys deemed April's disappearance a "critical incident" and instigated 
the UK's first nationwide child rescue alert (CRA). This was a tactic copied 
from the US in which high-profile appeals designed to warn the whole country of 
a child's disappearance are made.

Speed was critical. Most victims of abductions are dead within hours. April 
also had a mild form of cerebral palsy and needed medication, making a speedy 
resolution vital.

By 9am on Tuesday 2 October police had Bridger's name and designated him as a 
person of interest. Officers began working on his addresses and vehicles. At 
about that time Bridger was spotted near his home close to a riverbank carrying 
a black bin bag. A witness thought there was something in the bag.

Later, Bridger took his Land Rover into a garage to be repaired and pretended 
to help look for April. "I do not get the impression we have an individual who 
was panicking and was extremely concerned about what he had done the night 
before," said John. "He was in hope that this has gone by and he's got away 
with it."

But by noon Bridger was officially a suspect and at 3.03pm police searching 
for him – and April – kicked in the door of Mount Pleasant. There was no sign 
of either. Police were struck by how the wood burner was belting out heat and 
by the smell of detergent and air freshener.

Bridger was arrested near the river at 3.32pm. He told the arresting officer 
the basic story he was to stick to during 13 police interviews and his three 
days in the witness box. He said he had accidentally crushed April in a car 
accident, and had forgotten what he did with the body.
 During the hunt for April Jones, canoeists searched riverbanks close to where 
Mark Bridger was arrested. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
The key challenge for police has been running a murder inquiry without a body. 
Gradually the horrors of Mount Pleasant were revealed. April's blood was found 
in the bathroom and hall but, most importantly, on the underside of the carpet 
in front of the wood burner in the living room.

Bridger's cleanup job had been reasonable, but he had not been able to get rid 
of the blood that had soaked through the carpet.

During police interviews Bridger maintained April had not been to his house 
but – confronted in court by the overwhelming forensic evidence – he told the 
jury that images of laying her down in front of the fire had come to him in 
dreams.

Also crucial were the 17 pieces of bone found in the ash of the wood burner 
and one piece in the bath plughole. Scientists could not extract DNA from them 
but some suggested they could have come from a child's skull. Police do not 
believe April's whole body was burned, but believe the fragments of bone got 
into the fire and bath during the cleanup.

While scientists worked on samples from Mount Pleasant, computer experts 
delved deep into Bridger's laptop. What they found will haunt April's family.

As well as adult images of hardcore pornography, there was a library of 
graphic images, some depicting very young girls suffering sadistic sexual abuse 
by adults.

He had also filed away images showing the corpses of children and collected 
pictures of girls killed in notorious murder cases, including the Soham victims 
Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman.

In addition, Bridger had combed social networking sites for innocent images of 
girls from Machynlleth. Among them were April Jones and her three teenage 
half-sisters, which again he carefully filed.

Forensic analysis of Bridger's clothing revealed more worrying details. 
Scientists were not able to eliminate the possibility that April "contributed 
DNA" to a sample taken from the inside of the crotch area of his tracksuit 
bottoms.

Perhaps more damning were his remarks following his arrest that if April's DNA 
was found on his penis it could have got there if he had a "wee" while he was 
carrying her.

The seven months since April was murdered have been difficult ones not just 
for her family and friends but for the whole town of Machynlleth.

Police and social services have been visiting the estate since April vanished 
to care for children scarred by what happened to her, but also trying to 
establish if any other youngsters may have been victims of Bridger in the past. 
John said no allegations had come to light.

The search for April continued through the winter and became the biggest in 
British history. More equipment, including drones, was brought in. The number 
of search areas – within a box of 60 sq km – reached 650. The police even 
abseiled search dogs into mines shafts and cave systems.

A week before the start of Bridger's trial, Dyfed Powys police announced that 
the search was finally over. A "reactive team" of searchers are on standby in 
case they receive any fresh information. For now, though, the torment of not 
knowing what happened to April continues.
 