
The jury hearing the trial of the man charged with the abduction and murder of 
April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/29/april-jones-judge-mark-bridger> 
will resume its deliberations on Thursday after being instructed by the judge 
to conduct a "dispassionate review of the evidence".

Following a four-and-a-half week trial, the jury of nine women and three men 
was sent out shortly after lunchtime on Wednesday to consider its verdicts on 
former abattoir worker and lifeguard Mark Bridger.

The jury spent three hours deliberating before being called back into court by 
the judge, Mr Justice Griffiths Williams, who told them it had been a "long 
day". He sent the jury home ordering them not to talk to anyone about the case 
or to do their own research.

The prosecution alleges Bridger abducted five-year-old April as she played on 
her bicycle in the town of Machynlleth in mid-Wales on 1 October last year. It 
claims he killed her in a "sexually motivated" attack before getting rid of her 
body, which has never been found.

Bridger, 47, who denies the charges, says he accidentally hit April as he 
drove his Land Rover, put her into his car and had forgotten what he did with 
her body. Summing the case up at Mold crown court in northWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, the judge urged the jury to carry out a 
"dispassionate review" and not to speculate.

He reminded the jury that April's blood was found at the defendant's home, 
Mount Pleasant cottage, in the village of Ceinws, three miles from Machynlleth. 
The judge said that "pooling" of blood in the living room was consistent with 
April "lying on that area of carpet for some time while shedding blood".

April's parents, Coral and Paul, who have attended each day of the trial, 
watched from the public gallery as the judge spent time outlining evidence 
relating to fragments of bone found in Bridger's wood-burner.

He reminded the jury that the prosecution claim these fragments came from a 
human skull but an expert called by the defence had told the court she could 
not be certain this was the case.

The judge summarised evidence concerning explicit material found on Bridger's 
laptop, which contained images of young girls being sexually abused, pictures 
of children's corpses and photographs of youngsters killed in notorious murder 
cases. Bridger also collected pictures of local girls, including April and her 
half-sisters, but Bridger had denied in the witness box that he was a 
paedophile.

The judge also highlighted Bridger's claim that he was an alcoholic and had 
been drinking after – according to his account – hitting April with his car. 
Griffiths Williams noted that six hours after his arrest a test had not 
revealed any alcohol in Bridger's system.

Sending the jurors out, he added: "You are under no pressure for time. You 
must take as long as you need."
 