
How much time should children spend online or playing apps and games?

That question is one of the overriding parenting conundrums of our modern 
digital and social age. It's also a question that has become of particular 
interest to me as I develop my own app for kids. As I try to create a digital 
experience children will find so much fun that they'll tell all their friends, 
I'm aware that I might be contributing to a growing childhood development 
problem.

The facts about children's digital consumption are eye-opening. A 2010 Kaiser 
Foundation study 
<http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/8010.pdf> found that 
US youths spent more than seven and a half hours a day using media. In another 
study conducted that year by theJoan Ganz Cooney Centre 
<http://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org>, which specialises in children's media, 
two thirds of children aged four to seven had already used an iPhone. And how 
did these kids get hooked on digital? The Centre's own research suggests that 
most of the iPhones used by kids had been lent to them by a family member. Asa 
recent Atlantic Monthly article 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2013/04/the-touch-screen-generation/309250/>
 put it: "The centre's researchers labelled this the 'pass-back effect,' a name 
that captures well the reluctant zone between denying and giving."

Are children addicted to digital?

A mere 20 years after the Internet was founded, people do not yet know how the 
explosion in digital connectivity is shaping society. Ever since Gutenberg's 
breakthrough with the movable press each new breakthrough communication 
technology – be it the telegraph, the radio, the TV and now the internet – has 
both been heralded as a benefit and bane for society. Looking back in history 
the benefits of all these technologies have outweighed the problems they have 
caused. Could it be that the world is in a new period of technological 
adaptation and that what is considered digital overload for children, is simply 
the education they need to prepare for a connected society?

Perhaps. But that doesn't mean digital addiction is an issue we can just 
dismiss. At present there isn't a firm medical consensus on digital addiction. 
This month, however, the US Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, published by the American Psychiatric Association, is set to 
classify Internet Use Disorder (IUD) as an area worthy of further study.

Anecdotally, there are plenty of stories detailing how the internet and gaming 
have ruined peoples lives just like drugs, alcohol and gambling. In South 
Korea, one of the most digitally advanced nations in the world, government
estimates 2.55 million people <> are addicted to smartphone (using them for 
more than eight hours a day).

While we don't know exactly the effect information overload has on people, we 
do know that children, especially under-10s, are going to use digital 
technologies more than any generation before. Consider the apps industry that 
is only a few years old. According to theChildren's Technology Review 
<http://childrenstech.com>, an independent publication that monitors kid's 
interactive media, there are more than 40,000 kids' games available on iTunes, 
plus thousands more on Google Play. There have beencases of children running up 
massive bills 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2205555/Schoolboy-massive-credit-card-playing-iPad-Tiny-Monsters-app.html>
 on their parents' credit cards due to the incremental costs of collecting 
rewards in some unscrupulous app-based games.

How far does a company's responsibility go?

Yet even if children aren't being financially manipulated in the games, do 
gaming and app makers have a corporate and social responsibility to manage the 
impact their products have? Companies such as Microsoft already include 
warnings about spending too much time on its Kinect system (though this is 
geared more at over-exertion) while Nintendo's Super Mario 3D Land employs 
Princess Peach to advise players to take a break if they are tired (though this 
is because of concerns about the effect 3D playing has on kid's vision).

So could this principle of responsible gaming be expanded to cover digital 
overload as a whole? Lego is one of the world's biggest toymakers and a leader 
in digital gaming thanks to savvy partnerships with the Star Wars and Harry 
Potter franchises. When asked about its social and corporate responsibility to 
the amount of time children spend playing its games, Lego offered this 
statement: "Each child and situation is unique and that decision is ultimately 
the responsibility of the parent, that's why we encourage parents to have a 
dialogue with their children on healthy digital behavior and – as a family - 
set some clear rules regarding digital activity."

What about education?

All of which makes sense. Parents really should take the lead on moderating 
their kid's digital activity and you can see why technology companies are 
loathe to self-regulate against a digital affliction that has still yet to be 
fully understood or defined. But not all kids can count on having parents who 
care or at this point understand the importance of managing digital health. So 
what role will government – or to be more exact, education – need play in this 
evolving debate?

Primary age schoolkids in the UK already get some lessons in internet safety 
and protecting their privacy. In South Korea, however, the state education 
system is ramping up to meet the challenge it has identified in digital 
obesity. Starting next year, children from ages three to five will be taught to 
avoid spending too much time on the internet and digital devices.

Ultimately though, how kids use digital devices and games will be dictated by 
the example parents set at home. It's worth considering the next time you 
download an app to keep the kids quiet.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox

• This article was amended on 25 February 2014. An earlier version said a 
report by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that eight- to 18-year-olds were 
spending an average of more than seven and a half hours a day using a 
smartphone, computer, television or other electronic device. The report found 
that they were spending that time using media, which also included watching 
movies in an cinema and reading printed matter.
 