
The overarching theme of this column is living with less, so it really 
shouldn’t surprise me when each week I venture into the comments section to 
find dozens of people insisting that all efforts to do so are in vain – unless 
we are also choosing to reproduce less, too.

Recently I began to consider this question more seriously. Is overpopulation 
really the problem? Were the effects of all my eco-friendly initiatives wiped 
out the moment I had a child? Does the Earth have some sort of carrying 
capacity that we are rapidly approaching (or have already exceeded)?

Well, as with many issues, I quickly discovered that it isn’t quite that black 
and white. One of the main factors muddying the waters seems to be that humans 
consume resources at different rates. Prominent Canadian environmentalist David 
Suzuki recalls asking ecologist EO Wilson how many people our planet would be 
able to sustain indefinitely. His answer? “If you want to live like North 
Americans, 200 million.”

Determining some sort of final number that the human race can comfortably 
survive at is virtually impossible without considering the differing way we 
consume resources. Each American single-handedlyproduces 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/energy_around_the_world/2013/11/overpopulation_in_east_africa_thomas_malthus_stephen_hawking_and_dan_brown.html>
 the same amount of carbon emissions as 20 people from India, 30 from Pakistan 
or 250 from Ethiopia.

An American produces the same amount of carbon emissions as 20 people from 
India, 30 from Pakistan, or 250 from Ethiopia


In some respects then, it should come as a relief to note that those of us 
consuming the most – those in developed countries like the UK, USA and 
Australia have seen birth rates fall steadily since the 1970s.

According to the 2015 UN World Population Prospects  
<http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/key_findings_wpp_2015.pdf>
report, several countries are expected to see their populations decline by more 
than 15%, while “fertility in all European countries is now below the level 
required for full replacement of the population in the long run (around 2.1 
children per woman, on average), and in the majority of cases, fertility has 
been below the replacement level for several decades”.

So it would seem that those in the developed world have minded the dire 
warnings coming from the comments section and adjusted their lives accordingly.

Reproduction is declining, there are fewer babies and indeed, that will mean 
fewer resources consumed by those of us who consume the most. But that’s not 
the whole story, of course. There’s still Africa. The continent currently home 
to almost 1.2 billion people is projected to be responsible for most of the 
populationgrowth <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-34188248> over the next 
50 years, swelling to 2.5 billion by 2050 and 4.4 billion by 2100.

And, of course, many of the new billion people in developing countries will 
want to live the same lifestyles that cause disproportionate resources usage by 
North Americans – and they have just as much (or arguably, as little) right to 
adopt such environmentally unfriendly practices as we do: driving cars and 
SUVs, living in homes with central heating and air conditioning, eating 
imported foods, and filling our homes with clothing, electronics and consumer 
goods.

The problem is not just the sheer numbers of people inhabiting the planet, 
it’s also the lives we’re living once we’re here. That cannot be ignored. It’s 
not enough to say you won’t have kids and then declare Mission Accomplished 
like some sort of deranged George Bush derivative while you continue to drive 
your SUV and eat imported strawberries in December.

If we somehow managed to slow population growth so that we ended up with 8 
billion people in 2050 instead of the projected 9.1 billion, we’d save1-2bn tons
 <http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/population-and-sustainability/> of 
carbon emissions annually. That’sfantastic and, of course, there would be other 
implications for the resources not used by those missing billions, but erasing a
billion potential people still wouldn’t be enough on its own to alter the 
trajectory of climate change.

Furthermore, the likelihood of preventing that billion births is constantly 
being cut off at the knees by backwards politicians and religious groups 
limiting safe and affordable sex education, birth control and abortion access. 
If you’re ranting about population control I’d better see you ranting for 
women’s reproductive rights too, but that’s an issue for another soapbox.

If you’re ranting about population control I’d better see you ranting for 
women’s reproductive rights too

So, commenters, I concede the inarguable truth that you may be right. 

There may well be too many of us, and far, far too many of us if we all wish 
to live like North Americans. This is why it’s at least as worrisome to me, if 
not more so, that those of us who are here are – particularly those of us in 
developed countries – are consuming so much, so fast, with so little regard for 
the world around us.

A good handful of us will reproduce. It’s inevitable. Instead of getting 
tunnel vision by focusing so much on population control, why not expand the 
focus to educating, motivating and assisting those human beings already walking 
this earth to do less damage to it? Why not add support to environmental 
initiatives like zero waste and local food sources and reduced consumption (and 
yes, women’s reproductive rights) rather than bah-humbugging everything?


There’s already 7 billion of us. If we put our collective energy toward 
creating positive change, it could be incredible. Now, let’s hold hands and 
sing kumbayah, please.
 