
Johnny Davis UK music festivals are in decline because they've hit a natural 
ceiling: there are just too many of them now. By definition they used to be 
"summer" festivals; now the festival season stretches from March to December. 
No wonder record numbers of these events are being dissolved, some before 
they've even got off the ground. Thirty-four were cancelled last year; 31 this 
year, so far. This month closures include Devonrox and Bideford in Devon, 
Firefly in Shropshire, and Chalgrove and Amplitude in Oxfordshire. Last month 
there was First Days of Freedom in Kent and both Carnival del Pueblo and the UK 
Gospel music festival in London. The list goes on. Even names you've heard of, 
established ones such as Womad, didn't sell out this year. The economic 
downturn, the hike in petrol prices, plus all the additional costs of a 
festival weekend on top of already hefty ticket prices mean the great British 
festival boom, a gold-rush for would-be promoters in recent years, is on a 
downward spiral.

Even Glastonbury's Michael Eavis has cast doubts on the sustainability of 
British festivals. "Partly it's economics, but there is a feeling that people 
have seen it before. We sell out only because we get huge headliners. In the 
year Jay-Z played we nearly went bankrupt." If the organiser of the world's 
largest arts and music festival is struggling to balance his books, what hope 
does Firefly in Shropshire have?

Elizabeth Sankey I must admit that I am baffled by the sheer volume of 
festivals that take place each year in the UK, particularly since our climate 
is not widely known for its suitability for camping. And, despite the recent 
proclamations of Mr Eavis, the number of festivals only seems to be increasing. 
You rightly point out that Womad didn't sell out this year, but I urge you to 
look at the smaller festivals before you cut your losses on the whole bunch. 
Kendal Calling, which took place last weekend, invited acts such as Blondie and 
the Lancashire Hotpots into the mint cake capital of Britain and completely 
sold out, as have boutique stalwarts End of the Road and Green Man.

JD There are smaller festival success stories, but my point is that the 
overall market is in decline. It has reached saturation point; there are now no 
festival-free weekends left between June and September, so market forces 
dictate as much. Even when ticket sales are good there's a knock-on effect on 
the infrastructure supporting these events. Vintage at Goodwood won best new 
festival at last year's UK Festival Awards, selling its 45,000-plus tickets. 
This year it was scrapped, with organisers saying: "The introduction of Vintage 
put a great deal of pressure on the business and planning process at Goodwood, 
due to its busy summer calendar." It reappared with DJs, gigs and dressing-up 
stalls along London's South Bank instead. And while it's nice that there's now 
an ecosystem to support Blondie, Tricky and other acts whose appeal is becoming 
more selective, taking in market towns such as the mint cake capital of 
Britain, elsewhere potential audiences are being turned off because there's too 
much crossover between the acts. Last year, Hot Chip's summer festival diary 
included 46 shows across Europe. "Over and Over" is good, but there are limits. 
With the same bands being spread so thinly, festival organisers have scrabbled 
about to come up with a USP, a saleable point-of-difference, giving us 
ridiculous "boutique festival" confections such as Zoo Thousand at the Port 
Lympne Wildlife Park, which in 2008 offered Dizzee Rascal, Pendulum and 
Athlete, and "if all that gets too much, revellers are able to go on the Zoo8 
Safari because the animal park includes rhinos, tigers, elephants, cats, 
monkeys and lions". The event turned into a fiasco, and many of the big-name 
acts pulled out at the last minute.

ES What have you got against animals? Surely that was a fantastic marketing 
scheme – incorporating a zoo into a music festival because pre-teens don't 
particularly want to stand knee-deep in mud watching tipsy parents relive their 
halcyon days. The music industry is a constantly evolving organism. It's not a 
closed-door corporation but rather a creative hub, encouraging new artists, new 
ways of getting music to the masses, and new ways of making money. Worry not, 
audience fever for fields still burns strong. Rather it is the fault of bad 
promotion, poor scheduling, or over-enthusiastic sales predictions that leads 
to the closing of a festival.

This is where I play my band member card, so forgive me. It's only fair to 
explain how important festivals are to people like me, and to the audiences 
we're lucky enough to play in front of. Bands can now effectively cover the 
entire country over the course of a few weekends during summer. We've been 
booked for 13 festivals this year, which is nothing – the Vaccines are playing 
50.

JD I like animals. That's why I'm not sure it's fair to subject the lions and 
monkeys to hundreds of Athlete fans. Having loads of boutique festivals isn't 
necessarily a good thing. The scene has become very diluted, it would be better 
for everyone concerned if there were a small number of really good events, 
rather than loads sponsored by pretend-eco drinks brands, with only two or 
three good bands on – because it's become trendy to put your name to a summer 
festival. The UK festival market has been infiltrated by lots of amateurs 
looking to make money. It's very cynical. Barry Hogan, who with his wife 
organisesAll Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties>, a fantastic series 
of events done for all the right reasons, and run successfully without 
sponsorship for a decade, recently told me he was having to scale back on the 
few events he promotes each year because there was now too much competition to 
secure the acts that made ATP unique, and prices were going through the roof. 
He'd rather not do an event than do one that was half-cocked. One of the given 
reasons for Glastonbury 2012 not happening is that there won't be enough loos 
(the Olympics have got them). Lots of other organisers won't be as scrupulous 
as Barry or Michael Eavis. Of course seeing live bands is important; it's 
amazing – but if the only way you can get to see the band you like is in a 
field with one toilet, poor safety standards and the sound of another band 
leaking in from another tent, all for an inflated ticket price, is that really 
an experience worth having? Surely that's selling both the bands and the fans 
short?

ES If festivals are selling everyone short, why did End of the Road, Latitude 
(at the last minute, I am reliably informed), Glastonbury, Reading/Leeds, 
Secret Garden Party, Isle of Wight, Kendal Calling, Lovebox and T in the Park 
all sell out? Were the droves of music fans turning up to these events and 
standing in, as you say, "a field with one toilet", whining because this wasn't 
an experience worth having? I doubt it. The festivals that are good and sell 
out will continue to flourish, so surely, then, it is not all festivals that 
are in decline, but simply the bad ones? While a few of the larger festivals 
may struggle to balance the books, it is boutique festivals that are finding a 
new audience in those who wish to see big acts such as Prince or Tricky in a 
more family-friendly and intimate environment. The set-up and running of a 
festival is a massive undertaking and of course not every single one will be 
successful.

• This article was amended on 9 August 2011. The original said that the 
Alchemy festival in Lincoln had closed. This has been deleted as incorrect. The 
organisers have asked us to make clear that although they have cancelled a 
weekend event in August, the main festival is still going ahead at the weekend 
of 16 to 19 September.
 