
When Steve Cook broke his wrist it meant he had to take time off work – but 
that gave him the opportunity to sort through some of his old files and 
paperwork. He had emigrated from the UK to Sydney in 1989 and among his boxes 
of stuff he came across a certificate dated July 1989 saying he owned 100 Abbey 
National shares. Could they, he wondered, still be worth anything.

“I was looking through old files of paper and found this old share 
certificate,” he says. “I thought they were not valuable at the time (they had 
a face value of only £10) so I just tucked them away with a bunch of other 
official papers – my wife and I had been getting ready to emigrate to Australia 
at the time. Looking online on Guardian Money I could see that Abbey National 
was taken over by Spanish bank Santander in 2004 so I am now wondering if my 
Abbey shares are still valid and worth anything, in which case how do I sell 
them. Or should I just junk them?”

We put Cook’s question to Santander, one the bank says it only hears rarely 
since it has been more than 10 years since its takeover of Abbey.

The quick answer is that Abbey National plc share certificates are no longer 
valid – Abbey’s shares were cancelled and ceased trading on the London Stock 
Exchange after Santander took over Abbey in November 2004. But the good news 
for Cook is that he is still likely to be due about £460.

“It would be a lovely surprise because I never really thought of them as being 
worth anything,” he says. “It would be like getting a jacket out of a wardrobe 
that you haven’t worn for ages and finding a £50 note in the inside pocket.”

When Santander acquired Abbey its 1.71 million private shareholders became 
entitled to one Santander share, traded in euros on the Madrid Stock Exchange, 
for each ordinary Abbey share they held.

However Santander, like nearly all quoted companies, no longer issues 
certificates. Instead the shares are held in electronic format.

If former Abbey shareholders find an old certificate they should email the 
Santander Nominee Service atgrupo.santanderenquiries@equiniti.com 
<mailto:grupo.santanderenquiries@equiniti.com> or call 0871 384 2000, or +44 
(0) 121 415 7188 if calling from overseas. Make sure you have all the addresses 
you have lived at since the date on the certificate so the service can 
investigate further.

A spokesperson for Abbey explains: “All shareholders at the time of completion 
of the transaction automatically received new Santander shares so there are no 
unclaimed entitlements, only holdings where contact may have been lost with a 
shareholder, due to them not keeping their registered details up to date.”

This is likely to be what happened in Cook’s case. Provided Santander 
establishes the shares have not been sold at any time in the past, the shares 
plus any uncashed Santander dividends accrued in the interim will still be held 
by the nominee service on his behalf.

“If someone has 100 shares they would be worth approximately £460, though this 
depends on the daily share price,” a spokesperson says.

So how do you cash them in? First, try Santander Sharedealing on 0800 169 2001 
or, if held in the Santander Nominee Service, they can be sold by post, phone 
or online through Shareview Dealing. They may also be sold using a stockbroker 
or high street bank with a share dealing facility. It is not unusual to come 
across old UK share certificates, particularly when sorting through financial 
papers belonging to elderly relatives.

The first thing to do is to find out if the company on the share certificate 
is still trading. To do this, type in the company name in the search box on the 
London Stock Exchange Group (LSEG) website(londonstockexchange.com) 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com>. The difficulty with old share 
certificates, however, is that the company may have gone bust, changed its name 
or been taken over. LSEG suggests the best way to see whether a shares 
certificate is still valid and worth selling is to consult a stockbroker.

“It will cost you a small fee but, if there is money to be made from them, a 
stockbroker should help,” it says.

Another way to check on a share certificate’s validity is to contact the 
company registrars whose name should be written on the certificate. Companies 
use registrars to keep a record of who owns their shares. The registrars keep 
lists of all the registered owners and they can trace ownership back, sometimes 
for many years. They can also often help investors by tracing the history of 
the company and finding out whether it has changed name, gone bankrupt, merged 
with another company or been taken over.

If you cannot trace the registrar named on your share certificates (maybe they 
too have changed names or gone out of business), the LSEG suggests you contact 
one of the UK’s three main registrars who may be able to help. These are: 
Equiniti(equiniti.com) <http://equiniti.com>, 0871 384 2030; Capita 
(capita.co.uk) <http://www.capita.co.uk>, 0871 664 0300; and Computershare 
(computershare.com), <http://www.computershare.com> 0870 702 0003.
 