
No big prizes for working out why Argo won the Oscar for best picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/feb/25/oscars-2013-argo-lincoln-victory-campaign>
 this week. It is a superb movie – clever, witty, beautifully paced, 
brilliantly acted, exciting, suspenseful, characterful etc, etc … And, of 
course, it's based on the true story of how CIA agent Tony Mendez (played by 
director Ben Affleck) put together the "Canadian Caper", in which he faked the 
production of a sci-fi movie in order to rescue six US diplomats from Tehran 
during the 1979 Iran hostage crisis.

So, crucially, it tells Americans something great about themselves – about 
their courage, their ingenuity, their audacity and the lengths they will go to 
in saving the lives of other Americans. Just what the doctor ordered, at a time 
when the US has cause to feel a little less bumptiously certain about its 
global supremacy.

However, Argo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148728/argo>, despite 
its many wonderful qualities, would be just another technically proficient pile 
of steaming horseshit if it wasn't for the opening sequence, which uses 
historical footage and cartoon storyboards to make it abundantly clear that the 
Iranians had every right to be furious with the US, and to blame America for 
its woes. It's all there – the US's arrogant, self-interested, ruthless, 
hypocritical, unforgivable meddling in the sovereign affairs of another state, 
prompted by the UK and Churchill during and after the second world war, and up 
until the present day. Affleck is an intelligent man and a shrewdly commercial 
film-maker. He doesn't offer the US more truth than it can bear. He refrains 
from overdoing the mea culpas to the point at which Americans would reject 
them. Affleck doesn't sugar a pill, he "pills a sugar".

It's useful to compare and contrast Argo with Kathryn Bigelow's Zero Dark 
Thirty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149492/zero-dark-thirty>, about 
the hunting and killing of al-Qaida leader, Osama bin Laden. Zero is a much 
more demanding, complex and uncompromising film, far less easy to slot into the 
Hollywood thriller genre, andoverlooked at this year's Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/25/zero-dark-thirty-cia-oscars>
, apart from half-a-statuette for sound editing. Zero Dark Thirty has, of 
course, been highly controversial. There's a lot more pill than sugar in 
Bigelow's movie, that's for sure.

The pill, of course, is the torture. Critics from the left argue that the film 
glorifies torture by suggesting it's a useful way of operating, even though it 
was not used to make any of the specific intelligence discoveries that led to 
the assassination of Bin Laden. Critics from the right simply don't like the 
fact that the sort of torture theCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> 
resorts to has been depicted in a Hollywood feature at all, even though they 
strongly defend its efficacy in "real life".

You could, of course, be strictly pragmatic and condemn Zero Dark Thirty 
because it placed the needs of a film scriptabove the integrity of the 
pertinent historical fact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jan/25/zero-dark-thirty-reel-history>
 underpinning individual stories. But Argoplays extremely fast and loose with 
historical truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/17/zero-dark-thirty-argo> 
as well, grossly downplaying Canadian involvement, portraying Iranian officials 
as childish and easily duped, distorting the rescue mission to make it seem far 
more nail-bitingly precarious and in-the-nick-of-time than it actually was. 
What's the difference? Why is one historically inaccurate film about US 
involvement with the Middle East dismissed for the artistic licence it has 
taken, and the other garlanded when it has taken similar liberties?

It's simply that one film's overall message leaves no room for ambiguity in 
its portrayal of its hero, while the other, on the contrary, introduces very 
dark moral ambiguities that it needn't have. Affleck sacrificed accuracy in 
favour of easy-to-swallow heroics. Bigelow sacrificed accuracy in favour 
of hard-to-swallow anti-heroics. Argo's infelicities are conventional, clearly 
undertaken in the service of creating a recognisably feel-good cinematic 
narrative. Zero Dark Thirty's infelicities are much more difficult to read, as 
can be seen from the touching union between left and right in despising it.

In the end, however, the right understands better than the left that no one 
who is depicted as a torturer ever ends up entirely "glorified". That's why 
they prefer total secrecy and lack of acknowledgement around such matters. The 
torture sequences at the start of Bigelow's film are most usefully viewed as 
similar in intent to the potted history of US involvement in toppling the 
democratically elected leader ofIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, 
and replacing him with a decadent and authoritarian Shah. Both warn: "This is 
the story of an individual CIA agent's success – we're celebrating that. But 
it's part of a much more dubious wider context, of brutal and ignominious 
manipulation. That's not so easy to celebrate."

Both films would have been more existentially "inaccurate" without their early 
contextualising scenes, in which Americans are portrayed committing acts 
against foreign states or foreign nationals that they would not tolerate being 
conducted against their own. Without those scenes, both films would have been 
simple glorifications of individual CIA agents battling against the bureaucracy 
of the CIA as a whole. Affleck just slapped on his rider in a less contestable, 
less visceral way, which was more acceptable to the audience.

Yet it's fascinating, the way these two film-makers have both chosen to make 
films that denigrate the CIA as a whole, yet venerate lone operators within it. 
Overall, both films say that whatever shortcomings the American state may have, 
it still produces exceptional individual Americans. Actually, any culture can 
and does produce exceptional individuals. One of the great things about the US 
is that it unashamedly gets behind such people, nurturing "the gifted" in a way 
that Britain shrinks from doing.

But America's insistence on believing that somehow the particular qualities of 
the US as a state – good and bad – are indivisibly and uniquely brilliant at 
producing exceptional people is mistaken. Above all, it stops the US from 
really grasping that its empire-of-influence attitude to the rest of the world 
is hugely damaging – both to non-Americans and to the standing of the US itself.

Somehow, the US is always making an invisible movie about itself, an endlessly 
refreshed and recast mythology in which the nation itself is a doughty 
individual going against the grain and always certain that, whatever the risks, 
it will be proved right in the end, the story of its individuality and heroism 
only burnished by the surrounding recalcitrant nay-sayers. The US likes Argo 
because it sticks more closely to that line, while displaying a bit of doughty 
individuality itself.

It's wary of Zero Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zero-dark-thirty> because it deliberately 
blurs the line. It may be suggesting that even doughty individuality isn't 
necessarily a justification, an excuse or a worthwhile undertaking when the 
violation of the rights of other humans is being undertaken in its service, 
however crowned with success those individual efforts may be. It may be 
suggesting the opposite. That's not the important thing. You leave the cinema 
after seeing Zero Dark Thirty feeling troubled. You leave the cinema after 
seeing Argo feeling thrilled. Argo may be a more entertaining film. But Zero is 
disturbing, serious, doughtily individualistic art.
 