
Ari Up <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ari-up>, whose death from cancer has 
just been announced, was an extremely powerful energy force – a trailblazer who 
embodied the punk spirit. As singer and co-writer in the Slits, she completely 
redefined what a woman in music could do and – in the ethos of the time – 
opened up possibilities that would be explored by herself and many others in 
the years to come.

The Slits erupted during their appearance at the Harlesden Coliseum in March 
1977. Like many groups at that time, they were learning as they went along: the 
performance was chaotic and violent. But no one had seen young women behave 
like this on stage: enacting a flagrant parody of sexuality, at the same time 
seemingly tougher and more disturbing than the other (male) groups on the bill.

I loved seeing them in 1977 and 1978. The shows became more coherent, but 
there was always this edge of chaos – which added to the excitement. Visually, 
drummer Palmolive was fantastic: standing up to play, beating the crap out of 
her set in thundering, tribal patterns. Bassist Tessa Pollitt stood stock still 
and watchful, while guitarist Viv Albertine prowled the stage like a tiger.

Up front, Ari howled, screamed, toasted, crooned, skanked, hitched up her 
clothes, pulled at her bird's nest hair, and generally behaved in a most 
un-lady-like fashion. She was confrontational in person and on stage, but her 
courage went hand-in-hand with a gleeful, teenage desire to shock and outrage 
that was a major impulse in punk.

The Slits found it difficult to assimilate within a conservative, 
male-dominated music industry. The songs became clearer, and when you listened, 
they were tuneful, witty and extremely sharp. One masterpiece was FM – recorded 
for a John Peel session in 1977 – which tackles the insidious psychic effects 
of the mass media. It ends with a radio sweep that includesUnion Gap's 
salacious Young Girl <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hn0ZJHVH17I>.

By the time the Slits recorded their first album in 1979, they were a 
completely different band from their thrash beginnings. Produced by Dennis 
Bovell, the reggae-infused Cut is justly celebrated as a landmark statement 
that includes strong songs such as Newtown, Shoplifting and, of course, Typical 
Girls – an enduring manifesto for young women who seek to reject the norm.

Punk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/punk> has now become so familiar that 
people forget its primal, revolutionary drive. For a brief period, everything 
had to be new. If it hadn't been done before, do it: why not? What's to stop 
you? Ari Up enacted this impulse on stage, on record, and in person into the 
21st century. In any language, this was heroic, and I salute her for that: I'm 
sorry she's gone.
 