
Ariel Sharon (Obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/11/ariel-sharon>, 13 January) was a 
man of his time, specifically the years of ideological ferment that followed 
the collapse of Keynesianism in the 1970s. Like Thatcher, he broke the mould 
and replaced it with one of his own models that is now left to a younger, more 
financially constrained, generation to clear up. Thatcher unleashed a debt 
bubble; Sharon gave birth to Likud and the intensification of the settlement 
project. Thatcher's iterations were based on the assumption that "there is no 
such thing as society"; Sharon's were based on the default that "there is no 
such thing as a Palestinian". Incompetent Keynesian elites were replaced with 
ideologically sound alternative incompetents. Both models are now irrevocably 
broken and contaminate the political debate in their respective countries, 
leaving those behind with far reduced strategic depth.
Cathal Rabbitte
Zollikon, Switzerland

• The apotheosis of Ariel Sharon's career was surely when foreign journalists, 
myself included, diplomats and other observers entered the Sabra and Chatila 
Palestinian refugee camps of West Beirut on 18 September 1982, to discover the 
slaughter of innocents, Palestinian and Lebanese families. Christian militiamen 
from the Lebanese forces had carried out the task. But we all knew that had not 
Israeli forces been holding the ring round the camps for three days of siege 
the killers would never have dared enter; that the Israelis must have permitted 
– it later turned out, organised – the incursion; and that Sharon's lethal hand 
was on this operation as surely as it had been on the invasion of Lebanon he 
launched three months earlier.

It was no surprise: this was the leader of the Israeli army special reprisal 
unit 101 which had, in 1953, blown up 45 Palestinian homes in the West Bank 
village of Qibya with the families trapped inside them, killing 69 people, 
mostly women and children. No evidence was found that any Palestinian 
incursions intoIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> had originated 
in Qibya.

More recently, Sharon helped rekindle the violence in occupied Jerusalem and 
the occupied Palestinian Territories in 2000, going on to subdue the largely 
civilian population with weapons of war: aircraft, tanks and artillery.

Much will be made of the "man of peace" who withdrew the Israeli settlers and 
army from Gaza in 2005, but this only aimed at freezing any hopes of a 
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, left Gaza a besieged and even more vulnerable 
and impoverished entity than it had been before, and cleared the way for Israel 
to concentrate on acquiring and populating the lands it has always coveted, 
those between the Mediterranean and the river Jordan.
Tim Llewellyn
Former BBC Middle East correspondent

• Your obituary writer's comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/11/ariel-sharon> that Sharon felt 
at peace only on his farm in the Negev overlooks the fact that until 1948 this 
land belonged to the Abuelaish family, one member of which, Dr Izzeldin 
Abuelaish, wrote a book in 2011, described by the Guardian as "an impresssive 
statement of triumph over adversity" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/26/not-hate-gaza-doctor-abuelaish-review>
. Its title, I Shall Not Hate, is testimony to a lifetime devoted to 
reconciliation, which stands in stark contrast to the philosophy of the man who 
removed him from his family property.
Roger Symon
Cheltenham
 