
Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> stands alone like an 
ice-cream van in winter. He's a hyper-intelligent, pot-bellied, beady-eyed, 
apple-bong-smoking composer from Beverly Hills. His varied life has turned him 
from a sheltered child in therapy into a maverick who sings about castration 
and sausages. In terms of eccentricity, he has no rivals.

There isn't enough of it left in music. Sure, there's a faint smudge of 
strangeness running across 2012 – Madonna (breast, guns), Lana Del Rey (lips, 
acting), MIA (middle finger), etc. But Ariel Pink makes them look like 
anaesthetised Ellie Gouldings. In a hunt for the ones who inspire WTFs, OMGs 
and exclamation marks that turn into 1s because you're too excited to hold down 
shift, he's right there, on his own, and we need him.

His new album Mature Themes, his ninth official release, includes a song 
called Driftwood (a title made famous in 1999 by wet, boring Scottish men 
singing about a wet, boring thing) in which he barks madly about "the bad 
breath of a cross-eyed goat". Lyrically, it's full of schnitzels, 
nymphomaniacs, pink slime, "blow jobs of death", dreams, American primitives, 
assassins and G-spots.

The world outside his records is one of meltdowns, hoax band break-ups, 
ridiculous interviews, self-hate and the refusal to buy clothes, appease anyone 
or partake in life as we know it. The inevitable on-stage meltdown came at 
Coachella in 2011. Ariel shouted, "You hate me," stormed off into the wings, 
and returned to crouch, smoking under a keyboard, as his band played on. On the 
YouTube clip (Ariel Pink: Master Of His Craft Or Piece Of Crap?) a disappointed 
teenager comments, "He disengaged with every other human." Hello, suburban 
American youngster? That's the whole point.

Ariel's tics make him irresistible and vital. During a recent phone interview 
conducted from his LA bedroom at 4am his time, Ariel hung up on me twice then 
asked me for a cigarette. In the year he got his first smartphone, he has used 
it to ask Tyler, The Creator to make his next video via Twitter (@menopausemen) 
and to joke about his band's break-up on Facebook. He uses it to self-record 
himself "mouth-drumming", too. Imagine the contents of that voice memos folder.

We should salute Ariel Pink. Music is too impatient to accept weirdness and 
unpredictability at the moment, and as a result, he's the only one we've got.

So, let him into your life. Love him. It might seem difficult – and immersing 
yourself in the work of an artist who shrieks very specific fast food orders in 
a woman's voice for four minutes (Schnitzel Boogie) won't be easy – but you'll 
be okay. As he says on Symphony Of The Nymph: "I'm just a rock'n'roller from 
Beverly Hills. My name is Ariel Pink."

Mature Themes is released on 4AD on 20 August
 