
"On behalf of the American people, Michelle and I send our deepest condolences 
to the family of former Israeli prime ministerAriel Sharon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon> and to the people of Israel on 
the loss of a leader who dedicated his life to the state of Israel … We join 
with the Israeli people in honouring his commitment to his country." –Barack 
Obama

"I will never forget meeting with this big bear of a man when he became prime 
minister as he sought to bend the course of history toward peace, even as it 
meant testing the patience of his own longtime supporters and the limits of his 
own, lifelong convictions in the process. He was prepared to make tough 
decisions because he knew that his responsibility to his people was both to 
ensure their security and to give every chance to the hope that they could live 
in peace." –John Kerry

"He wanted to erase the Palestinian people from the map … He wanted to kill 
us, but at the end of the day, Sharon is dead and the Palestinian people are 
alive." –Tawfik Tirawi, Palestinian intelligence chief when Sharon was prime 
minister

"After eight years, he is going in the same direction as other tyrants and 
criminals whose hands were covered with Palestinian blood." –Khalil al-Haya, a 
leader in the Islamic militant group Hamas

"Ariel Sharon is one of the most significant figures in Israeli history and as 
prime minister he took brave and controversial decisions in pursuit of peace, 
before he was so tragically incapacitated.Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has today lost an important leader." 
–David Cameron

"Sharon will be remembered for his political courage and determination to 
carry through with the painful and historic decision to withdraw Israeli 
settlers and troops from the Gaza Strip. His successor faces the difficult 
challenge of realising the aspirations of peace between the Israeli and 
Palestinian people." – spokesperson forBan Ki-moon

Vladimir Putin "highly praised Ariel Sharon's personal qualities and his 
activities to protect Israel's interests, noting a high respect for him among 
compatriots and his high authority in the international arena." –The Kremlin

"With his courageous decision to withdraw the Israeli settlers from the Gaza 
Strip, he took a historic step on the path to a deal with the Palestinians and 
a two-state solution." – spokesman forAngela Merkel

"His passing is another grim reminder that years of virtual impunity for 
rights abuses have done nothing to bring Israeli-Palestinian peace any closer." 
–Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East director, Human Rights Watch
 