
For Palestinians living in the West Bank, Ariel Sharon's legacy is clear. They 
can see it from their windows: the monument of grey, graffitoed slabs topped 
with barbed wire and dotted with watchtowers that make up parts of theWest Bank 
separation barrier <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israeli_West_Bank_barrier>. 
This aggressive line of control, which when complete will extend 700km, is the 
prime physical reminder of the life of a divisive leader whose affiliations and 
policies shifted dramatically but who could claim to have influenced the shape 
of Israel more than anyone except David Ben-Gurion.

Mr Sharon's biography is rich in symbolism: for his fifth birthday, his father 
gave him a dagger. (He gave him a violin the following year, but by all 
accounts young Ariel did not much take to it.) The weapon was prescient for the 
boy who became the embodiment of the Israeli soldier-hero and called his 
autobiography Warrior. In 1948, aged just 20, he fought alongside his 
godfather, Ben-Gurion, in the war for independence; in 1967 he won a tactically 
complex victory during the six-day war; and in 1973 he brought about what many 
regard as the turning point in the Yom Kippur war by leading his unit across 
the Suez canal.

Mr Sharon was adored by his troops, but a reputation for brutality was never 
far behind. In 1982, serving as defence minister, he allowed Christian 
Phalangists into the Palestinian camps of Sabra and Shatila, where they 
massacred more than 700 men, women and children.An Israeli government inquiry 
<http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/foreignpolicy/mfadocuments/yearbook6/pages/104%20report%20of%20the%20commission%20of%20inquiry%20into%20the%20e.aspx>
 concluded that Mr Sharon bore personal responsibility for the incident. But it 
was Mr Sharon's promotion of settlements that would produce the most vitriolic 
reaction against him in the wider world. He was an early enthusiast for 
building Jewish homes in occupied territory and, for almost three decades, from 
the mid-1970s, he used a number of cabinet roles to push more than 100 
developments into the West Bank and Gaza.

There is a twist in the tail of Mr Sharon's political career, which came 
during his final period as prime minister. Like much in his life, the 
circumstances of his election in 2001 are controversial: in September 2000 he 
made a deeply provocative visit to the holyTemple Mount or Haram al-Sharif 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temple_Mount> with 1,000 police officers, 
sparking a riot that coincided with the start of the second intifada. In the 
climate of spiralling violence that followed, Israelis turned to the strongman 
of Suez, who was elected prime minister the following February. It was during 
this term that Mr Sharon took the substantial leap of moving to a strategy of 
"disengagement", unilaterally withdrawing troops from the Gaza strip and 
bulldozing Israeli settlements there. The Israeli right, including members of 
the Likud party he had helped found, were furious. Soon after, Mr Sharon left 
the party and set up the more centrist Kadima.

The stroke that felled him in January 2006 left his newfound policy to 
crumble, and created one of the enduring mysteries of recent Middle Eastern 
politics. At the end of his life, was the great war leader determined to secure 
peace by withdrawing from the West Bank? In the optimist's view, the point of 
Mr Sharon creating Kadima was to make the second, much more difficult, 
withdrawal. Pessimists say the Gaza pullout was a ruse to hold on to the West 
Bank, or that it traumatised Israeli politics so deeply that even he would not 
have had the capital to bulldoze Jewish homes there. All we know for sure is 
that in the subsequent eight years in which Mr Sharon lay in a coma,the 
settlements only grew 
<http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/settlement-info-and-tables/stats-data/settlements-in-the-west-bank-1>
.

It is tantalising to speculate that the illness of a man who had spent so much 
of his life at war may have robbed the region of its greatest chance for peace, 
but in the end Mr Sharon must be judged on what he did, rather than what he did 
not do. There may be nostalgia for his decisiveness and strength, and we may 
applaud the withdrawal from Gaza, but we cannot cheer his role in creating the 
settlements, or his long-held belief that the fight against "terror" can be 
waged only with bullets and bombs.
 