
Niri was in kindergarten when Ariel Sharon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon> entered his eight-year 
twilight zone between life and death. Now, at the age of 12, she was on Sunday 
skipping school with two friends to pay her respects to the man who dominated 
Israel for decades and split the country, region and much of the world over his 
record as a soldier and a statesman.

"He was a good man who did good things," said the young truant, one of several 
thousand Israelis who filed past the former prime minister's flag-draped coffin 
under an untypically leaden sky. "I don't think a leader like him will come 
again."

Sharon died on Saturday aged 85, eight years and one week after a stroke that 
plunged him into a coma. Inevitably most of those who navigated tight security 
around the Israeli parliament for the six-hour lying in state were admirers.

But the critical voices were also heard, particularly those of Palestinians 
who had borne the brunt of his military exploits.

The Knesset ceremony was opened by the Israeli president, Shimon Peres. A few 
minutes before the public was admitted to the plaza where Sharon's coffin lay 
on a black marble plinth, members of the Knesset guard laid wreaths at its base 
as two army rabbis read from the book of psalms.

Yuli Edelstein, the Knesset speaker, and Ehud Olmert, who succeeded Sharon as 
prime minister, paid their respects.

Police closed off roads near the parliament building and warned of traffic 
congestion in Jerusalem, but within 20 minutes of the ceremony's start the flow 
of mourners had slowed to a steady trickle and for much of the time media and 
Knesset officials outnumbered the public.

Among the mourners were old soldiers who had fought with or under Sharon. Some 
saluted the coffin.

Carmela Cohen, 73, said she would remember Sharon for "his personality, his 
goodness and his humour". Using the former prime minister's nickname, she 
added: "Arik gave all the years of his life to this country. He was a big 
figure who looked people in the eye."

Ahiya Davidi, 28, brought his five-year-old son Eliyah to pay his respects, 
telling the child: "We are here today because of what [Sharon] did". Avner Bar 
Hama, 67, a well-known Israeli artist, said he admired Sharon both as a soldier 
and a politician. "I think it's an obligation for citizens ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to recognise what he did for us and 
the important decisions he took, even though I think the withdrawal from Gaza 
was a mistake."

A state memorial event will be held at the Knesset on Monday morning , 
addressed by the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, Peres and Sharon's sons 
Gilad and Omri. The US vice-president, Joe Biden, and Tony Blair, now the 
representative of the Middle East quartet, will also speak at the ceremony.

The Czech prime minister, Jiri Rusnok, will also attend, but Germany, Spain 
and Canada will send ministerial or diplomatic representatives rather than 
heads of state. Russia will be represented by the chairman of the state duma.

After the ceremony, Sharon's body will be taken in an army convoy to his farm 
in the Negev desert, where he will be buried next to his wife, Lily, in a 
military funeral. The grave is just a few miles from the Gaza border.

The Israeli cabinet observed a minute's silence at the start of its regular 
weekly meeting on Sunday, before Netanyahu delivered a tribute, notable for its 
fulsome praise of Sharon's military career but cooler on his political record. 
The two men were bitter rivals.

"Arik was, first and foremost, a warrior and a commander, among the Jewish 
people's greatest generals in the current era and throughout its history. He 
was dedicated to the security of the state … and set two primary foundations 
for Israel's struggle against terrorism, initiative and retaliation, which 
stand to this day," Netanyahu said. "In all of his positions – defence 
minister, housing minister, infrastructures minister and foreign minister – 
Arik contributed to the state of Israel, as he also did as prime minister."

Debate over Sharon's record and legacy, centred on the polar opposites of war 
hero or war criminal, intensified following the announcement of his death. 
Israelis, however, were in no doubt that the loss of the man known as "the 
bulldozer" further weakened the remaining links to the generation that fought 
militarily and politically for the creation of their state. His death was the 
end of an era, said many.

Palestinians and critics on the Israeli left focused on Sharon's 
responsibility for the massacre of hundreds of Palestinians at the Sabra and 
Shatila refugee camps in Beirut in 1982, the huge expansion of Jewish 
settlements, his decision to build the separation barrier in the West Bank and 
his deliberately provocative walk on the Temple Mount, or Haram al-Sharif, 
which triggered the second intifada in 2000.

On the Israeli right, there was persistent bitterness over Sharon's 
"disengagement" policy, under which he withdrew Israeli settlers and troops 
from Gaza. In a statement shortly after his death, Orit Struck, an 
ultra-rightwing member of the Knesset, gave thanks that Sharon had been felled 
before he could extend the policy to the West Bank.

"Sharon was one of the great builders of the Land of Israel, but also one of 
its great destroyers," she said. "While thanking and recognising Sharon's great 
contributions to the State of Israel, we must also thank God for the fact that 
Sharon was taken from our public lives before he was able to bring to residents 
of Judea and Samaria [the biblical term for the West Bank] the tragedy he 
brought to the residents of Gush Katif and around Gaza." Struck later retracted 
her statement following an outcry.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, remained silent following Sharon's 
death, but others voiced criticism. "There are no good memories of Mr Sharon 
for the Palestinian people," said politician Mustafa Barghouti, saying he was 
responsible for a string of massacres and sought to destroy the possibility of 
a Palestinian state by building Jewish settlements in the West Bank.

Author Raja Shehada 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2014/01/ariel-sharons-corrosive-legacy.html>
 described Sharon's legacy as corrosive. "He sought to secure Israel's hold on 
the maximum area of Palestinian land, while at the same time suppressing 
Palestinian resistance. What others called his vision for peace, which he 
pursued as relentlessly as he pursued war, was based on the total surrender of 
the Palestinian side and its submission to the dictates of a militarily 
stronger Israel," he wrote in the New Yorker.

"Sharon was always a pioneer. He went further than most in his crimes against 
Palestinian civilians, and further than others in his deception; he showed 
Israeli leaders that they could retain the tactics of war while calling them 
efforts for peace."

• This article was amended on 15 January 2014 to remove identifying details of 
a child who was interviewed.
 