
When I meet Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> on an 
intermittently sunny afternoon in south London, the first thing I notice is the 
hair. He comes through the door of his record company's office wearing shades 
and a scuffed leather jacket. His T-shirt, which has a keyboard design, looks 
several decades old, as befits an artist with a fetish for disregarded musical 
styles from the 70s and 80s. But it's his hair – shoulder length and dyed 
bright pink – that makes me think to myself: Yes; I was expecting a weirdo 
art-rocker from Los Angeles and, indubitably, here he is.

We decamp to the pub across the road where Pink – real name Ariel Marcus 
Rosenberg – orders an early-afternoon beer and shuffles off to the gents. He's 
flown over to talk about his new album,Mature Themes 
<http://4ad.com/releases/21626>, a brilliantly odd piece of work that pushes 
the weirdness of Ariel Pink to new heights.

It's his ninth album in a decade. The first seven, released between 2002 and 
2008, were recorded at home for next to nothing on rudimentary equipment. The 
music paid homage to the sounds Rosenberg had soaked up during his precocious 
teenage years – psych rock to cheesy 70s pop and every offbeat thing in between 
– but did so with a hyperactive intelligence that made them surreally new. He 
gained a cult following, and his artfully lo-fi sound has been credited as a 
key influence on the current homemade aesthetic in indie music.

The turning point came in 2010 when he signed to 4AD, assembled a proper band, 
the Haunted Graffiti, and ventured into a professional studio. The result,
Before Today, was recognisable as an Ariel Pink record but its eccentricities 
were tempered by glossy soft-focus production and a couple of bona fide 
crowd-pleasers – notably Round and Round, which the music website Pitchfork 
named thetop track of 2010 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/7895-the-top-100-tracks-of-2010/10/>.

Were Rosenberg anxious to consolidate the mass of new fans he won with Before 
Today, he probably wouldn't have made Mature Themes. The album is expertly 
produced, like the last, but it returns, gleefully, to the madcap genre-hopping 
of his early work. For every song with widespread appeal, such as Only in My 
Dreams, there are bizarre flipsides: Schnitzel Boogie follows the artist as he 
sets out in search of some Austrian breaded veal; on Symphony of the Nymph, 
meanwhile, he cheerfully declares himself a nymphomaniac.

When he returns, I ask Rosenberg to describe the album in his own words. He 
stares hard at the table and drums his fingers. "I think it's an accurate 
assessment of where I am right now in my life. It doesn't take itself too 
seriously – that's a refreshing thing in this day and age."

It's also a new beginning, he says. The first seven albums, and a good portion 
ofBefore Today, drew on material he'd written during an intensely prolific 
period in his early 20s. This time, with the exception of a cover of the 1979 
song Baby by Donnie and Joe Emerson, he's done everything from scratch. "This 
was the first opportunity to see if there was anything left for me to write."

It doesn't take long to understand that Rosenberg, who turned 34 in June, is 
ill-at-ease about getting older. Rock'n'roll is for kids, he tells me: as you 
move beyond your teens you start to lose the plot. Inspiration is harder to 
come by. Add to that the fickleness of fandom in the digital age and it's a 
wonder he's still making music at all. Any new success merely buys him "another 
few months of relevance" before he inevitably gets "thrown on the scrapheap" or 
"brushed under the rug" – he repeats these phrases several times in the 
interview with a kind of perverse satisfaction.

His secret weapon against becoming obsolete, he tells me, is immaturity. "I 
think I've been lucky enough to have had an extended adolescence. I'm a lot 
like I was when I was 15." His career depends, in part, on not seeing what he 
does as a job. "In a sense I'm just the town fool that gets to do whatever he 
wants, and I'm so thankful for that."

Later, though, he gives a different account of how his youth has panned out. 
"I was actually under a lot of heaviness when I was younger. I thought of 
myself as an old soul. I was very obsessed with death. Basically, I didn't 
really have a youth – I sublimated all that into my identity and my music."

It was all a reaction, he says, to problems at home. Rosenberg's parents 
divorced when he was two, and he had difficulties at school. Concerned about 
his introversion, his parents put him in therapy. "I got used to seeing myself 
as almost a mental case. Of course I had an inner conviction that they were 
wrong and I wanted to prove it. Somehow it got justified by the way my life has 
unfolded."

Now, he says, he's making up for lost time. "I'm doing stuff that I should 
have done when I was 17. I'm a hedonist, just having fun, getting things out of 
the way – like being with girls, all that stuff."

Last I heard he was living with an arty LA singer called Geneva Jacuzzi. But 
he's clearly not in a relationship now.

"No," he says. "No way. I have no business being in a relationship. But at the 
same time… " He hesitates. "I wouldn't call this a break-up album, but this is 
the first time that I've been single, and maybe some of my humour [on the 
album] is because of my heartbreak."

Was it a difficult break-up?

"We were together for eight years. Yeah. For me it was. I don't know for her. 
But anyway. We're still good friends… but, god damn, I was ready to, to really… 
I wanted to have kids and stuff like that."

So she broke it off?

"I think I fucked it up," he says, and then, without explaining why, he goes 
off on a tirade about gender politics and how everybody under 27 considers 
themselves bi- or transsexual. He shakes his head, perplexed. "I feel very, 
very old-fashioned."

In spite of the hair?

He grimaces. The pink hair, it transpires, came out of a photoshoot he did 
recently with a US magazine. They wanted to make him look more like a weirdo LA 
art-rocker and he very reluctantly, after a lot of coaxing, went along with it. 
He gives a long-suffering sigh. "It's because I do music and I'm speaking to 
adolescents and I have to own that. I can't be just a grandpa and a sourpuss."

It's all part of Rosenberg's ongoing struggle to stay relevant. "If you don't 
appeal to kids, to the zeitgeist, you get thrown on the scrapheap." He drums a 
tense tattoo on the table with his fingers.

"But this new record," he goes on, brightening a little, "I feel like this is 
definitely the beginning of the end. I got good reviews last time and that will 
be used against me, y'know?" He glances up at me and half-smiles. "It's only a 
matter of time before they end up slaying the father and shove me under the 
rug."
 