
"In [Ariel] Sharon, it was all about the point where reality met fantasy," 
Israeli political scientist Yaron Ezrahi told theObserver, just days after the 
stroke in January 2006 that put Israel's most controversial prime minister into 
a coma.

"While he was in opposition, he was an ideologue who believed in the absolute 
use of Israeli power as a means to attain its goals.

"But when he came to power he became aware of its limits and realised that the 
settlements were a mistake of historic proportions that burdened Israel's 
security and economy. Once he realised that, the public saw a politician, who 
had a reputation as a liar and for ruthlessness, suddenly become a statesman in 
pursuit of necessity."

Sharon's "long goodbye", as it was described on Twitter by one journalist from 
the Israeli newspaperHaaretz, is now over with his death on Saturday, aged 85. 
History, by and large, has already made its judgment on many aspects of a man 
whose personality earned him the nickname "the Bulldozer".

Sharon died where he had lain for most of his last years, in an 18-bed ward 
where he was guarded by state security.

A physically brave, impetuous and ruthless soldier, he was shot in the stomach 
by Jordanian soldiers during fighting for the police fort at Latruncorrect as a 
young lieutenant in May 1948, in a series of engagements on the road to 
Jerusalem that are one of the founding legends of the Israeli state. But for 
each story of courage there was a more troubling counterpoint. In 1953 Sharon 
would lead Unit 101 during an infamous reprisal raid against the village of 
Qibya in which dozens of civilians were killed. He was also accused of 
disobeying orders that led his paratroopers into ambush by Egyptian forces in 
the Sinai during the Suez crisis in 1956, in which 30 of his soldiers died.

His reputation, as a commander at least, was rehabilitated during the Yom 
Kippur war in 1973 when Sharon, 45, was recalled to lead the dash across the 
canal. The controversy that so often swirled about him would not end when he 
left the army to become a minister in the government of Menachem Begin. It was 
a career in politics that for a while seemed doomed soon after it had begun, 
not least because of his role in the devastating 1982 invasion ofLebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon> – sold as a quick operation, but 
which would bog down Israeli soldiers for 18 years at terrible civilian cost.

It was during this period he was found by the Kahan commission – investigating 
the 1982 Sabra and Shatila massacre in Beirut, when Israeli forces allowed 
Christian Phalangist militiamen into two refugee camps in Beirut to slaughter 
hundreds of Palestinian refugees – to have been personally negligent in the 
killings "for ignoring the danger of bloodshed and revenge [and] not taking 
appropriate measures to prevent bloodshed".

There were other serious marks against him. As foreign minister, he encouraged 
the seizure by Israeli settlers of Palestinian land, saying: "Everyone there 
should move, should run, should grab more hills, expand the territory. 
Everything that's grabbed will be in our hands, everything that we don't grab 
will be in their hands." He was ultimately responsible for the harsh tactics he 
advocated during the five-year second Palestinian intifada which started in 
2000, in which around 3,000 Palestinians and 1,000 Israelis died.

Where the jury is still out is over the question of whether, in the few years 
before his stroke, he was changing – and whether it was in his mind to deliver 
a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement. In speeches late in his life, 
Sharon would suggest he was open to compromise. "I am prepared to make painful 
concessions," he would say, "but I will never sacrifice Israel's security."

For those who have argued that he was a transformed man in his 70s, who could 
have ended the occupation, the key piece of evidence is his order to evacuate 
the Israeli settlements in Gaza in 2005, a decision that infuriated the settler 
movement.

But that order was as much a soldier's judgment as a political one. The Gaza 
settlements, squeezed into one of the most populous places on the planet, were 
costly to protect and oddly pointless. As a chess move it was the sacrifice of 
a small piece to protect the settlements on the West Bank. Could he have gone 
further and ordered a withdrawal from the West Bank as well? Perhaps not. 
Sharon portrayed his "disengagement" plan that saw Gaza evacuated as a step to 
reduce tension between Israelis and Palestinians, but significantly it was 
accompanied by construction of a massive separation barrier in the West Bank – 
which Sharon approved after initially resisting –and that many saw as an 
attempt to unilaterally draw final borders.

One thing is unavoidable, whether seen through the prism of admiration as 
"Arik the king" or vituperation as "the butcher", Sharon forged his path on the 
battlefield through the force of his personality, an extraordinary self-belief 
of his place in history and in his importance. In a rare interview with the
Observer three years before his stroke, he painted himself as he wanted to be 
remembered – as a member of the only generation he believed that had the right 
to shape his country's future – those who had fought most bitterly in its wars 
from 1948. "The right thing," he said then, "will be if someone from our 
generation who has seen everything we saw. It is our generation's role to try 
to achieve this peace. It is a result of things we have seen. I think that 
makes it easier to do. It was something I had to try to solve.

"As one who participated in all the wars of the state of Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, I saw the horror of wars. I believe 
I understand the importance of peace, not more but not less than many of the 
politicians who speak about peace, but never had this experience. I saw these 
things."

Sharon was clear even then where most of the hard compromises should lie – not 
on the Israeli but the Palestinian side of any negotiation. "Once [it has] been 
completely quiet and the weapons have been taken from them and given to a third 
party to be taken out of the Palestinian Authority area and destroyed, if [the 
Palestinian Authority] takes serious steps and stops incitement and educating 
for peace, [then] I believe Israel will be able to … I mentioned the 
Palestinian state? … I mean no military; a demilitarised state.

"I said without final borders because the final borders should only be agreed 
on the third stage, the final stage. I think in this plan – the plan is called 
a performance-based plan – things should be fully implemented. You don't move 
from one stage or sub-stage to the next one unless the former one been fully 
implemented."
 