
The Arizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> have lost one of their 
best players to a serious injury two days before the opening of regular season.

All-Star center fielder AJ Pollock fractured his right elbow with a head-first 
slide into home plate in the Diamondbacks’ 7-4 exhibition victory over the 
Kansas City Royals on Friday night.

Manager Chip Hale said Pollock would require surgery and there was no 
timetable for his return. Hale said the club will know more on Saturday after 
the severity of the break is determined.

“We feel awful for AJ,” Hale said. “We’re a family. It’s like one of your 
family members taken away from you right now.”

Pollock, in the major league lineup for the first time since being sidelined 
with a sore elbow problem early in spring training, held his arm in obvious 
pain as he left the field.

“With his (earlier elbow) injury, he had one thing we worried about was him 
diving head-first, putting his hand down when he landed,” Hale said. “There was 
too much stress there.”

Hale said the attitude of the team is “next man up will have to perform. We’ll 
move some guys around.”

Socrates Brito would be the likely replacement for Pollock, but Chris Owings 
played some center late in the game.

Kendrys Morales homered and Alcides Escobar tripled for the reigning World 
Series champion Royals, who play a pair of exhibitions against Arizona before 
opening their season at home against the New York Mets on Sunday night.

Pollock’s injury came in Arizona’s five-run third inning.

He had worked his way back playing in a series of minor league games and the 
Diamondbacks wanted him to play with the big league club before the season 
opener, at home Monday night against Colorado.

After he doubled, he took third on Paul Goldschmidt’s single, then started 
home on David Peralta’s bouncer to second baseman Omar Infante. Pollock 
stopped, then went home when Infante threw home, evading the tag with the throw 
up the third base line.

“If he goes feet-first, he’d be OK,” Hale said, “but the problem is the way 
the play played out. If he goes feet-first, he might have gotten his leg broke 
by the catcher. It’s just unfortunate.”

Pollock fractured the same elbow in spring training in 2010 and missed the 
entire season.

The Diamondback open their season at home Monday night against Colorado.

Escobar hit the first pitch from Rubby De La Rosa into deep left center for a 
triple in the first, then scored on Mike Moustaskas’ ground out. Hosmer led off 
the second with a home run to center on a 2-0 pitch from De La Rosa.

Nick Ahmed had two singles and a home run for Arizona.
 