
Shares have regained some poise after the two day sell-off on emerging market 
concerns, but two UK technology favourites are in the doldrums.

Following Apple's disappointing outlook overnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/27/apple-shares-fall-record-iphone-ipad-sales>
, with a revenue forecast below expectations,Arm and Imagination Technologies - 
whose technologies are used in the US company's iPads and iPhones - have both 
seen their shares hit. Arm is down 24p at 933.5p while Imagination is off 2.6p 
at 176p.

The news from across the Atlantic was an opportunity for Liberum Capital to 
repeat its sell rating on Arm. Analyst Janardan Menon said:
 Apple shares were sharply down following weaker than expected iPhone 
shipments in its December quarter and weaker than expected revenue guidance for 
its second quarter ending March.

Apple sold 51m iPhones in the quarter, below street expectations in the region 
of 54m to 56m. The company blamed supply constraints as well as shifting 
carrier upgrade practices for the shortfall. Along with Samsung's weak fourth 
quarter smartphone sales and first quarter guidance, these figures further 
highlight the on going slowdown in the smartphone market, particularly at the 
high-end.

Smartphones account for the majority of Arm's royalty revenue and the slower 
sales in this segment is expected to reduce Arm's royalties below current 
market expectations. We regard the stock as being over-valued and reiterate our 
sell recommendation. 
Overall though the FTSE 100 has added 19.91 points to 6570.57, ahead of UK GDP 
figures and as some of the recent emerging market fears receded a little. Ishaq 
Siddiqi, market strategist at ETX Capital, said:
 The global deterioration of equity markets paused overnight in Asian markets, 
a day after stocks in the region fell to six-month lows. Slowing growth in 
China together with the US Federal Reserve's tapering of QE prompted fresh 
fears about the outlook for emerging markets. Last week's slide in the 
Argentinean peso after the central bank there halted policies to support the 
currency together with run on the Turkish Lira [a rate hike expected in coming 
days from the central bank there] and on political instable nations like 
Ukraine and Thailand, all added to rattle investor sentiment around the EM 
space.

The modest recovery in Asian markets helped kick European share markets higher 
this morning but investors mostly avoided taking big bets before the [latest] 
Federal Reserve policy meeting that is scheduled to commence today with an 
outcome expected tomorrow.

Positive news from Amec, up 13p at £10.33 on news of a $974m consortium 
contract win from BP, helped the mood, whileRoyal Bank of Scotland has edged up 
6.5p to 338.7p afterMonday's shock warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/27/royal-bank-scotland-report-losses-8bn-2013>
, which indicated annual losses of up to £8bn. Analysts at Canaccord Genuity 
said:
 With the potential for further charges to be taken in February we do not see 
any catalysts for near term outperformance but, with the valuation so low, we 
do not see scope for material underperformance from here. As such we continue 
to rate the stock as a hold, until we get see the new management strategy. 
Carnival has sailed 91p higher to £25.69 following a positive update from 
rival Royal Caribbean and news that Numis had raised its recommendation from 
hold to buy. The broker said:
 Royal Caribbean has reported 2013 earnings per share of $3.17, 4% ahead of 
consensus, and its 2014 guidance is positive (net yields plus 2%-3% in constant 
currency). We believe that the read-across to Carnival is positive and we have 
increased our 2014 earnings per share forecast by 13%, our target price from 
2,250 to 3,000p and we have upgraded to buy.

We remain positive on scope for yield and earnings recovery [at Carnival]. In 
2013 sentiment (passenger and investor) was badly affected by the issues with 
Carnival Dream and Carnival Triumph. This had an impact on both costs and 
yields: Carnival had to discount more heavily than the competition. Royal 
Caribbean's reported yields are now less than 3% short of the 2008 peak, whilst 
Carnival's yields are still 14% lower.
 