
As an electronics and systems engineer with several decades’ experience in UK 
industry, I find Philip Hammond’s unequivocal enthusiasm for the sale of ARM, 
our most valuable technology company, profoundly misjudged (Chancellor says UK 
is open for business as biggest tech firm sold overseas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
, 19 July). The pedigree of the ARM RISC processor architecture goes back to 
the BBC’s computer literacy public service initiative of the early 1980s. 
Building on the considerable success of their BBC Micro used in that project 
led Acorn Computers to develop the initial ARM device – or the “Acorn RISC 
Machine”, as it was then known – to power its successor.

The rest is history, and the ARM RISC processor concept took on a life of its 
own. Its great success has undoubtedly been a source of considerable 
inspiration and pride to those entering the electronics and computing 
professions in the UK – the US had Apple, Microsoft and HP Intel, to name a 
few, but we at least hadARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings>. 
It is difficult to imagine the US allowing those enterprises to fall so easily 
into foreign hands, but in “car boot sale” Britain, making a quick profit, with 
apparently little or no proper analysis of the consequences, takes priority.

Perhaps if there were more genuinely technically literate folk in government, 
with an understanding of the true long-term strategic and social value to the 
nation of successful technological enterprises such as ARM, things would be 
better? But not, it seems, under Mr Hammond (PPE, Oxford) or indeed Mrs May 
(Geography, Oxford). Brexit may perhaps give us our country back, but only to 
flog it off piecemeal to the highest bidder, it would appear.
Wayne Rimmer
Bromborough, Wirral

• John Mills criticises the sell-off of ARM to Japanese investors (The ARM 
sell-off is bad for Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/sell-off-british-businesses-must-stop>
, 19 July) as being against the interests of British working people.Philip 
Hammond says that “Britain is open for business, and open to foreign 
investment”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
Following the logic of Mills’ view, post-Brexit, like Canada, we could 
introduce a foreign investment screening law. This would allow the state to 
review foreign takeovers, considering their impact on the UK economy before 
allowing them to go forward, subject to contractual conditions. If we stay in 
the single market, such a law would be compatible with EU law, if limited to 
non-EU-origin investors.

However, all British governments since the 1960s have reduced controls over 
foreign investment. Vince Cable could not persuade the last government to adopt 
such a law after Kraft’s takeover of Cadbury. Opposition to a foreign 
investment law could be expected to continue under the current government.

If we are out of the EU, and dealing alone with foreign multinationals, we 
might need a Canadian-style foreign investment screening law. It is only at the 
point of entry that we have any real bargaining power with multinationals. 
Brexit might tilt the historic balance of policy towards such a law. The 
current liberal position might become politically unacceptable if 
multinationals do as they please, without binding commitments, putting UK 
firms, jobs and revenue at risk.
Peter Muchlinski
Emeritus professor of international commercial law, The School of Law, Soas, 
University of London

• As a nation with a trade deficit of some 7% of GDP, it is obvious that we 
have to flog things off but I would like to make the case that it would be less 
culturally damaging to sell off Ely Cathedral than ARM Holdings.

It might seem strange to those far from engineering but the creation of the 
technical and commercial basis of a company like ARM is more challenging than 
the construction of a cathedral. ARM was uniquely created from the fusion of 
two world-class academic engineering traditions: the computing architecture 
school at Manchester University descending fromAlan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/13/alan-turings-notebook-sells-for-more-than-1m-at-new-york-auction>
 and the first stored-program electronic computers, and the brilliant but more 
eclectic and entrepreneurial school at Cambridge. It also benefited 
substantially from EEC research funding.

For a company to break into the global computing market to the extent of 
having its chip design in 95% of mobile phones is a truly astounding 
achievement worthy of this great heritage, and unlikely to be repeated in our 
nation for many years to come.

We shall be lucky to see another such in the next few decades.

But we have quite a few cathedrals.
Tom Lake
Reading, Berkshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 