
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for people who have watched season four of 
Arrested Development on Netflix.Read Hadley Freeman's recap of episodes 6 to 10 
here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/27/arrested-development-recap-season-four-episodes-6-10>

Episode 11 – Gob

Brilliant – more Gob. If this is anywhere near as good as Gob's last episode, 
then that will serve as some recompense for the dodgy early episodes of this 
series. We begin with Gob still driving the limo of Mark Cherry's entourage, 
berating someone who is apparently his father for never sending him a birthday 
card.

Gob vows to get revenge on Tony Wonder at a gay magic night for sabotaging his 
wedding trick, but will need Michael to pretend to be his boyfriend in order to 
get in. Michael refuses, as did Steve Holt, who, it turns out, was the person 
Gob was yelling at in the limo. Gob signs Michael's movie contract.

Gob calls George Michael and tricks him into meeting him at the Gothic Castle 
and pretending to be his boyfriend. Beforehand, he tries on a shirt and the 
sales assistant tells him how great he looks. "I'll take it – the compliment, 
not the shirt."

At the Gothic Castle, George Michael realises that Gob has tricked him and 
leaves, though not before Gob snogs him, for appearances' sake.

Gob attempts to sabotage Tony's trick, although to apparently little avail as 
the trick works. The two men meet for a drink afterwards and, each thinking the 
other's gay, vaguely flirt with one another.

The next morning Tobias buys one of Gob's houses, as it fulfils all the 
requirements for a sex offender. Realising this is an untapped market, Gob 
sells the rest of the houses to other sex offenders. "I have a list of men who 
can fill every opening you have!" cries Tobias proudly.

We then see that not only is Tony Wonder straight but he is shacked up with 
Sally Sitwell (who is played, of course, by Ben Stiller's real wife). Sally 
stole money from Lucille 2 to rebrand Tony as the gay magician. "As long as 
we're recapping things we both already know," begins Tony, before then 
launching into his plan to trick Gob into revealing more about Fakeblock, which 
he overheard George Michael talking about at the Gothic Castle.

Gob and Tony make a date, and Michael and Gene Parmesan trail him, thinking 
he's going to meet Rebel. Gob goes to the wrong venue and he and Michael fight, 
and Michael rips up his contract.

Gob then goes to see Tony and the two feel genuine friendship for one another, 
while still pretending to be gay: "I would totally stay and have gay sex with 
you but, um, I just had a lot of water," says Gob. They plan to have "totally 
normal sex" on Cinco.

At Cinco, Gob bumps into Ann, who has a five-year-old. Ann tells him it's 
Tony's. Gob is outraged that Tony is straight and he tells Ann they will have 
revenge sex. But what he means is Ann should have sex with Tony to prove he's 
straight.

Ann storms out and tells Tony that Gob is plotting against him. Tony is 
similarly outraged that Gob is straight and the two plot to reveal him as gay 
to destroy his reputation as the Christian magician.

Then we see Gob walking downstairs in the model home, as we did in the very 
first episode, but now we see who is walking downstairs with him: Tony. Gob 
forces a Forget Me Now down Michael's throat. Michael calls Rebel to make a 
date but she is in bed – with George Michael.

So far, the Gob episodes are the strongest, which I reckon is partly a 
testament to Arnett and partly a testament to his and Hurwitz's relationship: 
the two have worked together several times since the end of Arrested 
Development's third series. What a joy, too, to get proper time with Tony 
Wonder. I love that he's the character Hurwitz uses to mock all the heavy 
exposition going on in this series. I'm going to be honest here and say I'm 
completely confused now by the wall plot and, perhaps worse, I don't really 
care. But the best characters are really coming into their own at last, and the 
criss-crossing of timelines and explanations of earlier scenes are becoming 
more fun and satisfying.

Episode 12 – Maeby

To me, Alia Shawkat was always the most overlooked of Arrested's cast members. 
She was excellent as a character who is arguably the show's most difficult 
character to play, and Maeby is endlessly fascinating (more fascinating than 
George Michael). I'm intrigued to see how Shawkat carries her episode.

Maeby is now dating Perfecto Telles and, because she's always failing school, 
she's been assigned to a college senior who will tutor her. This senior turns 
out to be George Michael. But, as he points out, how can she still be in high 
school when he's in college?

Flashback to the boat disaster. Maeby and George Michael are talking about 
their growing intimacy. Maeby doesn't want to become more serious (because 
George Michael is a bad kisser), and George Michael thinks it would be a bad 
idea too. Maeby tries to flunk out of school to make her parents notice her – 
but they don't, because they've both gone to India, although she doesn't know 
that. She goes to India too, to make Gangie 4, sees her mother in the hotel 
lobby and decides to play a trick on her by dressing up as a shaman and sending 
her back to America.

Back in California, the Fünkes all move into their ridiculous luxury house 
together. Maeby starts a new high school. Her parents run off with Marky and 
DeBrie and the house is repossessed. Maeby gets fired from Imagine and she 
decides to squat at her grandmother's but her mother and Marky move in with 
Cindy the ostrich. Maeby flees to the model home and decides to be a high 
school senior forever.

After seeing George Michael in the dorm and hearing about his (nonexistent) 
software, Maeby is ashamed of how little she's done with her life. She goes to 
a bar and offers the model home as a set for How to Catch a Local Predator. She 
also sees Perfecto holding up a badge, and thinks he's the rumoured undercover 
detective in her high school.

Maeby goes to her grandmother's apartment to pick up her royalties cheque for 
Gangie 4: The Facelift (as opposed to it being a cheque from her grandmother 
for a facelift, as Lindsay thought), but her mother has already taken it.

Maeby asks George Michael to be her date to the Opies, where she is getting a 
lifetime-achievement award, to impress him. There she bumps into Rebel, whom 
she knows from her time at Imagine, and uses George Michael's Fakeblock to 
impress people. George Michael agrees and stutteringly introduces himself to 
Rebel as George Maharis.

Maeby gives a typically Maeby-ish acceptance speech and then castigates her 
mother for whoring herself out to Herbert Love. Love's assistant mistakes Maeby 
for Lindsay's pimp, gives her what was originally Maeby's cheque in order to 
get Lindsay to sleep with Love. Now we understand why she was so encouraging of 
her mother's love life in earlier episodes.

Maeby makes enough money for an office and apartment (she, too, fails to 
recognise Steve Holt), but when she shows it all to George Michael he freaks 
out and fires her. She goes to see Perfecto, who is Lucille 2's fake foster 
child, and Lucille 2 sees them in bed.

At Cinco de Cuatro she bumps into Lindsay and thinks that Herbert Love is 
somehow cheating her and so tells Perfecto to beat him up. Perfecto confesses 
that he is just a 17-year-old student. At first Maeby doesn't care, but then 
she is arrested for sex offences by the real undercover cop – her teacher, one 
of Andy Richter's twins.

Not bad at all. Maeby was always a great character with lots of potential that 
occasionally went untapped in the first three series, so this episode provided 
some much overdue Maeby-time. The joke about the cheque was great and it 
justified Hurwitz's experiment with these long, overreaching plots. I also love 
the growing darkness of this series, with Maeby pimping her mother and being 
arrested for sex offences. I'm still feeling the lack of the familial 
interactions, though, and there really hasn't been enough of Buster. Have I 
mentioned that already?

Episode 13 – George Michael


Really, George Michael again? I'm not really enjoying George Michael in this 
series, which is odd as Michael Cera is now one of the writers. Can we please 
get to Buster soon?

Five years earlier, George Michael's grandparents throw a party for him as a 
congratulation for going to college – just as his father storms into the 
apartment and says he is done with the family. George Michael goes to college 
and makes friends. He heads to Spain for a year abroad and – like all college 
boys who go to Europe for a bit – grows a moustache and sleeps with an older 
woman who teaches him how to be a better kisser.

He returns to campus, confident and excited – but then Michael moves in. 
George Michael and his flatmate P-Hound decide to invent an app to make 
woodblock noises, which they want to call Fakeblock, but the domain name costs 
$5,000. To earn the money, George Michael volunteers to be a tutor and 
knowingly chooses Maeby to be his student, feigning surprise when she arrives.

Michael gets voted out of the dorm. George Michael goes to the Opies with 
Maeby and hears her talking about Fakeblock to Rebel. George Michael decides to 
continue the lie. Marky's bomb goes off at Love's event and people assume it's 
Maharis, the mysterious internet genius behind the fascinating Fakeblock app.

Later, George Michael gets into the exclusive Ealing Club where he meets 
Rebel, whom he recognises from the remake of Dangerous Cousins (which he and 
Ann picketed in the second series). This is the awkward phone exchange with his 
father during which both know the other is lying. Michael sneaks upstairs and 
sees Ron Howard. Rebel and George Michael hide from their fathers in a photo 
booth and end up having sex. The show ends with P-Hound and George Michael 
quarreling over Fakeblock, Social Network-style.

This held up a lot better than I feared. I enjoyed the little stories from 
George Michael: the College Years, especially his year in Spain. If anything, 
the storylines that are wearing thin by this point are the ones Hurwitz has 
tried to keep going over the whole series, Fakeblock and the wall. The smaller 
jokes have worked best, such as Maeby's cheque, for example, or who Gob was 
sneaking out of the model home in the first episode. Also, the Ron Howard joke? 
Bored now. Nonetheless, I loved The Social Network pastiche at the end, 
acknowledging that Michael Cera does, indeed, look like Jesse Eisenberg. Also, 
that was kind of a thrill to get a glimpse of George Michael's mother at the 
beginning.

Episode 14 – Buster


Yay!

Flashback to the aftermath of Lucille being arrested after the boat disaster 
at the end of season three. Buster is unable to accept his mother's absence: 
"It looked a little like that Vince Vaughn movie, Psycho." At last she returns 
home under house arrest but she and Buster begin to drive one another crazy. 
The evening before Lucille is due in court, Buster goes on a juice binge with 
Lucille 2, oversleeps and misses his mother's trial. She blames him for the 
guilty verdict. She refuses to see Buster when he visits, even when he dresses 
as her old college flame, Alex Trebek. He lives with Lucille 2, but is really 
looking for a mother figure. "And so Buster spent his days trying to get his 
mother to love him, and his lover to mother him."

Buster joins the army to make his mother proud of him and is set up as a drone 
pilot. But when he realises the people he's killing are real, he freaks out and 
obtains the first known injury to a drone pilot. In recompense, the army give 
him a big hand – literally, as a replacement for his hook.

The army discharges him and, on his way out, he meets Ophelia Love, Herbert's 
wife, who is shocked that a vet has nowhere to live and so adopts him. He and 
Ophelia sleep together and Buster goes to visit Lucille to tell her he is no 
longer a Motherboy – he is a Motherman. But soon after, Ophelia ends it and, as 
revenge, Buster steals the photos Ophelia has of Herbert with "a prostitute" 
(Lindsay).

Buster goes to Cinco and gives Lucille 2 the photos of Herbert. Lucille is 
shocked that gentle Buster would do such a thing (but takes the photos). Buster 
then realises that it was Lucille 2's fault that he missed his mother's trial 
and is furious. He may or may not be responsible for what happens to Lucille 2, 
and tries to tamper with the CCTV using George Michael's Fakeblock app – 
unaware that it is merely a woodblock noise.

This was great – Tony Hale is such a joy to watch as Buster. As in Gob's 
episodes, it really feels like the audience is watching a character grow and 
change, if not necessarily in a positive way. Buster goes from being the creepy 
manboy audiences know and love to making tentative steps towards maturity to 
then being twisted by bitterness and becoming an evil Bluth in the end. A 
genuinely fun and interesting episode, showcasing the best of Arrested's 
weirdness, creativity and darkness.

Episode 15 – Michael


Well, I guess it's not that surprising that Hurwitz would bring it back to 
Michael at the end. But I was secretly hoping that the last episode would 
belong to the whole Bluth family. Oh well.

George Michael is hanging out with Rebel in the Ealing Club, complaining about 
how his dad keeps phoning him. "At least he wasn't drunk and bitching about Don 
Ameche not knowing his lines in Cocoon," groans Rebel. They end up having sex 
in the photo booth, just as she did with Michael before.

We realise that both father and son have called one another while on dates 
with Rebel and that's why they duck out of seeing one another – not because 
they're actively avoiding each other, but because they're with her. Rebel dumps 
Michael for getting too serious and goes to see George Michael in his dorm. He 
continues to lie to her about Fakeblock.

Gob convinces him to buy a house in Sudden Valley and, because he looks so 
young but is of a legal age, all of his (sex offender) neighbours love him.

Maeby realises that Rebel is dating both Michael and George Michael. After 
seeing the photos of Michael with Rebel in Rebel's apartment, Michael realises 
this, too.

At Cinco de Cuatro, Gob tells George he needs to pay off the Mongols who 
helped build the wall. As they have no money, the Mongols – not the Mexicans – 
rampage the festival. Michael offers to have sex with Lucille 2 to pay off his 
debt, but she smacks him.

The next morning, as George Michael is leaving Rebel's place, he bumps into 
his dad and realises Michael is seeing Rebel, too. Worse, his dad knew about 
the overlap. George Michael punches him.

A shocking episode, really, and a reinforcement that what the fourth series is 
really about is the growing estrangement between Michael and George Michael. 
Unfortunately, that was a plotline that never really interested me, mainly 
because Michael's character became more and more annoying in this series. I was 
far more interested in Lucille's prison shenanigans, say, or Buster's attempts 
to be a man (and Gob's homoerotic relationship with Tony Wonder, of course).

But I like the way Hurwitz just dismissed all of those storylines and many 
others as mere shaggy dog stories, despite all of the suggestions that a big 
reveal was going to happen at Cinco de Cuatro (what happened to Lucille 2? Why 
was George Senior turning into a woman? We may never know for sure). A gutsy 
ploy on Hurwitz's part and one I genuinely enjoyed. A bigger problem was my 
growing irritation-slash-boredom with Michael and weariness of some of the 
plotlines. Ultimately, this didn't really feel like a TV series but more like a 
very long movie. Which, of course, is almost certainly what Hurwitz is plotting 
now.
 