
With a couple of clears of the throat, literal and metaphorical, the much 
anticipated fourth series ofArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> arrives at last 
on Netflix today, dumped in its entirety with the enthusiasm of one of the 
members of the Bluth family eagerly offloading its stock in the family 
business, risks be damned.

The literal clears of the throat come from the narrator, Ron Howard, whose 
gentle coughs make a promising opening for the first episode, winking, in that 
distinctively Arrested Development way, at the audience. The metaphorical ones 
come from the dizzying jumps in time that the viewer is expected to keep up 
with from the very start. In the first 10 minutes, there are more confusing 
leaps in time than Back to the Future 2 managed in the whole of its film, 
including a flashback to several decades past in which Seth Rogen plays George 
Senior and – much more successfully – Kristen Wiig is young Lucille. But as ace 
as Wiig is at capturing Lucille's casual racism ("It's all part of the Mexican 
war on May fifth!") and threatening eye movements, she's no Jessica Walter. 
From this very first scene, all of those devoted fans of the show whose loyalty 
helped to bring the show back might be feeling as nervous as Buster Bluth about 
all of this change. Um, what's happened to Arrested Development?

Well, what's happened is that, just as the show's creator rehauled the 
traditional sitcom in 2003-06 when the original three series aired, he's trying 
to do the same again seven years on. But change always takes some getting used 
to.

Each episode of the show focuses on one character ("It's Michael's Arrested 
Development," intones Howard in the opening credits of the show, helping the 
viewer along), catching viewers up on what's been happening in their lives for 
the past few years. Each of their storylines is utterly credible to the 
character (of course Lindsay would, inspired by Eat Pray Love, go to India "to 
let go of all possessions and to find something cute to keep her possessions 
in") and the show's style (of course George Sr would open up a sweat lodge on 
the Mexican border to con CEOs out of their money and to try to screw up Stan 
Sitwell's plans). All of the main characters and essential subsidiary ones are 
back, including Barry Zuckercorn, Bob Loblaw, Sitwell, Carl Weathers, Warden 
Gentles and, of course, Lucille Ostero, and there are, if anything, even more 
blink and you'll miss 'em background gags (later on, Lucille's prison numbers 
are 07734, or "hello" upside down, referring back to her adopted Korean son, 
Annyong, who she names the Korean word for "hello") and eye-popping weirdness 
(did you really just see Liza Minelli attacked by an ostrich? Yes, yes you 
did). There are also, as if paying the fans back for their long memories, 
little nods back at passing jokes from the first three series, such as 
Michael's youthful performance in "You're a crook, Captain Hook" and Lucille's 
cry, "Look what the homosexuals have done to me!"

But as a watching experience it is entirely unlike the past three 
much-cherished series, and unlike any other sitcom. Hurwitz has spoken often 
about his desire to make an Arrested Development movie and he has taken 
advantage of Netflix's plans to release the whole series at once to make a 
sitcom that has cinematic scope. It demands the same kind of patience from the 
viewer as a show like The Wire, but with more ostrich attacks. It's 
extraordinary how much Hurwitz packs into each 30 minute episode. Sometimes it 
feels breathtakingly brilliant and other times it just feels confusing. It 
takes some getting used to, but by the fifth episode, the patience begins to 
pay off. I didn't adore the show in the way I instantly adored the first three 
series, but I was admiring it, and even enjoying it in a new way. So far, I'm 
keeping the faith.

Episode one – Michael

With the kind of confidence that Hurwitz has always exuded with this show, he 
opens proceedings with the most complicated and probably least funny episode. 
After a certain amount of time-leaping (and a somewhat disconcerting cameo from 
Amanda de Cadenet as a newscaster, although at least she's better than Seth 
Rogen who is horrendously miscast as George Sr), we learn that Michael's 
attempts to go into the real estate business failed, partly because 
California's property market crashed, and partly because the only inhabitants 
he could lure to Sudden Valley were a vulture and a scrubby bit of tumbleweed. 
Broke, homeless and now in hock to Lucille Ostero, who he may or may not have 
slept with to get more money, he goes to live with George Michael in his 
college dorm, and becomes the nightmare parent he always threatened to be. He 
is stunned when George Michael suggests he'd like to change his name and 
suggests Boy George as an alternative. "I think I'll stick with George Michael 
– at least that was consensual," mumbles his son. He interrupts his son's 
attempts to invent Faceblock, "the antisocial network", and walks in on his son 
and Maeby's private moments. Finally George Michael's patience ends and he 
throws his dad out and Michael gets a flight to Phoenix purely to see an 
article an inflight magazine – "Altitude, the number two most read magazine in 
coach, three after the safety card." It is predictably unflattering.

A rather depressing kick off, and not really in a fun way. I can't imagine 
rewatching this episode 117 times the way I rewatch episodes from the first 
three series, but let's not panic yet, Freeman. Make like Oscar and stay zen.

Episode two – George Senior

George is running a sweat lodge to con CEOs out of their money. To explain how 
and why all this has happened, we go back in time to young George, Lucille and 
Barry Zuckercorn (played, of course, by Henry Winkler's son, Max) and we see 
not only where George and Lucille learned where husbands and wives can't be 
tried for the same crime, but why they were always so fond of boats. George 
thinks Stan Sitwell is building a fence across the Mexican border and he and 
Lucille, who is now in custody, decide to stick it him well. They tell people 
they are getting divorced so no one will think they're in cahoots. George bumps 
into Oscar and some of his hippy friends, including a disgraced 
anaesthesiologist played by John Slattery ("Of course the bigger crime would 
have been if the patient hadn't woken up to testify against me") and realises 
they live on the Mexican border. George decides to go there, buy the land, turn 
it into a money-making sweatlodge and screw Sitwell's plans. But at one point 
he and Oscar have a vision of an ostrich man while chewing on a plant and it 
appears that he and Oscar swap strength and sex drive.

Still not wholly loving the show, but it does include one of the best scenes 
ever made in Arrested in which Lucille smokes into Buster's mouth and he blows 
it out the window. Maybe I just need more Buster? And Gob. Definitely need more 
Gob. Actually, I need more of everybody.

Episode 3 – Lindsay

After the arrest on the boat at the end of season three, Lindsay decides at 
last to leave her husband and her family, spurred on by a conversation with her 
ever supportive mother: "You can't say one nice thing to your daughter, can 
you?" "Adopted daughter – and of course I can!" Inspired by Eat, Pray, Love, 
she goes to India to find herself ("And they have normal toilets there, 
right?"). While there, her shaman – who later appears to turn into an ostrich – 
tells her to return home to her love. She takes this as a sign that she should 
get back with Tobias and the two of them promptly buy a ridiculous house from 
the realtor, James "I don't sell" Carr(s), who Lindsay once tried and failed to 
have a fling with, and go to what Tobias thinks is a method acting clinic but 
is, inevitably, a methadone clinic (dismayingly, I saw that gag coming a mile 
away). There, they meet Marky Bark, the son of Johnny Bark who Lindsay once met 
in a tree, and DeBree, an addict played by the extraordinary Maria Bamford. 
They have a double date and Lindsay decides she's meant to be with Marky and 
runs away with him only to be woken up by an ostrich pecking her face.

OK, this one felt more Arrested, but I'm still not loving the format of 
focusing on one character at a time. Also, Portia de Rossi's face looks 
completely different from how it did seven years ago which is distracting. But 
I think things are picking up. I think. Please.

Episode 4 – Michael

The most jampacked and in-jokey episode yet. Michael is now working for the 
unnamed Google and is going around southern California in the Google car taking 
photos for Street View, meaning he is driving yet another absurdly tall car. He 
gets a call from Barry that Ron Howard wants to meet him at Imagine 
Entertainment ("Ron Howard wants to meet me? Did you get any other 
information?" "Apparently he directed a movie called Cocoon"). So off he goes 
and learns that not only is Kitty Sanchez working there, but that Howard wants 
to make a film of his family, and this requires Michael to get signatures from 
all of his family members. Michael then bumps into a beautiful but still 
nameless woman, played by Isla Fisher, and he realises the only way he can get 
with her is if he sells out his family and impresses her by being a producer. 
After a bit of to-ing and fro-ing, Michael gets his father's signature only to 
realise that Ron Howard wants the film to be about Michael and George Michael, 
not Michael and George, and that the beautiful woman, Rebel Alley, is – he 
thinks – Ron Howard's mistress (actually, she's his daughter).

This could have been the most annoying episode yet with all the jokes about 
Ron Howard. But actually, it was fine. The real problems for me is that there's 
not enough interaction between the family, and Michael is becoming less and 
less likable, and, again, not really in a fun way. But we still have episodes 
from my favourite characters to come – Lucille, Gob, Tobias and Buster – and 
I'm beginning to see the shape of the plot arc over the series.

Episode 5 – Tobias

The best episode yet! Thank God. I knew I could rely on Tobias.

Tobias learns, to his astonishment, that his entire family thinks he's gay 
and, to disprove their theory decides to do the least gay thing he can think 
of: get a license plate saying "anustart" (a new start) and go on a pilgrimage 
to India, inspired by Eat, Pray, Love. It turns out that it was his luggage 
Lindsay took by mistake at the airport and it was Tobias who kept kicking 
Lindsay's seat on the plane. His pilgrimage is cut short when (Lindsay's) bus 
runs him over and he returns home, gets briefly back together with Lindsay, 
only to run off with DeBree just as Lindsay is running off with Marky Bark, 
with similarly disastrous results. With nowhere else to go, he returns to 
Lucille's apartment and rescues Lucille Ostero from an attacking ostrich 
("Doctors said if that bird had got through my second layer of make up, he 
could have done real damage to my skin!"). She offers him a job at her rehab 
centre, he decides to keep working as the rock-covered The Thing from Fantastic 
Four on the streets. In desperation, he goes to see Maeby, crying out, "Is 
there a little girl here all by herself? Daddy needs to get his rocks off. I 
want to show her daddy's thing." He is promptly pounced upon by former 
newscaster John Beard, who is now hosting the paedophile-entrapment TV show, 
How to Trap a Local Predator.

OK, now I'm beginning to love it. The plotlines are starting to come together 
and the whole How to Trap a Local Predator (based on a real US show) is great 
and an excellent target for Arrested. Also, Maria Bamford is one of the few new 
guest stars who feels like she fits in right away, as opposed to being an 
awkward tack on. Pieces are falling into place.

Check back tomorrow for Hadley's recaps of episodes 6-10.
 