
Flurries of luminous colour billow across the canvas in Alexis M Teplin's 
paintings. Their hectic patchworks of tomato reds, lush blues, peppermints, 
peaches and pinks recall American abstract expressionistJoan Mitchell 
<http://joanmitchellfoundation.org>'s most vivid, sun-drenched creations. The 
sensual dazzle has an earlier precedent, though: the theatre of rococo 
painting, with its festoons of clouds, flesh and flowers. Yet Teplin's approach 
is very 21st-century. Her paintings are sometimes shown as strips of 
unstretched canvas, with their tatty edges curling, while her sculptures are 
roughshod assemblages of plaster, paint smears and household finds.

Painting's sensual side fascinates the American, London-based artist. That's 
not just the instant hit of colour and brushwork, but what lies behind it: what 
happened with the shift from grand history painting, servicing the interests of 
the state, to a medium making its appeal to the less official (if no less 
revealing) desires of its day. The rococo, particularlyFragonard 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/jean-honore-fragonard>'s erotic 
confections, and Mitchell, are two key touchstones in the dense array of 
historical references Teplin brings into play.

Those in the mix for Progress, PLEAS., her current exhibition, include two 
celebrated satirical works. The first isFragonard's The Progress of Love 
<http://world.std.com/~hmfh/frag.htm>. This cycle of paintings was commissioned 
shortly before the French revolution by Louis XV for his mistress Madame du 
Barry, who returned them, none too happy that the frolicking young things bore 
a cheeky resemblance to herself and the king. The second hails from another 
moment when the air was thick with the promise of social change: Luis Buñuel's 
1972 Oscar-wining film about the promiscuous middle-classes who can never 
finish a dinner party,The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0068361/>. It's a telling comparison: Buñuel's 
self-made financiers and industrialists might have replaced the aristocrats, 
but the old hierarchies, decadence and social stasis remains.

Two sculptures encircle Teplin's high-colour abstractions here: a yawning 
conch of drippy white plaster that could be a body or a mouth, bearing a 
picture of the Spanish film-maker rehearsing; and a dinner table, delicately 
arranged with silver spoons and chalky peaches, left to gather dust like 
Fragonard's fruit. Meanwhile, camouflaged in the lovely paintings are strips of 
canvas spelling out the show's punning title letter by letter – a misspelt 
please of desire and pleas of forgiveness. Things hover between pleasure and 
decay, an upbeat revolutionary vibe and failure. Progress please? The retort 
from the final two paintings in Teplin's cycle is cheerily sassy: AS if.

Why we like her: For her witty, gawky 2010 assemblage, Stick: a metal stand, 
wearing a flimsy cloak of white felt shreds, with a book about dancerMartha 
Graham <http://marthagraham.org/> for a head. Splashes of paint coat the dust 
cover, blocking out letters, so instead of the subject's name, it simply reads 
"ART AHA".

Making pictures: Teplin is a huge film buff, a passion nurtured by eight years 
spent studying in LA, soaking up everything from Bresson and Fassbinder to 
Douglas Sirk.

Where can I see her? Hotel gallery <http://www.generalhotel.org/913>, London 
E2, to 1 July.
 