
Though they hark back to classical sculpture, Tom Price 
<http://tompricestudio.com/>'s bronze figurines and claymation portraits could 
only come from the present day. Instead of idealised young heroes looking down 
from temple walls, he depicts ordinary black men with slouching shoulders and 
sagging bellies, whose body language subtly speaks of urban life. They are 
often nude and do almost nothing: they simply stand and stare. Yet these quiet 
works are exactingly nuanced. Small details – cornrows, forbidding frown lines 
or the legs-apart, hands-grasped pose of a bouncer – suggest specific social 
and cultural experiences.

These are not people who usually make it to art galleries, either as subjects 
on the walls or spectators in the crowd. Price, of white British and black 
Jamaican heritage, has recalled the frustration he experienced as an art 
student, being the only non-white person at gallery events where he was serving 
drinks or waiting tables. He is less interested in the politics of 
representation, however, than psychology.

Perhaps the first things his portraits make us think about are our own 
presumptions – in the wake of the London riots, might a mobile phone held to a 
figure's ear signify dodgy dealings, someone recently asked Price – as well as 
who we do and don't choose to look at, and why. Price's men – composites of 
people he knows or has observed near his home in Brixton – have far greater 
mystery than stereotypes allow for. They're shown lost in their own thoughts, 
those moments when we think no one is looking and the character we assume in 
public starts to melt. It's the inscrutable workings of another mind, so 
adroitly suggested by Price, that really captivates.

Price has recently returned to the clay animation portraits from which his 
work with bronze first evolved, four years ago.Near-motionless heads are set 
against black backdrops. They might be the least animated animations you're 
likely to see <http://www.vimeo.com/tompricestudio>, but something as simple as 
a blink can point to a tumultuous shift in someone's inner world. The 
diminutive bronzes also say a lot about sculpture's lost traditional role. In 
place of a memorial to a great event or emblem of spiritual and social values, 
we get ordinarily overlooked moments, experienced by men written out of the 
history books.

Why we like him: For Angell Town <http://www.halesgallery.com/exhibitions/_36/>
, Price's 2011 series of bronze figures. These characters are fully dressed, 
yet their neutral casualwear is surprisingly less class-specific than his 
previous nudes. These everymen leave us to fill in the blanks with our own 
beliefs and opinions.

Got it licked: Before he turned to portrait sculpture and animation, when he 
was studying at the Royal College, one of Price's early investigations into 
invisible states of mind was a three-day performance in which he licked the 
walls of a gallery until his tongue bled. Looking at the expressions of people 
visiting the gallery quickly made him realise that the face was where it was at.

Where can I see him: At Gallery Mac <http://www.macarts.co.uk>, Birmingham, to 
10 June.
 