
Mika Rottenberg turns gym or beauty salon rituals into a wickedly funny 
metaphor for the menacing absurdities of global commerce and women's 
objectification. The workers in her videos have taken personal grooming to the 
max. They sport nails like painted shoehorns, or bedsheet-length hair. Flesh is 
equally outlandish: women might have muscles that look like beaten metal, or 
boobs, bums and tums that bulge extravagantly. Their extreme attributes aren't 
just for show, however; they play a role.

In Mary's Cherries <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8M9CFHk8P-Q>, a long, red 
nail is clipped and passed through a line of labourers in beauticians' 
uniforms, where it is pummelled and then rolled to form a glossy glacé cherry. 
InDough <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPXpQPfZu4s>, women are squished alone 
into tiny compartments like boxed jewels or battery farm hens. With their cells 
linked by a system of tubes, shoots and holes, they all perform bizarre 
functions in a production line. This culminates with a teardrop drawn by 
sniffing flowers, which runs down a huge woman's dimpled legs and then drips 
off her toe through a hole in the floor to impregnate a lump of dough beneath, 
which is then vacuum-packed. It shows a neat division of labour in the creation 
of pointless products, with implications that reach way beyond the beauty 
industry, to capitalism's mindless cycle of production and consumption.
 Imaginative stretch … Mika Rottenberg's Tropical Breeze video installation. 
Photograph: courtesy of Nicole Klagsbrun and Andrea Rosen Gallery 
Rottenberg's boxed-in workforce has much to say about a culture that at once 
idolises, fetishises and exploits women's bodies – from female sweatshop 
workers to the desirable distortions of pin-up girls. Works like Dough first 
made the Buenos Aires-born, New York-based artist's name in the mid-2000s. More 
recently, she's broadened her vision, tackling globalisation and a shrinking 
world.

Her latest three-screen video installation, Seven, presents a sauna, a 
laboratory and the African wilderness apparently interlinked by an arrangement 
of shoots, as though stacked on top of each other rather than in disparate 
locations. It's a story of supply and demand that follows a yogi meditating in 
a sauna, apparently monitored by an Asian scientist in a lab, as his "chakras" 
are harvested and then sent, via the shoots, as coloured liquids in vials to a 
group of Africans waiting on a grassy plain. Without ruining the surprise, it's 
here that the chakras offer a brief, bright display before, we presume, the 
whole process begins once more.

Why we like her: For her woozy, surreal work Time and a Half, a video she 
created while still an art student at Columbia University in 2003. It depicts a 
bored young woman standing behind a work counter, tapping her palm 
tree-emblazoned acrylic nails as her long black hair blows around her like ink 
dispersing in water.

Larger than life: Dough's flower-sniffing, weeping woman is played by the 6ft 
4in, 600-pound-plus female pro-wrestler,Queen Raqui 
<http://www.queenraqui.com/home.htm>.

Where can I see her: At Nottingham Contemporary 
<http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/> until 30 June.
 