
Fiona Tan <http://www.fionatan.nl/>'s videos and photographic works could 
leave you with sea legs, wobbly and uncertain of the ground beneath your feet. 
They span numerous continents and lifetimes, exploring the ever-shifting sands 
of culture, identity, memory and time. Her video portraits and collections of 
other people's snapshots give us lives in transition, be that photos of pre-war 
German schoolgirls found in a street market, or her own footage where subjects, 
including American prisoners, contemporary Berliners and Indonesian kids, are 
asked to stand still for the rolling camera.

Then there are Tan's haunting video installations, weaving dream worlds from 
documentary, personal stories and grand-scale geopolitics. Disorient, part of 
her exhibition for the Dutch pavilion, when she represented Holland at the 2009 
Venice Biennale, conjured an east that was by turns fantastic and destitute: 
from silks and pickled snakes gathering dust in curious bazaars and men hauling 
an old car chassis through an arid mountain range, to western soldiers in 
occupied territories. Narrated with extracts from Marco Polo's 14th-century 
tome detailing his travels in the mysterious, rich and sometimes barbarous 
east, it merged western fantasies of exotic, faraway lands with colonialism and 
its aftermath.

Born in 1966, Tan's interest in displacement begins with her own history. Born 
in Indonesia, to a Chinese-Indonesian father and an Australian mother, she was 
raised in Australia and moved to Holland in her late teens. Yet as her work 
often underlines, displacement of one kind or another is part of everyone's 
life. Furthermore when you try and aim a camera at who we are, it slips away 
into a fog of generic poses.
 Child's play ... an image from Fiona Tan's Vox Populi, London, 2012. 
Photograph: Courtesy of the artist, Frith St Gallery and the Photographers' 
Gallery, London 
The fifth and final instalment of Vox Populi, her collections of other 
people's family photos, is currently on show at the Photographers' Gallery. 
Focused on Londoners, it features hundreds of images in categories like 
sleeping, bath time and children doing funny things. We might feel a pang of 
nostalgia for the toddler in a field of 1970s-yellow daffodils or smile with 
the woman in a sari, knee deep in the brown waves on a dull English beach, but 
what can we know of them, beyond the grins struck at birthday parties or days 
at the sea? It's an extraordinarily rich portrait of a city, full of intimate 
hints at the unknowable intricacies of other people's lives.

Why we like her: For Rise and Fall, her two-channel video pairing age and 
youth, where an older woman seems to recall flashes of her younger self. The 
waters of Niagara Falls rush downwards in streams of white foam and glassy jade 
currents, like the flow of time, which only her memories can reverse.

Up and away: For one of Tan's early works, Lift from 2000, she took to the air 
with the aid of a giant bunch of red balloons.

Where can I see her? At the Photographers' Gallery 
<http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/vox-populi>, London, until 30 September.
 