
Defending the arts: it can seem a peculiar and foolish thing to do. I've been 
working in the arts since what retrospectively seem the kind and smiling days 
of Thatcherite funding cuts. Now I'm watching what amounts to the UK 
closing-down sale. Soon, the public forests and rights of way will go, as will 
the post offices, the educational opportunities for the weak and the regional 
and the poor. And people with disabilities who live in residential care will 
lose their transport benefits, because why would anyone in residential care 
ever want to leave the building and, goodness me wouldn't "normal" people be 
mightily disturbed if strange and possibly non-voting social outcasts did get 
out and about? (Obviously the homeless non-voting outcasts will continue to be 
outside all kinds of buildings in increasing numbers.) And on it will go, like 
the original type of juggernaut. So why, when everything seems to be threatened 
–health, education, heritage, sport 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/public-sector-cuts> – even mention the arts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/culture-cuts-blog>?

If you've been reading this blog for any length of time, you'll be aware that 
I do feel very strongly that it's legitimate to defend the arts, even in the 
harshest of times. You'll also be aware of the usual arguments fielded against 
anyone positioned on the side of the arts – views which have been endlessly 
recycled in the media over the last decades and which now mean the principal 
activity within many arts is apology. This is, I would point out, a landscape 
that many observers abroad with an awareness of European history find both 
alarming and bewilderingly self-destructive.

You're just defending your own job. You're an artist and therefore a 
Middle-Class Tosser with no idea of the lives ordinary people lead and should 
shut up, because everything about you is suspect in ways I can't quite describe.

You know what? Yes, I am defending my own job. It's a great job – and I would 
like other people to be able to have ones like it: long, but flexible hours, 
adaptable practices, poorly-unionised – it's the kind of job neocon capitalism 
wants me to have. Sadly, it also involves reasonable experience-related pay, 
good working conditions and very few industrial injuries or diseases. It's work 
that does not depress or demoralise the worker. It involves dignity and high 
degrees of job satisfaction, both of which give an artist the time, energy and 
ability to have and express opinions – sometimes political opinions – should 
they wish. While a high-profile piece of bad art, self-indulgent art, 
patronising and watered-down art, uncommunicative art, tends to produce blanket 
condemnations of all arts everywhere, the pieces of art that people love – the 
songs on their iPod, the design of their iPod, The Angel of the North, the 
mural at the end of their street, the play they saw on a school trip that made 
them into a slightly different person, the stained glass in their church, the 
picture on the card from someone significant, the movies they've collected on 
DVD – that art tends to be so personally and deeply enjoyable and loved that it 
becomes a part of individual personalities. Good art stops being art – it 
becomes a way of being happy, of receiving something beautiful and human from 
stranger, of confirming one's identity, of being not alone. This is the average 
end-product of a good-quality and satisfying job in the arts sector of British 
industry. Why would I be a tosser for defending this?

Yeah, but you're an artist – I repeat, you don't know about ordinary people.

Wherever an artist comes from, the default classification for an arts worker 
tends to be Middle Class. This means that people can come into the arts from 
all kinds of backgrounds and places and be granted (or be cursed with) Middle 
Classness. This kind of social mobility can be hugely confusing for observers 
who want everyone to stay where they're put. (And, while we're about it, the 
arts are relatively gender-blind. Women can do very well in the arts without 
being punished for it too heavily.) Having gained an income and a trade through 
the arts, artists who suggest that others should have the same opportunities 
are dismissed as Middle-Class wankers for suggesting that access to the arts 
shouldn't be restricted to the Middle (and perhaps Upper) Classes. My personal 
experience – which is actually nobody's business but my own – would be that I 
was brought up by working-class parents who had educated themselves into 
Middle-Class jobs. I got through the last years of my schooling and all of my 
University education with the aid of the state – being, by then, the child of a 
divorced working mother with limited resources. I then spent around 10 years 
working with people in prisons, hospitals, daycare centres, elderly care homes 
and indeed in the homes of people with special needs, using the arts to improve 
their lives. Lives were improved. Finding a means of expression when people 
usually shout at you or ignore you, is something significant. Creating a piece 
of art that means others view you as human, rather than as a problem or a 
freak, is a remarkable thing. (Although it can scare the crap out of politicos 
who want to shut down your facility, or who are trying to pretend that just 
because you have cerebral palsy, or use a wheelchair, or are very old and will 
die soon, you won't mind losing what few pleasures you have, or jumping through 
increasingly arcane and humiliating hoops to gain the minimal aid that would 
help you contribute to your society.) The arts aren't about self-indulgence, 
they're about being fully and visibly alive.

No, the arts are elitist and self-obsessed. What about the baby who needs an 
incubator? Would you take the money away from a baby?

As I've just pointed out – and as I have pointed out for more than two decades 
– it takes a great deal of effort and what amounts to wholesale economic 
censorship to make the arts elitist and, even then, because they are nourished 
by personal enthusiasm, they can still break out in unexpected ways and among 
unconventional people. The arts communicate the humanity of others to us and 
our own humanity to them. It's not some strange indulgence that means 
dictators, police states and every colour and composition of oppressive regime 
seek to control the arts – there are the book-burnings, the intimidation, 
arrests and executions of artists, the specific targeting of much-loved 
artworks, the reduction of those private and sustaining joys that a population 
can cling to, unite around, the reduction of any indication that other humans 
are human, that they can't be robbed of dignity, harmed and destroyed. In the 
UK, increasingly unresponsive and self-regarding governments have imposed ever 
greater financial and moral burdens upon the electorate, while coincidentally 
suppressing the arts – muzzling one of the few ways we have of communicating 
with each other at emotional depth. The arts also represent one of the few ways 
we have of communicating with our leaders – of representing ourselves in a 
public forum to people dangerously isolated from the consequences of their 
actions in a manner that won't be answered by water cannon.

A straight – and completely mythical – choice between the baby's incubator and 
a poem? The incubator wins every time. The poet would write the poem anyway. 
Poets will write less if they never get paid, thrive less, or give up. So we 
get fewer poems and, long term, the poems are part of why we try to make sure 
there's an incubator there for the people we don't know, will never meet, don't 
understand, don't like. The arts are part of what gets us through the day, 
especially in the harshest of times. Onwards.
 