
An interesting and wide-ranging speech last night at the Royal Society for the 
Arts (RSA) from Alan Davey, chief executive ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>. There was a lot of 
talk of "a new era" with promises of new artistic risk, excellence and 
innovation, and creating work that has "authenticity and integrity". The kind 
of guff that always sounds impressive in speeches, but doesn't actually mean a 
great deal when you think about afterwards.

But there was some real substance here, too, including a very public throwing 
down of the gauntlet to Andy Burnham, the secretary of state for culture, to 
keep the government promise that there will be no further diversion of National 
Lottery money to contribute to the cost of the Olympics. "Not a penny more can 
we give," declared Davey, saying that he knew how the government worked and 
that pressure would be bought to bear. "Secretary of state, you will have to 
show courage, leadership and principle and fight for what we do in the arts 
because in the times we are living in, the arts matter more than ever. There 
will be pressure to cut, but I'd argue that now is the time to expand."

There was other interesting stuff too, including the announcement that the 
Arts Council has launched its consultation on self-assessment and peer review. 
Both include a range of proposals and people will have until January 23 2009 to 
make submissions on how they want it to work. The document is on theArts 
Council website <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/consultation>, and although I 
haven't had a chance to have a good look (as I'm off to the Peter Brook awards 
today), it is really crucial that we all do.

During the funding debacle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/theatreblog/2007/dec/27/bleakfutureforthearts> 
last Christmas, the two words being used again and again by artists were, "peer 
review". It does look as if we're going to get it, and so we must make sure 
that it is in a form that is really going to work. Sometimes we are quite good 
at moaning, less so at taking action; this is a chance to really shape the 
future. It is crucial that the Arts Council gets it right, and that means 
serious input from theatre-makers, producers and other funders.

The other thing from the speech that requires attention is the announcement 
that the Arts Council will be looking to create new-style funding agreements. 
"I want us to look at loosening the uniform three-year cycle, and examine 
instead a range of funding possibilities, with some bodies on longer term 
arrangements than now, and some on more flexible, shorter term arrangements," 
declared Davey. Again, it is going to be very important to watch how this 
develops. Details will apparently be up on the website next week.

I suspect that we may well be returning to all the issues raised in Davey's 
speech several times over the next couple of months. It's good to see him 
demanding courage from Andy Burnham; if the Arts Council andAlan Davey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-davey> are really going to create a new 
environment for arts funding and a new grown-up relationship, then that 
requires courage from artists and the Arts Council alike.
 