
AS Byatt <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> has won a major Dutch 
award worth €150,000 (£115,000) for her “exceptional contribution” to arts and 
culture.

The Booker prize-winning novelist was named winner of the Erasmus prize, which 
goes annually to a person or an institution, on Sunday. Byatt was cited by the 
judges for “her inspiring contribution to ‘life writing’, a literary genre that 
encompasses historical novels, biographies and autobiographies”, and which she 
has “reshaped … in her own way”. The judges described Byatt “as a born 
storyteller with a keen eye for relations in public and private life”.

In novels such as the Booker-winning Possession and The Biographer’s Tale, 
Byatt “explores the act of writing a biography or conducting research”, the 
citation continues, praising how in her “wide-ranging body of work she unites 
great erudition with an unbridled pleasure in writing and imaginative power”.

The judges continued: 

Her work crosses boundaries in style and content. It covers a range of genres, 
literary forms and subjects. She immerses the reader in the history of European 
thinking, taking the big questions about science, history and identity as her 
starting point.
Among her recurring themes are the influence of art on life, magic and 
realism, and the conflict between ambition and family. Her body of work brings 
together not only artists and academics, but also fairytales and myths.

Byatt told the Guardian she was “extremely happy to be awarded the Erasmus 
prize, and particularly excited about the extraordinary list of previous 
winners”. She will be presented with the prize in the autumn.

The Erasmus prize counts among its former winners the website Wikipedia, which 
won in 2015 for promoting “the dissemination of knowledge 
<http://www.erasmusprijs.org/index.cfm?lang=en&page=Prijswinnaars&mode=detail&itemID=6E14E89A-B503-03A7-788280E2CD593D04>
”; artist Henry Moore, who won in 1968 for making “an important contribution to 
the revival of European sculpture”; and the writer and former president of the 
Czech Republic Václav Havel, chosen in 1986 “because he remained true to his 
own conscience and showed great courage in raising his voice against threats to 
the freedom of the individual citizen and to peace between countries”.

In 1958, the prize’s inaugural year, it went to the Austrian people, because 
“amid political, economic and social circumstances, and confronted with an 
immense cultural reorientation, Austria did not lose itself in nostalgic 
longings for a glorious past but set itself the aim of not merely accepting its 
cultural heritage but of securing it, renewing it and integrating it within a 
European perspective”.

The €150,000 award for “persons or institutions that have made an exceptional 
contribution to culture or scholarship inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and beyond” is given by the 
Praemium Erasmianum foundation, which counts Dutch monarch King 
Willem-Alexander as its patron. Each year, the foundation’s board decides on 
the area in which the prize will be awarded, and an advisory committee 
subsequently proposes a laureate after consulting with experts. The foundation 
says the award is intended “for acknowledged achievements” in a career, not “as 
a stimulant to young talent”.
 