
The internet moves at a rapid pace with new trends emerging weekly, often led 
by celebrity culture, media, brands, and word of mouth. The latest "in" 
technology or service is talked about and used by a group of friends, and in no 
time it will have spread to neighbouring schools and colleges.

In meeting the challenge of protecting children in an increasingly digital and 
online world, education is vital. From the outset, it is important not to 
forget that the internet affords tremendous potential for all, with many 
opportunities to discover, create and connect. However, all too often these 
great opportunities are also the source of hurt and harm for children and young 
people.

Online risks come in many different shapes and sizes. Recently at the UK Safer 
Internet Centre's helpline there has been a proliferation in "spotted" pages on 
popular social networks. Often their primary purpose is to name and shame, 
bully and ridicule. No one is immune: teachers, pupils, even members of the 
public, many of whom will never know they have been photographed and featured 
on such sites. Other risks, such as grooming or sexting, are higher profile and 
attract more column inches.

In responding to risk there is a role for everyone to play. A survey, Have 
their Say <http://www.saferinternet.org.uk/safer-internet-day/2013/survey>, 
published this year by the UK Safer Internet Centre, asked more than 24,000 
children and young people what they believe their online rights and 
responsibilities are.

Young people responded that they believe they have a right to feel safe online 
and that they want online tools to help them manage their privacy and report 
concerns. As well as turning to friends and family members for support in 
staying safe online, young people value the growing array of safety tools and 
services available to them online: both primary- and secondary-age children 
believe they have a right to report concerns and to manage their privacy online.

While the study shows that the majority of young people are aware of 
reporting, a number of young people are not making the most of this tool 
because they lack the skills, knowledge or confidence in the reporting process.

Where removal of criminal content is concerned, the online industry as a whole 
has rallied behind theInternet Watch Foundation <http://www.iwf.org.uk/> (IWF), 
which was set up to remove particular types of criminal online content, namely 
child sexual abuse images and videos. It is not underpinned by legislation but, 
in the self-regulatory sense, takes a voluntary approach. After identifying 
child sexual abuse content from a public report, the IWF issues a notice to 
take down the content when it is hosted in the UK.

The online industry has also created a hostile environment for hosting child 
sexual abuse images in the UK. Some 18% of this content worldwide was hosted in 
the UK in 1996. Since 2003, less than 1% is hosted here. This drop has happened 
through companies voluntarily making it hard for people to distribute the 
content.

What are the examples of business working pro-actively on internet safety for 
children and young people?

Partnerships and working closely with those providing the services that 
children and young people are using are critical. Internet service providers 
(ISPs), as well as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Ask.fm and Tumblr, have provided 
the UK Safer Internet Centre with contacts who can give clarification on their 
site's safety features and to whom the centre can address reports of misuse.

The four main ISPs in the UK – BT, Sky, Virgin and TalkTalk – have worked with 
the UK Safer Internet Centre to produce video tutorials clearly showing how 
their parental controls work and can be applied. These are hosted on the UKSIC 
website, a trusted and impartial source of advice for parents, and supported by 
a range of resources on the safe use of internet-enabled devices and how-to 
guides for parents.

But there is more that ISPs can do. To create a better internet, it is 
important that we work together and listen to what children and young people 
are calling for. This includes ensuring that the barriers that prevent young 
people from reporting are removed. Service providers need to do more to make 
these mechanisms more obvious and simpler to use; they also need to introduce 
more transparency when it comes to informing users how their reports will be 
dealt with as well as considering feedback to help increase confidence.

Knowledge of privacy settings among children and young people could be 
improved, and instructions and information need to be more concise and easier 
to understand, perhaps by using more visual means, such as icons or 
illustrations.

Will Gardner is the CEO of Childnet International, Susie Hargreaves is chief 
executive at the Internet Watch Foundation, and David Wright is director at the 
UK Safer Internet Centre.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. Become GSB member 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/sustainable-business/> to get more stories 
like this direct to your inbox.
 