
Italian prosecutors have placed the former 100 metres world record holder 
Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>, his Jamaican 
team-mate Sherone Simpson, and their trainer Chris Xuereb under investigation 
for allegedly violating the country's doping laws.

According to the Italian news agency Ansa, police took 50 boxes of tablets, 
sprays and ointments – some unlabelled – from a hotel in Ligano where the three 
were staying.

Powell and Simpson admitted on Sunday that they had tested positive for the 
banned stimulant oxilofrine. A spokeswoman for Powell told the Guardian his 
team had been working with Italian police since last Friday and the boxes of 
tablets had all come from Xuereb's room – with the sprinter handing over only 
Aleve painkillers and a caffeine drink called 5hr Energy.

"We have been working with the police since last Friday because we wanted to 
get all the stuff out of Chris Xuereb's room before he knew that Asafa had 
tested positive," she said. She later released a statement showing a receipt 
from the police to that effect, which added: "Asafa Powell did not have 50 
bottles, vials, pills and supplements in his room nor on his person. Whatever 
amounts of pills, supplements and vials that were found and confiscated did not 
belong to Mr Powell but were taken from Chris Xuereb's room and it was he who 
was detained and his room raided, not Mr Powell."

An Italian police source knowledgeable of the raid told the Guardian on 
Tuesday that officers had been told by superiors in Rome before the raid that 
the athletes were collaborating and their initial instruction was only to raid 
Xuereb's room.

But a local magistrate coordinating the operation had decided to extend the 
search to the athletes' rooms as well, he said. "Of the products taken some 
were taken from the athletes' rooms but very few," said the source. "There were 
products which turned up in all three rooms, suggesting they were given to the 
athletes by Xuereb," he said. "By being placed under investigation all three 
now have the right to bring in lawyers and to be involved in the analysis of 
the substances taken. It does not mean they are guilty."

On Wednesday the seized products will be handed over for tests to a forensic 
unit of the Italian paramilitary Carabinieri police based in the city of Parma 
but the source could not say when results would be made available.

The news comes as Dr Herb Elliot, Jamaica's anti-doping commission chairman, 
warned his athletes to take only supplements approved by the food and drug 
agency in the United States – or risk the consequences.

"We have instructed our athletes to take only what is FDA-approved in the US," 
he said. "The other things are not approved by anyone."

"The supplement industry is in a bad shape," he added. "There is no regulation 
there. And the labels don't always reflect what's in the supplements so they 
run the risk of taking something that's on the banned list."

Italy is one of the few countries in the world that can impose criminal 
sanctions for doping offences on top of standard sporting sanctions. Being 
formally placed under investigation is a step up in the country's justice 
system from someone simply "informed of the facts", which is how someone can be 
questioned by police. All those under investigation were free to go and Powell 
was reported to be flying to Jamaica on Tuesday night.

Powell's coach, Stephen Francis, insisted that Powell has never deliberately 
taken banned substances. "Asafa has been somebody who doesn't use that kind of 
stuff," he said. "Over the 10 years I have coached him we have had great 
difficulty getting him to take basic stuff like protein, like vitamins. 
[Xuereb] kept to the outskirts of the training and he basically only dealt with 
Asafa."

Paul Doyle, the agent for Powell and Simpson, told AP: "Asafa and Sherone were 
under the assumption and led to believe everything they were taking was 
completely legal."

The discus thrower Allison Randall has become the third athlete to confirm a 
positive drugs test from the Jamaican trials in June. Randall, who tested 
positive for the banned drug hydrochlorothiazide, which reduces blood volume by 
inhibiting the kidneys' ability to retain water, said she was "extremely 
shocked and surprised" by the news.

"I have not intentionally taken any banned substance," Randall told Jamaican 
Radio station RJR 94 FM. "I have been vigilant with everything I consume, so I 
am extremely shocked and surprised by this incident.

"I have never even seen steroids and don't know the first thing about them," 
she insisted, adding: "I am willing to undergo any other testing methods to 
prove my innocence."

Despite questions about the effectiveness of Jamaica's fight against doping, 
Elliot refused to say how many out of competition tests had taken place in the 
country in 2013. "I know the figures but I don't want to release them because I 
don't want our athletes to know whether it's 400 or 500 or whatever," he 
insisted.
 