
Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> describes himself 
as "always laid back and chillaxing" on his Twitter page but the former 100m 
world record holder is unlikely to be so calm when he appears before a Jamaica 
Anti-Doping Commission disciplinary panel .

Powell tested for the banned stimulant oxilofrine at his national trials last 
June and expects to find out his fate this week. He faces a four-year ban, 
although a two-year or six-month sentence is more likely.

Last week Powell blamed contaminated supplements for his positive test when 
appearing as a witness in the hearing of Sherone Simpson, a fellow member of 
Powell's MVP training group, who also tested positive for oxilofrine.

Powell said he was introduced to the supplements by his trainer Chris Xuereb, 
who was staying in his house and noticed Powell was leaving for training at 5am 
having not eaten. "After a few days he told me that I should be taking better 
care of myself. It was then that he recommended the supplements," he added.

Xuereb has denied the allegation and said athletes should take "responsibility 
for their doping instead of looking around for a scapegoat".

Both Powell and Simpson have denied knowingly taking banned substances and 
have instead blamed a contaminated supplement Epiphany D1. At the hearing last 
week Professor Wayne McLaughlin of Caribbean Toxicology said two different 
tests showed oxilofrine in Epiphany D1 but there was no sign of it on the label.

Earlier Simpson, whose hearing ran out of time and was pushed back until 4 
February, said she researched Epiphany D1 before deciding it contained no 
banned substances. "I Googled the Epiphany D1 on the Wada [World-Anti Doping 
Agency] banned list and saw nothing on the bottle which appeared on the Wada 
list. No alarm bell. No red flag," said Simpson.

Both athletes hope to reduce their ban by proving they took all reasonable 
steps to ensure they were not taking banned substances. If the disciplinary 
panel agrees, they could get six-month bans, which they will have already 
served, thus making them free to compete again.
 