
Indoor athletics at its worst feels a little like indoor fireworks – a poor 
substitute for the outdoor equivalent. But Saturday's Aviva Grand Prix in 
Birmingham promises to be better than that. Perhaps it is the track, which is 
said to be one of the fastest on the circuit, or possibly it is because it is 
Olympic year and the world's athletes want a rehearsal in British conditions.

Either way the lineup at the National Indoor Arena is as good as any that will 
be, or has been, assembled inside this season excluding the World 
Championships, which start in Istanbul on 9 March. Top of the bill is the men's 
60 metres, which includesAsafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> and his Jamaican compatriots 
Lerone Clarke, Nesta Carter and Michael Frater, as well as the former 100m 
world champion Kim Collins of St Kitts and Nevis.

Clarke is the fastest man in the world over 60m this year, with 6.5sec. 
Powell, who has not run a 60m race in seven years, reckons he will have taken 
that title off his Jamaican team-mate by the end of the weekend. "I am looking 
to go sub 6.5," Powell says. "I'm not going to sayif I am going to do well 
tomorrow; Iam going to do well tomorrow. I am very confident. People have been 
saying that I am one of the best starters out there, so we will see if that is 
true."

Powell has not raced this distance in so long he had forgotten his own PB – he 
said it was 6.54 but it is 6.56.

It is a little surprising that a man who is so injury prone is taking on the 
extra workload of running indoors in an Olympic season. But Powell explains 
that, contrarily, it was exactly because he was worrying about injuries that he 
decided to run in Birmingham, the first time he has run indoors in the UK. He 
wants to put that fear behind him. "It's good to get that fear out of my head. 
Just because I have been injured before, I can't let that stop me from 
competing indoors.

"The same thing with the 200m. Just because I've been injured, I can't let 
that stop me running it. I just want to try and get the ball rolling early."

The last of those injuries came in the days before last year's outdoor World 
Championships in Daegu, South Korea, when he was forced to pull out with a 
groin problem. He says he soon got over the disappointment and was able to 
enjoy watching his Jamaican rivals Yohan Blake and Usain Bolt win the 100m and 
200m, respectively, in his absence. But Blake's emergence means that Powell is 
starting to look a little like yesterday's man. "It keeps it interesting that 
there are more guys there to compete," Powell says. "Jamaicans love seeing new 
talent and Yohan really is new talent for them and they are supporting him."

Powell, Bolt, Blake and the rest of the Jamaican team will be back in 
Birmingham for a training camp before the Olympics. Powell wanted to take this 
opportunity to acclimatise. "I have always wanted to know what it is like to be 
here at this time of year," he says. As it turns out, Birmingham in February is 
not exactly his cup of tea. "This is a big change for me to come to this kind 
of weather. It is not my thing. I'm allowed to complain because I'm not used to 
it. I don't need to go outside, I'm good in my room."

The Chinese hurdler Liu Xiang, on the other hand, has enjoyed getting out and 
seeing some of the city. Xiang's race against Cuba's Dayron Robles in the 60m 
hurdles will be their first head-to-head since the final of the 110m hurdles in 
Daegu, when Robles, who won the race, was disqualified for obstructing his 
rival, promoting the Chinese athlete to the top of the podium.

Xiang is such a star back in his home country that he hardly gets the chance 
to do something so simple as stroll around the shops without being mobbed by 
fans. He says he has been enjoying a lower profile over here.

Robles and Xiang are the two fastest sprint hurdlers in history and are firm 
friends as well as fierce rivals. Xiang describes their collision in the final 
in Daegu as a "beautiful accident" while Robles says, a little unconvincingly, 
that he "forgot it as soon as the race was over". Their showdown starts at 
3.50pm and, like the rest of the meeting, will be shown live on BBC1.
 