
Italian police questioned the trainer of Asafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> until 4.30am on Monday and 
confiscated supplements after raiding the hotel where the Jamaican sprinter was 
staying. The Udine police captain, Antonio Pisapia, confirmed that the room of 
Powell's physical trainer, Chris Xuereb, was searched and that supplements were 
taken away to be analysed.

A spokeswoman for Powell told the Guardian that the athlete's camp had 
arranged a search warrant with police and contacted the World Anti-Doping 
Agency to ensure that any supplements taken away for testing would be done so 
without contamination.

They also claimed that Xuereb had provided Powell and his training partner 
Sherone Simpson with a number of supplements, one of which they believe 
contains the banned substance oxilofrine, which both athletes tested positive 
for at the Jamaican championships last month.

Paul Doyle, Powell's agent, confirmed on Monday night that the trainer had 
started working with the athlete on 8 May, just before the championships, for a 
one-week trial period having been highly recommended by a Canadian 
physiotherapist.

Doyle said Xuereb's contract was then extended for a four-month period until 
the end of the season and that the Canadian's primary role in camp was to 
"treat Asafa and keep him healthy". Doyle earlier told local radio that he had 
hired him without any background checks being made.

There has been no comment from Xuereb but no arrests were made in the raid at 
the Fra i Pini hotel in Lignano Sabbiadoro in north-eastern Italy, and nobody 
has been placed under investigation.

Powell and Simpson pulled out of their training session on Monday at the 
Teghil Stadium in Lignano Sabbiadoro, with Powell making a brief appearance in 
the hotel's restaurant for breakfast at 10.30am before returning to his room.

Powell has also withdrawn from of a meeting on Tuesday as well as from the 
Diamond League event in Monaco on Friday. He is hopeful that Wada will reveal 
the results of its tests by the end of the week, his spokeswoman said.
 