
Italian police have raided the hotel where the Jamaican sprinters Asafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> and Sherone Simpson are staying 
after each tested positive for banned stimulants.

Udine's police captain, Antonio Pisapia, said that rooms of the athletes and 
the physical trainer Chris Xuereb of Canada were searched and that drugs were 
confiscated. Pisapia said it was unclear if the drugs were legal or illicit and 
that the substances were being analysed.

Powell and Simpson tested positive for the stimulant oxilofrine at the 
Jamaican championships last month, their agent announced on Sunday.

Pisapia said that no arrests were made in the raid early on Monday morning at 
the Fra i Pini hotel in Lignano Sabbiadoro, north-eastern Italy, and that 
nobody has been placed under investigation. Jamaican athletes have trained in 
Lignano for years.

Adidas, meanwhile, has suspended its sponsorship of Tyson Gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-gay> after the American sprinter 
returned a positive doping test. After being told a banned substance was 
detected in an out-of-competition test in May, Gay pulled out of the upcoming 
world championships.

In a statement, Adidas said: "We are shocked by these recent allegations, and 
even if we presume his innocence until proven otherwise, our contract with 
Tyson is currently suspended."

The sportswear giant has backed Gay since 2005, and says such sponsorships are 
terminated "if the athlete is found guilty of the possession, or use of drugs, 
or any other prohibited substance by the relevant governing sports body having 
jurisdiction over the athlete".

Gay has said he will have his B sample tested soon, possibly as early as this 
week.

The IOC president, Jacques Rogge, said the tests showed out of competition 
testing was working. Rogge toldwww.aroundtherings.com 
<http://www.aroundtherings.com/articles/view.aspx?id=43870>: "I was surprised 
and disappointed but I feel strengthened by the measures that have been taken 
by Usada [the US Anti-Doping Agency], by Wada [the World Anti-Doping Agency] 
and the world of sport in general.

"It's always disappointing when you hear bad news but at the same time this is 
confirmation that out of competition testing really is effective. I think 
that's what we have to remember about that. To continue to do 
out-of-competition testing, testing, testing all the time and storing blood 
profiles and freezing the samples and re-examining them within the eight years 
statute of limitation."
 