
The next generation of antisocial behaviour powers are working their way 
through parliament at the moment and they're bigger and badder than ever.

Liberty, a campaign group I work for protecting civil liberties, has long had 
grave concerns about anti social behaviour orders (Asbos) and other similar 
orders. Many dangerously blur the distinction between serious criminal activity 
and nuisance and can set the young, vulnerable or mentally ill up to fail. They 
can have the opposite effect to their aim, fast-tracking people into the 
criminal justice system rather than diverting them away.

The current anti-social behaviour, crime and policing bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2013-14/antisocialbehaviourcrimeandpolicingbill.html>
 was an important chance for some fresh thinking. Instead we've been offered 
reforms that retain most of the faults and weaknesses of the current system but 
with even fewer safeguards, multiplying the potential for unfairness.

Of particular concern are the new public space protection orders (PSPOs). The 
new powers would allow local councils to restrict or ban activity it deems 
detrimental to the quality of life of those in the area. These are incredibly 
broad-brush powers. Allegedly intended to deal with littering, dog fouling and 
graffiti, they actually allow many more punitive restrictions to be imposed. 
The unfairness of responding to anti-social behaviour by imposing blanket 
restrictions on everyone using an area is clear – not only do the community 
suffer the initial negative behaviour but their own freedoms are then curtailed 
because of it.

PSPOs would effectively allow local authorities to shut down activity in 
public places. We're often told that new overbroad laws are fine because 
they'll be used narrowly in practice; in this case, the home office say they 
don't think councils will use the law to curtail peaceful protest. But you only 
need to look to stop and search without suspicion to see how ill-written powers 
fast go wrong when released into the real world. And, as with stop and search 
without suspicion, the collateral damage here will be peaceful protest and 
other basic rights and freedoms.

There's no limit to the size of area PSPOs can cover, meaning blanket bans on 
lawful activity could cover large swathes of towns and cities. And the powers 
invite discriminatory use because while they can apply to whole communities, 
the legislation makes clear that they can also be specifically targeted at 
certain types of people. This means that trade unionists or rough sleepers 
might be singled out for exclusion.

Unfortunately PSPOs aren't all there is to fear in this bill. There's also a 
new injunction which can be slapped on someone – child or adult – for causing 
nuisance and annoyance. This definition of anti-social behaviour is even vaguer 
than the Asbo test which requires that behaviour has caused or is likely to 
cause harassment, alarm or distress.

It's entirely subjective and breathtakingly broad; a huge range of activities 
are capable of causing nuisance and annoyance to some person or other but 
certainly don't warrant legal sanction. This is especially true of children's 
behaviour, and why children's welfare groups are so concerned. The bill 
continues the damaging trend of demonising kids - introducing new provisions to 
name and shame them if they breach injunctions.

As with Asbos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos>, breach of an 
injunction can lead to imprisonment. But another new power would leave a judge 
no choice but to order the eviction of a social tenant if they, their family, 
or even someone visiting them breaches an injunction in their place of 
residence. Whole families will be left to pay for a breached injunction, never 
mind whether or not this person's injunction was even proportionate in the 
first place. It's hard to see how anti-social behaviour will be reduced by 
doubly-punishing those in social housing and increasing homelessness, in turn 
putting pressure on other public services in the area.

Taken together, this package of sloppy, dangerously broad powers will have 
serious implications for basic rights in our communities. The legislation 
should not pass and we must fight for better.

Sara Ogilvie is policy officer for Liberty  
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/index.php>

Want your say? Email sarah.marsh@theguardian.com to suggest contributions to 
the network

Not already a member? Join us now 
<https://register.theguardian.com/local-government/> for more comment, analysis 
and the latest job opportunities in local government.
 