
Asghar Farhadi <https://www.theguardian.com/film/asghar-farhadi>, who became 
the first Iranian to win an Oscar, with 2011’s A Separation, has spoken out 
about his country’s treatment of those who could criticise the government 
through their art.

Speaking in Cannes after the first screenings of A Salesman, in which a 
teacher and actor tries to track down the man who has assaulted his wife, 
Farhadi said: “Intellectuals have been so insulted and mistreated in my 
country. It embarrasses me no end. I’m very proud of [Abbas] Kiarostami and our 
poets and writers,” he continued, emphasising their resilience in the face of 
potential censorship and maltreatment. “They’re not bogged down in any way, 
that’s erroneous propaganda.”

The film shows the gradual escalating of the anger felt by Emad (Shahab 
Hosseini) after his wife, Rana (Taraneh Alidoosti), is attacked while showering 
by a man who may have been a client of the prostitute who previously rented 
their flat. Farhadi said he was interested in exploring what people felt to be 
proportionate vengeance.

The Salesman review: Asghar Farhadi offers layers of Willy Loman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/the-salesman-review-asghar-farhadi-cannes>
“I’m not talking about uncontrolled violence, but pre-meditated. Sometimes you 
are convinced that a violent act you are going to do is justified,” he said. 
“Like terrorists; they feel they have good reason to be violent. Sometimes you 
can believe you are entitled to be violent and build up a whole body of reasons 
which lead up to the act. A responsible and kind man can turn into a 
potentially violent being.”

Farhadi said such an investigation was prompted by his anxiety about living in 
such an unstable world. “A lot of violent things are occurring for ideological 
reasons. It’s becoming really disquieting as it grows so much. It is very 
difficult to withstand this violence, to eliminate it. Even if in the film we 
don’t directly refer to what’s happening, it is an illustration of contemporary 
society.”

In the movie, which is a contender for this year’s Palme d’Or, Emad and Rana 
are starring as Willy Loman and his wife in a semi-amateur production of Arthur 
Miller’s Death of a Salesman. The director said he had been struck by the 
parallels between Manhattan after the second world war and Tehran today. At one 
point Emad expresses the desire that the city could be razed to the ground so 
the developers could start again; Farhadi said that this has in fact already 
happened.

“Miller saw this change in the city; he loses all his benchmarks. You see the 
very modern life beginning to impact on individuals. But a lot of groups fail 
to adapt to fast changes so quickly.”

“What’s happening to Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> is very 
similar. This frantic, totally mad race forward. It’s spreading so quickly, 
this thirst for modernity – often irrational – and it doesn’t seem to match a 
lot of the very traditional values in our society. If you raze a city it may 
lead to disaster because such renovation and renewal cannot be achieved if you 
just sweep away traditions so deeply rooted.”

The troupe of actors of which the couple in The Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-salesman> are a part are highly-educated 
and open-minded people. “Yet modern people in given circumstances react in 
highly traditional ways, fairly backward ways,” said Farhadi.

The director said he felt that the couple were representativeness of an 
admirable “prudishness” which was central to Iranian society. As well as the 
fallout from the central attack, there are scenes in single sex classrooms, and 
one in which a young boy is reluctant to be helped in the bathroom by a woman 
who isn’t his mother.

“Our body is something very private,” said Farhadi. “Our private lives, too. 
There is total dichotomy between men and women. In a different culture the 
husband might have reacted differently and wouldn’t have been so shaken by what 
happened. There is also the problem of reputation and collective judgement; the 
way other people - such as the neighbours - view you. This makes him become 
violent and leads to him perpetrate a heinous act.”

Yet his star, Alidoosti, disagreed, saying she felt the film was “very 
universal and went beyond just Iran and Iranian prudishness and this business 
of reputation and honour.”

“I find it hard to believe that a western man wouldn’t react in the same way. 
The dignity of a woman hasn’t been respected, and that’s a very sensitive issue 
wherever you are in the world. All women find it difficult to describe rape or 
sexual assault.”

The director said he had filmed in Iran after shooting his previous drama, The 
Past, in France, after feeling the need to return home. His success with A 
Separation had helped facilitate film-making in the country, he said, and upped 
the levels of enthusiasm amongst his crew.

“If you have worked in Iran for decades you get used to running up against 
obstacles and they become a source of energy and motivation,” he said. “Despite 
the existing difficulties, I have great pleasure and satisfaction making films 
there. But I’m sure if an American came to Iran to make a film, they would find 
it impossible, insurmountable.”
 