
It is my assumption that in many professions – and this could even apply to 
the one I'm engaged in here – it is possible to get by for a while upon 
reputation. The odd split infinitive, the misuse of a comma, indecision over 
the semicolon and confusing John Terry with Paul Terry, the doughty Hampshire 
opening batsman of the 80s (I confess to that recently), can go unnoticed. Even 
better, there are often eagle-eyed aides, who spot the mistakes and correct 
them.

There was a vivid reminder last week that such luxuries rarely apply to the 
professional sportsman, especially the cricketer. All those nefarious figures 
do not lie very often and cricket is a game of figures. I was at Taunton 
watchingSomerset <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> versus Durham, 
young and old, Test hopefuls and Test has-beens. It was a frenetic, intriguing 
game, won in the end by the home side by five wickets and, in a curious way, it 
was painful and poignant to watch.

In the Durham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/durham> side were Steve 
Harmison and Liam Plunkett, making their first appearances in the County 
Championship since last July. I suspect they were as nervous as kittens. In the 
Somerset side was a bunch of youngsters, maybe just as nervous.

Alex Barrow and the Overton twins (Craig and Jamie), as well as George 
Dockrell from Dublin, would have been about 12 or 13 when Harmison was 
terrorising international batsmen. They must have watched the seven for 12 in 
Jamaica, the drawing of Ricky Ponting's blood at Lord's and those crucial 
wickets in the spellbinding 2005 Ashes series. Now here was Harmison, surely 
some kind of boyhood hero, galloping in (just about) to bowl at them. I presume 
they had to pinch themselves (I remember having to do that when I took guard at 
the Parks against John Snow as a 19-year-old, even though the silky smooth 
Sussex paceman was wearing five sweaters at the time).

Yet by the end of the game at Taunton it was Harmison and Plunkett who might 
have been pinching themselves. Was this the same game they had excelled in to 
such a degree that they were often summoned to play for their country? How they 
struggled.

For Plunkett, in particular, the ball refused to land in the right place and 
he was carted around the County Ground. Harmison's radar was a little better, 
but he remained a peripheral figure in the match; there was a flicker of the 
old pace, but any threat he posed was fleeting. When Durham were starting to 
lose control in the field, to whom did captain Phil Mustard turn? Not his old 
England bowlers, but the debutant, Jamie Harrison, a promising left-arm seamer.

The Overtons — identical twins who are about the same size as Harmison — had a 
far greater influence on proceedings. There was no hiding place. Professional 
sport does not permit one. Here was Kenneth Branagh playing the second 
gravedigger and it was an uncomfortable sight.

Timing can be everything in sport and the timing of one's departure can be as 
tricky as anything that takes place on the field. There are financial 
implications, of course, and somehow Harmison is only in the second year of a 
lucrative four-year contract. But there are also the questions of fitness, 
hunger and performance.

Objectivity can be hard to find. Sportsmen, almost inevitably, are poor judges 
of their worth as a player. They survive and prosper because of their 
self-belief. The best are the best because they think they can do anything. How 
can we expect them suddenly to make a more clinical assessment in their 30s?

Thus three of the Fab Four of 2005 can still be spotted on the county circuit. 
Harmison, triggered by that contract, trundles in. Last week there was also a 
fleeting glimpse of Simon Jones in a Glamorgan shirt; Matthew Hoggard continues 
in the demanding post of captain at Leicestershire, just defeated by an innings 
and 279 runs in Canterbury. Elsewhere, Mark Ramprakash, 42, has been dropped by 
Surrey – just before the wickets have flattened out – and last weekend could be 
found searching for form with Stanmore CC (he hit a half-century).

Each to their own. Maybe financial necessity or love of the game or that 
competitive edge clouds the judgment. Still they plough on playing this 
ruthless game, looking a little lost and exposing themselves, yet again, to the 
agonies of failure. And from a distance we wonder why.
 