
After almost a quarter of a century of accumulated sporting agony – and no 
sport does soul-searching defeat quite like Test cricket – England were finally 
able to celebrate winning an Ashes series on Australian soil when victory at 
the SydneyCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground completed 
an emphatic 3-1 series win.

In front of 18,000 spectators, 16,000 of whom were supporting England, the 
final Australian wicket was taken shortly before lunch. "It's almost beer 
o'clock," Shane Warne remarked in the Sky Sports commentary box moments before 
the final act of the series, the bowling of Australian debutant Michael Beer.

His departure was the signal for joyous and prolonged celebrations for England 
and their travelling Barmy Army, for many of whom, after an all-night vigil in 
the bars and clubs of Sydney, beer o'clock had already struck some time the 
previous evening.

The significance of the victory is measured most easily in years. The last 
time England retained the Ashes in Australia, on the 1986-87 tour, Margaret 
Thatcher still had another election to win, current fast bowler Steven Finn 
hadn't been born, and Elton John, with whom the 1986-87 tourists famously 
celebrated victory in his Sydney hotel suite, was married to a woman.

But it was the manner of England's subsequent drubbings down under that marks 
out this victory as a moment of gleeful catharsis. Tormented by a generation of 
Australian greats, England had won just three of the previous 25 Test matches 
in Australia before this tour.

Little wonder that the sense of imminent victory in Sydney was greeted by a 
swell of self-congratulation. In the BBC's Test Match Special box, the former 
England captain Michael Vaughan spent the morning cracking dodgy Australian 
jokes accumulated via Twitter.

For England's players, the celebrations began on the outfield at the SCG 
(Sydney Cricket Ground), where the team received the Waterford crystal Ashes 
victory trophy in a football-style moment of tickertape and dry ice before 
heading for the bar in the historic old pavilion, scene of successive 
generations of Ashes victory parties. The players later headed into Sydney to 
celebrate, with batsman Kevin Pietersen promising on Twitter to "sink a few 
bombs" for fast bowler Stuart Broad, who returned home injured after the 
Adelaide Test – a reference to the tour party's favoured victory tipple, the 
Jäger bomb, a brain-mangling cocktail of Red Bull and the 70%-proof 
Jägermeister.

For the Barmy Army, a phenomenon that first surfaced at the corresponding 
Sydney Test in 1995, the unslakable thirst for victory in Australia was at 
least partially slaked in Sydney's bars and pubs. The Bristol Arms hotelin the 
heart of the city was transformed into a sea of English red and white, as 1,200 
fans packed all four floors delivering renditions of their travelling songs, 
among them the Aussie-baiting current tour favourite, God Save Your Gracious 
Queen.

"It's been an absolutely incredible day," said Richard Dewar, a 28-year-old 
marketing specialist from Bexleyheath, south-east London. "To be in Sydney to 
see this is really something special. It'll live with me for ever."

On the rooftop of the Bristol Arms, which managed to combine local barbecued 
sausage with English-style drizzle, Barmy Army co-founder Dave Peacock said the 
general mood was one of ecstatic relief. "No one thought we'd come away winning 
3-1," he said. "We've absolutely outplayed the Aussies through the tour."

Among the players, at least, the revelry will have an edge of restraint. Ashes 
victory in England in 2005 was marked by Andrew Flintoff's infamous drunken 
appearance at a Downing Street victory party and mob-handed celebrations in 
Trafalgar Square. This time around things look slightly different. England's 
next game is on Sunday in Canberra, the start of the one-day leg of the tour.

If England might regret having little time to linger in the glow of 
generational success, Australia will be glad of the congested schedule. Ashes 
defeat has ushered in a mood of dire cricketing introspection, with today's 
Sydney Morning Herald bearing a front page picture of the current team below 
the headline, "Our worst ever XI".

It was a sense of gloom that some felt had already infected the immediate 
post-match formalities at the SCG, as England batsman Alastair Cook's man of 
the series medal failed to appear for presentation. Flintoff complained in a 
Tweet to his 105,000 followers: "Forgot Cooky's medal … no champagne, no 
individual medals. The boys deserved better than that."

There was also a slight sense of disappointment at the poor showing from 
Austrian supporters on the final morning, despite the offer of free entry to 
the SCG.

By contrast Phil Wark, a sheep farmer from Coonabarabran in far western New 
South Wales, had driven eight hours to Sydney to be present. "It's an unusual 
feeling for us. I feel like I've been put over a fence and thumped repeatedly," 
he said, sitting among the celebrating England fans at the Bristol Arms. "What 
we've got to do is go back and look at what England did and do the same thing 
and learn."

For England cricket fans, it really doesn't get any better than that.

The cruellest cut

It was the moment England cricket fans had waited a quarter of a century to 
hear – an Ashes series victory by England in Australia. Except that listeners 
to BBC Radio 4's long-wave coverage missed the crucial moment, after the 
station switched to the shipping forecast just before the final wicket fell. By 
the time Radio 4 returned from its weather update for Cromarty, Dogger and 
German Bight, the celebrations had begun in force.

"Was an Aussie responsible for scheduling the cricket forecast?" asked one 
cricket fan on Twitter. "Hurray we won the shipping forecast."

This was, incredibly, the third time in the series that Radio 4 had cut to the 
shipping forecast at the moment of an England victory, missing the climax to 
all three of the team's Test victories.

Listeners to 5 Live Sports Extra were able to hear the final wicket, as the 
station does not broadcast the shipping forecast. With the BBC and the rest of 
the radio industry keen to encourage people to buy more digital radios, it 
could be just the fillip they require.

John Plunkett

Taking the Michael

Former England captain Michael Vaughan's jokes at Australia's expense:

What do you call an Australian with a bottle of champagne? A waiter.

What do you call an Australian with 100 runs to his name?  A bowler.

What do you call an Australian who can hold a catch? A fisherman.
 