
The camera never lies, but it does miss stuff. In this Ashes summer there will 
be plenty of airplay of that famously stirring moment at the denouement of the 
2005 Edgbaston Test, whenAndrew Flintoff commiserated with Brett Lee 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Voo_XJ_PEDg> mid‑pitch, his hand placed 
solicitously on the other man's shoulder. It was the picture that launched 
Flintoff's legend as The Best Bloke In The World – but what it didn't show was 
that Freddie was following the example of Steve Harmison, who had been the 
first to head over to Lee and offer his condolences. If only Harmy had waited 
until the photographers were ready.

I learned this from a fascinating programme on Radio 5 Live 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b021170g/The_Ashes_Flintoffs_Ashes_Legends_Episode_1/>
 (you can still listen to it if you're quick), which reunited England's pace 
quartet to talk about that epic Ashes series. Apparently this was the first 
time Flintoff, Harmison, Matthew Hoggard and Simon Jones had got together to 
discuss it. Harmison, who always seemed the shyest of the bunch, his 
personality hidden behind Freddie's magnetism and Hoggard's madness, emerged as 
a particularly thoughtful man. At one point, the four were recalling the moment 
in the first Test whenone of Harmison's exocets cut Ricky Ponting's cheek open 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wJ70wtD-fLA>, and not a single England player 
moved towards him in concern. "That was the disappointing thing," said 
Harmison, as the others scoffed at him for being soft: "There's a line you 
don't cross, and I thought we crossed that line."

The bowlers wouldn't normally have been so unfeeling but they were, in their 
own words, "pumped up", and to be fair to them, they weren't the only ones. I 
don't remember me or my mates feeling much sympathy for the Australia captain 
at the time. And when on the morning of the Edgbaston Test I heard thatGlenn 
McGrath had injured himself treading on a cricket ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/05/ashes2005.ashes6>, and would 
play no part, my first reaction was not: "What a terrible shame for him, and 
for us all, since our contest will now be robbed of the presence of one of the 
game's greatest players." No – I jumped in the air, pumping my fist and 
uttering happy oaths.

It wasn't a pretty response, and clearly poetic justice would have been served 
if I'd broken my own ankle as I landed. Still, you can't help but be struck, 
listening back toTest Match Special snippets from that Ashes summer, by the 
sound from the crowd. It was unlike any I've heard at the cricket before or 
since: raw, aggressive, feral – well, as feral as you can get when you're 
perching an egg mayonnaise sandwich on one knee and balancing a glass of warm 
wine on the other. As Flintoff put it: "I've never heard posh people roar 
before."

And boy, did we roar. My memory of being at The Oval for the final Test is of 
bouncing around like a toddler, turning to my friend Mikey and telling him, in 
an uncontrollably loud voice: "IF I EVER GET MARRIED MY WEDDING DAY WILL NEVER 
LIVE UP TO THIS!" (Still not as weird as my reaction when England won the 2003 
Rugby World Cup. I was so overcome with emotion that I ran mutely around the 
garden in my pyjamas while my family looked on, bemused.) But then, it's one of 
the miracles of sport that we get to experience, vicariously, the physical 
ecstasy of the contestants. Your team are out sweating in the field, pushing 
themselves to the limits of human endurance, while you are in a sedentary pose, 
hydrating with Thatchers Gold; yet at the moment of triumph, your veins surge 
with the same adrenaline, your brain floods with the same endorphin rush.

As may be apparent from all of this, I am no cricketer: the high point of my 
sporting career was taking a hat-trick when bowling at a horse chestnut tree 
(the trunk was at least double the width of a regulation wicket, but who cares, 
I still celebrated like Shoaib Akhtar). I have absolutely no idea how it feels 
to stand, tensed all day, concentrating your mind on an object the size of a 
small orange, and required to sprint your heart out at a moment's notice. So my 
body can offer no muscle-memory plea, no physiological excuse, for the 
ludicrous ways it behaves when an England bowler takes a wicket. The macho 
poses, the angry, baritone shouts, the alien phrases that blurt from my lips 
(since when did I call anyone "my son"?) – these things are not me. Or if they 
are, they are a part of me that is buried very, very deep, and for very, very 
good reason.

Some sports scientist is no doubt, even now, doing the research on this. 
Somewhere in Nottingham Trent University are a bunch of sweaty, pallid fans, 
their bodies covered in sensors, ECG monitors spiking as they watch DVD boxsets 
of Headingley 81. But until the boffins decode this strange synchronicity of 
player-to-spectator biology, I'm going to claim it as a spiritual experience, a 
mystical bond that brings us closest to our heroes in the split-second moment 
of their triumph.

Flintoff said on Radio 5 Live that watching footage of himself is an 
out-of-body experience, and that's why he rarely brings himself to do it: "I 
just saw … some other bloke playing cricket, embarrassing himself with silly 
celebrations." It turns out I know exactly how he feels.
 