
They might have lost in any case, such is Australia's resilience and the sheer 
depth of their winning habit. Perhaps the prospect of playing for the Ashes was 
too Herculean a task: only when that issue had been decided did England start 
to compete.

The England pace bowling overall has been first-class. If the side need to 
take one positive image home with them they could do worse than transport that 
of Darren Gough in his stump-waving triumph after his yorker had finished the 
Melbourne Test. He epitomised the England spirit.

No one had more catches dropped off his bowling than Gough : had they been 
held he would have been leading wicket-taker in the series. Yet still he puffed 
out his chest and kept coming. In Perth he bowled in tandem with young Alex 
Tudor in a passage of play that raised the hairs on the neck. In Melbourne his 
finish was clinical, and finally here he got his hat-trick.

Tudor too looks the part with the capacity to bowl Caribbean pace. And 
although Alan Mullally's biggest contribution was with the bat, his accuracy 
brought him five wickets in Brisbane and control elsewhere. Perhaps he should 
have played in the final match.

Nasser Hussain and Mark Ramprakash battled diligently, prepared to bat with a 
game plan, and occupy the crease. Playing deliveries on merit is not an 
old-fashioned dictum just ask Steve Waugh. Now Ramprakash in particular must 
build on his success and score the hundreds he needs to complete the picture. 
Both also drew praise from Taylor for the quality of their fielding the catches 
by Ramprakash in Melbourne and here were electrifying and uplifting and 
Hussain's work at point was inspiring.

So too Angus Fraser, who arrived with expectations and more wickets than 
almost anyone else in the calendar year, and leaves with his career effectively 
over. The world has moved on but he too is owed a debt. Fraser had standards, 
ability and heart and one asks no more of a bowler.

Of the rest, Dominic Cork's lack of technique, and his apparent intransigence, 
found him out, as did Robert Croft's inability to spin the ball. He is not 
necessarily lost but he needs serious tutorial. Has he the capacity to listen? 
Of Ben Hollioake there is little to say. He was this winter's Joey Benjamin.
 