
So the Fab Four are now officially the men of yesterday. Andrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> has long-since departed the 
first-class game; Steve Harmison has retired in all but name. He has not bowled 
a ball at mean Mr Mustard all summer. And now Matthew Hoggard and Simon Jones 
have come to the end of their long and winding roads.

Hoggard often had to get used to being a loser when he left Yorkshire for 
Leicestershire in 2009, a typically quirky career move that highlighted the 
difficulties of coming out of a central contract. Jones moved from Wales to 
Worcestershire, and then Hampshire, before getting back to Cardiff for the last 
phase of his career – and he will not be seeking a similar contract with 
Glamorgan. He could bow out in glory at Lord's next Saturday, when Glamorgan 
play Nottinghamshire in the YB40 final, though he might reappear a few more 
times somewhere in T20 cricket.

For 18 months in 2004 and 2005, these four distinctive characters came 
together to be the most potent bowling attack across the universe, offering 
captain Michael Vaughan an option for all conditions: conventional swing with 
the new ball from Hoggard; exceptional bounce from Harmison; reverse swing from 
Jones; and controlled aggression from Flintoff. How they startled Australia in 
the most memorable of all Ashes series. But the magic did not last.

Subsequently, we learned of their bouts of misery, especially on tour. In 
Australia in 2006-07, Harmison sometimes propelled the ball here, there and 
everywhere. Flintoff, the captain of the side, occasionally took to the bottle 
when he should have known better. And in New Zealand, Hoggard suffered the 
agonies of rejection when he was dropped for the Wellington Test. Jones's 
battles were more often with his rebellious body.

But memories of that helter-skelter summer of 2005 linger on: of Harmison 
drawing blood in the first Test at Lord's; of Hoggard duping Matthew Hayden 
with an unconventional field and contriving to have the most belligerent of 
openers caught in front of the wicket; of Jones perplexing even veterans such 
as Justin Langer with his ability to swing the old ball when batting should 
have been a breeze; and of Flintoff bowling that over to Ricky Ponting at 
Edgbaston. During the greatest of all series, that quartet really were 
something.
 