
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff>, England's 
captain when they where whitewashed 5–0 by Australia in the last Ashes series, 
has admitted it was the lowest point in his career, although as he prepares for 
the three-day Ashes warm-up game against Warwickshire, which starts at 
Edgbaston tomorrow, he claims he is none the worse for the experience.

"You experience the euphoria of [winning in] 2005 and then the disappointments 
of 2006–07. Probably the last series emotionally was the stronger of the two," 
said the Lancashire all-rounder. "But all that is behind us. We have got a very 
new team and rather than dining out on 2005 or dwelling on 2006–07, it is all 
about what happens over the next six weeks. Of course, it was tough for a while 
but it has long gone now and a lot of things have happened in my life since."

In recent years Flintoff has become known more for his constant battle for 
fitness than for any sporting struggles, most recently having keyhole surgery 
in late April to repair knee cartilage. But he insists he always believed that 
he could recover the form that helped England to win the Ashes in 2005.

He said: "From my point of view, through all the injuries I had, if I didn't 
think I could come back and play the cricket I played in the past or be better, 
I don't think I would have done it.

"You miss England more as you get older. When you have missed as much cricket 
as me, of course you do. I've had something like two years' rehab since 2005 
and it has been tough. The reason you do it is to put back on that England 
shirt, to get the chance to play in an Ashes series.

"I'm not far away from that now but, as you get older, you don't want to miss 
much cricket because you don't know how much you've got in you."

Flintoff believes he is on target to be firing on all cylinders for the 
opening Test in Cardiff, which begins on 8 July. "For the past eight weeks 
since the knee operation, I've been working hard," he said. "Hopefully that is 
all behind me now. I'll just keep maintaining my fitness and looking after my 
knee as well as my ankle. I've played three weeks for Lancashire, bowled my 
overs, managed to score a few runs, and I'm pleased where I am at this stage.

"This game with Warwickshire is the final piece of the preparation for the 
team and also for myself. I've played two championship games and three 
Twenty20s and so this last game is vitally important, for form and also to bowl 
some overs and to get some more runs."

Flintoff is the only survivor from the 2005 Ashes attack which also included 
Steve Harmison, Simon Jones, Matthew Hoggard and Ashley Giles but he has 
confidence in the current crop of bowlers.

"We have got competition for bowlers," he said. "You see the way Jimmy 
Anderson and Stuart Broad have forged this new ball partnership and have done 
fantastically well. Jimmy Anderson as a bowler has always been skilful, and had 
all the tools, but now he looks like he has learnt how to use them. He is 
dangerous.

"Broady gets better all the time and, for the position of the next seamer, 
Graham Onions has improved out of sight and Ryan Sidebottom is bowling quick 
again and myself. It is exciting.

"There is competition for places within the squad and we have not even 
mentioned Steve Harmison who is knocking everybody over. It is going to make 
for a strong team."
 