
Australia won the Second Test yesterday just as they had seemed destined to do 
since the opening salvo put England on the canvas. Having bowled England out 
for 191 in the second innings, they required only 64 to win and managed it by 
seven wickets. The game finished 1½ hours after lunch, near enough halfway 
through the scheduled contest goodness knows what the cost in lost contracts 
will be to the ground authority.

 In the end it was the Waugh twins Mark and Steve who saw their side home but 
not before Darren Gough, Alan Mullally and Alex Tudor had given the opposition 
something to ponder before the third Test begins in Adelaide on Friday week.

 Each took a wicket as Australia slumped to 36 for three, and prompted the 
question as to what might have happened had England batted better in the first 
innings, held catches - another went down yesterday, making 10 in the series - 
and made another hundred runs in the second.

 Mark Ramprakash and Graeme Hick had taken their sixth-wicket partnership to 
91, the highest of the match, before Hick was caught at third slip off Jason 
Gillespie's third ball of the day for 68, the game's top score.

 Gillespie then embarked on a mopping-up exercise which saw him finish off the 
innings with a spell of four wickets for one run in six deliveries, giving him 
five for 88 in all, which was quite a comeback after his mauling by Hick on 
Sunday evening.

 While the tail collapsed ignominiously in the face of some fiery bowling, 
Ramprakash held firm and after 4½ hours had reached 47 not out when Mullally, a 
batsman trying hard to make Glenn McGrath seem like Sachin Tendulkar by 
comparison, backed away timidly and was bowled by a full toss.

 So the psychological and actual advantage rests with Australia, who will move 
on to Adelaide knowing that, as the holders, one more win would secure them the 
Ashes for two more years, whereas England need to win two of the last three 
games and avoid defeat in the other and the two venues Australia feared would 
be the most difficult for them are gone.

 England can take some comfort from the fact that the series is following a 
pattern not unlike that last summer when they came from behind to snatch a 
series win over South Africa. It is not impossible that they will do the same 
again, just extremely unlikely.

 After the match Alec Stewart, England's captain, said the batting in the 
first innings had been the key to the game. "It was a good pitch," he felt, 
"although it was slightly damp on the first day. Glenn McGrath and Damien 
Fleming were outstanding bowlers but we did not help ourselves.

 "This is a unique ground and the extra pace and bounce got some out. But we 
were playing at balls in areas outside off stump where you can let them go. 
Those that know the ground even let straight balls go because they trust the 
bounce. Overall it is one of the poorest first-innings performances I can 
remember."

 However, Stewart confessed that had England rather than Australia won the 
toss then in all probability he would still have opted to bat first, "and that 
would have been the wrong decision'. But all the portents pointed to that being 
the right thing to do, and Mark Taylor's decision to do otherwise seems to have 
been a brilliant combination of experience and intuition, rather than the 
exercise in post-Gabba psychology that some would postulate.

 "It was a 50-50 thing," said Taylor. 'The local boys Geoff Marsh, Tom Moody 
and Justin Langer, who know the place pretty well, all thought we should have a 
bat. But this is a new Perth pitch and I thought it had a bit of grass on it 
and, significantly, no cracks.

 "So batting last and chasing say 250 would be no more difficult than getting 
250 in the first innings, especially as there were no high temperatures 
forecast to really crack the surface up. The pitch actually got better, 
especially when the new ball had gone. It always was a new-ball pitch for the 
bowlers."

 England began the day on 126 for five, two runs shy of an innings defeat. 
Airline schedules were being scanned, hotel bookings checked. But such had been 
the exhilaration of Hick's batting on the previous evening that thoughts had 
turned to 1981 and another game turned by counter-attack when there was nothing 
to lose. This time it was not to be.

 Hick's fluency was not quite what it had been and, although he rattled along, 
reaching his half-century from only 54 balls, boundaries were becoming more 
involuntary. Finally, after 40 minutes' play, Gillespie replaced McGrath at the 
River End and made the breakthrough, as Hick, like many of his team-mates, 
tried to force off the back foot and edged to Ricky Ponting at third slip.

 Hick's innings was a genuine do-or-die effort from a fellow in his seventh 
Test reincarnation and batting at No 7 who, having dropped a couple of catches 
and made a second-ball nought in the first innings, believed there was little 
to lose and everything to gain from going down with all guns blazing.

 In so doing he may just have saved his Test career again. Due to go home this 
week, had Graham Thorpe's back not given up on him, he will now stay with the 
party for the rest of the winter.

 Meanwhile Ramprakash had been doing what he now does regularly, which is to 
occupy the crease and gather runs assiduously and in no great haste, like a 
keen philatelist collecting stamps at auction rather than in a ram-raid on a 
post office.

 The loss of Hick signalled the beginning of the end, however. Dominic Cork 
hung around for 45 minutes, taking a blow over his left eye for his trouble, 
but he went lbw, Tudor was caught at the wicket two balls later, Gough was 
another lbw victim next ball and Mullally surrendered abjectly.
 