
There was to be no resurrection. Australia retained the Ashes at four minutes 
past two on a sparkling Adelaide afternoon when Peter Such, a No11 batsman only 
because there is no No12, was leg-before wicket to Glenn McGrath, a contest 
roughly equivalent to Tiger Woods playing Bill Clinton level - or Australia 
playing England at cricket.

 Mark Taylor's team seem on their way to a record equalling six Ashes series 
in a row and the prospect of them making it seven in two years' time is 
overwhelming.

 The end was swift and utterly without mercy. Needing to bat all day to keep 
Ashes hopes alive, England almost made it to lunch for the solitary loss of 
Mark Ramprakash. Almost.

 The second new ball, taken 10 minutes before the interval, was the chosen 
instrument of execution. In its third over, with the lunch table just three 
balls away, John Crawley lost his concentration, hanging first his bat and then 
his head as a wide delivery was steered to second slip. The rest would have 
been missed by even a moderately zealous hospitality box diner.

 Graeme Hick, at No 8 came, tried to squeeze his first delivery square to the 
offside and succeeded only in offering a catch to fourth slip. The batsman 
stood his ground, hoping the ball had been hit on the half-volley: the umpire's 
decision, made after mutual consultation on the field but without recourse to 
the hapless third umpire, was spot on.

 Eleven times now this calendar year, an England batsman has gone to the 
crease and not survived a single ball.

 Darren Gough, Alan Mullally, who finally got off the mark in the series 
albeit with an inept edge over the heads of the slips, and Such then lasted 16 
more deliveries. It left Alec Stewart, the England captain, unbeaten on 63, a 
welcome if frenetic and not entirely convincing innings after a disastrous 
personal series, and only his seventh half-century in 44 innings against 
Australia.

 Against reason all the spoils yesterday were to the seamers. The last five 
wickets had fallen for 16 runs in 29 balls, four of them to McGrath. Of the 
other bowlers, Damien Fleming took three for 56, including the ball of the 
series - a stunning, late in-dipping yorker that uprooted Ramprakash's leg 
stump after a stay of more than three hours had brought him 57 - and Colin 
Miller, the journeyman jack of all trades still goggle-eyed at the unexpected 
thrill of being part of the Australian success, managed three for 57.

 Stuart MacGill, the leg-spinner increasingly seen as Shane Warne's successor 
rather than his understudy, ripped the ball hugely, was expected to reap huge 
dividends and failed to take a single wicket. The two may yet play together, 
however, for Taylor did not dismiss out of hand the prospect of them both 
turning out in the final Test on the spinners' paradise in Sydney.

 There are no more gags, no more jokes to be made about England collapses. It 
is beyond that now. There are those, including the England captain, who say 
that the malaise in the side is not down to whether tail-enders of doubtful 
pedigree score runs, and to an extent they are right. In this match, for 
example, the toss, won by Australia, was, as Taylor admitted, a huge advantage, 
allowing them to bat first in furnace heat, on a first day pitch devoid of pace 
or bounce, with the prospect of deterioration over the match. Once they got a 
total (and such was the admirable effort of the England bowlers that it was 
little more than par for the course) England were always under the cosh.

 But the collapses are a symptom of the general mindset of the team as a 
whole: certainly Taylor thinks so. "I have to say I think they are intimidated 
down the order," he said in his post-match euphoria. "I think that Nasser 
Hussain and Mark Ramprakash have batted against us as well as any Englishmen in 
the last 10 years or so. But those wickets at the end are a bonus.

 "We have a mental edge which comes in part from our performances in the last 
decade and it shows down the order with the respective tails where we can be 
five for 250 and still make 400 while England can still reach five for 250 but 
are all out for 275. It is a big difference. We seem to be able to get those 
extra 150 runs from somewhere.

 "In this game, for example, Glenn McGrath and Justin Langer put on 37 for the 
last wicket and you cannot tell me that McGrath is a better batsman than Dean 
Headley, Darren Gough, Alan Mullally or Peter Such."

 Maybe, though, he has more appetite and maybe, too, more thought has been 
given as to how, for example, to manipulate the strike. England need to ask 
themselves questions: why did Ramprakash take a single off the first ball of an 
over in Perth to expose Mullally why did Hussain do the same thing in the first 
innings in Adelaide and why did Stewart himself take an easy single from the 
third ball of an over, leaving the rest also to Mullally. A malaise is a 
cumulative thing.

 Stewart for his part looked devastated after the match, his voice wavering as 
he faced, with considerable dignity, the post-match grilling. He is a proud man 
and wore his England cap rather than a sponsor's baseball hat. But he now knows 
his hopes of Ashes success were little more than pipe dreams.

 "Australia has learned how to win," he said. 'If the going gets tough, they 
know how to hang in and come out the other side. I'd like to think that my 
players are not intimidated. But, if they are outbowled, and I think our 
bowling has been pretty good if without luck, outbatted and outfielded, then it 
is not very easy to win.

 "I do not think that English cricket has got worse but that the other sides 
have accelerated past us. We still produce good cricketers and last summer you 
saw a good England side. I am responsible for the team. If it goes well I'll 
get the pats on the back knowing I'll get the flak when we do badly. Well, I 
can take criticism provided it is constructive and fair.

 "This hurts, though, I can tell you. There are a lot of disappointed players 
in the dressing-room but we have got to keep our heads up. And I have to 
apologise to everyone at home. But we have worked really hard out here, I want 
people to know that, and that won't stop."
 