
Ashley Giles looked surprisingly bright and breezy, far more so than his 
players, who were still recovering from theirexit from the tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/29/england-world-twenty20-south-africa>
 while obliged to galvanise themselves for their "dead" match against the 
Netherlands on Monday afternoon.

The schedule has been demanding. Here the games unfold so slowly when there 
are power failures and/or heavy dew, which, added to the laborious over-rates, 
means that England's cricketers have become nocturnal animals (perhaps not for 
the first time in their history). The players do not leave the ground until 
12.30am. Then it takes a while to unwind back at their hotel so that it can be 
4am before they find sleep.

But Giles was his cheery self. This is his natural disposition. However there 
is that decision about England's cricket coach to be made in April so he was, 
no doubt, especially minded to be co-operative, as most new coaches are, when 
meeting the scribes. Anyone would think that there are people out there, even 
at the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board, who take notice of what is written in the papers.

So it was understandable that he should be so engaging – and a little wary.

He was asked by one of the tabloid correspondents whether he was "reasonably 
hopeful" of getting the job. "I'm not going to give you that headline; that's 
for other people," said Giles, whereupon our correspondent politely 
interrupted, "I don't think 'reasonably hopeful' is going to make a headline 
for the Sun."

Perhaps this prompted more candour from Giles. "I'd love to do it, because I 
want to do it, not just because it's coaching England but obviously I'm a very 
proud former England cricketer as well."

It cannot have been easy over the past month when Giles has been under intense 
scrutiny for the permanent post. A stream of victories would surely have 
clinched the deal but a steamy run-chase against Sri Lanka, fashioned by Alex 
Hales and Eoin Morgan, has been the only eye-catching result.

"I just keep trying to do what I'd do if I had the job long term," said Giles. 
"I'm not trying to please anyone or keep the guys happy. We've worked really 
hard throughout this trip; I think I've had the attention and commitment of the 
players and I think they've enjoyed it, barring the losing games."

Giles may sense, or perhaps he has read somewhere, that he is reckoned to be a 
bit too nice, too gentle for such a demanding position since he anticipated 
another line of inquiry. "Others will make the decision on whether I'm the man 
to do the job. There'll be a lot said on what I can and can't do, whether I'm 
tough enough or too soft.

"There is a time for a cuddle – you might think I'm good at that – but I can 
also deliver a kick up the backside. There's a time to be prescriptive, when 
teams are rebuilding, and there's a time for freedom. You have to strike a 
balance."

" I've been in coaching for seven years now and I've had to make some 
difficult decisions during those times. At Warwickshire I had to let players go 
who I'd played with. If I don't make tough decisions as a boss, I know that 
people above will make tough decisions on me."

Looking ahead, he said: "I believe we can be genuine contenders for the 
[50-over] World Cup next year. And it's right for everyone to think we'll win 
this summer [against Sri Lanka and India]. We go out to play to win. We're in 
our conditions. And we should play to our strengths in our conditions, as 
oppositions do against us. It's been said a few times – and you don't use it as 
a crutch – but there will be disappointments still along the journey. There's 
going to be blips. You guys, we need you to be patient with us and we need to 
manage some expectations. That's difficult sometimes with supporters and 
stakeholders but we are certainly looking to go north now."

Another possible disadvantage for Giles is that so many see him as part of the 
old, suddenly discredited regime (even though Andy Flower oversaw one of the 
most successful periods in England's history). But Giles points out: "My 
methods will clearly be different from anyone who's coached before because we 
are all different and I think it's important to be authentic and do it the way 
I need to do it."

However there is one major factor in his favour: a dearth of high-profile 
alternative candidates. Six years ago the England coaching job was one of the 
top three posts in the world. Today it barely makes the top 10. The reason is 
simple: the Indian Premier League.

The names routinely tossed out as if they were going to head for Lord's at the 
click of some powerful ECB fingers – Gary Kirsten, Stephen Fleming and Tom 
Moody – are all engaged in the IPL where they can earn enough in two months to 
make them hesitate long and hard about trudging around the gruelling 
international circuit for 12 months. Moreover Paul Farbrace, English, 
low-profile, highly regarded and recently appointed as Sri Lanka's coach, is 
not moving.

Unusually the most notable applicants are English rather than southern 
Africans, men such as Peter Moores, Mick Newell and, the likeliest of the lot, 
Giles.
 