
Ashley Highfield, four years into running Johnston Press, has never been 
busier. Aside from his chief executive role, he is vice-chair of the press 
industry’s trade body, the News Marketing Association (NMA), and is also a 
member of the advisory panel created by the government toreview the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/12/bbc-charter-review-green-paper-licence-fee-chief-funding>
.

But wearing three hats has placed him in what some BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executives believe is a potentially 
difficult position, raising questions about a conflict of interest.

Highfield represents fellow regional newspaper publishers who believe the BBC 
is trying to intrude on their territory, thereby threatening their commercial 
viability.

The latest skirmish began with the BBC’s suggestion earlier this month that it 
wouldfund 100 local reporters  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/bbc-will-offer-staff-and-content-to-help-local-newspapers>
to provide public service material for regional papers, a move the corporation 
viewed as an olive branch.

“More like an olive leaf,” says Highfield. “It looked to us like BBC 
imperialism through the back door. The whole idea was flawed. Essentially, by 
hiring more journalists, it meant the BBC putting another workforce into the 
regions who could well end up competing with us. We are worried about the BBC’s 
plans to get more local, as per their charter announcements, and worried also 
about theirfalse belief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/05/johnston-press-chief-attacks-bbc-future-of-news-report-local-media>
 that there is a market failure [by us] which gives them the right to fill the 
vacuum.”

Underlying the BBC’s initiative is a belief, born out by anecdotal evidence 
from judges, that some courts and inquests across Britain are no longer being 
adequately covered. Publishers deny that staff cuts are the reason.

So two weeks ago, Highfield, Simon Fox and Henry Faure, chief executives 
respectively of regional companies, Trinity Mirror and Newsquest, put their 
concerns toJames Harding <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesharding>, the 
BBC’s head of news.

Rejecting the 100 reporters idea, they prefer what Highfield calls a “much 
simpler, straightforward solution”. It is a quota system in which 25% of the 
BBC budget spent on regional news would be made available for publishers to 
fund their own journalists to provide content for newspapers and the BBC.

Highfield says it is close to the idea Harding outlined in a speech in June 
2014 at the Revival of Local journalism Conference in Salford. “There are 
issues around impartiality,” says Highfield, “but our guys can write impartial 
copy. It is solvable. And it would be an attractive proposition for our staff 
to have the chance to appear on camera. It will make working for the local 
media more attractive. I believe we can find a symbiotic win-win relationship. 
The BBC can take our content and pay for it. And we can take BBC content and 
extend our audiences. What’s not to like?”

BBC sources suggest there is plenty not to like. There appears to be less 
enthusiasm than Highfield implies and, despite his assertion that the NMA has 
“a solid front”, the corporation is concerned that some publishers have not 
signed up to his plan.

Then there is the delicate matter of his position on the eight-strong advisory 
panel set up to carry out a fundamental review of the BBC – appointed to that 
post by John Whittingdale, the culture secretary .

Last Monday, Highfield and Lord (Guy) Black, the Telegraph Media Group’s 
executive director who chairs the NMA’s regulatory sub-committee, met 
Whittingdale to discuss the publishers’ negotiations with the BBC. He says: “We 
came away quite buoyed by that so now we’ve got to try and sit down again with 
the NMA and BBC.”

Does Highfield not see this as a conflict of interest? “I’ve been absolutely 
transparent about it,” he insists. “John knows I have views on how the BBC 
should work with regional publishers. But that is being dealt with through a 
clear and separate channel, so no one can be in any doubt about the situation.”

Why did he join the panel? “Because John asked me and I said ‘yes’. I think he 
wanted my advice and input because I’ve seen both sides of the coin.” Highfield 
spent eight years with the BBC as director of new media and technology. “I’m 
extremely proud of having worked there … I’m a big fan of the BBC. It’s simply 
about finding the right ecosystem.”

Highfield’s major concern remains his “day job” at Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>, owner of 13 daily 
newspapers and 230 weekly titles. Like other regional publishers, its gradual 
post-recession improvement was disrupted in the spring by an unexpected 
advertising downturn. Property and job ads, two key sources of revenue, were 
hit. “Those strong headwinds have blown us off course,” he says. “But there are 
some signs that we are back on an upward trajectory.”

The City took fright and the company’s share price was hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jul/14/johnston-press-drops-16-on-profit-warning>
, down from 200p earlier this year to almost 90p. “That is disappointing,” he 
says, “but I can’t lose sleep worrying over our share price. We’ve just got to 
do the right thing.”

That right thing, it transpires, is the strategy Highfield has pursued since 
his arrival in 2011. He is committed to a digital transformation while 
continuing to accept that newsprint provides the lion’s share of revenue. “For 
many years to come our print advertising will exceed our digital advertising in 
gross numbers.

“We did reach a milestone earlier this year when digital went through 20% of 
total revenue, and it will probably be another three years before it’s half of 
our ad revenue. Even at that point, why would we stop print? It is still 
profitable and the margins are still good.”

He recognises that the future is online and eagerly shows off the result of 
his latest digital investment –a new website for the company’s flagship title, 
the Scotsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/25/johnston-press-revamps-the-scotsman-in-print-and-online>
. It is to be unveiled tomorrow and he concedes it looks remarkably like the 
Guardian site.

“It’s a big relaunch in Edinburgh,” he says. “There will be a new-look 
newspaper, the new website and a new app. It will be [Johnston’s] first fully 
responsive website, meaning whatever device you’re on it will size 
appropriately with the same content. There will be more video.”

The template will be rolled out in the coming months across the Johnston Press 
portfolio, beginning with the Yorkshire Post. He says it is the result of “a 
substantial investment to re-engineer sites”, but declines to say what it cost.

Some staff “focused on the digital platform” have been recruited, he adds, but 
print journalists fear further cutbacks as a result. As with all publishers, 
difficult choices must be made.

Johnston Press, with a huge chunk of debt, is geared much more highly than its 
competitors and it looks likely that two of them – Trinity Mirror and Local 
World – are about to join forces. Does the merger concern Highfield?

“I’m not worried about them being bigger. I think it’s good for the industry 
because it increases City interest in this sector and it probably fires the 
starting gun for another round of long overdue consolidation.”

Does that imply that he might consider a merger with, say, Newsquest, which is 
headed by his former colleague, Faure? “The logic is there but I don’t have a 
strong view one way or other about any particular partner. The nice thing about 
this industry is we’re better off working together and not trying to be mini 
press barons.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 49

Education Elizabeth College, Guernsey, City University London (business 
computing systems)

Career 1988 management consultant Coopers & Lybrand 1994 head of IT and new 
media, NBC Europe1995 managing director, interactive services Flextech, 2000 
director, new media & technology, BBC2008 UK managing director, Microsoft 2011 
chief executive, Johnston Press
 