
Ashley Giles has stepped down as an England selector after being overlooked 
for the coach's job. His place on the four-man panel has been filled by Mick 
Newell, Nottinghamshire's director of cricket, who was another interviewed for 
the post handed last week toPeter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores>.

Giles was appointed England's one-day coach 18 months ago and had been the 
acting head coach for two months.

The England and Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board's national selector, James Whitaker, said: "Ashley Giles has informed ECB 
today that he intends to step down from the panel and I would like to thank him 
for all his hard work and dedication to the England cause over the past six 
years both as a selector, and more recently as our limited-overs coach.

"We welcome Mick to the panel and his passion, cricketing knowledge and 
in-depth understanding of our county game will be invaluable as we seek to 
identify potential international talent and develop outstanding England teams 
across all three formats of the game."

Newell won the Yorkshire Bank 40 with Nottinghamshire last season and has also 
led the county to two County Championship titles. The 49-year-old, who has 
served as a coach on winter tours by the England Lions and England Under-19 
teams, joins Whitaker, Moores and Angus Fraser on the selectors' panel.

At Lancashire, the captain, Glen Chapple, will take on an expanded leadership 
role following Moores' departure, whichleftLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> without a head coach just two 
games into the county season.

The club have decided against looking for a like-for-like replacement and will 
instead hand greater responsibility to the long-serving Chapple, who will be 
assisted by the second-team coach, Gary Yates.

Yates' day job will be covered by the academy director, John Stanworth, with 
Lancashire hoping to add a new face to their backroom team to assist the staff.

Should the 40-year-old Chapple retire at the end of the season, as has been 
mooted, it seems highly likely he would then inherit Moores' job. As a Level 
4-qualified coach, it has long been seen as a natural step for the all-rounder.

"It is crucial that we minimise the disruption to the cricket department while 
we are in the middle of an important run of matches and therefore we need to 
ensure that we have continuity and provide support, leadership and resources to 
help us achieve our aims and objectives," said Lancashire's cricket director, 
Mike Watkinson.

"In his position as club captain, Glen Chapple will have responsibility for 
the first-team squad. Gary Yates will support Glen and spend the vast majority 
of his time around the first-team squad."

He added:

"The club are actively looking to have an additional coaching resource in 
place as soon as possible, whose primary role will be working with the Second 
XI along with other coaching duties.

"The academy director/player development manager John Stanworth will support 
the Second XI for the forthcoming fixtures but fundamentally his role will 
remain unchanged."

Lancashire's announcement ends any chance of them employing Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles>, who lost his job as England's 
one-day coach as a result of Moores' return to the international arena.

Speaking after Moores' appointment was confirmed, Chapple had said: "The lads 
are very pleased for him because he's been terrific for us as a coach. We wish 
him every success. He's taught me a lot about the game, about what you see from 
the sidelines when you're not a player, and in that respect he's inspired me to 
want to stay in the game.

"My role will inevitably be bigger because Peter's not here, but at the same 
time I've been involved in team selection for five years now. We've got a lot 
of resources at the club and a lot of highly qualified coaches, and we'll back 
ourselves to be great until the club tells us anything different."

Lancashire visit Northamptonshire on Sunday for their first County 
championship match since Moores' departure.
 