
The next six weeks may just be among the trickiest of Ashley Giles's 
professional life. On the one hand, he has a tour to the Caribbean to manage, 
that part of which involves ODIs without a first choice side, and the outcome 
of which will go on his CV. Meanwhile, in the back of his mind is the knowledge 
that when the following World Twenty20 is done, his ECB employers will be 
making a decision on Andy Flower's successor, a position for which Giles, head 
coach of England's one-day teams for more than a year, intends to apply. He is 
clear where his focus lies. "One thing I can't do and don't want to do ," he 
says, "is use this trip as a job interview."

Giles has been tasked with beginning the process of resurrecting the England 
cricket team <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> which has 
been on a downward slide since an unprecedented period of success under Flower, 
and he has very firm ideas of how this should be done.. He talks passionately 
about the most important work being done " from the bottom upwards," meaning 
instilling fundamental tenets into the players. "Get that right and the outcome 
will take care of itself."

Certainly he is adamant that he has the credentials for the job. " I've done 
my time now as a coach and I believe I can coach this England side but it will 
take a bit of time to regroup and get the right things in place: the right 
culture, the right people, the right environment, and if we do that I think we 
will see some positive signs pretty quickly. But it wont happen just in six 
weeks. If I am judged purely on results then so be it. It's for other people to 
make that judgment."

" If results went badly, it would be hard because we are still in the business 
of winning. But at the moment this group is working very well together. I think 
we need to create a new culture. We have had a very successful period and have 
dipped over that peak, and on the way down for a while. We need to get some of 
those simple disciplines in place and the outcome will then take care of 
itself. The simple things are how we work, how we are in the dressing room, the 
way we work together as a team , how we dress, our timekeeping, all these 
things create a culture."
 