
Ashley Giles maintained a neutral stance on the ugly row between Kevin 
Pietersen and his former England team-mates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/08/kevin-pietersen-bullying-rejected-graeme-swann>
when it inevitably cropped up at his unveiling as the new head coach of 
Lancashire.

But Giles, who was a former team-mate of Pietersen and also his England coach 
in one-day cricket before losing that job to Peter Moores, suggested that it is 
time for the 34-year-old to come to terms with the end of his international 
career.

“I don’t want to get sucked into it,” said Giles, who has signed a three-year 
contract at Old Trafford. “This is not the day to talk about Kev’s book.

“I played in the dressing-room with Kev and got on very well with him, but 
similarly with those other guys as well. I coached them and never had any major 
issues with them, so that’s pretty much as much as much as I want to say.”

Giles described Pietersen as “a million pound asset” in January when naming 
him in a 30-man squad for the World Twenty20 earlier this year - which now 
seems certain to be the last England squad in which he will ever be included.

“He would still consider himself to be a multi-million pound asset, I’m sure, 
he’s that sort of player,” Giles added.

“He’s the big show, if you like, but things have unfolded and he’s not going 
to play for England again by the looks of it. I’m sure it’s disappointing for 
him but everyone has to move on.”

Giles stressed that he was aiming to bring “sustainable” success to 
Lancashire, who have been relegated twice in three seasons since pipping his 
Warwickshire team to the County Championship in 2011.

Glen Chapple, who took over as coach at the start of the 2014 season when 
Moores was named England coach ahead of Giles, welcomed the appointment, 
suggesting that he is likely to remain available as a player although his 
priority will be his role on Giles’s coaching staff.

Giles confirmed that he plans to have talks with another former England 
team-mate, Andrew Flintoff, after his surprise comeback in Twenty20 cricket 
this year. Flintoff has continued to practise at Old Trafford in recent weeks 
and is shortly expected to confirm a stint in Australia’s Big Bash, probably 
with Brisbane.
 