
In a falling market, equipment hire group Ashtead has slipped back despite 
reporting record profits.

The company, which rents out everything from small tools to large excavation 
equipment, reported a rise in full year profits from £362m to £490m, benefiting 
from positive construction markets on both sides of the Atlantic. It was also 
positive on the outlook.

But with a spate of profit taking its shares are down 17p at £11.10. Analysts 
remain positive. Andrew Nussey at Peel Hunt said:

Growth momentum [is] continuing with underlying (constant currency) fourth 
quarter profits up 42% despite tough comp. Net debt £1,687m gives return on 
investment of 19% despite significant fleet expansion. Outlook remains positive 
with momentum into the first quarter. Modest forecast upgrades: April 2016 by 
2% to £610m.

Shares are trading on upgraded PE of 15 times to Apil 2016 and whilst some may 
have been expecting larger upgrades, we note it is still early in the year. 
With clear momentum we reiterate our buy.

Investec also issued a buy note:

The group has yet again delivered results ahead of expectations, with pre-tax 
profit up 35% to a record £490m. There appear to be no signs of any slowdown in 
the US and this is reflected in the confirmation that it will again invest some 
£1bn in capex during 2016.

We continue to see the trajectory of recovery as more sustainable than in 
previous cycles and this should ensure earnings momentum remains strong for 
some time yet. In our view, the current rating is not prohibitive.

Elswhere Ladbrokes is leading the FTSE 250 higher, up 3p at 120p after an 
upgrade from Morgan Stanley. The bank said:

New chief executive Jim Mullen will outline his plans for Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> on June 30. We see scope for 
forecast upgrades for the first time in years, both Digital and Retail have 
significant catchup potential, Europe could be a hidden gem, cash earnings 
exceeds earnings per share, and the valuation is cheap. We upgrade to 
overweight.

But property companies were mixed after a series of Goldman Sachs 
recommendations.

Foxtons has fallen 6p to 248o.6p as the bank moved from neutral to sell, based 
on its premium valuation compared to its peers.

Crest Nicholson is down 10.5p at 534p after Goldman reduced its recommendation 
from buy to neutral.

But Barratt Developments is 3.5p better at 599.5p as Goldman lifted its target 
price from 517p to 605p.

Lower down the market APR Energy has blown a fuse, down 92.5p or 26.5% at 256p 
after the temporary power supply company said full year results were likely to 
be significantly below expectations. It blamed the costs of moving out of Libya 
and delayed contract negotiations.

Flowgroup, the efficient energy equipment supplier, has fallen 8.75p to 18.25p 
as it warned of a substantial reduction in the number of boilers it expected to 
install in 2015. The European Court of Justice ruled earlier this month that 
the UK’s reduced VAT rate of 5% on energy-saving products was in breach of EU 
laws. VAT is now expected to be applied on its products at 20%, and it plans to 
accelerate its cost cutting programme.

Cantor Fitzgerald analyst Adam Forsyth said:

The early incarnation of the Flow boiler made strong economic sense when VAT 
was 5% for larger households. The VAT change is likely to reduce the set of 
suitable households and so today’s announcement is understandable if 
disappointing. The delay to cash breakeven is also a concern but the recent 
£23m fund raising should give some comfort here. The timings suggested in the 
statement imply a six month set back while a re-launch in winter is perhaps 
better than a summer launch for this product. The VAT ruling itself is still to 
be clarified by the UK government which remains supportive of micro generation 
in our view. But the product needs to achieve momentum in the marketplace and 
this setback is not helpful in that regard. We are putting our forecasts, 
valuation and recommendation under review but overall see this news as 
disappointing.
 