
The amount raised in stockmarket flotations around the world this year is 
expected to break the 2007 record of $300bn (£190bn), according to research 
from accountants Ernst & Young.

Asian companies are behind a surge in the number of floats. Britain and Europe 
have done better than last year, but account for only a tiny proportion of new 
activity because of fears about the future of the euro and the sovereign debt 
crisis.

In the UK, the change of government, uncertainty over budget cuts and fears of 
a double dip recession have put off scores of companies from listing on the 
London Stock Exchange.

The biggest initial public offer (IPO) of new shares so far in 2010 was in 
Hong Kong and Shanghai, where Agricultural Bank of China raised $22.1bn, making 
it the biggest float in history. Agricultural was closely followed by AIA, an 
offshoot of American insurerAIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig>, 
which collected over $20bn after its IPO in Hong Kong.

E&Y says that in the first 11 months of this year, 1,199 companies have raised 
$255bn ($94.6bn, 2009) with Chinese firms accounting for more than 45% of the 
value. David Wilkinson, UK IPO leader at E&Y said: "The IPO market reflects the 
twin-track global economy with Europe and the US trailing Asia, where GDP is 
racing ahead. I think next year will be a similar story, with perhaps more 
action from Latin America, especially Brazil. South America has recovered less 
quickly from the recession than China and India, but is now rebounding 
strongly."

In the UK, 50 companies listed in London during the first 11 months of this 
year, up from seven in the whole of 2009, raising $10bn. But the year began 
badly with turbulent markets persuading the private equity owners of 
Travelport, Merlin Entertainment andNew Look 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/new-look> to pull their IPO plans in 
February.

Supergroup, the pharmacy chain, Essar Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/essar-energy> and Barrick Gold have been 
rare British success stories as their shares today trade at a premium to their 
IPO offer prices. The same cannot be said of Ocado, the online retailer, whose 
stock price has bombed. Gartmore, the troubled fund manager has seen its share 
price dive since it floated at the end of 2009. Promethean (educational 
technology) and Betfair (online gambling) have also performed badly since 
floating in 2010.

Wilkinson said: "I am afraid it hasn't been a great year for the UK; shares in 
only four or five newly floated UK companies are today trading above the price 
at which they sold their shares to the public, so it's quite a sorry affair. We 
expected a much brighter picture back in January."

He was reluctant to make predictions for the British IPO market in 2011, 
beyond saying there is "a pipeline of companies waiting to list their shares, 
but if investors demand knockdown prices, firms may conclude now is not the 
time to sell."

E&Y says in the emerging markets, there is still everything to play for with a 
large number of firms earmarked for privatisation in 2011 and 2012, 
particularly financial institutions, commodities groups and industrial firms.

• This article was amended on 8 December 2010. 
 