
Indie professor, will you please explain the appeal of this May's ATP – I'd 
love to know your take on that festival.
HurricaneEdward 


Destination music festivals with their interchangeable lineups have left space 
in the market for boutique events. Many festivalgoers are becoming increasingly 
annoyed with overcrowding, corporate sponsorship, high-priced merchandise, 
perceived organiser indifference, and vendors attempting to squeeze every 
pound, euro or dollar from them. At Leeds, you have to buy a copy of the lineup 
to find out what times bands are playing.

All Tomorrow's Parties <http://www.atpfestival.com/events/madeinjapan.php> has 
been able to present itself as a brand that doesn't feel like a brand. It has 
done so by adhering to stringent values of independence. It is a point of pride 
that the festival doesn't have sponsors nor does it try to maximise profits at 
the expense of the fan. ATP is a deliberately small festival. For example, at 
their site at Butlins in Minehead, the venue capacity is 10,000, but they sell 
only 5,000 tickets. Upon arrival you get a booklet with set times and the 
information about special events such movies or a pub quiz.

One of the festival's specifications is that the price is all-inclusive. 
Everyone who comes to the festival stays onsite, including artists. This 
egalitarian approach produces a communal atmosphere where artists and audience 
members are treated equally: no VIP area, no tiered ticketing. The housing is 
the same for everyone. Artists can be seen walking around, watching other bands 
play, even partying with festivalgoers. The ability to meet some of your 
favourite artists is particularly valued: playing poker with Steve Albini, 
trying to win on the quiz machine with John Cummings of Mogwai, or having 
Kelley Deal teach you how to knit, sets ATP apart from festivals where the 
closest you get to an artist is having water hurled at you from a stage 
protected by barricades and security guards.

This intimacy extends to the promoters themselves. Unlike most festivals, the 
promoters are not faceless. Barry, Deborah and other members of the small ATP 
crew personally respond to emails. They sign their names, give contact 
information and tell fans to come to them if there are any concerns. ATP fans 
feel like they have full access to promoters, artists and other festival 
attendees. The experience is the antithesis of being a faceless consumer 
feeling exploited or disrespected.

ATP has been successful in making each festival seem special. This is quite a 
feat when you consider that there are at least four ATPs each year in the UK. 
ATP chooses kitschy locations that are evocative of the past and childhood, 
tapping into the nostalgia that is redolent within the indie community. Each 
festival has its own special twist.Festivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals> are guest curated, generally by 
a highly regarded ATP band, like this year's Animal Collective, but curators 
have also included cartoonists, film-makers and music producers. The festival 
has instigated bands to re-form and play classic albums in their entirety. This 
idea has spawned a trend of re-formed bands touring cult albums.

In some ways, ATP itself is a curator. By consistently choosing some of the 
most avant garde and artistically minded artists, fans have a general idea of 
what an ATP band will be like. They trust the promoters to put together 
something they will appreciate. This makes ATP a throwback to the era of 
independent record labels such as 4AD, Creation or Factory, where people would 
buy records without ever hearing the band just because of the label. Fans feel 
ATP is a seal of approval for a specific style of music.

ATP has used the values of the independent community: anti-corporation, 
artistic integrity, intimacy, and equality for their commercial enterprise. The 
boutique festival makes participants feel like they are part of a small, 
egalitarian community, having a distinctive experience.All Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties> has created a 
successful alternative to the mainstream destination festival.

•This article was amended on 28 April 2011. In the original, bottles of water 
were said to be selling for $10. This has been corrected.

If you have a query for the indie professor about the music industry, indie or 
anthropology please leave a comment below, email her at
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or inquire via Twitter @indiegodess 
<http://twitter.com/indiegodess>
 