
Is there an evening primrose oil available that is not encased in a gelatine 
capsule? We are a vegetarian family and my four-year-old daughter takes it for 
her eczema. 

BioCare has evening primrose oil in 511mg vegetable capsules, each containing 
51mg gammolinolenic acid; she could take one, twice a day with meals. You can 
also tear the capsules apart to apply oil directly to her skin. To get the 
right balance of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids, grind up flaxseed and 
sprinkle on her cereal, or pour a little flaxseed oil on vegetables, mashed 
potato and rice or pasta when they have cooled a bit. Call BioCare on 0121-433 
3727; £11.45 for 90 capsules, product code 54990.

I am 48 and am plagued by chronic constipation. Eating more fibre-rich foods, 
especially fruit and vegetables, and wholemeal bread, does not help - I simply 
bloat until my stomach is a tight and agonising drum. Any change in routine 
exacerbates it and laxatives and suppositories don't work. The general sense of 
discomfort and slowness really gets me down. I have been medically checked and 
there is no blockage. Any advice? 

It is very important to drink lots of pure filtered water because otherwise 
you will absorb it from your faeces while they are in the colon, and the longer 
they spend there, the harder they are to pass. Try drinking 2 litres between 
meals. The bloating may indicate a food intolerance, perhaps to yeast, gluten, 
wheat or dairy. Try eliminating these from your diet. Meat, cheese, eggs, 
refined grains, processed foods and salt can also cause constipation.

Laxatives do not solve the underlying problem and make the colon lazy, but 
high doses of vitamin C (3g daily) work as a natural laxative, and if magnesium 
levels are low, a daily supplement of 300-450mg will make a great difference. 
Flaxseed oil (3 tbsp a day) makes stools easier to pass and high-fibre 
fructo-oligosaccharide (1-6 tsp of EliminEase daily) will establish and 
maintain bowel regularity, keep stools moist and feed the friendly bacteria in 
your intestines. Artichoke leaf extract (2 tablets with each meal) will help 
the constipation and is very effective at combating bloating. Daily exercise 
that tones the abdomen is also extremely important. For supplements, call 
Nature's Best on 01892 552117.

I am in my late 40s, pre-menopausal, and still suffer outbreaks of acne. I 
have a clear spell after my period but just before it, and at ovulation, my 
skin becomes hot and greasy, and spots develop. I am fit and well, follow a 
well-balanced diet and a sensible cleansing regime, and have tried just about 
everything. 

At ovulation and before a period, hormone fluctuations compounded by high 
blood sugar levels can overload your system. Herbs and dietary changes, plus 
attention to good bowel function, will reduce acne. Cut out sugars and refined 
carbohydrates (white pasta, bread and rice, etc). Eat slow-releasing 
carbohydrates (wholefoods) combined with protein in small, frequent meals. 
Avoid stimulants, salt, processed foods and saturated fats (meat and dairy), 
drink lots of filtered water and try to reduce stress. Plant phytoestrogens 
restore hormone balance; go for dong quai, agnus castus, blue cohosh, alfalfa 
and soy isoflavones such as tofu, miso and tempeh. Or try HerBalance I by 
Vitamin Research Products from the NutriCentre, 0800 587 2290 (nutricentre.com 
<http://www.nutricentre.com>). 

· Emma Mitchell is a natural health therapist. Her recommendations are to be 
followed in conjunction with advice from your own healthcare provider. Send 
your questions to Wellbeing, Guardian Weekend, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 
3ER. Email:ask.emma@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.emma@theguardian.com>.
 