
Asterix is back in the land of Gaul in his latest adventure, Asterix and the 
Missing Scroll. The French comic book series, which began in 1959, was the 
original creation of writer René Goscinny and illustrator Albert Uderzo. After 
an eight year hiatus, Asterix returned with full force in 2013 under the 
guidance of creative duo Jean-Yves Ferri and Didier Conrad.


Asterix embarks on first adventure in eight years with new artists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/22/asterix-adventure-new-artists-first>
Now, with the publication of the second book from the capable hands of the new 
writer-illustrator team, it seems this French treasure is going from strength 
to strength. We caught up with the creative duo to discuss new characters, old 
formulas and the pressure of continuing the great legacy of Asterix.


In your new album, Asterix and the Missing Scroll, you’ve decided to change 
the setting back to Gaul. Why did you make this change?

It was a rule we imposed on ourselves from the start: we’d set the first album 
somewhere abroad [the first album at their creative helm, Asterix and the 
Picts, is set in the lochs of Scotland], and bring our second album back home 
to Gaul.

Asterix and the Missing Scroll - exclusive preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/ng-interactive/2015/oct/21/asterix-and-the-missing-scroll-exclusive-preview>
Are there any themes you’re exploring in the Missing Scroll that are new to 
the series?

Interestingly, we’re revisiting something from an old album, Asterix and the 
Goths. The Druids and sacred Forest of the Carnutes from that work features in 
the Missing Scroll, so we’re actually including some old aspects of Asterix.

Libellus Blockbustus (Caesar’s spindoctor) sounds like an exciting addition to 
the Asterix family - was it fun to create and explore an evil new character?

It’s always fun to create new characters, because through the process of 
creating them we can come up with other new ideas. Also, it’s no surprise for 
the reader when it’s always the same.

Are there any other interesting characters we can expect?

There is a new character who is actually based loosely on Julian Assange, and 
then there’s the servant of Blockbustus...but we can’t really reveal more 
beyond that.

You kept in line with the old formula last time - would you say it’s the same 
with this work?

No, actually, it’s very different. Our previous album was based on travel, but 
with Asterix and the Missing Scroll we’re delving into a more societal topic. 
It’s definitely more ambitious and topical. The last album was to assure the 
readers and publishers, but this one’s been done to worry them.

Did you find the process of creating this book any more or less challenging 
than your last work, Asterix and the Picts?

It’s difficult to say - the conditions were very different. With the last 
album, Conrad arrived after the script was finished. With this one, however, 
we’ve worked together from the start, so it was a much more natural 
scriptwriting process.

 Did you feel there was as much pressure this time around?

Given the successful sales of the last one, the pressure did go down to be 
honest. And this time there was less pressure in terms of timeframe and people 
checking our work. We’d say that the pressure in demand was the same, though. 
But the pressure will vary with every album.

You did say that Uderzo (original creator of Asterix) acted as something of a 
teacher last time - was this still the case?

[Laughs] No, this time, Uderzo acted in more of a wiseman’s role. It’s 
pleasing to get his consent - there is more pressure there as he’s our most 
important reader, of course. But he did give us more space this time.

Do you believe you’ve found your feet now in your roles as creators of Asterix?

We’re more at ease, but still learning!

You mentioned earlier that there was a positive response to Asterix and the 
Picts - do you think this will receive similar response?

We hope it will be even better!

What did Asterix mean to you growing up?

Ferri: The series was monumental in the comic book world. It was a complete 
universe for us. But we never tried to imitate it in our work before, so it’s 
funny how we’ve ended up working on it now.

Conrad: It was groundbreaking when we were children. It was a classic. There 
was nothing like it before and it remains a classic to this day.

It’s clear that Asterix continues to appeal to a wide range of ages to this 
day - are you surprised by its relentless popularity?

During the promotional work for Asterix and the Picts, we realised how 
emotional the reaction was to it. It was impressive, and strange. Asterix is 
seen as a part of the French heritage. But for us, it was always an underground 
series. We’ve tried to maintain that sense of how we perceived it.
 