
How does it feel to step into such huge shoes as Goscinny and Uderzo's?

Didier Conrad: It's impressive, of course. Obviously we're honoured we've been 
chosen to do this but, at the same time, we're also intimidated because it's a 
huge responsibility to live up to the memory we had as young readers ofAsterix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix>.

Jean-Yves Ferri: Usually, takeovers don't happen like this. Usually, with 
something this size, entire studios take over. But in this particular case, 
Uderzo wanted to find two individuals. So it's a bit like when you're used to 
driving a small car and all of a sudden you're told to drive a massive train – 
the proportion is very different to what we're used to. So we can do the work, 
definitely, and we're getting our heads around the volume and the size of it 
all, so we're working on it and we're learning … we're still learning now which 
is why we're a bit shaky!

Did you ever feel, having accepted it, that you simply couldn't do it?

DC: All the time! During the whole process. As I was drawing I felt I wouldn't 
be able to make it because we had very tight deadlines and there was no 
leniency, it had to be perfect. So I had to re-do it until it was perfect. We 
got no extension, the deadline was the deadline.

J-YF: For me, it was the same thing with the script because I come from comedy 
scripts but it's a very different humour to that of Asterix so I had to get to 
grips with that particular humour and that took a lot of work.

Were you ever concerned that it was going to be too constraining for you and 
that there would not be enough room for your own creativity because you had to 
follow the Asterix formula? And how did you bring in your own creativity within 
those constraints?

J-YF: That's the name of the game when you choose to work on something like 
this and I think there is still room for creativity, you just need to find a 
way to insert it into the format.

How did you find that way in?

J-YF: Usually when I work on a comic book, I like to play on classical codes 
of comic books and that's what I did with Asterix as well. I liked the idea of 
playing with already established codes and inserting them into the comic book. 
It's very specific but there is room for creativity, definitely.

DC: For me, there were constraints and not just with the format but also style 
and time. When Jean-Yves wrote his script he didn't have Goscinny to check it 
and say that it was OK. Whereas I had Uderzo – which was great, it was great to 
have his support – but I also had to get his approval, which was quite scary. I 
managed because Uderzo has a way of working that's quite intuitive and I 
decided to do the same thing so I took what I liked the most from his 
illustrations and then I turned it into drawings that I liked. That's how I 
managed. It was a bit like judo, I flipped the whole thing around and it 
worked, but it was difficult at first.

J-YF: For me, I had Goscinny's photo stuck on my wall above my desk. 

How involved was Uderzo?

DC: Well, he checked every page as I drew. Yes, it was very scary. Then he 
would comment – "there is some work to do" or...[laughs] "it will be better 
next time" [laughs]. Yeah … Like a kind teacher.

Did you ever disagree?

DC: The last word went to Albert.

Why Scotland?
J-YF: Because England was already taken! [laughs] Because Asterix had never 
been to Scotland. At the time it was the Picts and there is very little left 
from their time, just perhaps some stones, so we could imagine a lot. And I 
decided to make the Picts the ancestors of the Scots. Scotland was the first 
idea I had – I wanted to make this a "travel album" so I started to think about 
places I could send them to and I like Scotland. And I came across the Picts so 
that worked well. The landscape is really good. In fact, comic books have often 
used Scotland as a setting.

Why did you decide to include the Scottish referendum debate?

J-YF: It's a rumour but it's not true! When went to Scotland, for some reason 
everyone thought that we'd chosen Scotland because of the referendum. I kept 
saying "no, that's not necessarily why I chose Scotland" but they kept on 
insisting so I ended up saying yes …

But is there a reference to it?

J-YF: The only reference is that as a background you have clans that remind 
you of potential political situations. But there is nothing political in the 
album. That just shows you that you have to be careful with Asterix – it's a 
symbol of France's international relations.

But the Loch Ness Monster must be in it?

J-YF: It's a possibility...

What's your favourite Asterix album (both as a child and as an adult, if 
different)?

DC: Asterix and Cleopatra

J-YF: Asterix and the Legionary

And your favourite characters?

J-YF: Obelix. Not for his size but his character. He's very lively and 
unpredictable, always living in the moment.

DC: Cleopatra, for her very strong personality. And Panacea! That's her 
English name [in French, the character is called Falbala] – the English 
translator is a star. Getafix!

And your favourite to draw?

DC: The dog was fairly difficult to draw. I'd never drawn dogs before because 
I don't actually like them. I prefer cats. And as for my favourite … I don't 
know or I'm not allowed to say (because it's a new character I created)


Asterix and the Picts is going to introduce Asterix to a new generation of 
British children. Asterix is not quite as big in Britain as in France. Why 
should British children read Asterix?

J-YF: That's a difficult question to answer. Even in France we don't know 
which books chilldren read the most or why they read them. Generally, it's just 
a series that's available at home, parents have their collection and it's 
passed down from generation to generation.

Whereas in Britain children have to choose to read Asterix as it's not 
necessarily automaticaly there. Why should they choose to read Asterix? Why 
would you suggest a child reads it?

DC/J-YF: I think the reason why they should read Asterix is because it talks 
about a common cultural heritage, in a way. We all had the Roman invasion – in 
England, Denmark, Spain – so we have the same history of the Roman empire and 
even you were invaded at some point! I think the only place where Asterix can't 
mean anything is the US, which is the only great empire left today, because 
they can only relate to the Romans and not the small village. That's probably 
why it's not read out there. But elsewhere it should be read, it can be 
understood, it means something. Even though Asterix may look like a very French 
concept it is read, for instance, in Germany. It's quite popular there, which 
just goes to show …

Do you even see them as children's books? 
DC/J-YF: Yes, they are for children, they are accessible to children, that's 
the idea. It's the first Franco-Belgian series aimed at all age groups so we 
tried to do the same thing in this latest book. It's very rare to find a series 
that all age groups will like or enjoy reading. It's a tradition that has been 
lost and in France you now have very few series that all ages read. Asterix is 
inclusive, it wants to include all age groups and also different cultures, 
different nationalities. It's always done in a very welcoming way. It's never 
mean or trying to diminish other cultures and that's probably why people enjoy 
reading it – it includes other cultures and all age groups (well, all cultures 
except the US, I don't know why!)

You're known as a writer and an illustrator in your own right. Did you or do 
you ever worry that being associated with such a huge phenomenon as Asterix 
would have an impact, would overshadow your own work or make it difficult?

J-YF: No. It's not a bad thing. We're old so we've already done quite a lot. 
What we've wanted to do we've already done, at least largely. In terms of the 
public, that's completely different. Yes, everything is overshadowed by Asterix 
– the only exception would be Tintin – but that's not a bad thing as it's only 
going to make us better known and people who read our Asterix may be curious 
about our other work, which can only be a good thing. And if they're not it 
won't change anything anyway.

DC: The same for me. And it's also a new experience for us, which is a good 
thing. We've had series in the past that have worked well, of course, but never 
this level. This goes beyond the comic world. In France when a comic works 
there may be 100,000 copies sold. This is two million, so it's completely 
different. Usually it takes 20 years to sell two million copies of a book.

What next – for you and for Asterix?

J-YF: We're already thinking about the next album and we're talking about it 
but we're waiting to see how this one is welcomed by the public to see whether 
we're going to gain their confidence or not. We also have our other work that's 
waiting for us and we'll continue with that. We're looking at publishing an 
album every two or three years, it's good in terms of rhythm, it gives us time 
to see what happens, to work on our other projects. The idea is also that 
Asterix has to be great quality otherwise it will just be commonplace … We want 
to keep up the good work.
 