
In 50 years Asterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> the Gaul has 
fought off far more than hordes of Roman invaders: a battle over publishing 
rights, a bitter family feud, the early death of one creator, the recent 
retirement of another, criticism over an advertising deal for McDonald's, 
scores of animation films and live-action mega-budget blockbusters and an 
amusement park, to remain one of France's biggest cultural emblems.

Now, the first new Asterix comic book in eight years is about to be released 
despite controversy about it being the work of a new writer-illustrator team. 
The cartoon hero will also finally be feted in anexhibition at the hallowed 
National Library of France 
<http://www.bnf.fr/en/cultural_events/anx_exhibitions/f.asterix_eng.html]>, the 
first time a comic-book character has been the subject of a major show at 
Paris's foremost literary institution. France is braced for a fresh round of 
Asterix-mania.

Asterix and the Picts <http://www.asterix35.com/>, released next month, is set 
in Scotland and features the usual wry wordplay and satirical references to 
everything from the Scottish independence referendum to the Loch Ness monster. 
It is the 35th instalment in a series that has sold more than 350m books 
worldwide and been translated into 111 languages since the first album appeared 
in 1961.

But the respected and carefully chosen new writer-illustrator team, Jean-Yves 
Ferri and Didier Conrad, are the first people other than the original creators 
to produce an Asterix story. This comes after a long battle over whether 
Asterix could live on after his makers, with echoes of the Belgian comic 
illustrator Hergé, who stipulated that no one else could draw Tintin after his 
death.

Albert Uderzo, the illustrator who invented Asterix with his scriptwriter 
friend René Goscinny in 1959, announced his retirement in 2011 after producing 
the books alone after the death of Goscinny aged 53 in 1977. Now in his 80s, 
Uderzo has supervised the new book.

But in recent years, Uderzo's daughter Sylvie had publicly opposed his selling 
his Asterix stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jan/16/asterix-sylvie-uderzo-le-monde>
to a French publishing house and allowing the little Gaul village to live on in 
other people's hands. She went to court to keep control of the comic, appealing 
to "all Asterix readers" in an open letter published in Le Monde in 2009, 
warning that the plucky Gaul needed protection from his "worst enemies: the men 
of industry and finance". Court cases are continuing and father and daughter 
are still not reconciled.

But the Asterix machine grinds on, despite family rifts. Asterix and the Picts 
is slated for a print run of 2m copies inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> alone and will be simultaneously 
released in English, Scots Gaelic and a host of other languages. The huge 
advertising drive by its publishing house will stress the magnitude of what 
French academics call the "Asterix phenomenon".

The head of the National Library of France believes it is the perfect timing 
to cement Asterix's place in the French literary canon. "This is the first time 
that the library has dedicated a major exhibition to a comic-book hero," said 
Jacqueline Sanson, the library's director general. "What's interesting in the 
Asterix phenomenon is that it was a character created for children which became 
just as much reading for adults."

The show stems from Uderzo's gift to the library of 120 storyboards from three 
key albums. The exhibition features more documents loaned by Uderzo, unseen 
storyboards, recreations of the creators' writing and drawing desks and an 
exploration of the myths around Gaul.

Jean-Pierre Mercier, scientific adviser at the comics museum in Angoulême, 
said: "Asterix has gone beyond comic books to become a cultural phenomenon. One 
survey showed French people a drawing of Asterix's helmet alone and 94% knew 
what it was. He's as much a part of French general culture as the three 
musketeers and Victor Hugo: everyone knows the names of the characters even if 
they haven't read it. The catchphrases have entered the mainstream in French."

He said Asterix found success at a time in the early 1960s when frontiers were 
being toppled between high and low art. "Why has Asterix become a myth in 
himself? It's down to a very French dimension: the little guy who's not afraid 
of the big guys, a certain rebelliousness. It played on national cliches and 
stereotypes in a non-aggressive way, without being xenophobic. It addresses 
several audiences at once."
 