
At least nine people were killed today when a Turkish Airlines plane crashed 
into a field as it came in to land at Amsterdam's Schiphol airport, breaking 
into three sections on impact.

Among these who died were the three flight crew, whose bodies remained on the 
stricken plane, officials said. A total of 80 people had been taken to 11 
hospitals around the region, a medical official told a press conference. Six of 
these were very critically hurt and it was not known whether they would 
survive. Five others were seriously hurt, she said.

The mayor of the municipality, Michel Bezuijen, said the Boeing 737-800, 
believed to be carrying 135 passengers and crew, crash landed at 10.31am 
(9.31am GMT). "We cannot say anything about the cause at the moment," Bezuijen 
told reporters . "The priority of the authorities is providing assistance and 
care."

The plane, arriving from Istanbul, was severely damaged as it ploughed into 
the field while approaching the Polderbaan runway, the newest and furthest from 
the terminals at Schiphol, 12 miles from Amsterdam's centre. The impact split 
the fuselage near the front of the wing, while the tail and a rear section of 
the body was sheared off. One of the engines was also ripped from a wing and 
lay around 200 metres from the main wreckage. There was, however, no sign of 
fire or smoke.

Journalists at the scene, a muddy, rutted field edged with a few farm and 
warehouse buildings, about two miles from the runway perimeter, said they had 
seen four or five bodies covered with sheets waiting to be removed. A number of 
other injured people were taken away in stretchers.

Turkey's transport minister, Binali Yildirim, said it was "a miracle" that 
more people did not die. "The fact that the plane landed on a soft surface and 
that there was no fire helped keep the number of fatalities low," he said.

One passenger told Turkey's NTV television that the plane lost height suddenly 
as it came in to land, striking the ground tail first. "We were at an altitude 
of 600 metres when we heard the announcement that we were landing," Kerem Uzel 
said. "We suddenly descended a great distance as if the plane fell into 
turbulence. The plane's tail hit the ground."

Another passenger, Tuncer Mutluhan, told NTV: "While we were making a normal 
landing, it felt like we fell into a void, the plane lost control, suddenly 
plunged and crashed." This happened "in three or five seconds".

A local man said it appeared to him that the plane was gliding without any 
power. "The plane was nose up and the tail section was at a 45-degree angle. 
The tail section broke down first, which broke off," Thomas Freidhoff told the 
BBC. "And seconds after the crash people started exiting through the tail 
section ... I saw dozens of people making it out very quickly, and as I was 
about to dial 911 the first sirens were noticeable, and within five minutes 
there were 10 or 15 ambulances."

Candan Karlitekin, the head of Turkish Airlines's board of directors, said 
that visibility was good at the time flight TK1951 came in to land.

"Visibility was clear and around 5,000 yards [4,500 metres]. Some 550 yards 
before landing the plane landed on a field instead of the runway," he said. "We 
have checked the plane's documents and there is no problem concerning 
maintenance."

The airline was flying relatives of those on the flight to Amsterdam this 
afternoon, after Dutch authorities suspended the usual visa requirements.

The airline described the plane's captain, a former air force pilot, as very 
experienced. Gideon Evers, spokesman of the International Federation of Airline 
Pilots' Associations, said the cause of the crash remained unclear.

"Certainly it appears to be an unusual circumstance, but as always the 
sensible course of action is to wait for the results of the investigation into 
the causes leading up to the accident," he said.

There was no indication that the crash had anything to do with the fuel level, 
Evers said, adding that regulations require all commercial flights to carry 
ample reserves.

The airport, one of the main aviation hubs in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the continent's 
fifth-biggest by passenger numbers, was briefly closed to air traffic after the 
crash, causing some delays and cancellations.

The crash appears to be the worst in the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> since an El Al cargo plane hit 
high-rise apartment blocks in a suburb of Amsterdam in October 1992 , killing 
43 people, 39 of them on the ground.
 