
The Labour shadow work and pensions team of Rachel Reeves and Kate Green have 
this week taken their first steps in defining how employment and support 
allowance (ESA) andthe now infamous Atos "fit for work" tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/25/disabled-charities-fit-to-work-tests-benefit>
 might be reformed under a Labour government.

It has been a long and torturous process to get to this point. For far too 
long, policymakers from all parties refused to see the inherent flaws in a 
tick-box system designed to generalise, punish and restrict. Despite 
overwhelming evidence thatthe tests were failing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/atos-fit-for-work-tests-contract>
, the very issue of welfare reforms is so politically charged that no one had 
any desire to admit it was wrong.

But as I read the article by Reeves and Green 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/how-labour-would-reform-the-work-capability-assessment-9265479.html>
 in the Independent, I was tremendously disappointed. Having waited so long, 
campaigners like me could be forgiven for expecting a detailed plan, packed 
full of recommendations and suggestions. Instead, as is so often the case, 
Labour seem wary of their own message, neither saying one thing nor another in 
a bid to placate that ever dominant middle ground.

However, if we forget about the message for a moment and actually look at the 
content, things don't look nearly as bad. Lurking beneath the caution is a 
whole range of suggestions that sick and disabled people have been calling for. 
For instance:

• Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> says it would transform 
the way the work capability assessment is designed to make it more effective at 
helping disabled people into employment. The current system is a crude 
assessment of people's impairment, with little information about how this 
affects their ability to work.

• Labour would redesign the test, which is currently based on a computerised 
points system, to include a detailed analysis of jobs that individuals could 
actually carry out.

• Under new plans, disabled people would receive a copy of the assessor's 
report of how their health condition may affect their ability to work, and 
information about the support available in their local area to help them.

• Sick and disabled people would be given a central role in monitoring the way 
the tests are run, giving them a statutory role in monitoring the operation of 
the tests and drawing up suggestions for improvements.

• New contracts to run the fitness-to-work tests would be much more closely 
tied to the accuracy of assessments, measured by the number of times that 
decisions are overturned, with clear penalties for poor performance.

So we actually have a plan for true co-production with sick and disabled 
people, a reformed test that looks at the real world of work, punishments for 
failing contractors and involvement in the assessment itself.

Perhaps most importantly, Kate Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kate-green> says that:
 "We want the assessment to be part of the process of ensuring disabled people 
who can work get the support they need to do so, not to threaten or punish 
them. The test should be a gateway to identifying and assembling that support. 
We also recognise not everyone can work and we're committed to ensuring the 
support's in place for those who can't." 
It's hard not to be frustrated that we're so far from where we should be. 
Every day, more lives are ruined, and it's clear from Wednesday's article that 
any real reform will be by baby steps. There will be no "big bang", no moment 
of cathartic triumph. But if we look back at a Labour party who three years ago 
were defining the problem as one of "shirkers" who could work but didn't, the 
direction of travel is clear.

It seems that Labour has finally accepted that the employment and support 
allowance must change. That alone is cause for celebration. However, we still 
seem to be a very long way from knowing how or when.
 