 Like the male nipple and coccyx, the appendix is often viewed as extraneous 
evolutionary baggage that never quite got lost on the long-haul journey to 
modern humanity. Last year, British surgeons whipped out 44,562 of them, mostly 
during emergency operations when, as a result of infection, they rapidly became 
life-threatening. And people carry on perfectly well without them.
So it is late in the day that doctors have reported finally working out what 
this seemingly useless, worm-like few inches of tubing is for. According to a 
team at Duke University Medical School in North Carolina, it acts as a nursery 
for good gut bacteria, all ready to replenish your intestines with microbes 
should the need arise.

In the modern west, that need should never arise. If you suffer an infection 
that destroyed all your gut bacteria, they would soon re-establish themselves 
if you live in a densely populated area, because the bugs are easily picked 
from other people.

But far back in history, when populations were thinly spread, or in countries 
where contact with others is still infrequent, the appendix could be a 
life-saver. A serious bout of dysentery or cholera can strip your guts of 
harmless bacteria that are vital for digesting food. But the appendix is a safe 
haven that stockpiles the organisms, which would gradually be released back 
into the intestine.

Duke surgeon Bill Parker, who published a report on the appendix in the 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, said the location of the appendix, in a cul de 
sac just below the normal one-way system of the large intestine, supports the 
idea.

Cases of appendicitis have been falling in the west for the past half-century, 
largely because of changes in diet to include more fruit and vegetables. Forty 
years ago, there were nearly three times as many operations for acute 
appendicitis. Childhood deaths from appendicitis have fallen more than 85% 
since the 1960s, when death rates were particularly high among children aged 
four and under.
 