
Until the late 19th century much of our city space was owned by private 
landlords. Squares were gated, streets were controlled by turnpikes. The great 
unwashed, many of whom had been expelled from the countryside by acts of 
enclosure, were also excluded from desirable parts of town.

Social reformers and democratic movements tore down the barriers, and public 
space became a right, not a privilege. But social exclusion follows inequality 
as night follows day, and now, with little public debate, our city centres are 
again being privatised or semi-privatised. They are being turned by the 
companies that run them into soulless, cheerless, pasteurised piazzas, in which 
plastic policemen harry anyone loitering without intent to shop.

Street life in these places is reduced to a trance-world of consumerism, of 
conformity and atomisation in which nothing unpredictable or disconcerting 
happens, a world made safe for selling mountains of pointless junk to 
tranquillised shoppers. Spontaneous gatherings of any other kind – unruly, 
exuberant, open-ended, oppositional – are banned. Young, homeless and eccentric 
people are, in the eyes of those upholding this dead-eyed, sanitised version of 
public order, guilty until proven innocent.

Now this dreary ethos is creeping into places that are not, ostensibly, owned 
or controlled by corporations. It is enforced less by gates and barriers 
(though plenty of these are reappearing) than by legal instruments, used to 
exclude or control the ever widening class of undesirables.

The existing rules are bad enough. Introduced by the 1998 Crime and Disorder 
Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/37/contents>, antisocial 
behaviour orders (asbos) have criminalised an apparently endless range of 
activities, subjecting thousands – mostly young and poor – to bespoke laws. 
They have been used to enforce a kind of caste prohibition: personalised rules 
which prevent the untouchables from intruding into the lives of others.

You get an asbo for behaving in a manner deemed by a magistrate as likely to 
cause harassment, alarm or distress to other people. Under this injunction, the 
proscribed behaviour becomes a criminal offence.Asbos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos> have been granted which forbid the 
carrying of condoms by a prostitute, homeless alcoholics from possessing 
alcohol in a public place, a young man from walking down any road other than 
his own, children from playing football in the street. They were used to ban 
peaceful protests against the Olympic clearances.

Inevitably, more than half the people subject to asbos break them. As Liberty 
says, these injunctions "set the young, vulnerable or mentally ill up to fail", 
and fast-track them into the criminal justice system. They allow the courts to 
imprison people for offences which are not otherwise imprisonable. One homeless 
young man was sentenced to five years in jail for begging: an offence for which 
no custodial sentence exists. Asbos permit the police and courts to create 
their own laws and their own penal codes.

All this is about to get much worse. On Wednesday the Antisocial Behaviour, 
Crime and Policing Bill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/anti-social-behaviour-crime-and-police-bill>
 reaches its report stage (close to the end of the process) in the House of 
Lords. It is remarkable how little fuss has been made about it, and how little 
we know of what is about to hit us.

The bill would permit injunctions against anyone of 10 or older who "has 
engaged or threatens to engage in conduct capable of causing nuisance or 
annoyance to any person". It would replace asbos with ipnas (injunctions to 
prevent nuisance and annoyance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/anti-social-behaviour-crime-and-police-bill>
), which would not only forbid certain forms of behaviour, but also force the 
recipient to discharge positive obligations. In other words, they can impose a 
kind of community service order on people who have committed no crime, which 
could, the law proposes, remain in force for the rest of their lives.

The bill also introduces public space protection orders, which can prevent 
either everybody or particular kinds of people from doing certain things in 
certain places. It creates new dispersal powers, which can be used by the 
police to exclude people from an area (there is no size limit), whether or not 
they have done anything wrong.

While, as a result of a successful legal challenge, asbos can be granted only 
if a court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that antisocial behaviour took 
place, ipnas can be granted on the balance of probabilities. Breaching them 
will not be classed as a criminal offence, but can still carry a custodial 
sentence: without committing a crime, you can be imprisoned for up to two 
years. Children, who cannot currently be detained for contempt of court, will 
be subject to an inspiring new range of punishments for breaking an ipna, 
including three months in a young offenders' centre.

Lord Macdonald, formerly the director of public prosecutions, points out that 
"it is difficult to imagine a broader concept than causing 'nuisance' or 
'annoyance'". The phrase is apt to catch a vast range of everyday behaviours to 
an extent that may have serious implications for the rule of law". Protesters, 
buskers, preachers: all, he argues, could end up with ipnas.

The Home Office minister, Norman Baker, once a defender of civil liberties, 
now the architect of the most oppressive bill pushed through any recent 
parliament, claims that the amendments he offered in December will "reassure 
people that basic liberties will not be affected". But Liberty describes them 
as "a little bit of window-dressing: nothing substantial has changed."

The new injunctions and the new dispersal orders create a system in which the 
authorities can prevent anyone from doing more or less anything. But they won't 
be deployed against anyone. Advertisers, who cause plenty of nuisance and 
annoyance, have nothing to fear; nor do opera lovers hogging the pavements of 
Covent Garden. Annoyance and nuisance are what young people cause; they are 
inflicted by oddballs, the underclass, those who dispute the claims of power.

These laws will be used to stamp out plurality and difference, to douse the 
exuberance of youth, to pursue children for the crime of being young and 
together in a public place, to help turn this nation into a money-making 
monoculture, controlled, homogenised, lifeless, strifeless and bland. For a 
government which represents the old and the rich, that must sound like paradise.

• This article was amended on 23 January 2014. The original said that an asbo 
had been granted which prevented "a soup kitchen from giving food to the 
poor".This has been corrected.

Twitter: @georgemonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot> 

A fully referenced version of this article can be found at monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 