
AT&T set itself a target of cutting its electricity use in 2010 by 16% and to 
make $35 million of energy savings across its top 500 locations.

By using an energy scorecard to measure how well an energy team in each 
location was doing, savings have gone beyond the telecommunications company's 
initial target, with a total of $48 million saved through a total of 5,800 
projects, four times the number undertaken in the preceding year.

It tracks and benchmarks energy management at the top 500 locations, allowing 
individual targets to be set for each location. The central energy team reviews 
the results every quarter and then gives each estate manager a score for their 
efforts, taking into account variables such as projects, savings, electricity 
use and training.

The scorecard is a relatively simple and easily replicable idea, but the most 
innovative thing is the way the company has embedded the scorecard into it's 
staff bonus and appraisal system, which sets the AT&T approach apart from other 
similar programmes.

Scorecard results are factored into the annual assessment and rewards of key 
people within the estate management team and in order to achieve their full 
bonus entitlement, managers are required to meet energy performance goals set 
out in their own performance objectives.

Implementing the programme across so many locations was a challenge that 
required careful planning and management, but has been helped by winding 
programme participation into this system of appraisal and reward.

It's thanks to this that AT&T is seeing such big increase in energy saving 
projects and why savings have been much bigger than envisaged.

Instead of pushing energy projects through a top-down approach, the scorecard 
is encouraging individual units to take matters in to their own hands and come 
up with their own ideas.

These are now all shared through a central database to make sure other units 
can benefit from working initiatives.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 