
Before we get down to the business of discussing the best Athens street food, 
a disclaimer: Athens is at a disadvantage when it comes to streetside eats. For 
one thing, a lot of venues –souvlaki joints, pizza parlours and even offal soup 
places – are open all night or even 24/7; they are just not serving on the 
street, though. Whatever the reason, there are really just two main street 
foods in Athens:koulouri (sesame bread) which is eaten early in the morning or 
really, really late at night, and old-fashioned hot dogs, for people who have 
had a bit to drink and are looking for something greasy and filling.

Koulouri

Greeks are not a nation of breakfast eaters, so koulouri, a plain, circular 
bread topped with sesame seeds, tends to be the morning fare for most people. 
There is something seriously sweet and fresh about these bread rings, which are 
sold on most street corners in downtown Athens. The bread must be eaten fresh, 
so it is best consumed early in the morning or at places that have high 
turnover. In recent years, koulouri has evolved similarly to bagels in the US, 
with new flavours in addition to the traditional plain variety. There is now 
koulouri with cheese (usually feta), koulouri with chocolate (not our personal 
favourite), koulouri with cream cheese (an interesting option but not for the 
summer months, as it tends to melt) and, our absolute favourite, koulouri 
stuffed with black or green olives.
 Athens street food Photograph: Manteau Stam/Culinary Backstreets 
Though there are numerous koulouri vendors in Athens, three in particular 
stand out for us. Our preferred stand usually runs out before 2pm, thanks to 
its central location opposite the old Church of Agii Theodori in downtown 
Athens, at the intersection of Dragatsaniou and Evripidou, an area home to a 
number of banks and public services. What we love about this place is that the 
guy also sells small portions of yellow cheese or triangular white cheese (good 
old Laughing Cow) to go with your koulouri. Though nothing fancy, it turns out 
to be quite a lovely breakfast on the go.

For pure freshness, another perennial favourite of ours is the stand outside 
Zara on Ermou Street in Syntagma. The man who runs it always asks how you 
prefer your koulouri (well-baked or not so well-baked). We're also partial to 
the koulouri stand located just where Stadiou meets Paparigopoulou near 
Klafthmonos Square. This guy is famous for two things: the first is the quality 
of his koulouri, which is made with extra leavening and has more of a sourdough 
taste than most versions; the second is the guy's fantastic banter. When you 
ask for koulouri, he asks you how many. If you reply "one", he always says, 
"One equals none."

These days, a bakery named To Koulouri tou Psyri (Agias Theklas 23) – in the 
once hip and happening neighbourhood of Psyri – supplies koulouri to most of 
the street stands around Athens. It started in the 1990s as a tiny, humble, 
hole-in-the-wall bakery for all of the young people who partied in the area. 
Psyri may no longer be fun and hip, but the bakery has become one enormous shop 
that is open virtually 24/7, and it makes a great stop after a night out 
drinking.

Hot dog trucks
 Hot dogs in Athens Photograph: Manteau Stam/Culinary Backstreets 
Our two favourite vromiko 
<http://www.culinarybackstreets.com/athens/2012/food-trucks-part-1/> – a 
colloquial term for food trucks – are both located in downtown Athens and serve 
hot dogs and sandwiches until the early hours. We're also quite fond of two 
other hot dog trucks, the first of which goes by the name Johnie Hot Dog (136 
Andrea Syngrou). This bright red truck is parked on busy Syngrou Avenue outside 
Panteion University, the city's university for social and political sciences. 
Almost a gourmet hot dog truck, it offers four types of sausage and a number of 
"exotic" extras, such as jalapeños. Our favourite is the Athenian version of a 
corn dog, a frankfurter sausage served with sweetcorn, cheddar cheese and mayo. 
At night there is often mayhem here as Syngrou is home to a number of strip 
joints, bouzouki places and nightclubs.

The infamous Meraklis food truck is stationed at the edge of the Phaleron  
<http://www.culinarybackstreets.com/athens/2013/phaleron/>neighbourhood, close 
to both the marina and the tram lines. Meraklis specialises in what one could 
call the down-and-dirty version of a giant charcuterie sandwich, which is a 
veritable protein fest – salami, mortadella, ham, smoked bacon, turkey and 
gouda cheese (you can even opt for blue cheese for that extra kick), all in the 
same sandwich. This is a meat-lovers' sandwich for those who are either 
super-hungry, excessively drunk or, as is usually the case, both.
 