
The economic crisis that has plagued Greece for the past five years has led to 
changes on the Athenian culinary scene, including the opening of three new 
types of venues that seem to be reflective of the times. The first two – 
cupcake places and frozen yogurt shops – are imports from abroad, perhaps 
indicative of a population in need of something sweet, comforting and 
affordable. On the other hand, the third trend, wine bars, digs deep into 
Greece's roots, representing a fascinating phenomenon in a country that is one 
of the world's oldest wine-producing regions.

In antiquity, Greek wine was exported across the Mediterranean, and the 
winemaking tradition has remained strong through the millennia. Yet although 
there are numerous wineries around the country, in the modern era Greek wine 
has never achieved the place it deserves on the international market. 
Production levels are low and vintners have long been unsure of how to market 
abroad. Outside Greece, one might at best find retsina, a sweet wine infused 
with pine resin that's reminiscent of the wine used at Communion, ormavrodafni, 
a red varietal with an almost industrial flavour. But with Greeks themselves
increasingly consuming wine 
<http://www.culinarybackstreets.com/athens/2012/move-over-ouzo/>, these days a 
new crop of wine bars has opened in Athens that give both locals and visitors 
the chance to taste some great domestic varieties.

Oinoscent (which we previously mentioned in our Athens Best Bites of 2012 
<http://www.culinarybackstreets.com/athens/2012/best-bites-of-2012-athens/>) 
was the first wine bar downtown when it opened a few years ago and is still 
very popular with young professionals. The atmosphere – which, unlike most bars 
in Athens, is strictly nonsmoking – is smart yet casual, with aluminium chairs 
and warm decor. (Don't forget to check out the über-sleek wine cellar 
downstairs.) Oinoscent's owners, two lovely brothers in their late twenties, 
are happy to offer informed advice in English about what to choose from the 
wine list. The snacks are also excellent: in addition to the barley rusks 
(think big, fat rustic croutons soaking in olive oil) and olives and the truly 
fantastic cheese platter, there is an excellentmozzarella di bufala with baby 
tomatoes.

The short, carefully selected wine list at Oinoscent is balanced between 
domestic and foreign wines, but the real adventure lies on the list's Greek 
side. We particularly like the Mikri Kivotos, a blend ofagiorgitiko grapes from 
the Nemea region of the Peloponnese andxinomavro grapes from Amyntaio in 
northern Greece. Often characterised as Greece's merlot, xinomavro is one of 
the most promising Greek varieties, at once dark (mavro means black), dry and 
rich in flavor. If you are aiming for white, another interesting option is 
Magiko Vouno ("Magic Mountain"), made by Lazaridi Winery in Drama in Northern 
Greece. This is a popular sauvignon blanc in Greece and is an elegant, 
exuberant wine with fruity notes.
 Oinoscent wine bar. Photograph: Manteau Stam 
Located just off Ermou, Athens' biggest commercial street, Heteroclito (which 
means "heterogenous") opened its doors in late summer 2012. The place is our 
favourite in terms of decor: the downstairs area is like a nonsmoking French 
bistro, while the smoking area upstairs is an ode to 60s and 70s Athens, with 
mosaic floors and Danish furniture. The emphasis here is on Greek wine and 
Greek grape varieties, something that the owners, Madeleine and Chrysoula, are 
always keen to point out. Indeed, all of the wines served by the glass are 
Greek.

We loved the malagousia – one of Greece's best-known aromatic varieties, grown 
in both the Peloponnese and northern Greece – from Arvanitidis Winery outside 
Thessaloniki. This delicate, aromatic white grape had become virtually extinct 
by the 1980s, when Gerovassiliou Winery resuscitated it and turned it into a 
leading Greek wine, especially in the foreign market. Greece's dessert wine 
tradition is also worthy of note. Some of the country's best dessert wines are 
produced by a co-operative on the island of Samos. The award-winning Samos 
Nectar, which has a rich, sweet taste with an almost raisin-like aftertaste, is 
considered one of the best in its category – and, at €4 per glass, it's also a 
great deal.

There are two even newer entries to the roster of downtown Athens wine bars. 
By the Glass took over one of the Syntagma area's most beautiful arcades, 
opposite the city's Russian Orthodox church, to open a clean (no smoking 
allowed) bar with an interesting twist. Customers can pick and choose what they 
want to try and in what quantity, with glasses offered in 25ml, 75ml and 150ml. 
There are about 90 labels available, of which 19 are offered by the glass, 
making the venue a great place to taste different varieties. By the Glass 
attracts a somewhat older and more mature clientele.

Also brand-new, Harvest is located at one of our favourite street corners, 
where the pedestrianised Aiolou meets Evripidou, a traditional downtown trade 
street famous for its spices andpastirma shops. Run by the young and 
enthusiastic Evangelia Kontopoulou, Harvest is a place we have grown to love. 
The decor – funky ceramic tiles on the walls, large communal tables – is 
gorgeous. Thanks to both the menu and the wine list, Harvest attracts a mixed 
crowd, from young couples and singles to folks in their sixties. The food 
selection is reason enough to come here, though the tapas are on the pricy 
side. In our opinion, the best value-for-money items are thetostas, open 
grilled sandwiches served with salad on the side, of which our favourite is the 
one withjamón (Spanish ham) and tomato. We're also fond of the (very Spanish) 
fabada, a delicious mixture of white baby beans and chorizo in red sauce.

We imagine that in a few years from now, Athens will most likely have far 
fewer cupcake bakeries and frozen yogurt stands. This new crop of wine bars, on 
the other hand, seems like it's here to stay. We'll drink to that.

Note: Opening and closing times are to be taken with a grain of salt, as 
Athens bars close when people go home.
• Oinoscent: Voulis 45-47, Syntagma, +30 210 322 9374, Mon-Thurs noon-1am, 
Fri-Sat noon-2am, closed Sunday
• Heteroclito: Fokionos 2, Syntagma, +30 210 323 9406, heteroclito.gr 
<http://www.heteroclito.gr/en/index.html>, Mon-Thurs noon-midnight, Fri-Sat 
12.30pm-1.30am, Sun 5pm-11pm
• By the Glass: Georgiou Souri 3, Syntagma, +30 210 323 2560, Mon-Thurs 
8pm-late, Sat 10pm-late, Sun 11pm-late (closing time depends on business)
• Harvest: Aiolou 64, downtown, +30 213 025 2284, 7pm-2am

This is an article from our Guardian Travel Network. To find out more about it,
click here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/blog/2012/feb/29/guardian-travel-network-city-bloggers>
 