
One of the most revealing moments of Michael Atherton's England career came on 
an ill-fated tour of Zimbabwe when he rose to his full height, which at that 
time was about 4ft 6in, and pronounced that his back injury "was not a cause 
for national concern". Nearly five years on, he has left the nation in no doubt 
that he feels exactly the same way about his retirement.

If he had a choice, Atherton would retire during a news blackout, but the 
Queen Mother, who has a copyright on sombre military music, has no intention of 
helping him out. Instead, he will depart on his own terms, which means that he 
will tell everyone when he's ready. And that includes the England captain, the 
coach and the chairman of selectors.

Atherton is retiring. Certainly. Unless he changes his mind. That much we 
know. Nasser Hussain and David Graveney might express the wish for a definite 
decision before the start of next week's Oval Test, but the best they are 
likely to receive is strong inclination. It might be cussed, it might be 
inconvenient, but it is absolutely justifiable.

Atherton, unwilling to star in his own soap opera, regards the perpetual 
speculation about his future as further proof of the nation's dumbing-down. He 
protects his privacy as determinedly as he protects his wicket.

Atherton insists on the right to go quietly and if that means he is spared a 
single sentimental ovation then so much the better.

"These decisions, I believe, can only be made with a clear head and certainly 
not in the middle of two very important Test matches," Atherton wrote yesterday 
in his Sunday Telegraph column.

"I have played in games where the players have announced their retirements 
beforehand and it can be a distraction to the rest of the team. When I retire I 
will do so in a low-key manner.

"The selectors know which way I am leaning and it is always their prerogative 
to select the side as and how they see fit. For a player it is the most 
important decision he will have to make. Once made there is no going back and 
therefore I intend to give myself a little time to make the right choice."

There is no overriding reason why Atherton should commit himself to the most 
significant decision of his life with the Ashes series still incomplete.

If the England and Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board fixture planner imposed back-to-back Tests at the end of the summer, then 
the inconvenience is of the ECB's own making.

Anyone capable of making a measured judgment now, while England are still in 
danger of a whitewash, would not be focused enough on the task in hand.

"I have also been playing constant international cricket now for 13 years," 
Atherton said. "It demands absolute commitment. Since I do not have children, 
it is easy for me to say, but I believe you either play or don't play. So if I 
were available to tour this winter it would be for both tours and again it 
would be a long commitment. I need to ask myself whether I still have the drive 
and whether the competitive instinct remains as strong as ever."

Until then, he must be living in dread of the possibility that one day soon he 
will throw open the door of the English dressing room to find that his 
team-mates have clubbed together to throw him a surprise party.

"We've heard rumours that you're going, Ath," they would say, "and we can't 
let you go quietly. There are cans of lager in the cool box, we've got a 
karaoke and the stripogram will be along later."

Much better, a slap on the back, a stare into the distance and a satisfied 
sigh. That, and a farewell hundred. He should not be going. But, as Macbeth had 
it, if it were done when 'tis done, then t'were well it were done quickly.
 