
Atlanta Hawks’ player Thabo Sefolosha was acquitted Friday in a case stemming 
from a police fracas outside a trendy New York City nightclub.

A Manhattan jury found Sefolosha not guilty of misdemeanor obstructing 
government administration, disorderly conduct and resisting arrest.

The guard-forward, who suffered a fractured right leg in the 8 April struggle 
with police, was accused of repeatedly disobeying the orders of officers 
telling him to leave the area around the club where anotherNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> player, Chris Copeland, had been 
stabbed.

He testified that he moved off the block at the behest of a vulgar and 
confrontational officer and was trying to give a beggar a $20 bill when he was 
grabbed by officers and taken to the ground.

Lawyer says police targeted NBA star due to race: 'He saw a black man in a 
hoodie'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/07/lawyer-says-police-targeted-nba-star-due-to-race-he-saw-a-black-man-in-a-hoodie>
“They arrested him,” Sefolosha’s attorney, Alex Spiro, said in his closing 
argument. “They broke his leg out of eyeshot or earshot of an unrelated crime 
scene.”

Before the confrontation turned physical, the 6ft 6in Sefolosha said he 
challenged the tone of a particularly aggressive officer who was ushering him, 
former teammate Pero Antic and others. He said he called the 5ft 7in officer “a 
midget.” Charges against Antic later were dropped.

But prosecutors presented a different theory, arguing Sefolosha, a Swiss 
citizen, acted entitled as he slowly departed the 1Oak nightclub. They said he 
eventually locked his arms in front of him to make it more difficult for 
arresting officers to put on handcuffs.

“The police don’t get to tell the defendant how to play basketball,” an 
assistant district attorney, Francesca Bartolomey, said in her summation. “The 
defendant doesn’t get to say where the crime scene ends.”

The case is the second one involving high-profile athletes accusing New York 
Police Department officers of wrongdoing this year. On Wednesday, the city 
agency charged with investigating police misconduct substantiated claims by 
former tennis pro James Blake that an officer used excessive force in taking 
him to the ground and wrongly arresting him last month after mistaking him for 
a fraud suspect.

Spiro, the defense lawyer, has suggested Sefolosha, who is black, was targeted 
because of his race. He pointed to surveillance video showing the white officer 
passing Antic, who also is white, and others as he demandedSefolosha to move up 
the block.

Sefolosha had surgery on his leg and isn’t fully healed. He said he continues 
to undergo rehab and isn’t sure he’ll be ready to play when the NBA season 
starts 27 October.



 