
Atlanta forward Thabo Sefolosha will miss the Hawks’ final four regular-season 
games and the post-season because of a fractured right fibula and ligament 
damage sufferedwhen he and team-mate Pero Antic were arrested early on 
Wednesday in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/08/chris-copeland-of-indian-pacers-stabbed-outside-new-york-nightclub-say-reports>
.


The Hawks confirmed Sefolosha’s injury Thursday and said he will need surgery. 
The Swiss player was limping following the arrest.TMZ later released cell phone 
footage of Sefolosha being thrown to the ground during the arrest 
<http://www.tmz.com/2015/04/09/thabo-sefolosha-video-of-combative-arrest-headlocked-and-taken-down/?ncid=tweetlnkushpmg00000067>
.

“This is a very difficult situation for Thabo and our thoughts and support 
will be with him during his recovery,” Hawks coach Mike Budenholzer said in a 
statement. “We know that his approach and dedication will serve him well in his 
rehabilitation. Our team remains focused and will be prepared as we head into 
the postseason.”

Sefolosha’s attorney, Alex Spiro, said on Wednesday the forward was injured 
during the arrest, which followed the stabbings of Indiana Pacers forward Chris 
Copeland, his girlfriend and another woman on the street near a Manhattan 
nightclub.

Sefolosha and Antic were released without bail after they were charged with 
obstructing governmental authority and disorderly conduct. Spiro said the two 
did not commit a crime and he expects the charges to be dismissed.

The Hawks held out Sefolosha and Antic in Wednesday night’s 114-111 win at the 
Brooklyn Nets and haven’t said when Antic will return.

Budenholzer said Wednesday the team would support Sefolosha and Antic during 
the investigation though he said “we never want to see our players put 
themselves in a potentially negative situation.”

“We will continue to look into the facts of the incident but with the 
information and foundation that we currently have established, we will support 
them through this process,” Budenholzer said in a statement.

Sefolosha and Antic also released a joint statement Wednesday in which they 
apologized “to our respective families, team-mates, and the Hawks organization 
for any negative attention this incident has brought upon them.”

In the joint statement, the players said they would contest the charges.

“As members of the Atlanta Hawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks>, we hold ourselves to a high 
standard and take our roles as professionals very seriously,” the statement 
said. “We will contest these charges and look forward to communicating the 
facts of the situation at the appropriate time.”

The Hawks said Sefolosha’s injuries were disclosed in examinations that 
included an x-ray at Barclays Center on Wednesday and an MRI inAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> on Thursday.

In 52 games, including seven starts, Sefolosha has averaged 5.3 points and 4.3 
rebounds. He is especially valuable in Budenholzer’s system for his defense and 
size on the perimeter.

The Hawks have ample experience without the ninth-year veteran. Sefolosha 
returned on 25 March after missing 23 games with a right calf injury.

The Hawks (59-19) have clinched the No1 seed in the Eastern Conference 
playoffs and will play Charlotte on Friday night.
 