
The contract with Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> to 
administer millions of fit-for-work tests for sick and disabled people a year 
is ending early, the government has announced.

The £500m agreement to carry out work capability assessments had been due to 
end in August next year but following widespread public and political anger 
over the tests, which have been criticised by MPs and campaigners as crude and 
inhumane, the agreement will now end early next year.

There has been mounting evidence that hundreds of thousands of vulnerable 
people have been wrongly judged to be fit for work and ineligible for 
government support. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) said that the 
decision had been reached after "joint negotiations" with Atos. Ministers had 
been in private discussions with the company since the summer over the quality 
of its operation but if the government had terminated the contract it would 
have been faced with a penalty payment.

Mike Penning, the minister for disabled people, said: "The previous government 
appointed Atos as the sole provider for carrying out work capability 
assessments and since then we have carried out several independent reviews and 
made significant improvements to the assessment.

"Today we are announcing that we are seeking a new provider to replace Atos, 
with the view to increasing the number of assessments and reducing waiting 
times.

"I am pleased to confirm that Atos will not receive a single penny of 
compensation from the taxpayer for the early termination of their contract; 
quite the contrary, Atos has made a substantial financial settlement to the 
department." The DWP said that, to ensure a smooth transition, one national 
provider would be appointed early next year to take over the contract. In the 
longer term it intends to move to multiple providers to increase competition. 
Last month,the Guardian revealed that the government was preparing to oust Atos 
from the contract on the basis of a leaked review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/atos-fit-for-work-tests-contract>
, which suggested the DWP was lining up rival firms to take over the agreement.
Ursula Morgenstern, Atos chief executive for UK and Ireland, said 
<http://www.mynewsdesk.com/uk/atos-healthcare/pressreleases/early-exit-from-wca-contract-977418>
: "We are pleased to have reached an agreement with the government to allow us 
to exit this contract early and we remain committed to delivering essential 
services to the UK government as a strategic supplier."

Last year the work and pensions select committee said the government's 
handling of the assessment was damaging public confidence and causing claimants 
"considerable distress".

The committee said the problems with the computer-led, points-based assessment 
"lay firmly with the DWP", but added that the department was failing to apply 
"sufficient rigour or challenge to Atos".

More than 600,000 appeals have been lodged against Atos judgments since the 
work capability assessments began, costing the taxpayer £60m a year. In four 
out of 10 cases the original decisions are overturned.

Charities welcomed the exit of Atos but warned that the entire system needed 
overhauling.

Richard Hawkes, chief executive of the disability charity Scope 
<http://www.scope.org.uk/>, said: "The test should be more than an exercise in 
getting people off benefits. It should make sure disabled people get the 
specialist, tailored and flexible support they need to find and keep a job."

Steve Winyard, RNIB <http://www.rnib.org.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> head of campaigns 
and policy, said Atos's departure "might be welcomed by some but it leaves 
blind, partially sighted and other disabled people in a very uncertain 
situation. DWP will face lots of questions but it also has an opportunity to 
re-examine the whole process."

Richard Kramer, deputy chief executive at the deafblind charity Sense 
<http://www.sense.org.uk/>, called for root-and-branch reform.
 