
For someone as shy and discreet as Audrey Tautou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audrey-tautou>, the next few weeks will be 
feel uncomfortably like putting her head above the parapet again, exposed to 
potshots from her Gallic critics.

On the other hand her British fans, who remember her as the pixie-faced 
heroine ofThe Fabulous Destiny of Amélie Poulain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89588/amelie>, one of the most 
successful French films of all time, can look forward to a feast after the 
famine.

Next month the film Thérèse Desqueyroux, an adaptation of the François Mauriac 
1927 classic released inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> last 
November, in which Tautou plays the title role of a repressed wife who poisons 
her domineering, misogynistic husband, will open in British cinemas.

Around the same time, Tautou will confront her instinct to run away from the 
limelight, having agreed to bemaîtresse de cérémonie at the 66th Cannes Film 
Festival.

Such an honour suggests Tautou has finally made it on to the list of French 
cinema's national treasures, headed byCatherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinedeneuve>. Whether it is enough to 
stop the barbs from French critics, who have never forgiven Tautou for becoming 
a star on the back of the hugely successfulAmélie, is another question.

Thierry Chèze of the monthly movie magazine Studio Ciné Live told the Observer
: "Ordinary people love Audrey, but what you might call the 'intellectual' 
press hatedAmélie and demolished the film. Because she was its symbol, its 
star, it demolished Audrey too.

"There was a section of the French media that just didn't understand how or why
Amélie was such a success. The fact that it and she were so commercially 
successful just made things worse and she got hit even harder. It was 
intellectual snobbery."

In the 12 years since Amélie's release, Tautou has had difficulty shaking off 
the innocent, naive and meddlesome girl from Montmartre who came out with lines 
like: "At least you're not a vegetable – even artichokes have hearts".

As the American critic Anthony Lane wrote in his New Yorker review of her 
performance in the 2009 filmCoco Before Chanel: "The problem for Audrey Tautou 
is that she is doomed to trail clouds of 'Amélie' wherever she goes. Those inky 
round eyes and that pixie mug insure that hers are the features, poor thing, 
that social anthropologists will eternally reach for when asked to illustrate 
the term gamine. Or mignonne."

Playing Tom Hanks's sidekick in the populist but hugely successful The Da 
Vinci Code <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/112366/da.vinci.code> did 
little to soften critical hard-hearts in France.

On learning that Tautou, 36, had been chosen to open and close the Cannes Film 
Festival, the centre-leftNouvel Observateur dismissed Amélie as "unwatchable" 
andThe Da Vinci Code as a "tragic turkey". The magazine hinted that Tautou had 
slightly redeemed herself with her role in Cédric Klapisch's 2002L'Auberge 
Espagnole – which grossed just under $30m worldwide, compared with just under 
$174m forAmélie — and admitted she might redeem herself further with her role 
in Oscar-winning Michel Gondry's adaptation of Boris Vian's novelL'Ecume des 
jours, released in France in 10 days.

However, it added waspishly: "In accepting the role as maîtresse de cérémonie 
and presenting herself in more ambitious films, we might hope the second half 
of Tautou's career might flourish away from mediocrity: to be more precious, 
rare and unique."

No wonder Tautou has long held an ambivalent attitude towards her chosen 
career.

She grew up in rural Auvergne in south-central France and decided she liked 
acting after her father, a dental surgeon, and mother, a teacher – who named 
her after Audrey Hepburn – sent her on a summer course at the renowned Cours 
Florent theatre school in Paris as a reward for passing her baccalaureate with 
honours.

The young Tautou, however, was more interested in painting and drawing, 
subjects her parents doubted would lead to gainful employment.

Instead she was encouraged to study literature at the Sorbonne. After 
graduating, she considered a career studying primates, but gave herself one 
year "and not a day more" to make it as an actress. "I thought, 'I don't want 
to keep doing this job, if this job doesn't want me'. I didn't want to spend 
all my life waiting for the phone to ring and living in a 10 square metres 
apartment. No, no, no. There are too many other wonderful things to do in 
life," she once said.

In that year she was cast in the gentle comedy Venus Beauty, about a young 
beautician who falls in love with a much older pilot who is badly scarred from 
burns. Her performance earned her a César award, much to her surprise. "I was 
so certain I could not be chosen that I thought they had dialled a wrong 
number," she said at the time.

The movie caught the eye of Jean-Pierre Jeunet, who was looking for someone to 
play Amélie after his first choice, the British actress Emily Watson, suddenly 
became unavailable.

Roles followed in Stephen Frears's Dirty Pretty Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/93859/dirty.pretty.things>, The Da 
Vinci Code, Coco Before Chanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130736/coco-before-chanel> and 
Beautiful Lies <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143006/beautiful-lies>, 
directed by Pierre Salvadori, with whom Tautou worked in the 2006 comedy
Priceless.

None of the roles, nor her appointment as the face of Chanel No 5, appears to 
have done much to boost her confidence or make her less of a shrinking violet. 
In a 2011 interview she said: "A few months ago, I watched one of my old movies 
and I thought to myself, 'Oh, Jesus!' Thank God that at the point I made that 
film I didn't realise the extent to which I was terrible. Oh, mon dieu!

"I say to myself, does it simply mean that if in another 10 years I re-watch 
the films I am making today I will say, 'Oh mon dieu, how terrible I was then'."

After The Da Vinci Code, Tautou decided to "calm everything down", walking 
away from Hollywood, saying it didn't suit her and "wasn't the way I want to 
live my life". She once described her attitude as being a surfer turning their 
back on the biggest waves. "I understand that nobody understands me, but I 
can't be someone I'm not."

With Thérèse Desqueyroux, a lodestone of French literature, Tautou has at last 
earned grudging respect from French critics for her portrayal of the tortured 
heroine trapped in a rural marriage of convenience.

French reviewers were less effusive than English-speaking critics like Ed 
Gibbs of theSydney Morning Herald, who wrote: "The French elf rarely puts a 
foot wrong (on home turf, at least). Here, as the fearless, downtrodden wife 
whose husband's toxic medication finally offers a way out, she's in her 
element."

The French were kinder to her than they had been for a long time. Even Le 
Nouvel Observateur admitted that the role had given her a chance to "create a 
character of a complexity and blackness unusual for her (Tautou)". The TF1 film 
critic wrote that Tautou had evolved by seeking "more ambiguous roles than she 
had been used to", adding: "We hope her performance will be noticed by the 
profession that could perhaps give her a César. It would be amply merited."

The César never came, but Tautou told Femina magazine that she had "adored" 
playing Thérèse: "She's not a rebel, she obeys, but that gives her depth. I 
just had a bit of difficulty playing jealous, because I find that feeling 
rather shameful."

She added: "What I have in common with her is being quite obedient, even if I 
admire rebels. Thérèse sees things around her with a lot of distance, she 
analyses all the familiar conventions, that hypocrisy, the hidden violence that 
is omnipresent. I understood her so well that it wasn't hard to play her."

Chèze said that presenting Cannes will be much more of a challenge for the 
actress. "It won't be an easy exercise for Audrey, as she's discreet and 
introverted by nature. She won't like it, but I think she said yes because, 
after all, everyone has to confront their fears and there's (Steven) Spielberg 
heading the jury this year, so it's a huge honour."

He added: "She will probably always be remembered as Amélie; it's just one of 
those things. And whatever people thought of the film, it made Audrey an 
international star."
 