
It has been 1,011 days since a man wearing a gas mask and body armor walked 
into an Aurora,Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado>, movie 
theater during a midnight screening of the Batman film The Dark Knight Rises 
and opened fire on the audience. Twelve people died and 70 were wounded.

From Monday, a jury of 12 must decide the fate of the gunman, James Holmes. 
What the jury must decide is whether the shooting was a calculated mass killing 
or an act of insanity.


Colorado theater shooting: a deadly attack delivered with brutal precision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/20/colorado-theater-shooting-deadly-attack>
For those who were in the theater on 20 July 2012, the trial is both a source 
of trepidation and relief – relief in that it may bring closure to this 
terrible ordeal that shook a Denver suburb to its core.

“It’s hard to say how I’m going to feel when I get on the stand,” said Marcus 
Weaver, a survivor of the movie theater shooting. “I’ve been playing that and 
replaying that in my head for about two and a half years and now that we’re 
getting close, the anxiety is building up.”

That night, Weaver was with a friend. Earlier that morning, the two had met 
for breakfast.Rebecca Wingo 
<http://www.denverpost.com/theatershooting/ci_21146142/shooting-victim-wingo-was-fearless-lived-life-abandon>
, a single mother of two, reminded him he was supposed to take her to the 
midnight premiere.
   Live coverage of the trial 
Weaver admitted that he had completely forgotten, and promised to get tickets. 
That evening, he arrived before Wingo. He retrieved his tickets for the movie, 
which was showing in theater 9 at Aurora’s Century 16 multiplex. He found seats 
in the fifth row, saved them with a red hoodie, and went to buy some snacks.


Just before the movie started, Wingo joined him. The lights dimmed and the 
movie began. Some minutes into the film, Weaver said, he saw a canister fly 
across the screen.

“One of the last things I said to Rebecca was, I looked over at her and said: 
‘I can’t believe someone is doing a smoke bomb. They’re ruining the movie,’” he 
said. “I thought it was a prank.”

Then the gunfire began.

“The sound of that AR-15 rifle is the thing I can’t forget and the thing that 
keeps me up at night,” Weaver said.
 James Holmes in June 2013. Photograph: Andy Cross/AP 
He remembers diving to the floor under a rain of bullets, choking on smoke and 
still not fully grasping what was happening. He said he pushed Wingo to the 
floor too, but felt that she was lifeless.

It wasn’t until he had left the theater and Holmes had been arrested, Weaver 
said, that he realized he had been shot, twice in the right shoulder. The hours 
that followed were a daze. At some point after he left hospital, Weaver said, 
he learned that Wingo hadn’t made it out of the theater alive.

Holmes’ lawyers admit that the former University of Colorado neuroscience 
graduate student killed Wingo and 11 other people, and wounded 70. He has 
pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity to 166 counts of murder, attempted 
murder and other offenses. Under Colorado law, people who are acquitted under 
this defense are committed to a state hospital.

District attorney George Brauchler 
<http://www.law.du.edu/index.php/profile/george-brauchler> is seeking the death 
penalty.

“Justice is death,” Brauchler said in April 2013 when he announced that 
prosecutors would seek the ultimate penalty.

To prevent their client from landing on death row, the defense team will seek 
to prove that Holmes was legally insane at the time of the attack.

In 2013, Holmes’s lawyers wrote in a court filing that he suffered “from a 
severe mental illness and was in the throes of a psychotic episode when he 
committed the acts that resulted in the tragic loss of life and injuries 
sustained by moviegoers on 20 July 2012”.

The jury is expected to hear conflicting assessments on Holmes’s mental state, 
from experts recruited by either side. In total, Holmes underwent several 
psychiatric tests, the results of which have not been publicly disclosed.

Most important and controversial, however, may be a second independent 
evaluation of the accused that was carried out for the court after judge Carlos 
Samour ruled a first to be “incomplete and inadequate”.

Prosecutors had accused Dr Jeffrey Metzner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/19/james-holmes-trial-lawyers-aurora-theater-shooting>
, a psychologist appointed by the Colorado Mental Health Institute to examine 
Holmes, of bias.

There is so much humanity in actually finding him insane. And that’s going to 
be part of the defense lawyers’ job
Iris Eytan 
“There is so much humanity in actually finding him insane,” said Iris Eytan 
<http://www.rplaw.com/iris-eytan/>, an attorney in Denver who specializes in 
representing mentally ill defendants. “And that’s going to be part of the 
defense lawyers’ job, to really make that a prominent part of the case. To show 
that his illness isn’t who he is, that it’s a part of who is. And that he is a 
human being.”


About 9,000 prospective jurors, thought to be the biggest pool in US judicial 
history, were summoned to Arapahoe County district court. The pool was 
eventually whittled to 12 jurors and 12 alternates, among them a lawyer, a 
special needs teacher and a survivor of the 1999 Columbine high school 
shooting, which occurred just 30 miles from Aurora.

“That we were going to find a fair jury after these tragedies in Colorado was 
always going to statistically be a huge challenge,” Eytan said.

The jurors who were selected were asked at several turns if they would be able 
to set aside their biases and preconceptions about the case to serve 
impartially. They will be asked to decide whether Holmes was indeed insane when 
he plotted the attack.

If he is convicted, the jury will be asked to decide in a second phase of the 
trial whether he should be executed or sentenced to life in prison. If he is 
found not guilty, he will be sentenced indefinitely to a state facility.

Even though Colorado’s constitution allows the death penalty, only one person 
has been executed there since 1976, when the US supreme court ended a brief 
moratorium on the death penalty in the state. Colorado currently has three men 
on death row. One was set to be executed in 2013, before the governor, John 
Hickenlooper, granted “an indefinite reprieve”.

In an open letter published by the Denver Post 
<http://www.denverpost.com/ci_27166155/holmes-parents-our-son-is-mentally-ill>, 
Holmes’s parents, who have mostly avoided speaking to the media and declined to 
speak to the Guardian, pleaded for their son’s life.

“He is a human being gripped by a severe mental illness,” they wrote. “We have 
always loved him, and we do not want him to be executed.”

‘This tragedy will always be with us’
 A defense attorney reviews documents with suspect James Holmes. Photograph: 
Andy Cross/AP 
Holmes’s case has been beset by delays, pre-trial disputes, an avalanche of 
legal paperwork and the appointment of a replacement judge. That judge, Carlos 
Samour Jr, has said he would like the trial to finish by Labor Day, Monday 7 
September.


Residents admit that the next few months will be difficult ones, as a crush of 
media returns to the city, ensuring that photos of Holmes, who has in the past 
appeared in court with wild eyes and dyed orange hair, will be splashed across 
every newspaper and television station. But for those affected, the trial 
brings with it the hope for closure.

In a statement to the Guardian, Aurora mayor Steve Hogan said: “Our thoughts 
and prayers are with the victims, families and responders as they move into 
this very difficult time.


“Our community continues to heal and care for each other. And, while this 
tragedy will always be with us, it does not define us.”


“People are going to be happy when it’s done, whether it’s because there might 
be found a sense of closure in it, or because it’s going to just stop being 
promoted everywhere,” said AJ Focht, a member of Aurora Rise 
<http://www.aurorarise.org>, a charity founded to help those affected by the 
tragedy.

Focht, who works at a comic-book store in Aurora, was in the theater the night 
of the attack, but had seats near the back. He said joining the nonprofit, 
founded by the owner of the comic store, was his way of processing the events 
that night.

“I wanted to see how I could help everyone else because I walked out of the 
theater just fine,” Focht said. The charity hosts events and benefits to raise 
money for the victims and their families.

“Hopefully,” he said, “when the trial ends and everything is set and done, it 
will help the shadow pass over Aurora.”

Marcus Weaver said that in the more than two and a half years since the 
shooting he has completely changed, both mentally and physically.

He underwent surgery to help stop the numbness he felt in his arm many times a 
day. He married a woman he met through his church. They are expecting a 
daughter.

There’s not a day, an hour or a second that I don’t think about what happened 
that night on the floor of that theater.

“As time went on, the theater got this small and my life got this big,” he 
said, gesturing with his hands.

He added: “I don’t have nightmares as much anymore … but I still think about 
the theater. There’s not a day, an hour or a second that I don’t think about 
what happened that night on the floor of that theater.”

Weaver said he expected to testify during the trial and said he planned to be 
in court for the opening statements on Monday. He said he has gone back and 
forth on what punishment he believes Holmes should receive. In the end, Weaver 
said, he would rather wait and see what the jury decides.

“It’s not up to me,” he said. “I’m just a piece of a bigger puzzle … I’m going 
to play my part and once I play my part I’m going to do the best I can to move 
away from it a little bit and enjoy life for a while and not just have this 
constant feeling and all these emotions about this person.”

Ultimately, Weaver said he hoped the case would bring closure for the 
survivors and families who needed it. As for him, he’s doing his best to 
untangle his life from Holmes.

“I am OK with whatever happens,” he said. “My happiness will not come from 
that, It comes from seeing my wife every day. It comes from hanging out with my 
son … That’s where my happiness really comes from.”

 