
James Holmes was on Thursday found guilty of the first-degree murder of 12 
people during a midnight screening of the Batman film The Dark Knight Rises in 
2012.

The guilty ruling means that the trial now enters the sentencing phase, where 
jurors will decide Holmes’s fate. Prosecutors have said they will seek the 
death penalty, which has only been carried out once inColorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> in the past 38 years.

Family members of the victims wept as Judge Carlos Samour Jr read the verdict 
Thursday afternoon. Tissue boxes were scattered throughout the courtroom.

Holmes, dressed in a striped blue shirt, stood and stared silently ahead as he 
listened to the ruling.

Jurors sat quietly in the jury box as they passed a large stack of manila 
folders containing the verdicts to the judge. Due to the volume of charges, 
Samour sifted through the verdicts for 180 excruciating seconds as Holmes and 
the victims’ families waited to hear his fate. For over an hour, he read each 
of the charges individually, repeating over and over: “guilty”.

The jury reached its verdict after just 13 hours of deliberation.

When the judge found Holmes guilty of the attempted murder of Josh Nolan, the 
victim, sitting 30ft away, closed his eyes and nodded.

The jury reduced five of the attempted murder charges from first-degree to 
second-degree.

The verdict came down nearly three years to the day after the massacre in the 
movie theater took place. The trial lasted 11 weeks and featured 256 witnesses 
as well as thousands of pieces of evidence.

The jury, composed of nine women and three men, received the completed case on 
Tuesday evening after closing arguments wrapped up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/15/aurora-shooting-trial-james-holmes-closing-arguments-verdict>
. They began deliberations the following morning.

Holmes had faced 165 separate charges: two charges of first-degree murder for 
each of his deceased victims, two charges of attempted murder for each of the 
victims he wounded, and one charge of explosives possession.

Aurora shooting suspect had prior homicidal thoughts says psychiatrist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/aurora-shooting-trial-psychiatrist-testifies>
The defense lawyers never denied that Holmes carried out the brutal cinema 
rampage, but argued instead that the then 24-year-old was legally insane at the 
time and thus was not culpable for his actions. They argued that he was driven 
by his belief in a theory called “human capital”, whereby killing others 
increased his own self-worth.

“Mental illness caused this to happen. Only the mental illness caused this and 
nothing else,” Holmes’s public defender, Dan King, said in closing arguments.

Prosecutors, led by district attorney George Brauchler, argued vehemently that 
Holmes might indeed have suffered from mental illness in the past, but well 
understood his actions when he prepared for and carried out his massacre. 
Brauchler pointed to Holmes amassing his arsenal over the course of many weeks 
and repeatedly discussing killing people online and in counseling.

In Colorado, the burden of proof of a defendant’s mental illness in cases with 
an insanity plea rests with the prosecution. That side’s argument was 
buttressed by the fact that the court’s two appointed forensic psychiatrists, 
William Reid and Jeff Metzner, both declared that while Holmes suffered from 
mental illness, he knew enough to be judged legally sane at the time of the 
shooting.

During the trial, prosecutors relied on emotionally jarring video, audio and 
testimony from survivors to make their case. They wrapped up their case by 
putting one of the victims, Ashley Moser, on the stand. Moser was pregnant 
before the shooting, but was left paralyzed and suffered a miscarriage. It 
wasn’t until days later that doctors informed Moser that her six-year-old 
daughter, Veronica Moser-Sullivan, who was at the movie theater with her, was 
killed in the rampage. “I was told that she didn’t make it,” Moser testified in 
June. “That she had passed away.”

The trial, which began on 27 April, was presided over by Judge Carlos Samour 
Jr. Nine thousand jury summonses were originally issued, thelargest number 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2015/01/20/jury-selection-to-begin-in-colorado-theater-shooting-trial/>
 ever sent for a single trial in US history. The judge said last November: “The 
court has decided to summon 9,000 prospective jurors instead of 6,000. It will 
be much easier to call off prospective jurors who are not needed than it will 
be to adjust if there are insufficient prospective jurors.”

Before the trial began, Holmes had offered 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/29/aurora-shooting-spree-trial-james-holmes-plea-rejected_n_2977121.html>
 to plead guilty if prosecutors agreed to forgo the death penalty. That offer 
was rejected.
 