
A state-appointed psychiatrist who examined James Holmes two years after his 
attack on aColorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> movie 
theater said on Thursday that whatever he suffered from that night, he knew 
what he was doing.

Dr William Reid told jurors he believed Holmes knew the consequences when he 
opened fire at a midnight Batman movie premiere, killing 12 people and wounding 
58. Twelve others were injured in the chaos.

Reminded that his task was to determine whether Holmes was legally sane during 
the attack, Reid declared: “Whatever he suffered from, it did not prevent him 
from forming intent and knowing the consequences of what he was doing.”

The comment briefly frustrated the prosecutor, who said his witness had jumped 
ahead of him, and prompted the defense to ask for a mistrial.

Judge Carlos Samour ultimately denied the request, even as he acknowledged 
that it might confuse jurors on about Colorado’s legal definition of sanity, 
the key question of the trial. They must decide whether Holmes’s disease or 
deficient mental state left him unable to form “a culpable mental state” at the 
time the crime was committed.

Essentially, the judge said, Reid was supposed to limit his opinions to 
whether Holmes was capable of understanding right from wrong – but not whether 
he actually understood it.

“I do think someone could misunderstand the use of the term ‘prevent’,” Samour 
said, but he ruled that Reid’s overall comments didn’t violate that subtle 
boundary.

After a long break to settle the question, district attorney George Brauchler 
asked Reid “to be precise” about his findings, and the psychiatrist gave the 
briefest possible responses.

Did Holmes have a serious mental illness? 

Colorado shooting trial: 'He tried to murder a theater full of people to make 
himself feel better'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/27/james-holmes-trial-colorado-aurora-theater-shooting>
“Yes.”

Despite that illness, did Holmes have “the capacity to know right from wrong” 
on 19 and 20 July, the night of the attack?

“Yes.”

Did Holmes have the capacity to form the intent to act after deliberation, and 
to act knowingly?

“Yes.”

And did Holmes meet the legal definition of sanity? 

“Yes.”

Holmes has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity, but Colorado law gives 
the state the burden to prove he was sane, and therefore guilty. Prosecutors 
want him executed, not sent to a mental hospital.

Aurora shooting survivors prepare for trial: 'This tragedy does not define us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/27/aurora-theater-shooting-james-holmes-trial-colorado>
The appearance of Reid, who spent 22 hours interviewing Holmes in July 2014, 
follows a month of testimony from victims, first responders and investigators. 
The judge asked for Reid’s interview after prosecutors challenged the 
conclusions of the first state-ordered review of his sanity, by Dr Jeffrey 
Metzner in December 2013.

By then, Holmes had been anti-psychotic medicine for months, in part because 
20 doctors who treated Holmes after his arrest agreed he suffers from a serious 
psychotic illness, defense attorney Dan King said early in the trial.

Earlier this week, prosecutors showed jurors what Holmes wrote in his notebook 
before the attack, such as an estimated time for the police response (“3 mins”) 
and diagrams of the theater complex showing which auditorium had the fewest 
exits where victims might escape.

With detailed maps and cramped handwriting, Holmes sketched out a chilling 
list of choices: mass murder or serial murder; attack a theater or an airport; 
use guns, bombs or biological warfare.

The graduate student in neuroscience also sought to diagnose himself, listing 
13 ailments including schizophrenia and “borderline, narcissistic, anxious, 
avoidant and obsessive compulsive personality disorder”.

“So, anyways, that’s my mind,” Holmes wrote. “It’s broken. I tried to fix it.”
 