
Katie Medley was nine months pregnant, so she picked a seat near the exit 
door, just in case she went into labor when her husband and a friend took her 
to see the Batman premiere nearly three years ago.

She saw the man in combat gear slip through the door and toss a can through 
the air, filling the theater with teargas as he fired at the audience. She 
dropped to the floor, squeezing with her belly between the chairs, and couldn’t 
understand why her husband was still sitting upright.

Colorado shooting trial: 'He tried to murder a theater full of people to make 
himself feel better'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/27/james-holmes-trial-colorado-aurora-theater-shooting>
Then she saw he had been shot through the eye, his face was gushing blood. She 
had to decide: stay with him, or flee in hope of saving their unborn son?

Medley, the first witness called as testimony began on Tuesday in the death 
penalty trial of James Holmes, said she took the hand of her husband and felt 
him squeeze hers back.

“I told him that I loved him and that I would take care of our baby if he 
didn’t make it,” said Medley, who gave birth to a healthy son, now three, as 
Caleb underwent brain surgery in the same hospital.

Caleb, an aspiring comedian, survived with terrible injuries. His speech is 
barely intelligible, and he was pushed to the witness stand in a wheelchair. He 
answered questions on Tuesday by pointing to letters on a poster board for a 
court interpreter.

Defense attorneys said Holmes has “essentially admitted” killing 12 people and 
injuring 70 more, so there’s no reason to make survivors relive their horror in 
the courtroom for months on end.

Instead, they want to focus on what was going on inside his mind, which they 
say was so addled by schizophrenia that his sense of right and wrong was 
distorted, and he lost control over his actions.

Perhaps signaling a strategy they will use with many other victims whose lives 
were turned inside out by the shooting, the defense had no questions for the 
Medleys.

And Katie Medley kept her composure, even as her husband’s injuries were put 
on display. But she sobbed as she returned to her seat in the courtroom, 
comforted by others who said she had done a good job.

Holmes, who is being harnessed to the floor by a cable under his clothes, sat 
quietly. His parents, Robert and Arlene, showed no reaction from their seats in 
the second row.

Aurora shooting survivors prepare for trial: 'This tragedy does not define us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/27/aurora-theater-shooting-james-holmes-trial-colorado>
The trial’s opening statements on Monday revealed many details about Holmes’s 
life before, during and after the shootings that had remained shrouded in 
mystery due to the judge’s gag order.

Defense lawyers portrayed him as a “good kid” who enjoyed surfing with his 
family and never got in trouble, but who also sensed something wrong with his 
mind, even at a young age.

He hoped studying neuroscience at the University of Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> would help him fix his thoughts, 
but “psychosis bloomed” instead and delusions commanded him to kill as many 
people as he could, they said.

District attorney George Brauchler depicted a frighteningly smart killer who 
meticulously planned and carried out the mass murder to make himself feel good 
and be remembered, while knowing that it was immoral and illegal.

He also revealed that two court-appointed psychiatrists concluded that Holmes 
was sane when he opened fire, chasing moviegoers up and down the aisles and 
shooting at people who tried to flee.

Public defender Daniel King countered that Holmes was psychotic at the time, 
and that every doctor who has seen him – 20 in all – agreed he suffers from 
schizophrenia.

Holmes has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. His defense hopes jurors 
will agree and have him indefinitely committed to a mental institution. 
Prosecutors say he was sane and should be executed.
 