
Prosecutors in the Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> 
theater shooting trial were wrapping up their case on Friday against James 
Holmes after eight weeks of testimony in which they sought to show that the 
former neuroscience student meticulously planned and carried out the 2012 
massacre while knowing it was wrong.

As they have throughout their case, prosecutors also sought to drive home the 
emotional impact of the shootings, which killed 12 people and wounded 70.

The day began with a tearful Petra Hogan describing being shot in the face and 
arm at the suburban Denver movie theater. It was likely to end with testimony 
from a survivor who was paralyzed and suffered a miscarriage, and whose 
six-year-old daughter died in the attack.

The five-member prosecution team has relied on Holmes’s own videotaped 
statements to a state-appointed psychiatrist to undermine Holmes’s claim that 
he was so mentally ill he didn’t know right from wrong during the attack.

They tried to weave a powerful story by mixing dramatic recollections of 
victims with technical testimony. Weapons dealers and investigators described 
how Holmes spent thousands of dollars to amass an arsenal of guns, ammunition, 
body armor and enough chemicals to rig his apartment into a potentially deadly 
booby trap.

Classmates at the University of Colorado-Denver, a former girlfriend and two 
university psychiatrists who treated him before the shooting all testified that 
they knew nothing of his plans to attack a midnight showing of the Batman movie 
The Dark Knight Rises on 20 July 2012.

But prosecutors showed Holmes’s spiral notebook, in which he made lists of 
weapons he planned to buy and included detailed drawings of the suburban Aurora 
theater complex complete with pros and cons of attacking different auditoriums. 
He wrote about an “obsession to kill” he held since childhood.

“Interspersing that argument with so many victims was a reminder of the 
devastation that one man caused,” said Karen Steinhauser, a Denver defense 
attorney and former prosecutor who is not involved in the case.

One former fellow student testified that Holmes told her to stay away from him 
just over a week before he carried out the deadly attack.

Hillary Allen said she texted Holmes to check on him 8 July 2012, about a 
month after he said he was dropping out of school. He told her he had a form of 
mania and that she should avoid him, saying he was “bad news bears”.

During their text exchange, Allen asked Holmes if his condition was 
manageable. He responded: “It was. Floodgates open now.”

Prosecutors also planned to call one of the most grievously injured: Ashley 
Moser, the woman who was paralyzed and lost her daughter, Veronica.

Moser planned to tie up a case that opened with testimony from Katie Medley, 
who was nine months pregnant when her husband, Caleb, was shot in the head 
while seated next to her. Medley spoke about her decision to leave him behind 
in the theater in order to save their baby. She later gave birth in the same 
hospital where Caleb was in a coma. He can no longer walk and has trouble 
talking.

In Colorado, prosecutors have the burden of proof in trying to convince the 
jury to reject Holmes’s plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. They showed 
jurors – over strong defense objections – nearly 21 hours of Holmes’s 
videotaped interviews with a state-appointed psychiatrist who concluded Holmes 
was seriously mentally ill but legally sane at the time of the shooting.

Prosecutors pointed out that Holmes was going to the gym up until a couple 
weeks before the shooting, and that he after he was jailed, he was requesting 
highbrow literature from the classic novel Don Quixote to Plato.

“There was no stone left unturned, there was no ‘T’ uncrossed, no ‘I’ 
undotted,” Steinhauser said of the prosecution’s case.

Now the four defense lawyers will begin calling their own psychiatrists and 
presenting other evidence to argue Holmes should be found not guilty. They plan 
to begin their case next Thursday.
 