
Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> theater shooter James 
Holmes was formally sentenced to life in prison without parole on Wednesday, 
more than three years after he carefully planned and executed a merciless 
attack on hundreds of defenseless moviegoers who were watching a midnight 
Batman premiere.

Judge Carlos A Samour Jr had no other sentencing option after a jury earlier 
this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/08/aurora-shooting-shock-in-wake-james-holmes-verdict>
 did not unanimously agree that Holmes should get the death penalty. The judge 
issued his sentence after two days of testimony from survivors of the attack, 
including first responders.

Holmes killed 12 people and injured 70 others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/24/colorado-theater-shooting-judge-defends-life-sentence>
 in the 20 July 2012 ambush. He was convicted of first-degree murder and 140 
counts of attempted first degree murder, as well as an explosives charge.

Colorado prisons officials will determine where Holmes will be incarcerated 
after an evaluation that includes his mental health. Holmes, who has been 
diagnosed with varying forms of schizophrenia, could wind up in the corrections 
department’s mental hospital, the 250-bed San Carlos correctional facility in 
Pueblo. He also could be transferred to an out-of-state prison.

Holmes moved from California to Colorado in 2011 and entered a prestigious 
postgraduate neuroscience program at the University of Colorado, Denver. But he 
dropped out after a year; by that time, he was well into planning the attack 
and stockpiling ammunition. He rigged his apartment to explode on the night of 
the attack, hoping to divert first responders from the Aurora theater. The 
homemade devices didn’t go off.

In July, the jury rejected Holmes’s insanity plea, finding he knew right from 
wrong. But it couldn’t unanimously agree on the death penalty, meaning Holmes 
was automatically sentenced to life in prison. Prosecutors subsequently said 
one juror refused to sentence Holmes to death, apparently swayed by defense 
arguments that he did not deserve execution because he suffers from mental 
illness.

To the end, Holmes’s state-appointed attorneys blamed the massacre on his 
schizophrenia and psychotic delusions. They said Holmes had been obsessed with 
the idea of mass killing since childhood, and he pursued neuroscience in an 
effort to find out what was wrong with his brain.

Prosecutors pointed both to Holmes’s elaborate planning for the attack and his 
refusal to divulge to anyone – family, friends, psychiatrists – that he was 
thinking, and planning, murder.

Holmes stockpiled guns and ammunition and mapped out the Aurora theater 
complex to determine which auditorium would allow for the most casualties. He 
even calculated police response times.
 