
After one of the most horrific mass shootings in American history, there was 
widespread surprise in Colorado after the gunman, James Holmes, wasspared the 
death penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/aurora-jury-sentencing-verdict-james-holmes>
.

Aurora theater gunman James Holmes sentenced to life in prison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/aurora-jury-sentencing-verdict-james-holmes>
“I would’ve thought everyone would’ve been caught up in the emotion and given 
him the death penalty,” Chris Belila, 42, told the Guardian outside a Denver 
coffee shop on Saturday, a day after the life sentence was handed down.

But while Belila said that he would have advocated for the death penalty in 
the case, “what separates us from Holmes is the ability to be rational and 
choose not to take a life”.

Twelve people died and 70 were injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/20/colorado-theater-shooting-deadly-attack>
 when Holmes opened fire in an Aurora movie theater on 20 July 2012. He was
found guilty in July this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-murder-trial-verdict>
.

On Friday, the jury deliberated for less than seven hours before sentencing 
Holmes to life in prison without the possibility of parole, rejecting 
prosecutors’ request that he be given the death penalty. The decision brings to 
a close a three-month trial that featured hundreds of witnesses and thousands 
of pieces of evidence.

After the sentencing verdict came in, district attorney George Brauchler 
summed up his feeling with one word: “frustrated”. Brauchler added that “it’s 
not personal disappointment”, but rather said he “would’ve liked a different 
outcome for the victims”.

“I already apologized to them,” said Brauchler. “I am responsible for this 
decision. I came up short and that’s my fault.”

Many survivors and family members were distraught in the courtroom when judge 
Carlos Samour Jr read the jury’s verdict. One man rushed out of the courtroom 
moments later; others held each other and wept.

Outside the courthouse, though, many loved ones of those who died and were 
wounded in the shooting expressed relief not only that the trial was over, but 
that the death penalty had not been handed down.

Tom Teves, whose 24-year-old son Alex was killed in the shooting, told 
reporters he “was against” seeking the death penalty. Even so, he expressed 
“sympathy for other victims” who wanted to see Holmes executed.

Similarly, Lonnie and Sandy Phillips, parents of the 24-year-old victim 
Jessica Ghawi, said that “when this started we weren’t big believers in the 
death penalty”, although they understood Brauchler’s decision to seek it.

I already apologized. I am responsible for this decision. I came up short and 
that’s my fault
DA George Brauchler 
“Our vote was to get it over with and move on with our lives,” Lonnie Phillips 
said.

Sandy Phillips noted how “thankful” they were for Brauchler’s efforts, and 
said she hoped “he becomes a Democrat so I can support him”. Brauchler is a 
Republican whom many assume will eventually run for political office.

Not everyone was so glowing of Brauchler, however. Denver resident Phil 
Crimaldi, 34, criticized the prosecutor for “wasting millions of taxpayer 
dollars on something they could’ve gotten two years ago”.

Holmes’ defense team offered a guilty plea if prosecutors agreed not to seek 
the death penalty and instead accept life in prison without the possibility of 
parole. That deal was rejected.

Brauchler defended that rejection, calling the criticism “outrageous” and 
saying: “This kind of a crime cries out for community involvement in the 
sentence.”

The sense of shock at the jury’s decision was evident on the face of Robert 
Sullivan, grandfather of Veronica Moser-Sullivan, a six-year-old girl who was 
the youngest person killed in the theater. Speaking to reporters outside the 
courthouse, he lashed out at jurors, declaring that the verdict “doesn’t make 
sense and I don’t believe it”.

Sullivan floated a theory that there was “an infiltrator in the jury” who had 
managed to get selected just to spare Holmes’ life. Though it is unknown how 
the jury voted, all 12 members had to be unanimous in order to hand down the 
death penalty. Sullivan said the lack of a death penalty sentence “will give
Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> a very ugly face”.

His astonishment was shared by many. Another Denver resident, Fred Henrich, 
72, said he was both “surprised when they didn’t find him insane” and then, 
after Holmes was declared legally sane and thus guilty, “surprised they didn’t 
give him the death penalty”.

His friend Joe Salvatore, 69, also of Denver, had a theory of his own. 

“The sentiment for the death penalty is a mile wide and an inch deep,” he 
said. “Everyone sitting around a coffee shop wants him to get the chair. But 
when you’re sitting in the jury box and you have a man’s life in your hands and 
can see his face, it’s different.”

One thing the end of the trial did not bring was a sense of closure for the 
victims. Speaking on behalf of the families, Aurora police chief Nick Metz said 
this was not the end of the grieving process.

Waco, Columbine, Aurora and Newtown: 20 years of mass shootings that changed 
(and didn't change) America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/mass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston>
“Please don’t ever say there’s going to be closure, because there’s not going 
to be,” Metz said.

Robert Sullivan agreed, saying he felt “no measure of closure” and that the 
lack of the death penalty “makes it worse”.

Other family members of victims took a more hopeful tone, even those who 
supported the death penalty like Dave Hoover, who lost his 18-year-old nephew 
AJ Boik in the shooting.

“Tomorrow, the sun’s gonna come up and there will still be love in our lives,” 
Hoover said.

Tom Sullivan, whose son Alex was killed in the theater on his 27th birthday, 
agreed.

“The journey I’m on is far from over,” he said. 

But he added: “Love wins every time and justice will prevail in the end.”
 