
England's victorious Ashes campaign was compelling enough in its own right to 
make sleep deprivation a palatable hardship. But for older cricket fans, who 
remembered the meagre fare of the BBC's haphazard live screening of tours in 
the 1980s, the myriad opportunities to follow it seemed like a paradise, to 
paraphrase Philip Larkin, we dreamed of all our lives.

Alongside the over-by-over coverage, the internet has opened up the 
possibility of listening to commentary streams from Australia to complement 
Test Match Special's excellent coverage, particularly during the shipping 
forecasts. And those tuning in to ABC, particularly its Grandstand Reflections 
end-of-play wrap, will have discovered rich baritone voices and fresh, quirky 
insights.

I admit I originally switched over hoping to indulge in a spot of 
schadenfreude, thinking the home pundits would be chafing at England's 
marmalising performances with bat and ball. Instead I stumbled across a treat, 
with Kerry O'Keeffe and Terry Alderman idiosyncratically but judiciously 
analysing Australia's fall from grace and applauding the tourists' mettle and 
verve.

Take O'Keeffe on the enigma of Mitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>, summing up succinctly and 
vividly the dilemma of this infuriating target of the Barmy Army's acerbic 
scorn. "You buy him at his price," said O'Keeffe. "He plays silly shots to get 
out and bowls lots of pies but inbetween times he smites big sixes and bowls 
unplayable deliveries."

They may say "gee" more times in one session than Richie Cunningham managed in 
the entire run of Happy Days but they fill the day with a gift for redolent 
language for which Australian commentators seem to have a happy knack.

Listening to TMS's guest summarisers over the years we have become familiar 
with "death rattle", "new rock" and a fast bowler having "wheels". Alderman, 
though, a cross between Sir Les Patterson and Stanley Unwin, managed to 
introduce a couple more to the vernacular. To him slogging is "going cocoa" 
while Australia's habit of wastefully sticking to a middle-stump line was 
because they were "straining to get poles", or guilelessly only interested in 
bowling batsmen out.

For those of us for whom the only regular Australian voices we heard in 
childhood were Richie Benaud's and Alan McGilvray's, this was a different tone 
entirely. McGilvary's peppery, episcopal pronouncements were a delight but one 
felt on Brian Johnston's side when with impish glee he used to play the regular 
trick on his guest of asking for his opinion moments after he had bitten into a 
slice of cake.

On ITV4 we got Channel 9's coverage and the roster of commentators that we got 
to witness occasionally on the 1982-83 tour and whose characters were burnished 
by bootleg copies of The 12th Man in the years we could not listen to them. The 
one-day internationals will probably be the last time we can enjoy the four 
stalwarts of Billy Birmingham's act. Benaud is 80, Bill Lawry 73, Ian Chappell 
67 and Tony Greig 64. But what a legacy they leave.

The influence of The 12th Man parodies, far less affectionate than they used 
to be, even brought us Michael Slater on TMS doing an impression of 
Birmingham's signature Benaud soundbite, "222 for two", or "Choo, choo, choo 
fer choo" and Lawry's "Got him, yes!" The spoof Lawry is always portrayed as a 
typically robust Australian with "C'mon Aussie, c'mon" Ockerish tendencies, 
saying to batsmen who have been hit: "Get up you big poof and show some ticker."

The real Lawry, though, comes across as someone who genuinely adores the game. 
What we took as tubthumping when Australia routinely humiliated England on five 
previous tours was, it seems to me now, more disappointment at the inadequacies 
of the players' technique and temperament. Far from being mortified by 
England's dominance, he has been revelling in the great cricket they have 
played and unbegrudgingly handing out the laurels. Even Ian Healy, the epitome 
of merciless fortitude on the field and uncompromisingly candid judgments off 
it, has been the very opposite of a sore loser, graciously giving the victors 
their due honour. That may change during the one-day series if Australia 
exhibit their customary strengths in the format but I would urge you to catch 
them while you still can.

By contrast with football, where witless commentary can find no synonym for 
good other than "fantastic" and where sloppy is the new vogue word for bad, 
these broadcasters have been a joy to hear, minting new phrases and conveying a 
sense of wonder at England's historic achievements. This is not meant to 
denigrate the home commentators on the conventional outlets, who have been on 
effervescent form but it is a rare privilege to have such breadth to explore. 
One complaint, though. It can be very difficult to fall asleep when you're 
laughing out loud.
 