
Wimbledon crowds could learn a lot from the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Like us, the Australians 
have no players to speak of, so they do the next best thing and adopt a few for 
the purposes of the fortnight. They fell in love with Martina Hingis. Then it 
was Kimmy Clijsters, the Belgian obliging by getting engaged to Lleyton Hewitt 
until that relationship went the way of all soap operas. Now it's Aussie Ana.

If Ana Ivanovic has said it once, she has said it a hundred times, that she 
just loves Australia, and a few moments after reaching her first Australian 
Open semi-final she profusely thanked the crowd in the Rod Laver Arena for 
helping her get through the second set against Venus Williams, who she had just 
beaten for the first time in her short career, 7-6 (7-3), 6-4. The 20-year-old 
world No3 has not missed a public relations trick here, including adaily column 
in The Age 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/australianopen2008/preparation-and-hydration-often-keys-to-jubilation/2008/01/22/1200764265461.html>
 that gives her fans a few extra insights into her life, other than those 
already to be found on her website.

"A tennis match is like a school exam," opined Aussie Ana on the morning of 
her quarter-final. "Good results should come if the lead-up work is done 
properly." It doesn't always work out that way, sport being sport, but it did 
against Williams who - like her sister, Serena, against the other Serb, Jelena 
Jankovic - made far, far too many unforced errors, and served poorly. Must do 
better.

And so the Williams sisters, of whom much had been expected this time, were 
gone. Two days ago there was there was genuine debate regarding another 
all-Williams finals; then came the double Serbian knock-out, all completed with 
radiant smiles and much good humour by both the young women. Serbia, as a 
country, continues to suffer from a chronic image problem throughout the world, 
yet its tennis players, including Novak Djokovic and Janko Tipsarevic, who came 
so close to upsetting Roger Federer on the first Saturday, could not be more 
personable and well-liked. As ambassadors they have no equal, even though it is 
noticeable that most choose to live elsewhere.

Ivanovic's big breakthrough came last year when she reached the final of the 
French Open, defeating Russia's Svetlana Kuznetsova, the current world No2, in 
the quarter-finals and then Maria Sharapova. The final was a disappointment, 
though perhaps hardly surprising given that the young Serb was up against 
Justine Henin, the outstanding clay court player of her generation. Strangely 
that defeat gave rise to the idea that Ivanovic was somewhat flaky against the 
world's leading players, though she had a 14-6 record against her fellow top 10 
players last year.

There was a mental block against the Williams sisters, however. Prior to this 
quarter-final Ivanovic had not won a set against the Americans in five matches, 
four of them against Venus. Small wonder she was so obviously delighted with 
this win. It was not a pretty match, with no fewer than six successive breaks 
of serve in the opening set, but Ivanovic always managed to keep her nose 
ahead, and then dominated the tie-break.

When Williams snapped back to lead 3-0 in the second set a few alarm bells 
began to tinkle in the Serbian camp. Ana's father has relatives in the city, 
while her fitness coach, Scott Byrnes, is an Australian, so there were plenty 
of links and plenty of support, although Venus was by no means without a 
following. For a few minutes it seemed that Ivanovic might succumb to her 
Williams phobia, but once she had broken Venus's serve for the fourth time, she 
steadied herself and finished with relish.

For such a relatively slight figure, Ivanovic can give the ball and almighty 
clump, one service return scorching past Williams before the American could 
twitch a muscle. And she is gradually adding variety. Sharapova is the 
overwhelming favourite now after her stunning victory over Henin, but Aussie 
Ana will not be far away. She's a beaut, mate.
 