
There is no doubt that the Australians will have been hurt by the result at 
Headingley last week. Regarded by many as one of the finest sides to ever take 
the field, they have failed to complete a whitewash in the Ashes series and 
will be gutted - but they have bounced back.

What influenced the result was the way this Australian side play the game. 
Adam Gilchrist's declaration was a good one and meant that England would have 
to score their highest total of the series so far in order to win the game. 
These Australians are only interested in winning, it's virtually all they've 
known, and Gilchrist's decision gave his side the best chance of achieving that 
goal. What stopped them was a feat of individual brilliance from Mark Butcher 
and one of those classic twists that can influence a game of cricket.

Earlier this season my team (Worcestershire) declared in a championship game 
against Nottinghamshire leaving them a target of 458 to win. They got them for 
only three wickets - after 20 had fallen on the first day of the game. We felt 
we had a win in the bank but sometimes other forces come into play - the 
weather, the final roll of the pitch and the ball.

The condition of the ball may well change without it ever losing shape. 
Sometimes it just goes soft and instead of having a genuine weapon in his hand 
the bowler feels he is about to deliver a football. Which is exactly how a 
batsman sees it.

The Aussies will have felt very confident going in to the last day and the 
early signs were encouraging, with steep bounce achieved by the bowlers, but 
after that initial burst things suddenly became hard work for them.

The human element cannot be overlooked. Over history various players have gone 
out and performed at a completely different level to what we are used to. One 
only has to think of Ian Botham and Bob Willis at Headingley in 1981 (and I 
think we've seen quite enough of that particular highlight reel) and more 
recently VVS Laxman last winter in India. Australia had forced the Indians to 
follow on in the second Test in Calcutta but Laxman went out and scored 281, 
which effectively won the home side the match and changed the nature of the 
series.

Mark Butcher performed at a new level last Monday. He had quick feet, got into 
position and was seeing the ball like a balloon. What Butcher and Nasser 
Hussain managed to do was to reverse the pressure - put it back on the 
opposition. If there was a hint of width they went for it and they upset the 
length the Australians bowled. It was refreshing and it worked. At Old Trafford 
England tried to save the game and lost it, at Headingley they were positive 
and were rewarded.

There is no doubt that this brand of Test cricket is infectious and originated 
with the current Australian team. I'm sure most spectators would rather see 330 
runs scored in a day with a few wickets tumbling along the way than the kind of 
games we saw in Pakistan over the winter. It was a great result for England but 
the cricket on view hardly set the world alight.

What England will have learnt from Headingley are the benefits of a positive 
approach to the game. One of Steve Waugh's great sayings is, 'I back you.' This 
means that he is prepared to trust in the talents of the men around him and 
this takes a lot of pressure off a player. With all that luggage removed a guy 
can go out and play his natural game. There is little doubt that Hussain 
'backed' Butcher to get the job done.

Whatever happens at The Oval, England can go into the winter with Headingley 
fresh in the memory. If they play with the same spirit I've no doubt that they 
have the talent to shine in India and New Zealand.

 Tom Moody is director of cricket at Worcestershire CCC
 