
World golf heavyweights Jordan Spieth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> and Adam Scott could be 
challenged by a bunch of amateurs at this month’s Australian Open if the past 
year is anything to go by.

Amateurs hold most of the Australian golf tour’s major crowns, with 
21-year-old Ben Eccles winning last November’s NSW Open, 20-year-old Brett 
Coletta Queensland’s major event and Curis Luck claiming Western Australia’s.

Luck, 20, also became the second Australian to win the US Amateur 
Championships earlier this year, while 18-year-old Min Woo Lee also won the US 
Junior Amateur title.

Jordan Spieth ‘slump’ says as much about rivals’ strength as his own woes | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/02/jordan-spieth-slump-ewan-murray>
And they insist they’re not there to make up the numbers at Royal Sydney, from 
November 17-20.

“We’re not there to make the cut, we’re there to win,” Lee told AAP.

“We’re definitely going to give it a chance so the whole world can see what 
we’re made of.”

No amateur has won the Australian Open since Aaron Baddeley in 1999, but the 
junior stocks of the country’s golf have rarely been in a stronger position.

The introduction of a new high-performance program in 2011 combined nine 
separate academies being run by the states and the Australian Institute of 
Sport.

“If you put all the resources together, you have more funding there to go in 
the one direction with the right kids,” its brainchild and high-performance 
director Brad James said.

“The integration and sharing now between the states is probably a real key 
component of the culture that’s been created.”

The program began with the LPGA stars Minjee Lee and Su Oh, and resulted in 
Australia capturing the Eisenhower Trophy for the men’s world amateur team 
championships by a record 19 strokes in Mexico in September.

“The fruits of our labour won’t be shown totally for five or more years yet 
though,” James said.

Another key feature sees the youngsters being encouraged to travel and play 
abroad to become used to jetlag and the dietary challenges which come with 
different parts of the world.

However they’ll all return home for the Australian Open, and the chance to 
play alongside the likes of Scott and Spieth.

“It exposes them to potential sponsors and that’s a key element of it,” James 
said.

“Then there’s the chance to be alongside the top players on the course and 
what you can learn to replicate from them.”
 