
Australia has belatedly joined a “coalition of ambition” in the Paris climate 
talks – a loose grouping of more than 100 developed and developing countries 
including the US, EU, Canada and Brazil – aimed at countering a push by China, 
India and Saudi Arabia to water down aspects of the climate pact as 
negotiations run overtime.


Tony de Brum, foreign minister of the tiny Marshall Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marshall-islands>, and a founder of the new 
alliance, insisted Australia had not yet joined, and Australia was not 
represented at a press conference to announce new members – which also include 
Brazil, Switzerland, Iceland, the Philippines, the Seychelles, Luxembourg and 
Canada.



But Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> 
tweeted that Australia had joined the grouping in response to Twitter criticism.



De Brum later told the media, “we are delighted to learn of Australia’s 
interest and look forward to hearing what more they may be able to do to join 
our coalition of high ambition here in Paris.”

He said all countries were “welcome to join” but needed to “bring your 
credentials with you.”

Bishop downplayed the importance of the group.

“This is not a negotiating coalition, this is a group of people who say we all 
share a view about an ambitious agreement – of course we do, we’ve said that 
from the outset ... we’re focusing on getting an agreement, not which groups we 
might be signing up to ... our priority is the text,” she told journalists.

Island nations urge Turnbull to echo Obama's climate change leadership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/island-nations-urge-turnbull-to-echo-obamas-climate-change-leadership>
While not a permanent negotiating bloc, the coalition is acting as a 
significant counterweight in the Paris talks to the big developing countries, 
whose negotiators spent most of Thursday night in closed door meetings arguing 
for a watering down of parts of the draft text prepared by the French 
presidency and forcing the French to extend the talks into Saturday.

While world leaders are no longer at the summit, the US president, Barack 
Obama, has also been trying to smooth the way for a deal by phone, calling the 
Chinese president, Xi Jinping. According to the White House read-out, the 
leaders “committed that their negotiating teams in Paris would continue to work 
closely together and with others to realise the vision of an ambitious climate 
agreement”.

Bishop said she still “felt a strong level of optimism” and the most important 
thing about deal, if it is clinched, would be the “united global effort” of 183 
countries all agreeing to reduce their emissions.

Multiple sources said the Chinese negotiators in the second all-night “indaba” 
(a Zulu word for meeting) sought to dilute the agreement’s long-term goals and 
the proposed system to link country’s promises to reduce greenhouse emissions 
against a global “stocktake”. Saudi Arabia and India argued for changes that 
would even further weaken the deal.

Chinese deputy foreign minister Lui Jianmin dismissed the “coalition of 
ambition” as a “performance” and said China was arguing against the proposed 
goal that parties aim for “greenhouse gas emission neutrality in the second 
half of the century” because the meaning of the phrase was unclear.

“We heard of this so-called ambitious coalition only since a few days ago, of 
course it has had a high profile in the media, but we haven’t seen they have 
really acted for ambitious emissions commitments, so this is kind of 
performance by some members,” he said at a press conference.

“It is wrong to say China is blocking the concept of climate neutrality, we 
raised a concern because this is a new concept, there is no definition – we 
don’t understand, if you don’t know the concept, why you would put it in a 
legally binding agreement,” he said.

He also defended China’s position on another sticking point – the insistence 
by countries like the US and Australia that the Paris agreement should start 
the process of shifting all countries to a common system of reporting and 
reviewing emission reductions. The developing world wants to continue with the 
current two-tier system where obligations are born by rich countries.

“It is not only China’s request, it is a request from all developing 
countries, you should not focus on this as China’s request,” he said.

“Our capacity and national conditions means still we shall have some 
difficulties ... so the process needs to be more about encouragement. We need 
to avoid any punitive or intrusive measures,”

He said the US secretary of state, John Kerry, had spoken of the “domestic 
difficulty” the US would have if national targets were part of the legally 
binding agreement in Paris.

“I think all members would say for the Paris agreement we must have the United 
States on board as the largest developed world country in the world ... so for 
some issues, that should be considered in finding a solution acceptable to 
all,” he said.

Kerry told journalists he was hoping the marathon negotiations would see 
contentious issues “melt away”.

As negotiators tried to finalise the deal, leading scientists pointed out the 
disconnect between what negotiators were arguing about and what was actually 
needed to address global warming.

Kevin Anderson of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Research in Britain said the 
current text was “somewhere between dangerous and deadly” for the most 
vulnerable nations in the world. He said it was weaker than the deal that had 
come out of Copenhagen and “not consistent with the science.”

Julie Bishop chided for 'joke' about rising seas flooding Marshall Islands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/05/julie-bishop-chided-for-joke-about-rising-seas-flooding-marshall-islands>
After another day of private and small group meetings, the French will now 
produce yet another draft agreement – their third attempt at finding a 
compromise deal – on Saturday morning Paris time before the conference meets 
for what is supposed to be the final time.

Greenpeace said Brazil’s decision to join the coalition of ambition “could 
change the whole dynamic in the last closing hours of this conference” because 
major developing countries had been missing from the alliance.

Earlier in the conference, Bishop had smoothed over a spat with de Brum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/05/julie-bishop-chided-for-joke-about-rising-seas-flooding-marshall-islands>
 over her parliamentary mocking of claims by Labor foreign affairs spokeswoman 
Tanya Plibersek that one of the Marshall Islands was already underwater. 
Plibersek had issued a transcriptwith the wrong name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/08/julie-bishops-marshall-islands-remark-im-not-tanya-pliberseks-subeditor>
 of the island she was referring to, but the island was under water.
 