
The Hunter region in NSW has had a long tradition as a breeding ground for 
talented rugby league players. From Clive Churchill to John Sattler and the 
Johns brothers, the Hunter has produced some of the finest players Australia 
has ever seen.

Added on to that production line is a skinny fullback from Maitland who has 
spent most of his playing days in the UK. Journeyman Luke Dorn might not have 
reached the astronomical heights of icons like Churchill or Andrew Johns, few 
have, but the Morpeth Bulls junior has carved out a prolific and unlikely 
career in theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>.

Dorn has scored 167 tries in England, at roughly a rate of just over one in 
every two games. He’s crossed for 13 in the Challenge Cup and a whopping 154 in 
Super League, which ranks him among the competition’s top 10 for all-time 
try-scorers. Dorn sits in eighth position, which means he has scored more than 
any other Australian or overseas-born player in Super League history. He also 
owns the club record for scoring the most tries for the London Broncos. It’s a 
special feat for the 33-year old, who arrived in England a decade ago and never 
left.

His journey began in East Maitland where he grew up idolising Brad Fittler and 
Matthew Johns. “I must have won thousands and thousands of grand finals and 
Origins and Australian Tests with a chip and chase on the bell, or a Freddy 
Fittler left-foot step, out the front of my house,” he tells the Guardian.

Australians Abroad: the Sydney concreter's brief moment on top of the world | 
Pete Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/11/australians-abroad-taylor-saghabi-cook-islands>
At 14 he joined the Hunter Mariners’ juniors and then ended up in the North 
Sydney Bears system. In 2000 he was picked for the Australian Schoolboys and 
two years later he made hisNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> debut at 
just 19 for the Northern Eagles.

Bob Devetak was on North Sydney’s coaching staff and remembers Dorn as a 
lightly-built kid who worked hard. “Not much has changed today but back then he 
always had the ability to throw that miracle ball that led to another try. 
‘Dorny’ loved his footy and was an exceptionally dedicated trainer, one that 
always worked on his skills and kicking long before others turned up.”

His NRL chance came at five-eighth at Brookvale Oval and the Eagles upset the 
Roosters 28-22. In his first two seasons Dorn would go on make 37 appearances 
and score five tries, as he developed under the wing of stars such as Steve 
Menzies. But towards the end of 2003, with coach Peter Sharp ousted, there was 
a change of the guard and he was out. “It sort of left a bit of a bitter pill 
for me to swallow,” he says. “It was a bit of a mad scramble the timing, having 
to find a club with a couple of weeks to spare.”
Dorn chose the Roosters over Newcastle and although he only made one NRL 
appearance, given the Roosters claimed the minor premiership and reached the 
grand final, he learned plenty. “I went there and I’ve never trained 
previously, or to this day, as hard as I had to that season under that Ricky 
Stuart and Ronnie Palmer regime. Even as a young kid it probably made me the 
player that I was.”

Now aged 22, the playmaker found himself at a crossroads. He could stay 
comfortably with the Roosters but with game-time limited, or he could try Super 
League. “I had a few close school friends who got their two-year working visas 
to go to London so it just seemed like a good fit for a young bloke.” Dorn 
signed for the Broncos on a two-year deal and expected to return to the NRL in 
2007. “I just thought I would go over there, have a couple of years and then 
come home.”

The speedy half quickly took a liking to English footy. In a competition less 
structured and defensively focused than the NRL, where free-flowing play and 
off-the-cuff attacking is the norm, Dorn thrived. He bagged 24 tries in his 
first season and then 18 in his second. Switching from the halves to fullback 
at times, Dorn helped London to sixth and seventh placed finishes. But in 2007 
he was surprisingly pushed out and joined Salford.

Dorn managed 11 tries in 29 games but he was club-less at the end of the year 
as Salford were relegated. An offer to join promoted Castleford was made and 
accepted, and he claimed another 19 tries in 26 appearances. But after just one 
season Dorn was on the move again, this time back to London.

Continually switching between fullback and the halves, Dorn would spend the 
next five years in the capital. The four-pointers continued to flow – 13 in 
2009, 18 in 2010, 15 in 2011, 16 in 2012 and six in 2013. Dorn was content in 
Super League, travelling through Europe and Africa in his time off, exploring 
different cultures, and during that period never harboured a strong desire to 
return to the NRL.

“There was little bits of interest here and there but we never really made 
much of it… London felt like, strangely enough, like going home. It wasn’t 
something that drove me, I was perfectly playing happy at London and playing in 
Super League.”

Aussies Abroad: Iain Ramsey, set on a collision course with the Socceroos | 
John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/07/australians-abroad-iain-ramsey-set-on-a-collision-course-with-the-socceroos>
Scoring tries in rugby league is a skill that can be put down to many things 
and often it can become somewhat of an art form. For some players it is down to 
pure speed, others because of sheer size and power or through support play, 
their ball-playing ability, quick thinking or fancy footwork. Luke Dorn has a 
rare combination of most of these traits, fused together to create an uncanny 
knack of getting over the line. At 5 foot 9 inches and 86 kilograms, he has 
never bulldozed opponents like a Manu Vatuvei or Greg Inglis, or even stepped 
defenders like a Shaun Johnson or Matt Bowen. For Dorn it has always been about 
seeing the game, about anticipation and smarts.

“A lot of it is instinct,” Castleford coach Daryl Powell believes. “Luke sees 
things quickly, he gets himself in good positions. Obviously he’s an 
intelligent footballer and then it’s pure speed then. Once he gets clear he 
takes some reeling in, he’s very, very quick.”

Dorn has always classed himself as a student of the game, someone who studies 
and analyses the opposition. “I’m a big thinker of how we can play and how we 
can do things different, and how I can help other players as well. I think 
that’s made me a better player, my anticipation’s something that’s made me 
ahead of some other players and that’s why I’ve been able to score tries. Be 
aware that someone’s about to do something somewhere and turn up at the right 
spot.”

Playing fullback in an age where the fullback’s role in the attacking line is 
now vital, has helped. But Dorn has also had remarkable longevity at time when 
players are getting bigger and stronger each year, and the collision is king.” 
His injury count over the years is relatively small, excludingone ugly cut 
<https://twitter.com/JackBraydes/status/579922931393818624/photo/1>.

“I’ve had some cartilage repairs in shoulders, I’ve had my elbow fixed, I’ve 
had a scope on my knee. A few broken ribs and things like that but touch wood 
I’ve never needed any reco’s or anything like that. I’ve been very lucky... I 
suppose it comes down to knowing your body.”

In the past two seasons with Castleford Dorn has enjoyed a resurgence. In 2014 
the Tigers shocked Super League by almost winning the League Leader’s Shield 
and reaching the Challenge Cup final at Wembley. Dorn was a key component as 
the team’s No1, running in 19 tries in just 24 games. “We initially brought 
Luke in as a half but as it evolved he just played so well at fullback, his 
speed and ability in an opportunity in space was just outstanding,” Powell 
explains. “He’s been a pretty big part of what we’ve done over the last couple 
of years, the improvement that we’ve shown.”

Silverware eluded the Tigers but Dorn’s electric form won him another year 
contract extension. The 2015 season hasn’t been as kind to the veteran, as he 
has battled a hamstring injury, but he is back to full fitness as the 
semi-finals unfold.

Dorn’s career has almost come full circle. Next year will be the articulate 
and intelligent Australian’s 12th in Super League and potentially his last. He 
turns 34 in July but isn’t necessarily ready to pull the pin. Dorn already sees 
a future in rugby league, having coached London’s Under-19s and dabbled in 
media. “I want to be involved whether that’s coaching or in some off-field 
role. We’ll stay for a little bit after I hang the boots up and you never know 
where you can end up.”

From Morpeth Oval to the Stoop, the Willows, Wheldon Road and Wembley, it’s 
been a hell of a ride for Luke Dorn. Many great Australians have graced the 
British game but only a few have matched the modest Maitland utility’s impact 
or try-scoring accomplishments. He may not have set the NRL alight but he’s 
carved his name in the English sporting record books.

“It sort of gives you a sense of achievement that you came here, did something 
and it’s sort of going to last for a while,” he says. “It’s something I can 
show my kids that I wasn’t too bad for a certain amount of time.”

 * Australians Abroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/australians-abroad> is a fledgling 
Guardian series that tells the seldom-told stories of players, coaches and 
others involved in sport who now ply their trades overseas  