
Australia won the fourth Test match shortly before lunch this morning, just as 
they had threatened to do once they had dismissed England the previous evening. 
But, chasing 107, it was with no little discomfort and some controversy as Andy 
Caddick and Steve Harmison rattled the Australian batting before Martin Love 
and Adam Gilchrist saw them home by five wickets.

 If there has been a weakness in the home side during recent years it has come 
on the rare occasions they have been set a modest fourth-innings target. Four 
years ago, on this ground, required to make only 175, they subsided against 
Dean Headley and lost, the last time they were defeated on home soil. However, 
Australia have now won the first four Tests of the series for the first time 
since 1950-51. The fifth starts in Sydney on Thursday.

 The controversy came in Harmison's seventh over. Steve Waugh, playing his 
last Test innings here, inside-edged his first ball perilously close to his 
stumps to get off the mark and then, with the score 66 for three, edged a 
lifting ball to James Foster who, for some reason, stifled an appeal and then, 
seeing a replay, renewed his enthusiasm. Dave Orchard ruled not out.

 Next ball, Waugh drove furiously to extra cover where Nasser Hussain held a 
brilliant catch. No ball, called Orchard, although TV showed this to be 
nitpicking in the extreme. The Australia captain hammered the next ball to the 
boundary and the pressure temporarily was off. On such incidents hinge matches 
for the fourth wicket added a valuable 25 before Waugh gloved Caddick to second 
slip.

 The loss of Matthew Hayden, caught hooking to the day's first ball, lit up 
English eyes. Maybe, they would have thought. But Ricky Ponting is a class act, 
and while Justin Langer played a watchful role, eventually batting an hour and 
a half for 24, he unleashed a series of strokes to propel his side towards 
their target.

 Michael Vaughan had at least given England a glimmer of hope on the fourth 
day, and that commodity has been in desperately short supply this winter. 
Nobody was rushing out to bet against Australia, but just by taking the Test 
into a fifth dayhe restored pride - and he did so with another innings of such 
command over a quality attack that at times he took the breath away.

 On 55 overnight, he might, had he gone for broke in the final 15 minutes of 
the morning, have scored a hundred more runs in the session. On the way, 
though, he completed his seventh Test century and, more pertinently, his sixth 
in 18 innings since he took Sri Lanka apart at Lord's last summer. In the 
process he became the second most prolific run scorer in a calendar year, his 
1,481 overtaking Sachin Tendulkar on 1,392 as the leading run scorer in 2002.

 If it has been evident in this country that he is a batsman of genuine world 
class since he and Marcus Trescothick took the attack to the Australians on the 
second day of the first Test, then that reputation has been enhanced as the 
series has unfolded. His 177 in Adelaide was marvellous; this innings of 145, 
spread over the weekend, simply stupendous.

 He did not hang about. It took him 21 deliveries to move from 66 to 102, with 
a series of boundaries all round the wicket. In the aftermath of his 
celebrations, Vaughan could have been forgiven if he lost some concentration, 
for though Hussain and David Gower are recent England players to have made two 
centuries in an Ashes series, it is a rarity. One could be luck, but not a 
brace.

 But there was no lapse. Instead Jason Gillespie was pulled high over 
midwicket for six, and Stuart MacGill similarly deposited. After lunch, Vaughan 
felt compelled to step out to MacGill and loft him elegantly for a third six 
over long-off before sweeping another boundary.

 That prompted the leg-spinner to move to round the wicket and he had 
immediate revenge as, much to his relief, Vaughan attempted to chop down to 
third man and instead saw Love hold a reflex catch. Vaughan had added 90 more 
runs from 112 balls with 12 fours and three sixes to go with the seven 
boundaries he had already hit.

 That innings, backed up by a maiden Test half-century from Robert Key and 
contributions from Hussain, John Crawley and Craig White, helped England to 
387, their highest total of the series and their third best second-innings 
score at the MCG, and gave them a lead of 107 to defend.

 Vaughan has now completed a remarkable calendar year at the crease which 
began unpromisingly in New Zealand but which has gathered pace ever since. On 
Saturday, when reaching 44, he overtook Dennis Amiss's 28-year-old England 
record of 1,379 runs, and a further 28 on Sunday took him to 1,408, one more 
than Sunil Gavaskar managed in a heady 1979. By the time he had finished he 
could boast 1,481 runs at an average of almost 62, and, in aggregate, behind 
only Viv Richards' remarkable 1976 record of 1,710 with seven hundreds. It is 
exalted company he keeps now.

 The innings of Key, Crawley and Craig White all showed they should have a 
part to play when England begin rebuilding next summer. Key responded well 
after his sec ond-ball nought in the first innings, and Crawley's technique is 
now much tighter.

 White, not included in the original party, has been a revelation, taking his 
chance to bowl wholeheartedly. Stauncher lower-order support on Saturday might 
have helped him to a well deserved century but the side strain he took in 
bowling on the second day will almost certainly rule him out of the final Test 
in Sydney and may well wreck his World Cup hopes.
 