
Australia has signed a Paris declaration calling for new clear rules for 
international carbon trading in a signal the Coalition’s six-year carbon 
pricing policy veto could be softening as it prepares to review its climate 
policy in 2017.


Foreign minister Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, who signed the 
declaration in Paris, said it was in Australia’s interests to recognise the 
role an international carbon market might play in reducing emissions after 2020.

“It’s just a declaration, it’s not legally binding,” she said after a speech 
to an event organised by Australia’s Carbon Market Institute.

“It’s signalling our commitment to working with others about rules for a 
carbon market post 2020. The detail is for each country to include in their 
domestic policies, and this is something Australia will consider in due course.

“It is a declaration that recognises the role a carbon market might play after 
2020 and we thought it would be in our national interest to sign up to it,” she 
said.

Australia ranked third-last in climate change performance of 58 countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/08/australia-ranked-third-last-in-climate-change-performance-of-58-countries>
“We are engaging closely with business as we work towards developing and 
reviewing our domestic climate policies in 2017 and we deeply appreciate the 
private sector’s interest in accessing international [carbon] units and 
recognise international carbon markets are also a key part of the global effort 
to reduce emissions. Carbon markets can provide flexibility for countries and 
companies to use genuine and verified international units to help meet their 
commitments.”

The declaration, pushed by New Zealand and set to be announced at the end of 
the Paris meeting, calls for countries to work on transparent rules for carbon 
trading after 2020 so that they have the choice to enter into bilateral or 
multilateral carbon trading arrangements.

The Coalition has said it will review its Direct Action climate policy in 
2017, including the so-called safeguards mechanism – which could at that time 
become a baseline and credit emissions trading scheme – and also whether 
businesses will be able to buy offshore carbon permits.

The quality of international carbon markets has been of concern to the 
Coalition in the past. Tony Abbott once described buying international permits 
as being like sending “money … offshore into dodgy carbon farms in Equatorial 
Guinea and Kazakhstan”.

Australia’s opposition to allowing businesses to buy offshore permits began to 
soften towards the end of Abbott’s prime ministership, and is now considered 
almost inevitable after 2017.

Bishop said the declaration was not about domestic climate policy, but 
companies only need offshore credits if they have a domestic liability.

At the moment the “baselines” or benchmarks set for emissions from the 140 
businesses covered by the safeguards mechanism are set to stop wild increases 
in emissions, with no business ever likely to exceed them.

But the 2017 review will consider whether they should be tightened to make 
sure policies can achieve the 2030 emissions reduction target Australia has 
pledged in Paris; to allow businesses who exceed their baselines to buy 
emission reduction credits from those who have managed to do better; and 
whether they should be able to source permits offshore. The review could also 
consider other versions of carbon pricing.

Environment minister Greg Hunt has said the “safeguards mechanism” is slated 
to deliver 200m tonnes of greenhouse gas abatement by 2030 – something that 
would require major change.

There has been an overwhelming consensus from business groups in Paris that a 
carbon price would be the most efficient mechanism to drive deep emission 
reductions.

On the first day of the talks 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/11/30/heads-of-state-and-ceos-declare-support-for-carbon-pricing-to-transform-global-economy>
 the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and six heads of state 
launched the carbon pricing leadership coalition, which called on all countries 
to start pricing carbon pollution. The coalition includes more than 90 
businesses and non government organisations.

IMF managing director Christine Lagarde said “the right carbon price” had to 
be at the centre of reducing emissions and “given the slump in energy prices, 
there has never been a better time to transition to smart, credible and 
effective carbon pricing”.

Julie Bishop says Australia will reward 'innovation' to tackle climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/07/julie-bishop-says-australia-will-reward-innovation-to-tackle-climate-change>
“Policy makers need to price it right, tax it smart and do it now,” she said,

The call was backed by  
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/11/30/heads-of-state-and-ceos-declare-support-for-carbon-pricing-to-transform-global-economy>
Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, Mexican president Enrique Peña Nieto, 
French president François Hollande, German chancellor Angela Merkel, Chilean 
president Michelle Bachelet Jeria, and Ethiopian prime minister Hailemariam 
Desalegn.

World Bank group president Jim Yong Kim said it was important to get 
“momentum” behind carbon pricing.

Labor’s environment minister Mark Butler told the same Carbon Markets 
Institute event Labor remained convinced that a cap and trade scheme was the 
most effective policy, but indicated Labor might reconsider – in the interests 
of business certainty – if the Coalition won the next election and established 
its safeguards mechanism as a working baseline and credit scheme.

He said businesses told him a baseline and credit scheme was a “clunkier 
model” and that they would prefer cap and trade, but he said “if years down the 
track it has become a serious proposition and has deep roots and everyone has 
constructed their operations around it, then come back to me”.

Lewis Tyndall, co-founder of GreenCollar – a firm that has been a big winner 
from the government’s Direct Action auctions, told the same event: “Greg Hunt 
has described the safeguards mechanism as a baseline and credit system ... 
everybody is saying we should have a carbon markets of some kind, from a tax to 
baseline and credit system to an emissions trading scheme, and we agree.”

Greens leader Richard Di Natale said he was disappointed at the lack of 
ambition in the Australian government’s position in Paris.

“We continue to be one of the few countries who advocate the use of fossil 
fuels as a solution to poverty,” he said.

New Zealand is particularly keen for clear international carbon trading rules 
as its domestic emissions are largely from agriculture and it has limited 
options to reduce them.
 