
How would Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> beat 
Novak Djokovic? "Let's see," he ponders. "…I would have probably gotten in a 
fight with him in the locker room before the match. I might have had a chance 
there."

As for tennis, the former world No1 is as taken aback as anyone by the rising 
standard at the top of the men's game.

"It's been amazing watching the standard continually get better. You wonder 
how it's possible to continue at that sort of rate. What [Roger] Federer did 
when he came andwhen I said goodbye <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9hJNqBHUo04>
, a lot had to do with what I knew was untouchable.

"It's just a different standard of tennis. It's different rules of engagement 
when guys can do what these guys can do. I don't recognise it from a standpoint 
of strategy, because I counted on getting somebody behind in a point and then 
slowly smothering them. But nobody's behind in a point. You never know when 
they're behind in a point. That would have eliminated any ability I had to move 
forward in the court.

"I would have had to be a different player, would've had to have a different 
body. It means the game has gotten a lot better. Fed raised it; [Rafael] Nadal 
matched and raised it; [Novak] Djokovic, for that intense little period of 
time, even raised it. It seemed like last year settled down a bit, and now all 
of a sudden [Andy] Murray is in the equation.

"When I see those top three guys, I see what history will say is the golden 
age of tennis. You're talking about arguably the three best guys. Djokovic will 
still need some distance to cover, but best of all time, if you're having that 
discussion in the same generation, it's remarkable."

Agassi agreed that Lance Armstrong's recent admission that he doped during his 
cycling career has thrown the spotlight on all sports, including tennis, and 
said stricter testing in his own playing days "would have kept me from 
destroying a few years of my life. That's what I did to myself with the use of 
the recreational, destructive substance of crystal meth. It would have saved me 
on a lot of fronts."

As for testing, he said: "The more the better as far as I'm concerned. The 
stricter, the better; the more transparency the better; the more accountability 
the better. Describing a problem is a heck of a lot easier than solving it, is 
one thing I've learned."

Asked if it was possible for modern players to recover as quickly as they do 
without using performance-enhancing drugs – as the former Belgian tour player 
Christophe Rochus suggested last week – Agassi had a more circumspect view.

"I marvel at [what they do], first of all. My whole game was based on playing 
with that sense of urgency and to force guys to be ballistic out there, to 
treat a marathon like a sprint. I benefited from raising the stakes for that. I 
had more or less four hours in me before I knew I was running on borrowed time 
physically. That's four hours of me running other people.

"They're more calculated now. They play slower, so six hours is not the same 
six hours that I played. But they're also much better athletes. They also 
appear [in the lower body] to be a lot stronger than I was; upper body probably 
not as much. But my game was never about using my legs as much as it was 
bullying the ball around the court.

"So, yes, I believe it's achievable. I think they've gotten very aware at an 
early age how important it is to be prepared, and I think there's a lot you can 
gain from training right and training smartly.

"So, I don't watch it and wonder in light of the Lance situation. But I also 
have the luxury of knowing that there's no time to ... The negotiation of what 
one would have to go through to figure a way around [testing] or to figure a 
short cut seems implausible."

Implausible does not mean impossible. And, earlier, Agassi had this to say 
when he heard about Lance Armstrong: "My reaction to it is the same as 
everybody. It was shock, hard to stomach, sadness, disappointment. I think 
'anger' is a fair word. I was certainly one of those that flat out believed him 
that long period of time. The thought of it not being the case was 
unconscionable to me."

Unconscionable. That's probably a better word. You'd hope it doesn't have to 
be used in tennis in the near future.
 