
On the other side of the world, there is a political contest taking place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia/story/0,,2214300,00.html> which could 
fundamentally shape the future of the British monarchy. Australians go to the 
polls on Saturday, and all indications are that Kevin Rudd's Australian Labor 
Party will defeat John Howard's conservative coalition. If that happens, 
Australia will once again be asked: "Do you want an Australian head of state?" 
And this time around, they're unlikely to say no.

As one Australian commentator noted 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/opinion/remember-the-republic/2007/11/11/1194766504785.html?page=2>
, the departure of Howard will see the back of the last of the "avowed Queen's 
men". Even if he were to stage a shock comeback and snatch victory from the 
jaws of certain defeat this weekend, he and his republican Treasurer have 
already publicly agreed to a handover of power by 2009.

A Howard victory, however, would be a monumental political upset. The more 
likely scenario is that Labor will win, and win comfortably. Their new star 
leader, Kevin Rudd, has already committed to allowing Australians a second 
chance to abandon the Crown in favour of an Australian head of state. The first 
attempt was in 1999, and was defeated by a pro-monarchy campaign led by none 
other than Prime Minister John Howard. Contrary to the fantasies pedalled by 
monarchists back here in the "mother-country", the 1999 vote was not an 
unswerving pledge of loyalty to "Her Maj". In fact, it was quite the opposite - 
the Australians weren't saying no to a democratic alternative, they were saying 
yes to the most democratic alternative, but one that wasn't on offer: a head of 
state elected by popular vote.

Australians have wanted their own head of state for some time now, since well 
before the 1999 referendum.According to 
<http://www.republic.org.au/arm-2001/speeches&articles/archives/2003/spa_warhurst011003.htm>
 Professor John Warhurst of the Australian National University, since 1993, the 
Australian Election Survey has shown the republican majority "has always been 
about two-thirds of the electorate". Among young Australians, a staggering 90% 
want Australia to cut its last colonial ties with the UK. The issue is 
genuinely cross-party, with Labor, the Australian Democrats and the Greens (now 
Australia's third party) all supporting a republic. The conservative Liberals 
are held back only by their leader, who is on his way out, one way or another. 
Given that widespread support and the lessons learnt from the first attempt, it 
is all but certain that Australia will be a republic within the next five to 10 
years. The debate could get underway as early as the middle of next year. Labor 
sources have suggested the referendum could take place in 2010, the likely date 
of the next federal election after this one.

Such a move would be a major earthquake under the foundations of the monarchy. 
For the first time in living memory (perhaps in history), a peaceful and 
prosperous democracy will freely choose to abandon this feudal relic in favour 
of a democratically elected head of state. Australia will be big news back here 
in the UK and around the world - news about the debate; news about the 
referendum and the result; news about the transition; news about the election 
of the first Australian-born head of state. Every time this topic is raised, 
the question will automatically be asked: if Australia, why not Britain? And 
every time it is asked, supporters of the status quo will find it that much 
harder to answer, because there is no good answer. What Australia can and wants 
to do, Britain can and should want to do.

Moreover, the debate will be further reinforced by Canada and New Zealand, not 
to mention other smaller Commonwealth nations, all of whom would likely follow 
suit if Australia took the republican path. New Zealand's prime minister is on 
side, and recent pollsshow (pdf) 
<http://www.angus-reid.com/uppdf/ARS_Monarchy.pdf> that over half of Canadians 
now support severing ties with the British monarchy - and that support is 
across the political spectrum. The Australian debate could set off a chain 
reaction, which would, at the very least, leave the UK as the only remaining 
Commonwealth country with the Queen as head of state.

Perhaps the biggest effect an Australian republic will have will be the 
inspiration it will give to republicans in the UK, and the example it will set 
for all of us. Australians will prove beyond doubt that this change is not the 
enormous undertaking monarchists like to think it is. Australia will show that 
pride in one's nation, love of one's country, do not have to be articulated by 
a backward-looking obsession with outdated institutions; it can be demonstrated 
loud and clear, around the world, by taking a strong and bold step toward a 
more democratic and forward-looking society. Australia will prove false all the 
hollow arguments of the monarchists: that the constitutional changes are too 
complex; that the transition would be too painful; that from among our citizens 
we cannot choose one upstanding woman or man to represent us; that national 
identity is bound up with the Windsor family.

Although the headline figures in UK opinion polls have barely shifted in 
recent years, attitudes towards the monarchy have, as Mark Lawson was recently
pointing out <https://www.theguardian.com/monarchy/story/0,,2190380,00.html>. 
Much of the institution's support is reserved solely for the Queen. At 81, she 
is approaching the twilight years of her reign, and the debate about the 
succession will grow in tandem with the debate in Australia. Had Australia 
chosen a republican future 20 years ago, the effect back here may have been 
limited. Today, news travels further and faster, and our changed attitudes 
toward celebrity and royalty will make the ground that much more fertile for 
the republican cause. Who wins in the Australian house of representatives on 
Saturday is set to have long-lasting implications for the house of Windsor.

For more comment on the Australian elections click here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/australian_elections_2007/>.
 