
Roger Federer consigned his shaky second round performance against Gilles Simon
 to the past with a much more convincing display against Xavier Malisse to 
cruise into the fourth round of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Federer was taken to five gruelling sets by Simon on Wednesday night but was 
largely untroubled by the Belgian Malisse, winning 6-3, 6-3, 6-1 in one hour 
and 45 minutes.

Malisse, a good friend of the world No2 having come through juniors at the 
same time, looked good in the baseline exchange but Federer always seemed to 
have the answers when it really mattered.

The Swiss made a storming start, racing to a 5-0 lead in double-quick time. 
Malisse pulled it back with a break of his own but Federer closed it out.

The Belgian, ranked 45th in the world, threatened a comeback at the start of 
the second as he broke to establish a 3-1 lead. But the 16-time grand slam 
champion simply upped his level to rattle off five consecutive games to extend 
his lead.

Malisse cut a despondent figure in the third as Federer toyed with him. The 
Belgian finally got on the board late in the set, offering a bow to the crowd 
in mock celebration, before Federer cruised to victory.

"I am still happy I passed the test against Simon," Federer said afterwards. 
"Today wasn't a whole lot easier although the scoreline might suggest it."

Novak Djokovic also progressed to the fourth round with ease when his Serbian 
Davis Cup team-mateViktor Troicki defaulted after one set.

Troicki appeared to be feeling the effects of a stomach muscle strain from the 
outset and looked off the pace as Djokovic took 39 minutes to establish a 6-2 
lead.

By then Troicki had already called for the trainer at 4-1 down and the 
withdrawal came shortly after.

A sympathetic Djokovic said afterwards: "It is the third round of a grand slam 
and he wants to give his best but he wasn't able to do it. I know that Viktor 
is a very difficult opponent and I am just happy that I did not have to spend 
that much time on the court and that I can continue my run."

Andy Roddick came from a set down to beat Robin Haase 2-6, 7-6, 6-2, 6-2 while 
the sixth-seedTomas Berdych beat Richard Gasquet in straight sets, winning 6-2, 
7-6, 6-2.
 