The Socceroos’ 3-2 victory over Saudi Arabia arrested a losing streak of how 
many games?  Three  Four  Five  Six The new W-League season kicks off this 
weekend with Perth Glory among the favourites after having brought in several 
new faces over the close season. Jamie Harnwell’s squad now boasts how many 
Matildas?  Three  Four  Five  Six After the Boomers were accused of tanking in 
their final group game against Angola, which team then ended Australian 
involvement in the Basketball World Cup at the last 16 stage?  Turkey  Lithuania
 Mexico  Slovenia Gary Ablett’s stranglehold on the AFLPA MVP award was broken 
this week by Nat Fyfe. How many times had Ablett won the award previously?  Four
 Five  Six  Seven Who said this? “We’d probably play him if he was 85 to 90 per 
cent fit but we can’t put him out there if he can’t do his job reasonably well. 
If he’s going to be a passenger we’ll be better off going with someone else.”  
Fremantle coach Ross Lyon on Hayden Ballantyne  Melbourne Storm coach Craig 
Bellamy on Cameron Smith  Port Adelaide coach Ken Hinkley on Matthew White  
South Sydney coach Michael Maguire on Greg Inglis Which of his compatriots did 
Australia’s Omar Jasika emulate by winning the US Open boys’ singles title?  
Nick Kyrgios and Bernard Tomic  Lleyton Hewitt and Pat Rafter  Pat Cash and 
Lleyton Hewitt  Pat Cash and Bernard Tomic Which football championship is 
“reassessing” a sponsorship agreement with Royal Brunei Airlines because it was 
unaware that Brunei had introduced harsh penalties against homosexuality four 
months previously?  NRL  AFL  A-League  Rugby Championship Who, along with 
Mitch Marsh, has a chance of making their Test debut against Pakistan after 
being selected in a 15-man squad for a two-Test series in the United Arab 
Emirates?  Ben Cutting  Steve O'Keefe  Fawad Ahmed  Nathan Coulter-Nile Which 
NRL club’s players were photographed with a topless waitress in a Coogee 
restaurant on Mad Monday?  Parramatta Eels  St George Illawarra Dragons  Wests 
Tigers  Cronulla Sharks The Brisbane Lions have asked the AFL for $3m. What for?
 To fund their football operations  To redevelop a part of the Gabba  To pay 
Australia Zoo for the loan of a lion  To pay for a pre-season tour of Ireland  
You got…  Impossible to enhance that performance  You and sporting knowledge go 
hand-in-hand  Consider your reputation intact  Consider your reputation intact  
Questionable effort  Average, very average  Expect a show-cause notice  Get 
ready for accusations of tanking  Get ready for accusations of tanking  Wooden 
spoon for you  You don't even deserve to eat with a wooden spoon  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  