
Australia has warned against stripping the Paris climate agreement of ambition 
in order to get some kind of deal as negotiators met to consider yet another 
draft agreement.


Speaking of behalf of the so-called umbrella group of developed countries – 
which includes the US, Canada, Japan and New Zealand – Australia’s ambassador 
for the environment, Peter Woolcott, said the group had significant concerns 
the draft was “not balanced”.

Australia on the spot over Adani mine and funding of Attenborough reef series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/australia-on-spot-over-adani-mine-funding-attenborough-reef-series>
On each of the three points central to the political deal – the finance 
provided by rich countries to developing nations, the demand that all countries 
eventually report and review their emission reductions in the same way and the 
overall ambition of the agreement – both ambitious and weak options remain in 
the text.

But developed country negotiators argue it has been “slanted” towards the 
developing country concerns.

Woolcott said there were particular concerns about the longstanding issue of 
“differentiation” – the different requirements of rich and poor countries 
enshrined in the original 1992 climate convention which rich nations argue no 
longer reflect the world’s economy or its greenhouse emissions.

He said it was critical the Paris agreement did not bind the world into 
“static categories”.

Developing countries reacted relatively positively to the draft, with China 
saying it was “open and balanced” and South Africa, on behalf of the G77 group 
of developing countries (which now numbers 134) saying it was “a good basis on 
which to continue our negotiations”.

After more than 20 years of negotiations, including eight days of talks in a 
conference hall outside Paris, the next 48 hours are seen as crunch time in 
reaching a deal to avoid dangerous temperature rise.


With the release of the latest draft agreement by the French hosts on 
Wednesday afternoon, governments were meeting late into the night to try to 
strike an agreement before the scheduled end of talks on Friday.

Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, said the draft was 
the “starting point for the end negotiations” and she remained “hopeful we will 
see an ambitious, enduring agreement”.

The latest draft agreement recognised a key demand of more than 100 countries 
to limit warming to 1.5C above industrial levels, which scientists think will 
assure a better chance of survival for low-lying countries.


After years of fierce argument, pitting rich countries against poor, 
negotiators and campaigners described a spirit of cooperation and willingness 
to tackle climate change – symbolised by a US pledge of $860m in climate aid to 
poor countries, a doubling of its existing commitments.

The US and the EU joined some African and Latin American countries in a 
powerful “high ambition coalition”, bringing countries within sight of an 
agreement.

But the rising economies of China, India, Brazil and South Africa were noted 
hold-outs – especially on the 1.5C goal. “There are some countries who seek a 
more minimalist outcome,” Todd Stern, the state department envoy told 
negotiators. “We need a figure of 1.5c.”

Anote Tong, the president of the low-lying Pacific island state of Kiribati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kiribati>, said he remained upbeat. “I’ve 
always said we need to come away from Paris with a deal that would ensure the 
survival of people,” Tong told the Guardian.

“Nobody left behind – that’s the mission all along. This is quite a long way 
from where we started. It’s coming together.”

But the action plans submitted so far by some 186 countries were still likely 
to result in temperature rise of close to 3C, and the 29-page text lacked 
specifics on how to ratchet up emissions cuts among developed countries and 
channel more climate finance to the developing world.

Miguel Aria Cañete, the EU energy commissioner, acknowledged the gaps. “The 
text is not bold enough as it stands,” he said. “We will work to improve it. We 
invite other countries to join us.

Paris talks: US pledges to double aid to climate-hit countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/09/paris-talks-us-pledges-to-double-aid-to-climate-hit-countries>
Oxfam’s international director, Helen Szoke, said: “There is still a long way 
to go: this is crunch time. The chance to set new funding targets from when the 
Paris deal comes into force in 2020 is still very much on the table and needs 
to stay there if developing countries are to have any hope of more support in 
the years ahead.”

She said countries needed to improve emissions reductions within the next five 
years to have any chance of limiting dangerous warming.

Mary Robinson, the former Ireland president and a campaigner for climate 
justice, said there was at present nothing in the current draft which would 
stop countries from reaching the new lofty 1.5C goal.

But the deal remained in a state of limbo – high hopes, but little prospect of 
getting there unless governments agreed to take tough decisions in the next few 
years. “There is still a lot of work to do but the good options are still in 
there,” Robinson said. “We can get a very good robust climate agreement if they 
make the right choices.”

Unlike earlier climate negotiations, there was a strong concerted push from 
the US,Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and some of the 
world’s poorest countries to try to strike a deal.

Earlier on Wednesday, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US secretary of state, 
made a passionate appeal to countries to rally around a climate deal, 
sweetening the pot with an offer to double existing levels of aid to countries 
on the frontline of climate change.

The White House said the US would deepen its commitment to help low-lying and 
poor countries that are already threatened by rising seas and powerful storms. 
“We need to get the job done,’’ Kerry said in a hard-hitting speech to the 
Paris meeting, “This moment demands we do not leave Paris without a durable 
ambitious climate agreement.”

As President Barack Obama worked the phones from Washington, calling the 
leaders of India and Brazil, Kerry praised countries moving towards renewable 
energy and proffered more aid to countries already living with the impacts of 
climate change on the ground.

“There are countries we know for which climate change is an existential threat 
today,” he said. “We have a moral responsibility today to adapt and prepare for 
those impacts.”

He said the US would double existing $430m budget for adaptation by 2020, and 
the funds would come in addition to $3bn the US pledged to the green climate 
fund, which will focus more on helping countries move to green energy and cut 
emissions.
 