
Greg Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/greg-hunt> says 
Australia is acting as a “broker” between competing country blocs on one of the 
most contentious issues in the Paris climate talks but has also clarified 
remarks that had the potential to damage the delicate negotiations.


Hunt predicted there was no chance developing countries would achieve their 
aim of amending the purpose of the agreement from keeping global warming under 
2 degrees to keeping it under 1.5 degrees.

Greg Hunt describes analysts' focus on expected rise in emissions as 
'desperate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/greg-hunt-describes-analysts-focus-on-expected-rise-in-emissions-as-desperate>
One hundred and eight countries are demanding the lower goal on the basis of 
the latest climate science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/30/paris-climate-talks-vulnerable-countries-demand-15c-warming-limit>
, including the low-lying island nations that met with the US president, Barack 
Obama, on Tuesday.

Hunt said Australia was acting as a “shuttle” or “broker” on that issue, 
saying the concerns of those countries might be “referenced” in the final 
agreement but that inscribing it as a goal would be a “red line” for other 
nations and jeopardise the deal.

 “We are acting as a broker in that space because you have some of the large 
developed economies and larger developing economies … we are acting as a broker 
in the middle of that triangle,” he said.

He said Australia was flexible on the issue. “We know that some of the larger 
countries under no circumstances would accept 1.5 degrees as a goal so in a 
sense it is not Australia’s battle or fight, so we are trying to be 
constructive by providing a pathway but it clearly won’t end up as a formal 
goal of the text because then it will be vetoed by others,” he said.

Asked about the issue of climate refugees from island states that could no 
longer support their populations under a 2 degrees warming scenario, Hunt said: 
“I think that is something we will deal with as a country when and if it 
arises.”

He also moved quickly to clarify statements about the progress of the talks, 
which have got off to an “uneven” start, according to the Climate Institute’s 
Erwin Jackson.

Previous climate talks, including the disastrous Copenhagen summit in 2009 and 
negotiations in the leadup to this conference in Paris, have suffered serious 
setbacks when the host country attempted to force acceptance of a cut-through 
negotiating text with imposed resolutions to some of the myriad disputed items.

At a press conference, Hunt appeared to suggest this was exactly what the 
French government was proposing to do when it formally takes over running the 
talks from the professional negotiators.

“There are of course numerous options the way the current text is constructed, 
in a sense the current text is somewhat diverting from where it is likely to be 
when the French produce a text as the basis for the final negotiations, most 
probably on Saturday, that text I understand does significantly narrow down the 
options,” he said.

When asked whether the French text could produce the same kind of backlash 
seen at previous meetings Hunt agreed that had happened but said the 
negotiations over the coming week would “attempt … to resolve as many issues as 
possible, or to bring them down to the finest points of detail” adding “it has 
long been discussed, understood and embraced that the co-chairs text will 
evolve into a French text, which is being discussed with all parties as we 
speak”.

The French presidency flatly denies it is working on any separate document, 
and Hunt said later he had only meant to refer to the efforts the French were 
making to help countries resolve their many points of difference within the 
current talks.

“The key phrase I used was evolved … the French are helping parties outside 
the room knock out options, but there is no secret or separate French text,” he 
told Guardian Australia later.

Paris diary: Planet COP 21 is a strange place but it has nothing on Planet Oz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/paris-diary-planet-cop-21-is-a-strange-place-but-it-has-nothing-on-planet-oz>
Hunt also released Australia’s plan to cope with already-locked-in climate 
change at the Paris summit – a compilation of existing efforts and policies 
including mapping Australia’s coastline to help state governments plan for 
future flooding, planning guidelines and CSIRO research for housing in areas 
subject to more intensive cyclones.

The Abbott government defunded the Howard government’s $50m national climate 
change adaptation research facility before restoring $9m over three years. The 
lion’s share of that funding will go to the coastal mapping database.

Jackson said there would not be “a good sense of progress this week for a day 
or so but it is fair to say that progress is uneven”.

“This is being driven by certain regressive countries in the Like Minded 
Developing Country group (which includes China, India, Indonesia and Malaysia) 
attempting to suck energy out of the process and weaken the effectiveness of a 
possible agreement,” he said. “Saudi Arabia, a wealthy and diplomatically 
effective oil state, is the focus of much frustration.”
 