
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia is set to debate 
the future of the national coach, Tim Nielsen. The Sydney Morning Herald 
reported that the CA board will meet in Melbourne on 8 February to discuss a 
range of issues arising from Australia's 3-1 Ashes defeat against England. The 
meeting is a regular fixture on the CA calendar, but one official was quoted as 
saying that "there will be plenty to say".

The paper also said that sources had claimed there had been disquiet over the 
comments made by the national selection chairman, Andrew Hilditch, on Friday. 
Hilditch said of his four-man panel: "I think we've done a very good job as a 
selection panel."

The exclusion of the spinner Nathan Hauritz and the handling of the fast 
bowler Doug Bollinger, who played (and struggled) only in the second Test at 
Adelaide, continue to rankle with some. The future of the opener Phillip Hughes 
has also been questioned. Hilditch's contract expires after the World Cup and 
there are calls for CA's first full-time selector, Greg Chappell, to replace 
him.

Nielsen has led Australia to two Ashes defeats, two Test series defeats in 
India and a series loss against South Africa.

Nielsen was given a three-year contract before the Ashes but some officials 
say they may have made the wrong decision. "If contracts need to be paid out to 
get the right outcome, then so be it," one leading official said.

Nielsen will coach the side until the end of the World Cup but if Australia 
fail there he says he expects his position to come under scrutiny.

"I expect us all to be looked at, and talked to, in the review,'' he said. 
"The planning was there, it was just our inability as a group to do what we 
wanted with bat and ball."

The future of the batting coach, Justin Langer, will also be under discussion 
while the bowling coach, Troy Cooley, who held the role with England during 
their victorious 2005 Ashes campaign, will leave after the World Cup to take a 
job developing young talent at Brisbane's Centre of Excellence.
 