
Australia claimed the MLB scalp they were after in a 5-0 rout of the Arizona 
Diamondbacks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> on Friday 
night, as Perth sluggers Tim Kennelly and Luke Hughes brought the heat to the 
SCG.

Disappointed not to cause a stunning boil over against the might of the Los 
Angeles Dodgers the night before, Australia came out swinging to ensure they 
finished their two exhibition matches with at least one memorable win.

One of the reasons the MLB decided to bring their season-opening series to 
Sydney was because of the growing nursery of baseball talent here. And that 
potential was showcased in emphatic style on Friday, even though support for 
the home team was again poor - with fans mainly interested in the properMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> matches on the weekend.

But the week can't hurt Australian coach Jon Deeble's hopes of securing more 
international competition for his side leading into the 2017 WorldBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> Classic - after beating an MLB 
side for the first time since 2009, when they defeated the Seattle Mariners.

Kennelly smoked a home run over the left field wall that he'll never forget in 
the bottom of the fourth and added an RBI (runs batted in) the very next 
innings.

His Perth Heat ABL team-mate and successful former MLB export, Hughes had two 
RBI's and Stefan Welch another, as the Southern Thunder hitters played all over 
their more fancied American opponents.

Having lost No.1 pitching ace Patrick Corbin for Saturday night's MLB opening 
day clash with the Dodgers, the bad news continued for the Arizona pitching 
staff at the hands of the 13th ranked nation in baseball.

When the stadium fills for the official start of the American season at the 
SCG on Saturday, the Diamondbacks will hope their starter Wade Miley - who 
almost didn't make it to Sydney due to his crippling fear of flying - can 
deliver against the might of Clayton Kershaw and the Dodgers.

Against LA, Australia had led 2-0 only to capitulate in the eighth innings. 
Deeble demanded his pitchers improve under pressure - and when the Southern 
Thunder found themselves in front on Friday, they only went from strength to 
strength.

Starting pitcher Tim Atherton and relievers Craig Anderson, Wayne Lundgren, 
Todd Van Steensel and Brad Thomas never looked like giving up a run. "The 
hitting was fantastic, defence was fantastic, and pitching was fantastic. 
That's how you win games," said Deeble.

Kennelly described his home run as a career highlight. "To do it at the SCG 
for Team Australia against a big league club with my family watching back home 
in Perth and my wife here, makes it that much more special," he said.

Diamondbacks manager Kirk Gibson said his men were ready for their 
season-opener despite the setback. "We're ready. We've had a good tour here and 
Australia did a heck of a job," he said. "We give them credit for the way they 
come out and played us."
 