
Australia’s most senior orthodox rabbis have called on Jewish leaders who 
failed child abuse survivors to stand down from their public positions.

The rabbinical councils of Australia and New Zealand, New South Wales, and 
Victoria issued a joint statement on Wednesday in response to the royal 
commission’s damning findings against Yeshivah communities in Melbourne and 
Sydney.


The royal commission found 
<http://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/getattachment/e8136521-df46-4082-97ba-a9c474df5272/Report-of-Case-Study-No-22>
 the two insular, ultraorthodox Chabad-Lubavitch communitiesdiscouraged the 
reporting of child abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/jewish-communities-discouraged-survivors-from-reporting-child-abuse-commission-finds>
, failed to act when complaints were made, and treated survivors and their 
families as outcasts.

The three rabbinical councils said they were “deeply distressed” by the 
contents of the report, and acknowledged the abuse had caused “unimaginable 
suffering” to survivors.

The councils called on leaders who had denigrated or undermined victims to 
stand down from their positions, saying they had “lost their right to serve in 
our communities”.

“We call on those who have been identified in the report as not fulfilling 
their legal obligations to protect children to stand down from their public 
positions,” the statement said.

“The rabbinate must demonstrate that Judaism and the Jewish community will not 
tolerate child sexual abuse and those who perpetrate it, and must support those 
who have suffered.”


The Rabbinical Council of Australia and New Zealand was formed last year, 
largely to help communities reform in the wake of the royal commission.


Survivor Manny Waks, who was abused repeatedly in the Melbourne Yeshivah 
community in the late 1980s, welcomed the rabbis’ response.

Waks blew the whistle on abuse within the Melbourne Yeshivah community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/jewish-communities-discouraged-survivors-from-reporting-child-abuse-commission-finds>
 in 2011, a move that shocked the insular orthodox movement.

 He told Guardian Australia the councils’ statement was “extremely powerful 
and moving”.


“It will be comforting for victims/survivors and our families – indeed, for 
the entire community,” he said.

“It will also help to restore the community’s faith in the rabbinate. I look 
forward to continue working closely with these organisations in addressing the 
issue of child sexual abuse.”


The royal commission found that the Yeshivah communities’ strict adherence to 
orthodox laws and practices contributed to their poor handling of child abuse.


Disputes were handled internally according to Jewish law, rather than secular 
law, and members were prohibited from informing on one another to outside 
authorities.

Speaking negatively or gossiping about others in the community was also not 
allowed, regardless of the truth of what was said.

The rabbinical councils’ joint statement restated its ruling, first made in 
2012, that Jewish law requires all allegations of child sexual abuse to be 
immediately reported to police and government authorities.

The statement also encouraged anyone in the communities who had contact with 
children to undergo detailed training in child protection.

“Child sexual abuse has caused unimaginable suffering to the victims in our 
community, and RCANZ, RCNSW and RCV and their members are totally committed to 
removing this scourge from our community and from our institutions,” the 
statement read.


“We offer our deepest sympathies to the victims and commit ourselves to 
learning from the failures of the past.

“As the royal commission has made clear, child sexual abuse was allowed to 
continue because of actions and inaction by some rabbis and community leaders.”
 