
Playing for the Philippines may seem to pale when set against appearing for 
the reigning Asian champions,Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, but sometimes it must be more 
fun. The Socceroos brushed aside Bangladesh and are expected to do likewise 
against Tajikistan on Tuesday night and should that happen, fans won’t exactly 
be dancing on the streets of Sydney. But if the Philippines, a former American 
colony so long an afterthought in Asian football, can defeat Uzbekistan on 8 
September just outside Manila, it will really would be something special. For 
some nations, the journey itself really is as important as the destination as 
Iain Ramsay is finding out.

Born and bred in Australia, Ramsey picked a good time to start playing for the 
Philippines. His debut came in a 2-1 win against Bahrain in June in the first 
game in the second round of qualification for the 2018 World Cup, only the 
second ever qualification victory in the nation’s history. The third came five 
days later with a 2-0 over Yemen in Doha when Ramsay scored the second, 
ghosting in at the far post. With the same result against Uzbekistan on 8 
September, progression to the final round and a meeting with Australia would be 
a real possibility.

“If it comes, it comes,” Ramsay told the Guardian. “I still have quite a few 
friends who play for the Socceroos. It would obviously be an emotional game, to 
play against the country I was brought up in but it would be an exciting 
challenge and it would be a proud moment for my family.” Ramsay was eligible 
for the south-east Asian nation due to his Filipina mother who was delighted 
when her son accepted the call. “She was over the moon but whether I played for 
Australia or the Philippines, she would be proud. I represent not only here but 
the rest of my Philippines family back in Australia.”

Safety concerns for Socceroos as civil unrest flares in Tajikistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/04/safety-concerns-for-socceroos-as-civil-unrest-flares-in-tajikistan>
The 27-year-old is one of a number of Azkals who play for the team despite 
being born and raised overseas. It was a policy adapted in the previous decade. 
Ramsay joins the likes of England-raised stars such as Phil Younghusband and 
German-based Stephen Schrock. While it has not been fully free from controversy 
at home, the ‘Fil-foreigns’ have played a central role in the improvement of 
the team that is helping football challenge the three B’s – billiards, boxing 
and basketball – that traditionally dominated the sports scene.

Ramsay had been on the Manila radar for a few years but held hopes of making 
it as a Socceroo. The decision to become an Azkal was made easier when 
Melbourne City, the team he joined from Adelaide in 2013, changed his position 
in the 2014-15 season. “When I was 22 or 23, it was a massive goal to play for 
the Socceroos and I felt at one stage that I was quite close but then I played 
left-back at Melbourne last year. That was a move that I regret to an extent as 
I was a winger all my life. I was a winger at Adelaide and also the first year 
in Melbourne but then I was at left-back. There were times that I enjoyed 
playing there and times that I didn’t enjoy it at all. I knew that my chances 
of playing for Australia would be slim so I am grateful and fortunate that 
there was still interest from the Philippines and I was back on the wing. I 
have no regrets and haven’t looked back.”

It’s been an interesting Australian winter. Not only did Ramsay make his 
international debut in a historic World Cup qualification win in June but in 
July he joined the Iranian club, Tractor Sazi, an ambitious well-supported 
outfit near the border with Azerbaijan where a focus of regional identity from 
the local Azeri population is not always appreciated in Tehran. “Last year they 
finished second and the last game of the season cost them and they drew the 
game and lost on points. I’ve come to a decent side and hope to go one further 
this season.”

That does not tell the full story. Tractor thought they had done enough to win 
a first title and were celebrating when told that their rivals had not lost as 
they had been previously informed but instead had drawn. Communication from the 
other game suddenly stopped five minutes from time and the coach Toni Oliviera 
claimed that his team had been tricked. Iranian conspiracy theories is not a 
subject that, understandably, Ramsay wants to get into. “It’s a massive club 
and the fan base is very big, they sing non-stop in the game. So you want to 
perform at your best for more than 30,000 fans, depending on the game. I didn’t 
know a lot about the Iranian league before I came but I have been pleasantly 
surprised.”

The signing came out of the blue. “It was done in a matter of days and I 
haven’t looked back. I’ve been enjoying it so far, it’s been a great 
experience. There are a lot of players with great technical ability and it is 
not as easy as some people may think. The A-League is a tough league but this 
has more teams, more games and it is a tight competition. I am improving as a 
footballer here. Football is massive in Iran.” Being far from home is not a 
problem. “My family were supportive, when I told them I was going to Iran. When 
I was 17, I went to Scotland for a few years and wherever I have been, they 
have been supportive.

“The people here in Iran are very friendly and I get by easily. All the 
foreigners, I am one of four, talk English. Some of the Iranian players do too 
and it is easy to settle.” The similarities in the world game the world over 
help too. “The pre-match meal is the same as Australia – pasta and chicken 
though it tastes a little different here.”

If the Philippines do make it to the final round then Ramsay could be eating 
Australian-made pasta while on international duty. A win against Uzbekistan 
would be a massive step. “It is not easy for teams to come to the Philippines 
and acclimatise to the conditions. We feel strong at home. We have a good fan 
base and are building a good atmosphere. We are not an easy team to beat. It 
would be massive if we could get to the World Cup or even get close.”

 * Australians Abroad is a new Guardian series that tells the seldom-told 
stories of players, coaches and others involved in sport who now ply their 
trades overseas
 