
Notwithstanding events at Leeds on Monday the Australian backpackers in 
carriage D of the 8.05 to King's Cross that evening were still in high spirits. 
The conductor tried to gloat a little: "What was the score at Headingley today, 
boys?" The retort was a chorus: "3-1!"

When your team already have the figurative Ashes in their metaphorical 
knapsack, you can afford to brazen out the odd defeat. And the response in 
Australia to Mark the Butcher, to judge from its newspapers, has been 
philosophical - or as philosophical as Australians become.

Most reports gushed with praise for Butcher, invoking the coincidence that his 
173 not out was an echo of Bradman's 1948 score in the Australian version of 
the Headingley miracle. Brisbane's Courier-Mail even thought the innings 
"Bradman-like"; compliments do not come much higher in a country where 
Bradman-ness is next to godliness.

As for Adam Gilchrist, a straw poll of past captains in the Australian found 
them behind his Sunday-night declaration to a man, with Bill Brown in the role 
of elder statesman: cricket had "benefited tremendously from the outcome of the 
match", thanks to a declaration that "nine out of 10 captains would have made". 
And the 10th captain was probably a pom anyway.

The official Australian Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board website baggygreen.com posted an impassioned, if not empurpled, defence 
of Gilchrist's initiative: "Had he been a more frugal captain, an inflexible 
man, or a character imbued with a meanness of spirit, Gilchrist could have 
chosen to kill England's chances of victory in this Test. At a number of 
junctures. Instead he risked a real possibility of defeat in the pursuit of a 
glorious win." This, at any rate, is the house position.

The support has been so uniform and pre-emptive that one wonders whether they 
protest too much. Make no mistake, Australians do not like losing Tests, even 
dead ones and even after so much success. When Steve Waugh's men lost that 
unforgettable series in India a few months ago the comments that "yes, well, 
perhaps it was good for cricket" emerged only through gritted teeth.

It was to those matches in India that an Australian observer's mind turned on 
Monday. Australia's cycle of supremacy in recent times has followed a fairly 
simple formula, based on their bowlers generating regular wicket opportunities 
and complemented by acrobatic catching in attacking field placings. It has been 
so successful as a Plan A that there has been little need for a Plan B; on the 
rare occasions the Australians have been pressed, someone has usually made up 
the leeway.

Headingley repeated the Australians' experience in Calcutta, where they had no 
fall-back position once their initial thrust had faltered. Like Waugh there, 
when he set his bowlers the challenge of at least two consecutive days in 
enervating conditions by enforcing the follow-on, Gilchrist set his bowlers the 
challenge of bowling to fields where aggression brings instant gratification.

In the end the leading indicators of England's opportunity were probably Shane 
Warne's career at Headingley, two wickets in two prior Tests, and Jason 
Gillespie's career in Tests, 25 spaced over 4 years. Headingley was Gillespie's 
12th successive baggy green game - the longest run of his career - and he 
looked like a workhorse who has been a little too willing for his own welfare.

Australians, though, are not a churlish people. Less formal as a sample of 
antipodean opinion than the foregoing, though probably as scientific, was 
yesterday's email inbox. The 25 addressors were all delighted by Butcher's 
innings.

A club mate who has ribbed me for years about smoking and drinking coffee 
through lunch breaks wrote to apologise: "I now understand this to be the 
breakfast of champions." There was also an English friend who for the past few 
months has been crimson with rage at Butcher's continued selection. "Of 
course," he said, "I've always rated Butcher."
 