Which of these games drew the biggest crowd this week?  South Coast Wolves v 
Central Coast Mariners in the FFA Cup  Canterbury Bulldogs v Wests Tigers in 
the NRL  Canada v Germany in the women’s football U20 World Cup  Melbourne v 
GWS Giants in the AFL Australia’s cricketers are heading to Zimbabwe for the 
first time since 2004. Which bowler took 4-7 in an ODI on that last visit?  
Glenn McGrath  Brad Hogg  Ian Harvey  Darren Lehmann Which country’s leagues 
boasted the most players in Ange Postecoglou’s latest Socceroos squad?  
Australia  England  Netherlands  Germany Who beat Casey Dellacqua in straight 
sets in the first round of the Connecticut Open?  Klara Koukalova of the Czech 
Republic  Camila Giorgi of Italy  Alison Riske of the US  Ekaterina Makarova of 
Russia Who worried about damage to their reputation, “what I've built over the 
past 15-plus years”?  Suspended AFL veteran Brent Harvey  Former State of 
Origin brawler Paul Gallen  Under-fire NSW sports minister Stuart Ayres  
Incensed Guangzhou Evergrande coach Marcello Lippi Which country did the 
Australian women’s basketball team, the Opals, beat in a two-match series this 
week?  Belarus  Russia  Lithuania  Ukraine The US national coach said his 
swimmers would be “tested a little bit” by the icy weather and outdoor pool at 
the Pan Pacific championships. Where are they being held?  Canberra  Hobart  
Adelaide  Gold Coast The Wallabies prevented the All Blacks establishing a 
record number of consecutive victories with last Saturday’s draw in Sydney. How 
many would it have been?  17  19  18  16 Who was told “no one is listening” to 
what they had to say about football-related matters?  Craig Foster by Ange 
Postecoglou  Channel Nine’s Erin Molan by radio host Kyle Sandilands  Asada 
chief Ben McDevitt by Essendon chairman Paul Little  Tony Abbott by Tanya 
Plibersek Where did Sally Pearson finish in the 100m hurdles at the Diamond 
League meeting in Stockholm?  First  Second  Sixth  Disqualified  You got…  
Impossible to enhance that performance  Consider your reputation intact  
Consider your reputation intact  Questionable effort  Questionable effort  
Questionable effort  Expect a show-cause notice  Expect a show-cause notice  
Expect a show-cause notice  Expect a show-cause notice  Expect a show-cause 
notice  Challenge your friends Submit answers  