
Having become increasingly unsettled by the perils of faction, I decided to 
seize the opportunity to stir up a debate on the subject when I was invited to 
give the 2011 Roy Jenkins lecture at the Royal Society of Literature.

Last year at the Guardian Hay Festival, the simmering discussion about the 
uses and abuses of faction began to bubble merrily. Niall Ferguson argued that 
historical fiction "contaminates historical understanding". That is too 
sweeping. There are novels which can raise interesting historical questions, 
because they are able to go where historians should never dare to tread. 
Jonathan Littell'sThe Wellwishers, initially published in France as Les 
Bienveillantes – he is the first American to win the Prix Goncourt – has been 
highly controversial. But Littell's extraordinary research turned his 
psychological speculations on the mentality of the SS elite involved in the 
final solution into a useful adjunct to history, even though it lacked 
historical validity.

Some novelists want to give people in history a voice, because they have been 
denied it in the past. Andrea Levy, whose novelThe Long Song is set in Jamaica 
in the 1830s, said that the almost complete absence of accounts of the period 
by enslaved people allowed fiction to come "into its own in this type of 
story", with the novelist's imagination filling in the blanks of history. 
Nobody could disagree with that. A problem only comes, I think, when real 
historical characters are introduced with invented speech and thoughts. Helen 
Dunmore, whose novelThe Siege is about wartime Leningrad – its sequel, The 
Betrayal, is about the period immediately before Stalin's death – said that 
novelists stray into "dangerous territory" when they fictionalise real people.

One can argue that historical fiction set further away in the past poses less 
of a dilemma, if only because of the lack of verbatim accounts. Hilary Mantel, 
who wrote the highly praisedWolf Hall about Thomas Cromwell, wrote: "For a 
novelist, this absence of intimate material is both a problem and an 
opportunity." This very well-researched and magnificently written book is 
compelling, and Mantel makes absolutely clear that it is a work of fiction. 
"Unlike the historian," she argues, "the novelist doesn't operate through 
hindsight. She lives inside the consciousness of her characters for whom the 
future is blank." In fact, the historian should do both – first see the world 
as it appears to protagonists at the time, and then analyse with hindsight. But 
the key point is that when a novelist uses a major historical character, the 
reader has no idea what he or she has taken from recorded fact and what has 
been invented in their re-creation of events.

Restorers of paintings and pottery follow a code of conduct in their work to 
distinguish the original material from what they are adding later. The question 
is: should writers do the same if they are going to take a piece of history and 
then fill in the blanks, to allow the reader to know what is fact and what is 
the invention of the writer? If novelists do not want to make this distinction 
then they could at least change the names of real historical characters to 
emphasise that their version is at least one step away from reality. The 
novelist Linda Grant argues that the roman à clef also gives the writer a much 
greater freedom of invention. She pointed out that Curtis Sittenfeld'sAmerican 
Wife, which is obviously based on Laura Bush, benefitted greatly from the 
change of names. Sittenfeld thus was able to go where it would have been 
unthinkable to go otherwise. Keeping real names shackles the imaginative writer 
perhaps more than they realise. InWar and Peace, the most convincing and 
interesting characters are those Tolstoy made up, not the historical figures he 
introduces.

A blend of fact and fiction has been used in various forms since the dawn of 
creative writing, starting with sagas and epic poems. Yet the appeal of faction 
to writers and readers has recently increased in a dramatic way. Is this due to 
a poverty of imagination, as some critics argue? Is it a marketing-driven 
phenomenon, perhaps catering to the modern desire in a fast-moving world to 
learn and to be entertained at the same time? Is it influenced by a curious 
need for authenticity, even in works of fiction? Is there a prurient compulsion 
to fill in those gaps in our knowledge about the private lives of great 
figures, which history has failed to cover? Movies and TV now revel in the 
speculative biopic.

The power of historical fiction for bad and for good can be immense in shaping 
consciousness of the past. In what was then West Germany, the TV miniseries
Holocaust, broadcast over four nights in a single week in January 1979, 
attracted vast audiences. This story of parallel families, one of assimilated 
Jews and one Nazi, seized the imagination of the younger generation. Members of 
the older generation suddenly found themselves on the defensive as they were 
asked: "What did you know about it at the time?" Young Germans felt a surge of 
moral outrage that their parents' generation had buried the truth of the second 
world war.

We now live in an age in which "entertainment history" forms the historical 
perceptions of most of the population. Of course, many claim that even if it 
distorts the material, it at least gives a taste for the subject. But although 
some will be encouraged to read a truly factual account, most will not. And the 
compulsion of movie and TV directors to change the story for dramatic effect 
means that the result is bound to be incompatible with accurate history. 
Film-makers simplify historical subjects according to set formulas. Their films 
have to have heroes and baddies – there are seldom shades of grey. And the hero 
has to have the "arc of character" treatment in which he or she goes through a 
form of moral metamorphosis. Endings have to be upbeat, even for the Holocaust. 
Look atSchindler's List and the sentimentality of its finale, revealing that, 
in movies, only the survivors count.

I am certainly not trying to imply that novelists who use a historical setting 
are attempting to hoodwink their readers, but I do think that the growth of 
faction has consequences that should be recognised and discussed.
 