 The upper echelons of the scientific community were yesterday accused of 
"usually being wrong" and guilty of "a systematic resistance to discovery", at 
the Guardian Hay book festival.
The attack came from Nigel Calder, author of Magic Universe: the Oxford guide 
to modern science, a tome weighing more than the latest Harry Potter book and 
shortlisted for the 2003 Aventis science book awards. Calder, whose swipe was a 
rare example of a science writer biting the hand that feeds him, was among the 
first journalists to work on New Scientist magazine when it was launched in the 
mid-1950s and went on to become its editor.

During his talk at the festival, Calder criticised leading scientists for 
having forgotten that big new scientific discoveries, which remain to be 
uncovered in many fields, can overturn widely held beliefs.

"In any branch of science there are only two possibilities. There is either 
nothing left to discover, in which case, why work on it, or there are big 
discoveries yet to be made, in which case, what the scientists say now is 
likely to be false," he said. "The problem is, the top scientists seem to have 
forgotten that."

The result is a generation of scientists who have become a little too 
confident that their understanding of the world is more scientifically accurate 
than it will be proved to be.

Historically, some of the biggest brains have been off the mark with some of 
their theories. For everything he got right, Einstein maintained a quirk of 
physics known as quantum entanglement - where information seemingly travels 
instantaneously from one particle to another, regardless of how far apart they 
are - was impossible. Scientists have since proved him wrong.

The accusations went further than simply knocking scientists' confidence in 
their understanding of the world, though. Calder said the use of peer review, 
where established scientists decide what research gets published, and the use 
of review panels that hold the purse strings of university research, were 
exclusive and had the effect of hindering rather than encouraging new 
discoveries.

"It amounts to a systematic resistance to discovery," he said. Such 
"self-appointed clubs that claim to be experts" supported the publication and 
funding of mainstream work, rather than innovative science.

He said scientists were wilfully resisting pursuing certain lines of inquiry 
because they could upset the balance of science research. "The vast number of 
scientists are not even trying to do research that could lead to a Nobel prize 
because they don't want to rock the boat."

In other words, maverick researchers, by making discoveries that undermine the 
work being pursued by the scientific elite, could cause ripples many at the top 
would rather not witness. "The top people may be toppled from their perches and 
people may lose their jobs," Calder said.

Frank Close, the Oxford University astronomer and vice-president of the 
British Association for the Advancement ofScience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/science>, said while scientists were far 
from trying to hinder new discoveries, it was possible review panels might at 
times be too conservative.

"Are there blue skies research projects that are not getting funded, but 
should be? Are we being too conservative? There's always a chance of that, 
though I've not seen any convincing examples," he said. "And you have to bear 
in mind, this is taxpayers' money."
 