
George Osborne's true colours had already become clear to the crowd of several 
tens of thousands who booed him with gusto at the Paralympics in September. But 
if there were any doubt that he is a true-blue Tory chancellor, it was blown 
away on Wednesday.

The economics of the chancellor's autumn statement were, as expected, 
unremittingly grim – the Office forBudget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility's latest forecasts, 
which have been yanked back into line with the consensus, show Britain well on 
the way to a lost decade, with the age of austerity now expected to go on until 
2017-18.

But if the economics were sobering, the politics were downright dismal. 
Osborne's £3.7bn-a-year raid on the welfare budget – by uprating most benefits 
by just 1% a year for the next three years, instead of in line with inflation – 
may have been less drastic than the all-out freeze the Lib Dems claim credit 
for blocking. And a modest raid on top earners – through limiting tax-free 
pension contributions and dragging more people into the higher tax rate, worth 
a couple of billion between them – at least allowed the coalition to claim the 
highest-paid would contribute too.

But it would be a mistake to underestimate the severity of the hit to the 
poorest. The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the worst-hit group, just above 
the bottom of the income scale, would lose out by £5.10 a week by 2015: more 
than 1.5% of their income.

In other words, Osborne has surrendered any remaining claim he might have had 
to "fairness". He can't even be said to be "balancing the books on the backs of 
the poor": it's worse than that, since more than half of the cash raised from 
the benefits raid is not being banked, but instead handed to multinationals 
(corporation tax will fall by another 1p in 2014), and motorists.

As an aside, the economics of welfare cuts is also questionable: people 
struggling to make ends meet tend to spend every penny they earn, so every 
pound taken out of their pockets is a pound of demand sucked out of local 
economies.

But the second, and more serious, charge against the chancellor is that he has 
shattered one of the longstanding principles of the welfare state.

Donald Hirsch, director of the centre for the study of social policy at 
Loughborough University, argues that the 1% cap is "the most historic moment 
for the economic welfare of the poorest people in Britain for 30 years". Since 
1981, it has been accepted that benefits increase each year with prices, so 
that the living standards of the poorest are not eaten away by inflation. 
Osborne's stated rationale for breaking this tradition is that it would be 
unfair for welfare claimants to see their standard of living rise more rapidly 
than people in work: wages have been falling in real terms since the crisis 
began.

But although the 1% rise is only planned to last for three years, that's a 
very, very long time in politics. Below-inflation increases will rapidly come 
to seem like the norm. Labour, or any other progressive party wanting to argue 
for a re-establishment of the link with prices, would probably have to expend a 
significant amount of political capital to restore the consensus.

And the third criticism of Osborne's approach is that it was less about 
cutting Britain's coat according to its cloth, and more about a poisonous and 
cynical attempt to box Labour in.

Ed Balls's flummoxed response to the statement was partly because he couldn't 
immediately see how the Treasury had pulled off the feat of making the deficit 
decline between last year and this. But it was also because, as a shrewd 
tactician himself, he was wary of falling into the political trap Osborne had 
set for him, of being seen to back "scroungers" against "strivers".

The Resolution Foundation quickly pointed out that more than 60% of the impact 
of the below-inflation welfare rise will fall on people who are in work. So 
there are actually more strivers than scroungers in the chancellor's sights.

Nevertheless, Balls is extremely fearful of being seen as a friend of that 
hazily sketched star of many of Osborne's speeches – the stay-in-bed layabout 
whose curtains are closed when his neighbours drag themselves off to work at 
the crack of dawn.

Labour does appear to be edging towards rejecting the proposals when they are 
put to a vote – no doubt under intense pressure from its backbenchers; it seems 
unlikely that the party's rising stars went into politics to defend swingeing 
cuts in living standards for Britain's poorest families. But the frontbench are 
well aware that public polling suggests that so far at least, the voters 
support welfare cuts.

And when Osborne puts some flesh on the bones of his latest austerity plans, 
in a spending review now planned for 2013, he will have a whole list of charges 
to chuck at Balls and his colleagues. Would they reverse the benefits cuts? 
Yes? Then what else would they cut instead, or what taxes would they raise to 
pay for it?

But if Labour fails to stand up and be counted, we will face a general 
election campaign in 2015 that is the mirror-image of the pseudo-battle on tax 
and spending in 2005.

Back then, Gordon Brown, who was still holed up in No 11, had ramped up health 
spending, and promised more increases to come. The Tories, conscious of the 
public's fondness for the NHS and wary of Labour jibes about sacking nurses, 
said they would stick like glue to Labour's spending plans – which they later 
derided as the height of fiscal irresponsibility. The entire debate was 
sterile, nitpicking and bore little relation to reality.

So – quite apart from the abject failure of his economic and fiscal strategy 
and the whiff of fudge over the figures – Osborne's autumn statement was deeply 
unfair, nakedly cynical, and tugged at the fragile foundations of the modern 
welfare state. Compassionate conservatism has been exposed as a passing fancy 
almost as brief as David Cameron's infatuation with environmentalism.
 