
The prophesy that has hung over George Osborne ever since he moved into 
Downing Street wasmade by Mervyn King 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/finance/edmundconway/100005270/king-election-winner-will-be-out-of-power-for-a-generation/>
. Just before the general election, the Bank of England governor reportedly 
declared that "whoever wins this election will be out of power for a whole 
generation because of how tough the fiscal austerity will have to be".

Mr King has never denied that statement; and few observers would not 
acknowledge its truth. Yet the chancellor hasn't governed like a man hovering 
over a trapdoor: quite the opposite. Austerity amid a global slump is a 
terrible economic strategy; but the coalition has pursued it with as much 
electoral plausibility as possible. Intent on making the biggest cuts ever seen 
in postwar Britain, Mr Osborne has wielded the axe in a manner designed to give 
the Conservatives the best possible chance in 2015 – even at the price of 
growth. The government cut almost all outlays on new infrastructure, ahead of 
hacking away current spending. Cancelling planned projects – new schools and 
motorway lanes – is easier than shutting A&E wards and things that people are 
already using; but voters miss them less, too. The coalition also moralised the 
cuts it did make to welfare, which is why theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> indulge in all that rot 
about the unemployed sleeping in shuttered houses. And wherever possible, the 
Treasury has so far gone in for taking a little bit of money from a lot of 
people, rather than whacking a well-defined group. The times when it hasn't 
followed this rule of political economy – such as restricting the tax relief on 
philanthropy in the omnishambolic March budget – it has come to grief.

However skilful the politics, they have been completely detached from economic 
reality. At each budget statement the government has been forced to admit that 
the economic outlook is bleaker than forecast. The same was true of this week's 
autumn statement, and the result has been an ever-widening hole in public 
finances which,the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/conferences/AS_2012_PJ.pdf> said on Thursday, means a 
further £27bn of cuts and tax rises to be made by 2017. Indeed, the IFS 
analysis underlined that 2017 stands a chance of being one of the most 
miserable years in postwar history. Not only will Britain's annual GDP that 
year be 3.6% smaller than predicted even this March – but another round of 
austerity will have to be made. If it all comes from cuts, then unprotected 
government spending in 2017 – on defence, say, or transport – will be 31% less 
than it was 2010. If some money is raised from taxes, then£7bn would be raised 
by sticking a penny on the basic rate of income tax 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/budget/9727257/IFS-7bn-in-new-taxes-to-plug-Britains-budget-black-hole.html>
. If you think that sounds reasonable, consider the political neuralgia over 
taxes which means the 3p rise in fuel duty, scheduled for April 2011, was 
deferred at three consecutive budget statements before being scrapped this week.

Just how this government divides the pain between cuts and taxes will be 
hashed out between now and next year's spending review. These next few months 
will therefore largely decide the Conservative and Lib Dem platforms for the 
2015. They will also show up the tensions increasingly apparent in the 
coalition. It is one thing for two parties to sit down in summer 2010 and hash 
out a governing strategy based on painful cuts and a recovery within two years; 
it is quite another to have to get the axe out against the backdrop of a 
never-ending slump. The Tories need to decide whether they really do want to 
cosset defence; the Lib Dems will have to come up with their own fiscal 
strategy. And the autumn statement should also remind Labour that it still has 
no economic strategy beyond criticising Mr Osborne's cuts.

Ed Balls often acts as if a little less austerity would enable the UK to go 
back to a 2006-style boom. That is neither plausible nor desirable. Tony 
Blair's bubble was marked by lopsided growth, historic inequality and a 
lacklustre private sector. Labour should not seek to repeat that episode. But 
set aside the waffle about predistribution, and Ed Miliband is miles away from 
offering an alternative.
 