
Avalanches caused by a heavy winter snow have killed at least 124 people in 
north-easternAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, an 
emergency official said on Wednesday, as rescuers clawed through debris with 
their hands to save those buried beneath.

The avalanches buried homes across four north-east provinces, killing those 
beneath, said Mohammad Aslam Syas, the deputy director of the Afghanistan 
natural disaster management authority. The province worst hit appeared to be 
Panjshir province, about 100km (60 miles) north-east of the capital, Kabul, 
where the avalanches destroyed or damaged around 100 homes, Syas said.

The acting governor of Panjshir, Abdul Rahman Kabiri, said rescuers used their 
bare hands and shovels in an effort to reach survivors. Rescue teams had been 
dispatched to the affected areas and casualties were expected to rise, Syas 
said.

The heavy snowstorms, which began early Tuesday, hampered rescue efforts. 
Snowfall from the storm was nearly one meter (3ft) deep in places and fallen 
trees blocked roads in the Panjshir Valley.

General Abdul Aziz Ghirat, the provincial police chief of Panjshir, said the 
death toll from the avalanches was expected to rise when rescue attempts 
resumed at sunrise Thursday.

Avalanches <https://www.theguardian.com/world/avalanches> in the valley’s Dara 
district affected up to 600 families, according to people trying to reach the 
area to assist in rescue efforts.

“People there have told me that two of my relatives have been killed and eight 
others are still under the snow,” said an Afghan who goes by the single name 
Sharafudin. “My son and I are trying to get through to see if we can help find 
their bodies. But it will take us at least three or four hours to get there 
because of the snow and the road is very narrow, so we have to walk, the car 
can’t get through.”

He spoke at the mouth of the valley, where traffic moved at a crawl.

“We’ve had no help yet from the authorities, no medicines, no machinery to 
open the roads so we can get to the buried houses,” Sharafudin said.

Another man stuck on the highway trying to reach Dara told the Associated 
Press that many bodies remained in houses buried beneath feet of snow.

“We are so concerned about our relatives who are just stuck there,” said the 
man named Abu Muslim.

Large parts of Afghanistan have been covered in snow as a major storm 
interrupted an otherwise mild and dry winter.

Authorities in Parwan province closed the strategic Salang Tunnel, which links 
the north and south of the country, over avalanche fears. Power cables 
traversing the tunnel have been damaged, cutting power to much of Kabul since 
earlier this week.

In a statement, President Ashraf Ghani said he was “saddened by news of the 
avalanches and flooding across the country”. He said he had ordered urgent 
assessments of the extent of damage and offered his condolences to the families 
of the dead.

Temperatures have plummeted across the country, though the snow was expected 
to start melting in the Panjshir Valley and much of the mountainous north-west 
of the Hindu Kush range in coming days, according to forecasts.

Afghanistan has suffered through some three decades of war since the Soviet 
invasion in 1979. But natural disasters such as landslides, floods and 
avalanches have taken a toll on a country with little infrastructure or 
development outside of its major cities.

In May, a massive landslide killed anywhere from 250 to 2,700 people, 
authorities said at the time. Another landslide in 2012 killed 71 people. 
Authorities were not able to recover the vast majority of bodies and ended up 
declaring the site a massive grave.
 