
The long-awaited sequels to James Cameron's blockbuster Avatar will begin 
shooting in October 2014,according to new comments  
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/avatar-sequels-begin-production-october-649485>
by star Sam Worthington.

The Australian actor, who plays disabled soldier turned swashbuckling Na'avi 
rebel Jake Sully, revealed the schedule during an interview on Sydney's Nova 
96.9 station. He said work would begin onAvatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar> 2 in October 2014, with each of the 
film's three sequels due for completion a year ahead of its release. "They are 
still writing it," the actor told the Fitzy & Wippa show. "We are going to 
start this time next year, and we will do two, three and four. In one shot, 
we'll do them simultaneously. I'll be grateful if it finishes."

Avatar 2,3 and 4 are due to hit cinemas between December 2016 and December 
2018. Worthington also said Cameron was currently hard at work "building the 
ship to Pandora". The film-maker revealed in May last year that four movies are 
now planned and has said he is likely to direct only Avatar movies for the rest 
of his career.

Cameron has previously hinted that the second film might take place on another 
planet in the same solar system as Pandora, the fertile forest moon where 
Avatar's action took place. He has also mentioned the possibility of exploring 
the planet's oceans. The film-maker said characters that survived the first 
film "get to be in the second film, at least in some form".

Sully's Na'avi paramour, Neytiri, is also expected to return, and there could 
also be a reappearance for Sigourney Weaver's chain-smoking exobiologist Grace 
Augustine, who ostensibly died at the end of the first film. "Don't worry, I 
will be back," she told ComingSoon.net in September last year. "Jim says no one 
ever dies in science fiction. He's told me the stories for the next two movies 
and I have to say that they're absolutely wonderful and there's a real treat in 
store. Now we just have to make them."

http://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=82282

Released in 2009, Avatar has made a staggering $2.7bn worldwide and currently 
stands as the highest grossing film of all time.
 