
Germany’s Axel Springer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> has 
banned readers who use adblockers from its Bild tabloid website, stepping up a 
fight by publishers to stop online advertising revenues being eroded.

 Springer said visitors to the website of Bild, Europe’s top-selling tabloid, 
will be asked to switch off the adblocker or pay a monthly fee of €2.99 (£2.23) 
to browse the website mostly ad-free.

 “Whoever does not switch off the adblocker or does not pay cannot see any 
content on Bild.de, as of now,” the publisher said in a statement on Tuesday.

Axel Springer buys Business Insider for $343m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/29/axel-springer-buys-business-insider-henry-blodget>
Publishers are struggling with the increasing popularity of software that 
blocks the Web advertising that is key to maintaining or growing their revenue 
in theInternet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> age but which 
many users find intrusive or slows the loading of pages.

 Some 200 million people used ad blockers last year, up 40% from a year 
earlier, resulting in $22bn (£14.4bn) in lost advertising revenue, according to 
a study by Adobe and PageFair, an anti ad-blocking technology company.

 Some U.S.-based media owners including video-streaming company Hulu and the 
Washington Post have implemented similar measures but Springer’s is the most 
aggressive by a European newspaper publisher so far.

 More than 30% of Germans online use such software, many more than the 5% of 
internet users globally in 2014, according to Dublin-based analytics and 
advisory firm PageFair, which develops “ad blocker-friendly” advertising.

 Internal monitoring showed that about 23% of Bild.de vistors use adblocking 
software. In previous years that was about 20%.

 Last year, Axel Springer, whose other publications include Die Welt 
newspaper, received more than €1.5bn in revenues from major advertisers and 
circulation.

 Bild.de had 265,000 digital subscribers at the end of June who pay €4.99 a 
month for full access to the tabloid’s online content, generating less than 
€20m in annual sales.

 Axel Springer changed the website of Bild to a so-called “freemium” model 
about two years ago, with some content remaining free and items such as 
exclusive interviews, stories and photos subject to a charge.

 Adblock software acts like a firewall between a web browser and advertising 
servers. It is mostly installed by users on their desktop computer or laptop 
and blocks ads on websites including Facebook and video ads on YouTube.

 Axel Springer’s move is the first such initiative by a major German publisher 
and could accelerate the war between people using ad blockers and media owners 
who rely on advertising revenue as part of their business model online.

 Last month Axel Springer lost a court case against German software firm Eyeo, 
which makes the Adblock Plus browser. In May a Munich court ruled in favour of 
the start-up in a case brought by ProSiebenSat.1 and RTL Group.

 And the publisher of German newspapers Handelsblatt and Die Zeit lost a 
similar case in a Hamburg court. Several appeals are pending.

 