
German publisher Axel Springer's <http://www.axelspringer.de/en/index.html> 
plans to charge for online content from newspapers, including market-leading 
tabloid Bild, will start tomorrow, its chief executive said.

The content will start with a paid-for iPhone application for Bild, its 
flagship tabloid, and its quality newspaper Die Welt.

"I see no justification, neither democratic nor market-related, for content to 
be generally free on the internet," Mathias Döpfner, Axel Springer's chief 
executive,told the Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704825504574582060739041246.html>
. "For centuries, people have been willing to pay for things of interest to 
them."

The iPhone applications are the vanguard of a charging strategy that will 
include subscriptions and micropayment models, but also a lot of free content, 
Döpfner added.

The move by continental Europe's largest publisher, which owns Fakt in Poland 
and Handelszeitung in Switzerland, is a fillip for Rupert Murdoch's quest to 
persuade other companies to join News Corporation in charging for newspaper 
content online.

Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of News Corporation, which publishes 
the Wall Street Journal, the Sun and the Times,said last week that aggregation 
is theft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/01/rupert-murdoch-no-free-news>. He 
plans for the Times and Sunday Times content to join the Wall Street Journal 
behind a paywall next year.

Springer wants Germany's main telecoms operator, Deutsche Telekom, to allow 
users to be charged via their telephone bills. "One thing is clear: the 
customer wants it to be easy and quick," Döpfner said.

He added that the internet was "the future of journalism" but more pain lay 
ahead for the industry before online charging was successfully introduced. 
"Suffering always helps bring about change," he said.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 