
Celebrations to mark the 100th birthday of the late Axel Springer, the German 
founder ofEurope's largest publisher of newspapers and magazines 
<http://www.axelspringer.de/en/index.html>, were in full swing when the media 
magnate's favourite grandson decided to rain on the parade in dramatic fashion.

A stamp had been issued in Springer's honour, the champagne had been chilled 
for a series of drinks parties and gala dinners for Germany's great and good to 
attend; and the mogul's most successful product, the tabloid Bild Zeitung, was 
producing daily supplements praising his private and public triumphs, as well 
as making much of its plans to be distributed to every German household in 
June, the paper's 60th anniversary. But then the bombshell exploded.

Axel Sven Springer, known as Aggi, has just published a book called The New 
Testament, in which he claims he was, in effect, cheated out of a large 
proportion of his inheritance by Springer's lawyer and wife – Aggi's 
step-grandmother, Friede Springer.

To add insult to injury, Springer Jr also gave his first-ever interview to 
Spiegel magazine, whose founder, Rudolf Augstein, had been an arch-rival of his 
father. In it, Aggi said: "It is time to explain to a wider public why I spent 
seven years fighting for my inheritance through the courts."

Aggi, who lost the lengthy court battle, also questioned the right of Friede 
Springer to be at the helm of theAxel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> AG publishing house. Friede, 
he insisted in his most biting remark, was among several leading figures at the 
company who "should ask themselves why they are where they are, and why they 
enjoy such a high social standing".

Aggi has only repeated what some media observers have been saying for years. 
To them, the Springer family saga counts as one of the greatest heists in the 
history of media dynasties. But the fact that the claim has come from within 
the family for the first time makes it particularly electrifying.

Airing family feuds in public, especially when you are a Springer, is not a 
decision to be taken lightly. The 46-year-old insists he wasn't trying to spoil 
the party, but considered the 100th birthday of his grandfather on 2 May to be 
"the right occasion on which to present … my view of the machinations behind 
his inheritance". It has certainly guaranteed him maximum publicity.

Axel Springer AG has an annual turnover of about €2.9bn (£1.8bn), and is the 
most influential media organisation in mainland Europe, operating in 36 
countries. Its flagship title, Bild, is read by around 12 million readers a 
day; it also owns Die Welt, and controls almost a quarter of the newspaper 
market inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. A long-held 
interest in moving into the British market is no secret, and it was once tipped 
to buy the Daily Telegraph.

Axel Cäsar Springer founded Axel Springer GmbH in Hamburg in 1946. Friede, the 
family nanny, became his fifth wife in 1978. He groomed her as his successor 
and on his death in 1985 she took over as head of the media empire and defied 
attempts by other large shareholders to seize control from her. Since 2002, she 
has held a majority of the company's shares, and runs it successfully with its 
chief executive, Mathias Doepfner, who is sometimes described as her "ersatz" 
son.

Enter grandson Aggi, who alleges in his book that Friede and Springer's 
lawyer, Bernhard Servatius (still an important figure at the company at the age 
of 80), changed the businessman's will three weeks before his death, but that 
Axel never actually put his signature to the changes – whether because he never 
saw them, or simply didn't get around to it, is unclear. As a result, instead 
of receiving 25% of Springer's fortune, Aggi received a mere 5%. Friede 
received 70%, rather than 50%, as had been the original plan. Although Aggi's 
share is now worth an estimated €100m, he is still smarting at what he sees as 
the injustice done to him. Had he received what he considered to be rightfully 
his, he would now be worth €500m, he says.

"I don't dispute Friede's right to be heir," he told Spiegel. "What I do 
question is the way in which both Servatius and then Friede treated me."

Servatius, who has made little public comment, says that he has not read the 
book and that Aggi may have been badly advised.

Aggi has always been considered a troubled member of the Springer clan who has 
never found his proper place in the fold. His life was overshadowed by the 
death of his father – who had been severely neglected by his own father – when 
he was just 13. Six years later, he suffered a 68-hour kidnap ordeal at the 
hands of two former pupils of his Swiss boarding school who stuffed him into 
the back of a VWGolf and demanded a DM15m ransom from his family. He was 
initially – but erroneously – accused of being behind the plot.

So if anyone has reason to be bitter, it is arguably Axel Sven Springer. Had 
he won his seven-year court battle, it would have turned the power structures 
at Springer upside down. "The point is that my grandfather's last wish was not 
implemented as it should have been," he said.

Aggi has used the interview to call on Friede to make amends by contacting 
him. "I'm sure she'll admit that not everything has gone that brilliantly," he 
said. Those who closely follow the woman who runs the house of Springer don't 
believe she will be picking up the phone. She has remained publicly silent on 
the matter so far until now.
 