
Axel Springer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer>, the German 
publishing group, yesterday threatened to walk away and invest overseas after 
the country's media watchdog blocked its agreed €2.5bn (£1.7bn) takeover of 
ProSiebenSat.1, Germany's biggest commercial broadcaster.

KEK, the media regulator, said the merged entity would have too much sway over 
public opinion - equivalent to 42% of the German audience. It said Springer and 
its target had rejected the idea of selling off one of the two main TV channels.

Its decision, reached after talks with both companies yesterday, is expected 
to be confirmed by Germany's federal cartel office next week and could pave the 
way for Springer to expand abroad.

The group held out the dim prospect of appealing over the heads of the 
regulators to regional authorities controlling broadcasting or to the economics 
minister, Michael Glos. It has until tomorrow to persuade the cartel office.

Springer said it was exploring "other options". Thwarted in its attempt to buy 
the Telegraph newspapers in Britain, it has been cited as a would-be suitor for 
Trinity Mirror, publishers of the Daily Mirror and regional titles, and is keen 
to grow outside the tightly-regulated German market.

It has been desperately seeking a way out of the impasse posed by regulators 
over its planned takeover of ProSieben, controlled by US media investor Haim 
Saban, and agreed the €2.5bn bid last August. It aims to challenge Bertelsmann, 
which controls RTL and Channel 5.

Rejecting proposals to sell either ProSieben or Sat.1, it is understood to 
have tried to allay fears about its over-dominance or the creation of a near 
duopoly inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> by seeking a 
partner. TF1 of France, which once tried to buy ProSieben, and Luxembourg-based 
SBS, co-owned by private equity groups Permira and KKR, are said to have held 
talks.

Springer offered to sell some of its TV magazines and ensure its newspaper and 
TV businesses were kept at arm's length of each other, but the group, which 
publishes the conservative daily Die Welt, turned down a proposal to sell off 
Bild, Germany's biggest-selling daily tabloid.

Mathias Döpfner, Springer's chief executive, yesterday lambasted regulators 
for imposing impossible conditions out of outdated misconceptions about the 
modern, global media landscape. "What they've overlooked is a global shift in 
media competition into digital distribution markets - as though that were some 
kind of delusion of new economy yuppies gone wild. This opinion is not only 
false, it's negligent." He poured scorn on the notion that Springer, a seventh 
of the size of Bertelsmann, could form an equally powerful half of a duopoly 
squeezing out competition.

Mr Döpfner added that even the most comprehensive disposal proposals to 
address its concerns were turned down by KEK within hours of being handed in. 
"One has almost the impression that even if we were to propose selling off the 
entire Axel Springer publishing house they would nevertheless forbid us to take 
over the TV broadcasters," he said.

He accused the watchdog of dreaming up new models for assessing market share 
by adding together print and TV market shares, and of putting forward plans for 
a new oversight body that "would make the GDR [communist East Germany] appear 
like a liberal economic paradise."

Springer's increasingly desperate search for a way out of the impasse, reports 
said, is partly occasioned by an agreement with Mr Saban and his co-investors 
in ProSieben to pay daily interest up to €50m if the deal is delayed. But the 
US investor could decide instead to seek another buyer, especially as ProSieben 
shares have been rising dramatically.
 