
The track where Ayrton Senna <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> 
lost his life is set to be the focal point this week of commemorations marking 
the tragedy's 20th anniversary.

Brazil's three-times Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
 world champion was killed in an accident during the San Marino Grand Prix at 
Imola on 1 May 1994. The Italian circuit is being opened to the public from the 
anniversary on Thursday until 4 May.

Roland Ratzenberger, the Austrian driver who died the day before Senna in a 
crash on the same track during qualifying, will also be remembered.

Past and current figures from Formula One are set to be present for a series 
of events and a part of each day's proceeds will go towards theAyrton Senna 
Institute <http://senna.globo.com/institutoayrtonsenna/ingles/home/>'s 
charitable works.

Around the Imola site – where the paddock and pits will be open and people 
will be able to drive, cycle or walk around the track – there will be a 
commemorative ceremony, exhibitions and talks, and a presentation on safety in 
Formula One.

A lasting legacy of the deaths of Senna and Ratzenberger was the impact they 
had on the attitudes towards driver safety in the sport. It is testament to the 
measures implemented since that Senna, who was 34, remains the last driver to 
die on a Formula One weekend.

He made his F1 debut in 1984 with Toleman and, after moving to Lotus, secured 
two fourth-placed championship finishes and then third spot in 1987. In 1988, 
he joined McLaren as Alain Prost's team-mate and from there one of the greatest 
rivalries in F1 history played out.

Senna pipped the Frenchman to the title that year, saw Prost take it ahead of 
him in 1989, and was then crowned champion in each of the following two 
seasons, becoming the then youngest three-times champion in 1991 at the age of 
31. In 1992, he came fourth and was second in 1993 as Prost, who had moved to 
Williams, claimed his fourth title.

Senna finally joined Williams himself for the 1994 campaign, with Prost 
deciding to retire as he refused to be his team-mate again. The Brazilian made 
his worst start to a season with two retirements in the opening two races. The 
third race, which proved to be his last, was at Imola.

Senna, who was leading at the time, crashed on lap seven, smashing into a wall 
at the Tamburello curve and sustaining fatal head injuries.
 