
Ayrton Senna <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> did things with 
a racing car that I've seen no other driver do, before or since, and there was 
an obscene level of horsepower in those days.

There is one memory, one snapshot, that is seared on my memory for life, even 
though it lasted only two or three seconds. It was early in his career, at 
Brands Hatch, and he was on one of those bolts of lightning single-lap efforts 
that he used to put in.

When you reach the bottom of Dingle Dell you can't see the apex of the next 
corner. You have to anticipate it. Senna was absolutely mesmerising.

It was not only the speed he was carrying but the way he controlled the car, 
changing gear, turning the steering wheel and using the throttle to keep the 
turbo boost from dropping away. And remember, we had conventional gears, 
clutch, break and throttle in those days.

To do one thing at the speed he was going would have been something but to 
multitask the way he did was remarkable. I don't know how he did it to this 
day. He had this wonderful mental capacity to put a number of inputs into the 
car at the same time. And he was frighteningly quick.

The way he made the car dance on the track that day reminded me of the rain 
jumping on the street in the title track ofSinging in the Rain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1ZYhVpdXbQ>. It was wonderful.

Racing drivers change as they get older. Experience teaches caution, if you've 
got a brain. Through experience and tragedy you assess risk in a different way 
and become inherently more careful. You start to think, rather than react. But 
in those early days Senna just had a fantastic instinct to drive the wheels off 
the car.

I was commentating when he died at Imola in 1994. It was the worst weekend 
that many people can remember, starting with Rubens Barrichello, who had his 
spectacular accident in qualifying, then the death of Roland Ratzenberger and 
finally Senna.

It was no normal race either. There was a shunt at the start, then a restart 
and a safety car. And all the time there was the pressure Senna was under from 
Michael Schumacher.

There was the suspicion that Benetton were using traction control, though that 
was never established. But Benetton was a very good car and much easier to 
drive than the Williams at that point. So Senna, who was highly competitive 
anyway, had to do everything he possibly could to drag the necessary 
performance out of his car.

But once he had veered off the racing line at the high-speed Tamburello corner 
the distance to the wall was relatively short. I remember thinking what is 
going on? I don't think it was driver error on Senna's part. And then for him 
to get struck on the head too didn't seem feasible.

If he had not lost his life in 1994 we would have seen a phenomenal battle for 
the title that year, one I think Senna would have won, because as the season 
progressed Williams responded well to the problems they had. I'm sure Senna and 
Schumacher would have gone for it as everyone had anticipated.

I think Senna was prepared to drive for Williams for two or three years. He 
was looking to equal Alain Prost's four championships and maybe have a go at 
[Juan Manuel] Fangio's five.

But he was 34 and had already laid the foundations for his life beyond Formula 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, which involved Audi 
franchises in Brazil and other business interests, so he may not have been 
around for much longer.

He would not have continued into his forties. Physically, mentally and 
emotionally he had taken a lot out of himself. He wasn't ready for retirement 
but he wasn't a long way away from it.

At the beginning of 1994 the Williams car was a handful to drive and Senna was 
disappointed, to say the least. But by the end of the season it was pretty 
good. Looking at how it developed in 1995 and 1996 the door was open for two 
more world championships for Senna, apart from what might have happened in 
1994. So he could well have won six titles.

His death was such a tragedy. He was a unique man, a highly intelligent man 
who would have loved the complexity of today's cars. He had this intensity, and 
the Latin, South American aspect, the religious influence and the looks that 
all made him a little bit different.

He looked like a racing driver. He wasn't just some geeky little guy. He had 
all the qualities needed to be the best racing driver of his time, and that is 
exactly what he was. And he was also the fastest and the most exciting.

In an interview with Paul Weaver
 