
The first flush of daylight was lining the eastern sky as Flight RG723 said 
goodbye to its fighter escort and swung into the landing pattern, bringing
Ayrton Senna <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> home for the last 
time. Already his people were gathered along the expressway from the airport 
through the suburbs, a million of them or more, preparing to shed their tears 
of welcome and lamentation as the big jet, 11 hours out of Paris, floated above 
the endless clusters of high-rise blocks with their shanty-town infills.

São Paulo may be one of the biggest and ugliest cities on earth, a vast 
megalopolis of extreme wealth and extreme poverty, but in that dawn its 
inhabitants turned into villagers, sharing in the mourning for their golden 
boy, their favourite son, their champion.

At 6.12am the plane touched down. Over the next 30 minutes the polished 
mahogany casket was removed from the business-class section and carried by 
soldiers to a waiting fire engine, where it was draped with the bandeira, the 
familiar green and yellow flag of Brazil. At 6.45am, under a sky already bright 
blue, the fire engine moved off, preceded by an arrowhead of 17 police 
outriders in white leathers who led the motorcade on the 30-kilometre journey 
into the city.

As the parade gathered pace on the six-lane highway, it was joined by dozens, 
then scores, then hundreds of vehicles, in all shapes and sizes and states of 
repair: battered Beetles, shiny Subarus, jeeps and pick-ups, even a huge truck 
flying a Brazilian flag the size of a house, many crossing the central 
reservation and using the opposite carriageway in an attempt to keep up with 
Senna's last ride. Most of the vehicles had his picture taped to their 
windscreens, or black scarves tied to the radio aerials. From many side 
windows, in an echo of Senna's trademark gesture on so many afternoons of 
triumph around the world, a spare hand held a bandeira, its colours stiffened 
in the airstream.

Witnesses to this Mad Max remake of a grand prix lap of honour, the people of 
Senna's home town thronged the pavements and overpasses and the windows and 
parapets of their crumbling concrete canyons, applauding the passage of their 
champion, displaying their banners – one reading "Thank you, Senna, for making 
our Sundays so happy" – and shedding neither the first nor the last of their 
tears. Above them a dozen police and television helicopters hovered and 
circled, marking the motorcade's progress like a cloud of midsummer midges.

As it neared its destination in Ibirapuera Park, the procession slowed. The 
motorcycles peeled away, replaced by an honour guard of mounted lancers: five 
at the front on white horses, two dozen more on bays, flanking the fire engine 
as it crawled between crowds now 20 deep, jammed together, their hands 
outstretched above their heads as they applauded.
 The Death of Ayrton Senna, published by Penguin. 
All the way round the July 9 Palace, the state legislative assembly building, 
tens of thousands were already waiting calmly in line under the paneira trees' 
pink blossom. Inside, a 20-minute religious ceremony took place in the presence 
of the dead man's family. By the time the doors were opened, the queue of those 
wishing to pay their respects was three miles long, winding up the drive, out 
of the entrance and around the perimeter of the compound, unsupervised but in 
perfect order. It would take those at the back seven hours, in 80-degree heat, 
to reach the casket, now surmounted by a new flag and one of Senna's helmets, 
guarded by two soldiers with pikes and two riflemen, their weapons reversed.

The country's president had declared three days of national mourning, so 
Brazilians of all types and ages were able to make their way to say a personal 
farewell. Among the first was Adelia Scott, aged 84, who had travelled many 
hours from her home in the south of the country. Near her was a 13-year-old 
schoolboy, Marco Putnoki, who had been in line since the previous afternoon.

Opposite the coffin, the famous faces of Senna's friends and rivals and 
associates slipped in and out, joining members of the family in a special 
enclosure, some keeping a tight grip on their emotions, others unable to 
contain the flood of grief. But it was the ordinary people of Brazil who took 
the eye. Hour after hour the young and old filed by, some leaving flowers, 
flags, handwritten notes and other keepsakes.

So grievous had been his injuries that, at the family's request, the usual 
cosmetic preparations were abandoned and the coffin lid stayed shut. But many 
of those who passed by in a ceaseless flow blew kisses, or waved, or crossed 
themselves, or moved their lips in a silent prayer. Others could do little more 
than clutch each other in grief, some giving way altogether and collapsing into 
the arms of waiting paramedics. A man of advanced years halted, threw his arms 
wide, and began a formal valedictory address before being gently cut short and 
moved on by an attendant. In the late afternoon, a blind man in a business suit 
passed by, led by a friend. He, too, had spent seven hours in line.

Most of those who came to say farewell were young, a high proportion of them – 
the girls, mostly – with his name inked across their foreheads, often with 
three stripes painted on their cheeks: yellow, green and black. A friend 
explained that the custom had its origins in incidents two years earlier, when 
the country's youth took to the streets in protest against a corrupt president. 
"They painted themselves with the colours of Brazil," she said. "Now they've 
added a black stripe, for mourning."

Outside the railings were festooned with banners, many of them bearing the 
same word:saudade. "It's the most beautiful word in the language," my friend 
said as we went outside to buy some bottled water. "And it's one of those for 
which there's no direct translation. It means the sense of loss and sadness you 
feel when the person you love isn't there any more. No other language has this 
word."

This is an extract from The Death of Ayrton Senna by Richard Williams, 
published by Penguin
 