
Adrian Newey, the man who designed the cars that have made Red Bull a dominant 
force in Formula One, has spoken for the first time about how close he came to 
leaving the sport after the 1994 death ofAyrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> in one of his cars.

In a wide-ranging interview with the Guardian, Newey revealed how badly he was 
affected when Senna was killed while leading the San Marino Grand Prix in a 
Williams car.

"The little hair I had all fell out in the aftermath," Newey said. "So it 
changed me physically. It was dreadful. Both Patrick Head [Williams's technical 
director] and myself separately asked ourselves whether we wanted to continue 
in racing. Did we want to be involved in a sport where people can die in 
something we've created? Secondly, was the accident caused by something that 
broke through poor or negligent design? And then the court case started."

Newey and Head were charged with manslaughter in Italy – but his 
soul-searching was the reason he considered leavingFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>. "The court case was a 
depressing annoyance, and extra pressure, but it did not make me question 
whether I wanted to be involved in F1. It's the self-searching rather than the 
accusations that really matter."

Asked if he came close to walking away permanently, Newey replied: "Yes. For 
the whole team it was incredibly difficult. I remember the day after the race 
was a bank holiday Monday and some of us came in to try and trawl though the 
data and work out what happened. They were dark weeks. The honest truth is that 
no one will ever know exactly what happened. There's no doubt the steering 
column failed and the big question was whether it failed in the accident or did 
it cause the accident? It had fatigue cracks and would have failed at some 
point. There is no question that its design was very poor. However, all the 
evidence suggests the car did not go off the track as a result of steering 
column failure."

Newey admits that he has considered the causes of the crash repeatedly over 
the past 17 years. "If you look at the camera shots, especially from Michael 
Schumacher's following car, the car didn't understeer off the track. It 
oversteered which is not consistent with a steering column failure. The rear of 
the car stepped out and all the data suggests that happened. Ayrton then 
corrected that by going to 50% throttle which would be consistent with trying 
to reduce the rear stepping out and then, half-a-second later, he went hard on 
the brakes. The question then is why did the rear step out? The car bottomed 
much harder on that second lap which again appears to be unusual because the 
tyre pressure should have come up by then – which leaves you expecting that the 
right rear tyre probably picked up a puncture from debris on the track. If I 
was pushed into picking out a single most likely cause that would be it."

His cars have won 119 races, seven constructors' titles and six drivers' 
championships, but Newey admits that Senna's death still haunts him. Asked if 
he has seen the acclaimed documentary, Senna, the 52-year-old said: "No. It 
would not be an easy thing to do."
 