
Azealia Banks has apologised for a stream of racist and Islamophobic invective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/azealia-banks-suspended-twitter-racist-rant-zayn-malik>
 against former One Direction member Zayn Malik that led Twitter to suspend her.


The rapper, who has long been notorious for provocative social media postings 
and has rarely voiced remorse, offered her “sincerest apologies to the world” 
in a posting on Instagram, where her account remains active.

“Employing racial/sexual slurs/stereotypes in attempts to make fun of or 
degrade another person or group is not fair or fun for anyone,” wrote Banks, 
who performed in Istanbul on Sunday.

“Allowing my anger to get the best of me, I’ve managed to insult millions of 
people without reason. And for that I give my deepest apologies,” she wrote 
late on Saturday.

Banks, who is African American, used a series of epithets targeting Muslims in 
a rant on Twitter late Tuesday against Zayn, whom she accused of copying her 
style post-One Direction.

Banks at one point gloated that the US military would kill the family of Zayn, 
a Briton who is partially of Pakistani descent and is one of the most 
high-profile Muslims in Western pop culture.

Twitter suspended her account on Thursday, pointing to its policy against 
“abusive tweets and behavior.”

Banks initially defended herself, suggesting that she was singled out as an 
African American woman and saying she was upset that Malik refused to engage 
with her over her criticism.

Azealia Banks suspended from Twitter following racist attack on Zayn Malik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/azealia-banks-suspended-twitter-racist-rant-zayn-malik>
Banks, who did not mention Malik by name in her apology, also clarified one 
point from her insults – she had no problem with curry, one of the terms she 
used to berate him.

She said she was repeating a joke from her native New York – where nearly half 
of cab drivers were born in Bangladesh, India or Pakistan – that taxis smelled 
like curry.

“I feel compelled to clear the air with curry itself because that’s a bridge I 
don’t want to burn. I still want to be able to enjoy it freely without guilt or 
judgment,” she wrote.

Banks has previously used homophobic language and called for the burning down 
of buildings owned by descendants of slave traders, remarks that drew 
controversy but did not lead to her suspension from Twitter.

She has also raised eyebrows by supporting Republican presidential candidate 
Donald Trump, a fellow enthusiast of acerbic Twitter postings who has little 
support among minorities.
 