
Babcock International's shares have been under pressure since last week's news 
of the £950m acquisition of helicopter company Avincis and a £1.1bn cash call 
to pay for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/27/babcock-international-announces-plant-purchase-avincis>
, amid concerns about the cost of the deal.

But they have been boosted by news that the engineering services group, 
alongside US partner Fluor, has been appointedpreferred bidder for a £7bn, 14 
year contract to manage the decommissioning of 12 UK nuclear sites. 
<http://www.nda.gov.uk/news/magnox-rsrl-preferred-bidder.cfm>

The contract included old power stations such as Hinkley, Sizewell and 
Dungeness, currently under the ownership of Magnox and Research Sites 
Restoration. The Babcock/Fluor joint venture, Cavendish Fluor Partnership, will 
take ownership of Magnox and RSR. The formal award is planned for September, 
and the deal is expected to see savings of around £1bn in decommissioning 
costs. John Clarke, chief executive of the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority, 
said:
 Cavendish Fluor Partnership brings a successful track record and extensive 
nuclear experience that will bring enormous benefits to the decommissioning and 
clean-up programme. 
The news has seen a turnaround in Babcock's shares, which are now up 44p at 
£13.36 having earlier fallen to £12.77 and are leading the FTSE 100 risers. 
Analyst Kean Marden at Jefferies said:
 It is anticipated that this contract will provide savings in excess of £1bn 
in the decommissioning programme for the 12 nuclear sites versus the £7bn 
initial estimate. This is in-line with our previous calculations and support 
our £200m-£250m annual revenue contribution estimate. Post the Avincis 
transaction and rights issue, we believe this should likely support mid-single 
digit upgrades to consensus earnings per share.

Babcock's nuclear revenue could quadruple to £1bn in 4-5 years. In our view, 
Babcock has enormous scope to increase its revenue from civil decommissioning 
and new build in the UK; from international decommissioning opportunities in 
France, Japan (Babcock's experience at Dounreay may be particularly useful at 
Fukushima) and Chalk River in Canada; and from the dismantling of laid-up 
submarines.

Losing consortia members include Amec, up 18p at £11.24, Rolls-Royce, 6p 
higher at £10.83 andSerco, up 1.1p to 421.7p.
 