
Back pain <https://www.theguardian.com/society/back-pain> sufferers will get 
improved access to treatments by acupuncturists, osteopaths and chiropractors 
on the NHS in an effort to reduce the misery, welfare bills and inability to 
work caused by the condition, it was announced today.

Advice issued by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (Nice) 
recommends that the millions of people who develop persistent non-specific low 
back pain receive up to nine sessions of spinal manipulation or 10 sessions of 
­acupuncture over 12 weeks.

Experts praised Nice's first guidance on how to tackle back pain as a 
breakthrough in treating a condition that costs the country an estimated £5.1bn 
every year, including £1bn of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
budget, and leads to the loss of around 5m working days. The problem affects 
around one in three adults each year and leads to 2.6 million people visiting 
their GP.

While most people with acute back pain recover within six weeks, an estimated 
7% go on to develop a chronic form of the condition, which in the worst cases 
can lead to immobility and inability to work. Some GPs already offer 
acupuncture and some primary care trusts pay for patients to have manipulation 
privately. But Professor Martin Underwood, a Coventry GP who helped to draw up 
the advice, said current NHS treatment of back pain was "patchy".

In future sufferers in England and Wales will be given a choice of attending 
exercise classes, undergoing spinal manipulation or having acupuncture. 
Underwood said providing these treatments to patients in England and Wales may 
save the NHS money in the long term.

It will cost the NHS £24.4m to provide acupuncture and another £16m for 
­manipulative therapy. But £33.6m will be saved by stopping the practice of 
injecting therapeutic substances into people's backs and £13.2m from reducing 
the number of sufferers sent for an MRI scan or X-ray.

Professor Steve Field, chairman of the Royal College of General Practitioners, 
welcomed the guidelines. "This is good news for GPs and patients. Most GPs deal 
with patients with backache every day of the week," he said. "I welcome the 
endorsement of some complementary therapies for which there is a clearer 
­evidence base."

Dr Dries Hettinga, of the patients organisation BackCare, said: "These 
treatments are all effective. In future, virtually all ­people who get low back 
pain should be prevented from developing the serious form of the problem."

But it is unclear when patients will be able to routinely access the 
treatments on the NHS and if the NHS will pay for patients to visit private 
practitioners for treatment.

Laurence Kirk, head of osteopathy at Oxford Brookes University and osteopath 
to the Royal Shakespeare Company, said: "As osteopaths we knew that our 
treatment worked for most back pain sufferers, and it's good to have official 
recognition of that. This should mean that the public have greater access to 
the services of skilled manipulators who will alleviate pain."

But some opponents of alternative ­medicine criticised Nice. Edzard Ernst, 
professor of complementary ­medicine at Exeter University, said Nice had 
­"overestimated the benefit and under-estimated the risks of chiropractic 
spinal manipulation".
 