
The entertainers: Ant and Dec


This feels like real life," says Declan Donnelly, settling back into the sofa 
next toAnthony McPartlin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin>. 
"We've done this before." You would have thought that after all those hours on 
telly performing – often live – for millions, Ant and Dec would want to do 
anything but watch it when they got home. "It's my number-one way to relax," 
says Dec. "We watch everything and anything and we constantly text each other 
to check what we're watching." Dec's last text to Ant was about the best ham 
sandwich in the world, as featured onCountrywise Kitchen. Ant's alerted Dec to 
theHairy Bikers' pork terrine. Both food related, "but we text through sport, 
documentaries and dramas, too," says Dec. As hosts ofBritain's Got Talent, the 
pair have been baffled by the competition revved up betweenBGT and The Voice. 
"It's just about the time slot," says Ant. "The shows are completely different.
BGT is fun, a laugh." Adds Dec: "But have any of their contestants sung, 
'Where's Me Keys? Where's Me Phone?' Hopefully they will on season two"…

Would you be a good gameshow contestant?
Dec We would. We've hosted so many that we've got loads of knowledge about 
crap stuff. You accumulate it.
Ant I wouldn't mind being on The Chase and beating that woman. I don't like 
her.
Favourite childhood TV? 
Dec Game for a Laugh, Noel's House Party, Tiswas and Going Live. 
Ant Anything but Dad's Army.

The leading lady: Anna Maxwell Martin
 “People must think I just cry and have a sad face all the time:” Anna Maxwell 
Martin. Photograph: Ian Derry for the Observer 
I wish I got offered more comedy," says Anna Maxwell Martin. "People must 
think I just cry and have a sad face all the time." It's hard to feel sorry for 
her when, over the years, she's cried her way so brilliantly through such great 
TV shows asBleak House, South Riding and White Girl. She gets to look sad in 
two new dramas this year. "I'm in a 50s thriller calledThe Bletchley Circle, 
which has a grisly murder and nice cossies." Then there's Jimmy McGovern's
Accused. "The part wasn't like anything I've done before – I was cast as 
someone who works in a juvenile detention centre alongside Ewen Bremner. We 
were the scrawniest people in there." Anna says she's missing out on all the 
"groovy hot dramas" at the moment. "I've just had a baby so I'm in bed at 8pm. 
I'm watchingCorrie though. It's my dream to be in it when I'm 70. If I could 
end my days onCorrie, I'd be happy."

Who's your favourite newsreader? There's my friend Romilly Weeks – I get 
really excited when I see her on telly – and Kate Simms onNorth West Tonight. 
She's my best friend and my daughter's godmother.
Favourite childhood show? I watched The A Team and the wrestling. 
New TV discovery? Monica Dolan who was in Appropriate Adult. She's the most 
extraordinary actress.

The trickster: Kayvan Novak

 "If you’re winding up Americans, their buttons are in different places:" 
Kayvan Novak. Photograph: Ian Derry for the Observer 
After the phenomenal success of prank-call extravaganza Fonejacker, Kayvan 
Novak is relishing his new role on hidden-camera showFacejacker, when he acts 
out his surreal characters instead. "It tickles my acting ability. It's total 
immersion – no action, no cut – you're with people who think you're real." The 
show was mainly filmed in the States, which Novak enjoyed. "If you're winding 
up Americans, their buttons are in different places. I was trying to process 
how the British compare to the Americans, so I read Quentin Crisp. He says that 
the difference is that the British want you to fail because they're afraid 
you'll leave them behind. The Americans want you to succeed in case you take 
them with you. I want to be as articulate as that, instead of just 
regurgitating it."

Would you be a good gameshow contestant? I love cooking shows – like 
MasterChef: The Professionals. I'll be editing until 10pm then get home, make 
dinner, and sit and eat while watching other people make dinner. So anything to 
do with cooking would be good.
Favourite TV? Shameless has a good vibe and I love Breaking Bad. 
Favourite childhood show? I loved Harry Enfield and Blackadder. Spitting Image 
was the first show that I started mimicking off the telly.

The super villain: Andrew Scott
 "I have to remain schtum. Even my mother doesn’t know what happens": says 
Andrew Scott on the third series of Sherlock. Photograph: Ian Derry for the 
Observer 
Andrew Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-scott> declares his 
role in BBC'sSherlock as arch-nemesis Jim Moriarty to be an absolute blast. 
"Every time he appears he gets great stuff to do. You get real bang for your 
buck." Though Scott first made his mark in theatre – appearing in such 
award-winning productions asCock and A Girl in a Car with a Man in London and 
in David Hare'sThe Vertical Hour in New York – he has two more TV dramas coming 
soon. First, there's psychological dramaThe Fuse, starring alongside 
Christopher Eccleston, for the BBC – "It's a very human story about obsession," 
he says – then an adaptation of Daphne Du Maurier'sThe Scapegoat for ITV.

After that there's the third series of Sherlock to consider – well, possibly. 
Any hints about the resolution of season 2's cliffhanger, which seemed to end 
with the deaths of Moriarty and Holmes? "I have to remain schtum. Even my 
mother doesn't know what happens."

Favourite sitcoms? Grandma's House and Twenty Twelve. Olivia Colman and 
Jessica Hynes are brilliant.
Favourite childhood show? The Muppet Show: the theme music makes me excited 
even now. I used to watch the dramaChocky, too. There's something about 
sophisticated drama for kids – it's just great.
Guilty pleasure? Judge Judy. It appeals to some weird side of me, I like the 
way she deals with idiots. I got into it when I was doingEmperor and Galilean 
at the NT last year. You can't go home and watch BBC4'sThe History of Desks 
after Ibsen.
Favourite US show? I've just started Mad Men. I want to be that person who 
watches it until 4am, but I don't think I am.
 