
The total package: Zawe Ashton

I'm a massive disappointment," says Zawe Ashton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zawe-ashton>, star of C4's Fresh Meat. 
Ashton's wayward, partying character Violet, better known as Vod, won the 
hearts of viewers in the first series – so much so that when Ashton meets 
people at parties they expect her to be the last one standing. "It's a 
compliment that people think I'm going to be like her – it means I'm doing my 
job properly. But I can see the disappointment in people's eyes when I switch 
to fizzy water before heading for the door at a decent hour!"

Ashton's star has been on the ascent for a couple of years now. She's appeared 
on stage as well as screen, and she's also honing her skills as a writer, 
including a stint as writer-in-residence for production company Clean Break. 
Having just finished her run inHere by Michael Frayn at the Kingston Theatre, 
she says she "loves theatre" although it's "never, ever glamorous, but it is 
fun", and writing full time would never be an option either. "I'd start seeing 
things if I were on my own that much. I need to act."

So what does the future hold? She's just come back from Los Angeles, having 
had "promising" meetings with agents and managers. "It's nice to be stoking LA 
coals." But the most important thing, Ashton says, is that she's in work. "The 
actor's life is [one of] constantly treading a line between complete 
self-belief and complete self-doubt. To say that I'm working until August is 
the best thing – you just never know when your next job will be."

Favourite TV? Luther season two was groundbreaking, thrilling TV. 
Favourite childhood show? The Fresh Prince of Bel Air and I still love it now. 
Guilty pleasure? E! – anything on that channel is hilarious.
Favourite newsreader? Moira Stewart because she broke down boundaries for 
women, and black women, in her industry.
TV icon? I will always adore Del Boy. And Hyacinth Bucket. SS

The heir apparent: Alfie Allen 

 "I’m a real homebody. I’m not a big fan of living out of a suitcase": Alfie 
Allen. Photograph: Ian Derry for the Observer 
Alfie Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alfie-allen> swans into the 
photo-shoot grinning from ear to ear. "I've just found out that I've been put 
forward by my producers for a best supporting actor Emmy – it's like a pat on 
the back to say I'm doing well." Allen's potentially award-wining role is that 
of Theon Greyjoy in HBO's hit fantasy dramaGame of Thrones, now in its second 
season on Sky Atlantic.

Filming is in Belfast and the crew, he says, feels like a family. "It's off 
the scale – there are so many people involved in making it, but we work 
together brilliantly. And it feels special to be a part of something right from 
the start."

He's just come back from LA, where he had "interesting meetings about 
interesting roles". But, he admits, "I'm a real homebody. I'm not a big fan of 
living out of a suitcase."

Favourite childhood TV? I was forced to watch Home & Away because my family 
were into it. I'm a sportsman so I've always watched a lot of football and 
cricket.
Favourite television show of the past year? Black Mirror, but don't watch it 
with your partner – it exposes paranoia in relationships.
Best documentary? Werner Herzog's Into the Abyss about a man on death row; my 
dad's [Keith Allen] doc on Nick Griffin.
Favourite newsreader? Riz Lateef – her name sounds like she's stealing Rizlas! 
SS

The double act: Vic and Bob

 “If there was a hanging we’d all tune in”: Vic Reeves with his TV partner Bob 
Mortimer. Photograph: Ian Derry for the Observer 
Did you know," asks Vic, as Bob rests his little round head on Vic's chest, 
"Did you know thatDownton Abbey is filmed in Nairobi?" Bob snuggles in deeper 
under Vic's arm. They belong together these two, even now, 22 years after they 
first appeared side-by-side on TV onVic Reeves Big Night Out. "What do you eat 
while you're watching telly, Bob?" asks Vic. "There's nowhere I'd rather be 
than in front of the telly, me," Bob replies. "I sit there from the start ofThe 
One Show and eat. Last night I had a bar of butterscotch chocolate, some monkey 
nuts, prawn crisps and stilton on crackers. And some lager." "I had celery, 
hummus, goat's cheese, Snack a Jacks and a pint of orange squash. I feel naked 
without snacks," adds Vic. They love TV. "Except for the freak-show stuff – you 
know,Embarrassing Bodies, 16-Year-Old Fat Bastard." "If there was a hanging," 
muses Vic, "we'd all tune in."

What's your TV routine? 
Vic Every night we put the kids to bed and I'm obliged to watch EastEnders and 
Corrie. Then I watch Criminal Minds and I'm knocked out by the first break.
Favourite dramas?
Bob Breaking Bad, 24, Alcatraz, Fringe, Touch, The Killing, Spiral – I love 
them all…
Vic Mud Men with Johnny Vaughan. EW
 