
Australians don't stick your name on a massive building unless they think you 
are a special kind of person. And so Rod Laver's reappearance here after a long 
absence to grace the arena that bears his name lifted everyone's spirits almost 
as much as the sudden emergence of an exciting new star, Marcos Baghdatis.

'Isn't he great?' Laver says. 'We talked about Roger Federer being a breath of 
fresh air, but so is this kid. I love the way he measures his game, not trying 
for too much until he has the rally under control. In the end when he's hitting 
that top-spin forehand with such freedom, he looks as if he feels 10 feet tall 
and he makes everyone else feel that way, too.'

Laver, 67, may appreciate the young Cypriot's ability to work his way into a 
match and keep a rein on his attacking flair because, in the beginning, that 
was not one of the Queenslander's strong points. Flashy, you could have called 
him, during those forgotten years when he lost successive Wimbledon finals, 
first to Alex Olmedo in 1959 and then to his countryman Neale Fraser, with whom 
he played golf yesterday.

Laver chuckles at the memory. '"One day they'll probably go in!" was what Emmo 
used to say when I hit another one into the cheap seats. I used to like to give 
it a bit of a nudge.'

Roy Emerson, winner of 12 grand-slam titles, is just one of that great line of 
Aussie champions who have been laughing at old tales here this past week. Frank 
Sedgman, Ken Rosewall, Ashley Cooper, Fred Stolle, the Wimbledon doubles 
winners Geoff Masters and Ross Case and several more - as good a bunch of 
champions as you could meet.

A group of peers like that is something neither Switzerland's Federer nor 
Baghdatis will ever enjoy but they are already bringing so much to their sport 
that Federer, certainly, and maybe even Baghdatis, will join that pantheon 
reserved for the great.

'Baghdatis certainly seems to have what it takes,' said Laver. 'He moves so 
well and obviously has a great temperament. No sign of panic.'

I can't remember ever having seen Laver panic because he had taken on board 
some typical advice from the great Lew Hoad, who in 1956 came within two sets 
of winning all four grand-slam titles in a year - something Laver, of course, 
eventually did twice in 1962 and, at the start of the Open era, 1969.

'Hoady just told me to hit the bloody thing,' Laver recalls. 'We all choke at 
some time or other. It's just a question of how we deal with it. Hoady said, 
"You can either lose the point by pushing it around hoping that you won't make 
a mistake or you can lose it by giving yourself a chance of hitting a winner." 
So I just used to go for it.'

A stream of very respectable opponents will tell you that it was a hugely 
successful ploy, especially as Laver was the first world-class left-hander to 
be equipped with a top-spin backhand. The Rockhampton Rocket, they called him 
and everyone knew why.

He is moving a little more gingerly now, having recovered from a major stroke 
that he suffered in 1998. He had a new hip put in three years ago and a new 
left knee just a few months back. Already back on the golf course, he tried a 
gentle jog on the beach near his southern Californian home recently and 
reported no after-effects.

'All the new bits seem to be working all right. I'll be back on the tennis 
court soon,' he says. 'I'll probably start by hitting some balls with my 
five-year-old granddaughter.'

With his wife, Mary, having survived a year of serious illness, everything is 
fine with the great grand-slammer now and it is fun to see him gaze up at the 
huge letters that spell out his name on the side of the stadium. He shakes his 
head slowly in wonder.

'It's tough to believe,' he says with the modesty that was always his 
trademark. 'It really is.'
 