
The newly-appointed children's commissioner for England craves our indulgence. 
Al Aynsley-Green's failure to add his voice to last month's hoodie debate, when 
it seemed that all young people were to be tarred with the antisocial behaviour 
brush, was read by some as confirmation of their worst fears about his new 
role: that it lacks the necessary independence to challenge government policy.

But, according to Aynsley-Green, the constraints have been of a far more 
practical nature. "I was holding down three jobs [he has only just stepped down 
as national clinical director for children and chair of the Department of 
Health's children's taskforce], then setting up the nuts and bolts of the 
post," he explains. "Being given a clean piece of paper to draw up a 
commission, the challenge is staggering."

Now ensconced at the Department for Education and Skills, with nine staff, 
Aynsley-Green is ready to make himself heard, and he talks with urgency and 
enthusiasm about his future plans. His background in health has made him 
especially aware of the challenges facing children with disabilities, he says, 
"and the anger that some parents have that their children haven't been asked, 
haven't been listened to, and haven't been thought of".

In a pamphlet written two years ago, Aynsley-Green suggested that British 
society was experiencing turbulence similar to that of the upheaval of the 
Victorian era. He argued for a re-creation of the reformist "movement for 
children" that characterised that age. "Things happened in Victorian times 
because intellectuals were outraged about what was happening to children," he 
says. "They exposed issues to the public, got the public on board, and engaged 
with some courageous politicians who got things changed." In contemporary 
Britain, he argues, there is no such debate. "We have the paradox where the 
media is bombarding parents with issues about childrearing and very often 
making them feel inadequate, yet, on the other hand, we have this failure to 
recognise that many children are in serious difficulties."

He offers an image to which he returns frequently: "What I think should inform 
all the debate is that the vulnerable child is born completely helpless and it 
is our collective responsibility as parents, as services and as children to 
make sure they are given the opportunity to develop fully."

He concedes that a collective understanding of childhood should recognise 
children's capacities as well as their vulnerabilities, but argues that we also 
need to recognise that there is no such thing as "the child". He says: "There 
are seven ages of childhood: the foetus, the neonate, the infant, the 
pre-school child, the school-age child, the adolescent, and the transition to 
adulthood. Each has very different issues in terms of children's capacity to 
speak for themselves - and also their needs."

He is wary of setting himself up as someone concerned only with children. "I 
have to look at the child within the family, and that raises all sorts of other 
issues because we are in a state of incredible turmoil about what actually is a 
family in society. Families, in all their shapes and sizes, are critical in how 
that child is given support and nurture and love." Love is a key word, he says. 
"It's not politically correct to talk about love - you're seen as a sort of 
dewy-eyed person - but that's what shapes a human being's life forever."

The debate about family, traditionally commandeered by the right, is one that 
more progressive thinkers can seem uncomfortable about tackling. Aynsley-Green 
is quick to insist that he does not prejudge different family structures. "It 
comes back to the image of that vulnerable baby. What are the components of 
nurture? That's what I want to focus on, not whether it's a gay or lesbian 
family or a teenage mother."

He has cause to be reasonably confident about his appointment. Three of the 
six selection stages were conducted by children and young people - the most 
gruelling experiences of his 31 years in public service, he says - and he 
remains resolute that everyone who works with him should undergo the same 
process and that children should be embedded in everything the commission does.

"Participation is serious," he insists. "It's real, and it's not consultation. 
Consultation means adults ask children, but adults decide. Participation means 
children are actively involved in issues that affect their lives." He is 
seeking new, child-friendlier, premises, and is contemplating the possibility 
of appointing young assistant commissioners to work alongside him.

But the autonomy of the role has already been called into question. The 
European Network of Ombudsmen forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> - of which the other UK children 
commissioners are members -has expressed concern that his powers are too weak. 
Aynsley-Green, however, hopes to join the network, and insists that he feels 
free to speak out against government policy. "Now I'm outside the government 
machinery and I feel independent," he says. "But I'm a high- wire artist; I 
must work with government, to have the opportunity to influence their thinking, 
but I need to confront ministers when I think things aren't being done well, 
and the media will hold me to account."

There has also been much debate about his power to take into account 
children's rights. "I take great comfort from that key phrase from the 
[Children] Act that says I must have regard to the UN Convention on the Rights 
of the Child. That actually gives me a great deal of freedom." He says that he 
is intent on making sure that the convention is taken "very seriously".

In terms of informing children themselves of their rights, does he think that 
the convention should be included in citizenship classes? "I think the whole 
question of citizenship is incredibly important," he says. "That means 
understanding where you sit in society and what individuals' rights are, so I 
would strongly support that. But rights by themselves count for nothing unless 
you get action, and that has to be informed by asking what the needs of 
children are."

He acknowledges that there are great tensions between the current antisocial 
behaviour measures and the information sharing provisions under the Children 
Act and children's rights to freedom of association and privacy, but he will 
not be drawn further. He says he is still in the process of cementing policy. 
"The principles we have established are that anything we say must be based on 
fact, and anything I say must be informed by what children and young people 
themselves have to say, so we are developing our positions on a whole range of 
issues."

Antisocial behaviour orders (Asbos) are a case in point. "The facts are quite 
startling when you look at the extreme increase in the number applied," he 
says. "What do young people think about Asbos? We need to garner their views. 
From my own fieldwork, I see that they are perplexed. But, in communities, 
people feel very threatened by what they perceive as antisocial behaviour, and 
this raises an interesting debate about what the responsibilities of young 
people are, as well as their rights, and how they will be held to account if 
they impinge on the rights of others. That's part of citizenship as well."

The CV

Age 62.

Status Married; four children.

Education Guy's hospital medical school, London; Oriel College, Oxford; 
University children's hospital, Zurich.

Career 1975-1983: clinical and university lecturer at the University of 
Oxford; 1984-1993: James Spence professor of child health and head of clinical 
medical sciences at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne; 1993-2003: executive 
director on the Great Ormond Street trust board and director of clinical 
research and development at the Institute of Child Health; 2001-2005: national 
clinical director for children and chair of the children's taskforce at the 
DoH; July 2005: children's commissioner.

Interests Family, winter sports, photography, opera, music.
 