
Two outstanding rides made all the difference for the European team at Santa 
Anita on Saturday night, as Frankie Dettori took his score at the Breeders’ Cup 
to a round dozen aboard Queen’s Trust in the Filly & Mare Turf and Seamie 
Heffernan enjoyed his first win at the meetingon Highland Reel in the Turf. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/highland-reel-aidan-obrien-breeders-cup-frankie-dettori-queens-trust-horse-racing>
 Dettori, predictably, performed a flying dismount afterwards. Heffernan, just 
as predictably, did not.

Heffernan will never be a household name like Dettori or move markets like 
Ryan Moore but his career record now includes 26 victories at Group One or 
Grade One level. In what is, by definition, a highly competitive business he 
has found a niche as a perennial No2 at Aidan O’Brien’s stable and, when it 
comes to making the best of one’s opportunities, there is no one in the sport 
to match him.

Moore, O’Brien’s principal jockey, was scarcely sighted on either day at Santa 
Anita. Found, the Arc winner, was the only one of his six rides to make the 
frame and she simply stayed on into third place in the Turf without ever 
threatening the winner.

But then none of Highland Reel’s opponents managed to threaten his lead 
either, as Heffernan seized his latest opportunity with a rare flourish. He was 
in control of the race from the opening strides and in effect secured victory 
almost half a mile out as he opened a lead that Highland Reel, a multiple 
winner at the highest level, was never going to surrender.

Plenty of the spectators in the 70,000-strong crowd pointed fingers at 
Heffernan’s opponents, with Javier Castellano a particular target for his ride 
on Flintshire, the second-favourite. Yet Heffernan executed his own plan so 
adroitly that there was very little the rest of them could do about it.

Moore, of course, will be back aboard Highland Reel if he now runs in either 
Japan or Hong Kong at the tail-end of the season, but Heffernan is fine with 
that.

“I’ve been there a long time and I went there as a second jockey and work 
rider,” he said on Saturday. “I get very, very well looked after. More recently 
my name is coming out of the hat for the rides and I’m happy with my position. 
There’s no pressure. I’m never really on the first string, though the first and 
third string can be equal, never mind the second string.”

O’Brien himself always bends over backwards to stress that Ballydoyle’s 
success is a team effort. Heffernan has now been part of that team for two 
decades – his first Group winner for O’Brien was in August 1996 – and his Santa 
Anita victory was one of the most memorable moments of what was, even by the 
standards of the Breeders’ Cup, an exceptional weekend.

Dettori’s win on Queen’s Trust was another. The horsemanship, timing and 
confidence that have made him one of the all-time greats were all in evidence 
as he squeezed Sir Michael Stoute’s filly past Lady Eli, the favourite, in the 
final stride, and then waggled his whip to celebrate victory a moment later. 
Dettori was seemingly the only person at Santa Anita who was absolutely 
confident that Queen’s Trust had got up and, as so often, he was spot on.

The memories that will live longest for the American fans, however, will be 
the contests which closed the cards on Friday and Saturday night. After one of 
the great stretch duels between Beholder and the previously unbeaten Songbird 
in Friday’s Distaff, it seemed greedy to hope for something to match it in the 
Classic on Saturday night but the race between Arrogate and California Chrome 
which closed the meeting was every bit as good.

As California Chrome, the darling of the Santa Anita crowd, led the field into 
the stretch, Arrogate, who made his racecourse debut only a few days after 
California Chrome’s win in the Dubai World Cup in March, seemed to be 
struggling to close the gap. Yet Mike Smith, his jockey, kept asking for more 
and Arrogate kept finding it. With just under a furlong to run, there was a 
visible moment when the balance of power shifted towards Arrogate, like a 
shuddering punch in a boxing ring, and he landed his blow so late that the old 
champion had no time to respond.

Arrogate, with only five starts on his record before Saturday, is the most 
lightly raced Classic winner in Breeders’ Cup history and the best news of all 
is that he will stay in training next season, when the Classic at Del Mar, a 
few hundred miles down the coast near San Diego, will presumably be his big 
target.

Before that it is possible that Arrogate will find a berth in the Pegasus Cup, 
a new event to be staged at Gulfstream Park in January and also the race that 
is likely to be the last of California Chrome’s career. The Pegasus Cup’s $12m 
purse, which will make it the world’s richest race, is funded by selling a 
dozen places in the line-up to leading owners at $1m apiece and, while Prince 
Khalid Abdullah’s Juddmonte Farms operation did not buy a berth originally, 
there seems little doubt that it will be able to acquire one if necessary.

The Pegasus Cup’s unusual format and sudden appearance in the racing programme 
has not met with universal approval in the States. First impressions are often 
the most important, however, and a rematch between Arrogate and California 
Chrome would be a very good way to announce its arrival.
 