
Another win, another change of flight. "And now I'll have to change it again," 
saidElena Baltacha <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha>. "But 
it's a good problem to have, and it was a flexible ticket, thank God."

Having fought her way through three qualifying rounds last week, the 
21-year-old Briton, whose career was in serious jeopardy in 2003 when a liver 
problem forced her to give up the sport for six months, reached tomorrow's 
second round of the Australian Open with a wonderfully spirited 5-7, 6-4, 6-4 
victory over Katarina Srebotnik.

The Slovenian, who recently won the ASB Classic in Auckland and is ranked more 
than 100 places above Baltacha, must have believed she had the match cracked 
when she overturned a 4-2 deficit to win the first set and then levelled in the 
second after being 3-0 down. But Baltacha never lost her self-belief and, 
despite committing a host of unforced errors, continued to strive bravely for 
winners, gaining her just rewards.

"She stepped it up at the end and I was just running around the court like an 
absolute headless chicken," grinned Baltacha, who sank to her knees in delight, 
mixed with understandable relief, when a final forehand went in. "I've had four 
unbelievably tough matches and I'm just so happy that I've managed to come 
through and do it on a hard court rather than on grass."

In 2002, as a wild card, Baltacha reached the third round at Wimbledon, and 
last year she lost a close second-round match there against Jennifer Capriati. 
But this run, and rightly so, has given her much more satisfaction. "I feel I 
deserve to be here, rather than just getting a wild card."

Baltacha, who was born in Ukraine and whose father Sergei played football for 
Dynamo Kiev and Ipswich Town, has always been capable of giving the ball an 
almighty clump with her forehand, and has an excellent free-swinging serve, but 
over the past few days she has demonstrated a much greater maturity and a 
growing ability to construct points.

"My big strength has been that if I'm having a good day I can basically blast 
people off the court. But I've had to learn to control that, to rally a bit 
more and be more patient."

A lot of her over-exuberance was caused by anxiety and nerves, and there were 
times yesterday when the old failings resurfaced and she went for too much too 
early.

"But I've managed to enjoy the ball being in court more. I'm not as freaked 
out about trying to hit a winner because I think I'm not going to last a rally. 
I've had to learn to love the ball coming back at me."

Baltacha had been expecting to play the former Australian and French Open 
champion Mary Pierce tomorrow, but in an all-French first-round tie Pierce was 
defeated 6-2, 6-2 by Stéphanie Cohen-Aloro, who has won even fewer matches than 
Baltacha at slam level. It is a great opportunity for the British No1 to 
progress further, although her stamina will be tested to the full.

One thing is certain, she will give her all. "I keep saying to everyone that 
in the six months I took off I really realised how much I love tennis. Now it's 
my whole life, on court and off. It never really has been before, and now I 
want to sacrifice pretty much everything to fulfil my potential."

Bouts of tonsillitis when she was a teenager required so many antibiotics that 
her liver was permanently damaged, but a specialist eventually gave her the 
go-ahead to resume her career. "I'm not on medication and just have to get 
checked and screened twice a year."

Coached by Alan Jones and Jo Durie, Baltacha recognises her defects. "I'm not 
going to get carried away. I've had a great week and hopefully it can continue. 
But I still have a list of weaknesses that I have to keep working on. On the 
other hand, how exciting is it that I can do this with the weaknesses that I 
have?"

Elsewhere on the opening day it was relative plain sailing for the leading 
players. France's Amélie Mauresmo, the No2 seed, was thought to be the most 
vulnerable against the 20-year-old Australian Samantha Stosur, who had reached 
consecutive WTA finals this year on the Gold Coast and in Sydney.

After steadfastly ignoring the merits of women's tennis for its night matches, 
the Australian Open has this year followed the pattern of the US Open with a 
top women's match preceding the last men's match of the day under floodlights 
in the Rod Laver Arena.

Mauresmo, who reached her only slam final here in 1999, losing to Martina 
Hingis, had been tipped to win last year, only to pull out before the 
quarter-finals with a bad back. Yesterday her left thigh was heavily strapped, 
although she did not appear at all hindered. Stosur, herself suffering from a 
strained abdomen, broke for a 3-1 lead in the second set but was ultimately 
unable to cope with the French player's heavy top spin and more accurate 
hitting, Mauresmo winning 6-2, 6-3.

Maria Sharapova, the Wimbledon champion, also enjoyed an easy passage, beating 
Sesil Karatantcheva of Bulgaria 6-3, 6-1.
 