
Emilio Botín, head of Banco Santander Central Hispano, which is expected to 
buy Abbey National, was yesterday charged with tax and document fraud by a 
Spanish court.

Mr Botín and three others from the banking group must, between them, put up 
bail totalling €85m (£58.7m) while the case is readied for trial.

The news comes just a week before Abbey National's shareholders meet in London 
to vote on the terms of Santander's £8.5bn offer.

The 69-year-old patriarch of Spain's largest bank faces a maximum sentence of 
four years in jail, a court official told Reuters yesterday.

Mr Botín will be tried by the national court, Judge Teresa Palacios said in a 
written order yesterday which detailed the allegations against him.

Spain's top banker has been charged alongside three other present or former 
Santander executives and 28 of the bank's wealthier clients. It is now up to a 
three-judge panel at the court to set a trial date, a decision that will take 
several months.

The case dates back to the 1980s, when Santander offered what prosecutors 
claim were tax-evading investment products. Judge Palacios said the Spanish 
treasury was cheated out of some €85m in tax revenue.

Spain's tax authorities originally accused the bank of fraud during 1992 - 
and, although they dropped the charges, the case was taken up by private 
prosecutors.

Mr Botín is now at the centre of two separate court cases, having been 
ordered, along with two former board members, to stand trial on 
misappropriation charges in a separate case six months ago.

The deal between Santander and Abbey would be Europe's largest cross-border 
retail banking merger and create the world's 10th largest bank by market value.

Don Emilio, as he is known in the bank, took over as head of Santander from 
his father, who inherited the mantle from his own father.

Under his stewardship it has grown from a small national operation into an 
international powerhouse.

He is widely seen as wanting to keep the business in family hands by passing 
the running of it on to his daughter, Ana Patricia, who heads Spain's Banesto 
bank.

Combining a gruff manner with a keen eye for a deal, Mr Botín surprised the 
market in 1999 when Santander bought Banco Central Hispano, grabbing the number 
one spot in Spanish banking. He had previously launched a Latin American buying 
spree, investing heavily in the region.

Bank officials said yesterday that they had no immediate comment on the case, 
though they have previously denied any wrongdoing by Santander or its 
executives in either of the two cases now facing Mr Botín.
 