
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is to clamp down 
on insurance companies by subjecting their bosses to tougher scrutiny and 
forcing them to take steps to bolster their financial strength, Mark Carney has 
warned.

The governor of the Bank of England also warned on Thursday about the 
potential for risks building up in the financial system after more than five 
years with the base rate at a historic low of 0.5% – even as he repeated that 
the moment rates will rise was getting closer.

Pointing out that the weaknesses of insurers such as AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> were exposed during the 2008 banking 
crisis, Carney told the insurance industry that “the people running insurance 
companies should be more clearly held accountable for their actions”.

The Banks regulation arm, the Prudential Regulation Authority, is responsible 
for regulating insurers as well as big banks and one-third of its staff are 
involved in overseeing the insurance sector.

Carney said the regulator was on alert for any attempts by insurance companies 
to try to cut the amount of capital they hold and underestimate the size of the 
risks they are running. Referring to rules that allow insurers to use their own 
financial models to calculate the risks they run, Carney said the bank had 
learnt the lessons of the banking crisis when banks were allowed to run on 
lower capital as they measured their own risks.

“The dangers of using poorly designed models were made all too clear in the 
banking sector. So the Bank won’t hesitate to withhold approval of inadequate 
or opaque models,” the governor said.

“Models must be based on appropriate data and account for all quantifiable 
risks. Boards have the responsibility to ensure models remain appropriate and 
to show they are used in practice,” Carney said.

Carney said he did not expect to subject insurance companies to the same 
regime as bankers, who, if wrongdoing emerges, have to prove they had tried to 
stop it. A consultation will begin later this year to make insurance company 
chairmen, chief executives and risk officers and their actuaries “directly 
accountable for how a firm is run, for their decisions and for their actions”.

“These senior people will be expected to prove their fitness to regulators 
before they take up a role and the onus will be on them to ensure risks are 
understood, measured and properly considered,” Carney said.

In a speech to actuaries, he also discussed the economy and the potential for 
a rate rise. “With many of the conditions for the economy to normalise now met, 
the point at which interest rates also begin to normalise is getting closer. In 
recent months the judgement about precisely when to raise the bank rate has 
become more balanced,” he said.

The market expects rates to start rising from February next year.
 