
Personally, I'm a sucker for a slice of lemon in my gin and tonic – but I 
don't expect the barman to quietly stick a few pounds extra on the bill for 
provision of this twist of fruit. Fair's fair – as consumers, we expect to be 
told if we're to be charged for any inconsequential add-ons that we may or may 
not value.

Britain's banks adopted a rather more relaxed attitude to this principle 
throughout the 1990s and most of the noughties. Millions of personal loans and 
mortgages were sold with unwanted, unneeded and often unnoticed policies 
providing payment protection insurance (PPI), supposedly looking after 
borrowers' repayments if they ever fell sick or lost their jobs.

These policies often added between 20% and 50% to the cost of loans – in one 
case, the Citizens Advice Bureau found an unsecured personal loan of £11,000 
supplemented by a £5,133 payment protection premium. And a £5,059 hire purchase 
agreement for a car carried a £2,157 bill for PPI – a straightforward 
"protection racket", complained the bureau, creating one of the biggest 
mis-selling scandals for a generation, encompassing 20m policies.

So it's immensely welcome news that a seven-year battle surrounding this 
rip-off, which began to be exposed back in 2004, is finally drawing to a close. 
Britain's top banks have been fighting through the courts to limit the scope of 
compensation they must pay out to those who didn't want, didn't need or weren't 
realistically eligible for protection coverage, yet who were still unwittingly 
fleeced.

Lloyds, under its new chief executive António Horta-Osório, last week broke 
ranks by throwing in the towel, setting aside an eye-watering £3.2bn to settle 
potential claims.

In time for a legal deadline of Tuesday, rival banks – Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>, RBS and HSBC – must decide 
whether to pursue, or abandon, an application for a supreme court appeal 
against the Financial Services Authority, which has ordered a retrospective 
payback to all customers affected. The full compensation bill, according to 
analysts at Deutsche Bank, could reach £8bn.

This affair has shown the banking industry at its worst. Banks sold protection 
against job losses to the self-employed, who could not possibly have been 
eligible to claim. On sickness cover, the criteria were sometimes so tight that 
it was extremely difficult to claim. Payout rates were just 15p to 20p for each 
pound the banks hoovered up in premiums.

It's worth taking a moment to consider this. Executives at the highest 
echelons of banks can hardly have failed to notice that they were selling 
insurance with a payout rate of below 20% – a sure sign of a warped market. 
This was a cynical, conscious mugging of customers. It was worse, in a sense, 
than the wrong-headed build-up of toxic mortgages and derivatives that drove 
banks to the brink of oblivion during the global financial crisis. It's 
conspiracy, as opposed to cock-up.

In an ideal world, consumers who got burned by their banks would simply close 
their accounts and go elsewhere. But few actually do so; switching banks is 
considered a hassle and rates of change, according to the House of Commons' 
Treasury select committee, are just 3% to 7% per year.

James Daley, money editor of Which, says: "If you go to a supermarket every 
week, the checkout girl swears at you and the fruit's rotten, you'll change 
supermarkets. But it seems like banks can sling as much mud as they like and 
still keep their customers."

For the banking industry, there are broader issues at stake than a hefty £8bn 
payout. The British Bankers' Association complains that the FSA is trying to 
apply new standards, retrospectively, to past transactions. It feels that it 
would be unjust, on principle, to rewrite rules after the event and then to 
declare policy sales unlawful.

In the eyes of consumer organisations, this is a broader clash between 
box-ticking, rules-based regulation and more flexible common-sense, 
principles-based oversight.

Lloyds, the sprawling financial empire that includes Halifax, Bank of Scotland 
and TSB, may have won plaudits for surrendering first. But its actions were 
tactical. It makes sense for Horta-Osório, an incoming boss, to get this issue 
out of the way right at the start, rather than waging his predecessor's battle 
and facing a possible bill further down the road. And the bank's huge provision 
looked suspiciously like a "kitchen sink" job with the prospect of clawing back 
gains in a couple of years' time.

For Barclays, HSBC and Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, a dignified 
retreat now seems the least they can do. The banks have tried the public's 
patience more than enough over the past four years. The remnants of this 
shameful scam should be tidied up and consigned to the industry's darkest 
archive.
 