
It took almost as much strife, bickering, bluff and bluster as a strategic 
nuclear disarmament treaty. But the outcome of four months of secret-squirrel 
discussions between Britain's banks and the government,Project Merlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/project-merlin>, was a hopeless pamphlet 
of platitudes.

In a flimsy six-page document presented by George Osborne to the House of 
Commons, the so-called "big four" – Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds and RBS – plus 
Spanish-owned Santander declared that they "understand the public mood and have 
responded". How they must have sniggered when they penned that.

Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking>, at its core, is the 
art of negotiation, and outgoing Barclays boss John Varley, who led talks for 
the City, comprehensively outwitted the Treasury mandarins across the table. 
Let's remember what the public wanted: an increase in capital loans to small 
and medium-sized businesses to help them out of the recession, and a shrinkage 
in corpulent, telephone-number-sized City bonuses.

Osborne triumphantly pointed to a commitment by banks to raise lending from 
£176bn to £190bn this year. But this is gross lending, rather than net, so for 
each new loan the banks make, they can call in an old one if they choose. It 
was characterised by furious Liberal Democrat outrider Lord Oakeshott as a 
"weak, waffly aspiration with vast wiggle-room". The Institute of Directors 
expressed doubt that the commitment would have any major effect on overall 
lending.

Meanwhile, the Square Mile has given up virtually nothing on bonuses, which 
are likely to top £6bn this year, except to say that they will be lower than 
last year – which was already inevitable, since a slowdown in deals has cut 
investment banking profits. They've promised that a "significant proportion" of 
payouts will be in shares, which was already required under European 
guidelines, and they'll disclose how much their top five executives are earning 
– although "executives" are defined to exclude big-earning traders. Even the 
City's house newspaper, theFinancial Times, said the banks had offered 
"remarkably little", swallowing only a relatively paltry £800m increase in tax.

Presenting his vapid little pamphlet, the chancellor said that Britain needed 
to stop bullying bankers and move "from retribution to recovery". So is this 
the end of it? Has the battle been lost? Must we now accept that it's back to 
business as usual?

For those who object to vast extremes of City wealth, it's difficult, 
unfortunately, to see this as anything other than the missed opportunity of a 
generation. The credit crunch presented a crossroads. Would we continue as 
before? Or attempt a root-and-branch reassessment of the financial industry's 
role in the economy? We've opted for the former.

Part of the blame lies in Washington, where Barack Obama, who once derided 
bonuses as "the height of irresponsibility" and threatened to impose a $100,000 
cap, stepped back from confronting Wall Street within a few months of taking 
office – fearful of Republican taunts of "socialism", of nerves from treasury 
secretary Timothy Geithner and of threats by banks to shift investment 
elsewhere. Britain, the world's second largest financial centre, has blinked at 
acting without Uncle Sam's blessing.

A few loose ends still present opportunities. Labour politicians are making a 
push on tax avoidance, demanding that banks halt the practice of siting 
subsidiaries in offshore centres such as the Caymans, the Channel Islands and 
the Isle of Man. If we're prepared to put up with vast bonuses, perhaps the 
least we can ask is that banks pay a full whack of tax – within the spirit of 
the law, rather than the letter. There's still the Vickers commission on 
banking, which may recommend a partial separation of high-street and investment 
banking.

The prospect of multinational action lingers, too. At the G20 summit in 
Pittsburgh in 2009, world leaders, pushed by Gordon Brown, agreed to examine a 
tax on financial transactions – a so-called Tobin tax – intended to discourage 
speculation. That is still on the agenda, and is vigorously supported by 
several European leaders, including France's Nicolas Sarkozy.

For small businesses, though, frustration persists. One such firm, Luton-based 
2K Manufacturing, makes an environment-friendly recycled plastic called 
EcoSheet, used in hoardings around construction sites. It began production in 
November at a factory next to Luton airport employing 60 people. But its owner, 
Omer Kutluoglu, had to go to a Belgian bank, KBC Capital, to secure £2m in 
asset financing after getting the cold shoulder from 15 British banks, 
including RBS.

Kutluoglu just happens to be a former City trader and is clued up about how 
these things work: "The banks are asking themselves, shall we increase lending 
to businesses? Or divert money towards our trading operations, which are much 
more profitable when things go well and make us huge bonuses?" I think we know 
which option the banks favour.
 