
It was an easy line for an eager crowd. Picking up an Oscar for his scattergun 
credit crunch documentaryInside Job, director Charles Ferguson got a cheer from 
Hollywood's finest for a rant about the absence of prison time handed down to 
Wall Street banking bosses.

"Forgive me," Ferguson told his fellow movie-making luminaries. "But I must 
start by pointing out that three years after a horrific financial crisis caused 
by massive fraud, not a single financial executive has gone to jail. And that's 
wrong."

The baldness of his sentiment, widely shared by the public on both sides of 
the Atlantic, has caused a stir in the financial community. Interviewed 
afterwards by theWall Street Journal, Ferguson expanded on his theme, declaring 
that "there should be dozens or even perhaps hundreds of senior financial 
executives in prison now".

Unfortunately, it's just not that simple. Ferguson's remarks are in tune with 
his entertaining, polemical film, which contains interviews with financial 
players ranging from George Soros to Christine Lagarde, Nouriel Roubini and 
Eliot Spitzer. Using the briefest of quotable snippets from each, the 
documentary builds a crude argument that the global financial meltdown was a 
conscious "inside job" caused by greedy, ruthless, mendacious, out-of-control 
bankers.

But responsibility for the global debacle is as diffuse as liability for the 
typical sub-prime mortgage derivative – it can be sliced, diced and attributed 
to recklessly overstretched homebuyers, sly on-the-ground mortgage salespeople, 
flawed credit rating agencies and blind regulators as well as avaricious, 
bonus-hungry bankers.

Much as we might like to see some big names doing porridge, prosecutors have 
struggled to build convincing cases of willful lawlessness. In the US, the 
department of justice thought it had struck gold with a string of emails sent 
by two Bear Stearns hedge fund managers – Ralph Cioffi and Matthew Tannin – who 
privately worried that the sub-prime market was "pretty damn ugly" and "toast" 
while telling clients that everything was sunny. Their funds, which had 
investments of $20bn, collapsed, contributing to the subsequent demise of Bear 
Stearns in its entirety.

But during a trial in Brooklyn in late 2009, a jury decided that private 
expressions of self-doubt didn't amount to criminal fraud. That acquittal seems 
to have put paid to efforts to lay charges elsewhere on Wall Street – including 
the top brass at defunct Lehman Brothers.

In Britain, the RBS chief Fred "The Shred" Goodwin escaped sanction from the 
Financial Services Authority despite driving the bank into the ground. Although 
the FSA is yet to publish its findings in full, the authorities clearly felt 
that dreadful misjudgments and foolish lending policies didn't amount to 
criminality. Simon Bevan, an expert in fraud investigation at accountancy firm 
BDO, says: "There are many degrees of recklessness that may be reprehensible 
but aren't dishonest."

A 545-page tome landed on my desk last week: the full text of the US Financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission's findings. This bit of bedside reading concludes 
that the credit crunch was down to "human mistakes, misjudgments and misdeeds 
that resulted in systemic failures". It adds: "A crisis of this magnitude 
cannot be the work of a few bad actors."

Demanding imprisonment isn't the answer to this fiasco. Neither is it 
particularly constructive. However frustrating it may seem, we can't invent 
laws retrospectively to snare our chosen villains. But what remains so 
desperately disappointing is the lack of remorse shown by those who made such 
errors – and the failure of the government to implement lasting reforms. The 
head of America's biggest sub-prime lender, Angelo Mozilo, still thinks his 
business was "one of the greatest companies in the history of this country", 
responsible for delivering dream homes to thousands.

The Bank of England's governor, Mervyn King, declared last week that he was 
surprised that public outrage over bankers' failures had not been greater. On 
the single issue that most enrages the public – bankers' bonuses – there's been 
precious little reform, with the government crumbling in the face of threats by 
institutions to shift investment elsewhere in the world. But, encouragingly, 
Sir John Vickers's independent commission on banking is showing signs of 
backbone. Its members are said to have threatened resignation when George 
Osborne suggested he might take a break-up of banks off the table during the 
Project Merlin peace talks with the City. We could yet see some radical action.

As to whether the crisis was truly an inside job, Ferguson's own documentary 
cites a remark during the boom years by Citigroup's former boss, Chuck Prince: 
"We have to dance until the music stops." As George Soros subsequently pointed 
out, unbeknown to Citigroup, the music had already stopped.
 