
What a hyperactive week for Aidan Barclay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>, scion of the famously 
reclusive brothers. Early on, he was cooking up his bid for Glasgow's Herald 
titles, being sold by Scottish Media Group.

On Friday, he announced a £750 million deal to buy Littlewoods from the Moore 
family. That means he has pledged his family to an outlay of more than £1 
billion in less than five days.

Barclay junior has obviously refined and enhanced his entrepreneurial skills, 
because the Littlewoods deal was clinched with a minimum of corporate finance 
advice, but a maximum of determination - the Barclay family has been stalking 
Littlewoods for more than 15 years, and sees the chain as a neglected national 
treasure. So, unlike the quick 'flip' the family made on Sears, Littlewoods 
will be kept and made to work.

The Herald bid, too, showed a sense of derring-do. Bidding £230m - above the 
expected first round 'top' - was bold, as was the argument that the Herald 
titles will be run by a separate company from that which controls the competing 
Scotsman .

The only flaw in the Barclays' strategy for the Herald is that it is being led 
by Andrew Neil, their abrasive publisher, who has made so many enemies north 
(and indeed south) of the border that his bid will almost certainly be blocked.

 Cider not rosy


Trying to make Woodpecker cider popular in China was never going to be easy. 
But the move by Bulmer, producer of the drink, illustrated the quiet 
desperation of management under Mike Hughes, who quit last month shortly after 
the company warned of accounting problems.

Last week, it was the turn of Alan Flockhart, Bulmer's finance director, to 
walk the plank. And that may not be the end of it as the firm launches an 
internal investigation in order to find out what lies behind an accounting 
glitch that the company says is linked to 'previously unidentified promotional 
costs'.

Bulmer could still be a great company - in Strongbow, it has a cracking brand. 
But things have gone downhill since John Rudgard left in 1998. He managed to 
reverse a decline in sales and make cider fashionable again.

The Bulmer family, which own 50 per cent of the stock, have seen the value of 
their holding slump by a half during the year, so they must be spitting blood. 
If they can find another Rudgard, there may yet be hope. Otherwise, who can 
blame them if they press for the whole shebang to be put up for auction?

 Piper out of tune


Ric Piper is still in a state of shock after Trinity Mirror, publisher of the 
Daily Mirror, withdrew its offer to make him finance director on the day he was 
due to start work.

Trinity made the decision because 24 hours earlier Piper's employer, support 
services firm Atkins, issued a profits warning, which sent the shares down 70 
per cent.

Everyone accepts that the firm's problems occurred on Piper's watch. 

But it could all have ended so differently. Piper was set to leave Atkins at 
the end of June when he told the company that he had been headhunted by Trinity 
Mirror. But he was persuaded to stay on an extra three months to complete a 
number of projects.

Had he left when he wanted to, Piper would not have been at Atkins on the day 
of the profits warning.

In those circumstances, Trinity would have had to sack him when he had already 
been in the job for three months. Would it have done so? Probably not, as there 
would have been enough blue water between the profits alert and Piper joining 
Trinity.

In those circumstances, it would have been easier for Trinity to argue that 
Atkins' woes were not really his fault.

By staying on at Atkins - to do his employer a favour - Piper probably did 
himself out of a job. You have to feel sorry for the man.

 Capitol offence


 Nobody could accuse this column of having been over-friendly towards the 
American investment banks which helped inflate the dotcom bubble to such a 
dangerous extent.

But the sense of shock and injustice felt by Goldman Sachs last week, when the 
bank found itself the target of vicious accusations and headlines regarding its 
policy during the good IPO years, seemed persuasively genuine. 'F*****g 
outrage', was the on-the-record comment of one, normally silver-tongued, 
executive.

There has to be something in Goldman's argument that there are dark forces at 
work on Capitol Hill. After all, the charges were coming from the 
Republican-led House Committee on Financial Services. Goldman's former senior 
partner, John Corzine, the Democrat Senator for New Jersey, has been making a 
nuisance of himself in Congress.
 