
On the first Sunday of Adelaide festival two ceremonies took place at the 
festival nightclub,Barrio <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/club/barrio>
. In the first, a local couple were married by an exuberant Ghanaian 
celebrant, with the aid of a bottle of bio-oil "so the ring can slip on easily" 
and 95mls of good old-fashioned Jamaican rum "to help us get in the spirit of 
things." "No not you, Isaac," scolded celebrant Dorinda Haffner, as the 
couple's authentically over-excited eight-year-old son made a lunge for the 
bottle.
 
The wedding of Michael and Valli, a graphic designer and a local government 
worker, was followed by a public signing of the register and private dinner for 
40 in the Barrio's exclusive dining area, the Naughty Corner. While the wedding 
party were toasting the bride and groom, a second ceremony brought the Lord 
Mayor of Adelaide onstage to receive the keys to Barrio from the club's own 
first citizen, who goes by the name of Mayor Fruitcake. "I've not had a good 
time with keys of the city," said the Lord Mayor, rattling a set of outsized 
toy keys. "I swear I'm not on performance-enhancing drugs – and make sure you 
vote in the local election."
 
Welcome to Barrio, where reality and fantasy blend so seamlessly that that 
it's hard to know which of the mayors is more implausible. This apparently 
ramshackle improvisation on a shanty-town theme, nestled between the state 
parliament building and the municipal theatre, is where a festival that is 
otherwise tasteful to a fault goes to let its hair down after hours.
 
Now in its second year, it's the work of producer/director team Geoff Cobham 
<http://www.bluebottle.com.au/> and Ross Ganf, who came up with the format 
after a chance meeting with Mayor Fruitcake, a baker from the Adelaide suburbs 
who just happened to have six bars in his shed (stay with me).
 A reveller gets his teeth checked at the dentist during the phobia night. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 

Cobham, whose background is in lighting design, conceived the idea after a 
travelling scholarship allowed him to tour Europe's most happening venues. "I 
saw lots of big opening events, with thousands of people, and discovered only a 
few people were actually enjoying themselves. Music wasn't enough. They wanted 
to have a very personal experience, but within a group."
 
He is responsible for engineering a venue whose corrugated iron and cow-skull 
wackiness is in fact carefully designed. A partition might be made of 
safety-mesh studded with plastic cups, but it is artfully placed to create the 
illusion of intimacy for a crowd of thousands. The lighting might look like a 
string of naked bulbs – indeed itis a string of naked bulbs – but, combined 
with discreet uplighters in buckets, it makes the plain glamorous, the ordinary 
exotic.
 
The barrio theme came from an interest in conservation. Whether in Brazil or 
India, shanty-town dwellers are the original recyclers, says Cobham. "They take 
all the detritus from the cities and turn it into a house. You go to the 
poorest slum in India and the children are all sent off to school looking 
immaculate. I don't know how they do it, but they do."
 
He met Fruitcake when he was looking for a jetty for another project, and 
"Fruity" happened to have one in his back yard. "When I went to see him, he had 
a tin shed with six bars his friends had built, each one serving a different 
sort of alcohol." The bars are at the centre of Barrio, scrupulously rebuilt by 
the friends. Fruitcake is not only Mayor but "master of collection", who goes 
to the tip with a truck every Thursday. "He'll say 'they have lots of plastic 
crabs. Do you want them?' I'll say hell yes," says Cobham.
 
Fruitcake, aka David Harding 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/lifestyle/adelaide-magazine/the-blokes-behind-barrio/story-fn6d2yge-1226588508279>
, is an evangelical salvager whose life seems to be a shaggy dog story come 
true. He traces his bar collection back to a visit to London in his early 20s 
nursing a broken heart. There he met a flatfull of Aussie travellers with 
birthdays on consecutive days. Naturally, this miracle of numerology had to be 
celebrated in a unique way, so the friends expelled Fruity from his shed in 
order to construct the perfect hexagonal party experience – one which continues 
every May to this day.
 
There's more than a touch of the ancient mariner about Fruity as he fixes you 
with a beady eye and tours you around his bus seats and church pews (the latter 
saved from the church where his father once preached).
 
In a Barrio context, he appears no more eccentric than the Irishman who greets 
him with a brandish of his Liquorish Allsort boxer shorts - "I think I'll be 
Soviet boyfriend tonight". But the difference between Fruitcake and Dubliner 
John-Paul Hussey is that Hussey is one of the club's few professional "hosts", 
an actor with a knack for improvisation and a love of burlesque.
 
Most of the "performers", as Ganf explains, are not professional actors at all 
but ordinary people drawn from a rich community of local monocultures. On the 
second club night of this year's festival, a bunga-bunga theme brought South 
Australia's fetishists out in force, but it's not always so titillating. 
Thursday's Phobia Night featured a local conservation group,Bugs 'n' Slugs 
<http://www.bugsnslugs.com.au/>, who exhibited a collection of creepy-crawlies 
(not being entomomophobic, I got to handle a giant cockroach). Last year's 
events included a bake-in by theSouth Australian Country Women's Association 
<http://www.sacwa.org.au/> and an End of the World night with the Voluntary 
Euthanasia Society <http://www.saves.asn.au/>.

But now for the up-close-and-personal bit: Barrio is among most "alive" 
theatre experiences I've had – one that challenges the nature of both theatre 
and experience. I shed a tear for newlyweds Michael and Valli, I played along 
with my own parody wedding to a glass of riesling, under the ministry of hosts 
"Crystal Healing" and "Crystal Meth". I enjoyed the Cooper's lager and noted 
that the brand-name registered with me, despite Barrio's claim to be a 
marketing-free zone. I devoured the delicious Afgan biryani provided by the 
pop-up chefs of Thursday's Naughty Corner feast. But when it came to a food 
fight supervised by evil clowns, I made my excuses and left. Perhaps I'm a touch
coulrophobic <http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=coulrophobic>: 
slapstick always makes me want to bolt for the exit. I hope Fruity and friends 
will forgive me.
 