
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has been accused of 
threatening to axe popular services to stifle critics when it faces calls to 
improve the way it is run.

Rival ITV claimed the corporation shouts down those who suggest changes can be 
made by issuing warnings that hit shows such as Strictly Come Dancing will be 
abolished.

BBC bosses needlessly closed down a channel to make savings when the cash 
could have been found by making the organisation more efficient, ITV chief 
executiveAdam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> said.

Ahead of his appearance before MPs, the BBC launched a pre-emptive strike, 
accusing the commercial broadcaster of misrepresenting the facts about the 
distinctiveness about its programming.

Crozier told the Commons culture, media and sport committee the BBC could make 
savings by selling its London headquarters, making a big reduction in 
management, closing international channels, buying technology off the shelf or 
merging BBC2 andBBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> along with Radio 
4 and 5 Live.

Asked by MPs if he believed that the corporation did not need to close BBC3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3>, he replied: “Yes. When there are 
general calls for more efficiency there is a habit to trot out a number of 
things people wouldn’t like to see closed and threaten to close them when there 
is a whole list of things, some of which I mentioned may be right some of which 
may be wrong, that could be done to save a lot of money.

“BBC3 was a very distinctive channel. It was operating and producing 
programmes that the commercial market place finds very difficult to do.”

 Crozier called for “calm” over the future of the BBC as its charter comes up 
for renewal.

“In this day and age the idea that you can receive nearly £4bn of public money 
every year and not expect there to be some kind of debate on what that might be 
spent on I think is not right,” he said.

He added: “In many ways we have had a very, very odd public debate so far 
where as soon as anyone raises their head above the parapet to begin that 
debate it is sort of shouted down with ‘we’ll close BBC2, we’ll get rid of 
Strictly, you don’t want us to be popular’. I don’t think anyone has suggested 
any of those things.

“Everyone needs to just calm down and have a proper debate about how do we 
ensure that that public money, a great deal of public money, is properly and 
wisely spent over the next five to 10 years.”

Crozier said that every time the charter comes up for renewal the BBC declares 
that it will “focus on distinctiveness” but regulators have failed to enforce 
any real change.

MPs were told the peaktime content on BBC1 was “little different” to ITV.

“We think there needs to be more controls in place to ensure they are more 
distinctive and then they need to be regulated in a different way to hold their 
feet to the fire,” Crozier said.


He added there was a “lot of smoke and mirrors” around how programmes were 
judged as distinctive.

Crozier said it was the “simplest thing” to close the loophole that allow 
people to access the iPlayer without having a licence and claimed the issue was 
being “over complicated”.

A blog posted by James Heath, BBC director of policy, insisted the 
corporation’s content was distinct from its commercial rivals.

He wrote: “ITV is entitled to its own opinion, but not its own facts. My first 
response to the claim that BBC1 is aping ITV and chasing ratings at all costs 
is: ‘please watch the channels’.”

 A BBC spokesman said: “We welcome debate on how we ensure a strong BBC for 
the future but it wouldn’t make financial sense to sell a purpose-built 
broadcasting centre we’ve only recently moved into, Radio 1 and 6 Music are 
valued by audiences and are different to commercial alternatives, selling off 
profitable parts of BBC Worldwide would be illogical and we’re already cutting 
management and buying a significant amount of technology off the shelf.


“We’re pleased however that Mr Crozier doesn’t think the BBC News at Ten 
should be moved.”
 