
The BBC is developing an epic drama based on the six Palliser novels by 
Victorian writerAnthony Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope> and adapted by Andrew 
Davies.

Davies is working with BBC's Drama Production on the adaptation, which centres 
around the wealthy aristocrat and politician Plantagenet Palliser and his place 
in British parliamentary life.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said it is too early to say 
which channel the latest Davies adaptation is destined for but that it is 
likely to air as a serial next year.

It is not also yet known how many episodes there will be. But it is thought 
that Davies is writing his Palliser drama in the soap-style format of 30-minute 
instalments which brought him acclaim with his BBC1 adaptation of Charles 
Dickens' Bleak House in 2005.

The BBC previously broadcast a 26-part adaptation of Trollope's novels in 
1974. The Pallisers starred Philip Latham as Plantagenet Palliser and Susan 
Hampshire as his vibrant and wealthy wife Lady Glencora M'Cluskie.

Other actors featured in the epic series included Derek Jacobi, Anna Massey, 
Jeremy Irons and Anthony Andrews.

BBC Radio 4 also adapted the Palliser novels in 12 parts in 2004 for its 
Classic Serial strand.

The first book in the Palliser series, Can You Forgive Her?, was published in 
1864; with the last, The Duke's Children, in 1879. The other Palliser titles 
are Phineas Finn, The Eustace Diamonds, Phineas Redux and The Prime Minister.

This series of novels are as popular with Trollope fans as his Chronicles of 
Barsetshire series, which deals with rural life in a fictional county.

The Barsetshire books were adapted by playwright Alan Plater for the BBC in 
1982 in seven parts and starred Susan Hampshire, Nigel Hawthorne, Alan Rickman 
and Donald Pleasance.

Davies' new project also follows his successful adaptation of Trollope's story 
about mercantile greed, The Way We Live Now, for the BBC in 2001 staring David 
Suchet.

The writer is as busy as ever working on a range of drama projects. An 
adaptation of Charles Dickens' Little Dorrit, also for the BBC, has recently 
been given the green light to run in a soap-style format.

Davies is also working on a BBC adaptation of James Hawes' 2005 satire Speak 
for England; and an ITV1 drama based on Joanna Briscoe's modern novel about a 
love triangle, Sleep with Me, which will be made by Clerkenwell Films.

Recently aired TV adaptations by Davies have included Jane Austen's Sense and 
Sensibility for BBC1, E M Forster's A Room with a View for ITV1 and John 
Cleland's raunchy novel Fanny Hill for BBC4.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 