
When the BBC returns to the Chelsea flower show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow> next year it will 
do so without Alan Titchmarsh, the former Gardeners' World presenter who has 
anchored its coverage for the past 30 years.

Titchmarsh stepped down from the show after the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> decided to revamp the way it covers the 
flagship Royal Horticultural Society event, marking the end of the presenter's 
long association with the corporation.

The BBC's new presenting lineup will feature Monty Don, the current presenter 
of Gardeners' World on BBC2, and BBC News presenter Sophie Raworth.

They will join other Gardeners' World (and Chelsea Flower Show) regulars Joe 
Swift, Carol Klein and Rachel de Thame for 12 hours of coverage from west 
London on BBC1 and BBC2.

Titchmarsh, who has presented the Chelsea flower show on the BBC since 1983, 
said: "I really enjoyed my 30 years of presenting Chelsea Flower Show coverage 
for the BBC and wish the new team every success."

Titchmarsh left his role as anchor of Gardeners' World in 2002, moving to an 
afternoon chat show on ITV. He had a show on Radio 2 for four years until 2011 
and can now be heard on Classic FM.

The BBC said: "The way the Chelsea coverage will be presented across the BBC 
has changed for 2014, and Alan decided to step away from next year's show."

The corporation said it would announce more details of its new-look coverage 
at a later date.

Monty Don is a familiar face to green-fingered BBC viewers, but the show marks 
a departure for Raworth, a familiar BBC face from the BBC's weekday lunchtime 
news bulletin.

Raworth said: "I am delighted and honoured to be a part of the Chelsea 2014 
team. I grew up in a family of very keen gardeners, so know something about the 
joys and sheer hard work that go in to creating such beautiful places."

Don added: "It is great to be back at Chelsea and I am looking forward to 
celebrating all the best of British horticulture with the nation's gardeners."

Alison Kirkham, executive producer of the BBC's Chelsea coverage, said: "We're 
incredibly proud to be covering the RHS Chelsea Flower Show again this year. It 
is a much anticipated event for many and a real inspiration to all the 
passionate gardeners in our audience."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 