
A masterstroke! That's what George Osborne thinks he has delivered, according 
to his people. He has devised an entirely pointlesswelfare uprating bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/dec/05/cap-benefits-shirkers-workers-poverty>
 that enshrines a three-year 1% benefit rise, well below inflation, that he 
thinks willsnare Ed Miliband 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2012/12/osborne-sets-welfare-trap-labour-and-test-coalition>
 into seeming to side with the workshy. "I hope it commands support from both 
sides of the House," Osborne said with a portentous smirk as he sprang his 
mantrap.

Osborne has made bad political miscalculations in the past and this could be 
another. This transparently political calculation may snap back at him. Real 
people, real children risk facing near-destitution so that he can indulge in 
political tactics. Cynicism of this depth may not escape the notice of voters; 
his trap could prove Labour's opportunity. Those close to Miliband say he is 
"robust" on this. He will denounce Osborne's mendacious dividing of "strivers" 
from "skivers" for the disreputable dishonesty it is. These cuts fall on many 
more people in work than out of work, not the workshy but those rising at 4am 
to clean offices on the minimum wage, but still earning too little to keep food 
on the table for their children.

David Cameron and Osborne are gloating at what they imagine is Labour's 
discomfort, certain that their great winning ticket is to hack harder and 
deeper at benefits. They think there is no limit to the slashing voters will 
tolerate. Until now Labour has wriggled miserably, nervous of polls that show 
little sympathy for the unemployed and a wildly exaggerated belief that fraud 
and shirking are rife. Cameron quotes one story about a large Somali family in a
£100,000-a-year mansion 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2155726/Somali-family-benefits-handed-keys--2million-luxury-council-home-Londons-affluent-streets.html>
, that featured 15 times in the Daily Mail. Though the family has long moved on 
and onlyfive such cases ever existed 
<http://www.localgov.co.uk/index.cfm?method=news.detail&id=107641>, the image 
lingers for years.

Pilloried for lavishing taxpayers' money on the unworthy, Labour has mumbled 
and fumbled, uncertain how best to deny it. They were always conflicted, 
inclined in office to do good by stealth, signified by Gordon Brown renaming 
many benefits "tax credits", a meaningless disguise – thoughLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> rescued 800,000 children from 
poverty and greatly improved life for many families. But Brown cut support for 
the childless unemployed to show toughness.

Labour never made a rousing public case for greater equality. The minimum wage 
was immensely successful and popular, but a chance to turn Britain's 
dysfunctional pay structures into a wider political debate was missed. In 
opposition the same fear has gripped them, uncertain how to handle an 
understandable public fear of moral hazard, needing to separate the deserving 
from the undeserving. Navigating a firm public stance while urging generosity 
of spirit towards spiralling need is a tightrope that has left Labour 
semi-paralysed in combating this government's monstrous depredations on the 
poorest.

But now Osborne's challenge is jolting Labour into a new boldness. It looks 
clear they will vote against the benefit freeze bill. Ed Balls set out his 
tests on the Today programme: is this cut hitting working families (yes), does 
it lead to rising child poverty (yes)? Is it fair to take billions from lower 
income people on the day next April that Osborne gifts almost the same sum as a 
tax cut to top earners (no)? The scene is set for a grand confrontation, and 
not before time.

Labour's hand is forced by a dawning realisation that despite the rhetoric 
Osborne has little interest in dividing deserving from undeserving, the 
work-shy from the workers. The government treats anyone on benefit as part of 
the "dependency culture". This is a monumental shift, as all benefits are 
scheduled to fall back year on year permanently. To be sure the richest 1% take 
a hit too – but for them it's no more than snipping a gold button or two off 
their blazers. Down at the bottom cuts bite into the bone: food and heating 
costs that rise faster than inflation take up most of their income. Treating 
all on credits the same as the unemployed will be a political error. It risks 
uniting all 5.8m tax credit households and all mothers losing maternity pay and 
childcare credit with those who can't find work.

IFS figures show the upper middle to be the only gainers, mainly Tory-voting 
aspirers protected along with pensioners. None of this is accidental; it is a 
calculated and permanent shift in income away from the bottom. Some suggest the 
Tories just don't know: the mirror of society they carry in their minds is so 
badly distorted that they fail to comprehend that around 87% of earners are not 
paid the £41,000 that gets them into the 40% tax bracket. They barely know 
anyone on median income, let alone people who struggle to pay their food and 
heat bills. Tories see some in their surgeries – but local Labour parties have 
plenty of activists who themselves live below the median. Miliband's Doncaster 
party looks and feels nothing like Cameron's Witney party. But this social 
ignorance is intentional, part of a policy of convenient social blindness.

Cameron said again this week that he's "on the side of people who work hard 
and want to get on" <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20621313>. But the 
public may not for much longer approve of smearing the unemployed: more people 
will have friends, relatives and children desperate to get on, stuck in 
part-time, temporary, low-paid jobs or none. This week's figures show 
unemployment will rise next year and the year after: will Cameron blame a 
sudden epidemic of idleness and scrounging?

The tone of sneering contempt will grate as people feel a colder blast next 
year. After April when large numbers are struck off disability living 
allowance, when bailiffs are at the door for unpaid council tax – while low to 
middle incomes fall further – this cocksure divide-and-rule will jar. Why no 
note of regret or sympathy, even if bogus?

To turn the public mood, Labour needs to find its voice and tell the stories 
that counteract Daily Mail scrounger anecdotes. For every cheat claiming 
disability while running a marathon, there are thousands of tales of the 
hard-working and the desperate-to-work queuing at food banks. Labour MPs' 
surgeries brim with stories that need to be told, of families evicted unable to 
pay soaring rents, of children trapped in bed-and-breakfast single rooms, of 
"strivers" sinking through no fault of their own.

Labour needs to say what they see. Forget the polls and the focus groups, let 
the facts speak for themselves. Ed Miliband's best instinct is that people are 
sick of Osborne's callow politicking. Voters will reward honesty in politicians 
who speak their minds. If not, why bother at all?
 