
As a beauty writer, I'm fortunate enough to see incredible backstage trends as 
they happen. But I'm equally as guilty of slipping into the makeup rut of 
having two staple looks on daily rotation. My first look is a daytime dalliance 
of nude eyes and lurid lipstick. My night guise of a cursory dark eye and pale 
lip has now started to become a chore. After years of experimentation and a 
back catalogue of colourful styles (skipping swiftly over the blue-haired 
Cyber-Goth phase,) I now know that hitting this wall is the definitive catalyst 
for change.

That's where beauty trends come in- twice a year, every year, like clockwork. 
"Trends work for all skin tones, and so many products are available for dark 
skins now that we just don't have the excuses we did ten years ago not to try 
something new," Ruby Hammer, makeup artist and one half of Ruby and Millie 
cosmetics tells me. She's right. Realistically we can nip to any local M.A.C, 
Space NK or Sleek for base shades, dazzling pigments and glorious colours. 
Boundaries are set to shift again early next year as the biggies like Chanel 
and Lancôme expand their foundation shade ranges to include far darker hues 
than ever before.

If finding the colours isn't the biggest hurdle anymore, what's stopping me - 
and the many darker skinned women who've emailed or tweeted me - from updating 
our look each season? "We tend to take ourselves out of fashion," Hammer 
explains. "Sticking to what suits us, rather than following new trends. It 
becomes stale, quickly. So take those amazing editorial shoots and celebrity 
looks and recreate them. Change the intensity from matte to gloss, for example, 
to get the effect you love on your skin tone," she says.

The confidence to experiment is the battle itself, but gaining a little 
technique will make a visible difference. The next time you buy from any makeup 
counter, ask them to show you how to get a little more drama from your 
eyeliner, or what eyeshadow to pair with a dramatic lip. "The difference a 
little technique can make is overwhelming, and it's the little tweaks that keep 
makeup fresh. You're investing in yourself, so why wouldn't you make the 
effort?" says Hammer.

After hours of watching You Tube tutorials by Petrilude 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/petrilude/featured> (for extreme makeup that's 
impressive to watch),Pixiwoo <http://www.youtube.com/user/pixiwoo/featured> and 
KandeeJohnson <http://www.youtube.com/user/kandeejohnson> (technique advice, 
sorted) and others byQueenofBlendingMUA 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/QueenofBlendingMUA> and MakeupGeek TV 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/MakeupGeekTV> (great for colour inspiration) I've 
become equipped to take on most fashion looks and work them into my own 
routine. It's been the single-most liberating beauty move I've made, and worth 
every second of squinty laptop watching.

Going online for beauty bounty is another underused beauty tool. Reputable 
websites like cultbeauty.co.uk cherry-pick the best products from across the 
world, including the colourful 3 Custom Colour shades and the new highly 
anticipated Fiberwig LX mascara. Over at Zuneta.com the already legendary 
Edward Bess lipsticks make finding the perfect pale pink or toffee shade 
completely fool-proof. As with any form of online shopping, it's all about the 
research. For makeup, always Google Image the product name followed by 
'swatched.' Chances are some kind soul will have blogged all about the product, 
including some smear-on-hand pictures, so you'll see the true colour.

So, as we sail into 2012 and a new season in beauty, now is the time to look 
for inspiration to weave into your routine. I'll be here, guiding you along the 
wonderful ebbs of the spring/summer 2012 trends and guarantee that this time 
next year you'll look back at old pictures, and see the difference a little 
flair can make.
 Urban Decay Mariposa Palette, Mally Citychick Smokey Eye Kit in Khaki 3 
Custom Colour Century in Red Lip Palette 
Invest in a beautiful palette to effortlessly take you from autumn/winter 2011 
to spring/summer 2012

Urban Decay Mariposa Palette (£28, houseorfraser.co.uk)
This portable little tin with a mix of neutrals and brights makes for 
foolproof experimentation. You'll use all the colours, I guarantee.

Mally Citychick Smokey Eye Kit in Khaki (£34, qvcuk.com)
Swapping black for green is a quick update to the dark smoky eye, but how 
about teaming it with a rich berry coloured or blackberry lip for mega-drama? 
Go on, I dare you.

3 Custom Colour Century in Red Lip Palette (£30, cultbeauty.co.uk)
A mix of glosses and semi-matte lipsticks means you can play with textures and 
shades. Go rogue and create your own colour by mixing them up -or better yet - 
try one new shade every day. Hey, nobody said beauty was easy!

Anita is back in January 2012, her next column will tackle pigmentation. Let 
us know if there are any particular topics for darker skin you'd like covered 
in future columns on the blog below, or email us at fashion.desk@guardian.co.uk

Thanks to Ruby Hammer (rubyandmillie.com). Anita is the Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> Assistant at Stylist magazine
 