
At a point in every woman's life, coloured mascara seems like a brilliant 
idea. A dangling carrot of a beauty trend that, around age 14, appears as if it 
might contain the secret key to womanhood (it doesn't). Coloured mascara seems 
to have been deemed so passé that aside from a few minor flirtations, hasn't 
been seen since the murky depths of the 1980s and 90s. I know first-hand how 
bad it can look; for three weeks, aged 15, I wore a metallic blue on the top 
lashes, with a pale green on the bottom. I not only looked like some kind of 
terrifying sea creature, but by my own admission, like an absolute loon. But 
the most annoying thing was, it didn't look nearly so bad on my pale-skinned, 
blonde-haired best friend.

So, fast forward a decade and a half to Stella McCartney's autumn 2012 show 
<http://www.style.com/fashionshows/review/F2012RTW-SMCCARTN>, when the models, 
of varying ethnicities, strode down the catwalk with lashes bathed in layers of 
mesmerising electric blue. Twitter and beauty blogs around the globe were abuzz 
with its comeback. And like all good beauty trends, it's gradually filtered 
down to us, the consumers, with a myriad of tint variations this season.
 (L to R) Clarins Instant Definition in Intense Plum; YSL Luxurious Waterproof 
mascara in Majorelle Blue: By Terry Growth Booster in Terrybleu. 
I have kept a pile on my desk, eyeing them up with caution for weeks, before 
finally relenting to a similar blue to that of McCartney's models. As I delved 
in, it was obvious that these weren't the same mascaras I'd used at school. The 
colours had become richer, adding depth to lashes and bringing out different 
tones in darker eyes. It's also the fastest way to create a fashion-forward 
look in all of two minutes, but it's not without certain pitfalls. Application, 
I've finally discovered, is the key. What worked for me was firstly wiggling my 
regular black mascara as close to the lashes as possible – this creates the 
definition we crave. Then apply the chosen bold shade, from the middle through 
to the tips, and pair with neutral lips, cheeks and a lightly defined brow. For 
a trend I'd always assumed didn't suit darker skins, I'm pleasantly surprised 
and joyful that this time around, it's a trend that genuinely works.

 

Best picks of coloured mascaras

Clarins Instant Definition Mascara in Intense Plum, £20

For the slightest hint of colour, Clarins plum mascara is the perfect first 
step.clarins.co.uk <http://www.clarins.co.uk>

By Terry Growth Booster Mascara in Terrybleu, £31

A deep, rich blue that adds a little drama to the proceedings – I went for 
two-three coats for more impact.uk.spacenk.com <http://www.uk.spacenk.com>

Limited Collection Mascara in Purple, £5.00

It's subtle, but I swear to Elvis that this reddy-purple (that'll be burgundy, 
then) mascara made my eye-colour look more intense.marksandspencer.com 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/>

Guerlain Le 2 Mascara in Violet, £25

I used the smaller wand (it comes with a thick and thiner brush) to just coat 
the outer lashes, for a hint of colour.houseoffraser.co.uk 
<http://www.houseoffraser.co.uk>

YSL Luxurious WaterProof Mascara, £23 in Majorelle Blue

Saving the best for last, this shade (similar to the McCartney look) is bold 
and unapologetic – but unbelievably pretty, too.www.johnlewis.com 
<http://www.johnlewis.com>
 