
Choose a shade and slick it on; it should be that simple. But the fear of 
'getting it wrong' backs so many of us into a neutral lipstick corner. Perhaps 
this is because the makeup advice we heard when growing up came solely from 
ill-advised cosmetic counters. As a result, the phrase "dark skins suit a nice 
plum shade" still plays ad nauseam in our heads.

Here's what they didn't tell you: light and bright shades of lipstick look as 
beautiful on dark skin tones as they do on fairer skins. It's just about 
finding the right consistency for you, whether it'sJennifer Hudson's metallic 
coral lips 
<http://sophiemaestyle.files.wordpress.com/2010/12/jennifer-hudson-askmen.jpg> 
at the 2010 Oscars or Nicki Minaj's hot pink pout.

"What stops women from experimenting is the feeling that everyone is going to 
think 'she doesn't carry it off'," says make-up artist Nicola Chapman, one half 
of YouTube make-up duo Pixiwoo. "Take the colour you currently wear and try 
something a few shades brighter first as a stain or as a gloss, then as a full 
colour when you're ready. Going from lip balm to brick red would terrify 
anyone," Nicola advises.
 
Correction is one of those loaded words, bandied around more frequently with 
darker skins than others. It can be summarised thus: if you want to play 
certain features down and others up, you can. That's the beauty of make-up. But 
nobody should feel compelled to do so. "Women often ask me about correcting 
their dark lip colour towards the outside of the lips, but I think it looks 
beautiful because you have your own lip definition," says Nicola. "However, if 
you did want to even this out to get a bold block of lip colour, use concealer 
or a lip liner all over the lips first, then apply your lipstick."
 
The trickiest part is finding a balance between a bright lip and the rest of 
your makeup. "There are no rules anymore when it comes to choosing either lips 
or eyes. Soft browns, khakis and velvety moss greens look incredible with 
dramatic lips," she says. It's easy to think that darker skins always need eye 
definition, but a little mascara and a smudge of eye gloss to the lids and 
cheekbones (Mac Pro do a brilliant one) creates an ultra-modern look. Whatever 
combo you opt for, apply your lipstick first and work backwards, that way 
you'll always keep the proportion perfect.
 Photography/Getty Images/Gallo Images ROOTS 
If you're (still) reading this column and take away nothing else, then 
disregard the notion of cool and warm toned lipsticks. It's about taking a 
look, whether it's a catwalk trend or something ripped out of a magazine, and 
making it work for you. "My fail-proof tip for trying a tricky new colour, like 
an orange or red for example is to also buy a slightly darker lip liner so you 
can alter the colour yourself if it looks too bright," says Nicola. "Above all, 
the joy of makeup is that it's not a tattoo on your forehead, it always comes 
off." So go forth and experiment, remembering that the best gauge of whether 
you like a look or colour is your own infallible beauty barometer.
 
Thanks to: Nicola Chapman www.pixiwoo.com

A few products to get you started:

Dior Serum de Rouge in 850 Red Serum (£25) www.dior.com
One part serum, one part luxurious creamy colour in this seasons must-have 
crimson.

MAC Posh Paradise Mattene Lipstick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/lipstick> in Potent Fig, £13.50, 
www.maccosmetics.co.uk
Wear this matte purple dark and minimal – think Beyonce in Gaga's Telephone 
video.

Bobbi Brown 20th Anniversary Lip Palette, £43, www.Bobbibrown.co.uk
Twenty mini shades means you'll be spoilt for experimenting choice. Definitely 
one for the Christmas list.

Rimmel Kate Moss Lasting Finish Lipsticks, £5.49 www.boots.com
Take lipstick inspiration from the lady herself with these bold and 
unapologetic hues.

Clinique Almost Lipstick in Black Honey, £15, www.clinique.co.uk
This sheer lip tint was my first ever beauty buy and it still works perfectly 
for autumn's berry shades.

Anita is beauty assistant at Stylist Magazine. Next time, Anita tackles 
under-eye concealers.
 