
When something works, it becomes a given. It's the one thing that's reliable 
when life, technology and Tinder become an unpredictable roulette of insanity. 
Having a signature (or safe) look is one of those certain things. It's the 
surest hand of cards that we know will always come up trumps. The downside to 
having a failsafe "look" is that we'll never know what could be – what our skin 
would look like without a thick layer of foundation or that by ditching the 
straighteners we'll learn to fall in love with our hair's natural texture. 
That's why this column offers some words of wisdom from the experts, on what 
they would love you to try in 2014.

Kay Montano, thandiekay.com <http://thandiekay.com> 
A celebrity makeup artist who has some words on laying the right foundations

"Finally tackling any skin problems you've been suffering with is a good way 
to ensure you get beautiful skin this year. I have clients with a variety of 
skin tones, but the main concern I hear from my darker-skinned clients is about 
their skin's tendency to scar. That's why getting to the root of why you suffer 
from acne or blemishes is far more important than applying any topical 
skincare. Stress, lack of sleep and a poor diet (sugar is terrible for the skin 
and is also very ageing as it causes inflammation in the body) all trigger 
hormone imbalances that can cause spots. My key tip is to ditch juices: they 
contain no fibre – it's just sugar– and water is far better for you. Then comes 
finding your perfect foundation. There's plenty around now for darker skins, 
from value brands like Sleek to mid ranges such as Bobbi Brown, Becca and 
Illamasqua, and then the luxury ones such as Estée Lauder and Chanel. Try them 
all, don't be afraid to go for a more sheer base than you're used to, and don't 
buy anything until you've fallen in love with it."
 Look after yourself: stress and a lack of sleep are bad for the skin. 
Photograph: Purestock 
Charlotte Mensah (charlottemensah.com <http://charlottemensah.com>)
The current British Hairdressing Awards' Afro Hairdresser of the Year has some 
advice for those with very curly and afro hair

"More and more women are embracing the wondrous textures of their natural hair 
and celebrating its versatility with bodacious 'fros, beautiful braids, twists 
and locks. But chemical-free hair still requires maintenance. Hollywood is 
paving the way as women are becoming more comfortable with their hair textures. 
For example, Lupita Nyong'o's high-top fade, which was popular in the 80s, is 
causing a storm. The challenge with afro and curly hair is knowing how to 
maintain its condition. And the solution is moisturising, so my biggest tip is 
to use a hair oil, such as Mizani Supreme Oil (£13.34), daily. And don't forget 
maintenance trims every six to eight weeks; a dead giveaway of needing a trim 
is curls that frizz rather than 'hold' at the ends of your hair."

Debbie Thomas (debbiethomas.co.uk <http://www.debbiethomas.co.uk>)
A facialist and skincare expert that many beauty editors swear by, who would 
chase us all around with an SPF if she could


"One of the main concerns I hear from darker-skinned clients is that they 
suffer from uneven pigmentation – but they rarely wear an SPF. It's a myth that 
darker skins don't need one, and that's why I always recommend a good daily 
SPF. Try a BB or CC cream if they come in your shade, but nowadays there are 
plenty of completely translucent SPF's so you don't need to put up with any 
chalky-white residue. Another good way to boost your sun protection is by using 
an antioxidant daily to ward off sun-induced free radicals that speed up the 
ageing process. The most common are vitamin C based; I really rate 
SkinCeuticals Phloretin CF Gel (£150), which is ideal for sensitive skins. If, 
and only if, you're concerned about uneven pigmentation, look for brightening 
products that contain kojic acid, phytic acid and liquorice extract – they're 
all natural brighteners that won't damage your skin, but will help to regulate 
pigmentation. Dermaceutic's Yellow Cream (£29.95*) is great teamed with a high 
SPF and a mild exfoliating face wash that contains glycolic acid, such as 
Dermaceutic's Cleanser 5 (£27*) for drier/sensitive skins, or Neostrata's 
Foaming Glycolic Wash (£24*) for oilier skins." (*Prices vary at different 
stockists – go for the cheapest.)

• What advice do you have when it comes to skincare for darker skin?
 