
When Mary Katrantzou sent her models down the catwalk in a liquid sky blue lip 
during her spring/summer 2012 show this year, it was the one time the huddled 
throng of hawk-eyed beauty journalists looked away. They did the same at 
Vivienne Westwood Gold Label, as the models poured down the catwalk with a 
smattering of violet-blue lipstick. The reason for their disinterest? A 
statement lip is neither marketable, or, really, publishable. It lacks a 
certain allure. Blue lips neither mimic a youthful pink flush, nor conjure 
smoky images of Hollywood siren's pouting through the camera lens. In fact, 
blue, isn't a colour that says much at all (bar Smurfs and that horrific Eiffel 
65 song) – and what it certainly doesn't say is beautiful.

But beautiful on whose terms? The glossy magazines that have served our 
multicultural society so poorly to date, or the advertisers whose idealised 
beauty sits within such small, immovable margins? Fortunately, it seems the 
tide is beginning a gradual turn on what's deemed acceptable or beautiful in 
society, and it's filtering down into the colours we're choosing.
 A model sports a bold lip on the catwalk during the Mary Katrantzou Runway 
show at London Fashion Week Spring/Summer 2012. Photo by Stuart Wilson/Getty 
Images 
David Horne, Illamasqua's director of new product development has been in the 
industry for over 20 years and has seen the change evolve. "We've seen people 
wearing our new matte teal lipstick Apocalips on the street and it's becoming a 
bestseller. Women like Nicki Minaj and Jessie J are setting a new standard for 
beauty that's borne of experimentation. There's a zeitgeist moment happening 
now – people are ready for change. It's the idea of turning yourself inside out 
and expressing how you feel on the outside with makeup."

Now the stakes have been raised, and it's all in the way you wear it. But 
don't fear the onslaught of clown-like rainbow shades. The way to wear a 
statement lip is with nude eyes, a feathering of mascara, perfectly concealed 
skin with a neat slick of midnight-blue Disciple (£15.50 <>), for example. 
Paired with a clear gloss it takes on a new shadowy-luxe entity of glassy 
petrol shine. Barry M's Green 149 (£4.49 <>) is surprisingly pretty with a 
peachy eye, whilst Morgana Cryptoria's Absinthe (£8 <>) adds a little turquoise 
into the mix, with an utterly on trend metallic finish that can be taken to the 
next level with a little Sleek Molten Metal in Gold Leaf & Pewter (£7 <>) 
daubed in the centre.
 IllamasquaLipstick in Apocalips, MakeUp Forever’s Pure Pigment in Carmine, 
Sleek MakeUP Molten Metal in 714 Cream Eye Duo, Lip Paint in149 Green by BarryM.
If this all seems like too much effort, too great a risk, or perhaps you're 
happy with your current hues, you could consider changing the way in which you 
apply colour. The'orchid lip' at Prabal Gurung 
<http://www.fearnobeauty.com/makeup-minded/fear-no-ombre-lips/> this season was 
two shades working in contrast, an inner blackberry flourish in the centre of 
the lips was beautifully offset by a pink shade around the edges. Or perhaps 
try an ombre lip, using two similar shades – like red and hot pink or orange) 
for subtle effect. But the simplest way to push a colour to the next level is 
to apply your lip colour, and then pat on a similar shade of pigment like 
MakeUp Forever's Pure Pigment in Carmine (£11.50, preciousaboutmakeup.com) - I 
use this on top of M.A.C's Ruby Woo (£13.50, maccosmetics.co.uk) for a pop art 
red to beat all other reds.

So finally, my call to arms is this: when we're being sold ideals of 
perfection, or told what colours we should be wearing this season, look beyond 
and find the trends not placed at centre stage. While blue lipstick isn't for 
everyone, a little trial and error with a deeper purple, or a more hi-gloss 
blackberry is worth the danger.
 