
It is true that those of us with dark skin don’t burn as easily as our 
pale-skinned counterparts, due to increased amounts of protective melanin in 
our skin. But it is also true that we can be a littlebreezy with our approach 
to sun protection. When I say breezy, I mean borderline neglectful (I speak 
from past experience).


The big shocker is that our skin isn’t nearly as sun-resistant as we think it 
is. Darker black skin has a natural SPF of around 13.4, paler white skin is 
about 3.4 and everyone else fits along that spectrum. Whilst there is a 
definite difference between the highest and lowest levels, no one’s natural SPF 
is enough to keep the ills of sun damage (that’s skin cancer, wrinkles and 
hyperpigmentation, to name but a few) at bay. It does require extra effort on 
our part, especially when faced with serious summer sun, in the form of SPF 30 
or above with UVA and UVB protection.

 So what puts us off wearing suncream, especially on the face? For starters, 
so many SPFs contain hefty amounts of zinc or titanium oxide that make the 
formulations bright white, giving many dark skins a curious blue/grey hue 
(Smurf, zombie, clown mask much?). They are also so darn oily, they seldom stay 
on. Thankfully, some are genuinely ace and work brilliantly with our skin. Here 
are my top three:
 Sunscreen for dark skin. Photograph: Anita Bhagwandas 
La Roche Posay Anthelios Face Extra Light Fluid 50+, £16.50, boots.com 
<http://boots.com/>

Ask any dermatologist and chances are they will recommend this brand for its 
vigorous testing and clinical studies. Whilst this SPF is a tad on the oily 
side (not hugely though, don’t panic), it gives you high protection against UVA 
and UVB.

Ultra Sun Face 50+, Anti-ageing Ultra Sensative Facial Sun Cream, £24, 
johnlewis.com <http://www.johnlewis.com/>
On a recent trip to Australia, this was my first choice. It is 
water-resistant, long-wearing (about eight hours) and contains a host of 
anti-ageing benefits. Ideal for extreme sun exposure and sensitive skin.

Sensai Silky Bronze Cellular Protective Stick SPF30, £40, harrods.com 
<http://www.harrods.com/>
It is a little bit on the pricey side, but this stick is probably the most 
invisible SPF I’ve ever seen. The velvety formula uses silk extract to promote 
the formation of skin-plumping hyaluronic acid, and it contains polymers to 
blur pores and fill fine lines.
 