
You've heard the phrase "black don't crack." For the most part, this phrase, 
despite its terrible grammar, has a ring of truth. Darker skinsare more 
resistant to fine lines and wrinkles, due to the increased amount of melanin 
(the pigment that gives skin its colouring) that makes it more resistant to UV 
rays. Unfortunately, we're not entirely immune to the toils of time itself, and 
one of the key aging concerns for women across a kaleidoscope of ethnic 
backgrounds is hyperpigmentation - the darker spots and patches that lead to 
uneven skin tone.

Pigmentation is my resolute beauty bugbear. Firstly, it seems to occur almost 
overnight – mine was on a trip to India, foolishly, minus adequate sun 
protection. The usual culprits are trauma to the skin, acne, sun damage and 
hormones. Secondly, patchy pigmentation in the skin doesn't reflect light 
evenly, and one of the biggest indicators of youthful skin is the ability to 
reflect light. Thirdly, if you're still with me, congratulations - that's not 
even the science bit yet.

While skincare targeted at lightening areas of pigmentation certainly isn't 
new, the utter amount of little vials of hope that have recently landed on my 
desk, promising to fix the problem, is astounding. I met with consultant 
dermatologist Dr Susan Mayou to find out more about the problem. "Pigmentation 
can be superficial and located epidermal layers, or deeper in the skin, which 
is trickier to treat. A dermatologist can confirm at what level your 
pigmentation is – but whatever kind, it's always exacerbated by the sun."

I'm loathed to admit this as a beauty journalist, but I'd always – carelessly- 
thought of my darker skin as impenetrable to the sun's power. Now I'm vigilant 
about wearing an SPF every day. "Even in the winter months it's important to 
wear a daily moisturiser with a broad spectrum sunscreen," Dr Mayou scolds me. 
"It's to protect against the longer wave UVA rays, as well as the UVB rays, 
and, the SPF should be at least 15-25 for darker skins."

We're noticing a shift in favour of darker skins in the beauty industry in 
general, and it extends to the current crop of pigmentation-fixers. The 
language used on the products is far more race-sensitive - gone are the 
archaic, racially-loaded phrases like 'whiten' and 'bleach', in favour of 
lighten and brighten. These products are designed to even skintone – regardless 
of race - and the research that's gone into these new products is second to 
none.

But I have one caveat before we come onto these wonder-potions. You'll need to 
become your own investigative journalist; take a picture of the affected area 
before, commit to the amount of time recommended by the manufacturer (unless 
irritation occurs) and take another picture afterwards to compare. That's the 
only true test of efficacy in pigmentation products; and hopefully, the results 
will speak for themselves.
 (left to right) Darphin Melaperfect, La Roche-Posay pigment control, Kiehl's 
Clearly Corrective Dark Spot Solution, La Mer brightening essence, Clinique 
skin tone correcting lotion 
The newest products to treat pigmentation

Darphin, Melaperfect Anti-Dark Spots Perfecting Treatment £57
This silky potion from the hugely underrated French brand promises to reduce 
the size and intensity of dark spots by 50% in eight weeks. Et Voila, you might 
say.
darphin.co.uk  <http://darphin.co.uk>

Crème de La Mer, The Brightening Essence Intense cremedelamer.co.uk £220
This range was originally developed to cater to the needs of the eastern Asian 
skin, and it's increased vulnerability to sun damage. But, we can all benefit 
from this pigmentation-healer, infused with Crème's patent Miracle Broth.

Dr Nick Lowe, Super Light Skin Tone Perfector Cream £18.99
With nine lightening ingredients including acai and vitamin A, this cream 
evened out the skin tone of 71% of its testers in four weeks.
boots.com <http://boots.com>

Clinique Even Better Skin Tone Correcting Lotion, SPF 20 £35
This magical liquid exfoliates, breaks up clusters of pigmentation and 
provides an SPF 20 to protect from further damage. Genius, bottled.
clinique.co.uk <http://clinique.co.uk>

La Roche Posay Pigment Control £29
It's a brand that always comes highly recommended by dermatologist, and after 
eight weeks of use 82% of testers noticed their darker spots had lightened.
boots.com <http://boots.com>

Kiehls Clearly Corrective dark Spot Solutionn £36
Filled with natural ingredients, this serum is clinically tested to reduce the 
intensity of dark spots in a mere two weeks.
kiehls.co.uk <http://kiehls.co.uk>

• Thanks to Dr Susan Mayou, consultant dermatologist 
<http://cadoganclinic.com.> and adviser to Neutrogena. Anita is the Beauty 
Assistant at Stylist magazine
 