
I'd like to begin by saying how great the feedback has been for this blog, 
despite the recent onslaught of non-beauty related and misogynistic comments. 
When my editor and I initially discussed the idea for this blog, I wanted it to 
be like talking to a friend. A friend who had shared similar experiences of 
being offered terrible advice on makeup counters and had, perhaps, faced 
ignorance about how to 'treat', 'deal with' and 'correct' darker skins. Someone 
who was as fed up as I am with being under-represented and ignored by the 
majority of mainstream media. And, more positively, a friend who wanted to 
celebrate the many possibilities of beauty for darker skin.

What friends don't do is tell each other what to do, which is why I've always 
maintained that the most important part of beauty is choice. To me, the biggest 
hurdle women with darker skin face is being told, constantly, that they only 
suit a handful of look (purple, plum or bronze anyone?) We have so many more 
options than that! But, and here's the crucial part, it's also fun to 
experiment. You can be anyone you like with makeup, whether it's for a day or 
an entire season.Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> isn't 
about changing who you are; it's about exploring a different version of 
yourself.

As some regular readers pointed out on my last column 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/dec/04/beauty-dark-skin-gothic-makeup>
, I'd never endorse skin lightening, nor would I ever tell someone they had to 
try a trend they didn't want to just because it was 'in' as some comments 
suggested. And some of the bizarre, antagonistic comments seem to come from a 
small minority of unenlightened men who think it's OK to tell women how to 
look. That's never ok. It's really easy to forget that the person on the other 
side of this blog is writing it because they've seen the detrimental effects 
that the media's uniform, Caucasian idea of beauty can have on a person's self 
esteem. So I just wanted to thank the people who read, enjoy and support this 
blog, and to say that it will be coming out more regularly in 2013 on the last 
week of every month.
 End of year beauty products Photograph: Composite 

My top five beauty products of 2012

It's the end of the year and some kind of round-up is due. Fortunately, it's 
been a cracking year for beauty products.

Stila Stay All Day Liquid Lipstick in Fiery, £15, stila.co.uk

Simply the boldest opaque red lipstick ever. Though it can be a little drying 
(easy to combat by using a tiny bit of balm underneath) it truly lasts and 
really suits darker skin tones.
 Second beauty comp Photograph: Composite 
Bobbi Brown Long-Wear Even Finish Foundation SPF15, £30, bobbibrown.co.uk

There have been so many great foundations to choose from this year, but this 
one genuinely lasts all day, even on oilier skins. I love how it just looks 
like perfect skin – rather than like you're wearing make-up.

Rahua Shampoo and Conditioner, £27 each, urbanretreat.co.uk

Granted, £54 for shampoo and conditioner is A LOT of money. But I'm not the 
only beauty journalist who thinks it's made her hair grow more quickly - 
something to do with that organic Amazonian nut oil extract perhaps. Fancy!

Givenchy Noir Couture Mascara, £22.50, houseoffraser.co.uk

I'm on my third tube of this glorious stuff. The curious, three sphere wand 
helps to reach every tiny lash for the closest-to-false-lashes effect I've ever 
seen.

Tom Ford Ultra Shine Lip Gloss in Naivete, £30, selfridges.com

I never expect a lipgloss to be transformative, but one slick of this 
ultra-rich, stay-put gloss is like instant NYC-style sophistication. It's 
seasonal, so invest before it's discontinued.

I'd love to know your top five, so please do post them below.
 