
A stunning 25-yard effort from David Beckham put Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> on their way to a 2-1 win 
over Albacete at the Bernabeu.

The England captain was given time to pick his spot before hitting a shot that 
dipped and curled to put his side 1-0 up after 38 minutes.

However, Madrid were made to struggle against their lowly visitors and, after 
Albacete <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albacete> had drawn level within 
60 seconds through Livero Parri, it looked as if the winning goal was never 
going to arrive until Zinedine Zidane popped up to head home the decider from 
close range. The result saw the defending champions go level on points at the 
top of the Primera Liga with Deportivo La Coruna.

This week's international fixtures forced Madrid coach Carlos Queiroz to make 
some changes to his line-up. Although he welcomed back Michel Salgado, he 
decided to rest Ivan Helguera and Ronaldo, both of whom had played twice for 
their countries in the past eight days and gave rare starts to Javier Portillo 
and Borja Fernandez. It was Borja's first Primera Liga start and he took his 
place alongside Beckham in the middle of the park.

 Albacete had never won at the Bernabeu but began confidently for a side third 
from bottom of the table with Parri and Carlos Aranda both looking lively. 
Nevertheless, the first opportunity of the game fell to Madrid. Albacete 
defender Unai Vergara made a mess of Luis Figo's low cross from the left and 
the ball reached Raul only for him to mis-control and waste the chance.

Figo was again the provider after 19 minutes, this time his cross from the 
right evaded the defence only for the incoming Santiago Solari to hit the post 
with a neatly-placed volley. Salgado crashed a long-range shot well wide and 
Portillo fired straight at Carlos Roa when clean through, but on the whole the 
game struggled to take off as the visitors kept it tight and denied Madrid 
space in vital areas.

 However, Beckham's effort roused the crowd who previously had been quick to 
whistle and jeer Madrid's efforts. With the deadlock broken, the hosts would 
have expected to take a grip on the game but a minute later Albacete were level 
as Parri scored a scorching left-foot volley to send the 3,000 travelling fans 
wild and had Casillas not saved smartly from Aranda on the stroke of half-time 
things could have been even worse for Real.

 Albacete continued to keep it tight for the first 18 minutes of the second 
half, prompting Queiroz to bring on Ronaldo for Portillo, who had struggled to 
get into the game. Zidane came close with a header from a Figo cross but as 
time dragged on the visitors must have started to think about taking only their 
second point from six trips to the capital.

 Roa struggled to save shots from Zidane and Ronaldo, Beckham hit a free kick 
over the crossbar before Zidane put an end to Madrid's torment with a 
close-range header. Even then they had to suffer as Albacete won a pair of late 
free-kicks, but Laurent Viaud managed to send them both over the crossbar.
 