
Aren't they lucky? The nation's small-business leaders were wooed by no fewer 
than three cabinet ministers at the British Chambers of Commerce's annual 
shindig last week. One by one,George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, Vince Cable and Eric 
Pickles turned up to shower the nation's entrepreneurs with love, supplemented 
by a cameo appearance from the Labour leader, Ed Miliband.

Despite being briefly plunged into gloom by a power cut, Westminster's Church 
House was packed with commercial luminaries ranging from the founder of Coffee 
Republic to the heads of Jaguar Land Rover and high-street chain Next. This 
ought to be a good crowd for the Conservative-led coalition, and the chancellor 
duly launched into one of his favourite tortured rhetorical devices, lambasting 
the malignant "forces" opposing his small-government agenda: "There are forces 
out there who will try to stand in our way. Forces of stagnation, who will try 
to stop the forces of enterprise."

The coalition, declared Osborne, is "pro-enterprise, pro-business and 
pro-aspiration". Citing Portugal's distress call for a European bailout, the 
chancellor accused those who criticise his debt-slashing cuts of "playing 
Russian roulette with Britain's sovereignty".

Stirring stuff. And so it should be – the BCC's membership, predominantly 
leaders of small and medium-sized businesses, is a crucial constituency. 
Cameron and Osborne hope these are the people who will create jobs to support 
the 490,000 people (at the very minimum) set to be laid off by the public 
sector. And, in principle, these hard-nosed commercialists are on board.

"Frankly, we have a state the size of which we can't afford," said David 
Frost, the BCC's director general, who took a sideswipe at critics of 
government cuts. "Savage cuts? Try telling that to our businesses, who had to 
carry out some very deep cuts to survive in 2008 and 2009."

Nevertheless, they are grumbling, and top of the list of gripes is red tape. 
Frost recalled pictures of a major motorway ripped apart by Japan's 
catastrophic earthquake. Seven days later, the road had been repaired and 
rebuilt. In Britain, he suggested, we'd still be in the early stages of a risk 
assessment.

Ken McMeikan, chief executive of bakery chain Greggs, weighed in, observing 
that a planning wrangle over an illuminated sign outside one of his sandwich 
bars could take six months to resolve. Greggs is opening snack shops at a rate 
of one every five days – and dealing with hundreds of planning authorities, all 
with different rules: "Some want a drawing of the rear elevation of a shop, 
even though it's irrelevant to our plans; some charge for pre-application 
advice; some take cheques, some only credit cards."

Fiddly rules are a perennial bone of contention, but Cable is listening. The 
business secretary got an earbashing from a Spitalfields furniture merchant who 
complained of being uncompetitive with German rivals because fire safety laws 
mandate expensive, flame-retardant materials. Cable has duly set up a website 
called the Red Tape Challenge 
<http://www.redtapechallenge.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/home/index/> on which the 
public can scrutinise and comment upon all 21,800 statutory regulations 
impinging on British businesses. Industry by industry, every rule will be 
published.

As anybody who runs a large-scale website (including Guardian Media Group) can 
attest, encouraging all comers to offer their views opens the door to a few 
eccentrics. One respondent to the Red Tape Challenge advocated a change to 
rules on weights and measures to outlaw the half pint glass, requiring 
landlords to serve all beer in pint form, "thus reducing the number of glasses 
they need to stock". Another offered this on health and safety laws: "If 
someone can't use a ladder properly, that's their own fault. I'd like to see 
all ladder regulation removed."

Pity the poor civil servant who has to wade through all of this. But David 
Cameron has made a video message to back the Red Tape Challenge, so it's 
clearly serious. And Cable, stripped of his competition powers following his 
faux pas over Rupert Murdoch, hasn't many other directions to channel his 
considerable energy.

Weirdly, this government is so anti-government it is boasting about things it 
isn't doing. Cable proudly told his audience he will not give flexible leave to 
parents of 17-year-olds, won't extend rights to training time to staff of small 
businesses and won't force newsagents to take down tobacco advertising until 
2015. He wants the coalition to be the first government to leave office after 
reducing, rather than increasing, regulation.

On the surface, it's a noble liberal goal – to get out of peoples' lives. But 
it'll be interesting to see how the conservative base reacts if, say, Sunday 
trading restrictions are scrapped. And let's remember how this economic 
downturn began: through the reckless, runaway activities of one particular 
industry – finance – that ought to have been bound by far more red tape.
 