
The thing I love about the Italian approach to cooking is that, at heart, it's 
so damned simple: take a few decent ingredients, don't faff about with them, 
whack them on a plate and tuck in. This week's recipes for first courses or 
light meals are a good case in point: though not, strictly speaking, 100% 
Italian, there's nothing superfluous to requirements on any plate. The cheese 
and pepper salad and the mushroom dish couldn't be easier, and the quail dish, 
though a bit more involved, really isn'tthat much work.

Mozzarella and grilled romano pepper salad

Sweet roast peppers, soft, milky cheese, a few leaves and a good, sharp 
dressing: have I got your tastebuds going yet? Serves two as a light meal with 
good bread, or as a first course.

2 romano peppers
1 clove garlic, peeled and crushed
2 tsp picked fresh thyme leaves (or rosemary, in which case chop it up)
2 spring onions, trimmed and sliced very thin
2 tbsp good balsamic vinegar
2 tbsp good sherry vinegar
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 buffalo mozzarella
50g rocket leaves
10 fresh basil leaves

Roast each pepper in turn over an open flame until it blisters and turns black 
– hold the pepper with tongs, for obvious reasons (alternatively, you can get 
much the same effect by popping them on an oven tray and roasting in a very hot 
oven for 10 minutes or so, though do keep an eye on them, just in case). Once 
the peppers are blackened all over, drop them into a bowl and add the garlic, 
thyme, spring onions, both vinegars and a good pinch of salt. Cover with 
clingfilm, and toss gently – if you're too forceful, bits of the charred skin 
will break off into the marinade and make it go bitter. Set aside to cool.

Once the peppers are cold enough to handle, lift them carefully from the bowl, 
and peel off and discard the burned skin. Cut each pepper in half, remove and 
discard all the seeds and pith inside, then cut the flesh into long, thin 
strips. Put these in a large shallow bowl, and strain the marinade over the top.

To finish the salad, tear the mozzarella into chunks and add to the peppers. 
Add the rocket and basil (roughly tear the basil first), season to taste and 
toss gently. Scatter over a few toasted pine nuts and serve at room temperature.

Roast quail, radicchio chutney and hazelnut pesto 
 Angela Hartnett's roast quail, radicchio chutney and hazelnut pesto recipe: 
'my kind of starter'. Food styling: Claire Ptak. Photograph: Colin Campbell for 
the Guardian 
This is my kind of starter: a crisp-skinned roast bird set off by sweet-sour 
relish and earthy sauce. Serves two as a light meal or first course.

2 quails
1 tbsp olive oil
50g butter
2 tbsp picked fresh thyme leaves
1 clove garlic
Salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the hazelnut pesto
100g hazelnuts, shelled
30g grated parmesan
20ml hazelnut oil
60ml grapeseed oil

For the radicchio chutney
1 small red onion, peeled and diced 
1 tbsp olive oil
50g soft brown sugar
2 tbsp cabernet sauvignon vinegar
2 tbsp port
200g golden raisins
2 heads radicchio, trimmed and roughly chopped

For the pesto, toast the hazelnuts in a dry, heavy-based frying pan, or in a 
medium oven, until golden all over, then tip out on to a tea-towel. Wrap up the 
nuts in the towel and rub vigorously – this will peel off the papery skins. 
Roughly chop the nuts, and put them in a bowl with the parmesan and the two 
oils. Stir, season to taste and set aside.

For the chutney, in a large, heavy-based saute pan, sweat the onion in the oil 
until soft but not coloured. Stir in the sugar, vinegar, port and raisins, then 
add the radicchio. Stir and cook down until the leaves wilt a little, then set 
aside.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. In another heavy-based frying pan – an 
ovenproof one, this time – brown the quail all over in a touch of oil. Add the 
butter, thyme and whole garlic clove, transfer to the oven and roast for eight 
to 10 minutes, until cooked through (push the tip of a knife into the thick 
part of the thigh: if the juices run clear, the quails are done). Remove from 
the oven, and leave to rest in a warm place for 10 or so minutes.

Put a quail on each plate, put a spoon or so each of the chutney and pesto 
alongside, and serve at once.

Wild mushrooms on toast with lardo

Yes, it's just mushrooms on toast, but the crème fraîche and, especially, the 
lardo lift it to new heights. Lardo is pork back fat cured with spices and 
herbs, usually rosemary. It's cut wafer-thin, and melts gorgeously when you 
drape it over anything hot. Any Italian deli worth its salt should have some. 
Serves two to four as a first course, depending on how hungry or greedy you are.

4 slices white sourdough
2 cloves garlic, peeled and cut in half
2 tbsp olive oil
30g butter
500g wild mushrooms, brushed or wiped clean; don't wash in water
200ml crème fraîche
2-3 tbsp chopped flat-leaf parsley
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 slices lardo 
½ lemon, to finish

Grill the bread on both sides, until lightly golden, then rub one side of each 
slice with half a clove of garlic – the toasted bread will act like a grater, 
and little bits of garlic and its oils will infiltrate the bread.

In a pan, heat the butter and oil, then fry the mushrooms for three or four 
minutes over a high flame, until they start releasing their moisture. Cook for 
just a minute more, quickly stir in the crème fraîche and parsley, season to 
taste and take off the heat.

Put two pieces of bread on each plate, cover with the hot mushrooms, finish 
with a squeeze of lemon and top with a slice of lardo.

• Angela Hartnett is chef/patron of Murano <http://muranolondon.com>, Cafe 
Murano <http://www.cafemurano.co.uk> and Merchants Tavern 
<http://www.merchantstavern.co.uk>, all in London, and Hartnett Holder & Co 
<http://www.limewoodhotel.co.uk/hartnett-holder-and-co/> at Lyme Wood in 
Hampshire.
 