
On 12 July 2008, Ben and Catherine Mullany shared a "truly perfect day" as 
they were married in front of family and friends at St John the Evangelist 
church, in Cilybebyll, south Wales. Just over a month later they were buried in 
the grounds of the same church after falling victim to the violent crime that 
belies Antigua's reputation as a holiday island.

The couple spent their first night as man and wife camping in an unknown 
location – something which was hinted at by choosing the song Somewhere Only We 
Know, by Keane, as their first dance.

Two days after their nuptials they flew to Antigua for a two-week honeymoon 
that should have been a dream holiday.

Their friends and family had paid for their stay at the Cocos Hotel 
overlooking Jolly Beach – a picture-postcard Caribbean vista of turquoise 
ocean, white sand and palm trees that gently tilt in the breeze. On 27 July, 
the last night of their honeymoon, their idyll was shattered. After having 
dinner in the hotel restaurant they returned to their luxury chalet. At around 
5am Kaniel Martin and Avie Howell entered cottage 15 and shot Ben and Catherine 
Mullany, both 31, in the back of a head with a stolen handgun at close range. 
As the couple lay dying on the floor, they stole two inexpensive mobile phones, 
a cheap digital camera and a small amount of money before making their escape. 
Detective Superintendent Keith Niven, of the Metropolitan police, who led the 
British team called on by the Antiguan authorities to help with the 
investigation, said he was convinced Martin and Howell's main aim had been to 
kill first – and robbery was a secondary intention.

The shots were heard by other holidaymakers and the newlyweds were discovered 
by an American nurse. Catherine Mullany died instantly after being shot but the 
nurse tried to stabilise Ben Mullany before the arrival of paramedics. He was 
initially conscious but slipped into a coma and was taken to Holberton 
hospital, near St John's, where he was placed on a life-support machine. He had 
a fractured skull and a bullet lodged in the back of his head. On 1 August the 
student physiotherapist was flown back home to south Wales where he was treated 
at Morriston hospital in Swansea, where his wife, a doctor, worked. Despite the 
best efforts of the clinical team, a week after the attacks Ben Mullany was 
declared dead.

As Antigua sought to limit the damage to the island's "paradise" reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/03/internationalcrime1> and called 
in Scotland Yard detectives to assist in the investigation, Martin and Howell, 
aged 20 and 17 respectively at the time and nicknamed "Sample Dan" and "Demon", 
struck again in similar fashion. After breaking into the shop of local woman 
Woneta Anderson, they shot the 43-year-old at close range. After stepping over 
her bloodied body, they ran off taking two mobile phones and a handful of 
top-up cards. It was the murder of Walker that led police to the killers. A 
bandana with Howell's DNA was found at the scene as well as a blood-stained 
footprint. While the murder weapon was never found, tests later showed the 
bullets in all three killings came from the same gun. Gunshot residue was later 
found on Martin and Howell's clothing as well as in a gun holster found at 
Martin's home.

Twelve hours after the honeymoon couple were shot, Howell had inserted his sim 
card into Ben Mullany's phone. And the voice of his close friend Martin was 
found on the stolen Nokia. The item was later sold to a woman for around $200 
(£122) by a man standing opposite Martin's family home in Golden Grove. It 
remains unclear who shot the couple, as both killers refused to explain their 
actions all the way through their eight-week trial. The pair were eventually 
convicted the day after the three-year anniversary of the killings of Ben and 
Catherine Mullany.

For the parents of the honeymoon couple the pain of coming face-to-face with 
their children's killers was immense and compounded by Martin and Howell's lack 
of remorse. But they took comfort in the support from their friends, family and 
colleagues. And they have ensured that the memory of Ben and Catherine lives on 
throughthe Mullany fund <http://www.themullanyfund.org/>, launched shortly 
after their deaths to support UK students wishing to study medicine or 
physiotherapy but also to "help us to preserve their memories and ensure that 
their dreams live on".
 