
Fresh from a shareholder revolt over its planned pay packet for new chief 
executive Helge Lund, oil and gas business BG has sold its Australian pipeline 
business for $5bn (£3bn). But the weak crude price has put renewed pressure on 
its shares despite analysts welcoming the deal.

This is the company’s biggest disposal this year and is part of its strategy 
to disposed of unwanted assets to reduce debt and return cash to shareholders. 
The sale of QCLNG Pipeline, to Australia’s APA Group is expected to be 
completed in the first half of next year, depending on the start of commerical 
LNG deliveries and consent from its partners.

BG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> will make an after tax 
profit of $2.7bn which will be used to reduce debt anf fund growth. It is 
expected to sell other operations in Brazil and East Africa, as Lund begins his 
tenure.

But after an early boost, its shares are down 0.8p at 898p. Richard Griffith 
at Canaccord Genuity said:

The sale reduces our forecast gearing level for BG in 2015 to 32% from 45% and 
below our 2014 forecast of 39%. This is a significant sale as it removes 
concerns in the medium term about BG’s balance sheet gearing moving too high 
and risking a credit rating downgrade. The deal, though, is unlikely to prevent 
BG from scaling back capex next year from the current guidance range of $8-10bn 
per annum. to as low as $6bn following the recent collapse in oil prices.

We keep our buy rating and leave our 1260p target price unchanged.

Credit Suisse was negative on the company, issuing an underperform rating:

Following the announcement of the deal, BG will take an impairment of $2bn on 
its remaining QCLNG assets; it tells you something about the remaining assets 
after this deal. We understand there is a further review of carrying values 
(including QCLNG) as BG reviews its reference conditions, long term price 
assumptions and business plans. An update will be provided with fourth quarter 
results, where we would not be surprised to see further impairments on QCLNG; a 
project that would not generate that much free cashflow in a $70 a barrel world.

But separately Deutsche Bank issued a buy note albeit reducing its target 
price from £13 to £11.75, saying:

To say that BG has disappointed on perceived potential in recent years would 
be an understatement. Looking into 2015 we believe, however, that this is the 
year when at last the company should deliver. Very importantly, with 90,000 
barrels a day of net growth capacity now in place in Brazil, first LNG likely 
produced by end year and first oil from Knarr in Norway also anticipated 
visibility on production growth should add considerable confidence on forward 
potential. No doubt earnings will prove volatile across the period. Underlying 
direction should, however, become increasingly transparent.

Several years into the capital build and 2015 will in our view be the year 
when things finally start to come together operationally for BG Group. 
Start-ups by end 2014 should underpin a year of strong production growth and 
add considerable visibility on future potential. At the same time, collapsing 
capex and strong underlying growth in OCF should dramatically lessen financial 
risk. This leverage together with BG’s merger appeal suggest to us a share 
price that ought be well underpinned at current levels with material upside 
gearing as investor conviction in delivery improves.

Overall markets are moving higher after the week’s sharp reversals. The FTSE 
100 is currently up 18.04 points at 6547.51, with falling inflation in China 
raising the prospect of further rate cuts. But the shadow of Greece still hangs 
over the markets, with next week’s presidential vote raising concerns over a 
snap election which could be won by the far-left Syriza party.

Back in the UK, equipment hire company Ashtead has added 80p to £11.57 after 
it reported a 33% rise in half year profits and raised its guidance for the 
full year for the second time. Berenberg issued a buy note, saying:

Ashtead <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> delivered first 
half results ahead of our forecasts and has upgraded its guidance for the full 
year to “ahead of previous expectations” [and] we forecast consensus will 
increase by around 4.5%.

The results show that the company continues to benefit from the 
non-residential construction recovery in the US, take market share and improve 
its margin as it benefits from its scale and strong underlying rate growth in 
the market. On a December 2015 PE of 16.3 times for three years earnings growth 
of 24.8%, we believe the shares are attractive.

Airline shares were boosted by another fall in oil - with Brent crude 
currently down 1.23% to $66.03 a barrel. British Airways ownerInternational 
Airlines Group is up 5p to 463p while easyJet is 27p better at £16.52.


Carnival has climbed 99p to £28.18 as Numis raised its target price from 
£25.50 to £29.50. Analyst Wyn Ellis said:

Carnival <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carnival> (as implied by the 
recent share price performance) is a major beneficiary of the collapse in fuel 
prices. If current fuel prices are broadly maintained, we estimate a bunker 
fuel cost saving of over $500m in 2015 and we have increased our 2015 earnings 
per share forecast by 35% from $2.20 to $3.00.

Our confidence in the upgrade is reinforced by growing evidence that yields in 
the industry are on an upward curve. With the demand backdrop improving and the 
industry committed to growing return on invested capital we believe that there 
is every opportunity that the cruise companies will retain the fuel cost saving 
rather than see it being competed away.

Precious metal miners were still in demand as gold and silver held their 
recent gains, withRandgold Resources rising 83p to £44.18 and Fresnillo adding 
23.5p to 756.5p.
 