
 Author:  Traditionally, the authorship of the first gospel is ascribed to 
Matthew, the apostle referred to in the text (9:9) as a tax collector. As one 
of the three "synoptic gospels" - ie, covering the same historical events - 
Matthew was thought to be the earliest gospel, but subsequent textual analysis 
has suggested it postdates Mark. The oldest surviving manuscript fragment is a 
Greek papyrus ("Chester Beatty biblical papyrus p 45") dating from the 3rd 
century, but research has tended to date the original autograph from around 
AD70 - possibly a Hebrew or Syriac text.

 Story:  Beginning with an enumeration of Jesus's direct descent from King 
David, the Matthew gospel describes the key events in his life, closing with 
the moment of resurrection three days after the crucifixion. Matthew's central 
purpose appears to be to show how Jesus is the fulfilment of a string of Old 
Testament prophecies; in effect, to persuade the Jewish population of Israel 
that he is indeed the Messiah.

 The film-maker:  Born in Bologna, Pier Paolo Pasolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pier-paolo-pasolini> (1922-1975) made his 
mark as a novelist (Ragazzi di Vita, 1955), and as a poet (The Ashes of 
Gramsci, 1957) before making his debut as a film director with Accatone in 
1961. Pasolini's ideological and aesthetic preoccupations recur again and again 
in a series of radical, often difficult films. These include a veneration of 
the outcast social sector he called the "sub-proletariat"; an anthropological 
interest in medieval and pre-medieval literature; contradictory impulses 
towards communism, Christianity and sexual outrage; and an overriding affection 
for Italian Renaissance painting. Gospel was his third full-length feature; it 
was followed by, among others, meditations on classical mythology (Oedipus Rex, 
1967, and Medea, 1969), and a trilogy of tales cycles. After completing his 
most controversial film, Salo (1975), Pasolini was found dead - apparently 
murdered by a hustler near the seafront at Ostia, near Rome.

 How book and film compare: Pasolini saw his Christ as a crypto-Marxist 
revolutionary - he was, he said, inspired by the quotation: "I come not to 
bring peace, but a sword" (10:34). He initiated his film after reading the 
gospels during a papal visit to Assisi, favouring Matthew 's "epic" quality 
over the other three - Mark was "too crude", John "too mystical", Luke too 
"sentimental and bourgeois". Pasolini made no attempt to alter the dialogue or 
structure of the original text, creating scenes that simply dramatised 
individual incidents. He even objected to the "saint" appellation being used in 
the English-language title. However, Pasolini decided against shooting in 
authentic Middle East locations, either in Israel or Jordan. A documentary he 
made as pre-publicity, Seeking Locations in Palestine, makes it clear that both 
regions had lost the archaic purity he sought; he decided instead to film in 
Sicily.

 Inspirations and influences:  Pasolini's film was competing against a wave of 
biblical epics from Hollywood, such as King of Kings (1961) and Barabbas 
(1962). His approach couldn't have been more different. Quattrocento painting - 
notably Piero della Francesca and Masaccio - is the controlling visual 
influence on much of the film, as Pasolini modelled shot composition, costumes 
and set design on the Italian Masters. But for certain scenes - such as the 
trial before Caiphas - Pasolini makes a deliberately stark contrast, creating 
straight cinema vérité.
 