
Leaders in politics are masters of the travelator. Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> possesses the 
politician's most valuable currency: an aura of inevitability. He's the man of 
perpetual forward motion, where every career milestone is recorded and analysed 
as a staging post to the next milestone.

Shorten's leadership stocks were being talked up behind the scenes even before 
Saturday's election defeat. He was being portrayed by both Bill boosters and by 
less enthusiastic supporters as the person for the times.

The positive case for Shorten in the eyes of his colleagues is this: the 
Victorian rightwinger is a pragmatist, a proficient political communicator, a 
coalition-builder and an assiduous networker with the potential to unite the 
party post-Rudd and post-Gillard. He's also a clear projection by the ALP of 
generational change.

Fatalists have a more shaded assessment. Given Bill won't rest until he wears 
the crown, given "the inevitability of Bill" can't be avoided – then best to 
let events run their natural course. He will either flourish or fail, goes the 
most pragmatic internal rationale, and either scenario works for Labor in the 
long run. If it's to be success, then great – the party rebuilds and rebuilds 
quickly. If Shorten ultimately fails to live up to his mythology, then the 
party can move on. The thing about the political travelator is it keeps 
delivering alternatives.

Shorten rose through the ranks of Victorian Labor as an activist in the 1980s 
before serving his pre-parliamentary apprenticeship in the trade union 
movement. He achieved national prominence while national secretary of the 
Australian Workers Union (AWU) during the mine collapse in Beaconsfield, 
Tasmania.

His institutional power base in Canberra is derived in part from his enduring 
kinship with the AWU (although the former Labor treasurer Wayne Swan was always 
the key AWU "man" in Canberra) and in part from the so-called "short-con" group 
in the Victorian right. (The delightfully named short-cons are a sub-factional 
group controlled by Shorten and fellow Victorian rightwinger Stephen Conroy.)

The short-con group fractured badly during the Rudd-Gillard civil war (Shorten 
and Conroy were on opposite sides of the fight, with Conroy a staunch Gillard 
loyalist), and over bitterly contested preselections in Melbourne. Given 
political leadership is ultimately a numbers game, this splintering in his 
power base could have been a significant setback for Shorten's immediate 
leadership aspirations. But the group has patched relations for this 
transaction at least. Whether the rapprochement is short-term or long-term 
remains to be seen.

Institutional power structures still matter in how leadership battles in Labor 
are ultimately transacted, even though the current fashion is to downplay their 
importance in public; but Shorten is also firmly in the prototype of modern 
Labor leadership where power extends beyond the internal power alignments. 
Shorten's well-established media profile, and his ability to play "the media 
game", is seen as a plus in an age where presidential politics is the norm 
rather than the exception.

In terms of policy and legislation, Shorten's positive record in parliament 
includes his early, highly effective advocacy of the national disability 
insurance scheme, and his assiduous efforts to complete Julia Gillard's Gonski 
schools reform agenda pre-election. Shorten handled the sensitivities about 
Gillard's legacy and the legacy of the former education minister Peter Garrett 
with some diplomacy at a time when internal feelings ran high. Shorten also 
succeeded in the practical dimension: getting state governments to sign on.

The less positive baggage hovering around Shorten resides from his activities 
as kingmaker. His reputation for treachery stems primarily from his move 
against Kevin Rudd in 2010, and then his subsequent move against Julia Gillard 
in 2013. Those who wield the knife in politics accumulate power – but they end 
up wearing the consequences of the blood sport for some period of time, both in 
terms of public perceptions and relationships with colleagues.
 