
The Leveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> into 
phone hacking has turned its attention to the secretive, foreign-based 
billionaires whose shadowy grip on much of Fleet Street influences millions of 
ordinary British lives. But the session was not all about the Telegraph-owning 
Barclay brothers. The Russian oligarchs and their Australian rival, Rupert 
Murdoch, also shared the spotlight.

They are all very different, but also similar, as billionaires tend to be, in 
important respects, such as having lots of money. And their devotion to free 
enterprise and meritocracy also has a strongly counterintuitive side to it: 
heredity.

So the Russian tycoon Alexander Lebedev, who bought the London Evening 
Standard and (for £1) the Independent, was represented by his son, Evgeny (31), 
to whom dad gave both newspapers, as dads do. The Barclay twins, Dave and Fred, 
did the same. They sent young Aidan Barclay (55), who is chairman of the
Telegraph Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup>, 
but does not own it yet.

In fairness to Murdoch senior, he did not become a global media mogul by 
running away from a fight, and he will put in a personal appearance at the high 
court in London on Wednesday. Son James (41) will soften up Lord Justice 
Leveson's bowling on Tuesday. The press benches in Court 73 have been swapped 
with the public benches to provide a buffer between them and any lurking 
pie-throwers.

What was interesting on Monday was the way in which the proprietors take it 
for granted that busy prime ministers are interested in their views on Russia, 
Chinese tourist visas (the Barclays also own expensive London hotels) and 
quantitative easing for their own sake, not because they fear what their 
newspapers might do to them if they don't keep the boss sweet.

Speaking perfect, accented English, Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, who sported a grey 
waistcoat and tsarist beard, was serious and wholesome. Politicians and media 
types have lots to talk about because "we occupy the same sphere of existence", 
he kept saying. It probably sounds better in Tolstoyan Russian, but Leveson 
remained suspicious, not least because Lebedev also insisted that no politician 
had ever solicited support for a policy or an election, not even back-scratcher 
Boris Johnson or Brian Paddick, London mayoral rivals (he has never met Ken 
Livingstone).

People were always complaining to him about stories in his newspapers, but 
since Evgeny never seeks to influence them – sometimes they even reject his own 
articles, he claimed – he just says: "Speak to the editor." He also knows that 
criminal acts by some British newspapers (no names, Rupert) should be punished, 
but if Leveson thinks that Fleet Street has problems "go and try living in 
Russia", where political accountability is a real one.

Why, only yesterday, dad's Moscow website had reported $300bn worth of roubles 
illegally siphoned abroad, much of it by so-called political refugees now in 
London, Lebedev Jr added in a rare lapse from genial tact. Leveson clearly took 
a shine to him, as should all Fleet Street hacks, since he has pumped £75m into 
Britain's media, robust pillars of our democracy, he explained. The Guardian 
and Times lose millions too, he pointed out.

Later Aidan Barclay <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay> (no 
relation to the bank) embarked on a similar tack without the advantage of 
exotic foreignness, except in a fiscal sense, as dad and Uncle Fred are famous 
for keeping their assets and tax liabilities offshore. It did not stop him 
telling Leveson that over-regulated Britain's tax rates are too high – "It's 
counterproductive. High earners will just leave."

Barclay Jr presented himself as the Daily Telegraph's "Mr Ordinary Reader". As 
such, he talked things over with his editors but did not interfere. Leveson's 
lawyers found a few examples, but Barclay brushed them aside with a confidence 
that springs from a billion or so in the family vault on strife-torn Sark in 
the Channel Islands.James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> will be lucky to escape so 
lightly.

Mr Ordinary Reader's testimony turned gently comic when Leveson's duty lawyer, 
David Barr, asked him about his dealings with No 10. With Tony Blair, the chats 
were "relaxed and social". With Gordon Brown, he exchanged economic theories 
and occasionally sent him a chapter from the works of Milton Friedman. With 
David Cameron he exchanges "Regards, Aidan" text messages like "Do you think 
Ann Widdecombe will win Strictly?" (I made that one up), saving the economic 
theory articles for George Osborne.

Leveson was intrigued by this. Did Barclay think that his articles and advice 
on Europe or those Chinese tourist visas would be so well received if he was 
merely a hotel owner? Fair point, said the Ordinary Billionaire, but any FTSE 
100 chairman would feel duty-bound, as he does, to keep providing them. It's 
all sacrifice in the public interest around Court 73.

Before lunch Leveson had been severe with an impressive Sky News executive who 
defended his reporter's willingness to break the criminal law to expose 
wrongdoing. Yet when Barclay protested he knew little of the Telegraph's scoops 
before he read them, not even the MPs' expenses scandal, Leveson mildly 
expressed surprise because the CD has cost "a substantial amount of money". Had 
that involved bribing a public official, he might have wondered? For once 
Leveson's forensic skills deserted him. He must be conserving his energies for 
the Murdochs.
 