
Elena Baltacha <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha>, the last 
survivor of the four British women who made the main draw of the Australian 
Open, the best showing for 17 years, was yesterday beaten 4–6, 6–3, 6–2 by the 
former champion Amélie Mauresmo of France. In tough conditions Baltacha was on 
course to cause an upset when she took the opening set, and also held a 2–0 
lead in the deciding third, but in the end the French woman's far greater 
experience was crucial.

The weather changes from day to day here, sometimes from hour to hour — four 
seasons in one day is the local joke. Grey clouds scudded across the city, 
though it remained immensely hot and more than a little humid in the strong 
wind. Going for the lines was a risk, and the tennis was often erratic. 
Mauresmo had her left thigh strapped, the legacy of a recent injury.

Baltacha, dressed in black, as Mauresmo used to be in her early days, was 
quickly in trouble on her serve, with the French woman breaking for a 2–1 lead. 
This was the British player's fifth match in a week, having won three in 
qualifying, and she had hoped to make this tell against an opponent lacking 
match play.

If Baltacha and Mauresmo were to ­compare medical notes the conversation might 
go on for days, though the French have always believed that many of ­Mauresmo's 
problems have been in her head. For years it seemed that she was destined to be 
the most gifted player never to win a slam, but that all changed dramatically 
here three years ago.

She has never managed to recapture that form in the slams, however, and 
Baltacha, despite the difference in rankings of 111 places, felt she had a 
reasonable chance, especially if she could exert pressure and exploit the 
French woman's sometimes brittle temperament. This she managed in the first 
set, breaking back for 2–2, and then stretching out a 5–2 lead. Baltacha served 
at 5–3, only for her own nerve to temporarily desert her as she began spraying 
her forehand wide and long.

When she clinched the set Baltacha dropped to her haunches in excitement; it 
had been close, but there seemed a real possibility that she might repeat her 
run to the last 32 in 2005. But Mauresmo, indecisive and lacking conviction 
­initially, then began to curb the mistakes while Baltacha's forehand started 
to let her down badly at crucial moments.

The heat rule was in force, allowing a 10-minute break before the third set. 
Mauresmo, 30 this year, continued to struggle with her serve, allowing Baltacha 
to edge ahead again, but she could not maintain this initial burst, Mauresmo 
winning in 2hr 13 min when Baltacha double-faulted.

The first two rounds have seen hardly any upsets, and even the defeat of Venus 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams>, the No6 seed, 
could not be regarded as a true shock. She was beaten 2–6, 6–3, 7–5 by Carla 
Suarez Navarro. Outside of Wimbledon, where Venus has won the title in three of 
the last four years, she remains highly vulnerable.
 