
Tony Blair has agreed to resurrect his interest in acting when he leaves 
Number 10 after he was approached about a major stage role by his close friend, 
the artistic director of the Old Vic, Kevin Spacey, The Observer can reveal.

With speculation growing over the exact date of his departure from Downing 
Street and how he will handle life as an ex-Prime Minister, Blair appears to 
have taken Gordon Brown and his closest Westminster friends by surprise with 
the plan to star in an autumn production of Arthur Miller's The Crucible. It is 
likely to be a sell-out.

A proof copy of the theatre programme, obtained by The Observer and likely to 
become a collector's item, contains a cast list showing Tony Blair's name 
against the part of Reverend John Hale. Miller's classic play is ostensibly 
based on the 17th-century Salem witch trials and warns of the dangers of 
religious fundamentalism. Reverend Hale is a renowned expert on witchcraft and 
proves a noble character.

Kevin Spacey told The Observer: 'We're always looking out for talent in 
unexpected places. When I first approached Tony at the Labour conference he 
just laughed. Then he looked at me and said: "Seriously?"

'Tony is taking this role to heart as much as any big political speech. His 
skills in oratory and his ability to command an audience are well known, but he 
would be the first to admit that acting involves a lot more. He's going through 
some intensive sessions with our acting coach and we're confident that he'll be 
ready for the first night. I'm pretty excited about it.'

The Prime Minister, whose father-in-law, Tony Booth, is an actor, showed an 
early interest in drama at Fettes College where he played the role of Stanhope 
in RC Sheriff's First World War drama Journey's End. He has since had a bit 
part in a Russian soap opera, voiced a cartoon version of himself welcoming The 
Simpsons to Britain and appeared in a sketch with Catherine Tate for last 
month's Comic Relief, his deadpan delivery of the line 'Am I bovvered?' winning 
plaudits from the viewers and BBC executives.

As a result he is believed to have received numerous offers to send himself up 
in the finale of Ricky Gervais's Extras, a new Only Fools and Horses Christmas 
special and a proposed Doctor Who storyline in which a Prime Minister goes back 
in time to correct his past mistakes.

But according to a Downing Street source, Blair is determined to be taken 
seriously. 'The PM has always been a good actor but wants to show he's more 
flexible than a two-minute "Look, I'm Tony Blair" cameo played for laughs,' an 
insider said.

'When he puts his mind to something he's determined to master every detail, 
every skill and emotion. I think Al Gore's Oscar [for the documentary An 
Inconvenient Truth] has shown him there is life after politics.'

Blair's rapport with Spacey was evident when they appeared together on Michael 
Parkinson's television chat show last year, where the host told Blair: 'At your 
school... you were called the best actor of your generation.'

It is not known how Blair's wife Cherie has reacted to his new choice of 
career but the Prime Minister is said to be already running through his lines 
with his former director of communications, Alastair Campbell.

Some MPs have, however, expressed concern. One senior cabinet minister, who 
did not wish to be named, said: 'An ambassador arrived at Number 10 the other 
day to find Tony dressed like a Puritan, waving a crucifix in the air and 
shouting about chasing out the devil. Fortunately the ambassador had studied 
The Crucible at UCL.'

Additional reporting by Primera Delmes
 