
It's a bit unwise to show up the headmaster during a school trip. So it might 
have been politic for the bosses of RBS andStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> to suspend their 
whingeing about the government's City policies for the few days they spent 
accompanying David Cameron on Britain's largest trade mission to China for two 
centuries.

Ostensibly in Beijing to bang the drum for British business, RBS's chairman, 
Sir Philip Hampton, and Standard Chartered's boss Peter Sands just couldn't 
help themselves when quizzed about tax, regulations and City bonus 
restrictions. They both warned of an exodus of talent to Asia as banks flee 
what they see as undue meddling in London. The intervention, predictably, 
prompted Cameron to splutter on his peking duck pancakes.

We've heard these threats of relocation many times before, as Vince Cable's 
wearyreaction made clear  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/09/cable-row-bank-bosses-china-mission>
– the business secretary said claims of financial jobs going overseas were "a 
familiar negotiating technique".

But Cable is slightly misreading the mood. These unhappy bankers are serious. 
"For Cable to say that this is a negotiating tactic is naive," a senior 
executive at one big investment bank told me this week. "The question for us is 
– where are you going to locate, say, your next global head of foreign 
exchange? London? I don't think so."

The banks' moans fall into three categories: bonuses, tax and immigration. 
Fiercest of the bugbears, as ever, is pay – particularly European Union 
stipulations that 80% of bankers' bonuses must be paid in shares, deferred for 
three or four years. Investment banks claim this makes it hard to persuade 
their staff to move to London – and that it does little to discourage risky 
behaviour. Finance hardliners still feel that the entire debate is rooted in 
envy. One insisted: "We can live in a world where 'if I can't have it, you 
can't have it'. Or we can live in a world where we try to make the cake as big 
as possible."

As well as pay package squabbles, there's George Osborne's £2.5bn levy on 
banks' balance sheets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/21/bank-levy-to-raise-two-billion-pounds>
, plus immigration caps that make it tougher to bring foreign staff to London. 
All in all, the Square Mile feels put upon – and the banks aren't willing to 
keep quiet, even if it means the prime minister losing face in front of his 
Chinese hosts at the Great Hall of the People.

It's not realistic for banks to simply turn their backs on Britain by shifting 
thousands of people lock, stock and barrel from London. Ties of homes, 
mortgages and school fees make it unappealing for staff to move purely on 
financial grounds. But the number of banks insisting that they're diverting new 
investment elsewhere in the world is getting hard to ignore.

The problem is the tone of all this bleating. It's all too tempting to dismiss 
these as moans from wealthy financiers who have completely lost touch with 
Britain's recession-battered masses; who seem not to care that their earnings 
already eclipse those of ordinary mortals and that millions are struggling with 
joblessness, mortgage payments and cuts in public services.

The City of London Corporation points out that financial services provide 12% 
of Britain's tax take and employ more than a million people. The Square Mile 
accounts for about 2.4% of the nation's economy and losing London's position 
among the world's pre-eminent financial capitals would come at a hefty cost.

The coalition is showing signs of a slight kowtow – the Treasury looks likely 
to scale down the size of Osborne's tax on bank's balance sheets. But if banks 
want to win broader sympathy, they need to try a different tactic. Much of the 
population simply views Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan and Barclays Capital as 
billion-dollar casinos. The banks need to persuade us this view is mistaken. 
They need to explain how their trading floors can help bolster our savings, 
direct capital towards British businesses and broaden our prosperity in a much 
wider sense. They should stop moaning – and turn on the charm.
 