
The former culture minister David Lammy has said the decision to block the 
appointment of a black woman to the all-white board of Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/05/black-woman-althea-efunshile-channel-4-rejected-ex-arts-council>
 “beggars belief” and has called for the precise reasons to be revealed.

The former deputy chief executive of Arts Council England Althea Efunshile  
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/users/althea-efunshile>was informed last week 
that her appointment had been blocked by the secretary of state,Karen Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/14/is-there-more-to-karen-bradley-than-a-love-of-fiction-culture-minister>
.

This was despite it being recommended by regulator Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, which is tasked with finding, 
vetting and appointing Channel 4’s board members and it having the support of 
the broadcaster’s chairman, Charles Gurassa.

Lammy’s new intervention comes as the Guardian can reveal more detail on the 
process surrounding Efunshile’s interview, approval and subsequent denial of 
the job.

The MP, who was a minister at the Department of Culture, Media and Sport in 
Tony Blair’s government and is currently chairing the all-party review of 
racial bias and black, Asian and minority ethnic (Bame) representation in the 
criminal justice system, said the case raised important questions.

He said: “This is an absolutely extraordinary decision that really does beggar 
belief. The secretary of state must now tell us why she blocked Althea 
Efunshile’s appointment and why she ignored Ofcom’s recommendation given 
Althea’s wealth of experience, expertise and outstanding track record.”

Before joining the Arts Council in 2007 Efunshile was director of education in 
Lewisham and a senior civil servant in the Department for Education. At the 
Arts Council she was chief operating officer, deputy chief executive and, after 
the departure of Alan Davey in 2015, acting chief executive.

An advertisement seeking non-executive directors for the Channel 4 board 
<https://www.nedworks.net/channel-4-television-corporation-non-executive-board-members/>
 was published in the spring and, in June, the Guardian understands, Efunshile 
was contacted by headhunters about applying.

An interview then took place in July with the panel chaired by Dame Patricia 
Hodgson, chair of Ofcom. Hodgson is known for her rigour and toughness. In the 
1980s she had a formidable reputation as secretary of the BBC, responsible for 
the often fraught and difficult relations between the corporation’s governors 
and executive.

The interview would appear to have gone extremely well as her name was quickly 
put forward to the DCMS for rubber-stamping.

She was recommended with two others also with strong business backgrounds, who 
were later ratified, understood to have been Simon Bax, chairman of newspaper 
group Archant, and Paul Geddes, chief executive of Direct Line.

Over the summer the roles were advertised again and in September two further 
names, former BBC executive Roly Keating and Tory peer Lord Holmes, were 
submitted by Ofcom.

It was not until 28 November that Efunshile was informed by headhunters that 
her appointment had been blocked because she did not meet the criteria laid out 
in the original job application. The other four candidates were formally 
appointed the following day.

The original advert said that four board members were being sought and that 
candidates should have one of the following backgrounds:

• A current CEO of a plc or other organisation at least the size of Channel 4;

• A current or former finance director;

• A digital media professional;

• A senior marketing executive with a knowledge of television advertising.

The DCMS has not said which criteria Efunshile failed to meet. Technically, 
Efunshile was not the current CEO of the Arts Council when she applied for the
Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> job. But she had been 
acting CEO and was deputy CEO and was effectively in operational control of its 
£700m budget and 400 staff.

Examination of the CVs of the four white men approved by Bradley raises 
further questions on how specifically the jigsaw of criteria are met.

Holmes is a former solicitor and diversity adviser for the civil service. But 
he is best known as Britain’s most successful paralympic swimmer, winning 9 
golds, 5 silvers and 1 bronze.


Bax is a former chief financial officer of Pixar; Geddes, CEO of Direct Line 
Insurance; and Roly Keating, chief executive of the British Library.

If it was felt that Efunshile did not meet the job specification criteria it 
is puzzling that it was not raised at her interview.

Former colleagues say they are baffled by the decision. “She has been 
brilliant at the Arts Council, just fantastic,” said one. “She will be very 
successful and and do lots of good things on lots of good boards. The whole 
thing is just extraordinary.”


Another said Efunshile was a “formidable” operator. “She is a tough cookie and 
would have held them to account. At the Arts Council she was an operations 
person rather than an arts person, she is a fantastic implementer.”

Efunshile was awarded a CBE for services to art and culture in the Queen’s 
birthday honours last June, the same month she was approached by headhunters.

She announced a year ago that she was stepping down from the Arts Council to 
pursue “a new life” with a “portfolio career with projects and non-executive 
board positions that will challenge my intellect but take up a bit less of my 
time”.

There was nothing but praise from the Arts Council. Darren Henley, the current 
chief executive, said: “Althea’s contribution to the Arts Council has been 
enormous. Her strategic shaping of our work has helped us secure the confidence 
of government and the arts and culture sector.

 “We shall miss her enormously but she leaves an organisation that is in very 
good shape, with really strong processes and people – many of whom, she has 
recruited.”

Efunshile officially left the Arts Council in October and is currently the 
founding chair of the National College for Creative and Cultural Industries, as 
well as being a non executive director of Goldsmiths and University College 
London Hospitals.

Lammy said the DCMS needed to answer questions around the process. “How 
exactly did the four accepted candidates appointed to the board meet the 
criteria set out by Ofcom, yet Althea failed to meet the same criteria? What 
vetting did the department carry out in relation to these five candidates to 
come up with this ridiculous decision?”

Observers cannot recall a similar occasion when the DCMS has blocked a 
candidate who had been recommended by Ofcom for a non-executive role.


The decision means that Channel 4, which has a remit to reflect the diversity 
of the UK, has an all-white board consisting of ten men and three women. 
Channel 4 is allowed up to 15 board members.

David Abraham, the chief executive of Channel 4, last month sent an email to 
staff criticising the rejection of the fifth candidate, saying it represented 
the latest example of the government’s “worrying and unprecedented” 
interference. It was “dispiriting” and “hard to understand”.

It went on: “Not only do we share Ofcom’s view that the fifth candidate is 
highly qualified but she would also have added to the diversity of our board.”

The Guardian understands that the DCMS letter to Ofcom rejecting Efunshile 
said that the regulator might like to “encourage her to apply again” if future 
roles came up.

This leaves the door open for Efunshile to potentially join the Channel 4 
board next year as there will be a hunt for three further members, as current 
non-executive directors reach the end of their appointment contracts.

“The appointment of non-executive directors to the Channel 4 board are made by 
Ofcom in agreement with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport,” said a 
Channel 4 spokesman.

Efunshile has declined to comment. 

A spokesperson for DCMS said: “Non-executive members of the Channel 4 
Corporation board are appointed by Ofcom with the approval of the secretary of 
state. The secretary of state approved four candidates on the basis that they 
met the specific skills and experiences set out in Ofcom’s four advertised job 
descriptions.”
 