
The small boy sat on a straight-backed chair, in Chatterton's bookshop 
(specialising in Romantic literature and poetry), droop shouldered and helpless 
with boredom. His father, slightly desperately, seized Bronze In My Blood off 
the shelf, flicked through the autobiography of sculptor Benno Schotz, and put 
it back. Only the childless do any serious shopping for second-hand books in 
the last week of the school holidays.

In desperation I sold myself a £3 copy of Rudolph and Amina, a fable based on 
a hugely successful 19th century American musical show called The Black Crook. 
Charles Dickens saw it in New York in 1866, and wrote despairingly to a friend: 
"This has now been played every night for 16 months. It is the most 
preposterous peg to hang ballets on that ever was seen. The people who act in 
it have not the slightest idea of what it is about, and never had."

Instantly the hex - of my working behind a Blaenavon bookshop counter without 
selling a single book - was broken. A woman, followed by another despairing 
small boy, bought a paperback bodice ripper for £1.50. The shop's owner, Jo 
Wyvorn, trailing her own small boy, returned and promptly blew the entire 
profits on ice creams from the cafe across the road.

Rhiannon, the new operator of the cafe, is having her own problems: the oven 
packed up the day she took over. When she realised it was still stone cold, she 
took her first homemade cake out and sprinted up the hill to Kevin in the 
antique shop, who also runs a tea room, a furniture removers, and takes in 
ironing. He baked the cake in his oven. Rhiannon's is still awaiting repairs.

The path to the bottom of the hill leads through the town's last barrage of 
scaffolding and boarded-up shop fronts. A sign at the crossroads promises "more 
bookshops!" but few visitors believe it: instead they turn back and walk up the 
other side of the street. At the Left Bank Mark's day started well: he sold for 
£12 two of the books his mother has happily cleared out of her attic and onto 
his shelves.

However things had gone sharply downhill from there. Literally.

"Nothing has changed, nothing! It's a right state!" he snarled at his ongoing 
view of the scaffolding poles. Directly opposite Lata, from Broadleaf Books, 
the prettiest of all the shops, sighed and got on with stock taking.

The ennui of a long hot August has cost the infant booktown its first 
casualty. In an unforeseen development Louise the fortune teller and witch has 
had to give up her shop, Cobwebz.

She will continue to sell witchcraft and magic books and supplies over the 
internet, from a store room in Boot Lane, the alley behind Broad Street: anyone 
who thinks main street Blaenavon still looks a little tatty should see Boot 
Lane on a sticky dusty day. Some of the local youth use the padlocked doors as 
a community notice board, and their teachers should be proud of them: the 
sentiments may be revolting, but the handwriting is immaculate.
 