
The Sussex Stakes winner, The Gurkha, underwent surgery on Friday with all 
future plans on hold. His owners, Coolmore Stud, announced on Twitter that the 
French Guineas hero, trained by Aidan O’Brien, had suffered an injury and that 
they were in no rush to suggest what may lie ahead.

The tweets read: “The Gurkha setback – Classic winning miler The Gurkha, last 
seen winning the Sussex S. has met with a further setback.

“He was referred to Fethard Equine hospital and underwent surgery last night. 
He was discharged this morning and is back in his box. Future plans will be 
announced at a later date.”

As well as his two Group One success he was a narrow second in both the St 
James’s Palace Stakes and the Coral-Eclipse.

The Gurkha beats Galileo Gold in Sussex Stakes at Glorious Goodwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/the-gurkha-galileo-gold-sussex-stakes-glorious-goodwood-horse-racing>
At Newbury Godolphin’s alleged second string Richard Pankhurst caused an 11-1 
surprise to win the Hungerford Stakes.

The John Gosden-trained colt, who had seemingly lost his way after having 
shown Royal Ascot-winning form as a youngster, came from last to first within a 
handful of strides to take home the Group Two prize over seven furlongs.

His fellow Godolphin <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/godolphin> runner Home 
Of The Brave, the 7-4 favourite, made most of the running but he was caught by 
the Robert Havlin-ridden Richard Pankhurst, who gained the lead inside the 
final furlong and a half.

A length separated the main players in an all-royal-blue finish. Havlin said: 
“He’s always shown us a high level of ability but he’s had niggling problems 
throughout his career. He’s just lacked that bit of confidence. As he grows in 
confidence, more options will be open to him.”

Kings Fete made all the running en route to taking Group Three honours in the 
Geoffrey Freer Stakes at Newbury.

Brilliantly trained back to full fitness after a long spell on the sidelines, 
Sir Michael Stoute’s inmate served notice he was the force of old when 
successful in a big race at Goodwood last month. And he continued the good work 
in Berkshire with a pretty ruthless display under Pat Smullen.

Acutely aware that the five-runner race was devoid of pace, Smullen went 
straight into the lead in Khalid Abdullah’s famous silks. Ormito made a little 
bit of late headway but Kings Fete, the even-money favourite, had all bases 
covered and was good value for his length-and-a-quarter victory.

At Ripon Nameitwhatyoulike gave Connor Beasley a significant victory with a 
clean-cut success in the Great St Wilfrid Handicap.

Just over 13 months ago Beasley fractured his skull and spine, suffered 
bleeding on his brain, lost half of an ear and all of his teeth after a 
frightful fall at Wolverhampton. After three months in a custom-fitted body 
brace he defied medical logic by returning to the saddle in March.

He has since enjoyed a nice run of form but took his game to the next level at 
Ripon when he guided Nameitwhatyoulike to an accomplished success. The field 
split into two groups early on but the main action was towards the stands side, 
with the Bryan Smart-trained winner always in a prominent pitch.

Intisaab, by contrast, did not have a clean run through but found plenty of 
gears close home once the gaps appeared.

But Shelly Birkett’s partner was forced to play a secondary role to 
Nameitwhatyoulike, 16-1, who was a neck to the good at the line. Baccarat and 
Pipers Note finished third and fourth respectively in the £70,000 handicap over 
six furlongs.
 