
I have a black-tie event coming up and would love to wear a beautiful Thirties 
lace dress that belonged to my great aunt. However, the lace is fragile, there 
are some holes already, and I'm sure I hear it rip when I try it on. Can I have 
it repaired without spending a fortune? Frances


It is possible to have it repaired, and I can highly recommend Designer 
Alterations (020 7498 4360;designeralterations.com 
<http://www.designeralterations.com>) which has 30 tailors, each with their own 
area of expertise - including a specialist in lace. It is best to give them two 
weeks for alterations and repairs, but if someone comes in late on a Friday 
with a broken zip, they will do their best to help. I explained your problem, 
and they think the best way to repair your dress is to insert scraps of 
matching chiffon under the rips and fix it with a zigzag stitch. If it's really 
old and delicate, they would sew it by hand. You may have to buy the matching 
chiffon, but if they have off-cuts in the right colour, they'll let you know. 
It would cost around £15 to £20 per hole to repair. Let me know how you get on.

I'm going to a wedding in July. I've bought my dress, a silk wrap with cream 
and apple-green spots. My shoes are the same green. I need a bag for my camera, 
make-up and phone, but I'd rather it isn't too expensive. Lisa


With a delicate silk dress you should look for a clutch bag with diamante 
detailing. I know I often recommend department stores, but they have hidden 
gems - labels you may not have come across - and you always find something 
unusual. Fenwick has a good selection of clutch bags, from vintage dressy satin 
by Franchi (from £79), to leather clutches with wrist straps (£119 - £129) by 
Angel Jackson, whose label is brilliantly called Lie Down I Think I Love You. 
Fenwick also stocks Wilbur & Gussie, whose plain or printed silk clutch bags 
are £119 (wilburandgussie.com <http://www.wilburandgussie.com>). I have seen a 
perfect spring-green silk envelope clutch with a crystal brooch fastening in 
this range, and a green snake print - both could work with your outfit. If 
these are beyond your budget, try Marks & Spencer's Occasions bag line or 
Accessorize, which has a diamante snake clutch at £30.


· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <>
 