
JANUARY

Fiction

Michael Cunningham's The Hours revisited Virginia Woolf to stunning effect; By 
Nightfall (Fourth Estate) is his latest attempt to put art and beauty at the 
centre of consciousness, combining literary reference with sensuous 
observation. His narrator is a Manhattan art dealer distracted from middle age 
and marriage by the dangerous pull of his young brother-in-law.

Adam Mars-Jones becomes an early contender for jacket blurb of the year with 
Cedilla (Faber), the second volume in a projected trilogy which combines the 
joys of miniaturism with the scope of epic. "None of the reviews of the first 
volume," we are told, "explicitly compared it to a coral reef made of a billion 
tiny Crunchie bars, but that was the drift of opinion." May book two, in which 
hero John Cromer ambles into adulthood, be as tasty.

Other titles to look out for include We Had it So Good, by Orange-winner Linda 
Grant (Virago), charting the ups and downs of the baby boomer generation. And 
there's an extraordinary debut from Ida Hattemer-Higgins, whoseThe History of 
History (Faber) follows her young American heroine, a lonely expat in Berlin, 
on a journey into madness on the trail of family secrets and Nazi ghosts. For 
those with a Stieg Larsson-shaped hole on their bedside table, fellow 
Scandinavian Jo Nesbo's star has been rising for some time: inThe Leopard 
(Harvill Secker), Oslo cop Harry Hole is pitted against a new killer.
Justine Jordan

Poetry

Jackie Kay's Fiere (Picador) probes the complexities of her shared African and 
Scottish identity and draws on old and modern Scots –fiere is the old Scots 
word for friend – as well as poems inspired by Ibo dialect and African and 
European art (read a poem, page 16). Playing the Human Game, by Alfred Brendel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel> (Phaidon). The great pianist 
has long been more than a part-time poet, and now comes a collected edition of 
his work, in which his wryly humane observations on music and life reveal 
themselves via surrealist squibs.
Nicholas Wroe

History

The Taste of War: World War Two and the Battle for Food, by Lizzie Collingham 
(Allen Lane). Food historian Lizzie Collingham does far more than repeat 
clichés about how Britons were never healthier than when they were "digging for 
victory". Instead she goes backwards to show how Germany's ambition for 
self-sufficiency in food production was a decisive factor in going to war in 
the first place, while the allies spent it spectacularly mismanaging food 
resources in India, Africa and China.
Kathryn Hughes

Natural history

Incoming: Or, Why We Should Stop Worrying and Learn to Love the Meteorite, by 
Ted Nield (Granta). Thirty years have passed since father-and-son scientists 
identified a strange layer of iridium, an element rare on Earth, right in the 
rock strata where the cretaceous stops and the tertiary era begins. Bingo! 
Maybe a huge asteroid crashed into the planet and wiped out the dinosaurs? 
Could it happen again?
Tim Radford

Politics

How to Change the World: Tales of Marx and Marxism, by Eric Hobsbawm (Little, 
Brown). The great historian of the left looks at the spectacular rise and fall 
of Marxism over 162 years sinceDas Kapital was written, and asks if it is 
really defunct, as many have claimed since the fall of Soviet communism, or if 
it might still have resources to offer to our struggling capitalist world.
Claire Armitstead

Children

Half Brother, by Kenneth Oppel (David Ficking). Age: 11+. Having a chimp for a 
half-brother raises all kinds of issues. Ben does not want his teen years 
spoilt by his research scientist parents' experiment to raise a chimp as a 
human. But Zan is a sweet baby, and soon Ben is captivated by him. What will 
happen when the experiment comes to an end? A thought-provoking story about 
families and ethical responsibility.
Julia Eccleshare

FEBRUARY

Fiction

Nicole Krauss follows her acclaimed The History of Love with Great House 
(Viking), the intertwined confessions of disparate characters – a woman writer 
in hiding from the world, a man investigating his wife's hidden past, an 
antiques dealer reassembling family heirlooms stolen by the Nazis – whose lives 
are linked by the imposing, many-drawered desk that passes through their hands. 
Krauss's narrative addresses memory, love and loss; how our yearnings are 
enacted down the generations.

The under-appreciated Carol Birch may have her moment this year with Jamrach's 
Menagerie (Canongate), a vividly written tall tale of 19th-century adventure 
which takes its young hero from the banks of the Thames to the South Seas – in 
search of a dragon.

2011 sees several books set on northerly islands; Sarah Moss's Night Waking 
(Granta), about a young mother on the Hebrides haunted by letters from 
centuries before, is the second novel from this promising new voice. Closer to 
home, Tim Binding satirises our recent inglorious past, from Thatcher to Blair, 
inThe Champion (Picador), a portrait of a smalltown monster. Notable debuts 
includeThe Cry of the Go-Away Bird, by Andrea Eames (Harvill Secker), in which 
a young white girl in 90s Zimbabwe sees her privileged world fall apart, andA 
Discovery of Witches, by Deborah Harkness (Headline), a romp through magical 
academia hoping to rival Elizabeth Kostova. Those looking for some geo-politics 
with their crime fiction should turn to Elmore Leonard'sDjibouti (Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson), a "Middle-East western on water" about modern-day piracy.JJ

Poetry

Torchlight, by Peter McDonald (Carcanet). This fifth collection from 
Oxford-based Ulsterman McDonald brings together Irish, British and European 
themes – "ancient and modern, Catholic and Protestant" – as well as new 
translations of Homeric hymns.NW

Science/myth

Unnatural: The Heretical Idea of Making People, by Philip Ball (Bodley Head). 
In moments of moral panic over heart transplants, test-tube babies and embryo 
stem cell experiments, today's biologists are accused of "playing God". But 
humans have been playing with the idea of playing God for more than 1,000 
years. Witness golems, Frankenstein,Brave New World and the robots of Karel 
Capek. Ball, who started from a solid base of science writing, promises to 
follow a thread from mythological Daedalus to the fantasy of human clones.TR

Landscape

Edgelands: Journeys into England's True Wilderness, by Paul Farley and Michael 
Symmons Roberts (Jonathan Cape). This celebration of our post-industrial 
landscape explores "those unplanned, unwatched strips of land between cities 
and the countryside, full of car crushers' yards, gas-holders and retail 
parks". Just as the Romantics turned to previously shunned mountains and ruins 
in search of the sublime, the two poets promise strange beauty in mobile masts 
and business parks.JJ

Memoir

Bird Cloud, by Annie Proulx (Fourth Estate). Proulx's first non-fiction book 
in 20 years combines family history with natural history, as she hymns the 
unspoilt Wyoming wilderness of wetlands and prairie where she has made her 
home, and describes designing and building a house there. On the day she first 
visited the landscape, a cloud in the shape of a bird hung in the air: an omen 
for a harmonious way of living.JJ

History

Reprobates: The Cavaliers of the English Civil War, by John Stubbs (Viking). 
Stubbs, whose first book was an excellent biography of John Donne, now puts the 
losers back at the centre of the national story. He is clearly fascinated by 
those who stayed loyal to the crown during the decades when being a roundhead 
was the safer option. Expect lots of poetry, loose sexual morals and some 
really frothy hair-dos.KH

Language

The Language Wars, by Henry Hitchings (John Murray). As the unreceding tsunami 
of tendentious modern guides to "correct" English shows, some people have a 
large and angry bee in their bonnet about the lamentable illiteracy of everyone 
else. There have always been such complainers, as this history of debates over 
"proper" English promises to show, ranging from Swift toBuffy, and the split 
infinitive to textspeak.
Steven Poole

Games

Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World, 
by Jane McGonigal (Jonathan Cape). People are miserable, and no wonder, because 
the world sucks. McGonigal, a games designer, says we should make life more 
like videogames. Shoot a few hundred actual zombies in the face before 
breakfast? Sadly, she means something more subtle: to make reality more 
satisfying with the kinds of "rewards, stimulating challenges and victories" 
that people zonked out onWorld of Warcraft so enjoy. SP

Children

Quarry, by Ally Kennen (Scholastic). Age: 12+. Who is sending Scrappy texts 
daring him to do daft and dangerous things? At first it seems like a joke, but 
the dares become increasingly threatening: whoever is behind them knows too 
much about him for comfort. Kennen captures Scrappy's terror as the texts get 
under his skin. JE

MARCH

Fiction

A Visit from the Goon Squad, by Jennifer Egan (Corsair) arrives from the 
States trailing clouds of glory. Hopping between characters and eras from the 
70s to the near future, playing with language and form (one chapter is a 
PowerPoint presentation), it charts the dizzying acceleration of cultural 
change, and the depredations of time (the "goon") on a cast of rock'n'rollers. 
Back in the UK, Philip Hensher anatomises a smalltown English community inKing 
of the Badgers (Fourth Estate). When an eight-year-old girl goes missing in 
Hanmouth, the various residents, all with their secret lives, come under 
suspicion and surveillance.Anatomy of a Disappearance (Viking), Hisham Matar's 
follow-up to his acclaimedIn the Country of Men, is another story of absence 
and secrets, set in Cairo and England: a young boy who wishes his father out of 
the way for the sake of his glamorous stepmother slowly discovers how little he 
knows about those he loves. Meanwhile, we say farewell to lugubrious 
investigator Kurt Wallander inThe Troubled Man, by Henning Mankell (Harvill 
Secker): his final case uncovers cold war secrets that threaten both 
contemporary Swedish politics and his relationship with his daughter.JJ

Poetry

The Romantic Dogs, by Roberto Bolaño (Picador). First English translation of 
the late Bolaño's verse since he was "discovered" by the English speaking world 
a few years back. Bolaño turned to fiction in his 40s, concerned that he 
couldn't support a family by poetry. When asked "What makes you believe that 
you're a better poet than a novelist?" he replied: "The poetry makes me blush 
less."Hundred Doors, by Michael Longley (Cape). Longley's first new volume since
Snow Water in 2006 is the big event of the poetry month. In it, he continues 
his deeply affecting engagement with the natural world, the pity of war and the 
consolations of love and art.NW

Biography

The Omnipotent Magician: Lancelot "Capability" Brown 1716-1783, by Jane Brown 
(Chatto & Windus). Beautifully illustrated life of the garden wizard who 
changed the way England looked in the 18th century. "Capability" thought 
nothing of moving hills (mountains were a bit beyond even him) and making 
rivers change direction. The result was a pastoral idyll that, even now, lurks 
near the surface of our own continuing fantasies of rural England.KH

Children

Bracelet of Bones, by Kevin Crossley-Holland (Quercus). Age: 10+. When 
Solveig's father leaves for a new adventure without her, she sets off alone 
from Norway, through the Baltic, along the rivers of Russia to Miklagard. High 
in drama, and richly furnished in the Viking detail that Crossley-Holland, who 
won the Guardian children's fiction prize in 2001, inhabits so comfortably, 
this is an exciting story of one girl's journey to adulthood.JE

Natural history

Here on Earth: A New Beginning, by Tim Flannery (Penguin). Life, as far as we 
know, exists only on planet Earth: intelligent life lately seems to be about to 
engineer civilisation's apocalypse. Does it have to end like this? Flannery is 
a conservationist with clout, class and vision, and could be just the man to 
tell the whole story of creation again, this time with a happy ending (perhaps).
TR

Technology

The Information: A History, A Theory, A Flood, by James Gleick (Fourth 
Estate). Fans of Gleick, who more or less single-handedly invented the modern 
genre of heavyweight pop-science withGenius and Chaos, will welcome him back 
for an overdue cultural investigation into "information", a word whose ubiquity 
he began to interrogate last month on the New York Review blog: "The word 
'information' has grown urgent and problematic – a signpost seen everywhere, 
freighted with new meaning and import." Fifty years after the information age 
was declared, are we any closer to knowing what it is?SP

APRIL

Fiction

This month's pearl is The Pale King by David Foster Wallace (Hamish Hamilton). 
Unfinished on his death in 2008, it's been assembled by his editor from 
manuscript and notes, and tells the story of Illinois tax office trainee "David 
Foster Wallace" entering a workplace so monotonous that employees get 
boredom-survival training. There he finds a surprising cast of characters and, 
as ever, wonder in the mundane.

Following his historical trilogy, Roddy Doyle returns to contemporary Dublin 
withBullfighting (Jonathan Cape), a story collection in which an assortment of 
men face up to middle age, disillusionment and the death of the Celtic tiger. 
Another Irish master, Dermot Healy, publishes his first novel in 11 years:Long 
Time, No See (Faber) is set in a small community on the west coast of Ireland, 
and follows the friendship between damaged youngster Mr Psyche and a pair of 
elderly alcoholics, Uncle Joe-Joe and The Blackbird.

Two acts of literary ventriloquism next: in A Man of Parts (Harvill Secker) 
David Lodge channels the elderly HG Wells to look back on the life of "the man 
who invented tomorrow", while James Frey takes on no less than the Messiah, 
running loose in contemporary New York inThe Final Testament of the Holy Bible 
(John Murray).

Appearing in English at last, the banned Chinese novel The Dream of Ding 
Village, by Yan Lianke (Constable) is a furious satire of capitalism and 
corruption based on a blood-contamination scandal that saw whole villages wiped 
out after peasants who had been pressured into selling their blood were 
infected with Aids. Debuts to look out for include SJ Watson's high-concept 
thrillerBefore I Go to Sleep (Doubleday), about a woman whose amnesia makes 
each new day a blank slate, and Shehan Karunatilaka'sChinaman: The Legend of 
Pradeep Mathew (Jonathan Cape), a tragicomedy of Sri Lanka seen through the 
lens of cricket.JJ

Poetry

November, by Sean O'Brien (Picador). O'Brien follows his TS Eliot and Forward 
prize-winningThe Drowned Book with a collection "haunted by the missing and the 
missed". It features elegies for the dead as well as reflections on missed 
opportunities, on lost sleep and on times past. O'Brien also revisits Dante 
with a subterranean journey through his native Tyneside.NW

History

Below Stairs: The Bestselling Memoirs of a 1920s Kitchen Maid, by Margaret 
Powell (Pan). This was a huge hit in the 1970s, when the whole nation sat down 
to watchUpstairs, Downstairs (the first time around). Now, in the wake of 
Downton Abbey, it makes sense to reprint Powell as a kind of vintage companion 
piece. It's full of extraordinary detail and, behind the chipper tone, you 
sense Powell's relief that, by the end of her life, she had found an easier way 
of making a living than getting down on her hands and knees.KH

Science

On Being: A Scientist's Exploration of the Great Questions of Existence, by 
Peter Atkins (OUP). The total energy of the universe is zero: we exist, but we 
came from nowhere and ultimately amount to nothing. Cue for a creator? A moment 
to say such questions are not for science? Not a chance with Atkins, physical 
chemist of world renown and a thoughtful but vociferous atheist, with a record 
of books that sometimes read like lectures, but always those brilliant, 
compelling lectures that you treasure, because they illuminate unexpected 
worlds.TR

Philosophy

Green Philosophy, by Roger Scruton (Atlantic). Fox hunting is good because it 
makes people appreciate hedgerows – no, wait, I jest. Scruton's argument: 
"Environmental problems must be addressed by all of us in our everyday 
circumstances, and should not be confiscated by the state." To address them 
ourselves, Scruton says, we ought to cultivate "oikophilia" – not love of oiks, 
disappointingly, but love of home. Bound to contain interesting things, though 
it remains to be seen whether Scruton has corrected his views on climate 
science.SP

Natural history

The Reason Why: Snowball Earth and Intelligent Life, by John Gribbin (Allen 
Lane). Why is there life on Earth and (seemingly) nowhere else? What happened 
to make this planet special? Could it have been a cosmic traffic accident that 
set up a series of temperature traumas that gave complex life the compulsion to 
evolve, variegate and eventually deliver the intelligence that begatThe X Factor
, Twitter and thermonuclear war? Gribbin is an astrophysicist with a long 
record of books about both cosmology and climate history. This latest promises 
a new twist to old conjecture.TR

Literature

Elif Batuman's The Possessed (Granta) is a deeply clever and very funny 
collection of essays: half memoir, half love-letter to the Russian literary 
greats. The book has been feted in America: Slate called it a "cross between 
Borges and Borat" while the New York Times said the essays "unfold comically 
and intellectually as if Ms Batuman were channelling Janet Malcolm by way of 
Woody Allen". Expect similar raves here.
Paul Laity

Ageing

You're Looking Very Well: The Surprising Nature of Getting Old, by Lewis 
Wolpert (Faber). Almost certainly not the only 2011 book about the geriatric 
generation (right now, Britain has more persons of pension age than school age, 
and the imbalance will increase), nor about fantasies of immortality. But 
Wolpert is a distinguished developmental biologist with a talent for books that 
duck the predictable and throw new light on old themes by occupying unexpected 
vantage points. Great title, too, although I fear I may have committed 
precisely that triteness when last we met.TR

MAY

Fiction

After four glittering novels of high life, low life, abuse, addiction, 
thwarted love and family ties,At Last, by Edward St Aubyn (Picador) promises to 
be the final outing for Patrick Melrose. On the day of his mother's funeral, we 
follow Patrick from service to wake to solitary bedsit, where he is perhaps 
finally free of the legacy of the past. Another gem this month will be Anne 
Enright's follow-up to her 2007 Booker winner,The Gathering: The Forgotten Waltz
 (Jonathan Cape) unfolds over one snowy Dublin day, as a woman remembering the 
heady days of an affair awaits a visit from her lover's daughter.

David Bezmozgis's story collection Natasha made him an American sensation: his 
first novel,The Free World (Viking), introduces us to a family of Latvian 
emigrés stuck in Rome on their exodus from communism to the new world. 
Uncharted territory is explored in an unusual debut,The Wandering Falcon, by 
Jamil Ahmad (Hamish Hamilton), interlinked stories about nomadic tribes in the 
borderlands of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Meanwhile, out on the outskirts of the 
universe, China Miéville'sEmbassytown (Macmillan) is set on the planet of 
Arieka, where humans coexist with alien hosts; and behind bedroom doors back on 
Earth, Alan Bennett offers frank and funny tales of sex in middle life with
Smut: Two Unseemly Stories (Faber/Profile). Sebastian Faulks penned a James 
Bond novel in 2008: now thriller writer Jeffery Deaver takes the wheel for
Project X(Hodder & Stoughton), promising to resurrect Fleming's spy in a 
contemporary setting.JJ

Ideas

Adapt, by Tim Harford (Little, Brown). This is one of those books with an 
annoying Gladwellesque subtitle that promises an explanation of something you 
don't necessarily believe – in this case, "Why Success Always Starts with 
Failure". But Harford, the "Undercover Economist" and presenter of Radio 4's 
superbMore or Less, is no slouch, and the idea – that complex problems, from 
global warming to the financial crisis, can only be solved by rapid 
experimentation and learning from reiterated failures – sounds intriguing.SP

Poetry

Illuminations, by Arthur Rimbaud, translated by John Ashbery (Carcanet). 
Ashbery has had a career-long engagement with French poetry, and now comes his 
much anticipated translation of Rimbaud. The parallel text of this 
hallucinatory suite of prose poems – a "collection of magic lantern slides" – 
is a significant literary event. "If we are absolutely modern, and we are," 
says Ashbery in his preface, "it's because Rimbaud commanded us to be."The 
Captain's Tower: Poems forBob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>
 at 70 (Seren). Birthday anthology "concerned with Dylan's life, his work, and 
his cultural impact". Allen Ginsberg, Simon Armitage, Andrew Motion, Roger 
McGough, Paul Muldoon and many others wish His Bobness many happy returns.NW

Murder

Mr Briggs' Hat, by Kate Colquhoun (Little, Brown). The first of what is surely 
going to be a stream of Victorian murder books, bobbing along in the wake of 
Kate Summerscale's highly successfulThe Suspicions of Mr Whicher. The Briggs 
case involves the North London Railway Line, a bloody beaver hat and a frenzied 
Victorian press keen to suggest that railways and murder were somehow 
inevitable consequences of one another.KH

Economics

The Value of Everything, by Jeffrey Sachs (Bodley Head). Subtitled "Capitalism 
and Prosperity after the Fall", this is a guide to action from the US 
economist. Rising oil and food prices, he explains, are not temporary cyclical 
problems but the leading edge of coming ecological crises: what is needed is a 
new set of economic rules that address climate change and global developments 
as well as local and national interests. Sachs's chilling message is that we 
have less time than we thought.JJ

JUNE

Fiction

Beryl Bainbridge's posthumously published The Girl in the Polka-Dot Dress 
(Little, Brown) takes a detail from the investigation into the assassination of 
Robert Kennedy – witness sightings of a young girl in the hotel where he was 
shot – to spin a yarn around a childhood trauma, a sinister doctor and an 
American road trip.

Booker-winner Aravind Adiga follows The White Tiger with Last Man in Tower 
(Atlantic), a kaleidoscopic portrait of a changing Mumbai peopled by the 
residents of an old apartment block ripe for redevelopment. Back in London, Ali 
Smith'sThere but for the (Hamish Hamilton) explores memory, identity and 
communal living through the delightful conceit of a dinner party guest who 
really outstays his welcome: Miles is the friend of a friend who tags along to 
a Greenwich party, locks himself in a bedroom and refuses to leave. Other 
notable novels includeRiver of Smoke, by Amitav Ghosh (John Murray), the second 
in his opium wars seafaring trilogy;Pure, by Andrew Miller (Sceptre), set on 
the cusp of the French revolution; andWish You Were Here, by Graham Swift 
(Picador), about a brother killed in Iraq. JJ

Science

The Origin of Our Species, by Chris Stringer (Allen Lane). This is trailed as 
the definitive guide to the greatest debate of all: who are we and where did we 
come from? Definitive is a confident word, given that fresh evidence is 
unearthed (literally) every year and that the big picture seems to shift a bit 
every five years. But as the head of human origins at the Natural History 
Museum, Professor Stringer is the authority of final resort on human fossil 
findings. He has a record of fairly rehearsing all the competing 
anthropological arguments, while putting his own views with glorious clarity.TR 

Poetry

Selected Poems, by Philip Larkin, selected by Martin Amis (Faber). The Larkin 
industry continues in rude health, and after so much about the life it's good 
to get back to the poetry with a new selection by Amis, who has drawn on 
Larkin's four collections as well as previously unpublished poems. "More than 
memorable", he explains, Larkin is "instantly unforgettable".NW

FURTHER AHEAD

Fiction

In July, Alan Hollinghurst follows up his 2004 Booker winner The Line of Beauty
 withThe Stranger's Child (Picador), charting the fortunes of two families 
through the 20th century. There's also a second novel from Ross Raisin, author 
ofGod's Own Country, whose Waterline (Viking) centres on a former shipbuilder 
cast adrift in the modern world.

August brings a big new book from Hari Kunzru, Gods Without Men, about the 
disappearance of a young boy in the Californian desert, and a comedy of life in 
a Welsh commune,Offcuts, from novelist and poet Joe Dunthorne (both Hamish 
Hamilton). Sebastian Barry follows the Costa-winningThe Secret Scripture with 
On Canaan's Side (Faber), the story of an Irishwoman's life in America, while 
in AL Kennedy'sThe Blue Book (Jonathan Cape), two psychics fall in love.

September sees a new novel from Michael Ondaatje, The Cat's Table (Jonathan 
Cape), about a boy travelling by ocean liner from Sri Lanka to England, and the 
latest from Haruki Murakami,IQ84 (Harvill Secker), a love affair at long 
distance featuring a would-be writer and a religious cult. Then there's the 
English publication of Michel Houellebecq's Goncourt-winnerThe Map and the 
Territory (William Heinemann), a picaresque satire on art and celebrity 
featuring the brutal murder of Houllebecq himself. The death of the author has 
never looked so messy.JJ
 