
Jo Wyborn, in raspberry pink velvet frock coat, looked balefully out the 
window of Chatterton's bookshop at the rain sloshing down the road. "Never a 
dull day, never a good night's sleep". Booktown's inhabitants were assembling 
for the their anniversary and World Heritage Day parade, and looking back over 
a year of mixed fortunes.

It was a year to the day since Blaenavon, the small coal and iron town in South
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, launched an audacious experiment 
- to build a new prosperity based on second-hand books in a post-industrial 
graveyard of dead jobs.

The town's steep main street is a hill of dreams. The new booksellers have put 
behind them stalled lives, broken marriages, stifling jobs, and invested not 
just money but passionate hope. Mair Davies, once a teacher in London, 
profoundly shocked her children and grandchildren when she abandoned retirement 
and England to live and deal in English civil war books in a corner shop that 
was once a cafe. Her tenant, Peter Cottridge, came from the West Country and 
invested all his redundancy money in his rare books shop.

Halfway up the street, Serendipity opened six weeks ago, the shop's fourth 
incarnation in the year. James Hanna, the American bookseller and brains behind 
the booktown experiment cheerfully describes Megan Murphy as his third witch in 
the shop. Mrs Murphy says severely that she is not a witch, merely a spiritual 
person, but wonders if the shop's patchy fortunes could be related to its 
former use as an undertaker's mortuary. She cracked on with an anti-rain chant, 
which duly turned the day's torrent into a mere downpour.

In Browning's bookshop Stephanie Nummelin was dressed as her great 
grandmother, in a bustle she was finding most inconvenient. One good turn could 
demolish an entire display stand.

Mrs Nummelin is the only one of the new booksellers who actually comes from 
the town, though like almost all her former schoolmates, she left Blaenavon as 
soon as she could.

Old photographs show a town in decline for most of the 20th century, as iron, 
steel and finally coal abandoned the surrounding hills, and the population 
halved from 12,000. Nevertheless, even in the 1960s Mrs Nummelin remembers 
Friday pay days, when people poured into the town from surrounding valleys, and 
it was a struggle to walk the length of Broad Street through the crowds of 
shoppers.

By the time the relics of the 18th century iron works won the town its coveted 
World Heritage Site status, so many shops were boarded up that it also won the 
less coveted nickname Plywood City.

The Forgehammer, a handsome double-fronted late Georgian building, whose scale 
you can only appreciate by standing by the front door and noting that the 
handle is at earhole height, was once an imposing hotel. The two-foot-thick 
stone walls would take an earthquake to tumble, but everything else was rotting 
when Pete and Lizzie Miln, a musician and a teacher, bought it for a song two 
years ago. Only six months ago - once they'd stripped out the horrible warren 
of plasterboard bedsits - it was an icy shell, but today it has reopened as an 
antiques shop and cafe selling Fair Trade coffee, organic teas and locally made 
cakes. Visitors, booksellers and curious locals flocked.

Meanwhile at the top of the steep main street Claire and James McDonald were 
locking the door of Spirit of the Green, their book 
shop-cum-newsagent-cum-witchy New Age suppliers, and beginning to pack.

After six months they are leaving the business and the town, and abandoning 
book selling for good, before they lose any more money. They were torn between 
bitterness and determined optimism.

"We're not like some of the [town's] book sellers: there's no second income 
here," Claire said. "This business had to support five people, and the truth 
was it couldn't. We're leaving while we can still start up again somewhere 
else."

"We're looking for somewhere in Cwmbran where we can make proper money," James 
said.

John Rodger, director of the Blaenavon Project, which campaigned for the 
heritage title and is still fighting for the town's regeneration, was brooking 
no such defeatist talk, as the brass band squelched and tootled, the dripping 
dragons stamped, and the rain-sodden children drummed lustily.

Capering in a puddle, in tail coat and tall hat, he swept an arm towards the 
new and restored shop fronts, the new slate roofs, the flapping banners and the 
hanging flower baskets.

"We achieved five years' worth of regeneration in the first five months of the 
booktown, after 50 years of downhill slide. It's not without its troubles, but 
the good booksellers are putting down real roots in the community. This is a 
nationally successful project. If it's not recognised here, it is recognised in 
France and Germany and other countries across Europe which are trying to 
achieve the same effect."

Gail Johnson is almost local: she came from Brighton 16 years ago to open a 
care home in a derelict fish and chip shop. Six months ago, when a change in 
council policy took away all but one of her long-term residents, she converted 
her building into the Red Rooster cafe and an immaculate bed and breakfast.

"It was never going to happen overnight - the trick is to keep on going." 

Alan Fossey, founder of the Blaenavon First community newspaper, and of a 
hugely successful community radio project, put it more brutally.

"Some people resent the presence of anyone from south of Abersychan. There is 
no changing their ... outlook on life and they will always be there, pissing 
and whingeing. It's what they do.

"I'd say it's gone past experiment. It is now a fact. Even if half the shops 
were to go out of business in the next 12 months, Blaenavon would still be a 
booktown ... Forty years down the road, it might even rival Hay-on-Wye."

Joanna Chambers and Lata Unmy were the very first to sign up to James Hanna's 
booktown package: Joanna was desperate to move to a dry roof and permanent 
bookshelves, after years of spreading plastic sheeting over her stall under the 
leaking roof of Abergavenny market. It was thus a particularly bitter blow when 
their shop ceiling sprang a calamitous leak (still being sorted by the 
council), which left some of the stock wetter than ever happened in Abergavenny.

Even so, they remain faithful to the booktown dream. 

"I was the first in, and I'll be the last out," Joanna said. "This town is on 
the way up."

The rain slowed to a light but drenching drizzle, and James Hanna and most of 
the booksellers marched staunchly down the street behind a "Booktown Blaenavon" 
banner.

Mark Bennett, a bitter critic of James Hanna's stewardship, was not there. On 
the eve of the anniversary he finally signed an agreement with Hanna, leaving 
the group and reclaiming some of the money he had paid to join. His Left Bank 
bookshop is now on the market, and he is taking over the post office, where he 
may or may not also sell books. As a parting blow he registered the title 
Blaenavon Booktown as a limited company - not, he insists, to restrict it but 
to allow any bookseller to join without having to pay a penny to Hanna.

Hanna is not about to orphan Blaenavon, but he is already looking over the 
hills and far away. He hears more small towns with empty shops calling to him. 
Indeed as the parade ended, he tied down the first sale for the next booktown - 
Yorkshire's booktown Redcar should open next summer.

And he has just heard of a small American town with prosperous suburbs and a 
desolate town centre full of handsome, empty, historic buildings ...

Jo Wyborn, once a journalist in Bath, was dressed as Thomas Chatterton, for 
whom her shop is named. Not, perhaps, the happiest patron for a new business, 
since at the age of 17 the young poet swallowed arsenic to stave off death by 
starvation.

She pondered the year: "It's always been two steps forward, one step back - 
but it could have been worse, it could be one step forward, two steps back."

Today's two steps forward were that her shop sold over £100 worth of books. 
The one step back was that two books on the history of Newport Rugby Club, 
together worth almost £60, were stolen from a shelf near the door.

· After a year of monthly dispatches, Maev Kennedy will be making occasional 
return visits to Blaenavon to see how the booksellers are getting on.
 