
The egregious chairman of this year's judges, Michael Portillo, has said that 
every book on the Booker shortlist is "intensely readable" and has described 
them all as "exciting page-turners". These bold claims will no doubt have set 
plenty of Booker-cynics laughing into their sleeves, and advocates of the 
old-fashioned novel of ideas gnashing their teeth. Amitav Ghosh's The Sea Of 
Poppies has many fine qualities, but will in all probability only confirm the 
prejudices of both parties.

Beginning in 1838, among the poppy fields of India during the build up to the 
first opium war, this is a historical novel of the old school. There are 
pirates, exotic landscapes, palaces, prisons, swash and buckle galore, while 
reams of information about nineteenth-century conditions give a patina of 
authenticity to an otherwise enjoyably unlikely narrative.

In a suspiciously film-like manner, the story cuts between a number of 
characters who make their way onto the Ibis, a ship bound for Mauritius with a 
hold filled with emigrants, prisoners and coolie labourers instead of its more 
usual cargo of opium (since the lucrative trade with China is temporarily 
blocked). Among the various clichés are spank-happy English sailors and 
capitalists (who get their kicks from whipping "natives" or allowing their own 
bottoms to be subject to "chastisement"), deposed Indian nobles, noble Indian 
peasants, exotic Chinamen, even more exotic religious mystics (one labouring 
under the extraordinary name of Baboo Nob Kissin), attractive French women and 
– essentially for such a Hollywood-hungry opus – a hero from America.

This latter is the moral, intelligent, death-defying, romantic and very 
attractive Zachary Reid, the second mate of the Ibis, and first friend of all 
the friendless. He's annoying and his character is paper-thin, but Ghosh throws 
him into enough predicaments to ensure that there isn't much time to muse on 
his deficiencies. He fearlessly braves rising waters on leaky boats; on-board 
riots; starchy English dinner parties; sadistic first mates… There's plenty of 
a drama when he isn't on the scene too: a dramatic rescue from the ancient rite 
ofSuttee <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suttee>; a no holds barred description 
of the incontinence resulting from opium withdrawal; wrestling bouts; a court 
case…

Even so, it's stretching things to describe The Sea Of Poppies as a genuine 
page-turner. Much of it, unfortunately, is dull. Ghosh's insistence on making 
the most of his considerable researches can occasionally be a virtue – a 
room-by-room description of an opium factory that is an undoubted tour-de-force 
– but more often it's a drag. The worst offence in this regard is an insistence 
on using dialogue culled fromHobson-Jobson 
<http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/hobsonjobson/frontmatter/frontmatter.html>
. No doubt the vocabulary is authentic, but many passages such as the following 
smell too much of the lamp, and are baffling:

"Now there was another chuckmuck sight for you! Rows of cursies for the sahibs 
and mems to sit on. Sittringies and tuckiers for the natives… Cunchunees 
whirling and ticky-taw bos besting their tobblers. Oh old loocher knew hot to 
really put on a nuach all right!"

Did people really talk like that? Even if they did, Ghosh doesn't convince me 
that this is real dialogue. No Anthony Burgess, he. Things get even worse when 
the French girl, Paulette, is on the scene. We can tell she's French because 
she says her words in a funny order and is constantly subject to malapropism. A 
habit that Ghosh insists on turning into a (bad) joke just about every time she 
speaks and causes him to slip into some alarming constructions when the mystic 
Baboo is on the scene: "Come, Baboo Nob Kissin… I will walk you to the 
boathouse. Come to there one goes."

So much for readability. In terms of ideas, Ghosh does have a few pertinent 
points to make about the evils of colonialism and modern capitalism. It's hard 
to avoid the parallels between all that nineteenth-century rhetoric about free 
trade as justification for bloodshed and war and modern US politics. Hard 
especially since Ghosh labours the point so heavily. Even clumsier are the 
distinctly modern racial politics. One character must overcome his caste 
snobbery, Paulette has a 'native' stepbrother, Zachary is half caste… Which 
would be all well and good if they weren't so prone to speechifying about their 
various issues: "Are not all experiences defective in the end? Whatever there 
is within us – whether good, or bad, or neither – its existence will continue 
uninterrupted, will it not, no matter what the drape of our clothes, or the 
colour of our skin?"

Well yes. Few would disagree that it's better that people be judged by the 
content of their character <http://www. speeches/mlkihaveadream.htm 
americanrhetoric.com/> rather than the colour of their skin, but by thus 
putting these clichéd modern words into the mouth of his nineteenth-century 
character, Ghosh manages to sound both at once hackneyed and anachronistic. The 
net result is that the book feels like as much like lecture as an adventure – 
but one that has little that is new to tell anyone.
 