 World Book Day started in Blaenavon at 7.45am, when James McDonald sold two 
Terry Pratchett paperbacks for £3.50 to a customer surprised that even the 
newsagents at the top of the town had turned into a bookshop.
His wife Claire scored possibly a first in any bookshop in the world: she sold 
a copy of The Hobbit to a rep who had called on newsagency business.

The view from their doorstep, down the steep main street, was of an 
extraordinary experiment which began last June, to see if second hand bookshops 
can revive a town with World Heritage Site status from its historic ironworks, 
but brought to its knees by the ebbing tide of heavy industry.

The jury is still out, but the fluttering banners marked out Book Day events 
among the last remaining boarded up shops: Brownings, the children's bookshop, 
laid out fairy cakes and squash for a reading by Liz Whittaker; the library was 
inviting borrowers to choose a chocolate from a tin of Rose's, and offering a 
choice of matching books - hard, soft centred, chewy or dark.

The newsagent will be having a witch reading runes for charity. Even the 
butcher is doing a celebrity recipe signing.

"It's working, it's working," said James Hanna, the American who started it 
all, who had been doing local media interviews since dawn. "People keep saying 
to be realistic, but I think if we'd been realistic eight or nine months ago 
we'd never have done anything."

The customers, all drawn by the bewildering rumour of a new book town 
flourishing in the industrial graveyard of a south Wales valley, included a 
woman from Sweden, a retired bookseller from Burton-on-Trent, and a man brought 
up in the town who could hardly believe the change.

Even among the depressed former mining towns and villages of the valleys, 
Blaenavon was legendary, with far more shops boarded up than open on its 
desolate main street.

The McDonalds themselves are quite surprised to be running a split personality 
business - newsagency at one end, Spirit of the Green selling fantasy books, 
tarot cards and crystal balls, at the other - in a town James had written off 
as a basket case.

"To be honest, when I heard about the book town I thought 'No, it aint gonna 
work'. But it is working. I've sold books at half past seven in the morning. 
I've sold £9 worth of books today, and the day has hardly started."

Not everyone in the town loves its new face. In Howler's pet shop, four women, 
including the owner's daughter, were bitter at the breaks they felt the council 
was giving incomers. Every patch of dereliction cleared increased their feeling 
that nothing was done for them and everything was being done for the new 
traders -a snooty lot, they thought.

"We don't need any more bookshops, we need a supermarket," said one. 

The World Book Day celebrations were part of the town's first literary 
festival, organised in seven weeks on a shoestring by Jo Wyborn, who moved from 
Bath to open Chatterton's Books. "My favourite book is Great Expectations. I 
have great expectations of Blaenavon."
 