 Can books save Blaenavon? The women in two of the handful of surviving 
businesses on the small Welsh town's main street reacted identically: lips 
drawn into a thin line of incredulity, a brisk shake of the head, then a terse 
"We'll see".
American bookseller James Hanna will tolerate no doubts. He is an evangelist 
of the power of massed bookshops to transform local economies, in the style of 
Hay-on-Wye.

"Of course it's going to work!" he boomed. "There is no question about it!" As 
the sleet battered down, turning the desolate street into a river, flowing past 
shuttered and boarded-up shops - the ghosts of florists, jewellers, shoeshops 
and chemists - he said: "How can it not work? This place has everything!"

In a bold experiment, to see if tourists can be lured into an obscure south 
Wales town to buy books, at least eight bookshops will open simultaneously in 
Blaenavon in June.

Perhaps they will also be tempted to stick around and buy a pint in the Castle 
pub, a Welsh cake in Coffee Corner or Kevin Satchwell's antique shop, or a bowl 
of Welsh lamb stew in Lipton's Coffee Shop.

"It'll work!" insisted butcher Wayne Lewis, waving his cleaver. "I'm already 
wondering what we can do to get them in here. Buy one book, get one sausage 
free?"

John Rodger is director of the Blaenavon Project, which campaigned for the the 
town to become a world heritage site. He is backing the book project to the 
hilt. "We're not short on ambition," he said. "We're trying to take this little 
down-on-its-luck town and put it on the map of the world."

Blaenavon became a world heritage site last year, but recession and the 
collapse of the iron and coal industries upon which it was founded - and which 
won it the heritage listing - have ravaged it.

In the 19th century the coal mines, whose shafts still honeycomb the 
surrounding hills, were among the most productive in the world. Works still 
survive as witness to two centuries of the iron production which built the town 
and then made it rich.

The iron wealth shows in imposing public buildings and a profusion of 
beautiful railings. In the churchyard, solid iron slabs can be seen in place of 
tombstones on the family graves of the iron masters.

In the late 20th century, the tide of prosperity ebbed, seemingly for ever. 
Thousands of jobs were lost, and with them homes and businesses, until there 
were more boarded up shops than open ones on the main street, which is 
nicknamed Plywood City.

Almost 200,000 tourists a year come to the nearby Big Pit mining museum. But 
the visitors can drive there, park, visit, eat in the cafe, buy in the gift 
shop and then leave without ever setting foot in Blaenavon.

So what does Blaenavon have that will tempt booksellers into Plywood City? The 
answer is astonishingly cheap empty property: shop rents well under £200 a 
month are common, small terraced houses are on offer at £20,000, and you can 
pick up a four bedroom house, in good condition, for £45,000.

Prosperity


Meanwhile, the new prosperity that Hay-on-Wye is enjoying is in danger of 
pricing out the books. When Richard Booth, long-time friend and now business 
partner of James Hanna, moved into the town's semi-derelict castle 40 years 
ago, he proclaimed himself "King of Hay", opened a second-hand bookshop, and 
launched the process of creating the largest second-hand book centre in the 
world.

Back then, property was almost as cheap as it is in Blaenavon today. But 
nowadays new antique shops and smart clothes shops are far more common than new 
bookshops. There is almost no vacant property. The one tiny lockup shop that is 
on offer costs just under £50,000.

"We have booksellers calling us up every week wanting to get into Hay," said 
Hanna. "We have to tell them there's no room, and that they couldn't afford it 
even if there was."

Hanna and Booth are offering prospective booksellers premises fitted out with 
bookshelves and shop fittings, and a stock of 6,000 second-hand books, for 
between £15,000 and £20,000, depending on the size of the shop. Some 
booksellers have negotiated cheaper deals by taking a shell and fitting it out 
themselves.

Torfaen borough council has backed the scheme by handing over several of its 
own properties. The old NatWest bank premises will become the Blaenavon Book 
Bank. A cookery bookshop is to open opposite, and up the hill film and theatre, 
photography and children's bookshops are planned. Of the eight people who 
expressed an interest after the council's first public meeting, six are already 
signed up to open shops. "I believe it can work," said Bar bara Lewis, 
chairwoman of the traders' association. "We have to be optimistic."

"There's no such thing as book buying people," said Hanna. 

"There are people and there are books. Put the two together and you get people 
who will buy books. We will not allow this to fail."
 