
In North America, people are bombarded with around 3,000 marketing messages a 
day. "And there's no way you can escape being brainwashed by this onslaught," 
says Kalle Lasn, the founder ofAdbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/adbusters>, a Canada-based "culture-jamming" 
group which is not prepared to take the matter lying down.

Adbusters, "intent on clearing up the toxic areas of the mental environment", 
says society is being hoodwinked by corporate advertising. It aims to 
"transform our commercial media culture and direct it towards ecological and 
social awareness". To this end, Abusters' brainchild, International Buy Nothing 
Day, hit high streets across 15 countries in the pre-Christmas trolley dash, 
with shoppers urged to cut up their credit cards during the 24-hour consumer 
fast.

On this side of the Atlantic, the torch was carried by Manchester-based 
anti-consumerism group Enough. And the backing of Friends of the Earth 
increased the momentum. To mark the event, it designed a range of spoof toys: 
the Trashformers, featuring My Little Phoney, and Fibby ("Talks Rubbish, Looks 
Rubbish, Becomes Rubbish"). Its push focused on the impact of advertising on 
children, as well as trying to convey "the knock-on social and environmental 
effects of consumerism".

An ad campaign put together by logging companies destroying forests around 
Vancouver kicked the Adbusters movement into action 10 years ago. The "forests 
forever" campaign explained how loggers were "managing" the land. "That made us 
so angry that we made our own advert," says Lasn. But Canadian TV stations 
refused to approve the ad and sell them airtime, and the "realisation that 
there is no democracy on our airwaves" set the wheels in motion.

It's still one of the major thrusts of the group, expertly managed by Lasn, 
himself schooled in the ways and means of the advertising industry via a stint 
heading a market research company operating in the ad field.

"I got pissed off - they seemed to be so ethically neutral," says Lasn. As 
part of its social marketing campaign, Adbusters has created a catalogue of ad 
parodies and artwork, much of which is now posted on the Internet. But despite 
a sustained bid to get its "non-commercials" aired on mainstream TV in North 
America, and more recently in Europe, in almost every case they have been 
refused approval. In the run up to last year's G8 summit in Birmingham, 
Adbusters tried and failed to buy a 60-second chunk of airtime for an ad 
outlining "that the global economy is unsustainable, that it's a doomsday 
machine, and that we're living off the backs of future generations".

Lasn talks of media cartels and a realisation that "the same kind of bullshit 
is going on in the UK and Europe - I can't believe I'm living in a democracy". 
Lasn will be back in the UK this spring at the invitation of the Royal College 
of Art, and he plans to spend time "schmoozing" socialist activist groups over 
here.

It's a bid to drum up support for this June's G8 summit in Germany, when he 
plans to "test the system in a much more explicit way - we're going to 
challenge the system in the UK in the same way we have in North America for the 
past 10 years."

In the meantime, TV Turnoff Week ("where citizens reclaim 
a little time and tranquillity") is scheduled for April 22-28, and a Web-based 
campaign is calling for the broadcast industry's governing bodies to give two 
minutes of every broadcasting hour over to "advocacy messages".

Visitors to  www.adbusters.org <> are asked to sign the cyber-petition. The 
Adbusters magazine, published by the group, will also continue to try to raise 
the profile of the issues Lasn says need to be urgently addressed: "We're all 
merrily going on our way, but it's a house of cards that will collapse 
eventually."
 