
Usain Bolt is in town, tailed by a media scrum, Boris Johnson is attempting to 
steal the headlines with eye-catching pronouncements, and the government is 
pumping out endless statistics about the value of theOlympic legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/olympic-legacy>. A year on from London 2012, 
it's like the last 12 months never happened.

But as the London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor revealed that 
Westfield – the operator of the huge shopping centre that acts as a gateway to 
the Olympic Park – was planning to build Europe's largest indoor ski centre, a 
fierce debate over the Games' legacy continued to rage.

And in contrast to the media love-in of 2012, rather than facing playful 
questions about chicken nuggets Bolt, back in London for Friday's Anniversary 
Games at the Olympic Stadium, was forced to defend himself in the wake of a 
spate of failed drug tests among his rivals.

The Jamaican world record holder was faced not with the usual gentle probing 
about his form but was instead forced to protest his innocence and admit that 
the doping revelations about Tyson Gay andAsafa Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> had knocked the image of the 
sport.

"I am confident in myself and my team, the people I work with. And I know I am 
clean. So I'm just going to continue running, using my talent and just trying 
to improve the sport and help the sport," said Bolt, who will appear on Friday 
and Saturday at the Olympic Stadium when it is filled for the first time since 
the Games to mark the one-year anniversary.

Bolt will run alongside Mo Farah, Jessica Ennis-Hill and other heroes of the 
London Games at the two day event, which will be followed on Sunday by the IPC 
International Challenge, featuring Paralympians including Jonnie Peacock. The 
sold out stadium is expected to welcome 180,000 fans over the three days.

Johnson, ramping up the rhetoric to Olympian proportions, reminded a press 
conference attended by last summer's familiar faces – including the mayor of 
Hackney and the Metropolitan police chief – that permanent uses had been found 
all eight venues in the Olympic Park.

"Remember the fate of the Olympo-sceptics is all I would say to anyone tempted 
to doubt the legacy. If you are tempted to think in that kind of way you will 
be proved wrong," said Johnson.

Rower Anna Watkins, who won a gold medal with Kath Grainger, said the Games 
had provided a huge boost to women's sport. Paralympian Martine Wright, who was 
injured in the 7 July bombings and went on to play sitting volleyball for Team 
GB, said they had "proved sport can inspire a better world".

Announcing Westfield's planning application, which would see in an indoor 
skiing facility twice the size of the UK's current largest within two years, 
the mayor also said that the London Legacy Development Corporation was in 
"substantive discussions" with University College London about a major new 
campus on the site where Team GB won a record haul of medals last summer.

Johnson also hinted that discussions were under way with a major museum or 
cultural attraction for an offshoot on the Olympic Park, although officials 
later confirmed that earlier plans for an Olympic museum had been definitively 
shelved.

"It is very largely, or at least partially, as a result of the Olympics and 
Paralympics that we are seeing a surge of confidence and optimism in investment 
in London. Schemes that have been blocked for decades are now going ahead – 
Battersea, Croydon, Royal Albert Dock," said Johnson.

"I have no doubt the Olympic impetus has been very valuable," claimed Johnson, 
a ubiquitous presence during last year's Games – whetherdangling from a zipwire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/aug/01/boris-johnson-stuck-zip-wire-video>
 or waving the flag.

"I'm not going to sit here and claim that everything is better as a result of 
the Olympics," he said, before going on to do just that. He stopped short of 
ascribing what he claimed was "London's biggest baby boom since England won the 
World Cup in 1966" to the Olympics, but added that he "couldn't rule it out".

There has been considerable scepticism about the government's claim that the 
Games have already realised £9.9bn of economic benefit to the UK, a figure that 
it said would hit £40bn by the end of the decade.

But Lord Deighton, the former London organising committee (Locog) chief 
executive who is now commercial secretary to the Treasury, insisted that "in 
practice, the number is much, much bigger".

In an accompanying video supplied to foreign news crews, the former Locog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-organising-committee-olympic-paralympic-games>
 chairman Lord Coe showed he had not lost his gift for a soundbite in the 
intervening 12 months. "The Olympic flame will be as bright in 10 years time as 
it is now," he promised.
 