
The Russian oligarch Boris Berezovsky faced repeated accusations in the high 
court that he had given untrue and contradictory evidence in his multi-billion 
damages claim againstRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>.

Berezovsky is suing the owner of Chelsea football club for more than $5bn 
(£3.2bn). He claims that Abramovich "betrayed" him after Berezovsky fell out 
with the Kremlin and fled to Britain in 2000, forcing him to sell his share in 
the Russian oil company Sibneft for a knockdown price.

Berezovsky told the court how he, Abramovich and the Georgian businessman 
Badri Patarkatsishvili created Sibneft in 1995, against the backdrop of 
Russia's infamous "loans for shares" privatisation programme. He insisted that 
there had been an agreement under which Abramovich would own half the company 
and in effect manage it, while he and Patarkatsishvili owned the other half.

Giving evidence for the first time, Berezovsky conceded that from early 1994 
he became one of Russia's most politically influential oligarchs. He had a 
"good relationship" with President Boris Yeltsin's powerful daughter Tatyana, 
as well as with other members of Yeltsin's inner circle, and was the first 
businessman to join the president's exclusive Moscow tennis club.

But Berezovsky said the main reason for his influence with the Kremlin was his 
superior "intellectual capacity". He described Abramovich scathingly as "not a 
person of the first level" and said he was not talented enough to succeed in 
business on his own. "To get leverage you need to be smart …He [Abramovich] 
wasn't," Berezovsky said bluntly, conceding in written evidence that Abramovich 
was instead "very charming".

However, Abramovich's star lawyer, Jonathan Sumption QC, accused Berezovsky of 
inconsistencies. Berezovsky had publicly denied he was a Sibneft shareholder 
only to claim in 2001, once he had leftRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, that he and Patarkatsishvili 
actually owned half, the court heard.

The barrister said the oligarch had lied when he sued Forbes magazine for 
libel in 2001. In that case he had denied influencing Yeltsin through his 
daughter – something, Sumption said, Berezovsky now admitted. "Why did you deny 
it and then sign a statement of truth in support of your denial?" he asked. 
Speaking in English, and visibly flustered, Berezovsky answered: "It's a good 
question."

The packed court erupted in laughter. The judge, Mrs Justice Gloster, appeared 
unimpressed, chipping in: "Well, could you answer it please." Berezovsky said 
his lawyers had prepared the document, and he had not paid too much attention 
to it. Abramovich, who was in court, listened to the proceedings via a Russian 
translation, intently, occasionally rubbing his face.

Berezovsky asserts that Abramovich held his interest in Sibneft for him in 
trust, even though officially he was never a shareholder. Abramovich – who is 
still close to Russia's prime minister, Vladimir Putin – eventually gave him a 
$1.3bn pay-off. Berezovsky maintains this was a gross undervaluation for what 
his interest in the oil company was actually worth. Abramovich sold Sibneft to 
Gazprom in 2005.

Berezovsky said he agreed with Sumption's description of Russia in the 1990s 
as the "wild east". The oligarch admitted that corruption was widespread, but 
said that he personally "wasn't corrupt". But he said that under Yeltsin Russia 
was significantly less corrupt than today under Putin's authoritarian 
leadership, which scored 10 out of 10 for corruption compared with Yeltsin's "3 
or 4" out of 10.

Berezovsky that his main priority had been to secure Yeltsin's re-election as 
president in 1996 against the spectre of a communist comeback during closely 
fought elections. He said he had used his lobbying skills to ensure Sibneft won 
an auction for two Siberian oil companies as a way of raising money. His real 
goal, though, he said, was to support his loss-making ORT TV station, a crucial 
tool in Yeltsin's faltering re-election campaign.

The case is scheduled to last two months.
 