
GROUP A

Novak Djokovic, World No1

Form A breakthrough year in which he has played fantastic tennis, won three 
slams and established himself as the best in the world. His main issue going 
into the BarclaysATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> is tiredness, but if 
anyone deserves to be tired at this stage of the season it is him

Strengths He is the best counterpuncher in the game and has massively improved 
his serve

Weaknesses As mentioned, tiredness could be a factor after such a gruelling 
and epic year. Djokovic also has a shoulder injury which has been troubling him 
for months and forced him to pull out of Paris Masters last week. His fitness 
may not last these finals

Andy Murray, World No3

Form He is playing the best tennis of his life and having won five tournaments 
this year, will feel confident of adding another title before the end of the 
season

Strengths Along with a solid, consistent game, Murray is healthy, in good form 
and will fancy his chances on one of his favourite surfaces and in front of his 
home crowd

Weaknesses As ever with Murray, it is his ability to do it against the very 
best. Another year in which he has failed to win a slam and, on occasion, been 
blown away. That could happen again at the O2 Arena

David Ferrer, World No5

Form He is not a familiar face to fans in this country and even in his 
homeland he has been completely overshadowed byRafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>. But you do not get to world 
No5 without being a decent player and this has been another consistent year for 
the Spaniard

Strengths Ferrer is a great baseliner and he has a very strong forehand, too. 
He has also improved his movement on hard courts

Weaknesses Like Nadal, he does not like playing indoors, it just does not suit 
his game. There is not even the slightest chance of Ferrer winning

Tomas Berdych, World No6

Form After reaching the Wimbledon final in 2010, Berdych was expected to kick 
on this year, but there has been no other slam-final appearance and only one 
tournament win

Strengths Berdych has a great first serve, clean, dangerous ground strokes 
and, on his day, he can beat anyone

Weaknesses Having not reached another slam final since Wimbledon, Berdych 
lacks experience on the biggest stage

GROUP B

Rafael Nadal, World No2

Form Began the year as No1 but has seen that title go to Djokovic in a year 
when he has played lots of tennis and struggled physically. Won the French Open 
but it will hurt that he lost two other finals and so he will want to go out on 
a high at this tournament

Strengths His ground strokes remain an awesome weapon and no one in the game 
at the moment, not even Djokovic, has a will to win like Nadal He remains the 
ultimate warrior

Weaknesses Tiredness, mainly, but also Nadal does not like playing indoors. He 
wants to be surrounded by the elements, like wind, as this help him maximise 
his weapons, like the top-spin return

Roger Federer, World No4

Form By his standards Federer has a good year but not a great one. There have 
been no slam wins but he arrives in London after winning consecutive 
tournaments, in Basel and Paris, and so will be in confident mood

Strengths Federer is the defending champion and likes playing indoors. He is 
also the most in-form player coming into this event

Weaknesses After 16 slams, it is now a case of maintaining motivation and 
focus for Federer, which he can struggle with. If he does not come into this 
tournament with a full ambition to win it, then he will fail

Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, World No7

Form Tsonga is the most exciting player in the world right now. He has been a 
joy to watch all year. Having reached the final of the Paris Masters last week, 
he should also be in confident mood

Strengths The Frenchman has a powerful serve and always plays with his heart 
on his sleeve

Weaknesses Only his second appearance in this competition and, like Berdych, 
he lacks big-stage experience

Mardy Fish, World No8

Form The only American in the draw and the new American No1 after ousting Andy 
Roddick. Fish is one of the most improved players on the circuit but is 
struggling with injuries

Strengths Fish is a true serve-and-volley player and also a real threat 
indoors. This tournament should suit him

Weaknesses His fitness is a major concern – he may not even make the start of 
this event. Even if he does he may not last all the way through

Becker's verdict

Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> to finish first and second 
in Group A and Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal to finish first and second in 
Group B. Then, Murray to beat Nadal and Federer to beat Djokovic in the 
semi-finals. Murray v Federer final: "It's too close to call, but this might 
just be Murray's year."

Sunday's matches

Not before 2pm: Federer (Sui) vs Tsonga (Fr). Not before 8pm: Nadal (Sp) v 
Fish (US)

Monday's matches

Not before 2pm: Murray (GB) v Ferrer (Sp). Not before 8pm: Djokovic (Ser) v 
Berdych (Cz)

(Tickets still available via Ticketmaster)
 