

For Kees Kruythoff, Unilever’s president in North America, a sustainability 
moment of truth occurred when his company faced an expensive recall. An audit 
in Brazil revealed a packaging issue that could have led consumers to 
misunderstand which container held a beverage and which one contained cleaning 
fluid.

Unilever’s key guiding principles quickly came to the fore. “When we’ve had 
recalls in our business, there were no trade-offs to consider,” Kruythoff says. 
“We’d already made the decision long before the actual event … If there is any 
doubt, we will fully recall it. Wealways will.” 

It’s a bold policy, but when asked to specify its costs to his company, 
Kruythoff waves off the question, indicating that it misses the point. “Like 
any global company, we’ve had some recalls,” he says. “No doubt, in some 
instances, the associated short-term costs were substantial. However, that does 
not make those costs relevant – not when compared with our company being true 
to who we say we are. This is the accounting that truly matters.”

Indeed, Kruythoff argues, long term thinking and the determination to fulfill 
a purpose greater than profit alone are at the core of Unilever’s self-concept. 
He notes that the company was founded during the Victorian era specifically to 
address what was then the biggest issue in many people’s daily lives: hygiene. 
“Lord Lever made hygiene commonplace. Right from the beginning,Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/unilever> was built to 
contribute to the biggest issues in society,” he says, emphasizing that that 
purpose continues to the present day. “Ever since I joined this company two 
decades ago, I have seen that our people – and leaders in particular – are 
expected to act accordingly.”

In the case of the potentially confusing Brazilian packaging, Unilever’s 
values were on display. “We immediately recalled the whole lot, even beyond the 
affected product, so that consumers were not confused. These are things which 
are absolutely non-negotiable,” Kruythoff insists.

As for the market fallout, Kruythoff describes it as minimal. “The important 
question was hownot proceeding with the recall might have hurt our brand 
loyalty,” he explains. “Not acting would have been a surprise and a departure 
from how we do business.”


Why sustainability requires resilience

It’s easy to talk about sustainability in the abstract, but as Kruythoff’s 
experience demonstrates, swift and effective implementation requires strong 
will and constancy of purpose. When companies face concrete choices of how to 
implement their financial, environmental, and social ideals, their fundamental 
resilience comes into play.

Resilience refers to an organization’s ability to remain cohesive and composed 
under persistent internal or external stress, and to effectively overcome 
resistance. In a resilient organization, people take responsibility for their 
actions – especially when things go wrong – knowing that the organization has 
their back.

As Unilever’s experience indicates, cultures of purpose go a significant step 
further by demonstratingproactive resilience. They make difficult decisions in 
anticipation of a challenging future, rather than waiting to recover from a 
difficult past. Companies with this form of resilience trade the potential of 
massive failure at the core of the organization for the certainty of frequent – 
but small and comparatively cheap – failures at its frontier. Such 
organizations tend to be deeply principled and forward-focused, and so are far 
less likely to find themselves in dire predicaments.

What I noticed in my conversations with Kees Kruythoff was his pride in 
working for a company that is proactive and highly principled. In saying “We 
always will,” he revealed a strong sense of belonging.

In many companies, announcing a recall would unnerve employees and erode 
morale. But at Unilever, doing so can actually improve morale because it 
tangibly reinforces the unique sense of security that comes from being part of 
a company fortified by a clear and constant purpose. Over time, companies that 
know what they stand for and always act accordingly will also earn 
extraordinarily high levels of trust from customers and investors. This, in 
turn, creates a virtuous cycle, increasing the company’s resilience and 
proactivity – and further improving its market position.

Resilience also carries over into an organization’s internal interactions. A 
highly resilient culture is strong, tightly linked, mutually supportive, and 
able to sustain tremendous pressure from the outside. There is very clear trust 
and respect among its members, and it deals with conflict in a constructive 
way. Indeed, Kruythoff, claims, Unilever even welcomes avowed skeptics with 
open arms. He describes one session in which 25 executives gathered to forge a 
strategy for emerging markets: “We invited a powerful analyst for consumer 
goods, who was openly critical of Unilever’s performance,” he recalls. The 
company was clearly willing – indeed eager – to hear criticism. By bringing a 
pointed critic into its midst, Unilever ensured that it could shape the 
dialogue, rather than merely react to it.

This same thinking applied when Unilever acquired Ben & Jerry’s, an iconic ice 
cream company with a deeply ingrained independent flair. Although the 
acquisition made Ben & Jerry’s a wholly owned subsidiary of Unilever, the 
business continued to be guided by a separate board that included its colorful 
founders Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield. Not many corporations would 
contemplate such a construct for governing a prized new acquisition, but 
Unilever saw embracing voices with which it might sometimes disagree as a key 
to ensuring a major transaction’s long term success.


Building such a culture in your company begins with understanding its 
foundations. As Unilever’s proactive recall demonstrates, resilient cultures 
energetically act on constructive feedback, even when doing so is painful. 
Second, resilient cultures are highly cognizant of future challenges and 
willing to take risks to head them off. Third, resilience is built on a sense 
of belonging and trust: people throughout the organization take ownership of 
its purpose and trust that others – individually and collectively – are eager 
to do the right thing.

Many companies agonize about recalls. Unilever does not. Because they already 
agonized over the bigger values long before, the company’s leaders and 
employees never hesitate to make the hard choices that will sustain the 
company’s respected place in society.

Christoph Lueneburger, author of A Culture of Purpose: How to Choose the Right 
People and Make the Right People Choose You 
<http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1118814568.html>, founded 
the sustainability practice and currently leads the private equity practice at
Egon Zehnder <http://www.egonzehnder.com/us/>, the world’s largest 
privately-held executive search and talent strategy firm.


The values-led business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/values-led-business> hub is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.



 