
In Athens, Alabama, Tony the tiny taxi driver is showing me his gun. It says 
in the big book of cliche that a Guardian writer in the American south 
shouldn't lazily mention the fact that lots of people here carry firearms, but 
it seems worth noting because Tony the tiny taxi driver is threatening to shoot 
somebody. The book of cliche also bans hackneyed mentions of Alabama being a 
breeding ground for great American soul singers; we're just a few miles from
Muscle Shoals 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jun/19/jason-isbell-muscle-shoals> after 
all. This also seems worth noting, though. Tony the tiny taxi driver might be 
about to shoot Brittany Howard ofAlabama Shakes 
<http://www.alabamashakes.com/home>.

We pull up in a clearing on the lip of the woods. There is a beaten-up 
trailer, a constellation of wrecked cars around it.
"I hope this is the right address," he says, "Cos if not, we're trespassing 
and I'm gonna have to shoot whoever comes out of that trailer before they shoot 
you." Brittany opens the door unarmed and welcomes us inside. Assured, Tony 
packs his pistol in his pants and drives his jeep back down the dirt track to 
the road. An American pitbull watches him leave.

Brittany has a nuclear hangover. Yesterday was her last night out in her 
hometown of Athens (population 22,000) for the foreseeable future. This is 
because she starts her new job soon. She used to be a postwoman. Next week she 
becomes a star.

"Suddenly I'm having a hell of a time," she says. There is normally the ghost 
of a cigarette behind her. "I went into a sports bar and everyone knew who I 
was. Well, not really. They just watched 'the thing'. Everybody got our back. 
Everybody know we're doin' it."

"The thing" was a performance on Conan O'Brien's talkshow, Conan 
<http://news.twentyfourbit.com/2012/02/watch-alabama-shakes-on-conan/>. Most 
bands must wait until their third album before Conan calls. Brittany quit the 
post office last November.

We clamour for retro flavourings, anything that reminds us of time when the 
world of music seemed less full of wankers; hence the welcome soft-burn 
blues-drawl of theBlack Keys <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/black-keys>. But 
Alabama Shakes make these memories taste like fresh produce somehow. They're 
not imitating the Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin or Janis Joplin, they just sound 
like they've heard nothing since then. Maybe they were buried 50 years ago and 
have just been dug up. You can bury something for as long as you like: if you 
preserve it right it will still taste good.

'I bring a little bit of that punk with me. The energy, man; I can still 
thrash. I can't play the guitar very well but I can fake it' – Brittany Howard
 Onstage at the Boston Arms, Tufnell Park. Photograph: Marilyn Kingwill 
Drummer Steve Johnson first heard Brittany sing when he was 17: "It was in a 
garage right across Highway 72, near here. She was 13. But she could really 
scream. That was 2003."

"I was in a punk band called Kerosene Swim Team," she says. "It's what you do 
in Athens when you're bored and you can just yell about stuff. It's stupid, 
it's punk music. It's terrible … But I bring a little bit of that punk with me. 
The energy, man, I can still thrash. I can't play the guitar very well but I 
can fake it. I can scream. I can get away with it."

"Terrible," says Steve, "is an understatement."

Five years later Steve was working in the only music store in town when 
Brittany invited him to come and play with her and school friend, bassist Zac 
Cockrell. A demo they cut as "the Shakes" found its way into the hands of 
guitarist Heath Fogg, who'd left the same school a few years previously. He 
asked them to open for his band and discovered that night what everyone else 
was about to. A voice that enters through the pores, not the ears, that 
freefalls from growl to twisted whimper. A noise that has been locked inside a 
heart for hundreds of years, desperate for you to hear it, suddenly released. 
He joined the band and it worked.

"This is special," says Brittany. "Actually, no. The fact that we're all from 
here … It's not just special, it's miraculous." WhenAlabama Shakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes> step onstage it can look 
like things are about to cut loose in the science department but when they play 
they rock, their music swooping from the heights of hope to the depths where 
there are none. And it is honest. When Lana Del Rey says she is "born to die", 
it is a notion stripped of sentiment by the ribbon in which it's wrapped. You 
don't believe her. "Socks to darn" perhaps, but not "born to die". The words 
should be indestructible but they are fleeting. When, on Alabama Shakes' lead 
single Hold On, Brittany sings "Bless my heart/Bless my soul/Didn't think I'd 
make it to 22 years old" you don't just believe her, you want to politely 
remind her to sort out her life insurance. The songs become pleas you can't 
answer.

The band put together more demos in the first half of 2011 while holding down 
day jobs and expecting very little. Steve worked at a local nuclear power 
plant. "I think he wore the whole suit," says Heath, "he could be a radioactive 
drummer," which is apt, because he is as he plays, quick and tense like a man 
with a short half-life. One of their demos landed the band a sight-unseen 
support slot with Drive-by Truckers, which sent them on their way to the CMJ 
Festival in New York last October. At least one of the band had never been on a 
plane before.

This handful of live shows spawned a million Facebook likes-worth of hype – 
given that they were a rare combination of a rock band with the muscle of the 
American pitbull outside, but built around Brittany's mesmeric, soulful stage 
presence. They came home and handed in their notices. Which is the best thing 
that can happen to any band, isn't it?

'I had a good job. I made way more money at the nuclear power plant than I 
have yet playing music' – Steve Johnson
 Onstage in Austin, Texas. Photograph: Heather Kennedy/WireImage 
"Are you joking? It's scary!" says Brittany. 

Zac nods: "I didn't wanna quit my job. I was worried about it."

"Me too," says Steve. " I had a good job. I made way more money at the power 
plant than I have yet playin' music."

People say it's early days, but sitting here in Brittany's dad's trailer, we 
are reminded how early some days are. And yet, Alabama Shakes are the most 
talked-about new band in the world.

Conan came calling. Jack White had them over to his place. Robert Plant turned 
up at a show. The likes of Adele and Arctic Monkeys Alex Turner quickly spoke 
of their love for the band. Even Jamie Oliver, a man whose patronage previously 
made a nation scorch their retinas by briefly staring into the blinding light 
of Toploader, tweeted his excitement about their debut album, Boys & Girls. 
Russell Crowe showed up at their first ever London gig, at north London Irish 
pub theBoston Arms 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/feb/26/alabama-shakes-brittany-howard-review>
.

"Cool," smiles Brittany, "they listen to music. They're people too." She 
quickly changes topic, to sing the praises of what she calls "the best burrito 
in America" (naturally, we believe her) and we form a little convoy to go and 
eat one. There is a bang and a crunch as Brittany reverses her car. Nobody can 
see the dog any more.

Right about the time Brittany is reversing the car – that her dad was planning 
to sell – into a tree, and her dog is sleepily emerging from its kennel to see 
what the noise is, tragically, 2,000 miles away, Whitney Houston is being found 
dead in the bathtub of an LA hotel. It says somewhere in the big book of cliche 
that we will thus link or compare the two women somehow, or suggest that a 
mantle has been passed, them both being great American voices and all. But we 
won't because we're busy listening to one of the most exciting frontwomen of 
recent times on the phone to her dad, trying to convince him to sell her the 
car at daughter rates before he finds out about the accident, while we stand 
beside the interstate eating what could well be the best burrito in the States. 
She should be listened to, she speaks the truth.
 