
At the height of last year's oil-spattered summer, the gloomiest doom-mongers 
predicted BP would be bankrupt by now. But on Wednesday Britain's biggest 
company will reach the first anniversary of the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster 
which killed 11 men, fouled hundreds of miles of coastline, cost at least $20bn 
(£12bn) and turnedBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> into one of the 
most hated enterprises in America.

You would have thought a few tough lessons would have sunk in, but BP marked 
the run-up to this milestone by scoring another perfectly executed own goal. 
The company barred five gulf coast activists from entering its annual meeting 
on Thursday, even though they had travelled from Louisiana and Texas and had 
legitimate paperwork entitling them to speak as proxy representatives for 
shareholders.

One of them, shrimp farmer Diane Wilson, proceeded to anoint herself in an 
oil-like syrup in the foyer of the ExCeL centre in London's Docklands, shouting 
that she wanted BP's former boss, Tony Hayward, to be charged with 
manslaughter. She brandished what she described as a "real cheap little globe" 
adorned with the words "Black Planet Award" which she had hoped to present to 
BP's directors.

Wilson, who pulled a similar stunt in Washington during last year's 
congressional hearings on BP, is not a particularly subtle ambassador for those 
whose livelihoods were hit by the Deepwater Horizon spill, but her shrill, 
righteous indignation is shared by many Americans. And a line of burly security 
guards blocking a door is precisely the heartless multinational image BP needs 
to avoid as it struggles to repair its shattered reputation.

When challenged on the incident, BP's soporific Scandinavian chairman, 
Carl-Henric Svanberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carl-henric-svanberg-bp>, who speaks with 
all the passion of a secondary-school geography teacher, intoned: "Security 
didn't allow them in because they thought they might disrupt the meeting. I 
can't do anything else but accept that advice." Actually, Carl-Henric, you 
could easily have done something else – rejected that advice.

BP claims to have "reset" itself since the Deepwater Horizon disaster. It has 
ponied up all the cash demanded of it by the White House, and has co-operated 
with a government-appointed claims adjudicator who is evaluating the claims of 
fishermen, hoteliers and homeowners. It's an inexact science, but efforts are 
being made to be fair.

There's no question that some are still out of pocket. Shrimp caught off the 
Louisiana coast have consistently been tested as safe, but consumers are still 
not buying them. Self-employed businesspeople who can't back up their claims 
with paperwork are having a hard time. And it's hard to judge "indirect" claims 
– say of suppliers to businesses shattered by the spill.

But elsewhere there are anecdotal reports of "spillionaires" whose income has 
risen thanks to BP. And some BP cash has been squandered; an investigation by 
the Associated Press found police tasers, sports utility vehicles and iPads 
purchased by local authorities with BP grants. Florida's tourism agency 
diverted $32m to counties around Miami on its east coast that were unaffected 
by the spill.

BP is trying hard to move on; a $30bn divestment programme is under way to 
clean up its balance sheet. Unfortunately, though, new chief executiveBob Dudley
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-dudley> (who plays well in America, 
having grown up in Mississippi) has messed up his first big deal. A $16bn share 
exchange with Russia's state-owned Rosneft, intended to open access to oil 
reserves in the Siberian Arctic, has come spectacularly unstuck because of 
opposition from a group of oligarchs behind BP's other Russian joint venture, 
TNK-BP. The Kremlin, which was supposed to be on BP's side, has gone 
inconveniently quiet. That's a big blow to the credibility of Dudley, who is 
supposed to be a seasoned Kremlinologist.

There are other opportunities in the pipeline – Dudley reeled off a list of 
exploration ventures including Jordan, Brazil, the South China Sea and 
Australia. And BP's Sunrise project in Canada is a late attempt to cash in on 
the frenetic rush surrounding Alberta's oil sands. Environmentalists loathe the 
oil sands, but strategically they are lucrative – the US wants to cut the 
amount of oil it imports from unstable parts of the world and Canada is judged 
a friendlier source than Libya.

Some 80,000 people are employed by BP, which pays as much as £5bn tax in a 
good year. It's a relief for UK plc that it has emerged from the crisis with 
its limbs intact, but it will take years to heal the wounds left by Deepwater 
Horizon. One fishing boat owner, Tracy Kuhns, says: "The bottom line is: none 
of us – none of us – have the right to cause harm to someone else's business or 
a person without paying the cost."
 