
BP's attempt to rebuild its public image after the worst oil spill in US 
history has been dealt a blow by court documents showing it was willing to do a 
major deal with Russian billionaires whom it regarded as "crooks and thugs" to 
gain access to the country's vast oil wealth.

The damaging allegations have come to light at a critical time for BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp>, which faces a criminal investigation 
by the US justice department while preparing to fight a massive legal case in 
New Orleans over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill.

North American rival Norex Petroleum is seeking $1bn damages in its case at 
the New York supreme court as it argues that BP and its Russian business 
partner, TNK, have benefited from oil assets that were seized in the late 1990s.
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is important to BP – its 
joint-venture, TNK-BP, produces a quarter of its oil. At the heart of the 
dispute is the alleged misappropriation of the Yugraneft oilfield in Siberia, 
which Norex claims has generated $1bn in oil revenues in the past decade.

In 2003, BP announced a $6.75bn (£4.2bn) deal to acquire a 50% holding in 
TyumenOil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> – TNK – which was backed 
by Alfa Access Renova (AAR), a consortium controlled by four of the country's 
richest businessmen, Mikhail Fridman, German Khan, Leonard Blavatnik and Viktor 
Vekselberg.

A BP internal briefing, obtained by Norex and published through the New York 
court procedure, says: "Sources close to TNK believe [that the] local oil 
industry [has] been infested with criminal elements long before Alfa took over 
TNK."

BP itself suffered losses when the Yugraneft field was taken over by TNK and 
another confidential memo, dated 9 September 1999, and also revealed in the 
court papers, described the tension: "[Former TNK chief executive, Simon] Kukes 
noted … TNK was purportedly characterised by BP Amoco as 'crooks and thugs'."

Russia's image as a place for foreign companies to do business has been 
tainted by various high-profile court actions. The current Russian president, 
Dmitry Medvedev, has repeatedly expressed his concern at levels of corruption 
inside his country, while a new book byGuardian reporter Luke Harding, called 
Mafia State, has laid bare the wider political problems of the country.

At present, Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich is battling his former friend 
Boris Berezovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky>, the 
Kremlin critic and political exile, at the high court in London. Berezovsky is 
suing Abramovich for more than $5bn in the world's biggest private litigation 
case. The two men both benefited from an infamous privatisation programme under 
President Boris Yeltsin, where state oil and other groups were all but given 
away to a small group of oligarchs.

Berezovsky claims Abramovich betrayed him after he fell out with the Kremlin 
in 2000 and fled to Britain. He says the Chelsea owner took advantage of his 
political difficulties with Vladimir Putin, forcing him to sell his interests 
in Russian oil company Sibneft at a knockdown price. Berezovsky also says that 
Abramovich cheated him in another deal with the Russian aluminium firm Rusal.

When BP formally teamed up with TNK, it asked for a clause to be written into 
the contract that would remove it from any liability in the event of a 
successful action by Norex. The Canadian company believes this is a "smoking 
gun", as it says it shows BP realised that the Yugraneft field could resurface 
as an issue. Norex's chairman, Alex Rotzang, said BP made a "deal with the 
devil" by striking the TNK deal in 2003.

An official spokesman for AAR declined to comment on the affair, while BP 
argued that there was "no merit" in the Norex suit and said it had moved to 
have it dismissed.

"The allegations made by Norex all involve conduct that predates the formation 
of TNK-BP and had nothing to do with BP," said a spokesman from the oil 
company's London head office. He went on to rubbish the idea of a "smoking gun" 
and said that the special clause was "to protect itself against exactly the 
kind of meritless claims Norex is bringing"..

Privately BP executives dismissed the Norex documents as old material and 
pointed to previous failed attempts to bring legal action in the US against TNK 
as proof of their lack of merit.

But BP will not welcome any further legal action or bad publicity at a time 
when its share price is still badly dented from the Macondo well blowout.The 
British company has been working hard over the last 18 months to try to repair 
a reputation sullied by the Deepwater Explorer accident but also erase memories 
of the Texas City fire and pollution problems in Alaska which have forced out 
two of the company's three previous chief executives.
 