
The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, has said he does 
not believe there was a deal between the commonwealth and the Western 
Australian government over litigation surrounding the collapsed Bell Group.

In a 30-minute statement to the Senate on Monday, the attorney general sought 
to distance himself from conversations between the former treasurerJoe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, and the WA treasurer, 
Mike Nahan, in 2015, which prompted Labor to declare Brandis was throwing 
Hockey “under a bus.”

Brandis said he had no personal knowledge of the discussions between the two 
men until March 2016, and correspondence from the commonwealth to the WA 
government does not “evidence such an agreement.”

Penny Wong says Brandis has thrown Joe Hockey under a bus – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/28/turnbulls-agenda-hangs-in-balance-as-minor-party-support-skyrockets-politics-live>
Brandis is under renewed political pressure because of a report in the West 
Australian last Friday 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/33318001/1-billion-bell-group-bombshell/#page1>
 alleging that the attorney general instructed the then solicitor general, 
Justin Gleeson, not to run a particular argument in the high court when a 
creditor of the collapsed Bell Group, which is associated with the 
controversial businessman, Alan Bond, and its liquidator challenged the 
constitutionality of a Western Australian law to take control of the group’s 
$1.8bn.


The report in the West Australian alleges that Brandis told Gleeson that an 
understanding had been reached between the federal and WA governments to end 
two decades of litigation in relation to the Bell Group.

Nahan told the WA parliament on 18 May 2016 there was an “understanding” with 
the commonwealth that it would not oppose the Bell Act.

But Brandis said on Monday he was unaware of any understanding between the two 
governments, and “the only written record of those dealings … do not, in my 
view, constitute or evidence such an agreement”.

“There has been much mention of an asserted agreement between the commonwealth 
and the WA government,” Brandis said Monday.

“If WA ministers considered their dealings with Mr Hockey to constitute some 
form of agreement, I could only observe that the only written record of those 
dealings, the exchange of letters between Dr Nahan and Mr Hockey of April 2015, 
do not, in my view, constitute or evidence such an agreement.”

“In any event, whatever may have been discussed between Mr Hockey and Dr 
Nahan, neither I nor [minister for revenue] Ms O’Dwyer was aware of it at the 
time.”

Brandis added there was never any agreement between himself and the WA 
attorney general, Michael Mischin, in relation to courses of action taken in 
the high court proceedings.

The attorney general said every decision he had taken in the case “protected 
the interests of the commonwealth.”

Brandis said he had supported the decision of the ATO to intervene in the high 
court matter, and then he had accepted advice from Gleeson that the 
commonwealth should also intervene in the case.

He acknowledged that during preliminary conversations about how to proceed 
with the case with the tax office and his cabinet colleague, Kelly O’Dwyer, 
“one of the options I considered” was the ATO not intervening in the 
proceedings. He also acknowledged that his initial view was it was unnecessary 
for the commonwealth to intervene.

Brandis said he changed his mind about the commonwealth intervening after 
taking advice from Gleeson. “I saw the force of what Mr Gleeson put to me and I 
accepted his advice.”

Asked on Sky News after his statement to parliament whether he had verbally 
instructed Gleeson not to run a particular argument in the high court, as 
suggested in the news report in the West Australian late last week, Brandis 
said: “Well look, I’m not going to disclose legal advice.”

He said it was normal to discuss “a range of options and the posture and 
strategy that you should take” with your barrister before a court proceeding. 
“Now I’m not going to into that matter. I’m not going to go into that matter. 
Because it’s not appropriate,” Brandis said.

Pressed further in parliament during question time about whether he had asked 
Gleeson to run dead in the Bell proceedings, Brandis said he did not want to go 
into discussions that attracted legal professional privilege.

Timeline: how a tangled WA court case led to Brandis-Gleeson stoush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/25/timeline-tangled-western-australia-court-case-brandis-gleeson-stoush>
He said his initial instinct was the commonwealth didn’t need to intervene 
“because it was a revenue case”, and he’d had a discussion with the solicitor 
general about whether the commonwealth should intervene.

But Brandis said Gleeson had persuaded him about the merits of intervening, 
and had sought particular instructions about arguments to make in relation to 
corporations law matters, and “I gave him the instructions he sought.”

In the house, the prime minister was asked whether the attorney general 
verbally instructed the solicitor-general “not to run a particular argument in 
the Bell case in the high court”.

Malcolm Turnbull said he didn’t know.

“The shadow attorney general is asking me what transpired in a conversation 
between two distinguished members of the bar at which I was not present,” the 
prime minister told the house.

“Obviously I don’t know what transpired between them but the attorney general 
has set out his account of the events. It is comprehensive and I refer 
honourable members to it.”

Labor declared that Brandis in his parliamentary statement had thrown “Joe 
Hockey under a bus”.

“How convenient that you go after the bloke who can’t defend himself,” the 
Labor Senate leader,Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong>, declared during the 
parliamentary debate following the Brandis statement.


Wong asked Brandis whether the government intended to recall Hockey from his 
post in Washington to answer questions about the alleged agreement with the WA 
government. Brandis later told reporters the episode did not reflect negatively 
on Hockey. “No, it doesn’t, not slightly.”

During an interview outside the Sky News studios on Monday Brandis suggested 
he had not told Gleeson to run dead. “Well, that is not the truth and he did 
not,” he said.
 