
The headlines from the Labour party conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/01/labour-conference> may 
have been about the "chumps" at the Sun, about "fighters not quitters", about 
real social democratic analysis of the economic crisis, as rightwing market 
fundamentalism was attacked. There was even the promise of legislation to 
restrict bankers' bonuses, plus a commitment to free childcare with a new 
national care service for the elderly and a raft of other policy announcements 
for activists to really take the fight to the doorstep.

But something else took place that was quietly significant; beneath the radar 
a generational shift is happening in the party as Young Labour activists worked 
alongside perennial conference agitators to forge the way for ahistoric change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/30/new-labour-rupert-murdoch>
 in the way Labour party policy will be created.

The conference voted by 67% to 33%, with majorities in both the constituency 
and trade union sections, to open up the policymaking process by introducingone 
member one vote <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_member,_one_vote> for the 
party's policymaking body; the National Policy Forum. This may seem noteworthy 
only to political hacks and those involved in the structures of the party but 
it is more widely significant because it vastly increases democracy inside the 
party, giving every member the chance to vote for their NPF representative. 
This will increase the diversity of those involved in the policymaking process 
and give policymaking in the party real legitimacy with all members.

This change could signal the start of a re-connection and a re-alignment with 
a new type of politics, one in which no voice or section of the party's support 
base is shut out. There will now be a much greater chance of those from a wider 
social and ethnic backgrounds being elected to work on policy development as 
those from localLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party's in 
working class areas will now have as much chance of getting elected as those 
given the nod by the current party bureaucracy.

By empowering ordinary members to have a say and create a direct relationship 
between representatives deciding policy, this change creates an opportunity to 
re-connect the party to its roots, so that policy does not have to be 
constantly triangulated to reflect the desires of the aspirational middle 
classes without meeting the material concerns of the working class.

The dead hand of the party machine has been shrugged off in the first major 
extension of party democracy in over a decade as young members and seasoned 
activists came together to ensure that the concerted effort to defeat the rule 
change by party staff was overcome. Conference delegates always face a barrage 
of lobbying by ministers and party officials, often in the name of "unity" as 
backroom deals and haranguing take place away from the media spotlight – this 
campaign showed that this conference was not just a fight-back for the 
election, but a fight-back for the very party itself.

It signals the growing calls from across the party for a more organic way of 
developing policy and for a loosening up of the command and control culture 
previously so ruthlessly executed to stage manage conference decisions. After 
all, a party that can't trust its members won't win the trust of voters. Young 
Labour activists drove the campaign for this change; working to convince trade 
unionists and constituency delegates alike – because there is a realisation 
among the next generation that a new more pluralist party must be campaigned 
for and won.

This was made possible by a growing number of young activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/29/labour-conference-youth> 
who see democracy as not just a means to an end but an end in itself; a tool 
for engaging, empowering, revitalising and re-building the grassroots of the 
party. This ultimately means re-building the Labour party as a movement, not 
just a vehicle to capture political power. It is this fresh, constructive 
attitude from many in Young Labour – where the politics of ideas are backed up 
with the politics organising – that will hold the party in good stead for the 
tough fight ahead and will help provide the basis on which a new politics can 
flourish no matter what the result of the next election.
 