
President Bush has taken a welcome step by inviting the G-20 to Washington 
<http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/world/la-fg-bush23-2008oct23,0,877363.story>
 on November 15 to discuss the global financial crisis. This meeting should put 
in place a stability package that includes the developing countries and lays 
the groundwork for the creation of a new multilateral financial architecture.

Over the past five years, GDP per capita in the world's developing economies 
has been rising faster than in rich countries for the first time in history. 
According to statistics released by the World Bank last week, the developing 
world has pulled 232 million people over the global poverty line of $2.50 per 
day since 1999.

These gains in economic growth and poverty alleviation are the result of an 
economic model that significantlydeviates from the Washington Consensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/14/economy-development>. 
Nations like China, India, South Africa and Brazil have all recognised that 
markets and trade are important for development, but they have also shown the 
world that markets must be guided by appropriate governmental policy. In the
World Trade Organisation <http://www.wto.org/>, where each nation has an equal 
vote, the developing world has worked hard to preserve the ability to deploy 
the mix of state and market policies that have been working for them.

Until a week ago it was thought that poorer nations were "de-coupled" from the 
current economic crisis because they had piled up reserves and their banks 
weren't heavily involved in mortgage markets. Now it is clear that the crisis, 
which was not of their making, isat their doorstep 
<http://afp.google.com/article/ALeqM5ib3xv8TuVnwXRBcoVP_rMOSkn12w>.

Much of the economic boom in the developing world was fueled by commodities 
exports. Demand for exports has declined as prospects of a recession increase, 
causing a sharp decline in the prices of those exports. Global credit, which is 
crucial to exporters, has all but frozen. Banks in developing countries weren't 
heavily involved in the mortgage business, but they did swap with and borrow 
money from banks in developed countries, creating a credit squeeze for the 
local economy as well. If that wasn't enough, rising interest rates and credit 
tightening has strengthened the dollar, and currencies across the developing 
world are losing value.

World leaders should swiftly coordinate interest rate cuts and provide massive 
liquidity to markets in developing countries. New capital should also come from 
the larger developing countries, like China, and from the IMF's new short-term 
liquidity facility.

Developing countries can't do this on their own. Many of these nations simply 
don't have the capital. Some have reserves from the commodity boom but are 
draining them to save their currencies. What's more, when developing nations 
unilaterally mimic a rich country's methods of dealing with this crisis by 
nationalising private assets, such actions can instill even less confidence in 
a developing country's markets and provoke more capital flight.

New capital can be used in the short term to fend off runs on their 
currencies. Just as important, new credit and capital can be coupled with 
coordinating governmental policies to build the productive capacities of 
promising and strategic domestic enterprises and toward domestic consumers to 
stimulate demand. With jobs becoming scarce and food prices still high, small 
farmers are also among the strategic sectors worthy of government attention.

Non-OECD countries are now half the global economy and more than half the 
destination of OECD exports. Maintaining the growth in developing countries not 
only saves them from meltdown but can also help rich countries dig themselves 
out of a downturn with new demand.

Under no circumstances should a developing country's capital infusion have 
IMF-like conditionalities. Historically, the IMF often gave loans only if 
recipients deregulated markets, privatised industries, slashed government 
budgets and devalued currencies. A new book,Development Redefined: How the 
Market Met Its Match 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Development-Redefined-International-Studies-Intensives/dp/1594515239>
 by Robin Broad and John Cavanagh, documents how IMF conditionality often 
caused irreversible social and environmental costs on recipient countries and 
created a global backlash against the IMF and other international institutions. 
There is simply no legitimate reason for these conditionalities today. Indeed, 
it was the deregulation in rich countries that helped get us into this economic 
mess in the first place.

Finally, the global summit should be the first step toward a "Bretton Woods II 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/10/23/AR2008102302984.html>
" that supports multilateralism and policy diversity as core principles. This 
summit must be dedicated to setting counter-cyclical capital standards, 
regulating all parts of financial markets (including the rating agencies) and 
creating a credible lender of last resort. Under the current system, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Belgium have more votes in the IMF than China, 
India and Brazil. A truly multilateral organisation must have a one country-one 
vote system. Without a new infusion of capital and a multilateral approach to 
reform, the November meetings will be one step forward, two steps backward.
 