
In setting out his agenda for Bretton Woods II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/globaleconomy-g8>, 
Professor Jeffrey Sachs has gone far. He proposesa Tobin tax 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tobin_tax> – a tax that has been a bete noire of 
the international financial industry and hence the rich country's, especially 
US, governments. His rejection of emission trading in favour of a 
straightforward carbon tax is also bold – and in my view correct.

There are many things, however, that he could have added in relation to the 
reform of the international financial system. For example, he could have 
proposed the introduction of a country bankruptcy code that will enable orderly 
sovereign debt restructuring. He could have talked not only of expanding the 
capital adequacy requirement, but also making it counter-cyclical, rather than 
pro-cyclical as it currently is. More strict regulations of tax havens and 
private equity funds, which have greatly contributed to increasing opacity in 
the financial market, should also have been mentioned. He could also have 
talked about the credit rating agencies. In light of the critical role they 
play in today's financial system and the damages they have inflicted by 
blessing all those toxic assets, these agencies need to be much more heavily 
regulated or even replaced by an international public body. All of these would 
have been compatible with his overall approach, so the differences between us 
in this regard are a matter of emphasis rather than of principles.

However, I have some disagreements with Sachs's vision of how to reform the 
IMF, the World Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf>, and the world 
trading system.

As for Sachs's proposal to turn the IMF into a proper lender-of-last-resort, I 
fear that a vastly strengthened IMF without a serious reform of its missions 
and its governance structure is likely to make things even worse. The IMF has 
caused great damage to developing (and former socialist) economies that have 
come under its tutelage by insisting on deflationary macroeconomic policies and 
premature financial de-regulation and opening up. Without abandoning these 
policies, an expanded IMF will be even more capable of inflicting damages on 
its client countries.

Of course, the IMF has been able to continue with these problematic policies 
because the suffering countries do not have much say in the running of the 
organisation. Therefore, the voting shares in the IMF (and in the World Bank) 
need to be re-distributed in favour of developing countries. This is partly to 
reflect the dramatic changes in international economic power balances since its 
foundation, but more importantly to increase the voice of the "customers" 
(mostly developing countries), when there is no competitor to whom dissatisfied 
customers can turn.

I am also not persuaded by Sachs's development strategy. I am all in favour of 
achieving the millennium development goals as soon as possible, but, unlike 
what its middle name suggests, the MDG is mainly about providing basic needs 
(health, education, and poverty reduction) and little about development in the 
true sense of the world – expansion and upgrading a country's productive 
capabilities. True, making individuals more productive through better health 
and education will increase a country's productive capabilities, but there is 
only so much that can be achieved through individual improvements. A lot of 
productive capabilities in modern economies need to be accumulated in the form 
of organisational routines and institutional memories in (public, private, and 
cooperative) productive enterprises through actual production experiences. To 
put it graphically, what really distinguish the US or Germany, on the one hand, 
and the Philippines or Nigeria, on the other hand, are their Boeings and 
Volkswagens, and not their economists or medical doctors. The achievement of 
the MDGs is a noble goal in itself, but it is not the same as development.

Even more problematic is Sachs's support for "aid for trade" deal. In this 
deal, developing countries are asked to liberalise their trade in order to get 
the additional foreign aid that will enable them to make extra investment in 
skills and infrastructure. However, trade liberalisation will destroy, and make 
it very difficult to newly set up in the future, the very locales of 
accumulation of productive capabilities, namely, productive enterprises in 
high-productivity industries. This is why all of today's rich countries – 
starting from 18th century Britain and 19th century US and Germany, down to 
late 20th century South Korea and Taiwan – did not first invest in education 
and skills in general and then developed new industries. They first set up new 
enterprises with the help of (intelligently used, of course) protectionism and 
subsidies and then went on to invest in skills and technologies that those 
industries needed, as I document in my book,Bad Samaritans 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/books/chap1/badsamaritans.htm>
. Asking the developing countries to give up those policy tools is telling them 
to give up development.

We need a more wide-ranging and more productivity-oriented approach than 
Sachs's, if we want to make the global system more productive, durable, and 
equitable.
 