
At the end of 2010 Brett Lee looked like a write-off after a chronic ankle 
injury had kept him out of the international game for 14 months. Had you 
written back then that he would return at the World Cup to be his side's 
leading wicket-taker and 18 months on would be back in England at the age of 35 
needing only three more wickets to overtake Glenn McGrath's 381 (380 for 
Australia and one for the ICC World XI in 2005's WorldCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Tsunami Appeal match at the MCG) to 
become his country's most prolific ODI bowler, "fanciful" would have been the 
most generous of adjectives. And yet here he is, still leading the Australia 
attack into Friday's match at Lord's, the most exuberant of elder statesmen, 
combining his duties as spearhead with a mentoring role for the whirlwind tyro 
Pat Cummins, who was six years old when Binger made his Australia debut in the 
Boxing Day Test against India in 1999.

This is no sentimental prolonging of a career simply to bag a record either – 
when have Australia been guilty of such indulgences, unless you harshly count 
Steve Waugh's farewell tour in 2003-04? Since his comeback Lee has taken 55 
wickets, 16 more than his closest rival Mitchell Johnson, and at an average of 
23.52 which compares favourably with his pre-2010 figures of 23.01 runs per 
wicket.

After Australia won the first Test of the 1999-2000 series against India by 
285 runs, Steve Waugh played a rare Shield match for New South Wales against 
Western Australia in Perth. With such a huge margin of victory, any thoughts of 
strengthening the side seem sadistic, yet as Waugh wrote in his autobiography 
the captain was always keen on pulverising the opposition. "I was mesmerised by 
the pure artistry of a young quick named Brett Lee," he wrote of his new Blues 
team-mate.

"Like Warney years before in Zimbabwe, I knew straight away this kid was 
special; he had a twinkle in his eye that belied a killer streak, and on the 
pacy Waca pitch he was lethal. The guy was a matchwinner. I caught up with 
selector Geoff Marsh at the conclusion of the a match in which Lee had broken 
Jo Angel's forearm, terrorised Damien Martyn and Adam Gilchrist and bowled the 
quickest spell I'd ever seen, and said quite simply but half-jokingly: 'Swamp, 
pick him or I'm out, pal! This kid's raring to go. Don't waste him – the 
Indians will hate him'."

So, out went Michael Kasprowicz and Lee was called up for his debut, taking a 
wicket with his ferocious fourth ball, then dismissing Rahul Dravid and routing 
the tail with reverse swing to end with five for 47. The length of the run was 
intimidating enough but what he could do with the ball was far worse, making it 
rear up at a batsman's throat at more than 90mph then threatening to shatter 
their toes with viciously inswinging "sandshoe crusher" yorkers.

Australia won by a mere 180 runs at the MCG but his six wickets in the next 
Test in Sydney helped Australia to victory by an innings and 141 runs, taking 
VVS Laxman's scalp in both innings, the second after the makeshift opener's 
glorious 167 off 198 balls.

Lee was the epitome of almost comically unfettered impending menace at the end 
of his mark in those early days, conjuring up the image of a cartoon bull 
pawing the turf with a hoof to signal an imminent charge. His captain was frank 
about his use of his weapon, employing him to make "fragile opponents fold".

During the Adelaide Test against South Africa in 2001 he subjected the final 
pair Makhaya Ntini and Nantie Hayward to a brutal assault in one over, clouting 
Ntini twice in succession on the badge of the tailender's helmet then targeting 
Hayward's adam's apple as the batting rabbit retreated to the legside while 
being taunted to "Face up like a man, Nantie".

A year later Lee hit Alex Tudor with a fiendish bouncer that drilled in 
between the Englishman's helmet peak and visor, poleaxing him and lacerating 
his brow. "I know Brett Lee has a reputation as a tearaway quick who doesn't 
mind hitting the odd batsman, but when he saw blood he turned deathly pale and 
could barely utter a word," wrote Steve Waugh. "He kept on asking Alex: 'Are 
you OK, mate?'" Therein lies the contradiction at the heart of targeting a 
tailender, albeit one with a top score of 99 not out. Bowlers launch their 
attack with a kind of barbarous frivolity then once the all too predictable 
consequences of their actions are revealed contrition strikes home. Tudor left 
the Waca on a stretcher and, sadly for him as other injuries dogged his career, 
never played another Test.

For all his bogeyman antics with the ball, however, Lee was never perceived as 
a scoundrel by fans of other teams during Australia's age of dominance. He has 
a natural ebullience to go with that twinkle and a broad smile which absolve 
him of malevolence. His sheer joy in the game, manifest in his irrepressible 
wicket celebrations, conveys an essential unconceited likeability.

Having retired from Tests a couple of years after playing his last in 2008 
with a haul of 310 wickets, he focuses solely now on the short form in which 
Lord's has always been a happy hunting ground. In six matches there, two 
against Pakistan, he has 17 wickets at 13.82 and on his last visit in September 
2009 took five for 49, clean bowling Matt Prior, Luke Wright, Stuart Broad and 
Adil Rashid with trademark speed and bamboozling swing. That mopping up of the 
lower order was reminiscent of his spell during the 2003 World Cup in the Super 
Six stage against New Zealand when he skittled the last five batsmen in 15 
balls, "a vulture bent on supper" as the Almanack had it.

This incarnation of the Spin is a sentimental soul but Lee's current worth to 
his team transcends nostalgia. "He's been the face of fast bowling for a while 
in Australia," Cummins told Cricinfo this week. "His raw pace and always being 
a great competitor … it's hard not to look up to him as a kid. He's everything 
that a young pace bowler wants to be." At times he's been expensive, at others 
clinical but he's always been fast and exuded enjoyment in his work.

Frank Tyson once wrote: "To bowl fast is to revel in the glad animal action, 
to thrill in physical power and to enjoy a certain sneaking feeling of 
superiority over the mortals who played the game." While we cannot be certain 
of the third sentiment in Lee's case, he certainly transmits the first two to 
all who watch him. Long may his "twilight" endure.

• This is an extract from the Spin, the Guardian's free weekly cricket email. 
To sign up, click here <http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/signup/2010/mar/30/1>.
 