
Leaving the EU could present positive opportunities for Britain’s arts and 
creative industries rather than the feared disasters – but only if the 
government takes the right decisions on a series of important issues, a report 
delivered to ministers argues.

The findings are in a report by the Creative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/>, which draws on evidence from 
around 500 contributors, many of whom attended 11 quickly-convened “what next” 
meetings across the UK after the vote to leave the EU.

John Kampfner, the federation’s chief executive, said there were opportunities 
to be seized because of Brexit and that the government needed to see the sector 
as a “massive asset” which it could “work more closely with in the new agenda”.

“There is no time for lament. It is absolutely vital for this sector to be 
incredibly involved in helping the government to forge a very practical 
relationship between the UK, the EU and the sector.

“We have to roll up our sleeves and work through all the various areas where 
there are deep and ongoing concerns.”

Kampfner gave the example of how the creative industries tend to employ a 
higher proportion of international workers than other sectors because of 
longstanding skills shortages.

One key hope in the report is that the government creates “a visa system for 
the 21st century” enabling easy access to “world class talent” and recognising 
the importance of freelance employees.

At the other end there needed to be a “reboot” of education and training so 
young people could fill the jobs where there are skills shortages – in sectors 
such as animation and visual effects.

Kampfner said: “If the sector is not to just continue to be strong, but to 
grow further and employ more British workers in that endeavour, the education 
and skills agenda has to adapt as quickly to help foster that.”

Hardly anyone in the arts world was in favour of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/huge-creative-step-backwards-arts-view-brexit-eu-referendum>
 with 96% coming out against in a federation poll of its members. The most 
immediate effect has been the weak pound making it markedly more expensive for 
arts organisations who commission and stage a lot of work from overseas 
companies.

The creative industries, whether theatre, games, heritage, fashion or film, 
constitute the fastest growing sector of the UK economy and should be at the 
heart of new international trade deals, the report says.

The 73-page Brexit report, being presented on Thursday to the culture 
secretary, Karen Bradley, and the business secretary, Greg Clark, has been 
welcomed by a raft of arts and creative leaders. It is complete with data, 
analysis and recommendations around the key dilemmas facing cultural 
organisations in a post-Brexit world. They include the visa system, education 
and training, intellectual property and funding.

The peer and businesswoman Martha Lane Fox said: “Without great data and great 
analysis you can’t make great decisions. With so much at stake for our creative 
sectors in light of Brexit, we need this kind of work more than ever.”

Sir Nicholas Serota, the director of Tate who will next year become new chair 
ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>, said the success of 
Tate had depended on the ability to employ people from across the EU at all 
levels.

“For us, this is an essential ingredient in creating one of the world’s great 
galleries. We attract significant numbers of international visitors and a staff 
with different kinds of cultural and educational experience helps us to 
understand what engages these audiences.

“As the government works out arrangements for the future, we would not want 
any artificial barriers erected which might make it harder for us to attract 
the skills that we need in order to serve our public well.”

The report also calls on the government to appreciate the role that the 
creative industries have in healing fractures in society caused by the 
referendum.

Other recommendations include the government conducting an audit of existing 
EU funding to the creative sector to identify what should be replaced by the 
UK, and upholding intellectual property rights in trade deals, especially with 
markets which have bad copyright infringement records.

The designer Sir John Sorrell, who founded the Creative Industries Federation, 
said: “It has taken two decades and more to turn our creative industries from 
an afterthought to a key driver of wealth and global success. To imperil that 
would be to imperil our wider economy. That is why we need to be at the heart 
of the new government’s industrial strategy and negotiating priorities in 
coming months.”
 