
Scots could be justified in wanting to leave the UK in the event of Britain 
voting to leave the EU if there was a heavy vote in Scotland against such a 
decision, according toAlan Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson>, the leader of the Labour 
party’s pro-EU campaign.

EU referendum debate: Clegg describes reports Queen backs Brexit as '24-carat 
bilge' – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/15/guardian-eu-referendum-debate-with-farage-clegg-alan-johnson-and-leadsom-live>
He made the remark at a lively EU referendum debate organised by the Guardian 
in London, where the issues of security and immigration loomed large and there 
were particularly bitter exchanges between the former Liberal Democrat leader 
Nick Clegg and Ukip leaderNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>.

In a resumption of personal hostilities dating back to the general election, 
the Ukip leader repeatedly accused the former deputy prime minister of telling 
lies, at one stage telling a packed audience at the London Palladium that Clegg 
had made a career out of telling lies for a living.

Johnson warned early on that the UK was running “a very, very high risk not 
just for Britain’s place inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> but Britain’s continued unity”.

Admitting that he could understand Scottish people’s desire to leave the UK in 
the event of a so-called Brexit, he said: “To be frank, if I was a Scot … and 
yes it does depend onScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> voting 
heavily to remain … I would be thinking again as well.”

Representing the leave campaign, Farage and Tory MP Andrea Leadsom rejected 
the question of a threat to the UK’s unity, with Leadsom insisting that the UK 
government would not allow the SNP to have a new referendum and Farage claiming 
that levels of support for a Brexit were on the rise in Scotland.

The debate, which featured noisy interventions from large sections of the 
crowd, sparked a particularly polarised reaction to the Ukip leader, who drew 
pantomime jeers from some when he predicted that the EU was on the way to going 
into a union with Turkey “composed of 77 million even poorer people” and 
described Barack Obama as “the most anti-British US president”.

He said the biggest threat to the Anglo-American relationship, Britain’s 
security and Nato came from an EU that was “hellbent on building a European 
army, navy and air forces as quickly as possibly.”

By attempting to extend its influence, he said the EU had “directly provoked” 
a coup that got rid of a directly elected government in Ukraine when Viktor 
Yanukovych was overthrown. “We have actually provoked this situation with 
Putin,” he said of the conflict in Ukraine.

Representing the remain side alongside Johnson, Clegg denied there was any 
imminent entry by Turkey, but added: “I think that one of the unusual successes 
of the EU is that it has encompassed some very different cultures. We have not 
become any less British since 1970. It isn’t a straitjacket.”

He and Johnson went on the offensive against Farage on the question of 
immigration. Clegg said Ukip warnings were based on a “a totally false 
assumption that if we leave the EU people will not continue to try to flee war, 
attrition and hunger and come to the UK”. He added: “It is so dishonest to 
somehow claim that if we leave the EU, that problem will go away. It is deeply, 
deeply dishonest.”

The debate, organised through Guardian Members, was originally scheduled to 
take place at a much smaller venue in Westminster, but demand for tickets led 
to the venue being switched to the Palladium, which seats more than 2,000 
people.
 