
A onetime top ally of the New Jersey governor, Chris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, said the governor and his 
New York counterpart, Andrew Cuomo, discussed releasing a false report to tamp 
down questions over the George Washington Bridge lane-closure scandal, the 
prosecution’s key witness testified on Tuesday.

David Wildstein, who pleaded guilty in the gridlock scheme and is cooperating 
with prosecutors, said the former Port Authority of New York andNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> chairman David Samson told him 
the governors discussed the idea in October 2013. The report would have 
attributed the lane closures to a traffic study, covering up the true reason 
for the closures: political retribution against the mayor of Fort Lee for 
failing to endorse Christie’s 2013 re-election, Wildstein testified.

The report was never issued. 

Instead, Bill Baroni testified before lawmakers in November 2013, two months 
after the lane closures, that they were part of a traffic study.

 Baroni, who served as Christie’s top appointed staff aide at the Port 
Authority, and Bridget Kelly, Christie’s former deputy chief of staff, are on 
trial facing wire fraud and civil rights charges. They have pleaded not guilty.

 Wildstein said the idea for the report came as news reporters began to ask 
questions about the lane closures, which gridlocked the town of Fort Lee for 
four days.

 “My understanding was that [Republican] Governor Christie and [Democratic] 
Governor Cuomo had discussed this,” Wildstein said under cross-examination on 
Tuesday, according to the Record, adding he was told the information by Samson. 
“My understanding at the time was that it would put an end to this issue.”

 Cuomo spokesman John Kelly, who is not related to Bridget Kelly, denied the 
conversation between governors took place and criticized Wildstein as a “felon 
spinning a tale”.

 “It’s just false and delusional,” Kelly said. 

 Messages left with Christie’s office were not immediately returned. A message 
left with Samson’s attorney has not been returned. Samson pleaded guilty in 
another case to using his role as Port Authority chairman to influence United 
Airlines to reinstate a money-losing route closer to his vacation home and is 
awaiting sentencing.

Wildstein, a former executive at the Port Authority of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and New Jersey, which oversees 
New York-area bridges and tunnels, testified earlier that Baroni told Christie 
about the traffic jams as they were happening and said the Democratic mayor of 
Fort Lee was not happy that he was not getting his calls returned.
 Christie has not been charged and says he did not authorize the closures or 
play a role in covering them up.

 