
Hunger is a good word for it, but whose? In The Hunger Games 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1392170/>, 24 young people enter a television game 
show and only one returns. The survivor gets all the riches TV stardom can 
imagine – a private train, wailing fans, pretty frocks and the services of a 
fulltime stylist. I do not know if the "hunger" refers to the contestants' will 
to live or the viewers' need to watch them die, but either way it is a metaphor 
for the emotional violence of Saturday night TV.

The new season of TV talent contests – Britain's Got Talent 
<http://talent.itv.com/>, The Voice <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00k96j4> 
– began on Saturday night and contain the usual stew of snobbery, self-hatred, 
idiocy, sentimentality and projection. Out come the hopeful victims and 
friends, obediently flogging their narrative arcs, which are reported before 
the actual talent, or lack of talent, is even considered; the value of the 
story, rather than the voice, or the ballroom dancing, or the sponge tossing, 
is now explicit.

The cruelty of the judges, this year cut by David Walliams's occasional mercy 
– he put through a man who sprouts wings, one of which imploded and fell off – 
is not the point. That is what they are paid for, and with the exception of 
Walliams, who is a pretty good actor, they are not, actually, talented, unless 
you thought Amanda Holden's Cutting It was the Citizen Kane of hair salon 
dramas and Simon Cowell's Teletubbies single was really four Bob Dylans in 
Day-Glo fat suits. The talented tend to be kind to acolytes and the longer the 
judges stay with the show, the more inhuman they look, victims of the very 
cameras they point at others.Amanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden>, I think, has made a 
lifestyle choice to become a zombie.

It is the ordinary exploitation of human fragility, which is no less grotesque 
for being established, that offends. The pre-show buzz was all about a 
17-year-old boy called Jonathan Antoine, who sings opera with his 
friend Charlotte Jaconelli. The Britain's Got Talent's talent press office 
briefed the newspapers in advance – Jonathan is the new SuBo (Susan Boyle). 
That is, he has mental issues, is obese, and is innocent of the mysterious 
workings of hair product. (But he can sing like an – er – angel! A fat angel!)

On he walked into the lights, to the usual gasps, which are all the more 
repulsive for being staged. (The contestants are obviously pre-screened.) "Just 
when you thought things couldn't get any worse," said Cowell disingenuously 
when he saw him, even though he knew the teenagers would hear the remark later. 
Antoine duly sang – apparently very well, but I couldn't really hear above the 
screaming – and talked about being bullied at school, and how "it took pieces" 
out of him. He had a breakdown last year apparently; the tabloids said so. I 
have no idea if Antoine should be an opera singer, but he shouldn't have to do 
it like this. This is human beings seconded into fairground rides.

Cowell was impressed, and tried to separate Antoine from Jaconelli, saying she 
might hold him back. I see his point. Of course Antoine alone is a more 
enthralling narrative; alone he is more terrified, more prone to collapse, more 
in jeopardy, a kind of singing Titanic, heading for the iceberg of the public 
vote, with no Jaconelli as an emotional lifeboat. Cowell pouted; the pound 
signs dimmed faintly in his dead eyes. Never mind, Simon, maybe they'll fall in 
love, get new haircuts and announce their engagement on camera, and you can 
glitter-bomb them, sell them, and break their hearts; there may even be a sex 
tape.

Over on BBC1, it was the same schtick with The Voice; if you can prove you 
have an affliction normal enough for casual identification, but not so 
interesting it's weird (no rescued child soldiers or recovering paedophiles) 
you might be Chosen.

I call this Judy Garland Syndrome. I thought that Garland's madness ruined her 
voice, then her life – now I am certain it would be her unique selling point in 
a crowded market.

It is obviously a board game – does manic depression top schizophrenia? Does 
drug addiction top compulsive eating? The Voice's twist is that when 
contestants audition, the judges, led by Tom Jones and Jessie J, cannot see 
them; they spin round in chairs that make them all look like Davros from 
Dr Who, but more shiny.

This means they might miss someone hot, or someone with elephantiasis, but the 
show is loaded towards tragedy – Sean from Five tried and died. Eventually a 
woman with alopecia looked like a possible winner, but I doubt she can beat the 
new SuBo in this war of the broken.

Why? Part of it is a God complex. Let the viewers bring you riches and 
headlines and VIP tables in ugly nightclubs – or not, as we choose. Part is the 
deadening experience of watching television; it is so narcotically numbing the 
injected emotion must be ever more visceral, so obviously the contestants will 
play for sanity as well as success.

It is no coincidence that Susan Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/susan-boyle>, the patron saint and poster 
girl of salvation-by-TV, entered a private mental hospital after the finals, at 
which point the TV shrinks really should have smacked Cowell in his polished 
teeth, and resigned from either television or psychotherapy. The final reason, 
I think, is that these talent shows are, essentially, both a lottery and a 
paradigm of the lie-promise of capitalism. Few are admitted to the golden 
lands, but it could, as the National Lottery catchline said, be you, if you 
show enough talent for humility, and need. And that, in the end, is the hunger.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/uk-edition>
 