
British soldiers committed "gross violations of the Geneva conventions", 
including mock executions, during a fierce battle in which 20 Iraqis were 
killed and nine others seriously mistreated after they were captured, a public 
inquiry into the incident has been told.

The allegations were made by lawyers representing the Iraqis and their 
families. But suggestions that the soldiers murdered, mutilated and tortured 
Iraqi insurgents were dismissed by those representing the soldiers as "the 
product of lies" and of evidence that was "deliberately fabricated". Lawyers 
for the Ministry of Defence (MoD) accused Iraqi witnesses at the inquiry of a 
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.

Sharp and bitter claims and counterclaims were made at the end of year-long 
hearings on Wednesday into the battle of Danny Boy, a checkpoint on the main 
Amara-Basra road in south-eastIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, on 
14 May 2004.

Claims that the soldiers violated the Geneva conventions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/geneva-conventions> were made in the course of 
damning criticism of the soldiers' conduct and the MoD by Patrick O'Connor QC, 
counsel for the Iraqis, at the al-Sweady inquiry, named after a 19-year-old 
Iraqi killed by British troops.

He accused the soldiers of "inhuman and degrading treatment of wounded, broken 
and helpless young men who were utterly at the mercy of their military handlers 
and interrogators". O'Connor said: "At its worst the impression was 
deliberately created that the executions were taking place around them: mock 
executions to terrorise them further. Professional doctors and officers and 
NCOs charged with the duty to protect the welfare of prisoners failed in their 
duties."

In a blistering attack on the MoD, he accused it of "dereliction of legal, 
moral and professional duty" and a "catastrophic breakdown" in military 
discipline, and said the ministry's attempts to dismiss all the allegations 
were an "Arcadian fantasy". After accusing the MoD of vociferously fighting 
against the independent public inquiry, chaired by the former senior judge Sir 
Thayne Forbes, O'Connor said: "We are seeing the cold arrogance of the British 
state at work."

In a bitter response, Neil Garnham QC, for the soldiers, accused the Iraqi 
witnesses of "persistently and deliberately giving false evidence under oath". 
Garnham repeatedly described evidence from Iraqi witnesses as lies and strongly 
attacked the conduct of and claims made by Phil Shiner of the firm representing 
the Iraqis, Public Interest Lawyers.

Government lawyers representing the soldiers – mainly from the Argyll and 
Sutherland Highlanders and 1 Battalion, the Princess of Wales Royal Regiment – 
said in written evidence released on Wednesday that the allegations of murder 
and torture were "wholly untrue".

The soldiers' lawyers said that whatever else Forbes concluded about the 
detail of the events at the British nearby base, Camp Abu Naji, and later at 
the Shaibah detention centre south of Basra, "whatever criticism he might make 
about army policies and procedures and about the individual acts and omissions 
of busy servicemen seeking to do their best in difficult and trying conditions, 
he should make it crystal clear that the suggestion that the British took 
captured Iraqis back to their bases and tortured or murdered them, or mutilated 
the bodies of dead Iraqis, is a complete fabrication devoid of any evidential 
support."

The inquiry heard evidence about what happened during the battle itself, 
though this is excluded from its terms of reference. Witnesses said British 
soldiers had killed wounded Iraqis on the battlefield who presented no threat, 
and that the bodies of some of the dead Iraqis showed signs of being handcuffed.

O'Connor told the inquiry last month that the Iraqis now conceded there was no 
evidence prisoners were killed inside the British camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/20/al-sweady-inquiry-stopped-iraq-drop-unlawful-deaths>
, though he said "unlawful killings may well have occurred on the battlefield 
or elsewhere outside the base camp". He added: "That issue has not been fully 
investigated as part of this inquiry."

The MoD on Wednesday said the inquiry chairman should consider what happened 
on the battlefield even though this was outside his terms of reference. Forbes 
will give an account of what happened in his report, which he hopes to complete 
by November. But his main task will be to judge whether young and inexperienced 
British soldiers were adequately prepared and led and responded in an 
acceptable way to a violent ambush by Iraqi insurgents.

The inquiry, which has so far cost nearly £23m, heard that British military 
police were prevented from conducting a speedy investigation into the battle 
and its aftermath by their commanders, who said they wanted to protect young 
soldiers traumatised by the bloody gunfight. It was set up after senior British 
judges attacked the MoD for failing to conduct a proper inquiry of its own into 
the allegations surrounding the battle.

The inquiry has read more than 5,000 official documents and heard from more 
than a hundred Iraqi witnesses and nearly 500 military ones. Lawyers 
representing both sides will have the right of reply to what they heard on 
Wednesday. Forbes's report will be sent to the high court, where judges will 
consider whether further action should be taken.
 