
Britain has already spent half the week in a state of high excitement about an 
ITV programme. But even the UK's first leader debate found itself in danger of 
being overshadowed as theBritain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> machine cranked 
into action today, unleashing a preview of the ill-advised family rock bands, 
performing pets and heavily choreographed dance troupes to journalists ahead of 
the new series on Saturday night.

Last year Britain's Got Talent launched the singer Susan Boyle on an 
unsuspecting world, with an audienceof more than 17 million 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jun/01/britains-got-talent-tv-ratings> 
watching the final. But this Saturday's top dog (literally) looks set to be 
Chandi, a rescue hound who scampers through a ballet-inspired routine with his 
owner Tina.

Dancing pooches are by now as much of a BGT staple as unlikely looking singing 
superstars, small children with angelic voices and the judge's buzzers that 
rudely signal the end of an audition. But for all that, the show's format 
offers few surprises – Louis Walsh replacing a flu-afflicted Cowell on the 
judging panel for some of the auditions in the first episode is as exciting as 
it gets – the audition process ensures BGT remains engaging.

The joy of ITV's show is its ability to unearth the truly eccentric along with 
the sublime. For every 10-year-old Chloe Hickinbottom giving a tear-jerking 
rendition of a Vera Lynn number, there's a woman with a very large parrot who 
is extremely keen to demonstrate his "talent" of eating mashed potatoes from a 
fork. (Sadly, Polly isn't very hungry).

Given that the winner of BGT gets to perform at the Royal Variety Performance, 
some of the auditionees' choices are completely baffling. There's a man who 
gently reads poetry over background muzak; a very sweet retired teacher who 
does animal impressions; two sisters in matching frocks who perform a 
hilariously solemn tambourine routine; and a woman who wears a handpuppet to 
play both a trumpet and an instrument made from a piece of hosepipe and a 
teapot. Britain, it appears, is completely bonkers.

Viewers, however, have a history of being charmed by quirkiness – the father 
and son Greek/Irish dancing duo Stavros Flatley last year paved the way for 
comedy variety acts to make it through to the final. Their equivalent for this 
series may well be Kevin Cruise, a badly made-up man in a gold sequin shirt who 
gets around on a skateboard with a 2D cardboard ship stuck on the front. His 
medley of cruiseship favourites is a kitsch treat – as well as providing judges 
Piers Morgan, Amanda Holden and Cowell with an opportunity to enagage in their 
habitual bickering.

There is, of course, plenty of that – with Holden, in particular, shouting 
down Morgan after he dares to criticise (even slightly) the amazing dance 
routine of 22-year-old Tobias Mead who, Holden says, has a body that moves like 
liquid. With street-dance groups Diversity and Flawless both reaching the BGT 
final last year, and Diversity going on to win the title, it looks likely we'll 
see some strong street-dance auditions over the coming weeks.

We'll also be seeing plenty of BGT's best asset: presenters Ant and Dec. The 
pair bring bucketloads of charm to BGT, ensuring its tone remains warm rather 
than sneering, and are cleverly pitched to be on the side of the competitors – 
we see them jumping for joy when children get through the audition stage, and 
gulping down glasses of Coke in sympathy with a man whose talent is to 
punctuate the end of a drum roll with an enormous burp.

• Britain's Got Talent starts Saturday, 8pm on ITV1 
 