
Pre-show preamble....

See what joys spring brings: sunshine, green shoots and, Britain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent>. Cross people 
will already be preparing to fill the comments section with reasons why they 
are far too superior to ever watch a Saturday night ITV talent show. We however 
- along with many other mere mortals - enjoy a bit of BGT fun on a weekend 
evening. Which is why we thought a liveblog-shaped treat would be just the 
thing to kick off the auditions process.

So I'll be here from 8pm tonight to marvel at the talent on offer, and wonder 
at how bonkers Britain appears to be. If you've turned up early, you might like
to get your Britain's Got Talent bingo choices 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/16/britains-got-talent>
 in ahead of the programme. What acts do you think we're likely to see this 
series? Be as specific as possible, and we'll see if your predictions for acts 
come true.

See you at 8pm!

7.27pm: Evening all, and welcome to the first episode of Britain's Got Talent 
- the show that showcases the diversity of Britain's talent void and appetite 
for humiliation. And that's just on that judging panel, ba-boom tish.

For added interest, this evening I am accompanied on my viewing sofa by my 
Australian housemate, who has not only never seen this show, but never heard of 
it. He has, however, vaguely heard of Susan Boyle, which suggests that popular 
culture has now begun to eat its own head. I shall let you know what he thinks, 
or if indeed he makes it to the end.

In the sector commonly known as "technical things that might go wrong", this 
is the first time I have liveblogged from my new house, which is in a slightly 
remote village that has a 0.3mb broadband speed on a downhill with the wind 
behind it. If I disappear, it is because I am walking to London to file my 
liveblog, which may be quicker.

7.57pm: It's starting! I have been promised dancing dogs and everything, and I 
shan't be happy until I've seen someone doing something incredibily dangerous 
with knives, preferably involvingPiers Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan>. Nice to see Ant & Dec back on 
telly again, though, you hardly ever seen them these days.

30 seconds into the montage, and the housemate has just given me a look that 
would melt concrete and said "you're shitting me". Hahahahaha.

8.03pm: On comes Piers, whose hair is looking suspiciously Just For Men. 
Amanda wants a variety act to win this year.Simon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> says he wants to find a really 
talented dog act. Insert SuBo jokes here.

First act up, two ladies called Kat and Candy who have an act called Double 
Take. They both play the timbrel, which appears to be a tambourine with tinsel 
on it. They do some kind of musical semaphore, but with faces that suggest 
murderous intent.

"I like you, but everything was wrong" says Simon, winningly. He gets a lesson 
he'll never forget in the difference between a tambourine and a timbrel.

8.10pm: Lots more rubbishness, including a woman who has a parrot that can't 
eat mashed potato off a spoon (don't ask), and another woman in a 1980s 
bridesmaid's dress with a penguin puppet that plays the trumpet. It's a whole 
world of demented out there.

8.15pm: The housemate is agog. I have promised him it will get better. 

In London, the judges have seen nothing that looks promising, and that 
includes Amanda's electric blue polyester disco blouse.

We meet Kevin Cruise, who skates onto the stage in a yellow sequinned shirt 
and a gravy browning suntan. By the accent, I'd wager he comes from my neck of 
the woods. He treats us to his brilliantly camptastic cruise ship medley - 
Simon is unimpressed, but Piers and Amanda think he's great. In an unlikely 
twist, I agree with them - he's hilarious.

8.23pm: Another mini-montage, including a cracking little 11-year-old dancer 
called Josh and a bunch of strippers called The Ruby Girls who aren't quite my 
cup of tea, but I'm probably not their target audience, in fairness.

Next up is Tobias Mead from Wiltshire (is it West Country night tonight, or 
are we just particularly talented down here?). He looks vaguely familiar - has 
he been on another reality show? So You Think You Can Dance, possibly? Oh hang 
on, I think he was on Dirty Dancing - Time Of Your Life a couple of years ago. 
God, how sad am I that I remember this? It's on LIVING, for crying out loud. It 
had Kelly Brook in it.

He puts his baseball cap on backwards and does some fantastic, but very 
surreal, hip-hop robot dancing. The vote from the liveblog lounge is a firm 
thumbs up, and all the judges loved him too - he sails through to the next 
round.

8.36pm: Back at the auditions, Simon is off sick with flu so he's called up 
Louis Walsh to fill in. Poor Louis, he clearly has nothing else on these days. 
Amanda is in lurid pink polyester today, for those of you who pay attention to 
her ludicrous wardrobe.

Next up is Michael, a 71-year-old retired teacher who does bad impressions of 
jungle animals. Louis is loving having a buzzer, and thankfully he has plenty 
of cause to use it, including some dodgy bagpiping, a terrible stand up and a 
man with an outstanding monotone who reads poetry.

8.42pm: They ramp up the music for 10-year-old Chloe, however, suggesting she 
might just be quite good. She sings Vera Lynn's White Cliffs of Dover with a 
wonderfully mature, old-fashioned voice. For Chloe, the old people's home tour 
starts here. The judges all love her, and Chloe bursts into tears, bless her.

9.11pm: 
(Belated - sorry system problems here ...)

Next, we meet Tina and her dog Chandy, who she rescued from a dog pound. He 
has slight sinister, glowing red eyes, and he actually dances. And I mean 
proper dancing, not that rubbish jigging about they do on Crufts. They are 
brilliant, and it's a shame Simon is too sick to see it as we all know how he 
likes dancing dog. All the judges agree that it is the best dog act they have 
ever seen, including Louis who has sat through several seasons of X Factor.

9.24pm: 
The next act is a man who burps really loudly, and wishes to take this 
spectacular talent to the Royal Variety Performance. I'm sure this is just what 
the Queen loves on a night out (one does love a good burp, no?). He only gets a 
couple of meaty ones out before he gets buzzed off.

Oh, I do love a family act - it's little Kieran, an Eoghan Quigg-a-like who 
played the drums last year, apparently. He is now back with his mum and dad. 
Mum is clearly on the way to a Rocky Horror night and has very limited singing 
talent. Dad has a mullet and plays bass. It's truly awful. I have no words.

The judges send mum and dad home, but are happy to see Kieran and his drums 
again. Mum and dad don't look very happy, there's nothing worse than putting on 
a red basque and PVC boots and STILL being upstaged by a small boy with a 
drumkit.

9.27pm: 
Kieran is back with his drums - he has no practise, no backing track and no 
idea why the hell he isn't hanging around in a bus stop with his mates.

He's a cracking drummer, I'll give him that. I'm just not sure how it might go 
down at the Royal Variety Performance. Will Her Maj GET drumming? It 
fundamentally lacks visual appeal,

He cries, the audience cheer, everyone is very proud. Blah.

9.30pm: 
Oh, bless Kieran. Please note I'm not knocking his talent in any way, just 
whether it's likely to get the Queen jigging in her seat in delight, compared 
to, say, a dancing dog or a parrot that won't eat mashed potatoes.

And that's it for this week - it hasn't been a classic collection of BGT 
brilliance, to be fair, but then it's only week one. Thanks for joining in, and 
enjoy the rest of your weekend - I'm off to tend my sunburn. G'night! Hx
 