
The government’s anti-corruption tsar, Eric Pickles, is considering naming any 
foreign citizen subject to a UK visa ban as a response to theinquiry into the 
2006 murder of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
.

The home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, was criticised on Thursday 
for failing to impose tougher economic sanctions against agents of Vladimir 
Putin’s regime in the wake of the inquiry’s finding that Putin had probably 
approved Litvinenko’s murder in 2006. She will meet Litvinenko’s widow next 
week.

A change in the law that ministers are proposing to Pickles would give the 
public the right to know who the UK is banning from entering the country, and, 
by implication, who the UK would let in.

After Litvinenko, more sanctions against Russia would be pointless – and 
hypocritical | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/22/litvinenko-sanctions-russia-putin-russian>
The list would also act as a reassurance for Russian dissidents living in 
London who fear they may be victims of political assassination. At least two 
Russian businessmen, Alexander Perepilichny and Boris Berezovsky, who had 
fallen out of favour with Putin, have died in mysterious circumstances in the 
UK.

May’s sole substantive measure has been to impose an asset freeze on two 
Russian agents, neither of whom has any assets in the UK. Both men have scoffed 
at suggestions that they should come to the UK to stand trial. May is likely to 
reject calls from Litvinenko’s wife, Marina, to add to the list of Russians 
subject to visa bans or asset freezes when the pair meet shortly.

There is currently no transparency around the government’s exercise of its 
powers to impose visa bans or deny entry, all of which are non-statutory, in 
relation to people involved in serious international crimes such as torture, 
terrorism and other kinds of organised crime.

Putin’s spokesman criticised the Litvinenko inquiry ruling on Russian 
television. Dmitry Peskov told Channel One: “I have the feeling that this was 
for one goal only, to continue turning the spinning wheel of anti-Russian 
hysteria. And they have been successful. People are becoming zombies, they look 
at Russians with eyes wide from horror, our bilateral relations suffer and the 
interests of the British people suffer.”

Pickles is due to publish an update of the government anti-corruption plan 
before an international conference to be convened by David Cameron in May as 
one of his main international initiatives of 2016. Cameron said the conference 
would look at how “to stop corrupt officials or organised criminals using 
anonymous shell companies to invest their ill-gotten gains in London property, 
without being tracked down”. He has promised he will prevent London becoming a 
home for dirty money.

Key findings: who killed Alexander Litvinenko, how and why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
No 10 said the anti-corruption conference would look not just at preventing 
corruption, but also ending impunity and compensating the victims of 
corruption. One focus will be on strengthening law enforcement in big 
international anti-corruption cases, but it will also propose rules requiring 
disclosure of beneficial ownership of foreign-owned rather than domestic 
companies.

MPs on all sides of the Commons on Thursday called on the government to do 
more to crack down on Russian politicians, and their use of London to hide 
dirty money.

The justice minister Dominic Raab championed the automatic publication of the 
identities of those subject to visa bans when he was a backbencher, at the end 
of the last parliament.

He said in the Commons in 2015: “In the 21st century, the British public have 
a right to know whether the henchmen of despots like Putin – or, indeed, any 
other international dictator or outlaw – are being granted a free pass to come 
to this country.

“If we are serious about trying to alter Putin’s behaviour, should we not 
start by making sure that those who bankroll him cannot enjoy the fruits of 
their labour here, clandestinely in luxurious comfort?

“Those individuals who bankroll Putin and his like should know that when they 
cross the line and engage in serious international crimes, their association 
with him and support for him will bar their ability to enjoy the luxurious 
Knightsbridge lifestyle that so many of them crave. To ensure that message hits 
home consistently and publicly, we need transparency over such visa bans.”

He also pointed out that the Home Office does sometimes disclose when someone 
is subject to a visa ban, but claims it is neither diplomatically sensible nor 
fair in terms of natural justice to disclose the names as a matter of routine.

Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
In the Commons on Thursday May repeatedly rejected a call from all sides of 
the House for a “Sergei Magnitsky law” designed to impose mandatory visa bans 
and asset freezes on any individual linked to the torture and murder of 
Magnitsky, or similar such international crimes, inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and elsewhere. She said she already 
had powers to impose travel bans.

Magnitsky was the lawyer for a British businessman, Bill Browder, and was 
brutally killed on orders from the Kremlin for disclosing a $23m (£16m) tax 
fraud – the biggest in Russian history – that had allegedly been committed by 
Putin and his associates.

David Davis, the former shadow home secretary, said he backed the proposal of 
a “Magnitsky” list, with individuals banned from the UK named and identified. 
“The US has done it, the European parliament has done it,” he said. “We can 
certainly make it a Europe-wide thing.”

He added: “There is a slight problem with this. Sometimes they [the 
government] want to ban people without telling anybody, including spies. But I 
think to have a public list is a good idea. It takes the judgment out of the 
reach of the courts. I’ve got no problem with a Magnitsky list. I think it’s 
the most powerful way of doing it.”

Davis renewed his criticism of the prime minister’s low-key response to the 
Litvinenko public inquiry report, saying that he had “totally misjudged” Putin. 
He said Russia’s president would interpret the UK’s failure to expel diplomats 
or impose other measures as a sign of weakness.

The prime minister defended retaining contact with Russia pointing out 
relations were needed for the Syrian talks to succeed. Speaking in Davos, 
Cameron said: “Obviously we have real difficulties with our relationship with 
Russia because of what has happened, and it’s right that we take the action we 
announced yesterday. But when it comes to Syria, difficult as it is, we have to 
discuss this issue with them. Because the crisis in Syria will only be solved 
when all of the players recognise that it’s in their interest to have a 
settlement.”
 