
A five-prong attempt to get more British representatives than just Tim Henman 
and Greg Rusedski into the men's main draw of the Australian Open ended in 
dismal, if predictable, failure at Melbourne Park with Arvind Parmar and Alex 
Bogdanovic beaten in the second round of qualifying yesterday.

Jamie Delgado, Alan Mackin, and Jonathan Marray had all gone down at the first 
time of asking on Thursday but there were hopes that Parmar or Bogdanovic, and 
preferably both, would make it through to today's final hurdle.

Parmar, the British No3, should have done so but, as on so many other 
occasions, he contrived to lose from a winning position, this time against 
Daniel Koellerer, the Austrian No5, who is ranked lower than he is. Having lost 
the first set, Parmar fought back and led 4-1 in the third before calling for 
the trainer and getting treatment for cramp. Any initiative he had was 
immediately lost, with Koellerer taking the match 4-6, 7-6, 8-6.

Bogdanovic, 20, who qualified for the US Open last autumn before losing in the 
first-round proper, failed to build on that experience, losing 7-6, 3-6, 6-1 
against the Croatian Roko Karanusic. Bogdanovic showed much promise in his 
teens but appears to have stalled, a fate that befalls so many British players.

Andrew Murray, the 17-year-old Scot who won the junior US Open title last 
year, has skipped Australia and is currently in South America attempting to 
build up some ranking points. He is also hoping to qualify for the ATP Tour 
event at Vina del Mar, in Chile, at the end of this month.

Rusedski practised yesterday with the Romanian Andre Pavel and believes that 
his serve is now back to something like its best, as it may need to be when he 
takes on the veteran Swede Jonas Bjorkman in the first round. Bjorkman holds a 
7-4 career advantage, although Rusedski has won both their previous grand slam 
encounters, most famously the 1997 US Open semi-final.

If he wins, Rusedski, who lost to Sweden's Joachim Johansson in Sydney this 
week and Roger Federer in Doha, is due to meet Andy Roddick, the No2 seed, in 
the second round. "So far this year I've lost to the two hottest players on the 
circuit, so I feel I'm ready for Jonas."
 