
Roger Draper, the Lawn Tennis Association's chief executive, is prone to using 
buzz words. "Ruthless" is his favourite one and the British junior Marcus 
Willis can testify to the fact that at least some of the LTA's coaches are 
willing to put their superior's slogan into practice after being sent home from 
theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> in 
disgrace yesterday.

Seventeen-year-old Willis found himself on his way back to Berkshire after 
repeatedly disobeying the instructions of Martin Bohm, the LTA's travelling 
coach, and his assistant, Martin Lee. Bohm has been repeatedly displeased with 
Willis's behaviour since the squad of boys arrived in Australia and, since he 
advocates a no-nonsense "three strikes and out" rule, could accept no more 
disobedience.

Willis was on his final warning when he missed a training session on Saturday 
morning. He disappeared for several hours and, when he did finally put in an 
appearance, supposedly to practise with fellow British juniors - Dan Evans, 
Neil Pauffley, Daniel Cox and Niall Angus - he turned up without his rackets.

"He's been sent home for disciplinary reasons. He was actually written to 
before he came away to explain that he was really in the last-chance saloon," 
said Draper. "We said last year that we were going to get a lot tougher. 
Hopefully Marcus will come back a better player and a little bit wiser for his 
actions. It's frustrating because he is a top-20 player in the world and he's 
blown his chance at the first grand slam of the year. It's even more 
frustrating because we've been making some progress with the boys. He's a 
really talented player. Hopefully, like the rest of them, he'll learn from 
these mistakes."

Judy Murray is not a woman to suffer foolish behaviour gladly and both her 
sons would shudder at the thought of what fate might have awaited them had they 
been sent home as juniors. Needless to say she was not impressed with Willis's 
antics or his lack of understanding of just how privileged an existence he 
leads as one of the cash-rich LTA's most promising - and therefore cosseted - 
young players.

"It's a message to the other players as well that the LTA isn't going to stand 
for any nonsense," said Murray, who is an adviser to the organisation. "In many 
ways our kids are still spoilt by the opportunities that they have and we just 
have to find a way to make them hungrier and set them goals."

Draper has watched how other federations like Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia handle their young players 
and may have taken his lead from Craig Tiley, who is in charge of player 
development at TA. Under Tiley's regime two Australian juniors were banned from 
travelling last year - the 2007 Australian Open junior champion, Brydan Klein, 
for losing his temper on court and 15-year-old Bernard Tomic, who was judged 
not to be trying hard enough.
 