
Toll roads should be introduced around Heathrow to help pay for the costs of 
building a third runway, according to the boss of British Airways’ owner, IAG.


Willie Walsh, the chief executive of IAG, which operates around half the 
flights at Heathrow, said he would favour the idea as a way of funding the 
infrastructure, as hecondemned the price tag of a third runway as “outrageous” 
and “overinflated” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/31/heathrow-third-runway-unjustifiable-says-ba-parent-company-boss>
.

Speaking at the Airport Operators Association conference in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Walsh said toll roads had worked in 
other countries, and it was fair that the user paid.

Improved road and rail links to a bigger Heathrow are expected to add at least 
£5bn to the £17.6bn bill and the question of whether the airport or government 
pays has been left open by the Airports Commission. The M4 motorway will be 
widened, and the M25 will be tunnelled under the new third runway, should the 
government endorse the commission’s recommendation.


Walsh said: “I think there are times the government should pay and there are 
times when there is another way. I don’t mind tolled highways; I don’t mind 
tolled motorways if they are efficient. It works in other countries.

“The road network in Ireland is superior to the UK today. It used to be 
dreadful … But Ireland invested in major infrastructure projects, some of it 
funded by the EU, some of it funded by private equity and the cost of that is 
borne by the consumer. If you get a benefit I don’t see why you shouldn’t be 
prepared to pay.”

Heathrow's connectivity and size gives it trump card for new runway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/01/heathrow-new-runway-airports-commission>
Heathrow has indicated that it expects the government to pay for improved road 
and rail links to the airport should its expansion plans go ahead.

Walsh accused the commission of “getting its figures wrong” in putting the 
costs of Heathrow expansion and the subsequent charges to be levied on 
airlines, at around £29 per passenger, making it one of the most expensive 
airports in the world.

He said: “I don’t think the [airline] industry can afford it. We believe it is 
outrageous. We can’t see how it can be justified and certainly we would not be 
prepared to pay or support the development. There is no point having 
infrastructure if people won’t use it because it’s too expensive.

“We wouldn’t pay if the figures in the Davies report are realistic – which I 
don’t believe they are. The economic arguments only stack up if it’s built 
efficiently and in a cost-effective way.

“If that is the bill it has no prospect of success.”

He questioned why the new Terminal 6 was being priced far higher than Terminal 
5, asking: “How many chandeliers can you have in a terminal?”

Gatwick has also questioned some of the methodology and figures in the Davies 
report, as the Sussex airport tries to persuade the government to back its own 
runway plans instead of the commission’s recommendation to expand Heathrow.

Despite his qualms with the costs, Walsh said that choosing Heathrow was the 
“obvious” answer, and reiterated his belief that “we don’t have enough runways. 
We will at some stage face a major problem in the south-east.”

He also warned that a proposed ban on night flights as a condition for 
expansion would have a significant economic impact: “Most are coming in from 
far away … the problem is when you look at the other end of the route. You 
can’t just export our noise problems. We need to be serious about that.”

The government has promised to give a formal response in December to the 
commission’s report, which in July gave a “clear and unanimous” backing for a 
third runway at Heathrow.
 