
A few squeaks of modernisation are emanating from the crusty old Institute of 
Directors. The pinstriped fraternity has shifted its annual shindig from the 
venerable Royal Albert Hall to the O2 arena in Greenwich. An unsettling blast 
of Lady Gaga welcomed one speaker onto the stage. And veteran director general 
Miles Templeman is shortly to step down.

Certain old allegiances, though, never change. Britain's top trade unionist, 
Brendan Barber <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/brendan-barber>, took to 
the stage on Wednesday, gazed out at the massed ranks of sceptical faces, 
folded arms and charcoal suits, and remarked: "At the TUC, this is what we call 
a difficult away fixture."

He got a brief laugh, but that was the only sign of warmth. The TUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> man played his role as the pantomime 
dame, telling Britain's top employers everything they didn't want to hear. Amid 
dour economic conditions and brittle corporate profitability, it takes a tough 
character, even perhaps a contrarian, to call for across-the-board pay rises. 
But Barber is that man.

"Pay your workers more," said Barber, to stony silence. "Sounds ridiculous, 
but hear me out."

He suggested that household debt, forecast to reach £2tn by 2015, could become 
"an albatross" around the neck of Britain's economic future. "Unless workers 
can see their pay packets grow, we won't be able to build sustainable economic 
demand."

He added: "Now is surely the time for a real change in direction, to build a 
fairer, stronger economy, to nurture demand based on wages, not debt."

Barber threw in quotes from Ben Bernanke and former IMF chief economist 
Raghuram Rajan to support his case. But Britain's employers aren't buying it.

As the graph shows, once you exclude the ups and downs of bankers' bonuses, 
earnings are flatlining. Average annual pay growth in the economy dropped from 
2.3% in January to 2% in February – well below the rate of inflation, which is 
4%. The Institute for Fiscal Studies forecasts a 2.2% fall in median incomes 
between 2009 and 2011. Living standards are in a vice-like squeeze.

But the old arguments between unions and employers are as entrenched as ever. 
Barber, under questioning, defended his movement'senfants terribles, including 
bellicose RMT provocateur Bob Crow. And the view from the floor at the 
Institute of Directors to Barber's call for higher wages bordered on scornful.

"The world is full of dreamers," said one delegate, Sohail Amer, chairman of a 
hi-tech lighting manufacturer, McGeoch Technology. "But there's a difference 
between dreaming of something and actually going out and doing, achieving 
something."

Amer bluntly blamed "dinosaur unions" for the loss of Britain's coal and motor 
industry. And, for good measure, he took a pop at education: "I have to employ 
graduates who can't even read or write English."

The prospect of pay rises got similarly short shrift from Andrew Rodda, whose 
Cornish dairy, AE Rodda, is famous for its clotted cream. He pays "slightly 
above" the minimum wage but reckons staff can be unduly spendthrift. "We're all 
told you must go on holiday all the time and do all these other things," he 
complained. "There's more to be gained from teaching employees how to manage 
their money more effectively than giving them more money to mismanage."

And Philip Higgins, managing director of an engineering recruitment firm, 
Rullion, reckoned it made little sense to raise wages in the middle of a period 
of austerity: "In a climate where costs are being tightly controlled and in 
many cases reduced, raising salary levels seems a simplistic viewpoint."

So pay rises? Not likely, despite evidence that many workers are struggling to 
make ends meet. A report from London mayor Boris Johnson's economic unit last 
week concluded that one in six employees in London are earning below the 
£8.30-an-hour "living wage" needed to make ends meet in the capital – a figure 
which has been described by the mayor, hardly a leftie, as "morally right".

The IoD's director general reckons Britain's employers are too often 
characterised as heartless mill owners. Templeman said: "The idea that 
companies are exploiting their employees, or exploiting their customers, is no 
longer true – if it ever was."

Maybe. But let's remember that boardroom pay at Britain's top 350 companies 
jumped 45% last year, as a revival in bonuses heralded a return to the good 
times. The High Pay Commission will produce figures tomorrow suggesting that 
the proportion of pay going to Britain's highest earners is reaching a level 
unseen since Victorian days, tilting us dangerously towards a "trickle up" 
economy.

Britain's directors are foolish to dismiss these concerns. During the good 
times, every multinational boss loves to waffle that talented staff are a 
company's most valuable asset. Loyalty works both ways – companies will 
ultimately benefit if they stand by their people in the depths of a downturn, 
too.
 