
It's two days on from the MTV Video Music Awards - the only ceremony which 
rewards not just talent and creativity, but being a"quadruple threat" 
<http://www.mtv.com/ontv/vma/2007/category.jhtml?categoryId=quadruple> (apart 
from the annual Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Weaponry awards, 
that is) - and Vicky Newton's got around to writing about it.

You can't blame her. Such is the nature of newspaper deadlines - allowing you 
enough time toskin the pigs for paper, etc 
<http://music.theguardian.com/news/inthenews/0,,2162846,00.html> - that she 
couldn't have written about it before now. And so, to make up for the fact that 
everyone in the world has had ample time to consume Britney Spears's 
staggering, and we mean that literally, performance, Vick has compensated by 
ramping up the vitriol.

"The drug-addled star put in a performance... so poor she would have struggled 
to make it through the first round of Simon Cowell's X Factor auditions.

"Her 'dancing' if you could call it that, was lacklustre...

"Her expressionless gaze was interrupted only by her embarrassingly 
out-of-time lip synching.

"Forget car crash, this was a train wreck."

Hmmm, thanks Vick. We failed to notice all that when we WATCHED IT FOR 
OURSELVES yesterday.

But the reason for quoting Fleet Street's number two goth (the commodities 
correspondent on the FT used to be a member of Fields of the Nephilim) is to 
show that the immortal hobby of giving someone a good old kicking when they're 
down is still alive and wearing a size 11 today.

The Mirror, for example, runs all the bitchy comments about Britney from US 
papers across page three. It also quotes the man who has more snark per square 
inch than anyone on the planet - that'd be Perez Hilton - directly addressing 
Britney: "Your performance was beyond pathetic." Because he'd know.

In fact, it comes to something when perhaps the most considered, considerate 
remark on the whole affair comes fromAkon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon>. Said the Senegalese punter-humper: 
"That could have been better."

And there we shall let it rest.

The other notable event of the VMAs was the increasingly traditional Kanye 
West I-wuz-robbed rant.

He lost out in all categories at the 2006 MTV VMAs, but his sore-loser streak 
was really brought to worldwide attention when he failed to win the best video 
award at the MTV Europe show and some electro chancers called Simian vs Justice 
won instead. This provoked an outburst from son-of-a-lecturer West, which 
evinced the superiority of his vid by stressing: "[My video] cost a million 
dollars. Pamela Anderson was in it."

This year, you already know, he lost in America again. And so he ranted again, 
albeit changing tack to blame his failure on that ever-uncontroversial topic, 
race. "That's two years in a row man," Kanye said, successfully counting his 
outbursts. "Give a black man a chance. I'm trying hard, man. I have the... No 1 
record man."

We take our quotes from the Mirror, so they may not be 10,000% exact, but we 
would like to point out to Kanye that - at the precise moment he threw his 
Louis Vuitton dummy out of his Bathing Ape pram - his album wasn't actually on 
sale yet.
 