
Taking a sustainable technology that works within your own business and 
encouraging others to adopt it usually costs time and money.

But property company British Land was prepared to make the investment as part 
of its ongoing energy efficiency drive in 2010.

The commercial property developer, which owns and manages properties, 
co-invested nearly £1m to roll out a metering and monitoring system to occupant 
businesses at nine buildings, following a pilot at its own head office.

Mainly forward-funded by British Land, the system provides remote monitoring 
of energy use, pinpoints opportunities for efficiencies and quantifies the 
financial cost of every action.

"The hardest things to tackle are often the least glamorous, and yet the most 
important. We wanted to commend British Land for its engagement with the "nitty 
gritty" of energy management and recognise the scale of change that work like 
this can achieve," the judging panel said.

The move, it says, is set to reduce energy use by over 4m kWh a year, saving 
1,654 tonnes of carbon and £450,000 from occupiers' total energy bills, after 
an initial pay-back of three years.

But savings may be greater. In the last 18 months, British Land's trial at its 
own head office has reduced energy use by 37%, cutting emissions by 700 tonnes 
and saving £105,000.

Moreover, in Australia, where the technology was first developed, the system 
has reduced greenhouse gas emissions across 500 sites by 25%, or 60,000 tonnes 
of carbon, over three years.

Behind the initiative, which has been singled out for commendation by our 
judges, British Land aims to reduce energy intensity in its portfolio by 20% 
per sq metre by 2012, compared to 2009.

To meet challenging annual reduction targets, the company gained agreement 
from over 40 occupier-businesses to roll out the new system from April 2010.

Agreements included the formation of "green building groups", with many 
occupiers signing up to meet at least twice a year.

British Land also launched bi-annual environmental statements to encourage 
further action across its portfolio.

Buildings using the system which have shown reductions in energy use include 
10 Exchange Square, where total energy use has reduced by 18% since April 2010, 
saving 590,000 kWh, 313 tonnes of carbon and £49,000 compared to 2009 and 201 
Bishopsgate, where energy use has reduced by 12%, saving over 500,000 kWh, 257 
tonnes of carbon and £40,000.

The cuts are being achieved using a number of different approaches, including 
the installation of motion sensors, adjusting temperatures and switching off 
electrics; introducing power-saving software on computers; and fitting fuel 
conditioners on gas supply pipes.

Aside from helping British Land to win the better buildings partnership's 
(BBP) owner-occupier partnership award in 2010, the initiative is a big hit 
with commercial tenants.

Portia Perry, office services co-ordinator for Western Asset Management, for 
example, said: "It was very much a catalyst that brought energy-saving 
initiatives into focus for us and galvanised our efforts in specific, practical 
ways."

During 2010, British Land's Justin Snoxall chaired a BBP group to develop a 
green building management toolkit.

Published in January 2011, this is designed to help the industry's owners and 
occupiers to work together to reduce energy, water and waste, as well as cut 
occupancy costs.

The company is also seeking planning consent for a commercial development 
which will be zero-carbon by 2015 and aims to achieve a Breeam "excellent" 
rating for all new office developments.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 