
A British soldier who made some of the most detailed allegations about alleged 
abuse by comrades in southernIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> in 
May 2004 has told an inquiry he cannot now recall whether any of it happened.

Mark Keegan, at the time a lance corporal in the Princess of Wales Royal 
Regiment, told the al-Sweady inquiry that he could no longer vouch for claims 
made to a BBC Panorama programme in 2008, or even for a witness statement to 
the inquiry given in January this year.

Keegan had described seeing a young Iraqi detainee – who was hooded with a 
sandbag – being repeatedly pushed face-down into a water-filled ditch and 
punched in the head, and being hit with a rifle butt.

But under cross-examination from Jonathan Acton Davis QC, the main counsel for 
the public inquiry, Keegan repeatedly said he did not remember what had 
happened as the alleged abuse had taken place after he was injured by a grenade 
and was thus disoriented. Large amounts of the Panorama interview had been 
"exaggerated", he said.

Asked why he could seemingly recall the events so clearly as recently as 
January, but not now, Keegan said: "I have given so many accounts and 
statements about this over a long, long time that I don't believe what is true 
and what is not."

Keegan later explained he had been called names by soldiers in his local pub 
and abused on Facebook after making the allegations on Panorama. However, he 
insisted this was not the reason for changing his evidence.

The inquiry into allegations that British soldiers killed 20 unarmed civilians 
and abused others detained after a battle with Shia insurgents north of Basra 
in 2004 opened in March. Named after the family of Hamid al-Sweady, an alleged 
victim aged 19, the inquiry was forced on the Ministry of Defence in 2009 after 
high court judges accused the government department of "lamentable" behaviour 
and serious breaches of its duty of candour over the claims.

Keegan, who left the army in 2007, had been expected to be a significant 
witness given his Panorama interview, in which he described seeing a young 
Iraqi detainee suffer serious and sustained abuse following a bloody battle 
which began when Keegan's patrol came under fire from guns and rocket-propelled 
grenades.

Keegan told the BBC programme he saw the young man "nearly get drowned" after 
British troops repeatedly knocked him into a water-filled ditch with his hands 
tied behind his back. He said of other abuse towards the same detainee: "All 
the blokes were running past and punching him in the head … I see him have 
massive rocks thrown at his head, and yeah, his face must have been pissing out 
with blood underneath that sandbag."

In his January witness statement to the inquiry, Keegan said he might have 
exaggerated some of these incidents "to make them more interesting" for 
Panorama, but did recount seeing the detainee being hit with a rifle butt while 
being taken away in a Warrior armoured vehicle.

Asked about this incident, Keegan told the inquiry: "I can't remember now." 
Asked why his recollection had changed from January, he replied: "I can't 
remember a lot about January."

Earlier in the inquiry a friend and former colleague, Private James Lawrence, 
gave evidence that Keegan had been on the receiving end of "grief" over the 
internet about his Panorama testimony.

Keegan, however, denied retracting his evidence under pressure, saying he had 
not spoken to anyone from the military since giving his witness statement in 
January.

He said: "All I have done is think about this, and try to think about the 
events that have happened, and it has played over and over in my mind."

Acton Davis questioned Keegan about the reaction to the Panorama programme, 
and he recounted being abused by people he believed were soldiers in the pub of 
his local town, which cannot be named for legal reasons. "It was named being 
called at me from the other end of the bar," Keegan explained.

He also said he had been targeted for abuse via a fake Facebook account in his 
name.

Keegan, however, denied retracting his evidence under pressure, saying he had 
not spoken to anyone from the military since giving his witness statement in 
January.

He said: "All I have done is think about this, and try to think about the 
events that have happened, and it has played over and over in my mind."

Keegan's evidence continues.
 