
The British author Alan Shadrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-shadrake> is today facing a possible 
prison sentence after a court in Singapore convicted him of challenging the 
integrity of the city state's judiciary in a book criticising its use of the 
death penalty.

Shadrake faces a custodial sentence or a fine – or both – for contempt of 
court when Singapore's high court sentences him next week.

The Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> constitution does 
not specify a maximum penalty for the crime, according to reports, although 
prosecutors are reported to have demanded a prison sentence of between three 
and six months and an unspecified fine.

The judge, Quentin Loh, said he was giving 75-year-old Shadrake "a final 
opportunity to make amends".

The author, who has refused to apologise, said after the ruling that he would 
"work out how to do this and satisfy the court".

The case has cast further doubt on Singapore's commitment to freedom of 
expression. Shadrake's lawyer, M Ravi, insisted his client had not intended to 
scandalise the conservative state's "hypersensitive" judiciary, adding that 
comments critical of the criminal justice system were "fair criticism".

The case was brought in response to Shadrake's book, Once a Jolly Hangman: 
Singapore's Justice in the Dock, which accuses courts of bowing to diplomatic 
and economic pressure in deciding how to dispense justice.

It also accuses them of favouring the wealthy and abusing the law to suppress 
political opponents.

The book includes a profile of a former chief executioner and interviews with 
human rights activists, lawyers and former police officers.

According to Amnesty International, Singapore, with a population of five 
million, has one of the world's highest per capita execution rates, having put 
more than 400 people to death over the past two decades.

Loh said: "This is a case about someone who says, among other things, the 
judges in Singapore are not impartial ... and are influenced by political and 
economic situations and biased against the weak and the poor."

Last month, Singapore's attorney general's office described comments in 
Shadrake's book as "especially pernicious", adding that they "cannot possibly 
come within any reasonable notion of fair criticism".

The book, which was published in Malaysia, where Shadrake is based, is 
reportedly not banned in Singapore, but sellers and distributors will have to 
seek legal advice before releasing it.

Shadrake, whose passport has been confiscated by the authorities, was released 
on bail. He was arrested in July while promoting the book in Singapore, and is 
also being investigated for possible criminal defamation – a crime carrying a 
prison sentence of up to two years.
 