
The hostile reaction to George Osborne's refusal last week to let 
environmental issues play a part in restoring Britain's ailing economy is 
unsurprising. As a swath of enraged ecologists, academics and NGOs has claimed, 
his party – put in power on a promise to be the greenest ever elected – is now 
set to acquire the mantle of being the most environmentally destructive in 
recent history.

You can see their point. Threatening to weaken planning regulations, reducing 
subsidies for solar panels, scrapping plans to increase fuel duty and providing 
tax subsidies for our most polluting industries – on the grounds that "endless 
social and environmental goals" will cause businesses to fail – are not the 
actions of a chancellor sympathetic to green causes.

For his part, Osborne has made it clear that short-term expediency motivates 
his actions: we cannot save the planet until we have saved our economy, he 
argues. This view is straightforward but mistaken in many ways. Consider the 
political issues. Exposing parts of our finest countryside, such as Chesil 
Beach or the Norfolk Broads, to the threat of industrial development risks 
alienating the strong Tory vote of these areas. David Cameron, who made much of 
his championship of green causes at the last election, has also been made to 
look foolish.

Then there are the economic concerns. Slashing support for renewable energies 
and providing tax relief for heavy, energy-intensive industries will only 
increase Britain's reliance on fossil fuels. By contrast, committing the 
country to the development of wave, tide and solar energy projects would have 
helped Britain wean itself from oil and gas, which we are importing at 
ever-increasing costs. This investment could also have helped create 
technologies, including tide and wave power plants, whose sales round the world 
could have made billions for Britain in future decades. A golden opportunity 
has been lost.

The fact that Osborne has chosen this moment to reveal his climate-sceptic 
colours is also intriguing. In Durban, delegates from across the globe have 
gathered in a bid to revitalise international agreements to curb carbon 
emissions and global warming. Those who looked to Britain for a lead will have 
noted the signals sent out by our chancellor: there is no rush and we have 
other priorities. Like Canada, the US and several other developed nations, 
Britain appears to be happy to sit back and watch as hopes of reaching a 
binding international deal to cut carbon emissions fade away.

Two years ago, the Copenhagen climate summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/copenhagen> was alive with the belief 
that an agreement would be reached. No such expectations have been voiced in 
Durban, where climate negotiations seem beset by political complacency and the 
prospect of failure. Yet scientists' warnings have never been clearer. 
Organisations such as the Royal Society, Nasa, the Met Office, the national 
science academies of virtually every country on the planet – as well as several 
dozen Nobel laureates – have made it clear they think greenhouse gases are 
having a major impact on the planet. A US poll of 1,380 climate scientists 
found that 97% backed the belief that carbon emissions are raising global 
temperatures. The science is straightforward. Yet politicians appear less and 
less inclined to listen or act.

In the US, this attitude has reached extraordinary levels. Most Republican 
candidates for the presidency openly doubt that climate change is real and have 
even accused scientists of fiddling facts in a bid to garner research grants. As
New Scientist put it: "When candidates for the highest office in the land 
appear to spurn reason, embrace anecdote over scientific evidence, and even 
portray scientists as the perpetrators of a massive hoax, there is reason to 
worry."

Britain, until recently, has escaped the worst of these anti-intellectual 
excesses. There are signs that this state of affairs may not last, however. 
Climate sceptic groups, in particular Lord Lawson's Global Warming Policy 
Foundation <http://thegwpf.org/>, are increasingly influencing the media. Last 
week, a welter of stories that openly doubted any link between climate change 
and humanity's industrial actions appeared in the British press. A plurality of 
views about global warming is healthy, but the accusation that scientists are 
fiddling facts simply to attract grants is extraordinary. Nevertheless, most 
deniers' arguments rest on this assumption. It is a distressing trend which 
reveals that the desire to avoid uncomfortable truths is spreading.

It is therefore worth emphasising the dire consequences of our continued 
failure to address climate change. If humanity cannot get its emissions to peak 
by 2020, there is little chance of holding down temperature rises to under 2C 
by 2100. Major changes to our planet will then occur. Deserts will spread, ice 
caps melt, sea levels rise, coastal zones will be inundated and hundreds of 
millions of people will be left homeless. Rising temperatures will melt the 
world's regions of permafrost, releasing more carbon dioxide and methane, which 
will raise temperatures even further.

Humanity will be left with one last line of defence – geoengineering – a 
business involving schemes such as the seeding of seas with iron filings to 
boost the growth of plankton (which absorb carbon dioxide) and the spraying of 
the atmosphere with sulphur aerosol particles to reflect solar radiation back 
into space. All are untested and highly controversial because of their 
potential to trigger further ecological mayhem. The fact that these ideas, for 
all their inherent dangers, still have scientific support reveals an 
uncomfortable truth: many senior researchers realise that at our present rate 
of inaction we will soon find ourselves living on a cruelly scorched planet. 
Only high-risk strategies will be left to save us.

From this perspective, our obsession with our current economic headaches looks 
woefully misplaced. We should note that we are in our present financial mess 
because we let bankers and economists take irresponsible risks. Yet that fiscal 
gambling is dwarfed by the risks we are how taking with our entire planet.

Britain, creator of the industrial revolution, has the longest legacy of any 
nation for pumping carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. We have a duty to 
acknowledge what we have done and to recognise what our scientists are saying 
about the dangers we face. More importantly, we have a moral obligation to act 
on those warnings. If Britain will not act, most other developed countries will 
not bother either. The government's refusal to address environmental issues is 
therefore deeply worrying. An admission of failure and a pledge to restore past 
promises is urgently needed. We should be under no illusions about the impact 
of climate change. A true global meltdown awaits us.
 