
Alistair and Jonny Brownlee spoke of their “very special” day after becoming 
the first British brothers to win gold and silver in the same Olympic event. 
The pair were locked in an almighty duel for triathlon gold along Copacabana 
beach before Alistair, at 28 the oldest by two years, struck for home to retain 
the triathlon title he won at London 2012.

Alistair said he hopes to go for a third gold medal at the Tokyo 2020 Games 
and admitted he “had to go through hell” to get the better of his brother in 
Rio.

Alistair Brownlee claims triathlon gold and Jonny takes silver at Rio Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-ollympics-rio-2016-gold-silver>
“I was pretty confident we would get first and second,” he said. “I didn’t 
know entirely which way it would go. I’ve had the edge the last couple of races 
but he’s killed me in training every day. We’ve both been flying, pushing each 
other to the max. I had to go through hell and I did.”

When asked whether he had the mental edge over his brother, who also finished 
behind him with a bronze at London 2012, Alistair replied: “You can only go as 
hard as you can go.

“Maybe I have that little bit of endurance-based engine. At the finish I was 
just so happy. Last time I had to keep going, this time I had the chance to 
enjoy it. It’s probably never going to happen again so you have to enjoy it.”

The pair said they had never discussed beforehand the possibility of making 
history, even though they had been the bookmakers’ favourites to do so. 
“Finishing first and second was something that went unsaid,” Alistair said.

“We’re not really the kind of people to say that to each other but probably 
after 2010 we thought we could do it on the right day.

“

“It was flipping close at London 2012, where I won gold and Jonny bronze, but 
Javier Gómez [of Spain] got between us.

“But we knew if it went right we could do it. When that gap got up to a minute 
on the bikes, we knew that was probably going to be the outcome – we just 
weren’t sure which way round that it would be,” Alistair said.

Gold and silver also means that the Brownlees became the first brothers to 
finish first and second in the same Olympic event since the Italian show 
jumpers Raimondo and Piero D’Inzeo in 1960.

Jonny said: “That’s a good first. I’m very proud of that. It’s very, very 
special to race next to your brother. We’ve very fortunate to do that.”

He also paid tribute to his older brother, who overcome a serious ankle injury 
last year to return to his best. “We had a tough year last year,” he said. 
“Only 12 months ago there was a test event here. Alistair ran around in about 
36 minutes and was awful. I was at home on my crutches with a stress fracture. 
A lot of people said we’d got no chance. That makes it even more special.

“You’ve got to appreciate special athletes.”

“I realise how good Alistair is and I gave it everything to beat him. I was 
training as hard as I possibly could. And it’s a silver medal at anOlympic Games
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. If I wanted to get beaten 
by any athlete out there, it’s got to be Alistair.”

The pair were supported by their mother and father, who held a Yorkshire flag 
and Union Jack in the stands, as well as thousands of British fans who lined 
the course. However, there was one notable absentee – the pair’s younger 
brother, Ed.

As Alistair put it: “My little brother didn’t really bother coming, he’s at 
home training to be a vet. I think he’s milking cows – doing something far more 
interesting than watching us.”
 