
Dustin Brown converted his own rebound with 1:27 remaining to lift the Los 
Angeles Kings to a 5-4 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks on Monday. Brown's 
first attempt went off the back of Blackhawks defenseman Johnny Oduya, but it 
bounced back to the captain, who sent it past Corey Crawford for his 12th of 
the season. Anze Kopitar set up the score by winning a faceoff in Chicago's end.

Kopitar also had a goal in the second period and Jarrett Stoll and Dwight King 
also scored for Los Angeles. Michael Frolik had two goals and an assist for 
Chicago, and Patrick Kane and Jonathan Toews also scored.

Zach Parise scored two goals and added an assist as the Minnesota Wild 
extended their winning streak to six games with a 7-4 win over theDallas Stars. 
Both of Parise's goals came on bounces that barely made it over the goal line. 
Mikko Koivu and Matt Cullen each had a goal and assist for Minnesota, which 
snapped a 16-game losing streak in Dallas. Dany Heatley added an insurance goal 
with 1:28 remaining and Pierre-Marc Bouchard added an empty-netter with 16 
seconds left. Jaromir Jagr, Alex Goligoski, Trevor Daley and Philip Larsen 
scored for the Stars.

At Glendale, Arizona, Pavel Datsyuk scored his team's second power-play goal 
in the third period and had an assist to lift theDetroit Red Wings to a 3-2 win 
over thePhoenix Coyotes. Ian White also had a goal as the Red Wings scored on 
the power play for the eighth straight game to win for the fifth time in six 
games. Martin Hanzal and Rob Klinkhammer scored for Phoenix, which has lost six 
straight for the first time since 2009.

Brent Burns and Martin Havlat each had a goal and an assist as the San Jose 
Sharks sent the Anaheim Ducks to their third home loss in four days, 5-3, while 
Patrice Bergeron scored the equalizer with 9:24 left in regulation, then put 
his team ahead in the shootout as theBoston Bruins beat the Toronto Maple Leafs 
3-2. In other games, the Ottawa Senators beat the New Jersey Devils 3-2 in a 
shootout and theNashville Predators edged the Edmonton Oilers, also 3-2.
 