
Michael Lynch, standing down as chief executive of the Southbank Centre, 
criticised "corporate Britain" for what he saw as its failure to support the 
arts in general, and theFestival Hall refurbishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artblog/2007/jun/07/royalfestivalhallhits111m>
 in particular.

I admire Lynch for being a breath of fresh air, and what he has done for us in 
sorting out the Royal Festival Hall – rediscovering the spirit of that 
wonderful venue – is immense. The 50,000 people who experienced theSímon 
Bolívar Youth Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/apr/19/simon-bolivar-youth-orchestra> 
last week would agree. Getting sponsorship was a tough job, but he did it, 
including from about 20,000 individual donors.

Now is not the time for negativity. In the last few years commercial 
sponsorship has been important for the arts in this country – more than £160m 
in 2007-08. And now, in the jaws of global recession and on the brink of a 
budget that may set the tone for arts funding in this country for years to 
come, public and private funders of the arts need to stand firm and stand 
together.

In England we have a six-key model for funding the arts – public funding; 
through the Arts Council and local government; private funding; through 
commercial sponsorship; foundations and individual giving; and through the box 
office.

When things are going well, this model has plenty of advantages, which we 
should draw more effectively to the attention of those who hold the purse 
strings. Relatively small amounts of public money attract private money, and 
allow more to be done for the public money that is available. It's not the 
chimera of pyramid selling, it's core public investment levering in more real 
money from elsewhere.

In hard times it is vital that all elements of the funding package stay as 
strong as possible. It's important that public and private funding remains 
strong and it's important to keep box office going by providing something the 
public want.

And what do the public want? They want to be entertained, sure, but they also 
want to be challenged, offered insights, invited to question the world as they 
have understood it until now. It's more than bread and circuses; it is 
nourishment for the soul as former certainties begin to crumble.

Boards of arts organisations – many of whom might in their day jobs work in 
the financial sector – may well be feeling like pulling back on artistic risk, 
programming the supposedly safe. But within the safe lies the prospect of 
boredom. Artistic leaders know that the public remain eager to experience 
something less ordinary, and want artists to take properly thought through and 
executed artistic risk. It's not like gambling on toxic debt, it's the way the 
arts work – risk moves boundaries and takes audiences to places they did not 
know existed.

We should trust our artists to do what they do best – challenge, thrill, 
surprise and offer us the comfort of hard won insight into our condition. And 
funders should support them in this.

We know what can go wrong if more than one pillar of the funding structure is 
shaken at the same time. In previous recessions not only has private money been 
scarce but public funding was cut too. This led to a spiral of decline where in 
some cases programming became more conservative and the public, rightly, lost 
interest. We mustn't let this happen to the arts this time.

What we ask of private funders is courage – we understand that you are under 
pressure but we know you see the value of your investment in the arts. Have the 
courage to continue it.

What we ask of politicians is faith – in the arts and what they can do, and 
for the important pillar of public funding to remain strong as a key part of 
the way through for the nation and its soul.
 