
Electrochromic glass

Imagine a future without blinds or curtains where your windows can be turned 
transparent or opaque with the flick of a switch. This may soon be possible 
with the advent of electrochromic glass. This material is composed of layers of 
specially formulated metals and plastics, which change their optical properties 
with electrical stimulation. The windows can also selectively reflect infrared 
light, which is responsible for much indoor overheating, leading to cooler 
interiors and lower use of air conditioning.

Self-healing concrete

Tiny cracks in concrete do not necessarily affect structural integrity in the 
short term, but they do allow water and other chemicals to seep into 
the structure, which may cause problems over time. Self-healing concrete has 
embedded clay particles that contain dormant bacteria and a food source. When a 
crack appears in the concrete, water seeps in and activates the bacteria. 
When they wake, the bacteria eat their packed lunch and then conveniently 
excrete chalk, which fills the crack.

Biomimicry

Biomimicry – taking inspiration from the natural world to solve our problems – 
is already in use in buildings such as the Dome at Greenwich, London, where the 
"lotus effect" is used to create self-cleaning surfaces. A drop of water on a 
lotus leaf stands proud and spherical, as the microscopic surface contours do 
not allow the drop to spread out. If buildings are designed with surfaces like 
this, then rainwater just rolls off, taking dirt with it.

Aerogel

This is a solid glass foam saturated with minuscule air bubbles. It is the 
lightest solid on earth and an extremely efficient insulator. It will one day 
allow us to build walls or windows that are not only see-through, but will 
provide efficient insulation – allowing architects of the future more freedom 
to create visionary structures without worrying about heat loss. Aerogel's 
eerie appearance has earned it the nickname of "solid smoke".

Thermobimetals

This material is created by joining together two metals that expand at 
different rates when heated, making the structure bend and contort as the 
metals grapple with each other at their interface. It may be used in the future 
to produce specially shaped "skins" for buildings that respond to heat in much 
the same way our own skin does. When it's cold, the skin will remain closed and 
stop air flowing through it. When it heats up, pores open across its surface, 
allowing the building to breathe.

• Philip Howes is a researcher at the Institute of Making, King's College 
London:instituteofmaking.org.uk <http://instituteofmaking.org.uk/>
 