
What do you do with a sprawling 40-year-old building on a tightly packed city 
centre site, sweltering in summer, freezing in winter, and fitted with windows 
you daren't open because of traffic noise? Do you demolish and rebuild, resort 
to cosmetic surgery or convert to something else?

Ashburton Court, Winchester (seen panel below), is typical of countless local 
authority and public buildings built during the 1960s in towns across the UK. 
Leaking energy at every turn, many are well past their sell-by date, with their 
long-suffering occupants coping with outdated office layouts, antiquated 
heating systems and basic technology.

Do such buildings have a future? The Carbon Trust answers with a resounding 
yes. Founded in 2001 as an independent company by the government in response to 
the threat of climate change, it aims to accelerate the UK's move to a 
low-carbon economy by helping organisations cut carbon emissions and develop 
commercial technologies to match.

Richard Guy, the Carbon Trust's senior technology acceleration manager for 
low-carbon buildings, says the organisation exists in part to monitor successes 
and failures in low-carbon construction projects and then feed back into 
government and industry. The acceleration programme is designed to act as a 
magnifying glass on the complete low carbon refurbishment process from the 
first design through to the operation and use of a finished building.

The Carbon Trust also works with organisations wanting to take a new approach 
to low-carbon reduction or "adopt an improved target on our building," says its 
head of public sector, Richard Rugg. "Different bodies have different barriers 
to overcome. Some are at the technical end and we advise a customer where are 
the best applications for carbon reduction. A consultant will literally walk 
round with a clipboard and draw up recommendations in a report to reduce carbon 
footprint. We call this a carbon survey.

"We also run a carbon management service – a long-term partnership between the 
Carbon Trust and public service bodies, lasting typically over one year, to 
help them work out a carbon reduction strategy over five to 10 years. It's 
about everything from getting the right ownership of carbon management in your 
organisation to helping measure your carbon footprint and training in how to 
identify, set and meet long-term carbon reduction targets."

Among its 2,500 clients, the Carbon Trust has worked with 436 large public 
sector bodies on strategy management, more than half the UK's local authorities 
(256), 82 universities and at least 80 large NHS trusts. "We want local 
authorities to know we don't just give technical fixes – but long-term 
support," says Rugg. "It's not just a question of changing light bulbs but 
about making sure you are properly including carbon reduction in how your 
organisation operates as a business.

"One task is to watch and learn and the other is to influence as much as 
possible. We want to see where projects are going wrong but, if we can make a 
difference, get them back on track." The Carbon Trust asks what are the lessons 
learned and then backs this up with real evidence from data gleaned from its 
extensive monitoring of buildings' energy levels. This enables it to 
understand, say, how the ventilation is working, how the boiler plants operate, 
or what the temperature of the building is as a whole.

The Carbon Trust deals largely with key decision-makers in public sector 
building procurement ranging from developers to building services such as in 
local authorities, the NHS, and education institutions, although it also works 
with a number of third sector organisations.

Above all, though, the Carbon Trust promotes innovation in low-carbon 
technology. So besides a courageous showcase project such as Hampshire county 
council's Ashburton Court, it is constantly seeking new projects, large or 
small. One example is Cranfield University, which has set itself the massive 
goal of cutting carbon emissions by half.

"We're delighted it's raising the game for universities," says Rugg of 
Cranfield, which is scrutinising its entire core business to make it more 
economically and environmentally sustainable. It's working with the Carbon 
Trust to reallocate academic activities from one campus to another, consider 
installing combined heat and power units and even aspire to convert its 
vice-chancellor's car to recycled cooking oil. Meanwhile, Coventry city 
council, a very large authority, is working with the Carbon Trust to reduce its 
carbon emissions by 30% (over 6,000 tons) over the next five years – and save 
just under £1m a year.

The key in any public sector project, though, is knowing what you want to 
achieve before you start spending, which is why Rugg urges against delay in 
contacting the Carbon Trust. "We can help discuss the issues and present a 
range of solutions which we then hope will help you in your journey to reduce 
carbon emissions."

Key steps in project management
• Engage teams with a good track record
• Look for long-term value, not short-term cost-cutting
• Understand who can help you inside/outside your organisation
• No one can fix what they don't know so understand your systems such as 
lighting, heating and ventilation

Council offices that breathe

Last month saw completion of the final phase of a remarkable low-carbon 
refurbishment project – the result of a close partnership between the Carbon 
Trust, Hampshire county council and its design and engineering team.

The last tranche of council workers have moved into the newly renamed 
Elizabeth II Court – a refurbished building now comprising 13,000sq m of office 
space in the centre of Winchester – after a low-carbon makeover that was 
planned back in 2004.

The statistics look impressive – a 50% cut in energy use, a 30% saving in 
occupied office space, a new external brick façade, a pioneering natural 
ventilation system and "intelligent" lighting. The new open plan offices mean a 
70% increase in staff capacity and a rise in permanent workstations from 600 to 
800 which can take1,100 staff on flexible working patterns. And all this has 
been completed on time and to budget … in short, a modern, sustainable office 
environment, a satisfied workforce and a building that allows the council to 
rid itself of expensive leasehold accommodation.

Just three years ago, an old wornout building called Ashburton Court dominated 
Winchester's city centre. Some 40 years after it opened, the council's HQ had 
become expensive to run, ugly, dilapidated, draughty, with an uncomfortable 
workforce resorting to placing cups by windows that leaked when it rained.

Hampshire county council and its assistant director of property services, 
Steve Clow, had a choice: spend £15- £20m on short-term repairs, £75-80m to 
knock it down and rebuild, or £40m to give it a trail-blazing sustainability 
makeover, slashing energy costs and creating a new office environment designed 
to last another 40 years.

For Clow it was a no brainer. In close collaboration with architects Bennetts 
Associates, engineers Ernest Griffiths and the Carbon Trust, the council drew 
up plans to monitor the basic structure, extend office space into part of the 
basement car park and so begin a project that has become a prime example of 
what the Carbon Trust believes can be repeated with countless other1960s 
buildings across the UK.

"What attracted me was the challenge it represented," says architect Julian 
Lipscombe. The brief was to halve the building's carbon footprint and create a 
21st-century business centre. "It was about setting objectives, realistic 
targets and, at the outset, not being over-ambitious."

For its part, the Carbon Trust has raised the profile of the project, added 
order and guidance to the process of collaboration, and provided £75,000 in 
funding. It's undertaken a highly detailed pre- and post-occupancy evaluation 
exercise to measure the efficiency of the project's energy saving measures, 
installing a sophisticated system of energy meters in the building.

"The trust was very helpful," says Charles Pearson, senior partner at 
engineers Ernest Griffiths. "They suggested a lot of measurement devices, so we 
have a very good idea of how much energy the building uses."

And the Carbon Trust's view? "Hampshire county council was courageous in what 
they did but without making it seem unachievable for others. It's a very 
replicable project."

Calling all pioneers

Any local or central government authority, education institution or other 
public sector organisation that is using low-carbon technology in an innovative 
way is urged to publicise its success by entering the public sector category in 
this year's Carbon Trust Low Carbon Innovation awards.

The Carbon Trust is offering public sector organisations a chance to win over 
£50,000's worth of national publicity opportunities to promote their ideas 
across the country. Winners pick up a trophy; have their ideas published in the 
Guardian and New Scientist, thereby gaining priceless exposure that can attract 
potential customers; forge invaluable commercial partnerships; and raise 
national awareness of the basic equation: low carbon = less energy and less 
cost.

Entrants should ask themselves: is their use of carbon-reducing technology 
innovative and breaking new ground? Can it show significant carbon saving? 
Would other public sector organisations want to adopt it?

"Recognition that you have made the right decision in a low-carbon project is 
extremely powerful to stake-holders – I see that as the main driver for people 
wanting to enter the awards," says Richard Guy, the Carbon Trust's senior 
technology acceleration manager for low-carbon buildings.

Deadline for entries in all six categories – public sector, buildings, 
industry, power, transport and the private sector – is 5pm on 9 October 2009.

For more details and an entry form, please visit carbontrust.co.uk/awards 
<http://www.carbontrust.co.uk/awards>
 