
It is not often that big business comes to Washington to seek regulation. But 
a group of companies including IKEA, Jones Lang LaSalle, Mars, Sprint, and VF 
Corp did so this week, asking Congress to take steps to prevent catastrophic 
climate change.

Executives organized by the business coalition BICEP 
<http://www.ceres.org/bicep> (Business for Innovative Climate and Energy 
Policy), testified before a Senate and House task force on climate change, 
telling lawmakers about their own corporate commitments to reduce carbon 
pollution. Then they fanned out across the Capitol to lobby on behalf of a 
clean-energy financing bill.

They did so on the first anniversary of the release of the Climate Declaration 
<http://www.ceres.org/bicep/climate-declaration>, a corporate call-to-action 
that has been signed by more than 750 companies. It was a reminder to 
legislators that the US Chamber of Commerce, the coal industry and the Wall 
Street Journal editorial page do not speak for all of corporate America when 
they oppose government action to regulate carbon pollution.

"Business is not a monolith," said Anne Kelley, who coordinates BICEP's 
lobbying efforts. "That's been the message of BICEP since the beginning."

But if BICEP has shown that hundreds of companies favor political action on 
climate, its efforts so far have been drowned out in Washington by those of the 
US Chamber and its allies, a US Senator told the group.

Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, a Rhode Island Democrat and a strong advocate of 
climate action who convened the hearing, said BICEP's voice is "a murmur and 
not a message", and he urged companies to spend more of their political and 
reputational capital on the climate issue.

"You've got to take the next step, and say, 'our lobbyist in Washington is 
going to add this issue to the agenda'", Whitehouse said.

He called on big, brand-name companies that are ordinarily fierce competitors 
– Coca-Cola and PepsiCo, Fedex and UPS, Target and Walmart – to unite around 
the climate issue.

"I'd love to see the CEOs of Coke and Pepsi on a screen saying that we compete 
like crazy with one another, but one thing that we all agree on is that climate 
change is real," Whitehouse said.

That's unlikely to happen anytime soon. Even those companies that have joined 
BICEP and back climate regulation admit that the issue has yet to rise to the 
top of their Washington priority list. While climate change is a pivotal issue 
for coal companies and the utility industry, it is not front and center for 
most firms.

"It's not realistic for me to say this is going to be part of our core 
agenda," Amy Hargroves, director of corporate responsibility and sustainability 
for Sprint, told me after the hearing. Sprint understandably pays more 
attention to telecommunications issues or antitrust policy. Jim Hanna, director 
of environmental affairs at Starbucks, said many companies don't align their 
government relations work with their sustainability efforts.

Sprint and Starbucks have both signed the Climate Declaration, joining such 
companies as eBay, Gap, GM, Intel, Microsoft, Nestle and Unilever. But the 
declaration is an anodyne call for a "coordinated effort to combat climate 
change", without specifying what that effort will entail. An insider described 
it to me as "a gateway drug", designed to start a conversation that will 
progress as momentum builds.

Similarly, this week's lobbying effort focused not on an economy-wide program 
to curb climate pollution but on an obscure piece of legislation known as the
Master Limited Partnership Parity Act 
<http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2013/12/19-clean-energy-mormann-reicher-muro>
, which is intended to lower the cost of financing clean energy.

BICEP members also attended a White House briefing about forthcoming EPA rules 
to curb pollution from existing power plants. "You are going to see full-on 
support from BICEP for the carbon rules," Kelley said.

Whitehouse urged the BICEP members to aim higher. "We are tantalizingly close" 
to a "significant piece of climate legislation", he said, expressing a view 
that is not widely held in Washington. He predicted that EPA's power plant 
rules will be a "game changer" that will force big emitters to rethink their 
use of fossil fuels, that climate change will be a winning issue for Democrats 
in the 2014 congressional elections and that a corporate shift in favor of 
climate regulation could make a decisive difference.

"The denial castle is built on sand, and the sand is eroding fast", he said.

Speaking of erosion, several of the corporate executives who spoke described 
severe weather which may be climate-related as a threat to their businesses.

Kevin Rabinovitch, director of global sustainability at Mars, a major buyer of 
chocolate, said: "We see crops suffering from climate change, and that flows 
through to us in terms of price."

Letitia Webster, senior director of global corporate sustainability at VF 
Corp, whose brands including Wrangler, Timberland and North Face, said their 
operations could be affected by climate change because they buy a lot of 
cotton, which is affected by drought in terms of its price and availability. VF 
also sells into the ski industry, which is threatened by warmer weather.

Webster said the company would like to buy more clean energy, but that the 
economics are challenging. "Renewables are difficult right now," she said. 
"It's often a six or seven-year ROI (return on investment)", which isn't quick 
enough to satisfy top executives.

By contrast, IKEA said it is stepping up its commitment to low-carbon energy. 
The companyannounced 
<http://www.ikea.com/us/en/about_ikea/newsitem/pr-IKEA-wind-farm-investment> 
that it is making its first wind investment in the US by purchasing an 98 
megawatt wind farm under construction in Illinois. IKEA – which is 
privately-held company owned by a Dutch Foundation – has allocated $2bn to 
invest in wind and solar by 2015, and it aims to generate as much renewable 
energy as the total energy it consumes by 2020.

That's a bold and expensive commitment – and one that few US companies, 
including those in BICEP, have been willing to match.
 