
Generosity of spirit on the field of play is not considered one of the great 
Australian virtues. Tooth and claw might as well be national symbols here; if a 
man is down, give him a shoeing and only after play take him a beer to salve 
the wounds.

But they were generous to Mark Butcher yesterday almost to a fault and, 
although the second new ball dragged the first day of the final Test back on an 
even keel, leaving England at 264 for five, the Surrey left-hander had thanked 
his hosts after batting his way to his sixth Test century in more than six 
hours.

Tiredness, over-ambition and Brett Lee's pace and verve finally did him in 
with the sanctuary of the dressing room barely three overs away. Lee, hostile 
all day, pitched up wide of off-stump and Butcher, as he has done a thousand 
times during his career, launched himself at the offside.

Tiredness stole his conviction, though, his eye and timing out as the ball 
wavered back into him a fraction. It caught the edge, diverted on to his stumps 
and, as Lee celebrated in extravagant fashion, Butcher removed his helmet and, 
with the beads of sweat on his head glistening in the evening sun, he raised 
his bat to the thunderous applause of 44,000 people and disappeared into the 
pavilion.

As an example of how to take one's opportunities his 124 was a masterpiece, 
much more like his first Test and Ashes hundred four years ago in Brisbane - 
which stood out amid a background of low scores - than his landmark innings of 
173 not out against Australia at Headingley two years later.

 He might have been lbw to his first ball before the sleep was from his eyes, 
as Lee's booming inswinger, sent down at searing pace, crashed into his pads. 
The appeal was compelling and looked justified, but Russell Tiffin was unmoved.

Next, on 13, Damien Martyn in the gully climbed high but just failed with his 
left hand to cling on to a typically loose drive. The chance he offered to the 
close cordon on 43 - he flirts shamelessly with slips and gullies - was simpler 
and ought to have been left to the excellent hands of Martin Love at first 
slip. Instead Adam Gilchrist, who had already poached one catch with 
spectacular success, tried to do so once again and he pushed the chance away.

 Finally, having fought his way to within five of his hun dred, Butcher's 
attempt to heave Stuart MacGill's leg-break mightily towards mid-wicket brought 
only an under-edge on to his front pad and a rebound to Matthew Hayden lurking 
at silly point. This time, to everyone's disbelief, the South African umpire 
Dave Orchard looked kindly upon him.

 It was certainly a curate's egg of an innings. Butcher is a rounded man who 
gets his kicks not just at the crease but with his music and in the bar. He is 
not the type to see the new year in with a glass of lemonade and until well 
past lunch and on into the afternoon he might have been batting with his eyes 
closed so frequently did ball after ball rip past his outside edge, especially 
early on in the day.

 Butcher kept on, buoyed by the efforts of Nasser Hussain at the other end. 
This was the captain at his battling, bloody-minded best, taking advantage of 
slack Australian fielding (the catch MacGill missed off his own bowling when 
Hussain had only half-a-dozen was the simplest of the series) to score 75 with 
eight excellent boundaries.

None was better than the pull off Lee immediately after being "sent to the 
penthouse suite" by the paceman and immediately and pointedly asking for the 
sightscreen to be moved to a proper position. The pair were to add 166 
together, beating Wally Hammond and Maurice Leyland's third-wicket record for 
England on this ground and the sixth highest for any wicket. At times, when 
both hit a purple patch, it bordered on exhilarating. Hussain deserved a 
hundred but fell three-quarters of the way there, unable to avoid a bouncer 
from Jason Gillespie, the ball feathering his glove on the way to Gilchrist.

 Quite what woke Butcher from his apathy midway through his innings is 
unclear. Suddenly after the interval the runs began to flow as if he had turned 
on a tap. MacGill was hit searingly through the covers, swept square and then, 
two overs later, back-cut through the gully as his initial forward press 
movement seduced the bowler into dropping his length.

When Andy Bichel tried a slower ball it was clipped mercilessly through mid-on 
before one of a number of MacGill Full tosses was smashed through the covers.

 The loss of Hussain, immediately after Orchard's blunder, might have upset a 
man more easily distracted than Butcher. Instead another MacGill full toss - 
the leg-spinner sent down more than a third of Australia's 90 overs - was put 
away firmly before a flick to leg gave him his century.

 The third-wicket stand resurrected an innings that had seemed doomed to go 
off the rails after Michael Vaughan and Marcus Trescothick were dismissed 
inside the first hour. Only five days ago Vaughan's wonderful 145 had made him 
the leading run scorer of 2002. Yesterday's innings made him the lowest scorer 
of this year. How the mighty have fallen.

 Although Australia bowled their way back into the day with three wickets 
after tea, it finished positively for England. Whether or not Alec Stewart had 
chicken pox in what may be his last Test he came out in a rash of strokes, 
culminating in the last two balls of the day from Lee hitting the boundary 
boards.

Stewart waited for more, only to be told by John Crawley that stumps had been 
drawn and all were making their way off. Like Stewart, it was well spotted.
 