
Mark Butcher had spent so long out of the England Test side that he had almost 
forgotten what Test cricket felt like. Last night, after Australia paid him the 
ultimate accolade, he was in no doubt.

When Butcher was recalled to England's ranks this summer, he was not even 
guaranteed a place in the Surrey team. Now he will be acclaimed as the batsman 
who has salvaged England's self-respect in a manner that not only deserved its 
rapturous response but, after a demoralising summer, stated to a shaken 
Australian side that English cricket might well remain flawed but is not 
iredeemably lost.

"It felt like Test cricket," said Australia's captain Adam Gilchrist. "This 
guy was giving it to us. Good on him."

That such challenges to Australian supremacy have been few this summer was 
taken as read. That rarity made Butcher's cavalier, unbeaten 173 - the same 
score that Don Bradman made to beat England at Headingley in 1948 after Norman 
Yardley's declaration - even more remarkable.

Butcher had played no part in the rewarding 18 months that tempted England to 
imagine that they could match Australia. He was dropped after the lost Test 
series in South Africa two years ago, as his personal life plunged into 
turmoil, and returned only at the start of the summer when England, beset by 
injuries to Graham Thorpe and Michael Vaughan, looked around and shrugged in 
desperation.

Sportsmen are mistakenly assumed to exist in an unreal world, where every 
important emotion, every stage of their development, is available for public 
consumption. Collapsing careers are routinely put down to injuries, faulty 
technique or character defects. Success, and by extension individual welfare, 
is measured in the appropriate currency: in Butcher's case, runs. Nothing else 
is deemed to matter.

When, as in Butcher's case, it owes more to the upheaval of a failed personal 
life, the inclination is to look away. At the end of that South Africa series 
Butcher's marriage was floundering and so was his Test career. The two facts 
were entirely intertwined.

His was a particularly messy cricketing split. His marriage to Judy, which had 
produced a baby daughter, had joined two of England's foremost cricketing 
families: the Butchers and the Stewarts.

Alec Stewart, Judy's brother, was a Surrey and England colleague. Micky 
Stewart, a former England and Surrey coach, was still an emeritus grise. Alan 
Butcher, Mark's father, one of England's one-cap wonders and a deeply respected 
coach, was in charge of Surrey's second team. Amid such turbulence they ensured 
not just that the cricket continued but that it continued in good spirit.

"It was a wonderful innings," Alec said last night. "It has added credibility 
to the series."

Butcher identified last Christmas as the time when his head began to clear - 
"the problem was not with cricket but with me." It reignited his ambition: he 
worked with his father to adjust his grip and stance, to free up his game. He 
vowed the game would become a source of enjoyment, not a bind.

"I was worrying about getting back into the Surrey side at one point and I had 
no one to blame for that but myself," he said. "I had a real downer on my own 
form but fortunately Dad turned me round. If things had gone as badly for 
another year I might have quit. He's already talked to me. I think he's quite 
emotional about what his little lad has done."

Twice this summer Butcher's determination to keep the enjoyment alive has 
invited criticism. As England searched for a replacement captain at Lord's, 
with Nasser Hussain injured, Butcher, who had stood in once before and judged 
himself naive to do so, quickly ruled himself out. "At this stage of my life 
and career I just want to enjoy myself," he said.

Steve Waugh shrewdly made great political play of the fact that some England 
players had opted out of such an honour before it was offered. Butcher had 
every reason to do so.

His other lapse came at Trent Bridge where, after getting out cheaply, 
midnight struck with him still relieving his sorrows in a cafe-bar. As late 
nights go, it was pretty professional - he was not due to field for some time 
next day - but complaints followed, he was reprimanded and apologised.

That slightly self-destructive streak still erupts periodically in his running 
between the wickets. In the first innings he crazily ran himself out, imagining 
a single to Brett Lee at mid-on. Yesterday, on 97, he nearly did it again, this 
time with Glenn McGrath the fielder, but survived as Hussain sent him back.

"What were you thinking of?" he was asked. "I was thinking, yep, there's one 
there, whoops, no there isn't," he replied.
 