
A quite brilliant 173 from Mark Butcher - who, were it not for injuries would 
not even have been playing - gave England a memorable Ashes win in the fourth 
Test at Headingley today.

Butcher's quickly-scored ton, England's first of this Ashes series, together 
with Nasser Hussain's half-century, made a seemingly insurmountable 315-run 
target look easy. They reached it with 19.4 overs and six wickets to spare.

Stand-in Australian captain Adam Gilchrist may come in for criticism for 
generously declaring last night on just 176-4, but as he magnanimously said 
afterwards: "It's good for the game to keep it interesting. It's very 
disappointing, but look, it's not the end of the world."

After a frankly abysmal English summer of sport during which Australia have 
pummelled the Poms at anything and everything, the anguish etched onto 
Australian faces brought smiles to the home crowd who waited in nervous 
expectation.

"Today was the day we have been waiting for all summer," said a visibly 
relieved Hussain afterwards, and the crowd cheered in agreement.

Butcher, who admitted to lunching only on "a cup of coffee and a couple of 
cigarettes" was a Colossus at the crease for England, and together with captain 
Nasser, he seized back the initiative for England when earlier, at 33-2, it was 
very much with the visitors.

The exhausted Surrey left-hander said of his century: "I can't remember it to 
be honest." But for the overjoyed Headingley crowd that witnessed it, his 
innings will never be forgotten.

It was a statistician's wet dream: England's second-highest fourth innings 
total to win a Test match, their highest in England, the second highest at 
Headingley, and the joint 13th highest of all time.

Butcher reached his third Test century - and first since Brisbane in 1998 - in 
142 balls in a three-hour stint at the crease which included 13 boundaries. It 
makes him England's leading run-scorer in this series - a dramatic improvement 
in form given that he was languishing in Surrey's second XI at the start of the 
summer.

In a tantalising final session, Butcher slaughtered the Australain pace 
attack. Glenn McGrath was swatted expansively through the covers. And in 
celebration, Butcher dispatched Jason Gillespie with a classy drive to mid-on, 
a cut stroke which nut-megged Damien Martyn at third-man, and an intended 
uppercut over third man for six in an over that cost 19.

He lost Mark Ramprakash to the spin of Shane Warne and the reflexes of Mark 
Waugh at first slip. However, television replays suggested that the ball did 
not quite carry.

Ramprakash's misfortune added to that suffered by Hussain who went shortly 
before tea. After a spate of fervent appeals, Australia finally got the wicket 
they had been baying for. Hussain looked dismayed to be given out - and with 
some justification. Although umpire Venkat agreed with Gillespie that the ball 
had indeed brushed the captain's glove on its way through to Adam Gilchrist 
behind the stumps, it actually came off his hip.

Nevertheless the captain's knock of 55 was a priceless one. It sparked a 
remarkable recovery for an England side which, before his arrival, had slumped 
to a 33-2. Hussain steadied an England ship which was in danger of capsizing 
when first Atherton and then Trescothick fell, and even Butcher's wicket was 
looking fragile.

He signalled the fightback, raising the home crowd's spirits and their arms to 
acclaim a massive six as he smashed Gillespie out of the ground. The 50 
partnership came from just 72 balls, and encouraged, Butcher took 13 from Brett 
Lee's first over.

A quiet Headingley crowd started to find their voice as they sensed nervously 
that, not only could England save this match, they might - whisper it - win it.

Earlier it had all looked fist-eatingly awful for the home side. First to go 
was Atherton who succumbed to a virtually unplayable delivery from McGrath for 
eight in the first over of the day. Trescothick soon followed. Gillespie 
steamed in to remove the Somerset opener who thick edged to Matthew Hayden at 
gully for just 10 to leave England seemingly in all sorts of trouble.

Their fightback was as welcome as it was unexpected, and Butcher carried his 
bat and his side to lead England to another remarkable Headingley victory.
 