
When eight different people send me a link to the same website in the span of 
a week, I know I have to write about it.

The site is called Buy Me Once <http://www.buymeonce.com/>. I’m in love, and I 
think the site and its mission are incredibly important.

Here’s why.

I talk a lot about reducing consumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/02/marriage-small-simple-wedding-ideas-save-money>
,buying less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/19/eco-friendly-living-sustainability-recycling-reducing-saving-the-planet>
 and choosing to buy better quality products when it is actually necessary to 
make a purchase. But as I’ve discovered over the past eight years, actuallydoing
 this can be quite challenging.

Initially, when I was trying to change the way I shopped, I vowed to stop 
buying clothing from fast fashion outlets. You know the ones – they’re popular 
and trendy and filled with stacks of $5 T-shirts and racks of $15 shoes. The 
whole place is fluorescent and pulsing with music and when you go in it’s hard
notto buy something.

Banning fast fashion made me feel good, but it wasn’t long before I realized 
that I really wasn’t making much of a difference. The $40 T-shirts I was buying 
at the upscale shop a few blocks away were still made in sweatshops with 
unsustainable manufacturing practices and horrific working conditions. The 
fabric was a bit better and the label certainly was, but other than that, was 
it really all that different?

This realization was disheartening. It wasn’t long before I began to encounter 
the type of fact-finding fatigue that plagues most people trying to be 
conscious of the impacts of their decisions – things like buying a T-shirt, 
which used to be a simple five-minute decision, now took weeks of research. I 
was sick of it.

Yes, you recycle. But until you start reducing, you're still killing the planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/19/eco-friendly-living-sustainability-recycling-reducing-saving-the-planet>
Did I really have to conduct a full-scale investigation into each company I 
wanted to support just to buy a new pair of shoes or lipstick? And sometimes 
even after investigating labour practices I’d finally pull the trigger, only to 
have the product fall apart a few short months later.

Rage. Just pure rage. 

It’s true what they say, they don’t make ’em like they used to, whether you’re 
referring to appliances, cars, electronics, clothing or furniture.

So, here we are, shopping and shopping. Meanwhile, those who would like to 
fill their homes with well-made products rather than spend their lives looking 
for replacements often find themselves at a loss, frustratedly casting about in 
a sea of temporary crap, trying to find the one-offs. The good stuff.

The site my friends and family kept sending me is designed to help do just 
that.

It’s called Buy Me Once <http://www.buymeonce.com/> and its motto is “Love 
Things That Last”. It’s one of those sites you wish you’d thought of yourself. 
It is lists products – clothing, kitchen goods, footwear, toys and more – that 
are simply built tolast. 
This site is the holy grail for those looking to prioritize quality over 
quantity. You won’t find the cheapest stuff here, nor always the most stylish, 
but everything collected on the site is designed to be bought once. It’s 
designed to spur a shift from the pervasive “consume and replace” mentality of 
our culture to a more sustainable “keep or pass on” mode of operation.

In the Buy Me Once collection, you’ll find Patagonia brand coats, leggings and 
shirts that come with a lifetime guarantee – you can send them back to be fixed 
at any point in their life cycle. You’ll find Tweezerman tweezers which you can 
send back to be sharpened and realigned, teddy bears that can be returned and 
repaired in a bear hospital when they’re loved a little too much, and even Le 
Creuset dutch ovens, which have always carried a lifetime quality guarantee.

Of course, let’s get one thing out of the way: this stuff ain’t cheap. These 
products are a far cry from $5 T-shirts and the prices may seem steep at first 
glance (although not when you run a simple cost-per-use calculation). It’s 
worth noting that the price points may make these products inaccessible for 
many consumers. It would be ignorant to assume that it’s pure evil that fuels 
the cycle of buying cheap crap that breaks: it’s not. For many, it’s the fact 
that coming up with $15 to replace an item every year is far more feasible than 
coming up with $100 to invest in something that will last a lifetime. For many 
of us, big chunks of money are hard to come by – especially since no one really 
seems to save up for purchases anymore (but that’s a different column 
altogether).

Nonetheless, a site like Buy Me Once is long overdue. It shines a 
well-deserved spotlight on those companies which have bucked the trend of 
planned obsolescence. It highlights the manufacturers who stand behind their 
products, those who design them to last and have the guts to guarantee the same.

The site also has a fascinating side effect that is not unlike the effect the 
Bechdel test <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bechdel_test> had on how I evaluate 
movies. When you start evaluating products by whether or not they’d qualify to 
be listed on Buy Me Once, it’s astonishing how few make the cut.

Let’s show that we support the ones which do. 
 