
Cable & Wireless Worldwide jumped more than 2.5% ahead of Thursday's deadline 
for prospective bidders Tata Communications andVodafone to decide whether to 
make an offer or not.

India's Tata has reportedly changed the size of its $2bn loan to help fund the 
deal, while critics have suggestedVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> could struggle to explain 
its position if it used CWW's tax losses to reduce its own bill. Analysts at 
Espirito Santo said:
 A bidding war may emerge but we still believe Vodafone could justify a higher 
premium than Tata because of the combination of the available tax assets and 
synergies with its existing UK operation. We note reports that if Vodafone 
enters a bidding war "the price could be pushed up to 50p, which could 
eliminate Tata", but if Tata has secured more financing than previously 
expected bids may actually go higher than this level.

CWW closed 0.92p higher at 37.05p while Vodafone has dipped 2.6p to 169.9p.

A number of companies in the leading index went ex-dividend including insurers 
Resolution, down 14p at 225p, and Legal and General, 6p lower at 118.2p, Old 
Mutual, off 5.3p at 150.1p, and BAE Systems, down 14.6p at 289.2p.

Engineering group GKN fell 2.3p to 209.2p on profit taking following a 19% 
rise in first quarter profits.

Overall, leading shares fell back after Tuesday's surge, as worries about 
Spain and Italy unsettled investors once more. UK unemployment fell back while 
the latest Bank of England minutes suggested that further quantitative easing 
could be off the agenda. Disappointing updates from Intel and IBM did not help 
sentiment. So with Wall Street and European markets also slipping back, theFTSE 
100finished 21.66 points lower at 5745.29.

Fresnillo flew to the top of the tree, up 51p at £16.24. The Mexican miner 
said silver production fell 2.9% in the first quarter but was in line with 
expectations, while gold output was ahead of target, thanks to the opening of a 
new mine, Noche Buena. Numis said:
 The company appears to remain on track for its full year guidance of 41m 
ounces of silver and 460,000 ounces of gold. No mention of [joint venture] 
Juanicipio and San Julian pre-feasibily study results so looks to be 
disappointingly pushed back to later this year, as we feared. 
Other miners were also in demand, as copper and other base metals moved 
sharply higher in tandem with the Shanghai stock market. The catalyst was news 
that South Korea's central bank planned to buy $300m in Chinese stocks over the 
next three months, as well as renewed hopes the Chinese government would ease 
monetary policy after weak housing figures.

All that helped push Antofagasta 2p higher to £11.78, while Rio Tinto rose 
22.5p to £35.40.

Defensive stocks were again in favour. Imperial Tobacco climbed 56p to £25.03 
ahead of its first half figures in early May. Nomura raised its price target 
from £21.84 to £21.97 but remained neutral on the shares.

One of the day's biggest risers was equipment hire group Ashtead. Its shares 
climbed 10.2p to 252.4p on positive news from US peers United Rentals and RSC, 
as well as an upbeat Architects Billing Index. Seymour Pierce said:
 [Tuesday's] results from peers United Rentals and RSC show that the secular 
shift away from ownership of equipment towards renting remains strong. We stick 
with our buy recommendation on Ashtead as we believe it is well placed to 
benefit from this. 
Shares in the London Stock Exchange added 25p to £10.93, a 2 year high after a 
number of positive broker notes suggested the City was starting to see the 
benefits of its offer for LCH.Clearnet, which is expected to complete by the 
fourth quarter of the year.

Lower down the market Borders & Southern, one of the companies drilling in the 
Falkland Islands (to the chagrin of Argentina), jumped 38.5p to 108p as traders 
speculated on a positive result from its Darwin well. Peer Falkland Oil & Gas 
rose 24.25p to 93p.

Elsewhere whiteboard maker Promethean World slumped 15.75p to 57.5p after it 
said US school budget cuts had hit its revenues by more than expected, while
Zenergy Power dropped 26% to 5.3p The technology company told shareholders 
there were no firm orders in place which would secure the future of the trading 
business. It had two short term prospects with utility companies in the US and 
Russia, but has also decided to consider other strategic options.
 