
Vincent Cable, the Liberal Democrats' Treasury spokesman, waded into the Abbey 
National takeover debate yesterday by warning the City regulator of his 
concerns about Banco Santander Central Hispano's ability to manage the UK bank.

At a time when the government has been keen to take politics out of merger 
situations, particularly on competition grounds, Mr Cable wrote to John Tiner, 
chief executive of the Financial Services Authority, after receiving 
representations from concerned parties.

He said there were questions to be asked about the corporate governance of 
Banco Santander, which is chaired by Emilio Botín. "Representations have been 
made to me over the complexities of nepotism on the board of Banco Santander 
with four members of the Botín family sitting on the board, the latest in a 
line of family members to sit on the board, despite a stake totalling only 
2.8%," Mr Cable said.

Mr Botín's sons Javier and Emilio are on the board as is his daughter Ana 
Patricia, who was in London for a presentation yesterday in her capacity as 
chairman of Banesto, the Spanish bank rescued by Santander.

"Further to this I have had concerns aired to me that the board has been in 
receipt of abnormally high bonuses, pension packages and payoffs with two board 
members, Jose María Amusátegui and Angel Corcóstegui who left in 2001 and 2002 
respectively, receiving payoffs totalling £108m.

"The issues are important because they raise questions over whether in the 
absence of external scrutiny of decisions there are sufficiently robust 
arrangements for managing risk."

Liberal Democrat party member Warren Edwardes said he had raised the issue of 
boardroom structure - but not pay - with Mr Cable.

"My concern stems from being a policyholder of the Equitable [Life] and a 
mortgage and cheque account holder of the Abbey. The Equitable fell as a result 
of strong management by one powerful individual. Operational risk arose in the 
form of weak checks and balances."

The FSA refused to comment on the letter. A spokesman for the Spanish banking 
group said: "Santander's corporate governance standards are entirely 
appropriate for an international banking group."

When asked earlier about more general corporate governance issues, general 
manager Juan Inciarte said the bank had a "very high" rating from European 
corporate governance agency Deminor.

Mr Cable raised his concerns days after the Dutch government, which holds the 
EU presidency, had tried to use the the Santander takeover as a way to 
highlight the case for easing the process of pan-European mergers that could 
prevent US "megabanks" buying their way into the region.

Frits Bolkestein, internal market commissioner, wants to revise the EU banking 
directive of 2000 so the "prudential rules" allowing national regulators to 
block mergers to be more narrowly defined.
 