
By now, you're probably aware that The Beaver is about a depressed family man, 
played byMel Gibson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson>, who 
communicates via a glove puppet. What you might not be aware of is that it's 
not funny, but creepy. And you're not alone in that; Jodie Foster, who 
directed, doesn't seem aware that it's creepy either, and approaches the 
material as if it were a sensitive family drama about mental illness, when all 
the time you're thinking: "No! This is a movie about a man whose hand takes 
on a life of its own! This should be a horror movie!"

Just think: what other movies have we seen about men whose hands take on lives 
of their own? I give you Oliver Stone's The Hand, in whichMichael Caine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine> wrist-wrestles his severed 
hand, which then scuttles up his trouser leg to attack his private parts. And 
of course, there's Sam Raimi's Evil Dead II, in which Bruce Campbell's 
demonically possessed hand smashes crockery over his head before he hacks it 
off with a chainsaw. Both of these are unabashedly horror films, and both 
scenes are hilarious (though admittedly only one is intentionally funny, unless 
I've wildly underestimated Stone's sense of humour), but you get the impression 
Foster's film has been hamstrung by her striving to stop it tipping over into 
genre. Don't shun the horror, Jodie – embrace it!

The Beaver isn't the only recent movie in which I found myself wishing the 
film-makers had taken the horror route. The Hangover Part II kicks off with the 
familiar horror movie set-up of obnoxious Americans treating a foreign country 
like a rumpus room where they can disrespect the locals and behave as 
revoltingly as they please. And where have we seen this set-up before? Oh yes, 
in films such as Hostel and Turistas, where things turn out very badly. By all 
means let Bradley Cooper, Zac Galifianakis and Ed Helms live happily ever 
after, but at least let them lose a few body parts before the closing credits. 
I'm pretty certain that would result in increased viewer satisfaction, as well 
as adding a touch of Old Testament justice.

But then, so many comedies are only a sliver away from being terrifying psycho 
thrillers; I remember getting sweaty-palmed in Clockwise while all around me 
roared with laughter as John Cleese's attempts to reach a conference went 
horribly wrong, resulting in escalating humiliation and madness; this was like 
one of my worst nightmares. In Housesitter, architect Steve Martin has a 
one-night stand with Goldie Hawn, only to find her installed in the house he's 
just built and telling everyone she's his wife; this was played for laughs, but 
it's only a twitch away from Fatal Attraction. After all, screwball comedy and 
film noir are just different sides of the same genre coin, as many a re-edited 
YouTube trailer has demonstrated.

I bet I'm not the only one whose favourite part of Pirates of the Caribbean: 
On Stranger Tides was the vampire mermaids, when the frantic action slows down 
a little to give us a few moments of genuine creepiness. Looking back on it, 
the best part of the first Pirates movie was the undead pirates turning to 
skeletons in the moonlight. Big-budget blockbusters tend to flirt with horror – 
think of the supernatural climax to Raiders of the Lost Ark – without ever 
fully embracing it. Of course they don't – they don't want to scare away their 
target audience. But imagine how much more fun the Pirates franchise would have 
been if they'd played down the merciless fun-for-all-the-family remit and 
pumped up that spooky streak. Or maybe they should have just gotSam Raimi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sam-raimi> to direct.

But I wonder if I'm alone in always feeling just a teensy bit disappointed 
when, after all the ominous music and camera creeping up the fence to reveal a 
misty mansion with gothic turrets, Citizen Kane turns out not to be a horror 
movie. All you'd need is a narrator intoning, "Silence lay steadily against the 
wood and stone of Xanadu, and whatever walked there … walked alone," and bingo! 
A haunted house movie, instead of just a film about a haunted man.
 