
The world’s largest computer game publisher, Activision Blizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/activision-blizzard>, is hoping to use 
Facebook’s live video to turn e-sports into a mainstream attraction, and make 
the people who play computer games competitively into the next sporting stars.

In New York on Thursday the company announced a slew of improvements to its 
e-sports platforms, which host video of competitive gamers playing titles such 
as Call of Duty or Starcraft. The company’s most popular event to date was the 
Major Championship of first-person shooter Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, 
which attracted 71m live and on-demand views.

The company is pushing e-sports out on as many channels as possible, but says 
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> offers the most 
effective route to break out into the mainstream.


Six reasons why everyone is hating on Call of Duty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/call-of-duty-infinite-warfare>
“Based on our tests so far and our existing partnership for Facebook it;s 
where we see our greatest capability to introduce a new audience to e-sports,” 
said Mike Sepso, co-founder and SVP of the company’s Activision Blizzard Media 
Networks division.


“We have already seen tremendous growth in audience reach. Especially 
Facebook’s own focus on live video. We are continuing to work with Twitch and
Instagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> , and we will be 
producing a lot of daily content on Facebook live.”

“What really drives the global sports media is personalities and storylines. 
It’s not about the technical aspect.

“There’s all this drama and storyline, that’s what we want to bring to the 
table and all bring to the forefront. Facebook is a big part of that as our 
current fans are sharing with their own communities.”

Key to the strategy, said Sepso, was building up stories around the people 
competing, in the same way fans follow their favourite players in physical 
sports.


As part of the range of improvements, Activision is introducing interactive 
data features to its MLG.tv platform, providing detailed information about 
individual players’ performance and in-game action.

The features will debut at a two-day Call of Duty: Black Ops 3 tournament on 
10 June, which will also see the start of a “deeper collaboration” with 
Facebook.

Sepso said e-sports would soon rival traditional sports, despite sceptisicm 
from some quarters.

“I think it will happen quicker than people think, it’s not just that gaming 
is pervasive ... As we start to tell this story behind players, people will 
connect with these stories.”
 