
European medicine watchdogs are reviewing the safety record of the anti-acne 
drug Roaccutane which has been linked to suicide and depression. The move comes 
as a consultant, Anthony Chu, of Hammersmith hospital, west London, has called 
for a commission into the prescribing of Roaccutane.

Campaigners alleging the drug is dangerous say checks, being made to harmonise 
information to patients and doctors across EU member states, do not go far 
enough. They want the drug withdrawn until manufacturers agree to help fund 
independent studies examining the risk of depression.

Families of patients allege dermatologists are persistently prescribing the 
drug for mild rather than severe acne, contrary to the prescribing rules, and 
are failing to conduct pregnancy tests, blood tests or psychiatric assessments.

Manufacturer Roche, whose product has been available in Britain for 20 years, 
insists there is "no causal link between Roaccutane and psychiatric events". 
The company said the European review had been triggered by the arrival of a 
potential rival generic drug made possible by the ending of the patent on 
Roaccutane. It said 13 million people had used the drug worldwide.

The government's medicines control agency has been under pressure to review 
reported adverse reactions to the drug, which is known to be dangerous to women 
of child-bearing age because of the possibility of birth defects. There can be 
other side-effects, including dryness of skin and eyes, liver disorder and 
increased cholesterol levels.

British safety information on possible psychiatric reactions was strengthened 
nearly five years ago. Now the medicines agency is leading the review by the 
European committee for proprietary medici nal products "to ensure healthcare 
professionals and patients receive adequate and consistent information to aid 
the safe use of isotretinoin (Roaccutane)".

The agency said it was impossible to estimate the number of British patients 
who had received the drug. About 375,000 treatment courses might have been 
prescribed. There had been 1,259 reports involving 2,134 suspected adverse 
reactions. Of these, 277 related to psychiatric disorders, including 93 reports 
of depression, 15 of suicide, and 11 of suicide attempts. Most patients 
reported to have committed suicide had a background of depression. In all, 24 
deaths had been reported.

"It is important to note that these suspected adverse reactions are not 
necessarily caused by the drug," it said.

Dr Chu believes there is a causal relationship between the drug and 
depression, although studies to investigate it might be difficult and costly: 
"If there was an alternative, Roaccutane would be taken off the market. I think 
it is grossly overused. I often see patients who have been offered Roaccutane 
by other consultants. To use a drug which causes major problems when not 
necessary is not good medicine."

He was surprised by how many patients on Roaccutane said they felt low or 
depressed. "Acne is one of the most depressing conditions."

People might be depressed before going on Roaccutane but "if Roaccutane is 
working, why is not the depression lifting?" But many patients were treated 
successfully with Roaccutane. "I get people who send me Christmas cards saying 
'you have changed my life'."

David Chow, chairman of the Roaccutane Action Group UK, said: "We believe 
there is sufficient evidence to warrant a public inquiry, similar to the 
congressional hearing... in the US into the safety of a drug which has been 
associated with the deaths of many worldwide [240 suicides]."
 