
The children's commissioner today called for a ban on a controversial audio 
device which disperses gangs of teenagers, saying it demonises young people and 
infringes their human rights.

Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> joined 
forces with civil liberties campaigners to raise concerns over whether using 
the Mosquito device is legal and ethical.

The gadget emits a high-pitched sound that only young people under the age of 
20 can hear. The ability to pick up very high frequencies declines after this 
age.

The Mosquito is increasingly being adopted by shopkeepers, local councils and 
even private homeowners to disperse gangs of young people. Around 3,500 of the 
devices are believed to be in use in the UK.

However, Aynsley-Green, who was appointed by the government to champion 
children's rights, says the devices can penalise innocent children.

"These devices are indiscriminate and target all children and young people, 
including babies, regardless of whether they are behaving or misbehaving," he 
said.

"The use of measures such as these is simply demonising children and young 
people, creating a dangerous and widening divide between the young and the old."

Civil rights campaigners say there would be public uproar if the Mosquito was 
used against other groups in society.

Shami Chakrabarti, director of Liberty, said: "Imagine the outcry if a device 
was introduced that caused blanket discomfort to people of one race or gender, 
rather than to our kids."

Aynsley-Green says he is planning to write to all MPs and local authorities 
who are using the Mosquito to highlight his concerns. As reported in the 
Observer, it is believed he is prepared to bring a test case in court if 
necessary.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he said: "We want to expose the 
issue because of what children and young people have been telling us across the 
country.

"Thousands of them, who are law-abiding children who don't cause anti-social 
behaviour, are very angry indeed over the fact that these devices are being 
installed indiscriminately, affecting any young ear - it will affect babies, 
toddlers, children, disabled children as well as young people."

The Mosquito was invented by a former British Aerospace engineer, Howard 
Stapleton, after his daughter was intimidated by a gang of boys hanging around 
outside shops.

Stapleton said he received hundreds of positive reports from police, councils 
and businesses, but agreed a test case in the courts might be the only way of 
establishing the Mosquito's legality.

Aynsley-Green is asking anyone who knows where a Mosquito is to contact him so 
he can create a map of their locations.
 