
Video game publisher Activision is being sued by the family of Angolan rebel 
chief Jonas Savimbi, who have objected to his depiction in the game Call of 
Duty: Black Ops II.

Three of Savimbi’s children, who are now based in France, contend that the 
game depicted their father – the founder and leader of the National Union for 
the Total Independence of Angola (Unita) – as a “barbarian”. They are seeking 
€1m in damages from the French branch ofActivision Blizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/activision-blizzard>.

Savimbi led a decades-long guerrilla insurgency against the Angolan government 
and its dominant party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation ofAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> (MPLA). He was killed in battle 
against government forces in 2002. Although feted as a freedom fighter by 
Ronald Reagan, Savimbi was a controversial figure. The civil war led to the 
deaths of 500,000 people with several million forced to flee their homes.

In the first campaign mission of Black Ops II, the player must aid Savimbi in 
a battle against MPLA forces. The sequence reflects the US backing of Unita 
against the Soviet-supported government. Savimbi is depicted leading his troops 
shouting “fight, my brothers” and wielding a grenade launcher.
 How Savimbi appears in Call of Duty: Black Ops II. 
The family’s lawyer Carole Enfert said Savimbi is represented as a “big 
halfwit who wants to kill everybody”. The lawsuit will argue that he was in 
fact a “political leader and strategist”.

France has extremely strict laws on both defamation and a person’s rights of 
publicity – in other words, the right to control the commercial use of their 
likeness. “In cases such as this, where a well-known person is either depicted 
or has provided inspiration for a character, it is not surprising that someone 
aggrieved by it is able to formulate the basis of a legal argument,” said Alex 
Tutty of law firm Sheridans, which specialises in the entertainment and media 
fields.

“A claim for defamation of a dead person is notoriously difficult and can be 
impossible depending on the territory. France does have laws that permit a 
defamation action in the case where the alleged defamation affects the deceased 
person’s relatives in that it causes them suffering or reflect upon their 
reputation.”

A lawyer for Activision Blizzard, Etienne Kowalski, has rejected the claim, 
stating that the game represents Savimbi as a “good guy” – and that he is 
portrayed fairly, “for who he was … a character of Angolan history, a guerrilla 
chief who fought the MPLA”.

This is not the first time Activision has been threatened with legal action 
over the depiction of real people in Call of Duty: Black Ops II. In 2014, 
imprisoned Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriegaattempted to sue the company over 
his own appearance in the game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/16/manuel-noriega-sues-activision-over-character-in-call-of-duty-video-game>
. Activisionbrought in Rudy Giuliani to defend the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/21/giuliani-call-of-duty-lawsuit-noriega>
 and the suit was rejected by a judge of the Los Angeles Superior Court, under 
the first amendment right to free expression.
 