 Children's charities yesterday called for a fundamental review of the youth 
justice system after the death of Adam Rickwood, 14, the youngest person in 
memory to die in custody in Britain.
Adam was found hanging on Monday by staff at a privately-run child jail in 
County Durham. He had previously taken an overdose and his family say they had 
told staff at Hassockfield secure training centre, near Consett, that he should 
be put on suicide watch.

He was the 25th child to die in custody since 1990 and the second child in 
four months to die in a secure training centre. The units were created to 
provide safe, supportive custody for vulnerable young offenders.

But yesterday charities including Barnardo's, the Children's Rights Alliance 
for England and the Children's Society expressed alarm that so many children 
were in custody and urged the government to undertake a full review of their 
treatment by the justice system. The number of under-18s in custody has doubled 
over the last decade.

"This is a tragic reminder that our practice of locking up children in the 
kind of numbers we do and with the kind of vulnerabilities they have has to be 
fundamentally reviewed," said Kathy Evans, assistant director of policy for the 
Children's Society.

The call was backed by Yvonne Scholes, whose 16-year-old son Joseph hanged 
himself in a young offender institution in 2002. He had been sexually abused as 
a child and had a history of serious self-harm.

The Home Office is considering whether to hold an inquiry into his death, as 
the coroner at his inquest recommended.

Mrs Scholes added: "A child can end up in prison for breaching an antisocial 
behaviour order, which may have been for graffiti or throwing fireworks. Is 
that really appropriate?"

Charities pointed out that the United Nations convention on the rights of the 
child states that custody should be used as a last resort and for the shortest 
possible time.

"Prisons are not safe places for vulnerable children, regardless of their 
individual offending behaviour. Self-harm, assaults and bullying are endemic," 
said Pam Hibbert, senior policy officer at Barnardo's.

"Not only does England and Wales lock up more children than almost any other 
European country, but we do so at an earlier age, for lesser offences and for 
longer periods."

Jacqui McCluskey, senior policy officer for the charity NCH, said boundaries 
between the youth and adult justice systems were blurring and called for a 
system "based around community interventions rather than locking [children] up".

Chris Cloke, head of the children protection group at the NSPCC, said: "It is 
imperative that we develop a more humane and effective policy to deal with 
these young people."

He added: "There needs to be a strong focus on their welfare and care if we 
are to prevent them from reoffending."

A Home Office spokeswoman pointed out that the number of under-18s in custody 
had fallen by 14% since October 2002 - to 2,637 this week - and that of 190,000 
young people dealt with by courts each year, only 4% went into custody.
 