
One of the many memorable things about Anne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> was her weekly visit 
to the Watchdog office.

It was like the Man from Del Monte: feared quality-control chief gives 
nervously awaited verdict on the fruit – or, in this case, the reports. Working 
with Anne on Watchdog, it was clear she is not your average TV presenter. 
Plenty of "name" hosts are glorified ventriloquist's dummies: they read the 
lines, collect a cheque and go home. Not Anne. She had real editorial power 
with a big say in which stories ran, and in what order.

And her sharp populist instincts were crucial in deciding whether a story – be 
it British Gas incompetence or the side-effects of anti-malaria drugs – should 
be a one-off, or a long-running campaign. The programme was all the better for 
it. She was also lucky. When she took over in the mid-1990s the show was not 
taken seriously at theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. Episodes 
such as one featuring a studio of people who had burned their tongues on 
Pop-Tarts may have had something to do with this.

But then a new team with perspective and humour took over. Critiques of big 
companies including Roche, British Airways and British Gas became the norm. As 
did stunts. My favourite was one with Bernard Manning trying to become a member 
of the National Association of Psychotherapists. He succeeded after stating in 
his application that he "specialised in sexism and racism". Audiences swelled 
to 10 million, and there were spin-offs: Weekend Watchdog, the Big Dinner, 
Watchdog Healthcheck.

The show might have peaked then, but it continues to perform. The most recent 
series, which finished in the spring, regularly attracted more than 5 million 
viewers at 7.30pm on Mondays – a superb performance for an incredibly 
competitive, ITV-soap-dominated slot. It ain't broke, in other words. So why is 
the BBC fixing it? Why is it being extended to an hour when it returns on 
Thursday? And why is Anne coming back, when she hasn't shown signs of 
desperately wanting to? (In her honest and entertaining autobiography, Watchdog 
barely got a mention.)

The risks are many. It seems a backward step. There are new tanks on 
Watchdog's lawn, such as the consumerist The One Show. Then there's the 
credibility issue. Previously, Anne chimed perfectly with the (mainly female) 
audience; she was one of them and knew their lives. Now she is said to be worth 
more than £60m, the two-way empathy may be harder to come by. One theory is 
that it's about money – the BBC has finally understood that it's our millions 
it is paying presenters, and is fixated with getting more bangs for its bucks. 
Although not cheap, asking Anne to front a regular prime-time show is a good 
way to start by getting more out of the "brand".

It also smacks of a BBC1 controller wanting to make her mark by tinkering in 
an area she knows best. Jay Hunt made her name in factual so she is going to 
feel more comfortable messing about with Watchdog than Doctor Who, say.

Will it succeed? There are good signs. Anne's co-presenter, Matt Allwright 
from Rogue Traders, has the ability to make mainstream stories witty but not 
naff. (But so does Nicky Campbell, whom Anne is replacing.) That will help.

There is every chance it will work. I hope it does: there will always be 
companies who overcharge, rip us off and take advantage, so fearless 
independent consumer journalism is essential and the BBC is best placed to 
supply it.

Then again, I worry. Anne was always fond of folksy advice about work and 
money. Like: "Never let anyone else own the deeds to your plantation" (I read 
that one in an interview she did last week).

My worry, appropriately, is also a saying. An ex said it, years ago, when she 
refused to go out with me again, stating: "You can't reheat an old souffle, 
Jonny."

Mind you, there will be plenty of BBC big cheeses – Jay Hunt, Jana Bennett and 
Mark Thompson included – fervently hoping you can.

• Jonathan Maitland presents factual shows on ITV1. He appeared on Watchdog 
between 1995 and 1999
 