
Archie Norman's first results as chairman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/mar/03/itv-results-2009> of ITV appear to 
show the company in a more positive light than at any time in the past five 
years. The on-air creative shortcomings of the Charles Allen era were 
significantly addressed by Michael Grade and the recession (which left him and 
the company's revenues for dead) appears to be abating. Along with better than 
expected cost savings, stable shares of viewing, increased shares of all TV 
advertising, and advertising market improvements – 7% up for the first quarter 
of this year, as much as 20% up for April and estimates for the whole of 2010 
now running at increases of 3% to 5% plus – could result in ITV's bottom line 
improving by as much as £100m. And all that's without Norman (and his new chief 
executive, Adam Crozier) really getting started.

This may offer some respite to long-suffering shareholders, who have seen the 
value of their holdings utterly shredded since the Carlton/Granada merger 
created the company in 2004. But what about the longer-term future? On this 
issue, Norman may be a new singer but he's singing a remarkably familiar song. 
ITV's digital channels "lacked identity" and the online business was 
"underperforming". But most importantly the content division, ITV Studios, was 
in urgent need of "regeneration". Its UK revenues are dropping and its share of 
ITV commissioning fell from 65% a few years back to 47% last year. Worst of 
all, the "integration advantage" is not being realised. What Norman has 
discovered is that ITV's production and broadcasting divisions show distinct 
signs of working against each other.

Given the dynamics of the emerging new media world, where owning and 
controlling content is key to future prosperity, Norman is understood to have 
been shocked by the way ITV's production division had been allowed to wither. 
Grade had spoken the right words with his "profitable content" strategy but had 
presided over the decimation of ITV's capacity to deliver it. In fact, Norman 
walked into one of the most enduring and certainly most damaging aspects of 
Granada's legacy to ITV. In the years before the merger, making production 
profits at the expense of ITV's other owners - even on occasion to the 
detriment of the network's performance - was the name of the game. Granada was 
far from alone in playing that game but it was by far the most successful 
player of it and went on to dominate the eventual creation ofITV plc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV>. ITV Productions (which initially kept 
the Granada name) still sought to maximise profits at ITV Network's expense, 
which led to a state of virtual war between producers and commissioners – with 
each seeking advantage at the expense of the other.

It all changed when Allen moved Simon Shaps – the old Granada hand who had 
been running productions – to run broadcasting. The poacher turned gamekeeper 
set about fixing ITV's underperformance on air with gusto. As a result ITV 
Productions' share of commissioning started dropping. And the rest is, as they 
say, history. But can Norman and Crozier, both complete outsiders, succeed 
where Allen and Grade failed? Forcing the broadcasting side of ITV to 
commission in-house is fraught with danger. If ITV's on-air performance were to 
falter, revenues and shareholder value would go with it. ITV Studios needs to 
be able to compete but talent has drained away and it's hard to see how it can 
be attracted back.

And then there is the City, all jolly pleased with last week's interim results 
and eager to hear about Norman's "strategic review". But will they cut him the 
slack he'll need to even attempt a solution, which even then might well not 
work? Improving economic conditions may create that space. If not, sale and 
breakup surely beckon.
 