
At first glance, ITV doesn’t seem to have too much in common with HBO. ITV is 
a British, free-to-air broadcaster, relying for its hit on shows aimed squarely 
at a mainstream audience sensibility, such as Downton Abbey.HBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> is a US subscription-only cable 
channel, relying on fare aimed at more niche tastes, such as Game of Thrones. 
But, if ITV’s chief executive is to be believed, the two companies’ drama 
output could soon have much more in common.

Speaking at the recent Media Summit, Adam Crozier explained his aspirations 
for ITV’s new pay-TV channel, ITV Encore 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/broadcasters/crozier-hints-at-encore-strategy/5072803.article>
. The new channel will, said Crozier, allow ITV to commission “particular 
niches” of drama – along the lines of US imports such as Game of Thrones or 
AMC’s Mad Men – which might not attract “huge audiences”, but which are 
“terrifically high quality”.

ITV Encore has launched with a schedule of archive shows, notably Broadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/03/itv-encore-launch-broadchurch-lucan-sky>
. Originally commissioned drama series will not hit the channel’s airwaves 
until next year – Peter Fincham, ITV’s director of television, hasn’t yet even 
announced one. And commissioning niche drama doesn’t mean that ITV expect to 
have a British HBO on their hands. But Fincham does share his boss’s creative 
ambition for the embryonic channel. “We want premium dramas with range and 
ambition and scale,” he says. “We’re hoping that we’ll find things that 
instinctively feel right for ITV Encore, but might not be quite right for the 
main channel – but, of course, things that are top-quality and utterly 
brilliant.”

What Fincham can’t yet do is to pin down what those brilliant shows might look 
like. “What I don’t really want is for people to think that ITV are looking for 
their equivalent of, say, Breaking Bad,” he says. “The truth is that there are 
quite a wide range now of dramas that are universally praised and set the 
standard – and some of them are on ITV, like Broadchurch. It might seem a 
frustrating thing to say, but I think we’ll know it when we see it.”

America’s hit cable shows do share some creative similarities. They are 
consistently more adult than their broadcast-network counterparts, with 
thornier and more difficult themes. Is that the recipe for success on ITV 
Encore? “It could be, but I don’t think that it necessarily means that on ITV 
Encore you will see something darker,” says Fincham. “Because to be honest, 
there’s some pretty dark drama on our main channel, and on all mainstream 
channels.”

The launch of ITV Encore was announced in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/29/itv-pay-tv-channel-sky-itv-encore>
, as part of a new four-year deal between ITV and BSkyB. A well-placed source 
estimates the overall deal – which includes greater availability for ITV 
programmes on Sky’s video-on-demand services, including Now TV – to be worth 
“tens of millions of pounds” in revenue to ITV. BSkyB and ITV both decline to 
comment on the commercial terms, but it is highly likely that Sky has insisted 
on a certain level of original content for ITV Encore – and that, in return, it 
is paying a subscription fee for every home receiving it as part of its basic 
channels package.

As a result, ITV Encore is – as a senior ITV source puts it – “profitable from 
day one”. Its metrics of success are also different from ITV’s free-to-air 
channels. BSkyB’s investment in ITV Encore is designed to shore up its 
subscription base – which depends as much on how punters feel about their 
channel package as on how much they watch it.

So Fincham needs to commission series for ITV Encore that not only rate well, 
but are well-reviewed and talked-about. “It’s the two Fs – fortune and fame,” 
says Mathew Horsman of Mediatique, a research and strategy consultancy. “The 
fame part is quite important. If you get a good series that you’re associated 
with, likeNetflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> with House of 
Cards, there’s a trajectory there.”

Of course, ITV’s new venture isn’t without risks. Despite massively ramping up 
its spend on original British programming in the last couple of years, BSkyB 
has yet to find a homegrown watercooler hit on any of its pay channels on the 
scale of Game of Thrones. Its entertainment chief, Sophie Turner Laing, 
announced her exit recently – but BSkyB firmly denies that her move signals any 
departure from its ongoing £600m-a-year commitment to UK content.

And UK subscription revenues for ITV Encore will not reach the sums coined by 
HBO or AMC in their domestic market any time soon. The US has more than four 
times as many TV households and, with no Freeview-style alternative available, 
almost all of them have some kind of pay-TV subscription. What the Brits and 
Americans do share, though, is their ability to co-produce programmes across 
the Atlantic, to sell shows to new video-on-demand customers such as Netflix, 
and to monetise successful programmes through international sales.

The result is an exponential rise in the opportunities, both creative and 
commercial, available to British drama producers. Patrick Spence, managing 
director of Tiger Aspect’s boutique drama label Fifty Fathoms, is 
executive-producing Sky Atlantic’s upcoming 12-part drama, Fortitude. “It has 
scale – it’s set in the Arctic, so its literal and metaphorical landscapes are 
huge,” says Spence. “It’s emotionally complex, it’s dark, and morally very 
challenging. It’s long – 12 episodes. And the risk we’re taking with its tone 
is not something I’d ever expect to be able to do on a more mainstream channel.”

The opportunities available now to a British drama producer are, says Spence, 
“so exciting, compared to just three years ago. So many new doors have opened, 
to tell different kinds of stories. There isn’t any story that we can’t tell 
now.” As Crozier and Fincham open their new channel for business, they’re 
hoping to tell similarly stratospheric stories – both on-screen and off – with 
ITV Encore.
 