
Can the Independent prosper as a digital news provider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/independent-and-independent-on-sunday-closures-confirmed>
? Can the i newspaper flourish under new ownership without its strong Indy 
links? Both questions haunt everyone involved in the transition that follows 
the decision by Evgeny Lebedev’s company, ESI Media, to sell off the i to 
Johnston Press (JP) and to close the Independent’s print versions in favour of 
an online-only entity.

In each case, there will be big adjustments. Some of the staff’s worst fears 
about losing their jobs will be allayed by JP’s plan to recruit more than 30 of 
the current Independent editorial team.

They will join the 17 dedicated i <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> staff 
who are moving over because they are covered by the legal protection enjoyed by 
employees of a business that is acquired by another business.

So JP’s chief executive Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield> foresees the emergence of a 
50-strong journalistic workforce for i, which will be headed by editor, Oly 
Duff, and based in the paper’s current Kensington offices.

The i will look the same and Duff will be able to choose material from several 
sources because JP has secured content deals with the Independent, London 
Evening Standard and a US publisher plus, of course, the Press Association. And 
there is likely to be input from the company’s other major daily titles, the 
Scotsman, Yorkshire Post and Belfast Newsletter.

But the decision of what is published in the i and its new digital offshoot, 
inews.co.uk, will be Duff’s. Although nominally answerable to JP’s 
editor-in-chief Jeremy Clifford, he will be editorially independent (pun 
intended).

One immediate benefit for i will be an enlargement of its circulation area. 
Currently selling about 270,000 copies a day, there are places where it is not 
available, such as Northern Ireland and parts of Wales.

With its widespread network of weekly titles, Highfield also believes the 
company will be able to leverage the links it has with distributors to maximise 
sales. And, for the foreseeable future, the 40p cover price will remain.

In the Independent’s final week of publication, from 21 March, full-page 
adverts will announce the i’s transition to a new owner and will seek to 
persuade Indy readers to transfer their affections to it.

All of this sounds positive enough, but i’s serious content has come from the 
Independent’s heavyweight contributors, especially those who work abroad, such 
as Robert Fisk, Patrick Cockburn, Rupert Cornwell and John Lichfield. Then 
there are the high-profile domestic columnists like Matthew Norman, Yasmin 
Alibhai-Brown and Virginia Ironside.

Will i still be able to count on such contributors providing the intellectual 
ballast to balance the lighter content? That all depends on whether they are 
happy to see their work published in future on the Independent website.

Steve Auckland, ESI Media’s chief executive, is known to be eager to retain 
the big names. He was quoted last week as saying: “We want high quality, strong 
journalists on that site.”

Given the desire to ensure that the website is seen as a credible global 
brand, writers like Fisk and Cockburn are key to the enterprise. Their articles 
on the Middle East are among the paper’s most read online items.

However, Lebedev, Auckland and whoever ends up in overall charge of the new 
website after current Indy editor Amol Rajan becomes editor-at-large will need 
to agree on its target audience in order to ensure that quantity doesn’t 
overwhelm quality. Some Indy staff have been disappointed by the disconnect 
between the values of the website as against those of the paper. They think 
there is too much light-weight content, arguing that it is little more than “a 
click-bait operation.”

An impartial eye would suggest that that is an unfair assessment. The 
Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> brand of serious 
journalism still shines through in the main. Much more pertinent is the clunky 
nature of the site, which is poorly signposted and badly designed. If it is to 
win global approval and improve its current claim to 58 million monthly unique 
users it will need a comprehensive overhaul.

Auckland knows that and once the company receives its Johnston Press largesse 
there will be money to invest in a better website and to honour the commitment 
to quality journalism.

To underline that pledge, there are plans to open new editorial bureaux in 
Europe, the Middle East and Asia. An expansion in the US is also on the cards.

But the overarching question is whether the digital-only Independent, once it 
has burned its way through the initial funding, can attract the necessary 
revenue to fund its journalism.

Will advertisers consider the volume of readers, the quantity, rather than 
their status, the quality? The newspaper called the Independent knew just where 
it stood on that issue. From its inception it announced itself as a serious 
paper with a high-minded agenda. Can the Indy website do that too?
 