
Q I recently placed an order for a cake decoration stand with a local 
soletrader cakeshop. I was told there was a deposit of £20, which I paid by 
Maestro, while a further charge of £30 would be made at the time of the actual 
hire. My friend then changed her mind about the stand, so I went back into the 
shop to try and get a refund of the £20.

The assistant explained that as the deposit was paid for by debit card rather 
than cash she would have to get the owner, which she duly did. The owner came 
out and told me it is her policy that deposits are non-refundable. Embarrassed 
by the situation developing in front of other shoppers I left, but the more I 
think about the incident the more angry I become. I was never told that the 
deposit was non-refundable, nor does the shop state this anywhere. There was no 
contract or signed agreement, in which case from my point of view, the 
non-refundable claim did not form part of the oral contract agreement into 
which we entered. I think she is trying to fob me off.

She tried to appease me by saying that she would consider giving me my money 
back if someone else books the same item, but ultimately that is down to her. I 
have been a loyal customer of the shop for over 10 years, so I am appalled at 
being treated like this. Am I within my rights to have the deposit refunded to 
me? Can they withhold the whole amount?


A Not many people realise that when they hand over a deposit they have made a 
legally binding contract. It doesn't matter whether there is a written 
agreement or not, and you don't need to have signed anything for the law to 
take hold.

The basic rule is that a deposit acts a surety for you entering into the 
contract and effectively guarantees that you will fulfil your side of the 
bargain. Therefore, if you change your mind and pull out of the deal the 
supplier is entitled to keep your deposit. However, since the deposit formed a 
substantial part of the price you could try arguing that you didn't pay a 
deposit at all, because in reality the £20 amounted to a part-payment.

In these circumstances you may be entitled to some form of refund, although 
you may not get all your money back. This is because the shop can withhold some 
of your advance payment to take account of their loss of profit on the deal, as 
well as for any administration costs.
 