
Canberra <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> police are 
hunting a group of men thought to have gang-raped and robbed at least six sex 
workers.

Australian Capital Territory policing’s sexual assault and child abuse team 
has been investigating reports of violent sexual assaults and robberies since 
last month as part of Operation Sparren.

They are aware of six attacks involving the same offenders. Police say the 
men, who operate in groups of two or three, make an individual appointment with 
a female sex worker through an online ad. The man then lets in one or more 
others.

Women have been aggressively sexually assaulted, sometimes at knifepoint. Some 
have also been robbed at knifepoint.

Detective Sergeant David Crowe said there could be other victims who had yet 
to come forward. “Police recognise the emotional hardship and courage involved 
in coming forward if you are a victim of a sexual assault,” he said.

I helped a sex worker to get justice after she was raped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/21/sex-worker-justice-after-rape>
“What I am asking for is any information out there to be presented to police 
so we can positively identify these guys and bring them to a stop.

“We can help you in that process, we have support services available. You will 
be treated professionally and with the utmost respect. You will not be judged 
by anyone from Operation Sparren.

“If you are not comfortable with speaking with police, please contact the Sex 
Worker Outreach Program. They are a peer-based support service and will be able 
to help you through the process. Or please contact Canberra Rape Crisis Centre, 
who will also help you through the process.”

Two of the men are described as Middle Eastern or Indian in appearance. A 
third is described as African in appearance.

Anyone with information is urged to contact ACT policing on 131 444 or via 
Crimestoppers on 1800 333 000. Victims can also contact the Sex Worker Outreach 
Program on 6257 2855.
 