
A minister has expressed disgust at revelations that a small fenced enclosure 
was built inside anAustralian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> 
public school classroom in which to place a student with special needs.


Authorities said the 2m by 2m structure was made with pool fencing and looked 
“fairly confronting”, but they stopped short of describing it as a cage.

The ACT education minister, Joy Burch, said an independent investigation had 
been launched and she was horrified anyone would consider such a structure to 
be acceptable.

“I am immensely disappointed, disturbed and, quite frankly, disgusted that 
this structure was allowed in our school,” Burch said. “It is absolutely 
unacceptable.”

The principal has been removed from the school and placed on administrative 
duties in head office while the investigation is conducted. The name of the 
public school has not been disclosed. The ABC and Fairfax Media reported the 
child was a boy with autism but this could not be confirmed.

The director general of the Education and Training Directorate, Diane Joseph, 
said parents of children at the school had been informed.

Officials were alerted to the structure after a member of the school community 
raised concerns with the Human Rights Commission.

Joseph said the acting director general found out about the matter last 
Thursday “and the structure was taken down immediately”.

The structure had been erected 17 days earlier, Joseph said, but it was 
“unclear if and when the structure has been used”.

“The structure has been in the classroom from 10 March until 27 March,” she 
said. “It was built for a particular student to help manage his behaviour and 
to provide a space for that student to withdraw.”

Joseph said she had asked for the investigation to be completed with “utmost 
speed” and, when asked if it could result in possible criminal charges, said 
“the appropriate authorities would be informed”.

“The decision to erect such a structure raises so many questions. This is not 
how our students should be treated,” she said. “This is an isolated example of 
very poor decision-making.”

Joseph said her first priority was to ensure support for the student and 
family, and had assigned two extra teachers with expertise in behaviour 
management and disability education to the school.

Burch said her office had been notified about the issue late last week and she 
sought answers.

“Words can’t put into place the absolute disappointment and horror I have that 
in our schools that anyone would consider a structure of this nature in any way 
shape or form acceptable. Will there be consequences? The investigation will go 
to that,” the minister said.

“Very clearly, whether it was in the school for 17 days, 17 minutes or 17 
seconds, it had no place there, and so I am very angry and very disappointed.”

But Burch said she believed it was “a one-off incident, a one-off appalling 
set of decisions” that did not reflect the quality of care provided to students 
in schools across the ACT.

Hugh Boulter, the vice president of the ACT Council of Parents and Citizens 
Associations, said he was “most alarmed at today’s news”.

Boulter said students should be treated with dignity and respect. “As parents 
we send our children to school each day with the high expectation of nothing 
less,” he said.

Boulter backed the independent investigation and called on the directorate to 
extend its inquiries to non-government schools to ensure no such structures 
existed in any ACT classroom.

“I understand the minister and the directorate have taken swift steps in 
response to this matter including providing immediate support for the student 
and family concerned and the broader school community,” he said.
 