
 Nicole Kidman is here in Cannes, so is Ang Lee, and Audrey Tautou, and a 
second-generation Jagger, and Justin Timberlake, and Cindy Crawford, and Cheryl 
Cole, and Pelé, and all of them have been rained on, stubbornly, for days. Rain 
at Cannes used to be rare, regulars say. Russell Crowe has an anecdote about 
sitting in a screening wearingsodden zip-ups 
<http://www.people.com/people/article/0,,20368550,00.html> back in 1991, and 
Bruce Willis got splashed by a freak wave in 2006 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qSNDiyfpIDc> – but for a couple of decades 
straight, at least, this festival was a dry deal, screenings and parties staged 
outdoors, everyone "cooked to a turn" (as F Scott Fitzgerald described the 
local way of sunbathing). Then last year the roof of the Soixantième theatre 
blew off. Storms halted yacht parties, and the trade papers were left 
calculating the value of deals not done, with every producer and distributor 
hiding indoors instead of agreeing contracts on sunny terraces.

At this year's festival, the 66th, those attending are more seasoned and 
sanguine. Opening-night fireworks went ahead regardless, the rockets fired into 
low, dark clouds. "I can handle a rain shower," said Kidman, joined on a 
swampy, bubbling red carpet by Carey Mulligan; the British actor was struck by 
someone's umbrella and was happy to laugh it off. Baz Luhrmann promised any 
watery streaks on his face were weather-related – "not tears". He'd brought his 
filmThe Great Gatsby <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150967/great-gatsby> 
to Cannes and the critics, for the most part, had been unkind.

It was fitting that Gatsby kicked off festival fortnight, given that this is 
Fitzgerald country, the stretch of coast around Cannes memorably caught in the 
writer's next-most-famous novel,Tender is the Night. But by Wednesday 
Luhrmann's brash adaptation was already out in the US, and had previewed in the 
UK , and everyone I met seemed to have seen it already. Talk in queues and 
foyers was of a silly, thin movie that drowned its stars,Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> and Carey Mulligan, in 
swampy computer effects – a 143-minute music video. "It reminded me of the 
films you see in the queue at theme parks," one critic said on the Croisette. 
About the nicest thing I heard said was that this was "the Good Gatsby", hardly 
great. I'd adjust that to the Perfectly Reasonable Gatsby or the Look, It Was 
Fine Gatsby.

It wasn't in competition for Cannes's main award, the Palme d'Or – shortlisted 
films for that began to be screened on Thursday, after the celebrity judging 
panel had introduced themselves and laid out their goals. "I'm looking for 
honesty," said director Cristian Mungiu. Actor Christoph Waltz expected "a 
discussion on the highest level" with his peers, while jury presidentSteven 
Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>, dressed in a drab 
grey suit (all his sparkle within), gave a wicked smile and said: "Everyone 
judges us. So – it's our turn."

François Ozon's new film, Jeune et Jolie (Young and Beautiful) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155219/jeune-et-jolie>, was tipped as a 
potential winner. We squelched into the Palais des Festivals to see it one 
morning, just in sight of two workmen in an elevated crane trying to get rid of 
an enormous globule of rainwater that had collected in a plastic roof panel. 
While they punched the water out, the Ozon got under way – set, cruelly, 
somewhere on the sun-drenched French coast. Isabelle (Marine Vacth) is on 
holiday with her family, and the 17-year-old has started a fling with an older 
boy. "Dumb," Isabelle tells her mother, Sylvie (Géraldine Pailhas), but he'll 
do, she says to her brother Victor (Fantin Ravat) to whom she's confessed a 
plan to lose her virginity. When it happens, Isabelle seems to have an 
out-of-body experience. Afterwards, Victor wants details and Isabelle won't 
share them. Sex, now done, has lost any imagined romance.

Next, at an uncertain point in the future, wearing a business suit and thick 
lipstick, Isabelle arrives in a hotel room to meet an older man. Folded €100 
notes are handed over. This pampered, middle-class girl, now using her 
grandmother's name as a pseudonym, has become a prostitute. Ozon cunningly 
delays a surprise: she's still 17, only weeks or months having elapsed since 
the summer holiday. How has such a transformation taken place?

Ozon explores his subject without making any obvious judgment, even with a 
breezy French permissiveness. Sylvie, sensing that Isabelle is sexually active, 
leaves out condoms one night. Later, knowing much, much more, she frets about 
her daughter being a prostitute and is told by her partner: "No point being 
dramatic!" The humour is subtle and unsettling, generally relying on Isabelle's 
precocious and inflated understanding of what by-the-hour services – 
babysitting, therapy – should cost. Only when a police officer lays the blame 
on internet porn ("Kids get ideas") does Ozon's finger seem to wag. "I didn't 
want to underscore too many points," the director said at a post-film 
conference. Outside, the photography corps waited to get at Marine Vacth, 
actually 23 and a former model, the breakout star of Cannes's first week (see 
Trash interview <http://gu.com/p/3gv9c>).

Young and Beautiful concludes with the sense that things may turn out all 
right for Isabelle. There's no such sense of second chances in Amat Escalante's
Heli <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155250/heli>, a Mexican film also in 
competition. Again we're introduced to a teen romance and, again, this means 
about 15 minutes of introductory sweetness (ice cream and kisses) before things 
get ugly. Estella (Andrea Vergara) has fallen for an army cadet, Beto (Juan 
Eduardo Palacios), who gives her a puppy called Cookie as a symbol of his love, 
and as a sop to get her to go to bed with him. A sister-in-law offers counsel 
while Estella's brother, Heli (Armando Espitia), forbids the relationship.

 There's no time for a family tug-of-war. Beto has stolen some coke and 
foolishly stashed it at Estella's house, where crooks showed up, wanting 
revenge. Heli, Beto and Estella are taken off at gunpoint. "You're fucked now," 
they are told – and the walk-outs, in my screening, began soon after that. 
Scenes of torture are protracted and inventive. "Bloody Heli" might have been a 
better title, and the theatre became noisy with gasps and the commotion of 
mid-film flight.

I wondered what Steven Spielberg would make of the beatings, hangings, a 
two-minute genital bonfire and poor Cookie abruptly halved. Perhaps he'd snuck 
into a non-competition screening of Sofia Coppola'sThe Bling Ring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154498/bling-ring>, though, and had other 
things on his mind. For instance, did he definitely, definitely lock the pool 
doors back home?

 In Coppola's measured, cynical drama, a group of spoilt teens ransack the 
homes of Hollywood celebrities who might have assumed their splendid and remote 
addresses (rather than, say, alarms, triple-locks and moats) would keep them 
secure against burglaries. Not in the Google age. Joints are cased by Rebecca 
(Katie Chang) and Marc (Israel Broussard) using Street View. They decide which 
stars to strike and when by browsing TMZ.com, easily learning who's out of town 
at a party, a launch or – who knows? – a French film festival.

After a test-invasion of Paris Hilton's palatial home – dare they pinch her 
dog? – Marc and Rebecca's posse expands to include Nicki (Emma Watson, whose 
American accent, I'm afraid, would sink a school play). They walk into the 
homes of Orlando Bloom, Megan Fox andLindsay Lohan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lindsay-lohan>, and walk out with millions in 
clothes, shoes and sunglasses. Hilton's place, brilliantly, is so poorly 
guarded it becomes a sort of lair for the gang. They frequently make use of a 
pole-dancing suite.

But these are artless thieves, sprawling on a kerb outside a looted home, for 
instance, surrounded by stolen goods and waiting like exhausted shoppers for a 
lift. Money from the spoils is spent on nightclub booths and jeroboams of 
vodka, better to prettify their Facebook updates. Everyone poses endlessly for 
self-taken photographs, fanning cash and wearing pinched luxuries. They are 17 
and 18 and even criminality must be documented through social media. When the 
police catch up with them, it is Coppola's gentle suggestion that the switching 
of Facebook accounts from "public" to "private" is as sad and mighty a fall as 
prison time.

Coppola's film, my favourite of the festival so far, benefited from a little 
documentary zing: these events actually happened, the real-life bling ring
active in Los Angeles 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2010/03/billionaire-girls-201003> 
about five years ago. (And curiously, in the early hours after Coppola's 
premiere, £650,000 of jewels were stolen from a Cannes hotel room: had the Ring 
reformed, and gone international?) Back in 2008 Paris Hilton really was blithe 
enough not to notice that thieves were wandering in and helping themselves, 
over and over.

Lindsay Lohan, at least, may have learned something from her experiences. 
Elsewhere in the Palais desFestivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals>, I tried to get into a showing 
of her new film,The Canyons, a troubled project directed by Paul Schrader, 
which was quietly screened for distributors in a faraway room. I made it as far 
as the door. An American security man had been posted there, instructed to keep 
undesirables out.

• Trailer Trash in Cannes with Jason Solomons 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/2013/may/19/trailer-trash-cannes-marine-vacth-pele>
 