
My friend Canon Ian Tomlinson achieved the distinction of serving as the 
rector of a rural benefice in Hampshire for 37 years, from 1979 until his 
death, at the age of 66, from cancer.

He never lost his sense of engagement with the community, his ability to be 
imaginative and his disconcerting sense of humour, which, like the court jester 
of old, lay in quietly uncovering something profound in the ordinary. His soul 
would not be fettered by church programmes or policies. One bishop claimed that 
he “did good by stealth”.

Son of George Tomlinson, a painter and decorator, and his wife, Joan (nee 
Saggers), Ian was born in Cottingham, in the East Riding ofYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>. A few years later, his family 
moved to the coast at Scarborough to take over the running of a boarding house 
from Joan’s parents. There, as a choirboy at St Martin’s, Scarborough, Ian was 
captured by the beauty of holiness in the worship of an Anglo-Catholic shrine 
with the discipline of three choral services every Sunday. He was educated at 
Scarborough high school for boys, then trained for the ministry at King’s 
College London.

Ian was ordained deacon in York Minster by Donald Coggan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/may/19/guardianobituaries.religion>, the 
archbishop, in 1973, and priest the following year, to serve in the parish of 
Thirsk. His second curacy was in Harrogate, where his vicar was Michael 
Manktelow. When Manktelow was appointed suffragan bishop of Basingstoke, he 
persuaded his talented young curate to follow him south.

Ian was inducted as incumbent of the benefice of Appleshaw with Kimpton, 
Thruxton and Fyfield in 1979, to which in 2002 was added Shipton Bellinger. He 
brought with him a Yorkshire warmth and candidness, which won respect and 
affection in the Hampshire countryside. He intensely understood rural 
Anglicanism: the church schools, the hall committee, the playing field, the 
magazine; he was there and often heading things up. Yet he never succumbed to 
the purely local. His keen mind was always engaged to the full: he undertook 
two master’s degrees (at Hull and Oxford) and a doctorate (at King’s) alongside 
his church work.

After undergoing psychotherapy training at the Tavistock Clinic and the Grubb 
Institute in London, Ian founded a diocesan pastoral counselling service. He 
was a deeply involved chairman of theAndover Crisis and Support Centre 
<http://www.andovercrisisandsupportcentre.org.uk/>. He was made an honorary 
canon of Winchester Cathedral in 2004. His final duty in this role was to be 
involved in the interview process for the next dean of Winchester and he was 
proud to have made that contribution to the future.

A book developed from his King’s thesis, and provisionally titled What’s 
Happening to Me and Why?, is due to be published next year.

He is survived by his second wife, Caroline (nee Shirley), whom he married in 
2006; by Hugh, Ralph and James (the Hampshire cricketer), the three sons of his 
first marriage, to Janet, which ended in divorce, and three grandchildren; and 
by his sister, Christine.
 