
District Six, situated in the east end of Cape Town, was once one of the most 
culturally mixed neighbourhoods in all ofSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. Then, in 1966, the government 
declared it a whites-only area and began a forced eviction, ­ultimately driving 
out 60,000 black, mixed-race and Indian people. District Six became a symbol of 
the apartheid era – and of the struggle to defeat it.

Many weapons were used in that struggle. One was the pen of Athol ­Fugard, who 
savaged apartheid in dramas such as The Island and Sizwe Banzi is Dead. Fugard, 
once described by Time as "the greatest active playwright in the 
English-speaking world", has now been given an unusual honour: a new theatre 
has been named after him – and it's situated in District Six.

The Fugard is home to an all-black company, Isango Portobello. The inaugural 
season kicked off last week, in the presence of Fugard, with two Euro-African 
fusions already known to London audiences: the Olivier award-winning The Magic 
Flute (Impempe Yomlingo), and The Mysteries (Yiimimangaliso). But next month 
will see the world ­premiere of a work by Fugard, The Train Driver, which he 
says "may be the most important one I've ever written".

Fugard, now 77 and living in California, will direct the play himself. But now 
that apartheid is over, what does he have to say? "In the old SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, I tried to tell stories about 
desperate ­fellow South Africans," he says. "There are still enough of them 
around today to keep me busy. The euphoria of those early days of freedom has 
worn off. There are bitter disappointments now: the government's handling of 
the Zimbabwe crisis; the tragic death of hundreds of thousands of South 
Africans because of an unbelievably stupid policy on Aids; corruption in high 
places . . . "

Redeveloped from two warehouses and a church at a cost of 18m rand (£1.5m), 
the theatre looks, from the front, like a cramped gothic-style church. But step 
into the foyer and it becomes airy and spacious – a vision of red bricks, steel 
supports and restored antique wood. This is the old church hall, which, with 
its high ceilings and stained glass windows, also makes for a magnificent 
rehearsal space.

At the helm of the theatre is a ­Yorkshireman. A decade ago, Mark 
Dornford-May, from Goole in the East Riding, was running Wilton's Music Hall in 
London. He came out to South Africa for an eight-week stint and never left. "I 
love South Africa," the 54-year-old artistic ­director explains. "I love its 
­democracy, its lack of pomposity. It's a fantastic country, a brilliant place 
to work. There's none of that bloody ­nonsense you get in British theatre. You 
can be much more dangerous – and your ­impact can be much greater than ever it 
could be in London."

He describes Fugard as South Africa's greatest theatre practitioner. "Athol 
was working with mixed-race groups in 1958. The work that was achieved then, 
like The Island, is remarkable, and he's maintained a steady output 
of extraordinary plays. For me, it's hugely important to be here. District Six 
is one of apartheid's biggest ­monuments. We feel that we're moving back into 
the area."

Ten years ago, Dornford-May began building a theatre company drawn largely 
from the township of ­Khayelitsha, on the outskirts of Cape Town. The result 
was Isango Portobello, now a 35-strong group that has toured internationally to 
great acclaim with musical productions that mix English, Xhosa, Zulu and 
Afrikaans. How has being in the troupe changed their lives? "On a simple 
level," says Dornford-May, "people are buying cars. On a more complex level, 
most people who join the company have never travelled ­internationally, stayed 
in a hotel or been to a restaurant. The fact they have now got passports and 
been to Paris, London and Tokyo gives them a different level of confidence and 
sense of dignity. They go to restaurants, whereas before they would have been 
hesitant and thought it wasn't for them."

Every production will have a ­distinct South African context. One forthcoming 
show is a musical ­adaptation of Robert Tressell's novel The Ragged Trousered 
Philanthropists. "Robert Noonan – pen name Tressell – was a radical Irishman 
who came here and fought against the British in the Anglo-Boer war," says 
Dornford-May. "Once you know that, you see that in the book there is a lot 
about South ­Africa, about the exploitation of one class by another."

As we sit talking in the stalls of the cavernous auditorium, the singer and 
actor Pauline Malefane enters, looking for somewhere to rehearse. Malefane, who 
grew up in Khayelitsha, was a memorable African Queen of the Night in The Magic 
Flute. She is also Dornford-May's wife. He says their interracial marriage and 
mixed race children are a sign of how far the "rainbow nation" has come since 
Mandela's release. "Twenty years down the line, I think the changes are bloody 
remarkable," says Dornford-May. "If we're building a theatre in the middle of 
Cape Town, the country cannot be on the edge of imploding. Whatever else the 
theatre is, it's a place for intellectual pursuits. I'm convinced we're on the 
right track."
 