
Defending champion Jennifer Capriati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jennifer-capriati> was bundled out of the 
Australian Open after a shock 2-6, 7-6, 6-4 loss to Marlene Weingartner.

The twice Australian Open champion blew her chance of a hat-trick of titles 
when she crashed to an unexpected loss after looking to have the match under 
control.

The American raced through the opening set then opened up a 4-2 lead in the 
second when her game suddenly fell apart with a series of uncharacteristic 
mistakes - letting in the 90th ranked Weingartner.

"Probably if I wasn't the defending champion I wouldn't have shown up. I'm not 
trying to make excuses but I have to say it had a lot to do with my 
preparation," said Capriati, who became the first women's defending champion to 
fall at the first hurdle at the Australian Open.

Visibly upset, the 26-year-old conceded she was still some way off regaining 
full match fitness after an operation to improve her eyesight.

"I would say a few weeks, maybe a month or so. I had stitches in both eyes but 
they are OK now. I'm basically now getting back to feeling normal again," said 
the three-times grand slam winner. "The recovery time from surgery just wasn't 
enough. She (Weingartner) just got on a roll there. I just felt the momentum 
swing and mentally and physically I wasn't strong enough, I guess."

Capriati looked a pale imitation of the player who produced an astonishing 
comeback in last year's final, when she came from 6-4, 4-0 down and saved four 
match points to defeat Martina Hingis and claim her second straight Australian 
Open crown.

"In a lot of ways it's disappointing but I guess I've got to look on the 
positive side. I came here as defending champion and maybe didn't feel like I 
was at my best," said Capriati, who had beaten the 90th-ranked German 6-0, 6-2 
in 2001 in their only previous meeting in Charleston.

"But I put myself on the line and took that risk. I guess I would have to give 
myself credit for being strong enough to just come and try to fight - even if I 
go out the loser."

But Capriati, whose victory here in 2001 propelled her back to the top 
echelons of the game after her career went into freefall following her 
rebellious teenage years, had been cruising at the start against Weingartner.

She breezed through the first set in just 24 minutes in a blur of passing 
shots and fierce service returns. Capriati then opened up a 4-2 lead in the 
second but her lack of match practice suddenly began to tell and her game 
quickly deserted her.

Weingartner seized her opportunity with glee and piled on the pressure as 
Capriati fell to pieces.

"Maybe physically I felt like I was getting a bit tired. But she was just 
hitting some great shots - that's the match toughness, the mental toughness," 
said Capriati.
 