
The Castlemorton Common festival, which ran for seven days in May 1992, was by 
no means the sole cause of the government's full-blown assault on the free 
party scene, but it was certainly the excuse. The giant party set in train the 
moral panic that led to the 1994 Criminal Justice and Public Order Act. "It was 
amazing," remembered Lol Hammond of techno duo the Drum Club, "but you knew it 
couldn't go on."

Following the 1989 crackdown on quick-buck rave promoters such as Sunrise, 
more idealistic clubbers embraced rave as a major countercultural force, a 
basket of ideas that included hippy radicalism, eco‑activism, anti-capitalism, 
new age paganism and conspiracy theories.

Of the many sound systems soundtracking the union — Club Dog, Tonka, Bedlam — 
the most militant and attention-grabbing were Spiral Tribe, a black-clad, 
shaven-headed crew who combined fanciful talk of ley lines and numerology with 
an avowed dedication to "make some fucking noise". In the weeks before the 1992 
Avon Free festival, traditionally a small, informal annual gathering, Spiral 
Tribe had high hopes for a transformative summer.

But to the Conservative government and much of middle England, this was an 
intolerable alliance of bogeymen: the pill-popping ravers and the freewheeling 
new age travellers, both staking a claim to the countryside in a way that 
didn't play at all well in the shires. The Stonehenge Free festival, 
Castlemorton's spiritual precursor, had been banned in 1985, leading to a 
brutal police attack on a traveller convoy in the so-called Battle of the 
Beanfield. This time, though, the police were cannier. While the Avon and 
Somerset force turned back convoys looking for the festival site, neighbouring 
West Mercia decided it was best to confine the disruption to a small area: 
Castlemorton common.

Convoys entered the site unimpeded, setting up an ad hoc, self-regulating 
community that resembled a festival crossed with a shantytown: tents, 
generators, food stalls and, most importantly, sound systems that ran all day 
and all night. The more the media fretted about police inaction, the more 
revellers flocked to the site, reaching an estimated total of 20,000.

For the ravers, this week-long party was heaven, but many travellers had 
misgivings. Their lifestyle depended on the goodwill of landowners and the 
relative restraint of the police, but the weekend ravers had no such long-term 
strategy. One provocation was the loud techno, which drove local residents, and 
even some of the travellers, to distraction; another was the carelessness of 
the ravers, who had no experience of burying their waste. Visiting reporters, 
who didn't discriminate between the two tribes, painted an unflattering 
caricature of reckless travellers spending their benefit cheques on drugs while 
wreaking havoc on their picturesque surroundings.

When the party finally wound down, West Mercia police swooped on Spiral Tribe, 
impounding their equipment and arresting 13 members. By avoiding another Battle 
of the Beanfield, they comfortably won the public relations war, licensing the 
authorities to take further action. Every attempt to mount a free party that 
summer was quashed by a slick police operation, and at the Tory party 
conference in October John Major taunted: "New age travellers? Not in this age. 
Not in any age."

The free-party dream was already dead by the time the government introduced 
Part 5 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Bill, a wide-ranging measure 
that targeted not just ravers and travellers but squatters, hunt saboteurs and 
eco-warriors. The campaign against the bill was broad but largely toothless. 
With new clubs springing up across the country every month, most ravers had 
little incentive to fight for free parties, leaving the travellers and 
activists to fight a losing battle.

Castlemorton was both the apotheosis and the swan song of a particular vision 
of rave culture that was unsustainable: renegade yet tolerated, escapist yet 
confrontational. The radical idealism of Spiral Tribe couldn't even persuade 
most of their fellow ravers and traveller allies, let alone the public. Broken, 
though acquitted of conspiracy to cause a public nuisance, the Tribe fled into 
exile on the continent.

The ideas, organisational tactics and technological savvy of the free-party 
scene did go on to inspire many of the decade's direct-action campaigns, such 
as Reclaim the Streets and the road-building protests that gave us Swampy, but 
the fight for the right to party was over.
 