
Cate Le Bon, On tour

An associate of Gruff Rhys, Cate Le Bon has often seemed cut from a similar 
cloth (good tunes, sideways view of the world). A certain degree of surprise 
was inescapable, then, on learning that the singer had moved to LA and recorded 
her new album there. Not that this was undertaken with any thought of “making a 
breakthrough”. If anything, the move has seen her plumb an even deeper well. 
Mug Museum, recorded there with Noah Georgeson – a pal of Devendra Banhart and 
Joanna Newsom – set Le Bon’s songs in the best type of indie rock context: one 
in which anything might be possible. Scruffy, divergent, Le Bon’s songs now 
occasionally recall the free rock of Yoko Ono and Can, all the while retaining 
their intimate essence.

The Sage, Gateshead, Sat; The Lemon Tree, Aberdeen, Sun; The Electric Circus, 
Edinburgh, Tue; The Duchess, York, Wed; Plug, Sheffield, Thu; touring to 22 Sep

JR

Syd Arthur, On tour

What’s in a name? In the case of Syd Arthur – who devised theirs by combining 
the first names of Pink Floyd founder Syd Barrett and Love’s Arthur Lee – quite 
a lot, suggesting as it does an appetite for music at its most mind-bending. 
Hairy of appearance and aspiration, Liam Magill’s band definitely have that: at 
times on their debut album Sound Mirror, you can feel their jazz swing and 
psychedelic intention push them impressively towards the sun. Given their 
gentle bucolic reveries and nice guitar playing, you can also see why they’ve 
been tipped by Paul Weller, although Magill’s scat singing and the band’s 
strong chops align them more with the post-mod, red jeans scene that was Acid 
Jazz. The biggest clue to where the band belong, though, may be their label: 
the band are on Harvest, the imprint where EMI used to put those acts who just 
didn’t fit in at all.

The Louisiana, Bristol, Wed; Sunflower Lounge, Birmingham, Thu; touring to 2 
Oct

JR

Alt-J, On tour

Such are its unknowable criteria, no one is ever completely surprised by what 
wins the Mercury prize. Even so, it was completely surprising when Alt-J won in 
2012 with their debut An Awesome Wave, a record of fiddly indie rock matched 
with strangely pronounced lyrics. Clearly the subsequent rapid spike in sales 
hasn’t been completely pleasurable; at the start of this year, bassist Gwil 
Sainsbury decided to leave the band. Judging from some of the new music from 
the forthcoming This Is All Yours, and to their credit,Alt-J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> seem completely unfazed by this, and 
by any notion of heightened expectation.

O2 Academy Glasgow, Thu; O2 Apollo, Manchester, Fri & 20 Sep; touring to 27 Sep

JR

Fort Process, Newhaven

Newhaven Fort was built into the contours of its coastal surroundings in East 
Sussex in the mid-1860s, and was the first time concrete was used in a military 
structure. Its peculiar acoustic properties will be explored at a one-dayer 
today, with over 25 shows and installations on from lunch till 10pm. Catch John 
Butcher playing his breathy improv in the tunnels, and take in Peter Brötzmann 
and Steve Noble as a raucous counterpoint. Thomas Köner (also known as one half 
of Porter Ricks) will be blasting deep industrial ambience in the Romney Hut, 
which hosts heavy drones throughout the day, while Liverpudlians Ex-Easter 
Island Head play prepared guitars with mallets.

Newhaven Fort, Sat

JA

Herts Jazz Festival, Welwyn Garden City

The 2014 Herts jazz festival balances plenty of lyrical expressiveness with 
hard-swinging firepower (Georgie Fame, Chris Barber’s Big Band and former Jazz 
Messenger Jean Toussaint are among the stars on a packed bill), but the 
weekend’s most elegant juggler of sophistication and straightforwardness might 
just be the great British pianist John Taylor, performing in the classy company 
of saxist Julian Siegel, bassist Chris Laurence and Loose Tubes drummer Martin 
France. Manchester-born Taylor doesn’t convolute pop tunes like Brad Mehldau, 
reawaken standards like Keith Jarrett, or unleash Herbie Hancock’s rivers of 
sound, yet putting his own stamp on all those qualities has made him a revered 
international soloist, composer and teacher for four decades. Like his friend 
Kenny Wheeler, Taylor loves oblique resolutions that nonetheless sustain a 
song-shape, and contain plenty of straight-swing passages.

Hawthorne Theatre, The Campus, to Sun

JF

CBSO Beethoven Week, Birmingham

In July next year, Andris Nelsons steps down as the City of Birmingham 
Symphony Orchestra’s musical director. In his seven seasons at the Symphony 
Hall, Nelsons has become one of the most sought-after conductors in the world, 
and his achievements with the CBSO have reinforced its international standing, 
too. The centrepiece of the orchestra’s European tour this autumn has been a 
complete cycle of the Beethoven symphonies at the Beethovenfest that’s held 
each September in Bonn, Beethoven’s birthplace. They are launching their autumn 
season back in Birmingham with a repeat of those concerts, four of them packing 
the nine symphonies in chronological order into just six days. Nelsons’s 
approach to Beethoven is unashamedly traditional; it’s big-boned and muscular, 
but always intense, and never, ever dull.

Symphony Hall, Tue to 21 Sep

AC
 