
Cath Kidston's floral-print handbags and homeware have proved such a big hit 
with Asian customers the retailer now has more overseas stores than British 
ones for the first time.

Booming sales in China, Japan, Thailand and Korea helped the designer reach 
annual sales of more than £100m for the first time since it was founded in 
1993. International sales soared by more than 50%. The retailer's chief 
executive, Kenny Wilson, said: "The products we sell are universal in their 
appeal. In Shanghai, for example, there are a lot of bright printed products, 
so we fit in really well. Customers get the quirky Britishness and sense of 
humour of the brand.

"Obviously, there are some products that are focused for individual markets, 
such as the bento lunchbox which sells really well in Japan, but overall all 
categories have seen growth."

Handbags have sold particularly well and some of the floral prints have been 
used for 20 years, he added.

The group now has 58 stores in the UK and 60 across China, Spain, Thailand and 
South Korea, with a new flagship store opening in Shanghai as well as the first 
major UK shop on London's Piccadilly, due to open in December.

Underlying profits were up 13% to £21m for the year to end of March after 33 
new stores were opened, including eight new UK stores, where sales were up 21%.

Worldwide network sales, which include wholesale to retailers, increased by 
24% to £129m.

Wilson said the reason for the success was the cheerfulness of the brand and 
its popularity with women.

"One in four women owns something from Cath Kidston today and we've got a very 
loyal customer base. We obviously want those people to keep buying from us, but 
we also know there are still three out of four women who haven't shopped with 
us," Wilson said.The company was founded by designer Cath Kidston as a shop 
selling vintage fabrics. Kidston sold a 60% stake to a private equity firm, TA 
Associates, in 2010, but she still holds a 23% stake and sits on the board as 
creative director.

As part of the company's 20th-annivesary celebrations it had a summer house at 
the Chelsea Flower Show in May.

Wilson said "[Kidston] is still intrinsically involved in the direction of the 
company and although she doesn't design everything any more, she still decides 
on everything we sell.

"Since I joined the business we have clear distinct roles: mine is to grow the 
business and hers is to be the creative. We are mutually respectful of what we 
both bring to the party."

As well as adorning everything from oven gloves to lampshades, the brand has 
also collaborated to decorate Roberts radios and design floral Millets tents.

Most private equity companies have a short-term strategy to exit businesses 
after a few years, but Wilson said TA were very supportive and were in the 
business for the long term.

"They recognise that this is a growing business and that we want to reinvest 
the profits to grow the business."

Plans for further overseas growth will focus on Asia, but Wilson did not rule 
out looking at markets including the US and, while the UK venture has been 
successful, he wants to avoid overexposure.
 