
A long-awaited report into the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> police bugging 
scandal has delivered adverse findings against two senior officers, one of whom 
has since left the force.

The report found that a former deputy commissioner, Nick Kaldas, may have 
given “false and misleading” evidence to a secret inquiry, possibly exposing 
him to prosecution.

It also criticised Kaldas’ former rival, deputy commissioner Catherine Burn, 
for “unreasonable conduct” during the notorious bugging operation, and found 
her handling of an informant to be unlawful.


The report of Operation Prospect, released on Tuesday by the acting ombudsman 
John McMillan is the single biggest investigation of any ombudsman in 
Australia’s history, spanning four years, relying on more than 1m pages of 
source documents, 107 hearings, and 67 interviews with 131 witnesses.

It was set up to be a “definitive examination of a troubled era” for NSW 
police, which began in 1999, just after the NSW police’s special crime and 
internal affairs division set up its “Mascot Taskforce” to investigate police 
corruption.

Mascot conducted a widespread bugging operation, using listening devices and 
telephone intercepts to spy on more than 100 police officers.

Burns was involved in the taskforce, while Kaldas, her rival, was one of the 
targets.

The ombudsman’s findings were released on Tuesday afternoon, after Kaldas 
failed in a NSW supreme court bid to block the report’s release.


The ombudsman found Kaldas provided false and misleading evidence to operation 
prospect about his contact with the NSW crime commission solicitor John 
Giorgiutti.

“Kaldas’s evidence to Operation Prospect concerning his contact with 
Giorgiutti may … be conduct that constitutes an offence,” the report found.

Kaldas was also found to have engaged in unreasonable conduct twice, first by 
improperly requesting or receiving NSW police information on three occasions, 
and secondly by failing to report that he had received confidential crime 
commission and NSW police documents anonymously.

Burn, meanwhile, was found to have engaged in unreasonable conduct four times. 

“Burn’s conduct as the leader of the team that investigated Officer P through 
the use of [listening devices], [telephone intercepts] and an integrity test 
was unreasonable conduct,” the report found.

Burn was also found to have acted unlawfully in her use of an informant, known 
as “Paddle”.

“Burn was the team leader with management and supervisory responsibilities for 
planning and executing the deployment of a NSW Crime Commission informant in a 
manner that constituted a breach of the informant’s bail condition on two 
occasions,” the report found.

But Burn issued a statement late Tuesday afternoon, rejecting the findings of 
the ombudsman.

She said the ombudsman was unfairly assessing her actions 17 years after the 
events, relying on unreliable memories of witnesses and ambiguities arising 
from documentary evidence.

She flatly rejected any involvement in the use of the informant Paddle.

“I was not Paddle’s handler, I had no knowledge of his bail conditions and it 
was not my responsibility to check them,” Burn said.

“This was an instance in which I relied on subordinate staff and NSWCC staff 
to carry out the delegated work competently which was proper and reasonable in 
all of the circumstances.”

Burn said the ombudsman had cleared her of any intentional or deliberate 
failure, and of “flagrant and unsubstantiated accusations of dishonest and 
corrupt conduct”.

“I reject absolutely the suggestion that I may have engaged in any 
unreasonable, let alone unlawful, conduct in connection with this matter,” she 
said.

The ombudsman has recommended the Crime Commission and NSW police force 
apologise to more than a dozen officers over the bugging operation.


Nick Kaldas loses bid to prevent release of ombudsman’s NSW police bugging 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/nick-kaldas-loses-bid-to-prevent-release-of-ombudsmans-nsw-police-bugging-report>
The ombudsman’s initial inquiry was conducted by now-departed ombudsman, Bruce 
Barbour, and was set up in 2012.


McMillan said: “I am confident this report provides a thorough and balanced 
explanation of the Mascot investigation and the controversy that it sparked.


“For some this report will be vindication.

“The report recommends action, including formal apologies to those individuals 
whose private conversations were improperly listened to, or [were] improperly 
named in affidavits and warrants.”

The report also addresses systemic issues following on from the scandal and 
recommends a review of the protocols for joint operations between NSW police 
and the NSW Crime Commission.


It also recommends that a public interest monitor be established, with the 
same powers as a judge or magistrate, to vet applications and warrants for 
bugging operations.

The NSW Police Association slammed the report, saying its release “highlights 
the inherent unfairness and lack of natural justice” for police.

Greens MP David Shoebridge, who this year moved to suppress the publication, 
meanwhile says he fears the report will cause more ripples within the force.

“This ongoing division in the NSW police might be justified if there was a 
serious likelihood of people being held criminally accountable for the illegal 
bugging, but that is not what this report is recommending,” he said.

The acting premier, John Barilaro, and the NSW police force have both said 
they will carefully consider the report and respond in due course.

A NSW parliament upper house inquiry into the bugging operation had previously 
recommended the state government apologise to Kaldas.

With Australian Associated Press
 