
Chamin, or cholent, as the Ashkenazi call it, is a really slow-cooked stew. 
It’s aShabbat meal; in Judaism, you’re not allowed to cook from sunset on 
Friday to sunset on Saturday – so in this instance the pot is brought to the 
boil, before sunset, then left to sit on a electric hotplate at a very low 
temperature for 12-18 hours. It sits all night long, thick and heavy, and by 
Saturday morning you are losing your mind because it smells so good, but you 
can’t have any until it’s time. I could eat it every second of my life: it’s 
the one thing I can eat until I explode.

Whenever I visit my parents in Jerusalem, it’s the dish I want my mum to make. 
Mum is always in the kitchen – her specialities are Friday-night fish with 
whole garlic that explodes in your mouth, or Jewish chopped salad with loads of 
paprika and lemon, or a Moroccan carrot salad, orkube (semolina dumplings 
filled with meat, then cooked in a really sour, herby green soup). And there 
are always 5-6 salads in the fridge that you can make into a meal with just a 
hunk ofchallah bread. But of all of these, chamin is my favourite.

A homely recipe for stacked blue corn tortillas with red chilli sauce | A 
taste of home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/19/blue-corn-enchiladas-chilli-sauce-recipe-deborah-madison>
It is served with great ceremony, the big pot in the centre of the table, its 
contents spooned on to plates – the heavy bits first, followed by the beans and 
intensely spiced broth with cumin and paprika. So homely and fragrant. I 
usually have 3-4 platefuls. Each area, even each home, has its own recipe: it’s 
a bit like a Sunday roast in that way, every household and every kind of Jewish 
culture – from Russia to Yemen – has a version. I’ve tasted many different 
ones: the Kurdish version that my dad’s mother used to make had macaroni and 
chicken in it, but my favourite is my mother Sima’s Moroccanchamin – it’s more 
soupy, which keeps it lighter, with beans, potatoes, eggs, meatballs made with 
rice, some bones, and some beef cheeks. She often adds a little bag filled with 
wheat and a date or two for colour and depth. The egg and potato along with the 
meat and beans make it a whole meal, although you do often have mezze with it. 
When you finish all the meaty parts, you have leftovers for the day after – the
sabich – a pitta bread sandwich with deep fried aubergine and tahini. But when 
I’m eating it, I tend not to interrupt my stomach with anything else. I want as 
much space for it as I can muster.

I love the history of this dish. Every community used to have a baker, who’d 
put the pots in his ovens while they were still hot, and leave them there until 
they had cooled down completely. Nowadays, hotplates have replaced those 
communal ovens, but I think the dish still brings people together.

I sometimes make it at home, but I never change the recipe. It’s the one thing 
I never tweak. And no matter how I try, I can never make it as good as my 
mother’s.

Chamin

Serves 4-5
2 tbsp vegetable oil
1kg beef cheeks, or oxtail, cut into chunks
225g white beans (soaked in 1 litre of water overnight)
225g dried chickpeas (soaked in 1 litre of water overnight)
4 litres water
3 pieces bone marrow
4 large potatoes, peeled
4 whole eggs (to be hard boiled)
2 dates (optional)
2 tbsp cumin
1 tsp sweet paprika
Salt and black pepper, to taste

 For the meatballs
About 90g arborio rice or similar (soaked in 1 litre of water for two hours)
2 tbsp semolina or flour
500g minced beef (15-20% fat)
1 tsp cumin
Salt and black pepper

1 For the kofte, drain the rice and then mix with the minced beef along with 1 
tsp cumin, the semolina or flour and then season generously with salt and 
pepper. Knead the mixture well before rolling into meatballs. It should make 
roughly 8 balls.

2 Heat the oil in a large, deep pot over a medium heat. Once this is hot, add 
your beef cheeks to the pan and gently seal them on both sides. Season well 
with salt and pepper.

3 Drain the beans and chickpeas, and add them to the pot with the beef. Add 
the water and deglaze the pot by scraping the bottom, which will release the 
flavours.

4 Bring the pot to the boil, and add the rest of the ingredients including the 
meatballs. Season with salt and pepper.

5 Turn the heat down as low as you can so the pot is at a gentle simmer, cover 
with a lid and cook for 10 hours.

 * Tomer Amedi is head chef at the Palomar in London <http://thepalomar.co.uk/>
.The Palomar Cookbook is published by Mitchell Beazley and is out now. Tomer 
will be hosting an exclusive dinner inspired by A Taste of Home on Thursday 29 
September atThe Geffrye Museum of the Home, <http://www.geffrye-museum.org.uk/> 
London, and a special Guardian Masterclass on Monday 10 October. Go to
membership.theguardian.com <https://membership.theguardian.com/> for more 
details.
 