
Adron Chambers singled home the winning run in the 14th inning to give the St 
Louis Cardinals a 4-3 win over the Pittsburgh Pirates on Tuesday, cutting into 
the Pirates' lead in the National League Central division. Four straight losses 
have seen Pittsburgh's division lead sliced to two games over St Louis, with the
Cincinnati Reds a further one and a half games back after an extra innings win 
of their own.

By contrast, the NL East race looks as good as over, with the Atlanta Braves 
maintaining a 14-game lead after defeating thePhiladelphia Phillies, while in 
the West, theArizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> remain seven and a 
half games off theLos Angeles Dodgers, as both teams won.

In the American League, the Boston Red Sox extended their lead in the East 
with an 11-inning win over theToronto Blue Jays while the Tampa Bay Rays lost a 
tight one at theSeattle Mariners to slump to a sixth-straight loss; the Texas 
Rangers' lead in the West remains at a single game as they lost to the 
Milwaukee Brewers and their rivals, the Oakland A's, were beaten by the Houston 
Astros.

St Louis' Sam Freeman (1-0) pitched a scoreless 14th inning to set up the 
hosts for victory in the bottom of the frame. Jon Jay singled off Jared Hughes 
(2-3) with one out to notch his fourth hit of the game. He stole second and 
then raced home on Chambers' hit, beating the throw to the plate and ending the 
game only five minutes short of five hours.

Atlanta's Kris Medlen won his fourth straight start by pitching the Braves to 
a 3-1 win over Philadelphia. Medlen (10-10) appeared to be in danger of being 
sent to the bullpen a month ago, now his spot in the rotation appears secure. 
He left to a standing ovation after allowing one run in seven innings. Chris 
Johnson gave Atlanta a 3-0 lead in the third inning with a two-run homer off 
rookie Ethan Martin (1-2). Johnson leads the National League with his .337 
batting average.

There was a moment of silence before the game in honor of a fan who fell from 
the stadium to his death in the parking lot during Monday's game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/13/ronald-lee-homer-fall-atlanta-turner-field>
.

Arizona's Paul Goldschmidt hit the first pitch of the 11th inning for a 
game-ending home run having earlier tied the game with a homer in the ninth 
inning as the Diamondbacks made it back-to-back walk-off wins over theBaltimore 
Orioles, winning 4-3. Goldschmidt hit his second game-ending homer of the 
homestand, lifting the first pitch by TJ McFarland (1-1) just over the wall in 
right for his 29th homer and Arizona's 25th win this season in its last at-bat. 
The Orioles have lost all five interleague series they have had against Arizona.

Boston's Shane Victorino hit a two-run single in the 11th inning to give the 
Red Sox a 4-2 win at Toronto. Jarrod Saltalamacchia drew a one-out walk off 
Aaron Loup (4-5) and Will Middlebrooks followed with a single. Jacoby Ellsbury 
hit into a fielder's choice, with Middlebrooks forced out at second and 
Saltalamacchia advancing to third. Ellsbury stole second before Victorino hit a 
ground-ball two-run single up the middle.

The Los Angeles rookie starter Hyun-Jin Ryu got the better of Matt Harvey and 
guided the Dodgers to a 4-2 win over theNew York Mets and their first 
seven-game winning streak since 2010. Ryu (12-3) allowed one run and one walk 
in six innings. He is unbeaten in his past seven starts, winning six of them. 
The Dodgers improved to 39-8 since 22 June, becoming the first NL team with 
such a winning percentage over that length of time since the New York Giants in 
1951.

Nick Punto and A.J. Ellis drove in two runs apiece, with Punto's RBI double 
putting the Dodgers ahead in the fifth as they went on to beat the Mets for the 
eighth time out of nine. Harvey (9-4) gave up four runs in six innings, having 
not allowed an earned run over his previous four starts.

Milwaukee's Scooter Gennett homered twice as the Brewers beat Texas 5-1, 
ending the Rangers' eight-game streak and costing them a chance to move two 
games above Oakland atop the AL West. Marco Estrada (5-4) allowed one run in 
six innings. The Seattle leadoff hitter Brad Miller homered twice to help the 
Mariners defeat Tampa Bay 5-4. After Justin Smoak ended Chris Archer's (6-5) 
night with a leadoff single in the sixth, Dustin Ackley gave Seattle a 5-4 lead 
with a triple.

Cincinnati's Shin-Soo Choo hit a tiebreaking two-run single in the 11th inning 
to lift the Reds to a 6-4 win over theChicago Cubs. The Cleveland Indians' Zach 
McAllister won for the first time in almost three months as he guided the 
Indians to a 5-2 win over theMinnesota Twins.

Alejandro De Aza singled in the winning run with the bases loaded in the 11th 
inning to lift the lowlyChicago White Sox to a 4-3 win over the Detroit Tigers. 
Alfonso Soriano homered twice and drove in a career-high six runs while Alex 
Rodriguez chipped in with a two-run double as theNew York Yankees beat the Los 
Angeles Angels 14-7. The Washington Nationals' Adam LaRoche hit a two-run home 
run in the sixth inning to help lift the Nationals to a 4-2 victory against the
San Francisco Giants.

Nick Hundley homered and drove in two runs while Will Venable had three hits 
as theSan Diego Padres rallied to a 7-5 win over the Colorado Rockies. 
Christian Yelich singled home the go-ahead run with one out in the 10th inning 
as theMiami Marlins prevailed 1-0 over the Kansas City Royals in a pitching 
duel.
Houston's Jordan Lyles pitched seven innings for his first win in nearly two 
months, steering the Astros to a 5-4 win against Oakland.
 