
LeBron James and Kyrie Irving had their usual stellar performances. Kevin Love 
came up big, too.

But when Channing Frye turned in the best playoff game of his career, the 
Atlanta Hawks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> didn’t have a 
chance.

Frye scored 27 points and the Cavaliers kept up their three-point barrage 
Friday night, dominating down the stretch for a 121-108 victory that gave 
Cleveland a commanding 3-0 lead in the Eastern Conference semifinals.

“We’re a team that’s destined for greatness,” James said.

Certainly, the Cavaliers will be hard to stop if Frye plays like he did in 
game 3.

Acquired from Orlando in February to provide another outside threat and extend 
defenses, the 32-year-old played that role to perfection. He made 10 of 13 
shots, including seven of nine from three-point range.

It was a devastating blow for an Atlanta team that already was outgunned by 
the Cavaliers and couldn’t cope with someone else stepping into a lead role.

“We brought him here to shoot,” James said. “And shoot and shoot and shoot.”

Two nights after setting an NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> record 
with 25 baskets beyond the arc, the Cavaliers were nearly as good in a 21-of-39 
performance that moved them within one victory of their second playoff sweep 
over the Hawks in two years.

Atlanta turned in a much more respectable showing after getting blown out in 
game 2. But in the end, it was the same result for a team that has lost 10 
straight to the Cavaliers going back to last year’s conference final.

Game four is Sunday in Atlanta, but this was likely the last chance to make it 
a competitive series.

“We’re fighting for our playoff lives right now,” Al Horford said. “At this 
point, we have to do some changes, because what we’ve done hasn’t worked.”

The Hawks led by as many as 11. Turns out, that wasn’t nearly enough to hold 
off the Cavaliers.

James and Irving each scored 24 points, while Love chipped in with 21.

Then there was Frye, whose previous high in these playoffs was 12 points and 
best showing ever in the postseason was a 20-point effort in 2010, when he 
played for Phoenix.

Frye relayed some advice from teammate James Jones: “Channing, you’ve got to 
stop passing. You’re not very good. You’ve just got to shoot it.”

So he did. Over and over again.

The Hawks led 103-99 with just over eight minutes remaining, but the Cavaliers 
were relentless and the home team – which had matched Cleveland shot for shot – 
suddenly went cold.

Cleveland went ahead for good when the Hawks inexplicably left James all alone 
outside the three-point stripe. He had time to step up to the line, set 
himself, and put up the jumper. Nothing but net, naturally, giving the 
Cavaliers their first lead since late in the second quarter.

At the other end, Paul Millsap had a pass knocked away by JR Smith, the ball 
winding up in James’ hands. He saw Frye breaking toward the other end, all 
alone, and fired ahead for a thunderous dunk that extended Cleveland’s lead 
with 5:56 left.

Cleveland scored 22 of the final 27 points, the Hawks making just two of their 
final 12 shots, with four turnovers mixed in.

The frustration boiled over in the closing seconds. As James attempted to 
drive, Jeff Teagueshoved him into the seats behind the basket with a shoulder 
shot, drawing a flagrant foul.

Looking for a boost after the game 2 blowout, the Hawks changed up their 
lineup. Thabo Sefolosha started in place of struggling Kyle Korver, who reacted 
to the demotion with his best game of the series.

Korver scored 18 points and made five of nine from three-point range. Horford 
led the Hawks with 24 points, also his best showing of the series. On top of 
that, the Hawks got some valuable minutes out of little-used reserve Kris 
Humphries, who had nine points and four rebounds.

It didn’t matter.
 