
A measure of quite how spectacularly the 2005 Ashes victory propelled English 
cricket to prominence is that shortly before the series, when the England and 
WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board was composing 
its strategic plan to develop the sport, it included a far-fetched hope: that a 
single cricketer, just one, might become a star, instantly recognisable to the 
general public.

After five gripping Tests, in which every ball had been followed on 
terrestrial television by an absorbed nation, Andrew Flintoff, Kevin Pietersen, 
Michael Vaughan, Steve Harmison — even Ashley Giles, at a push — pounded their 
way on to an open-top bus and confirmed their sporting celebrity.

The England team, like the national game, has somewhat stumbled through the 
four years since that famous victory, from defeat in Pakistan immediately 
afterwards through the 2006-07 Ashes whitewash in Australia and on to the 
priceless image of Sir Allen Stanford landing a helicopter on the pitch at 
Lord's, bringing his dazzling smile and a case of dollars. TheECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb>, though, can point to a quieter, more 
consistent success story. Its strategic plan has taken root, boosted by 2005 
and major investment from controversial television deals with Sky, and it has 
produced a huge increase in the number of people playing the game.

"2005 was incredible and our feet have hardly touched the ground since," says 
Pete Ackerley, the ECB's head of development. "But we had already set out plans 
for major investment and in some ways the boost came too soon, because some 
local clubs could not cope with the upsurge in interest."

Those who grumble about the ECB now might recall that just a few years ago 
cricket was in desperate need of investment, with many established local clubs 
struggling for numbers and money and the game in schools having almost 
completely declined.

In 2009, cricket, the sport with deep upper-class traditions which gave us 
separate changing rooms for amateur "gentlemen" and professional "players", 
still illustrates Britain's monumental class divide, between the lavish fields 
owned by public schools and the comparatively threadbare landscape at the state 
schools in which 93% of people are educated. Most public schools boast 
manicured pitches, pavilions often of county standard and field several teams 
in each year, all perfectly kitted out.

The Chance to shine initiative, which was launched in May 2005 by the Cricket 
Foundation, an independent charity, conducted research which showed that 
cricket was being played regularly in fewer than 10% of state schools. 
Facilities and resources, including many of the fields themselves, had largely 
disappeared during the savage cuts to education spending which were made by the 
Conservative government in the 1980s.

Chance to shine aims to raise £50m by 2015, specifically to reintroduce at 
least the opportunity to play cricket to a third of state schools. The scheme's 
funding last year was £5.4m – £1m from the ECB and £1.7m from sponsors and 
private donations, and £2.7m "matched" by the government, via Sport England. 
The scheme has, since 2005, provided a taste of cricket, usually using portable 
stumps and a tennis ball or a harder "tapeball", to 3,000 primary and secondary 
schools.

Graham Able, the master of Dulwich College in South London, is a trustee of 
the Cricket Foundation and a passionate supporter of Chance to shine, but his 
own school embodies the almost ludicrous inequality that remains between the 
private and state sectors. Able says Dulwich College — where it costs £27,330 a 
year to board — has, for 1,450 boys aged between seven and 18, eight full grass 
cricket fields. That, according to Southwark Council, is two more than exist 
for the whole borough, where just one state school, Bacon's City Technology 
College, has a single grass cricket field.

The imbalance has been reflected in the disproportionate number of England 
players who went to independent schools. State-educated players like Flintoff 
and Matthew Hoggard, a Chance to shine ambassador, have tended not to play 
cricket at school and instead to be introduced to the game at clubs, where 
their families were involved.

The ECB, in its development strategy, has concentrated on building up and 
modernising its clubs, providing significant resources to improve facilities 
and train 5,500 new coaches a year. The ECB's chairman, Giles Clarke, says 23% 
of its income, which was £94.5m last year, is distributed to cricket 
development via clubs, counties and the 39 county boards.

Ackerley puts the numbers playing all forms of cricket at 1m, "hugely up" on 
2005, with around 300 staff employed on development nationwide. "The task has 
been to build the infrastructure to capitalise on the upsurge of interest after 
2005," he says. "We feel the programme is bearing fruit. It doesn't directly 
depend on how the England team performs — the biggest rise in participation we 
had was in 2007, when England were whitewashed. We registered a 27% increase."

Chance to shine aims to be a first experience of cricket, and young people who 
show talent or enthusiasm are encouraged to play at local clubs, which 
increasingly have links with schools. Wasim Khan, who was recently appointed 
Chance to shine's chief executive, was the first British-born Muslim to play 
county cricket — opening the batting for Warwickshire's double-winning side in 
the mid-1990s, then moving to Sussex and Derbyshire. He says that over the last 
three years 10,000 young people have come through school sessions to play 
regularly at clubs.

"I grew up in Small Heath [in] poor, inner-city Birmingham, where there were 
no facilities, but we were passionate, we played with milk crates for stumps in 
the middle of the road, and 15 professional cricketers came from within a 
three-mile radius," he says. "Our aim is to provide cricket to children in 
schools where very little is going on. We are making a difference, but we need 
the funding, particularly from the government, to continue."

Discussions are continuing with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 
but it is understood the government is impressed with Chance to shine's 
achievements and believes it should continue to be funded from the £38m Sport 
England has allocated to cricket development from 2009 to 2013.

The ECB defends the sale of its TV rights to Sky largely because the deals, 
reportedly worth £220m from 2006 to 2009 and £300m for 2010 to 2013, have 
brought money for development on a scale beyond anything previously available 
to domestic cricket.

Clarke is bullish, predicting that cricket is on the threshold of another 
boost. He is proud of the growth in women's and girls' cricket, hailing 
England's victory in the women's ICC World Twenty20 tournament last month, and 
points to successes in disabled cricket as well.

"We have worked hard to make the most of the 2005 legacy," the ECB chairman 
says. "And we will continue to do so this time. We're going to beat Australia, 
too."

Old school ties

English independent schools
Ian Bell Princethorpe College
Stuart Broad Oakham School
Alastair Cook Bedford School
Matthew Prior Brighton College
Andrew Strauss Radley College 

South African independent school
Kevin Pietersen Maritzburg College

State/independent schools
Monty Panesar Stopsley High School; Bedford Modern School

State schools
James Anderson St Theodore's Roman Catholic High School
Ravi Bopara Brampton Manor School
Paul Collingwood Blackfyne Comprehensive School (now Consett Community Sports 
College)
Andrew Flintoff Ribbleton Hall High School (now City of Preston High School)
Graham Onions St Thomas More Roman Catholic School, Blaydon Graeme Swann 
Sponne School
 