
The Paralympian turned television presenter Ade Adepitan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ade-adepitan> has praised Channel 4 for 
giving a new roster of disabled people a chance in front of the camera, as the 
broadcaster announced a presenting team for the London Paralympics which 
includes seven largely unknown discoveries from a nationwide talent search 
undertaken in 2010.

"I think it's fantastic," said Adepitan, who will anchor the coverage along 
with Clare Balding. "For me, ifChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> hadn't won the rights I don't 
think it would have been possible for this amount of disabled talent to show 
their skills on TV. They bring a different angle and experience, not only 
knowing about disability sport but also about people with disabilities. I think 
they'll add another layer and another perspective, and they'll be able to say 
things which no able-bodied presenter would be able to say."

Channel 4's decision to give another relatively unknown presenter, the Gadget 
Show's Ortis Deley, a key role in its coverage of the last year's World 
Athletics Championshipsmemorably backfired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/31/ortis-deley-channel-4>, but 
Adepitan insists that confidence in its new discoveries is not misplaced. "It's 
not happening overnight," he said. "We're all working really hard at the 
moment, and have been for six or seven months, honing our skills. It was a 
really bold decision, not just to show the Paralympics but to portray people 
with disability as widely and as broadly as they can. They've made sure they 
have the training and the experience on air. They've got to be relaxed and 
enjoy it. It's an amazing thing that's happening."

Adepitan said that Channel 4's plans had changed considerably during two years 
of planning for the event. "They initially spoke to me in 2010. They had 
thought of trying to bid for the Paralympics and then the ideas evolved in the 
last two years," he said. "It soon became evident that you should be looking to 
have disabled presenters doing your coverage. It would be ridiculous to show 
Premier League football without having some ex-footballers involved; why 
shouldn't you do the same with the Paralympics?"

Channel 4's coverage will also feature Rick Edwards, who has presented four 
series ofThat Paralympic Show 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/that-paralympic-show>, the disabled 
Australian comedianAdam Hills <http://www.adamhills.com/>, the 2000 Olympic 
triple jump champion and world-record holder Jonathan Edwards, and the former 
Sky Sports News presenters Kelly Cates and Georgie Bingham.

The newscaster Jon Snow will anchor coverage of the opening and closing 
ceremonies. The majority of the 150 hours Channel 4 has committed to 
broadcasting will be on the main channel, with the remainder on More4.

Balding brings extensive experience, having worked on the past three 
Paralympic Games with the BBC. "Sydney was the first one I did, and I saw what 
effect it had in Australia, which was a sport-loving country which had not been 
that engaged with the Paralympics," she said. "This changes the way people 
think. It has enormous power, particularly with kids. There's a great 
responsibility, to tell the athletes' stories really well and follow them 
through to their enormous, unscripted climax in the Games."

She has also been involved in bringing through Channel 4's new intake. "I came 
along the other day and met everybody and did what they ambitiously call a 
masterclass," she said. "My partner said: 'They should just call it a class.'"

Adepitan hopes that the team will have a long-term effect on the way future 
Games are broadcast, starting in Rio four years from now. "I'm hoping we'll 
leave a legacy," he said. "The Brazilian TV companies have already come out 
specifically to see what we're doing. We're setting the benchmark, saying: 
'This is how it should be done.'"
 