
The film and television director Charles Jarrott, who has died of cancer aged 
83, began his career during a golden period of British TV drama, working on 
Armchair Theatre and The Wednesday Play in the 1960s alongside writers and 
directors such as Ken Loach, Dennis Potter and David Mercer. Both series were 
presided over by the Canadian producer Sydney Newman, who encouraged original 
work – what he called "agitational contemporaneity" – and had an astonishing 
impact. But in 1969 Jarrott's career took a different turn when he left for 
Hollywood, thereby increasing his income a hundredfold, while having to contend 
with far less adventurous material. His best films were his first, two 
Elizabethan costume dramas, Anne of the Thousand Days and Mary, Queen of Scots, 
enlivened by the Oscar-nominated performances of Richard Burton (Henry VIII), 
Geneviève Bujold (Anne Boleyn) and Vanessa Redgrave (Mary Stuart); Jarrott 
himself won a Golden Globe for his direction of the former.

Born in London, Jarrott was brought up in glamorous surroundings. His father, 
also Charles Jarrott, was one of Britain's greatest racing drivers. Jarrott 
Sr's mottos were that it was better "to race clean and lose, than to win by 
foul driving" and "finish at all costs". His son inherited much of his morality 
and determination, and a taste for show business from his mother, who was a 
musical-comedy performer. 

After begging his recently widowed mother to allow him to join the Royal Navy 
during the second world war, Jarrott served in the far east while still a 
teenager. After being demobbed, he joined the Nottingham Repertory Theatre as 
actor, stage manager and director. In 1953, he moved to Canada, where he 
directed his first TV play for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, on which 
Newman was supervising producer.

When Jarrott returned to Britain in 1960, Newman, who had joined ABC Television
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, invited him to join his team 
of young directors. Some of Jarrott's contemporaries were directors Philip 
Saville, Ted Kotcheff, and Alvin Rakoff, and writers Donald Churchill, Clive 
Exton, Alun Owen, Allan Prior and Hugh Leonard. Few of them made successful 
transitions to the big screen nor did much better or more interesting work than 
they did during this period.

Four years later, when Newman moved to the BBC, Jarrott joined him. Among the 
first teleplays he directed was The Young Elizabeth (1964), starring his 
South-African born wife Katharine Blake as Mary Tudor, a foretaste of his 
feature-film debut. Among his directing triumphs at the BBC were two plays by 
Harold Pinter, Tea Party (1965) and The Basement (1967); The Wesker Trilogy 
(1966); a couple of Irish-set plays by Leonard; and The Snow Ball (1966), 
adapted by his wife from the Brigid Brophy novel.

From 1959 to 1969, Jarrott was mostly occupied with directing a breathtaking 
range of plays for Armchair Theatre. There were fantasies – notably The Rose 
Affair (1961), Owen's take on Beauty and the Beast; social dramas, such as 
Athol Fugard's The Blood Knot (1963); classics, including Oscar Wilde's The 
Picture of Dorian Gray (1961) with Jeremy Brett in the title role, and 
comedies. One of his final television assignments before Hollywood called was 
The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (1968), shot in Canada, with Jack 
Palance in the dual role.

All this remarkable work brought him to the attention of the producer Hal B 
Wallis, who invited Jarrott to direct Anne of the Thousand Days (1969), the 
success of which led to Mary, Queen of Scots (1971). Jarrott then embarked on 
Lost Horizon (1973), an expensive ($7m-plus), interminable (150 minutes), 
musical version of James Hilton's novel about Shangri-La. Actually, Jarrott did 
the best he could against the dire songs, the calamitous choreography and the 
kitschy sets. The mega-flop ruined the career of the producer Ross Hunter, but 
only slightly dented Jarrott's. 

Away from the purgatory of Shangri-La, Jarrott's next film was The Dove 
(1974), the name of a 23ft sloop on which 16-year-old Robin Lee Graham (Joseph 
Bottoms) sailed for five years on a solo voyage around the world in 1965. 
Photographed on location by Sven Nykvist, it was a sea-blue movie with most of 
the footage being of Bottoms, weathering tropical storms and being swept 
overboard, only interrupted by a soppy love story on the Fiji islands. Soppy, 
too, was The Other Side of Midnight (1977), based on a bestselling novel by 
Sidney Sheldon. An over-the-top melodrama, it covered the second world war and 
its aftermath in three hours.

Jarrott, who had settled in Los Angeles, was taken up by Walt Disney 
Productions for several films including The Last Flight of Noah's Ark (1980) 
and Condorman (1981), neither of which added to his reputation. His subsequent 
work on American television could not have been more dissimilar from his days 
at ITV and BBC. There were biopics such as Ike (1986), on Eisenhower; I Would 
Be Called John: Pope John XXIII (1987); Poor Little Rich Girl: The Barbara 
Hutton Story (1987); and The Woman He Loved (1988), on Edward VIII and Mrs 
Simpson, and soaps based on blockbuster novels by Judith Krantz (Till We Meet 
Again, 1989), Danielle Steel (Changes, 1991) and Jackie Collins (Lady Boss, 
1992).

Jarrott's last feature, Turn of Faith (2002), co-produced by and starring 
former boxer Ray Mancini, was a minor mobster thriller. Jarrott, who was 
married three times, leaves no survivors.

• Charles Jarrott, film and television director, born 16 June 1927; died 4 
March 2011
 