
In Norway, you're not a true citizen unless you're in, or dreaming of being 
in, a hytte - often a fairly basic, timber "hut" with no electricity and in 
which the only running water is the sweat you produce reaching its remote 
location. So it's quite a delight to discover one to rent just off the A68 in 
Northumberland.

Inspired by a 15-year-long sheep-shearing stint in Norway, Simon Gregory and 
his wife Sonja, a part-time midwife, decided to design and build one of their 
own in Britain. "I just sat down with a bit of graph paper," says Sonja. The 
result is a self-catering holiday let that has at its heart a sustainable ethic 
reaching from its tufty grass roof down to its 6kw ground-source heat pump.

Hunkering down on the gently sloping two-acre site, the Hytte's unassuming 
exterior belies its Tardis-like interior. It's huge: a superb kitchen (complete 
with A-rated appliances, natch), four bedrooms, a bathroom and wet room (fully 
accessible for wheelchair users), fan out from a wooden-clad open living area, 
reminiscent of a rather grand sauna.

Peppered with stunning images of nearby Hadrian's Wall by local photographer 
Roger Clegg and sheepskins (a little reminder of Simon's past), the decor is 
more homely than chichi: black, practical leather sofas are set around the 
smart Norwegian fireplace with views overlooking the decking area and garden 
beyond.

And my, how warm it is. The Gregorys could have gone down the usual 
oil-powered central heating route ("a lot cheaper - but only in the short 
term") but instead have installed a ground source heating pump that harnesses 
all that lovely, CO2-free, renewable energy found underground. Pumped through 
the underfloor heating system it manages to keep the Hytte and its guests 
toasty warm even in the harshest Northumberland winter.

Heavy insulation, glazing and, of course, the green roof also play a part. Its 
turf (sourced from a mile and a half away), dotted with aubergine-hued sedums, 
not only plays a role in heat retention and sound insulation, but can also 
absorb up to 75 per cent of the rainwater that falls on it, reducing the amount 
that ends up in the drainage system and going some way to offset the run-off 
from the hard landscaping around the property. A reed bed then admirably does 
its bit to manage bathroom waste.

Set on the edge of the Northumberland National Park, the Hytte is perfect for 
those with an active disposition. But active or not, make sure you visit French 
restaurant Bouchon Bistrot in the pretty, ancient market town of Hexham, barely 
a 10-minute drive away.

Should you decide to stay in and cook, you'll find the recycling system easy - 
it's the most organised I've ever come across. There are plenty of boxes, full 
instructions and, best of all, the contents of the little compost bins under 
the sink go to the hens who spend their days in the recently planted wildlife 
area, which includes a 17-variety "Buddleia Avenue".

The Hytte doesn't score any eco-points for its outdoor hot tub and sauna but 
its "Electricity Pay Back" scheme does mean guests tend to check the internal 
electricity monitor and reflect on their energy consumption. "You can use the 
hot tub and sauna every day and still be under the average," explains Simon, 
"but it encourages people to switch them off if they're not using them." If 
guests are determined to guzzle energy, the units above average they use are 
charged (at 10p per kW on a competitive Green tariff with EDF) with all 
proceeds going to the Northumberland National Park Environment Association and 
the Great North Air Ambulance.

"I used to lie in bed,'" says Sonja, "and think no one would come." But the 
Hytte - now five-star rated and awarded the Green Tourism Business Scheme's 
gold standard - shows that being sustainable in no way compromises your 
business: it had 87 per cent occupancy in its first year, and an impressive 97 
per cent in the second.

The cost: Four-night breaks from £385; one week from £550. The Hytte is a 
silver winner in theEnjoy
England Awards for Excellence 2009 <http://www.enjoyengland.com/excellence>
 