
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have sanctioned the 
sale of Oscar to Shanghai SIPG after the Chinese Super League club, now managed 
by André Villas-Boas, formalised their long-standing interest and tabled an 
offer worth up to £60m for the Brazil midfielder.

The Premier League leaders accepted that bid on the day they were fined 
£100,000 by the Football Association for the part they played in the touchline 
melee in stoppage time atManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> this month. The level of 
that sanction reflected the reality it was their fifth charge of failing to 
control their players within 19 months – City, who had two players sent off, 
must pay only £35,000 – but did mean Chelsea avoided a points deduction for 
repeated breaches of rule E20a.

The incident has, however, served as a reminder to Antonio Conte’s side that 
the threat of the more severe punishment is real as they seek a 10th successive 
Premier League win, at Sunderland, on Wednesday. They are expected to be 
without Oscar for that game on Wearside, with the Brazilian understood to have 
told his team-mates he will leave at the end of the month. The 25-year-old had 
started the first five Premier League games of Conte’s tenure, but has been 
reduced to a bit-part role since and has played 36 minutes, encompassing four 
substitute appearances, of the nine-match winning run.

César Azpilicueta extends Chelsea stay but Terry’s situation stays on hold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/cesar-azpilicueta-signs-new-three-and-a-half-year-contract-chelsea>
Villas-Boas, who endured an unhappy eight-month spell in charge at Stamford 
Bridge, is a long-time admirer and had first attempted to sign the attacking 
midfielder, then with Internacional, for Tottenham Hotspur in the summer of 
2012 only for the Brazilian to opt to move to Chelsea in a £19.5m deal. He has 
made 99 Premier League starts in the period since and won the Premier League, 
Europa League and League Cup. But, having grown frustrated on the fringes at 
Chelsea of late, he will now take up the lucrative new challenge in China.

Both Guangzhou Evergrande, coached by another former Chelsea manager in Luiz 
Felipe Scolari, and Jiangsu Suning, who made their own interest known last 
summer, had continued to track Oscar, but Villas-Boas is confident he will be 
able to deflect any late rival bids and secure the player. Oscar will join his 
compatriots Hulk and Elkeson at Shanghai SIPG and expects to double his wages 
in China. Hulk, who is believed to earn more than £300,000 a week, is currently 
the club’s record signing at £48m, though that fee will now be eclipsed by the 
offer submitted for Oscar.

It will be the second January in succession that Chelsea generate a 
substantial fee for one of their Brazilian contingent, having sold Ramires to 
Jiangsu Suning in last season’s mid-winter window. That deal was worth in 
excess of £20m, with the player signing terms worth around £200,000 a week.

This sale would grant Conte considerable leeway in the market as he seeks to 
reinforce his squad, with interest likely to be expressed in the Southampton 
centre-half Virgil van Dijk. That potential move is more likely to progress at 
the end of the season, with the Dutch defender’s club reluctant sellers. 
Regardless, the sale of Oscar will rule out any transfer for Cesc Fàbregas 
mid-season, with Conte having reiterated on Tuesday that the Spaniard remains 
“an important player”.

Conte, more used to Italy’s winter break, is about to experience his first 
festive programme of matches, with the Sunderland game a first of five in 22 
days. As part of his preparations for that period he will seek to dissuade his 
squad from arranging a formal Christmas party amid the cluttered schedule, 
though he has revealed he is more than happy for his players to enjoy a beer 
immediately after games.

David Luiz posted a video on Instagram on Sunday of the post-match 
celebrations in the dressing room at Stamford Bridge after the hard-fought 1-0 
win against West Bromwich Albion, with the footage showing Costa dancing with a 
beer in hand. The head coach has apparently sanctioned one post-match drink, 
when players are still effectively burning calories after their exertions out 
on the pitch. “After the game, for rehydration, you can drink Coca-Cola, or one 
beer,” Conte said. “It’s good for recovery. But one. Not a lot. And, after you 
finish the game, you must drink it quickly, not an hour after the end.”

Yet, while the club organise a festive event for the players and their 
families, Conte is more circumspect over his squad conducting their own 
pre-Christmas outing, conscious that focus must be on retaining the team’s 
current momentum.

“I’m sure I have great professionals in my players so, with that the case, I 
don’t think a coach or a manager can say: ‘Do this’ or ‘Don’t do this’,” said 
the Italian, who will train his players on Christmas Day. “I have great 
professionals and I know they will have the better attitude and behaviours in 
this situation. But, I must be honest, I’d prefer they stayed at home and 
celebrated with the family. Not [have] a great party.

“We are preparing to celebrate with our families during the week before 
Christmas, to stay together with our children, with our families, and on the 
26th we play the game [against Bournemouth], a tough match. So maybe a glass of 
red wine – one – on Christmas Day is good.”
 