
As the sun burned down on the Chelsea flower show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow>, Alan Titchmarsh 
bustled past, a potted shrub in each hand. "Sorry, no time to talk," he said, 
adding: "I feel like I'm back in 1985."

It is his first time as a designer at Chelsea for 30 years, a return that 
followed the announcement that he had been axed by the BBC as its frontman for 
the flower show coverage. But any disappointment and anguish is clearly an 
excellent fertiliser for his garden. In full bloom, featuring a gently 
meandering stream, sandpit and a small beach hut, it could be the perfect 
setting for one of his romantic novels.

"I only spent part of my life presenting and every day gardening, so for me, 
this is just another day in the garden. This is a celebration of my 50 years in 
gardening and all the gardens that have inspired me," said Titchmarsh, 64. 
"I've just been putting moss on a wall. It's all very therapeutic."
 Exhibitors unload flowers at the Chelsea flower show. Photograph: Toby 
Melville/Reuters 
Titchmarsh may have been the model of calm, but the air on Friday was filled 
with the fragrance of freesias and frustration as the last adjustments were 
made in time for judging on Sunday, and the official opening on Tuesday. 
Gnomes, which were given a one-year moratorium at Chelsea last year, have been 
returned to their status as the ultimate Chelsea faux pas.

Charlotte Rowe, designer of the much talked about first world war centenary 
garden, No Man's Land, has had a week-long battle with the elements.

"The weather has been a nightmare, I'm really not exaggerating," she said, 
while directing a man carrying a fern. "We've had hailstorms for two days and 
now it's boiling hot, so we're frantically trying to keep the plants back and 
protect them with whatever we can."

Rowe took inspiration from the French fields of the western Somme, where the 
scars of war still show. "When you go back to the fields now, the traces of the 
trenches and tunnel craters are still apparent, so this garden is really about 
the regeneration of the land after severe conflict as a sort of metaphor for 
the human spirit," she said.
 No Man's Land by Charlotte Rowe. Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
While designing the garden – her first at Chelsea – Rowe visited the site of 
the battle three times, and has recreated the wild mounds and undulations of 
the former trenches, covering the garden in a lush abundance of grass, 
strawberries and wildflowers. A single wild red poppy sits among the foliage.

"I've also used yew bushes here which is significant because yew hedging was 
used in hundreds of cemeteries around the western front. And the pale stone 
that I've used is the same that is used for the soldiers' remembrance 
gravestones."

The first world war garden also features a large mine crater, crafted into a 
water feature, while a dark, brutalist wall runs along one side of the garden, 
evoking the restriction felt by soldiers in the trenches. Climbing up the dark 
granite are white roses, the flowers the soldiers were showered with on their 
return from the conflict.

For this year's show brothers Harry and David Rich, 26 and 23, are being 
touted as ones to watch. Their stargazing garden, designed to recall the 
constellations of the night sky, was inspired by their home in the Brecon 
Beacons, and they brought everything from boulders to traditional stone walling 
from their home landscape. "The plants are also meant to echo the feeling of 
the Milky Way, so we have the whites of the cow parsley, the aquilegia crystal 
which looks like a shooting star," said David. "And then we have tons of 
purples and reds littered throughout."

"We did an artisan garden last year, so this is about six times bigger," he 
added. "Six times the stress."
 