
The journey itself feels like a quest. I'm driving through the rural backroads 
of Cheshire's Peak District, the lush landscape of ancient droving trails 
overshadowed by Jodrell Bank's Lovell telescope, to meet an author described by 
Philip Pullman as "the most important British writer of fantasy since Tolkien".

Alan Garner published The Weirdstone of Brisingamen in 1960 but his 
folklore-rich prose, crafted amid and about the landscape of east Cheshire, is 
finding a new legion of fans today, not least with the publication ofBoneland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/29/boneland-alan-garner-review>, 
the final volume of the Weirdstone trilogy last year.

We meet at Toad Hall, the medieval, timber-framed building in the hamlet of 
Blackden he bought for £510 in 1957. Gooseberry bushes flourish in the garden 
and the Manchester train rumbles regularly by. The property has been under the 
care of the Blackden Trust since 2004 and, while still the Garners' home, it 
also hosts creative writing and archaeological courses in summer.

The septuagenarian writer holds court in his study. "I grew up knowing the 
stories behind this landscape," he says. "I was seven and sat in my 
grandfather's blacksmith forge when he first told me the story of the hero king 
asleep under the hill."

Such legends, and objects Alan found during childhood explorations of the 
heathland outside Alderley Edge, have informed his work ever since. The Edge's 
labyrinth of copper-mine tunnels has a crucial role in The Stone Book Quartet, 
and the knarled rocky outcrop of Mow Cop, just beyond Congleton, features in 
Red Shift.

But, for now, we simply walk around the grounds of Toad Hall, soaking up the 
deep-rooted sense of mythology and spirituality of the Cheshire countryside.

"I'm built into this landscape on every level," says Alan as I take my leave. 
"I felt a symbiosis with the place as a child and I still do now. It is," he 
adds, "a primeval feeling."

• What to see: Toad Hall, Blackden, Holmes Chapel (01477 571445, 
theblackdentrust.org.uk <http://www.theblackdentrust.org.uk/>), occasionally 
has conducted tours £7.50. See also cheshirepeakdistrict.com
 