
To say that the first 10 years of this century have been eventful for food is 
about as obvious as pointing out that Susan Boyle is an unlikely pop princess. 
This was the decade that cheffing itself went pop: the celebrity chef exploded 
onto our screens with never before seen vigour; high-end food became really big 
business and chefs valuable, international exports. Closer to home we embraced 
British food – from its pig's snouts to its snail porridge - seasonal cooking 
caught on in a big way; local produce was championed like never before; food 
blogging took off and underground restaurants and supper clubs popped up here, 
there and everywhere, with a helping hand from the foodTwitterati 
<http://twitter.com/guardianfood>.

We watched with growing fatigue as Gordon Ramsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gordonramsay> morphed from 
furrow-browed, occasionally-documented top London chef into a botoxed celebrity 
whose multi-Michelin starred global restaurant group went from boom to the 
brink of bust; while 'pukka' Jamie Oliver transformed from a resolutely perky 
cheeky chappy into a world-weary social interventionist right before our eyes. 
Love them or hate them, the 'chef as media personality' phenomenon paved the 
way for an unrelenting food television onslaught, which, as food writer Tim 
Hayward (for whom food programming was a low point of the decade) succinctly 
put it "followed the stars and burned out so that now, with a few noble 
exceptions, it comprises a cooking talent show and the cultural death-zone that 
is 'Come Dine With Me'."

Metro's food critic Marina O'Loughlin 
<http://www.london-eating.co.uk/critics/marina-oloughlin.htm> asks "isn't 
everyone wising up to the 'celebrity chef'?" and isn't alone in her view that 
"Big Sweary should hide for a couple of years before anyone can bear to look at 
him again - and the rest of them should start cooking in their restaurant 
kitchens." But as Angela Hartnett points out, taking chefs out of their 
kitchens and onto the telly has given profile to an industry previously sneered 
at as an inferior vocational path. "It's all good," she says. "It's opened up 
cookery to everyone and made it a positive career choice rather than a negative 
one."

But has the food on our screens combined with all the high profile cheffy 
exploits to make a difference to the way we eat? ChefFergus Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fergus-henderson> wonders if we 
haven't just become a nation of culinary voyeurs. "There's definitely been an 
improvement," he says. "But there's danger of the pornography theory. You might 
get all hot and steamy watching a pornographic film but then not change your 
habits. There's so much on telly and in magazines about food, and everybody 
looks at the stuff, but then they don't change what they're doing."

Allegra McEvedy is optimistic. "I think things have got better. For every 
person who sits on the sofa and watches Nigella making lovely food, probably 
90% of them won't change, but something subliminally must be going in on some 
level. It's not a food revolution – but awareness is a good thing," she says. "
Jamie Oliver's school dinners <http://www.jamieoliver.com/school-dinners> 
campaign was a positive thing. Of course it hasn't changed the way all school 
kids are fed in this country, but it's done something, and that's better than 
nothing."

Few can argue with the way the restaurant scene has developed and improved 
over the past decade. O'Loughlin remembers "getting wildly overexcited by the 
likes of Spoon at the Sanderson" when she first began reviewing 10 years ago, 
and admits that "now it takes a lot more to wow." And of course, many will 
remember this decade for being the one in which molecular gastronomy reared its 
eccentric, enchanting head from behind a fog of chilled nitrogen – and the 
strange and unexpected flavours of Heston Blumenthal and Ferran Adrià's food 
delighted and surprised us. For the Guardian Weekend magazine's food editor Bob 
Granleese, "the first mouthful of langoustine cream, pea puree and quail jelly 
on my first visit toThe Fat Duck <http://www.fatduck.co.uk/> in September 2001" 
was a defining moment of the decade. But like most zeitgeisty things, the 
flipside to this new cuisine has been its poor imitations. As Hartnett points 
out, "Heston is amazing but it's when young cooks just copy and add these bits 
to their menus that it is annoying, as there is little understanding of the 
techniques."

O'Loughlin predicts that molecular gastronomy could possibly out-weird itself 
into esoteric oblivion: "This is going to become even more niche than it 
currently is, with tyro chefs waking up to the fact that it's far easier to go 
down the local, seasonal, simple route than it is trying to ape Heston and 
Ferran," she says. And while there is a general consensus that Blumenthal is an 
excellent, taboo-breaking chef, it's whatMark Hix 
<http://www.hixoysterandchophouse.co.uk/> calls "the unnecessaries" sparked by 
this latter day cuisine – the froths, foams and fripperies - which are 
irritating to many. Michel Roux Jr doesn't mince his words on the subject. 
"These mousses and foams that have popped everywhere have been a disaster," he 
says. "To add gelatine to an ingredient and pump in CO2 to make a froth out of 
it isn't food to me. It's vile and it has no place in gastronomy. People make 
potato puree out of it for God's sake."

One of the decade's developments he's more enthusiastic about is what Angela 
Hartnett calls "the rise of the great female chefs." Hartnett cites the success 
of Spanish chefElena Arzak 
<http://www.caterersearch.com/Articles/2009/06/19/328299/elena-arzak-to-make-uk-debut-at-caterers-chef-conference.html>
 andNadia Santini <http://www.dalpescatore.com/news_libro_en.asp> in Italy, but 
in this country - aside from Hartnett herself - we've seen the likes ofClare 
Smyth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2007/dec/16/foodanddrink.features10> at 
Hospital Road,Lisa Allen 
<http://www.caterersearch.com/Articles/2007/05/10/313652/acorn-winner-2007-lisa-allen.html>
 at Northcote Manor and Roux's ownRachel Humphrey 
<http://www.caterersearch.com/Articles/2008/06/06/321350/rachel-humphrey-promoted-to-head-chef-at-le-gavroche.html>
, who's now head chef at Le Gavroche – steadily rising up the ranks and coming 
into their own. "Rachel started with me as an apprentice and has worked her way 
up as a head chef and that's something to be applauded," says Roux. "We should 
be championing this and screaming it from the rooftops. We are seeing more 
women in the kitchen, but I don't think it's got easier – it's never going to 
get easier, and there are still barriers there - but it is possible for women 
to achieve, and we're seeing women break down these challenging environments 
and do seriously well."

Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall notes this rising emphasis in seasonality and 
provenance with glee. "Provenance has started to matter at least as much as how 
clever the chef is," he says. "And it's the clever ones who have been pushing 
it. What we're seeing is a waning interest in clever things on the plate and 
more of an emphasis on where it comes from." This has also been reflected in 
the number of people getting hands-on with ingredients. "I think there are more 
people growing their own in the UK now than there have ever have been before, 
and that's very exciting," he says. "Seed companies are selling more than they 
were before the recession - and more people are finding new ways of growing 
outside the allotment system, which is massively over-subscribed. Our own 
landshare project is really taking off and allowing people to find land to grow 
food on. People seem to find it empowering – even if they're doing it on a 
small scale. It's partly down to a backlash against the industrialised food 
machine, and partly thanks to the recession.

For chef Mark Hix, British produce has never been better. "Farmers' markets 
<http://www.farmersmarkets.net/findafmkt.htm> are on the up, which is great," 
he says. "Restaurants are realising that they can buy most of the stuff they 
need from the UK. Even this year I've got some amazing black truffles from 
Wiltshire. I can put a menu together here which is 100% British ingredients, 
whereas you couldn't necessarily have done that 10 years ago. British producers 
are just doing great stuff now – likeTrealy Farm <http://www.trealyfarm.com/> 
in Monmouthshire which won the Radio Four farming awards for producer of the 
year. It makes traditional cured meats with British pork – that kind of thing 
is great to see. It's brilliant for the general public and it's good for chefs 
to use on their menus."

Hix also points to Michelin's acknowledgement of London's St John restaurant 
(where Fergus Henderson has been banging the drum for British produce and 
seasonal cooking since its inception), as proof that things are changing for 
the better. "The Michelin Guide relaxing their views on things and giving St 
John a Michelin star in the 2009 guide was fantastic," he says. "It ruffled a 
few feathers with chefs that had been trying really hard to get a star over the 
last few years and maybe never getting one, or getting one after lots of 
painful expense – and then suddenly the Michelin Guide seemed to change its 
parameters a bit and gave one to Fergus."

But O'Loughlin is anxious about nose-to-tail overkill. "I do love St John and 
some of its acolytes," she says. "But sometimes these days I think that there's 
a lot of dick-swinging, milts-and-cods-tongues serving cheffy showing off just 
for the sake of it," she says. Henderson himself concedes that done badly, 
nose-to-tail cooking can be nightmarish. "My low point was in New York when 
someone served me half a sheep's head which hadn't been properly cooked," he 
says. "The brain was raw and it was utter confusion. It's not meant to be 
testosterone-fuelled, cheffy, fuck off, raw, gesture-making food at all – it's 
a 'cook things well and they're delicious' idea. Raw lamb's brain in half an 
open lamb's head was gloomy. It was such a misunderstanding of what I'm trying 
to do, because offal needs to be cooked incredibly well. That was a bad moment."

Eating the whole beast has always made sense to chefs like Henderson and 
Anthony Demetre <http://www.arbutusrestaurant.co.uk/> – and is something which 
has particularly caught on during the recession thanks to its obvious 
economical sense, but Hix is also applying this minimal-wastage mentality to 
fish, due to its increased scarcity. "Sadly fish is in a sorry state," he says. 
"We haven't taken much notice over the past 10 to 15 years of declining fish 
stocks and fisherman, chefs, restaurants and the general public have been 
buying unsustainable species and not buying second and third division fish. On 
my menu at Hix I've got gurnard, dabs, sea bass which is sustainable, and 
monkfish cheeks. I'm utilising things that make these fish go a lot further, 
and rather than just using the prime cuts of the fish I'm using other bits and 
pieces – even the scallop frills – which usually go in the bin - I blanch and 
deep fry. It's about being a bit clever about what you use on the menu."

Awareness about the sustainability of the food we eat, along with animal 
welfare and farming ethics has been a definitive factor of the past 10 years, 
and an undeniably good one. But as McEvedy points out, we are still in the 
midst of a global food crisis. "In the west we're all dying from being fat and 
elsewhere people are still starving – there's something really grotesque and 
upsetting about that disparity."

And what will define the next 10 years in food? The consensus seems to be that 
there will be a return to simplicity, as Hix describes. "I think things will be 
simpler, more to the point and less fussy. I think there will be an improvement 
in high street restaurants, and I'd like to see fast food getting better; a 
return to proper bistros and brasseries and more honest food. We've moved a 
long way in the last 10 years and there is now so much choice. The whole thing 
is a big new education – people are becoming much wiser and more knowledgeable 
about what they're eating and buying, which benefits everyone."

Well that's it from our food experts. But what about you WoMers? What have 
been your highs and lows of the past decade in food, and what are your 
predictions and hopes for the next 10 years? Do tell.
 