
Phoenix Coyotes 4, Chicago Blackhawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-blackhawks> 0
Coyotes win series 4-2
After the first five games of the series went to overtime, Chicago were blown 
out and eliminated in game six.

Oliver Ekman-Larsson, Gilbert Brule, Antoine Vermette and Kyle Chipchura 
scored the goals as the Coyotes beat the Blackhawks 4-0 in Chicago.

The Blackhawks outshot the Coyotes - 16 to 2 in the first period - but could 
not find a way past Phoenix goalie Mike Smith.

It was the franchise's first playoff series win since 1987 and the first since 
the team moved to Phoenix. The team has had financial troubles and is currently 
owned by the league.

The Coyotes will now face the Nashville Predators in the western conference 
semi-finals.

New York Rangers 3, Ottawa Senators 2
Series tied 3-3
Facing elimination, the top-seeded Rangers won 3-2 in Ottawa to force a game 
seven in New York on Thursday - the first Game seven in any sport at Madison 
Square Garden in 17 years.

Brad Richards scored the go-ahead goal and Derek Stepan had a goal and two 
assists as New York staved off elimination with a 3-2 victory against the 
Senators. Chris Kreider scored the Rangers third goal in only his third everNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> start. The Rangers were aided by 
penalties against the Senators, including a goal during a 5-on-3 power play.

The return of Daniel Alfredsson, who missed three games with a concussion, in 
front of the noisy home crowd at Scotiabank Place could not quite help the 
eighth-seeded Senators complete the upset. Carl Hagelin returned to the Rangers 
lineup after sitting out a three-game suspension for his elbow on Alfredsson.

The Rangers broke through in the second period with three goals after going 
six straight periods without scoring.

Chris Neil had given Ottawa a 1-0 lead in the first with a power-play goal and 
Jason Spezza cut it to 3-2 with 39 seconds left to play in the third. That goal 
was reviewed after some question about whether Spezza kicked it in.

After six games, there has been very little to choose between teams that were 
separated by 10 wins and 17 points through the regular season. But the Senators 
have one more chance to pull off the upset, needing only one more victory at 
Madison Square Garden, where they are an overall 4-1 this year.

The last Game seven at the Garden was in the NBA: The Knicks lost 97-95 to 
Reggie Miller and the Indiana Pacers in the 1995 Eastern Conference semifinals. 
The last time the Rangers hosted a Game seven was 1994, when they beat 
Vancouver to win their first Stanley Cup in 54 years.
 