
The chairman of the new owner of one of Britain's high street banks will be 
accused of misusing shareholders' funds in order to win a boardroom power 
struggle when he stands trial on corruption charges in Madrid this week.

Three months after he clinched the £9bn takeover of Abbey National, Emilio 
Botín, chairman of Grupo Santander, will face allegations that he used 
shareholders' money to pay off rivals who challenged his leadership of Spain's 
biggest bank.

If convicted, the 70-year-old Botín faces up to 12 years in prison. He would 
also be barred from the chairmanship of the bank, triggering a succession 
crisis at the bank he has led for almost 20 years and further destabilising 
Abbey National.

The Botín dynasty controlled Banco Santander for most of the last century with 
the chairmanship passing down through the family from the current chairman's 
grandfather.

But when Santander merged with Banco Central Hispano in 1999 it was agreed 
that two Central Hispano directors, José María Amusátegui and Ángel 
Corcóstegui, would become co-chairman and chief executive of the new bank 
alongside Botín.

But power sharing proved difficult and, as a bank spokesman acknowledged, the 
uneasy partnership quickly evolved into a full-blown power struggle. No one was 
surprised when the Central Hispano men left the bank two years later.

Many observers were shocked however when details emerged of the severance 
packages that the two received. Mr Amusátegui got €56m and Mr Corcóstegui €108m.

One man decided to do something about it. Rafael Perez Escolar was a director 
of Banesto when it went into administration at the end of 1993 and was 
subsequently convicted of fraud.

Mr Perez Escolar maintains his innocence and claims that when Santander bought 
Banesto at auction the following year the Banesto share holders lost out. So 
began his campaign against the Santander chairman.

Mr Perez Escolar teamed up with Francisco Franco Otegi, an independent 
shareholder rights activist, to bring charges of misappropriation of funds and 
criminal mismanagement against Mr Botín for the Central Hispano severance 
payments.

They claim these sums were unearned and as such constituted a misuse of 
shareholder funds. "Botín is a man who uses power in an immoral way," Mr Perez 
Escolar said. "He has used the bank for his own benefit, the whole world knows 
that."

The bank said the sums involved were simply the outstanding salary, bonus pay 
ments and pension entitlements of senior executives rolled up into a lump sum.

The payments were agreed by the board and endorsed by the shareholders when 
they approved the accounts for that year, a bank spokesman pointed out.

"The contribution by Mr Amusátegui and Mr Corcóstegui was crucial to the 
resounding success of the merger," Mr Botín told the bank's annual general 
meeting following the payments. "In compensating them, the board did what it 
had to do, and it did so because it was in the interests of all the 
shareholders. Such decisions were entirely correct, both from a legal and a 
business viewpoint."

The charges faced by Mr Botín caused a rebellion of Abbey shareholders at the 
meeting convened to approve its takeover by Santander. And last week, a group 
of rebel Santander shareholders lodged a complaint with the Financial Services 
Authority urging it to investigate the Spanish bank following the Abbey 
takeover.

In Madrid people have grown accustomed to seeing illustrious banking careers 
ended in the courts. But there remains a sense of disbelief that Mr Botín 
himself is facing charges.

Regardless of the outcome of this trial, Santander's legal problems will 
continue. Mr Botín and Mr Perez Escolar are due back in court later this year 
to settle a separate charge of tax evasion.
 