
The children's tsar today attacked the government's youth justice policy, 
which he warned is enraging and alienating young people.

In an impassioned speech to the Guardian Healthy Kids Summit, Professor Sir Al 
Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> said normal 
behaviour was being demonised. Children hanging around shops were seen as 
threatening and signs warning against ball games were commonplace.

"This demonisation and lack of empathy for young people is a major issue for 
England. It causes anger and alienation," the Children's Commissioner for 
England told the conference in London.

"It is driving policy. At the moment we have a youth justice system dominated 
by a punitive approach. It doesn't focus on children's needs.

"We have to ask questions about naming and shaming, particularly for people 
who have learning difficulties and can't understand why Abso restrictions are 
being applied.

"Is there not an urgent need to review our youth justice programme to see why 
we are locking away so many kids?"

The government is to be put under the microscope by the UN in the next few 
months for it's approach to children's rights, an investigation Sir Al welcomed.

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) enshrines children's 
rights, such as to have their interests considered and to be treated with 
dignity and worth. This was at odds with much youth justice practice, he 
suggested.

"Young offenders tell me no one shows me any respect," he said. "When I go to 
see them they are amazed an adult would shake hands and sit down to listen to 
them.

"They say we want to cuddle our mothers but when they come to visit 
[officials] will not let them in case they smuggle drugs or whatever.

"These are children. Where is the empathy for young offenders?"

The government was making bold steps to improve child wellbeing in other 
areas, he said. A plan to extend primary mental health workers to secondary 
schools and a focus on social and emotional aspects of learning in schools was 
welcomed.

But more needed to be done after a Unicef report earlier this year branded the 
UK bottom for child wellbeing out of 21 of the richest countries.

Studies show one in 10 children have a diagnosable mental health disorder, he 
said. Extra support could boost their school performance as there is growing 
evidence that emotional resillience helps good learning.

Sir Al, Engalnd's first children's commissioner, said there was an urgent need 
to improve empathy, listen to children and recognise improving their wellbeing 
was everyone's business.

His office, rebranded 11 Million after the number of chidlren it covers, has 
worked with young people in nine local areas. Their main concerns were family 
stability; safety; school life, including having friends and freedom from 
bullying; and having someone to turn to.

Support was particularly important at times of transition: when they started, 
finished or moved school.

"I'm not arguing against children having any stress but we need to manage 
it,'" he said.
 