
Clause 15 of the children and social work bill is eliciting much comment and 
criticism from the social care sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/05/troubling-clauses-in-children-and-social-work-bill-that-should-be-deleted>
.

The clause, in the words of the children’s minister, Edward Timpson, seeks to:


Allow great social workers to try out new approaches and be freed from 
limiting bureaucracy, all in the interests of achieving more for children.

But, according to the charity Article 39 <http://www.article39.org.uk/> (and 
these fears are shared by the British Association of Social Workers and many 
others), it:

Introduces an unprecedented threat to hundreds of social care requirements 
that have developed over decades.

Timpson assures us that: 

There is absolutely no intention of allowing the delegation of child 
protection functions to profit-making organisations.

 I believe this is not only true but that G4S et al would not want to run 
child protection even if they were allowed.

The experience of Circle Holdings in its disastrous running of Hinchingbrook 
hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/09/circle-exit-private-contract-hinchingbrooke-nhs>
 shows that the private for-profit sector falters where unlimited demand is at 
play. Circle was sunk by the continual demands placed on A&E, it couldn’t get 
the financial model to work for it as it was overwhelmed by demand and so was 
facing significant losses.

Similarly, any given local authority cannot control the numbers of children in 
its area requiring statutory intervention; demand is not controllable as it is 
if you are running a children’s home or a prison with a fixed capacity. So 
fears that clause 15 is a gateway to privatisation are misplaced.

 The claim from the Department for Education (DfE) for clause 15 is that it 
will allow the DfE and local authorities:

To safely test and evaluate the removal of barriers that social work leaders 
tell us get in the way of good practice. 


This would create a controlled environment in which we could enable local 
authorities to test deregulatory approaches that are not currently possible, 
before taking a decision to make substantial changes to existing legislation 
that would apply across the board.

 There are a number of these approaches Tact would like to try out in 
partnership with local authorities. Many of our young people in long-term 
foster care have multiple social workers and dislike having to make new 
relationships as social workers change (some frequently).

Stand up for me and be brave: what young people want from social workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/jul/06/stand-up-for-me-and-be-brave-what-young-people-want-from-social-workers>
These young people view their foster carers as their support and would prefer 
not to have an allocated social worker. Others value their social worker and 
wish to keep them. It would be useful to pilot both approaches in the same 
local authority, dependant on the child’s wishes and feelings.

Similarly, some young people value their six-monthly reviews and others view 
them as a reminder that they are “different” and would prefer not to have them. 
Again, offering both options in a local authority area would allow us to assess 
the impact of outcomes for children in long-term placements.

I view fostering and adoption panels as valuable. Doing away with them could 
lead to unsuitable people being approved, as the need for capacity in the care 
system could lead agency decision-makers to approve those that panels would 
reject. It could also lead to a drop in the quality of assessments as the panel 
process drives up standards.

However, I would say that adoption matching panels when there is also a judge, 
guardian, local authority and family court process looking at the case might be 
duplication and should be scrutinised. I also agree that panels should not be 
excessively large; Tact generally works with three fostering panel members and 
a panel adviser, and this is sufficient.

 There are also myriad inspections of independent fostering agencies by local 
authorities and Ofsted. These could be streamlined, freeing up social work time 
in both the local authority and the agency.

 Opponents of clause 15, who include the education select committee, are 
worried that if enacted it will allow local authorities to seek exemption from 
specific requirements of children’s social care legislation, in order to test 
new ways of working. It could potentially change child protection powers, 
social care practice and statutory regulation at an individual council’s 
request.

The select committee’s objections were in part confused and contradictory: for 
example, simultaneously decrying accreditation proposals while demanding the 
cohesive continuing professional development framework that accreditation will 
help deliver.

 I too would have concerns about clause 15 if I felt it was going to be used 
to weaken safeguards for vulnerable children but, as long as this is social 
work-led, I do not see that happening.

Opponents of the proposed legislation are concerned the lack of detail could 
cause chaos in social care law and regulation. I would like to see a clearer 
structure about how opt-outs are applied for and agreed. For many of the 
changes we need to see a large element of co–design with the children and young 
people, staff and foster carers they would affect.

 It also important the proposed What Works Centre monitors all these 
innovations and quickly moves to mainstream those that improve outcomes so we 
avoid a piecemeal system developing. However, testing new ways of working at a 
local level before mainstreaming is a good idea and means that any proposals 
taken forward nationally will be evidence-based and practice-tested.

 I urge the social work profession to engage with the proposals in this bill 
and see it as an opportunity to test ways of improving outcomes for children. 
The bill provides the children’s workforce with a chance to shape the way 
services are provided and ensure they are child focused.

Social work as a profession is all too often seen as suspicious of, and 
hostile to, innovation and change. Many local authorities have shown this need 
not be the case over the past few years through the delivery of excellent new 
ways of working, some funded by the DfE innovation fund. Alongside this, 
Frontline (of which I am a board member) and Step-Up have brought new, and 
successful, innovations to social work recruitment.

 There is more positive government attention on social work than ever before, 
and it is up to us social workers to shape this attention into better outcomes 
for the children we work for.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 