 The government should ditch any moves to introduce "baby Asbos" to tackle 
antisocial behaviour in children under 10, Al Aynsley-Green, the children's 
commissioner for England, said yesterday. The "worrying" development was "part 
of the incessant programme of policy towards punishment and control" of 
children.
In an interview with the Guardian, Professor Aynsley-Green said he was not a 
"dewy-eyed liberalist" and not against allAsbos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos>, but that they were inappropriate 
for children below the age of criminal responsibility. He was responding to 
reports that the government is considering extending antisocial behavioural 
orders, which ban individuals from committing certain acts or entering certain 
areas, to youngsters. He said the government was "speaking with forked tongue", 
since it was seeking ever tougher punishments while introducing reforms to 
protect vulnerable youngsters.

He was concerned about whether some Asbos were "appropriate, sensible, 
proportionate and just". He also expressed concern about the high numbers of 
young people, including those with mental health problems, targeted by 
antisocial behaviour orders. He said young people with autism, Asberger's 
syndrome and Tourette's syndrome had no control over their behaviour, and 
called for an inquiry to see whether the orders were effective before their use 
was extended.

But senior police officers said that measures for the under-10s might be 
necessary as a last resort. Mike Goodwin, the Leicestershire chief constable 
and the Association of Chief Police Officers' spokesman on Asbos, said: "We 
support any well thought-through proportionate intervention that gives some 
respite where beleaguered communities are suffering at the hands of 
individuals, some of whom are under 10."

The Surrey chief constable, Bob Quick, said many people would argue that some 
10-year-olds were "streetwise enough to know the consequences of their actions".

According to figures in June, 4,649 Asbos have been issued since their 
introduction in 1999, of which 2,057 have applied to children aged 10 to 17.
 