
Mary Marsh, director of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Children:
 "[We] are very pleased with the appointment of Professor Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> as children's commissioner 
for England. He is an excellent choice with his health background, good 
understanding of children and his recent work with government. His approachable 
manner and skill in making complex issues concrete and understandable to 
children and young people will be a great asset. [But] the NSPCC has concerns 
about the power and independence he will have. The government's model of a 
commissioner is the weakest in the UK, suggesting a government listening 
officer rather than a powerful champion for children."

The ChildLine chief executive, Carole Easton: 
 "We're delighted that the commissioner's influence, and the changes the role 
can make to the lives of children, now rest in the hands of Prof Aynsley-Green. 
While the powerful views of young people should drive the commissioner's 
agenda, Prof Aynsley-Green's background expertise in what affects children and 
young people's physical and mental wellbeing, and his knowledge of the services 
they currently receive, will enable him to be a credible, effective and 
influential champion."

Carolyne Willow, national coordinator of the Children's Rights Alliance for 
England:
 "We are delighted that England's 11 million children and young people are 
finally getting their champion. Prof Aynsley-Green has an excellent track 
record of pushing forward children's interests and concerns. Having got to the 
top of his profession in the health service, we are certain he will prove a 
strong advocate for children's rights and push them much higher up the 
political agenda."

Paul Ennals, chief executive of the National Children's Bureau (NCB): 
 "Al Aynsley-Green has an excellent track record in championing children and 
young people. As national clinical director for children, responsible for the 
children's national service framework, he has shown the ability and the 
determination to make a real difference to children's lives. Like many in the 
sector, NCB has expressed concern about the formal powers given to this new and 
important post. That is why it is vital to have a commissioner who can work 
effectively with the government, but who has the independence and integrity to 
put the interests of children and young people first."

Tony Hunter, president of the Association of Directors of Social Services: 
 "We welcome the appointment of Prof Al Aynsley-Green as the first children's 
commissioner for England. He did a very good job leading development of the 
children's national service framework. He is a farsighted individual and we 
believe he's got a clear vision of the need for education, health and social 
care to work together to deliver effective children's services."

Caroline Abrahams, director of policy at children's charity NCH: 
 "The appointment of Al Aynsley-Green as the first children's commissioner for 
England is good news. I am sure he will get this post off to a good start. NCH 
looks forward to working with him in support of children and young people's 
rights and interests, nationally, regionally and locally."

Barnardo's director of operations, Chris Hanvey: 
 "We congratulate Prof Al Aynsley-Green on his appointment as children's 
commissioner for England. Prof Aynsley-Green has been a champion for children 
throughout his professional life. His leadership of the children's national 
service framework shows just how determined he is that the health sector should 
work closely with others for the benefit of children and young people. He is 
deeply committed to improving the lives of the most vulnerable children in our 
society, such as disabled children."
 