
The new children's commissioner will earn £30,000 a year more than the 
advertised salary, it emerged today.

The job originally carried a £100,000 a year salary, but Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, England's first 
children's commissioner, will receive £130,000 when he takes up the post later 
this year, SocietyGuardian.co.uk has learned.

The Department for Education and Skills said the position of children's 
commissioner was advertised at a £100K a year salary but "that could increase 
for an exceptional candidate".

Details of the commissioner's salary will silence critics who said the low 
salary showed a lack of government interest in the post when it was advertised 
last December. They warned that such poor remuneration would deter any high 
calibre candidates from applying for the post.

It is not clear whether any potential candidates were put off by the 
advertised salary, which is lower than some directors of social services and 
charity managers are paid.

Terri Doughty, co-ordinator of Action on Rights for Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and one of the most vocal 
critics, said: "This is the kind of salary that reflects the seriousness of the 
role, and is right for someone of Al Aynsley-Green's calibre.

"The role of the English commissioner has been limited by statute and is the 
weakest of any of the UK commissioners, and it took a fight even to get 
children's rights mentioned."

But the details of the commissioner's salary prompted fresh debate among 
critics who questioned whether such a high salary was reflective of the post.

Ian Johnston, director of the British Association of Social Workers, said: 
"The danger with a salary of this magnitude is that it will make the 
commissioner remote from the kind of people whose rights he's supposed to be 
championing. It's hard to see how someone in this salary bracket can identify 
with people on benefits."

But he added: "Hopefully the status that goes with this salary will mean he's 
less likely to be a puppet on a string and will have some power."

· Children's charity Barnardo's is advertising for a new chief executive to 
replace the long-standing incumbent, Roger Singleton, who retires later this 
year.

With an annual salary of £120,000, the post, advertised in today's Society 
Guardian supplement, is one of the highest paid in the voluntary sector.

Steven Bubb, chief executive of the Association of Chief Executives of 
Voluntary Organisations, said: "[Charities] are becoming more professional. 
Charities are commercial, competitive organisations and so they need to be able 
to recruit the best."
 