
Sick and injured children are still not receiving adequate pain relief, the 
government's children's tsar warns today.

Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, a 
consultant paediatrician and England's first children's commissioner, is urging 
greater efforts to ensure all children who need it receive help with pain, 
whether through "magic cream" - anaesthetic gel - to ease the hurt of 
injections, rapid access to painkillers in accident and emergency departments 
or support for severely disabled or very ill children receiving palliative care.

While the UK has made great strides in managing children's pain over the past 
30 years - prior to which it was widely believed that babies and infants did 
not feel pain as adults do - methods of alleviating it are not applied 
consistently, too few drugs are licensed for children and parents are too often 
left out of pain management decisions, the commissioner said. "Pain should be 
at the centre of everybody's thinking about managing a very sick child," he 
said.

Prof Aynsley-Green's call, made today on a global "day against pain" held 
annually by the International Association for the Study of Pain and this year 
focusing on children, is echoed by other medics.

Professor Linda Franck, co-director of the Well Child Pain Research Centre at 
Great Ormond Street children's hospital in London, said research into 
children's pain remained "just minuscule compared with the amount of research 
funding and support for other aspects of medical care.

"We still have so much more to learn both in terms of how to measure the 
extent of children's pain and what to do about it."

Prof Aynsley-Green, whose own pioneering research on stress levels in sick 
babies in the 1970s proved that infants feel pain, pointed to A&E as an 
"adult-centric" environment which did not always understand pain in children. 
"Their [children's] manifestations of pain may be different from adults', for 
example they may lie perfectly still." There was a need for better training of 
those treating children in pain, particularly those who were too young to 
explain their experience or were unable to do so through disability, he said.
 