
England is one of the worst countries in the developed world in which to be a 
child, the children's commissioner said today.

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> said 
he was "angry" that adults frequently "demonise" children while vulnerable 
young people continue to die through poverty and neglect. And he warned of a 
"crisis at the heart of our society" in the way children are treated by adults.

His comments echo the findings of a UN report, released three months ago, 
which said children growing up in the UK suffer greater deprivation, worse 
relationships with their parents and are exposed to more risks from alcohol, 
drugs and unsafe sex than those in any other wealthy country in the world.

As he launched a new five year plan for his organisation, Sir Al said children 
often raised concerns over safety, security and bullying.

"Children exist in a state of great uncertainty," he said. "They feel unsafe 
in the streets, they often have domestic violence at home and bullying in 
school and they feel demonised by the adult population."

He said "endless testing" in schools also contributed to children's 
unhappiness, and he condemned the use of Asbos and the "mosquito device" to 
stop children hanging around in particular areas. The device emits a 
high-pitched sound only audible to children.

"We are one of the most child and young person unfriendly countries in the 
developed world," he said

It is "exhilarating" to meet children who are interested, passionate and 
concerned about the world, he said.

"But I am driven almost to the point of despair when I see the awfulness of so 
many children's lives. That's why I am so angry. I am angry that many people 
are just not seeing the problem."

Sir Al, two years into his post as England's first children's commissioner, 
has published a new five year plan for the Office of the Children's 
Commissioner, which has been rebranded "11 Million", a reference to the 
11million children in England.

The plan focuses on key issues facing young people, including youth justice 
and antisocial behaviour, asylum and trafficking, mental health, and enjoying 
education. The organisation's theme for the next 12 months will be children's 
health and happiness.

In the foreword to the document, Sir Al said: "I believe there is a crisis at 
the heart of our society. We have been failing children and young people for 
far too long.

"I am angered at the state of so many children's lives - those in crumbling 
inner city estates, in poverty, or struggling to access services that should be 
free and easily available to them. But who cares enough to help?"

He added: "Our work is firmly grounded in the experiences of children and 
young people. My door is always open - as are my ears. When nobody else will 
listen to a child, I will. Together, we'll improve children's lives, rights and 
happiness."
 