
The government's respect agenda risks alienating vulnerable youngsters and 
breaching their human rights, children's rights campaigners warned last night.

Among the critics of the plans is the children's commissioner, Al Aynsley 
Green, who told the Guardian he was "concerned about a knee-jerk reaction and a 
one-size-fits all response where punishment is the answer". "I would remind the 
government that children's rights are protected by the UN convention on human 
rights," he said. They are entitled to the right to meet in public, to privacy 
and to have a say in the decisions affecting their lives, he added.

Bob Reitemeier, chief executive of the children's society, said: "The effects 
of the government's existing policies, such as Asbos, dispersal powers and 
curfews, have made many young people feel demonised, disrespected and alienated 
within their communities."

The prime minister's offer to support families has also caused some confusion. 
Heads of social services warned that the £70m earmarked for parenting support 
programmes through local authorities was dwarfed by a £600m funding shortfall 
in children's services over the next financial year.

Andrew Webb, co-chair of the association of directors of social services' 
children and families committee, said: "We don't have enough money, we can't 
take it out of schools or the care system, so the only place that's left is 
preventative support for families.

"At the same time the prime minister is saying we ought to be doing more to 
support parents to prevent antisocial behaviour. That's our dilemma."

Chris Stanley of the crime reduction charity Nacro warned against replacing 
established programmes to support families with untested schemes. "Although 
establishing a national parenting academy may sound impressive in theory, more 
money needs to be invested into schemes that we know are really making a 
difference to individuals, families and communities," he said.

However, the action plan was welcomed by the London mayor, Ken Livingstone, 
and Sir Ian Blair, the Scotland Yard commissioner, as they showed off the 
city's Safer Neighbourhood policing scheme to the Los Angeles police chief, 
Bill Bratton, on a walkabout in Camden yesterday morning.

"You've got to take the streets back before you build a respect agenda," said 
Mr Livingstone. "If you discourage kids from getting into that first bit of 
bother, it stops them becoming involved in criminal activity down the line."

Mr Bratton, the former New York police chief famed for his zero tolerance to 
minor crime, compared Tony Blair's move to what the then mayor of New York, 
Rudolph Guiliani, achieved in the 1990s.

Sir Ian said: "The decision by the police authority, the Met and the mayor to 
go down this route [neighbourhood policing] is part of the building of what the 
prime minister has launched, to be the vibrant society London needs to be by 
the time the Olympics arrive."
 