
A culture of violence in Britain is to blame for an epidemic of school 
bullying that is devastating the lives of millions of children, according to a 
devastating attack by one of the country's leading experts on young people.

In his first major interview as the new Children's Commissioner for England, 
Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> said 
nearly every child was affected by the problem: 'I have no doubt that children 
are being brought up in a society where violence is the norm in many ways. I 
include in this the violence on television, in the workplace and in the home.

'I have had hundreds of in-depth conversations with children since accepting 
this post and I can tell you that the one thing every child I have met has been 
affected by, with virtually no exceptions, is bullying,' said the former head 
of the Department of Health children's task force and ex-professor of child 
health at Great Ormond Street Hospital forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and University College, London.

Appointed last July, he is the most influential, independent voice for 
England's 11.8 million children and young people. Each year he will report to 
Parliament, highlighting issues he believes require greater focus. The 
government has assured him that his findings will play a large part in 
influencing national policies on children's rights.

The commissioner's comments come after a week in which 15-year-old Natashia 
Jackman was stabbed five times by a gang in her school canteen at Camberley in 
Surrey. In a separate incident, 19-year-old Tommy Kimpton was jailed for two 
years at Truro in Cornwall for killing a schoolmate who had bullied him for 
many years.

Bullying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying> in schools is getting 
worse, says the charity Childline, which claims it has received thousands more 
calls about the issue in the year to October than in the whole of 2004.

But, as Aynsley-Green points out, behaviour that is not curbed in childhood is 
likely to be replicated in later life, a claim supported by a TUC report last 
week showing that two million people were bullied at work in the past six 
months, mostly by managers and supervisors.

'My first plea in my new post is for adults to look in the mirror before they 
start castigating children,' said Aynsley-Green. 'Nobody will challenge an 
adult for bullying colleagues if they are successful in achieving their work 
targets but the long-term pain for victims is incalculable.

'I want to see the treatment of bullying mainstreamed in schools so that by 
the time the children become adults, they know how to cope with it and defeat 
it.'

He has told The Observer he will use the launch of England's Anti-Bullying 
Week next week to ask the government to compel all schools to present every 
pupil in England with a termly questionnaire on bullying.

'I want to pay tribute to much of the extremely good work going on in schools 
[concerning bullying] but from what children are telling me, there is still a 
lot of denial about the existence, severity and effect of bullying,' 
Aynsley-Green said. 'It has to be everyone's business.'

In comments that will further stoke the debate on violence, Rod Morgan, head 
of the Youth Justice Board, has said adults had to earn the respect of 
teenagers as well as the other way round.

Morgan called for a greater emphasis on helping younger children at risk 
before they begin offending - and criticised the setting of targets to increase 
the number of anti-social behaviour orders (Asbos) issued by courts.

His comments are pointedly at odds with the more draconian ideas being 
canvassed for the government's high-profile 'respect campaign' to crack down on 
anti-social behaviour. This has included suggestions of Asbos for the under-10s 
and 'sin bins' where problem families would be monitored round the clock.

'You don't coerce people into respecting you. Respect is a product of 
legitimate authority and it has to be earned,' he said

Morgan will use this week's annual conference of the Youth Justice Board to 
emphasise promising results gained from its early intervention programmes, 
which target children as young as eight who are identified as at risk of future 
offending because of factors such as playing truanting or a disrupted family 
background.

The policing minister, Hazel Blears, who will this week outline plans for 
community policing designed to bring the police closer to the public they 
serve, announced extra funding last week for the projects, which have reduced 
arrest rates for teenagers who took part. Research suggests those who have not 
committed a crime by the age of 14 are unlikely ever to do so.

Ministers have been pushing for increased use of Asbos. However Morgan said 
they did not necessarily solve the problem. 'We have one of the longest hours 
cultures in the world,' he said. 'We have an adult population besotted with 
watching television, who possibly aren't listening to or spending enough time 
with their children.'

Morgan added that youth offending has fallen since 2000 but the public's 
perceptions of it were affected by their anxiety about low-level incivility and 
street behaviour.
 