AA Milne wrote: "A bear, however hard he tries..."  "can never stop telling 
lies"  "grows tubby with no exercise"  "stinks and attracts the flies"  "has 
very very tired eyes" Lewis Carroll wrote: "You are old father William, the 
young man said..."  "and your hair has become very white"  "and your eyes have 
become less bright"  "and you're going to die tonight"  "and you seem to have 
lost your sight" Robert Louis Stevenson wrote: "the friendly cow, all red and 
white/I love with all my heart/..."  "she moos and moos with all her might/and 
sometimes does a fart"  "I milk her all day and all night/and with all my heart"
 "she gives me cream with all her might/to eat with apple tart"  "I drink her 
milk every night/to give my sleep a start" Edward Lear wrote: "The owl and the 
pussycat went to sea..."  "in a strange yellow boat"  "in a beautiful pea-green 
boat"  "in a horrible purple boat"  "in a terrible holey boat" AA Milne wrote: 
"When I was five I was just alive, but now I am six..."  "I'm as clever as 
clever"  "I'm as old as old"  "I'm as big as big"  "I'm as nice as nice" 
Clement Clarke Moore wrote: "Twas the night before Christmas, and all through 
the house, not a creature was stirring..."  "not even a louse"  "not even a 
mouse"  "not even the dog"  "not even the cat" Spike Milligan wrote: "On the 
ning nang nong where the cows go bong..."  "and the monkeys all say boo"  "and 
the teapots jibber jabber joo"  "all the mice go clang"  "you can't catch 'em 
when they do" Shel Silverstein wrote: "There is a light on in the attic..."  
"though everyone is asleep"  "though the house is dark and shuttered"  "though 
mum turned the lights out"  "I wonder who is there" Roald Dahl wrote: "The 
animal I really dig, above all others is the..."  "horse"  "dog"  "pig"  "cat" 
Roald Dahl also wrote: "As soon as Wolf began to feel/that he would like a 
decent meal/he went and knocked on Grandma's door/when Grandma opened it, she 
saw..."  "a hairy snout and scary eyes"  "very scary teeth and claws"  "a wolf, 
and wouldn't let him in"  "the sharp white teeth, the horrid grin"  You got…  
Wow! You're a rhyming sensation who really knows your poetry – well done!  
You've read quite a bit of children's poetry, but you could do with reading a 
bit more!  Oh dear – you really need to brush up on your rhymes and children's 
poems!  Challenge your friends Submit answers  