
Darren Henley’s article (The ENO must evolve for its own sake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/16/english-national-opera-eno-cultural-treasure-value-for-money>
, 17 February) is disingenuous and highlights the problem with Arts Council 
England and arts funding; a lack of an art form policy that holds the 
organisation to account for its funding decisions. Before the last funding 
round in 2015, Arts Council England conducted a comprehensive review of ENO, 
resulting in a £5m cut in its funding from £17m to £12m, but ENO was offered an 
inducement of £7.6m to help in the transition of its business plan. In 2015, 
ENO was awarded national portfolio status judged against strict criteria, two 
of which were an effective business plan and sound governance.

Shortly after passing these tests, ENO was put into “special measures”. Darren 
Henley seems to think that in this age of harsh austerity, two opera houses 
cheek-by-jowl in London is fine; this all demonstrates that it is Arts Council 
England that lacks credible ideas. The Royal Opera House has absorbed vast 
amounts of lottery and revenue funding and is ripe for privatisation. It is 
time thatArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> is replaced with a 
leaner, innovative organisation that can deliver a policy for the arts that 
ensures equitable distribution of public funds across regions and art forms.
Chris Hodgkins
London

• Darren Henley says that the ROH has been full every night while ENO 
audiences have been declining. I have observed that trend over the past few 
years. But as a regular opera-goer, I have seen no great difference in the 
artistic quality of the programmes put on by ROH and ENO over recent years: 
both have had outstanding and poor productions. What I have witnessed is an 
increase in ENO ticket prices to a level where on many evenings they are not 
very different from those at the ROH. Indeed, a few years ago the ROH and ENO 
staged the same opera – Alban Berg’s Wozzeck. The best seats were significantly 
cheaper at the ROH.

The ROH audience is – on average – richer than ENO’s audience; and ROH punters 
are – on average – less price sensitive than ENO’s. It seems to me that what 
has happened is that ENO has increased its seat prices to try to compensate for 
reductions in subsidy and this has in turn led to smaller audiences and less 
ticket revenue. What is not clear to me is whether Mr Henley thinks that the 
ENO can offer a programme of the same (or better) artistic quality as it has in 
the past with a significantly reduced subsidy, or whether he accepts that ENO’s 
programme will be smaller and less ambitious. I am worried by his comment that 
he will “squeeze every ounce of value out taypayer’s [sic] cash”. That seems to 
me to imply a very naive view of the purpose of subsidy or how artistic 
excellence is fostered.
Simon Rew
London

• Darren Henley says: “Let’s worry and care for the talented members of the 
ENO chorus.” Absolutely. Let’s. Perhaps the senior management team at ENO could 
start by addressing their shambolic lack of “worry and care” regarding the 
family lives and financial circumstances of its choristers, which are in danger 
of being thrown into utter disarray if these insulting new contracts are 
enforced. As the daughter of a chorus member who has dedicated 18 years of her 
life to ENO, I should perhaps show Mr Henley’s thoughts to my 14-year-old 
brother. I am sure he would be eminently understanding of the fact that he will 
have to leave his home, school and friends in the interest of “value for 
money”, despite the fact that his mother is a highly trained professional 
musician. The chorus is not being offered a living wage, however Cressida 
Pollock and her backers try to spin it. It’s time all those working in the arts 
stood up for better working conditions and fairer pay, rather than accept the 
expectation that they ought to be grateful to simply have work because, after 
all, one must be careful with “taxpayers’ money”.

Incidentally, I believe my taxes contribute towards Mr Henley’s and Ms 
Pollock’s salaries. Am I getting value for money from them? Is my mother?
Ines Meza
London

• There used to be at least one orchestral conductor who made no secret of 
despising orchestral musicians. Did it ever occur to him how foolish he would 
have looked waggling his baton with no orchestra in front of him? Yet, the 
orchestra could have played (and historically they always used to) without a 
conductor. Compare this with the ENO chairman and chief executive who seem to 
think they can run an opera without a chorus. Could either of them live in 
London on 25% less than £32K pa?
Hazel Dakers (who had a lovely time at The Magic Flute on Tuesday evening)
Brentford, Middlesex

• The present plight of ENO is indeed sad (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/english-national-opera-board-ignores-proper-debate-at-its-peril>
, 15 February). Think back to its early days at Sadler’s Wells, a much more 
intimate theatre well adapted to the generally smaller style of English 
singers, when it did not seek to compete with the ROH. In an attempt to do so 
today, it is all too likely to rely on the importation of second-rate singers 
form overseas, rather than concentrating on the kind of repertoire which suits 
its core company. The fact is, regrettably, that the Coliseum, beautiful 
building though it is, is too big, and much better suited to the kind of shows 
which present management threatens to import by way of prostitution. The spirit 
of Lilian Baylis would be better served by moving ENO into a smaller theatre 
(perhaps Julian Lloyd Webber would swap one of his) and concentrating on the 
kind of repertory which English singers can do so well. Beecham made the same 
point 70 years ago and it was regarded as heresy, but today it may seem more 
pertinent. And at the same time, the sacred cow of opera in English (where the 
words are rarely discernible anyway) has surely been overtaken by the use of 
surtitles. Radical thinking is required by professionals who understand what 
opera is all about. The present planned amputation is … just that.
Paul Strang
London

• Darren Henley is right, the ENO must change – no arts organisation can stand 
still. The key question is what change? It is widely accepted that ENO’s 
artistic output has been outstanding with the ENO chorus a key part of that. 
Less open to praise has been ENO’s management – no organisation in good health 
would lose all three of its key leaders in a few months as ENO did last year.

The current management, which appears to have the backing of the Arts Council, 
believe that the change needed is a smaller chorus with their pay cut to 75% of 
its current level. This is the wrong change. Choristers pay will fall to £25K a 
year, inevitably forcing many to leave for other work. ENO will use freelance 
singers to make up numbers who will need longer and more expensive rehearsals 
and might not be able to reach the artistic heights of the permanent chorus. 
With the artistic heart of the opera ripped out, disappointed audiences will 
drift away sending ENO further down its spiral of decline.

ENO must change – but to attack the very people who deliver its artistic 
excellence is mistaken and will do nothing to save the company.
Malcolm Sinclair
President, Equity

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 