
My father-in-law, Christopher Powell, who has died from a brain tumour aged 
70, was a lecturer in architecture for more than 30 years.

Born and educated in south Gloucestershire, Chris followed his father's career 
and graduated in 1964 with a degree in architecture from Bristol University. He 
chose not to join the family practice and instead took a post at the Ministry 
of Public Buildings and Works, then spent time with various agencies and 
practices, including Wilson and Womersley, working on housing developments in 
the south-east.

During this period, the historical and social dimensions of his subject became 
an increasing attraction. After completing a master's thesis on local authority 
housing in 1972, Chris moved into academia as a lecturer at theWelsh School of 
Architecture <http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/archi/>, in Cardiff. While there, he 
pursued new areas related to the economics of building and design. He was 
instrumental in the establishment of theConstruction History Society 
<http://www.constructionhistory.co.uk/> and was for many years the joint editor 
of its journal. The strands of his research were brought together in the book 
An Economic History of the British Building Industry, 1815-1979. He also wrotea 
history of the Welsh School of Architecture 
<http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/archi/news-wsa-a-history.php>, published in 2009.

Away from university life, Chris had many interests. A pile of books, often 
hefty biographies of artists, authors and politicians, was always to hand, and 
he delighted in sending amusing postcards and cartoons to family and friends. A 
keen cyclist, he completed several long distance jaunts around the country, 
most notably Land's End to John O'Groats, which was achieved not long after 
heart surgery.

Painting and drawing were passions which gave an effective expression of his 
familiarity with building styles and forms. This knowledge also came to the 
fore when travelling around the countryside in search of an isolated church, an 
unusual cottage or an old inn. In the last case, "Powell's law" on the age of 
pubs would lead to a declaration that at least 100 years should be deducted 
from any claimed age.

Whoever he was with, Chris was an ideas man who enjoyed nothing better than 
debating a new finding or piece of research in diverse fields from archaeology 
to politics.

He is survived by his wife, Pam, whom he married in 1963, and his daughter, 
Jo, and son, Alex.
 