
Britain's white December was hideous for shops. It was as if the heavens had 
calculated the toughest possible test for hard-pressed high street retailers – 
a huge dump of snow on two critical weekends at the height of the Christmas 
shopping season during an economic downturn.

New year trading figures are trickling in and we're gradually seeing who 
passed, and who flunked, the trial. Pregnant mums struggled to make it to
Mothercare <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mothercare>. The music is 
fading as HMV shuts stores. Hardly anyone bought festive missives from Clinton 
Cards. The clothes chain Next reckons that £22m of sales of its everyday 
sweaters and shirts evaporated due to the harsh weather, but the well-managed 
store at least managed to hang on to decent profits.

The research firm Experian Footfall, which counts how many people go shopping, 
reckons numbers were down 3.1% year-on-year in December, the worst drop for any 
month of 2010. Air-conditioned shopping centres fared better than high streets. 
Marks & Spencer, with its heavy presence in town centres, is likely to reveal 
this week that it suffered to the tune of as much as £40m as customers gave up 
on optional "top-up" trips for food.

Neil Saunders, an expert at the retail consultancy Verdict, reckons the snow, 
in a way, was useful – it separated the retailing men from the boys: "One of 
the things that definitely came out was a degree of polarisation. Those doing 
very well did very well. Those with underlying issues really struggled."

Next was sufficiently nimble to shift stock from its high-street supply chain 
to meet a surge in online orders as the weather kept customers at home. Tesco 
moved quickly to ramp up discounts and special offers. AndJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis>, with its reliable mixture of 
quality and value, still delivered an impressive 7.6% surge in like-for-like 
sales.

But Clinton Cards' tired shops, which have a fusty air of the 1980s, suffered 
badly. And Mothercare, which ought to be an essential Christmas trip for 
parents, ended a year of dismal performance with a profits warning.

The end of 2010 ought to have been a last blast of consumer spending before 
George Osborne's Ebenezer Scrooge policies kick in. The wintery let-down could 
put survival at risk for some high-street names. Philip Dorgan, an analyst at 
Altium Capital, says: "A few are pushing towards the edge, particularly in the 
non-quoted sector. There will be some twitches towards the end of the month 
when landlords come to collect their rent. Quite a few of them haven't got the 
cash they thought they'd have."

This burst of retail euthanasia is another reminder of the danger of the 
coalition's strategy of rapidly withdrawing stimulus from the economy in the 
earliest stage of a tepid recovery. In its obsession to cut the deficit at 
supersonic speed, the Treasury is presiding over a sharp rise in the cost of 
living – on top of the hike in VAT to 20%, train fares are rising, utility 
bills are on the up and global commodity markets are pushing petrol, food and 
cotton costs higher.

In these days of economic wobble, at least there's one thing we can be sure of 
– Britons enjoy a drink.Majestic Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine> was the festive season's 
star with a solid sales rise as shoppers snapped up cases of New Zealand 
sauvignon blanc and French claret. Chief executive Steve Lewis had little 
sympathy for struggling competitors, suggesting that they should take a long, 
hard look at themselves: "Blaming things on snow is weak management."
 