
As a deluge of rain and hail fell on the super-category climb here, amid the 
lowering Pyrenean skies there was a little clarity over the identity of the men 
who may eventually stand in Chris Froome’s way as he bids to win his thirdTour 
de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>. With the Dutchman 
Tom Dumoulin assured of stage victory, further back down the hillside the first 
major skirmish of the 2016 race developed around Froome, as the race leader was 
attacked time and time again by two men: the Irishman Dan Martin and his former 
team-mate Richie Porte.

Tour de France 2016: Tom Dumoulin wins stage nine – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/10/tour-de-france-2016-stage-nine-updates-live>
Two others kept a watching brief. Nairo Quintana barely moved an inch from 
Froome’s wheel but never showed any inclination to put the Kenyan-born Briton 
under pressure, while Adam Yates occasionally slipped off the pace but had the 
strength to snatch the sprint for 10th place ahead of Froome and the other 
three. Yates maintained his second place, 16 seconds behind Froome, while 
Martin – born in Birmingham but with an Irish passport – moved ahead of Joaquim 
Rodríguez into third overall, 19sec back.

Others had started the day with pretensions to a place on the podium or a 
possible challenge, but were unable to hold the pace when Froome’s team-mate 
Sergio Henao launched a searing attack with five kilometres remaining. The 
Italian Tour debutant Fabio Aru lost a minute, which does not bode well, but 
Romain Bardet and Rodríguez limited their losses; like Quintana, the pair 
remain within a minute of Froome along with Henao, the Dutchman Bauke Mollema – 
another energetic attacker here – and the South African Louis Meintjes. The 
race, like the weather, has yet to settle.

Of the quartet who finished with Froome, the enigmatic Quintana is by far the 
most threatening, as a previous winner of the Giro d’Italia and twice runner-up 
in the Tour. Porte lost time on stage two, but will have taken heart from his 
riding in the Pyrenees. Martin has a pedigree as a climber, and as one with a 
talent for finding openings, but has previously tended to fall apart in the 
Tour’s final week, while Yates is an unknown quantity, whose plan this year was 
to aim for stage wins.

“It’s still a very open race at this point,” said Froome, who attacked twice, 
but was unable to dislodge Quintana or Porte. “There were a lot of attacks on 
that final climb. I was hoping to gain time, but at the end there were a few 
contenders in front so I made sure to finish in the same time as them. I was 
waiting for Quintana’s attack all up the climb, I thought he was waiting for 
one big one, but it never came.” He added, optimistically: “I’d like to think 
he was on his limit.” The Colombian might have been. Or he could have been 
biding his time.

Sky’s plan appeared to be for Henao’s move to put Froome’s rivals under 
pressure, so that the leader could perform the coup de grâce but, instead, it 
was Froome who faced a welter of attacks. His rivals can take encouragement 
from the opening weekend of heavy-duty climbing: unlike in the past at this 
point of the race, Froome has been unable to open a decisive gap, while Team 
Sky have spent two major stages riding defensively in debilitating heat to no 
major effect. Over the first climb, the Port de la Bonaigua, for example,
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> and 
Alejandro Valverde put on the pressure, and the British team had to respond.

Before the four horsemen of the Apocalypse saddled up around Arcalis and the 
temperatures plummeted, the thermometer topped 40 degrees, meaning Sky seemed 
unwilling to expend energy keeping tabs on a large group of escapees as the 
race approached Andorra. Up front, Dumoulin kept a watching brief over two 
horrendously steep ascents through the principality – the first-category Col de 
Beixalis was little more than a tarmac goat track – before taking flight at the 
foot of the final ascent.

Dumoulin is likely to prove one of Froome’s main rivals for the time trial 
title at the Rio Olympics; this was a third Grand Tour stage win for the 
solidly built Dutchman who hasalready taken stages in the Giro d’Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/tom-dumoulin-wins-opening-time-trial-giro-ditalia>
 this year, and the Vuelta a España, where he challenged strongly for overall 
victory last year. He came here with the intention of building his fitness for 
Rio and the “Butterfly of Maastricht” is clearly flying in spite of doubts 
earlier in the race.

The escape also included all three contenders for the measled King of the 
Mountains jersey: Rafal Majka, Thomas de Gendt, and France’s Thibaut Pinot, 
whose hopes of overall victory disappeared on Friday. De Gendt literally came 
to a standstill on the Beixalis, while, as Dumoulin forged ahead, Majka and 
Pinot marked each other like hawks until the Pole – the best climber in 2014 – 
disappeared with the Portuguese Rui Costa. The Frenchman has the jersey, 
however, and it may well end up as a consolation prize rather than the yellow 
he had hoped for.

The Pyrenees have also ended Contador’s last remaining hopes that he might win 
a third Tour. The Spaniard had stuttered day by day since his crashes on the 
opening weekend and his attack on the Bonaigua was purely pyrrhic. His race 
came to a halt roughly 100km from the end of the stage, when the Spaniard 
climbed into his team car. “Since my two crashes I haven’t felt good, and that 
is what pushed me to this decision,” he said afterwards. According to his team, 
the Spaniard had been suffering from fever symptoms.

Contador is a man of the past – good and bad – but this climb has offered 
portents for the future on previous Tour visits, most notably when a slimmed 
down Bradley Wiggins revealed unseen climbing talents when the race finished 
here in 2009. Yates was Arcalis’s revelation of 2016: whatever his goals this 
year, his strong performance to hold second to Froome here means he can 
definitely now be tipped as a future contender for overall success.
 