
Chris Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-coleman> believes 
his young Wales side are ready to deliver at last but he would still take a 1-0 
victory against Andorra on Tuesday.

The rise of the Real Madrid superstar Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> and the Arsenal playmaker 
Aaron Ramsey, not to mention a healthy sprinkling of solid Premier League 
performers, has taken expectation levels in Wales to new heights as Coleman’s 
squad start out on the road to Euro 2016 in the tiny football outpost.

Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> have not qualified for a 
major tournament since the 1958 World Cup finals and the present side have had 
their fair share of setbacks during their development.

Coleman feels he has the talent at his disposal to challenge group favourites 
Belgium and Bosnia-Herzegovina for the automatic two qualifying spots, let 
alone make the play-offs by finishing third in a section which also includes 
Israel, Cyprus andAndorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra>.

“There’s a reason why people talk so highly of the group because it’s true 
that when we’re at our best we are a good side,” Coleman said before Wales’ 
first Group B test in the Pyrenees.

“I sense the expectation and two years ago I would have been wary of it. I’m 
not now and I won’t shy away from it. We have to take it as a compliment and 
deal with it, and if we do that we’ll do the business.

“Belgium and Bosnia are the top teams and then it’s the other four, but we 
have a chance to put pressure on those two. I don’t want to go at it thinking 
there’s a possibility of a play-off. Let’s go for the top two, that’s what we 
have to aim for.”

Andorra are ranked 199 in the world and their statistics do not make 
impressive reading: they have won only one competitive game since their 
introduction to world football in 1998, not collected a single point in Euro 
qualifying and not managed a competitive goal for four years. On the plus side 
they tend not to suffer heavy defeats and Holland struggled to a 2-0 victory in 
Andorra during 2014 World Cup qualifying.

“We’re not going to into the game thinking about we’re going to win it this 
way, we just want the win and I’d take 1-0,” Coleman said. “As good as we can 
be, we’ve also shown tendencies where we can be a little bit loose and a bit 
carried away. We can’t have that.”

The buildup to the qualifier has been dominated by the controversial surface 
at the newly-built National Stadium in Andorra la Vella.

The stadium’s artificial 3G surface was passed fit for use by Uefa only last 
Wednesday after original tests showed the ball was rolling too fast on the 
pitch.

Coleman will not be blaming the pitch should things go dramatically wrong on 
the night and Wales suffer one of the biggest embarrassments in world football. 
“Whatever happens I won’t mention the pitch. I’m not interested in it and we 
haven’t talked about it.”
 