
Having spent a couple of weeks in May training from the same base on Mount 
Teide in Tenerife, the 2013 and 2014 Tour de France winners, Chris Froome and 
Vincenzo Nibali, are reunited from Sunday in the Alps, where both race the 
Critérium du Dauphiné, which in recent years has become an obligatory element 
in any successful attempt to win theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>.

The Dauphiné marks the beginning of the final countdown to the Tour, which 
starts this year in Utrecht on 4 July; both Froome and Nibali and the bulk of 
their support riders for the Tour have spent two weeks in the single hotel at 
the top of Mount Teide – independently but certainly not coincidentally – in 
order to reap the benefit of training at high altitude during a sizeable block 
of time away from racing.

While Sir Bradley Wiggins won the Dauphiné in 2012 en route to the Tour, and 
Froome emulated him a year later, last year Froome and Nibali enjoyed mixed 
fortunes in the eight-day French event. Nibali was visibly riding to a plan, 
refusing to commit fully at key moments to save his strength before eventually 
finishing 10th, while Froome dominated the first part of the race before 
struggling after a crash.

“My Tour de France experience has taught me that going too well at the 
Dauphiné is never a good thing,” Nibali said this week. “In 2012 I lost nine 
minutes on one stage but finished third overall in the Tour. Last year wasn’t 
too bad either. I only lost a few seconds compared to Froome and Contador but I 
felt that I ended the race in crescendo.”

The other two big favourites for the Tour, Alberto Contador and Nairo 
Quintana, are absent, with the Colombian continuing to prepare on home soil, 
while the Spaniard rests afterwinning the Giro d’Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/31/alberto-contador-giro-ditalia-tour-de-france>
. Other potential contenders include the American Andrew Talansky – winner in 
2014 at the end of an anarchically enthralling final stage – Ireland’s Daniel 
Martin, France’s Romain Bardet and the British Yates brothers, Simon and Adam.

As usual, the race reflects what will await the Tour riders in July. There is 
no individual time trial, but instead there is a team time trial on day 
three, which is of a similar distance to the equivalent stage in the Tour. Two 
days later, a 161km mountain stage to the Pra-Loup ski resort traces exactly 
the same roads that the Tour will cover on stage 17 on 22 July, while the final 
stage includes the Lacets de Montvernier, a new first-category ascent which 
figures in the Tour’s 18th stage.
 