
The Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
teenager Chris Gunter refuses to accept that being part of Wales' youngest-ever 
side is an excuse if the team lose their World Cup qualifier on Saturday 
against Azerbaijan.

Gunter, 19, who expects to be sent out on loan again next term by the Premier 
League side, believes age should not be an issue in their Group Four encounter 
on the shores of the Caspian Sea. He will win his 16th international cap in the 
Tofik Bakhramov stadium, where he is likely to be switched to left-back after 
the knee injury sustained by his Tottenham colleague Gareth Bale.

"People may think this is just a squad full of raw youngsters and that we are 
going to lose but we have come here to win," Gunter said. "There will be no 
excuses, not just because we are youngsters. As players you should never look 
for excuses. We have to ignore who we are playing, the heat and hostile crowd 
and go for the win."

Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> are again crippled by 
injuries and are in effect without a full Premier League side, not helped by 
the late withdrawals of Bale, Jack Collison, Sam Ricketts and Ched Evans before 
this trip.

Toshack seems likely to bring in the Oldham full-back Neil Eardley, the Wolves 
midfielder David Edwards and the Reading striker Simon Church, for his full 
debut, with a choice still to be made between Wayne Hennessey and Boaz Myhill 
in goal.

Gunter said: "It would be nice to end our season on a high, before we all go 
away on holiday. It has been a roller-coaster season for Wales but we know the 
fans want a win and we have certainly not come all this way to lose.

"We have had some good performances and some poorer ones this season, so we 
want to give ourselves a good feeling ahead of the summer break. And, although 
we know we can't qualify now, we are all roughly the same age and pretty young 
so by the time we are all about 25 or so, this will be a very good side.

"But we know we need to win now, not in five years. The home crowds have been 
a little disappointing, so we know that the only way to generate interest is by 
winning games. BeatingAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> is not going to make 
everything right that was wrong when we lost recently to Finland. But we cannot 
look back, we have to focus on what is ahead.

"We know that we as players will face games in tough places like Azerbaijan 
during our career, so we have to learn how to handle it."

Gunter still does not know where he will be playing his football next season, 
having spent the final three months of the last league campaign on loan to 
Nottingham Forest. "I have been told that the manager [Harry Redknapp] does not 
want to sell me and another loan move would be good for me. If that is what 
happens it would be fine by me. I have had two managers already at Spurs with 
different ideas and coaching methods.

"But never in my career have I had a run of 20 or more games on the spin, or 
even played a 50-game season. So I need to go out on loan to learn my trade, 
how to play a consistent amount of games. It worked well for me at Nottingham 
Forest and, if someone said I was going back there for a season, I would be 
happy with that."

He added: "The set-up was impressive, Forest are a big club with crowds of 
26,000 most weeks. The manager there [Billy Davies] was good and I really 
enjoyed playing there.

"Everyone knows they used to be a big club but I discovered that they still 
are. In my second away game with them, they took 6,000 fans to Barnsley and 
that doesn't happen in the Championship. It is all there for them to go as high 
as they want. And they gave me a good spell to progress from.

"I still have two years left at Spurs, the manager has not said I have a 
future or not because you have to prove that to him and I intend to do so. But 
I need to know definitely soon where I will be next season and then concentrate 
on giving my best to whoever I join and see where we go from there."
 