
Chris Woakes spent Tuesday night in that difficult but unavoidable position 
for a sportsman, with his chances of playing for England dependent on the 
fitness of a team-mate. In the case of the 23-year-old Warwickshire 
all-rounder, an appearance in the third match of the series against Australia 
at Edgbaston, his home county ground, would seem to be contingent on Jimmy 
Anderson being ruled out with his groin problem.

"It would be a dream come true – although I haven't actually dreamt of it 
before," said Woakes, with his honesty rescuing the cliché. "I'm from Great 
Barr, north of Birmingham – I'm as local as local can be."

He would be the fifth-choice seamer in this England squad, having been called 
up as cover when Jade Dernbach and Stuart Meaker were released for 
compassionate reasons at the start of the week. But Anderson did not bowl in 
the nets at Edgbaston on Tuesday having tweaked his groin in the opening match 
of the series at Lord's, then missed out at The Oval where he was replaced by 
Dernbach.

The likelihood of more showers and a damp outfield means that England will be 
reluctant to take a chance on the Lancastrian, even though – or perhaps 
especially because – they could seal the five-match series with two games 
remaining. That would set two records – a ninth consecutive ODI win to secure 
their seventh straight home series, although Durham and Lancashire may be 
quietly hoping for an Australian fightback given the questions it would raise 
all about further rotation in the last two matches in Chester-le-Street and 
Manchester.

"I haven't got a clue whether I'm playing," Woakes said. He does not even know 
whether he would have played in the last match of the previous series against 
West Indies at Headingley, when he had also been called into the squad, but the 
players did not make it on to the field. Australia would be familiar 
opposition, even though injuries have forced Woakes to wait almost a year for 
his latest international exposure. He made an eye-catching impact in the 
one-day matches that followed England's Ashes triumph in the winter of 2010-11, 
taking six for 45 in a 50-over match in Brisbane, after hitting the winning 
runs in his Twenty20 debut in Adelaide.

But since that tour, he has been restricted to a low-key ODI in Ireland, and a 
T20 mauling by Sri Lanka in Bristol. He had an excellent county season with bat 
and ball for Warwickshire last summer, but then tore his ankle ligaments on 
their pre-season trip to the West Indies.

"It's fantastic to be in the squad and involved again and nice to know the 
selectors are thinking of me," he added. "I've had a few injury problems, but 
they're in the past now. I'm feeling fresh and I'm over that. I've been in the 
gym and I'm stronger in certain areas where I needed to improve and feel my 
cricket is going in the right direction. I'm desperate to play.

"The first tour in Australia went reasonably well, but I think I've improved 
as a cricketer since that series and when I was last in the England squad. I'm 
a much better player than I was back then really. I see my route into the side 
is as a genuine all-rounder, batting at six or seven. So Tim Bresnan is the one 
that I have to get past. I have improved – and become quicker – as a bowler 
every season."Ian Bell, the other Warwickshire player in the squad whose 
Edgbaston place is assured, has extended his contract with the county until the 
end of 2015.

England (from) AN Cook (captain), IR Bell, IJL Trott, RS Bopara, EJG Morgan, C 
Kieswetter (wkt), TT Bresnan, SCJ Broad, GP Swann, ST Finn, JM Anderson, CR 
Woakes, SR Patel, JM Bairstow.

Australia (from) MJ Clarke (captain), SR Watson, DA Warner, GJ Bailey, DJ 
Hussey, PJ Forrest, MS Wade (wkt), B Lee, CJ McKay, XJ Doherty, JL Pattinson, 
MG Johnson, BW Hilfenhaus, SPD Smith.

Umpires A Dar (Pak) and R Bailey

Third umpire M Erasmus (SA)

Match referee J Srinath (Ind)
 