
Britain’s Christian leaders are focusing their Christmas messages on 
uncertainty, anxiety and fear at the end of a tumultuous year on the global 
stage.

In his Christmas Day sermon at Canterbury Cathedral, Justin Welby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/justin-welby>, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
will warn against putting trust in the wrong things and values in the wrong 
place.


“The end of 2016 finds us all in a different kind of world, one less 
predictable and certain, which feels more awash with fear and division,” the 
head of the Church of England and leader of the worldwide Anglican communion 
will say.


Prince Charles: rising intolerance risks repeat of horrors of past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
Echoing the themes of his recent book Dethroning Mammon 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dethroning-mammon-making-money-serve-grace.html>
, which warns that materialism cannot solve the problems of the world, he will 
tell worshippers: “Uncertainty in the midst of so much – but far from universal 
– prosperity is a sign of our trust being in the wrong things. It tells us that 
our values are in the wrong place … Economic progress, technological progress, 
communication progress hasn’t resulted in economic justice. It hasn’t delivered 
glory for us.”

In his first full-length book, published this month, Welby wrote: “Materialism 
is not the answer to the challenges we face. Rather we need a deep sense of the 
priority of the human person, whoever they are and wherever they come from. We 
need to remind ourselves that Mammon always deceives his followers. A campaign 
fought on his agenda will lead to division and despair.”

Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of Westminster and leader of the 
Catholic church in England and Wales, also addressed the challenges of the past 
year in his midnight mass homily at Westminster Cathedral. He quoted WB Yeats’s 
1919 poem, The Second Coming: “Things fall apart, the centre cannot hold / Mere 
anarchy is loosed upon the world.”

These words, Nichols told the congregation, “reflect the deep and widening 
sense of uncertainty many feel today. This is not the time or place to reflect 
on reasons or causes, but it is right to recognise these anxieties and fears.”


Referring to the Bible story of the shepherds who found a place by Jesus’s 
crib in Bethlehem, the cardinal said: “In our thoughts, prayers and actions 
there has to be room for the poor of our time so that they too may know this 
respect and concern. The list of those seeking our welcome is long: the 
homeless, the refugee, the victim of violence and human trafficking. Their 
voices call out for our compassion.”


Nichols also highlighted the needs and uncertainties facing those caring for 
elderly parents and relatives. He said: “They are so frightened that resources 
to meet the basic needs of their loved ones are being withdrawn as care 
services are reviewed and reduced. For many elderly and needy people, not only 
are these basic needs sometimes left unmet, but human contact disappears and 
the darkness of loneliness closes in.


“Meeting this challenge requires a recognition that good care for the elderly 
and vulnerable is not only important but nothing less than a defining 
characteristic of our society.”


In the face of anxiety about the “current instability in economic prospects 
and in the effectiveness of political structures,” people should “strive for 
truth, respect, compassion and forgiveness,” he said.


In the last week Prince Charles has also spoken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
 about disturbing trends in 2016. “We are now seeing the rise of many populist 
groups across the world that are increasingly aggressive to those who adhere to 
a minority faith. All of this has deeply disturbing echoes of the dark days of 
the 1930s,” the prince said on the Radio 4 Today programme’s Thought for the 
Day slot.


“That nearly 70 years later we should still be seeing such evil persecution is 
to me beyond all belief,” he said. “We owe it to those who suffered and died so 
horribly not to repeat the horrors of the past.”

 