
Christopher Stell, who has died aged 84 from kidney failure, was recently 
described as the "doyen of nonconformist architectural historians". His 
reputation in this field was established by his weighty four-volume Inventory 
of Nonconformist Chapels and Meeting Houses in England that appeared between 
1986 and 2002.

The architecture of religious dissent in England is sometimes modest and 
deliberately self-effacing, especially those places of worship built by the 
Quakers and the earlier Congregational and Unitarian groups. But from the 19th 
century nonconformity often produced well-appointed buildings, proud to assert 
differences from established religion in their architecture. All seek to bear 
testimony to centuries of religious diversity in England since nonconformist 
worship was first made conditionally lawful in 1689. Yet architectural (and 
other) historians have been slow to catch up and, until Stell's inventory, too 
often ignored the majority of places of worship in Britain – that is, those 
that are not Anglican.

In particular, Stell's work highlighted the many serious omissions in the 
Pevsner Architectural Guides of that time, with the inventory itself becoming a 
"Pevsner for nonconformism". Like his predecessor, Stell visited each site by 
car. Unlike Nikolaus Pevsner, he drove himself and also recorded the buildings 
with photographs, careful scale drawings and sometimes sketches. It was a 
marathon task and his family became used to his absence throughout the week.

It is a testimony to his work that the revised Buildings of England volumes of 
today do list and discuss nonconformist places of worship with far greater 
seriousness.

Stell was born and brought up in Liverpool, the son of a PE teacher, and read 
architecture at Liverpool University's School ofArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/architecture>. Completing his training, 
he resolved to be a building historian and early writing quickly established 
his credentials as an accomplished self-taught researcher.

So many chapels and meeting houses have been demolished since the second world 
war, especially in those working-class communities where the once thriving 
"co-op and chapel culture" has collapsed in recent decades. Their entry in his 
inventory has become their obituary. Many have been converted to other uses 
which at least preserves the chapel outlines in the English landscape; but the 
photos in the inventory poignantly show the lost interiors.
 Christopher Stell drove all over England making sketches and taking 
photographs of nonconformist buildings. Photograph: Historic Chapels Trust 
In 1988 Stell helped found the Chapels Society 
<http://www.chapelssociety.org.uk> which has pioneered serious study of this 
neglected area. When he heard thatWalpole Old Chapel 
<http://www.walpoleoldchapel.co.uk> in Suffolk was to be sold off he wrote to 
its trustees: "It truly amazes me that any denomination should wish to dispose 
itself of one of the finest and oldest and most richly evocative buildings in 
its care. To dispose of a worn-out building is one thing. To disclaim any 
further interest in the one tangible link with early Suffolk Independency is 
another."

In fact the church did divest itself of this simple but moving building though 
happily it went to the ownership of theHistoric Chapels Trust 
<http://www.hct.org.uk>, of which Stell was also a founding spirit and trustee 
for two decades.

Stell was trustee of the Ancient Monuments Society for 30 years and attended 
every one of the annual VernacularArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> Group meeting for 50 
years. He personally rescued a partly 17th-century stone house in Calderdale 
intended for demolition, which he bought for £50. He got it listed and adapted 
it with the absolute minimum of modernisation, long before such a domestic 
style became fashionable.

Always modest but meticulous in his scholarship, he quietly appreciated the 
recognition of an OBE in 1989 and the fact that his work was the first port of 
call for younger scholars. A lifelong Baptist, he enjoyed the Athenaeum – 
traditionally better known for the Anglican bishops among its members – for 
Stell was a champion of religious dissent who felt confident in the corridors 
of power.

Many will remember his astonishing recall for buildings he had last seen 20 or 
30 years previously, his endless curiosity and his dapper hats. Sometimes he 
wore a brown bowler, sometimes a deerstalker – for he loved Conan Doyle 
stories, as only a meticulous detective of buildings would.

He is survived by his wife, Jean, whom he married in 1957, and their sons, 
John and Edward.

• Christopher Stell, architectural historian, born 26 January 1929; died 16 
January 2014
 