
Indiana Pacers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiana-pacers> forward 
Chris Copeland, his wife and another woman were stabbed early on Wednesday 
following an argument on the street near a Manhattan nightclub that also led to 
the arrest of two Atlanta Hawks players, authorities said.

The violence broke out just before 4am outside 1Oak Club. Police say the 
couple were arguing on the street as the attacker eavesdropped, and started to 
interfere. The dispute escalated until the 22-year-old suspect pulled out a 
knife and started slashing, police said.

The suspect, Shezoy Bleary, was in custody, authorities said. Police said 
charges were pending, and it wasn’t clear whether Bleary had an attorney who 
could comment on the charges.

Copeland, 31, a former member of the New York Knicks, was stabbed in the left 
elbow and abdomen and his wife, Katrine Saltara, was slashed in the arm and 
across the breast. The second woman, who was believed to be with the attacker, 
was slashed in the abdomen. The victims were hospitalized and in stable 
condition, police said. A knife was recovered at the scene.

Atlanta Hawks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> players Pero 
Antic and Thabo Sefolosha were arrested on charges of obstructing the crime 
scene, after police said they blocked officers from trying to start their 
investigation. The players were in town to play the Brooklyn Nets at the 
Barclays Center on Wednesday night. The team arrived late Tuesday, after 
beating the Phoenix Suns in Atlanta in a victory that set a single-season 
franchise record with 58 wins.

Garin Narain, the Hawks vice president of public relations, said in a 
statement tthat the team is investigating the matter.

“We are aware of the situation involving Pero Antic and Thabo Sefolosha this 
morning,” Narain said. “We are in the process of gathering more information and 
will have further comment at the appropriate time.”

Hawks officials did not indicate whether the two would play Wednesday night. 
They are reserves, averaging fewer than six points on a team that has locked up 
the top playoff seed in the Eastern Conference.

The Pacers were in town to play the Knicks; Copeland played with the Knicks 
during the 2012-13 season. Pacers President of Basketball Operations Larry Bird 
said the team was aware that Copeland had been injured.

“We are still gathering information and will update when we know more. Our 
thoughts are with Chris and those injured.”

Copeland has played infrequently, missing 21 games since 31 January.

The nightclub had been cited at least 10 times for altercations and four times 
for noise in 2014, according to a New York Post report. In a statement, the 
club disputed that the altercation occurred near the venue, and said it was 
cooperative with the NYPD.

“A review of the video footage seems to reveal the incident did not originate 
from or surrounding the venue,” according to the club’s statement.
 