
A care home for retired priests is being closed by the Church of England 
because it cannot recruit and retain staff, leaving 30 residents, many of whom 
have dementia, in need of new accommodation.

The C of E pensions board announced that Manormead care home near Hindhead, 
Surrey, will shut at the end of March, describing it as a “heartbreaking 
decision”.


Its two high-care wings, which include 14 beds for people with dementia, 
require round-the-clock staffing. Manormead has been forced to use agency 
workers for about a third of the posts at the home after finding it difficult 
to attract staff, particularly to work unsocial hours.


Jonathan Spencer, the board’s chairman, said: “After more than 60 years of the 
pensions board providing care and nursing at Manormead, this has been a 
heartbreaking decision to take.


“However, the safety and wellbeing of our residents is paramount, and we will 
not compromise that in any way.


“Over the past couple of years, we have found it increasingly difficult to 
recruit and retain nursing and care staff, and we are now reaching the point 
where we will be unable to staff the home in a way that meets the needs of our 
patients.”


The reliance on agency staff was “not sustainable in the longer term”, Spencer 
said.


According to a C of E source, as well as the considerable cost of using agency 
workers, there were concerns about turnover, consistency of care, and levels of 
safety and standards.


About 40 members of staff are expected to lose their jobs when the home closes.


Each resident of the high-care wings has been assigned an advocate to help 
find alternative accommodation.


“We know this is a very difficult time for our residents and their families,” 
Spencer said. “We will work very closely with each of them over the coming 
months as they choose where to move to.

“We will then do all we can to ensure that their moves to new homes are as 
smooth as possible.”


A nearby facility, Manormead supported housing, which provides assisted-living 
accommodation for 36 people, will remain open.


Christine Law, 80, moved into a flat in the supported housing facility in 
October in order to be close to her husband, the Rev Richard Law, 82, who has 
advanced dementia and had been a resident at Manormead care home for more than 
two years.


“Manormead is a fantastic facility, we were so pleased to find it. The staff 
are superb and it’s [a] really good quality of care,” said John Law, the 
couple’s son.


“My mum moved to a flat there because she wanted to spend more time with dad, 
and here we are, a few weeks down the road and the care facility is closing.

“There was no hint whatsoever when my mum moved in. The only reason my mother 
is there is to be in the same place as my father.”


Law said his father was unaware of the home’s impending closure,, but his 
mother had been “shaken up” by the news.

The family would like Richard Law to move to another specialist dementia care 
home within easy walking distance, but the church has suggested a place 20 
minutes’ drive away, which would make daily contact for the couple difficult.


The staffing difficulties at Manormead care home were “a genuine issue”, John 
Law said. “But to provide good care we have to pay people a reasonable income.

“People can’t live on salaries that care homes pay. This is a real issue and 
the reason why care provision in the UK is at breaking point.”


The fees at the home are approximately £1,000 a week, which is in line with 
the area average, according to the C of E. For many residents, fees are met by 
a combination of funds, including their pensions and savings, local authority 
contributions and top-ups directly from the C of E.

The pensions board’s charitable funds also subsidise the running of Manormead 
and the other care homes it operates.


The C of E said it had no immediate plans to sell the care home site, which 
will be “mothballed” after closure.


The Rev Richard Bodle, the vicar of St Albans church in Hindhead and the 
chaplain to the home, said recruitment of staff was a challenge, adding: “There 
are a number of nursing homes in this part of Surrey and it may be that they’re 
all struggling.”

The C of E had not taken the decision lightly, he said. “The staff are very 
dedicated. Obviously it’s a difficult time for all, but the residents are being 
given as much support as possible.”

 