
Christopher Hitchens' incisive piece (Unspeakable truths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/31/the-kings-speech-gross-falsification>
, G2, 1 February) about the blatant rewriting of history by the film The King's 
Speech is timely and welcome. However, the film's success is not only due to 
its appeal to British people's reactionary need for reassuring fairy stories 
around monarchy and class. These myths, in the film, intersect with those 
around gender.

Surely another reason the film has wowed so many (often male) critics is 
because it offers a romantic and heroic myth about being a man. The damaged 
king, who by artistic sleight of hand is Everyman, can be restored to full 
potency when he gets his voice back. Then he can lead his people into war. We 
on the left need to look at the stories our culture tells about gender – in a 
recession so often the most comfortable for both sexes to believe in.

Michele Roberts

London

• Re your editorial (Unthinkable? Historically accurate films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/29/editorial-unthinkable-historically-accurate-films>
, 29 January), I can see where you're coming from with this – facts are sacred 
– but you need to be clear that movies are entertainment, not historical 
documents. It is an ancient tradition in drama to play "what if?" and to tinker 
with historical reality for dramatic effect. It goes back to ancient Greece – 
think of Aristophanes' The Frogs, for example, and the little bottle of oil 
that crops up everywhere. Or Schiller with his epic and entirely imaginary 
meeting between Elizabeth and Mary Stuart in the play of that name. Or Hochhuth 
in more modern times. And there's the arch-manipulator Shakespeare, of course. 
Who now believes that Macbeth was actually a fairly decent ruler by 
contemporary standards and you could go to stay at Lady Macbeth's and be 
confident of getting up for breakfast? And Richard III – the proverbial wicked 
uncle, murdering his way to the top; except he wasn't and didn't. His bad press 
is largely due to William having to tailor his play to satisfy the Tudor regime 
and edit out any suggestion that it was Henry VII who was the usurper.

Robert Ward

Leeds

• Christopher Hitchens' assault on the historical accuracy of The King's 
Speech reminded me of the recent criticism of the ballet sequences in Black 
Swan – technically correct but regrettably missing the point.

A film is primarily entertainment, and by this measure both films are a great 
success. The purpose of art is not to create a photorealistic record of life, 
but rather to take liberties with reality to the extent that our minds and our 
hearts are stimulated and something deeper within us is stirred and unlocked.

I would agree that The King's Speech fails as a historical record but it is 
certainly a triumphant work of art.

Tony Hughes

Stockport, Cheshire

• Mr Hitchens' criticism of the portrayal of Churchill in The King's Speech is 
fair. Less fair are his attacks on George VI and the monarchy for their support 
of Chamberlain and distaste for Churchill, since this only reflected the 
conventional view of parliament and British society.

Chamberlain after Munich was seen as having averted world war and was 
applauded for it. Churchill was seen as an irresponsible outsider and a 
warmonger. Labour had a strong pacifist element and no coherent alternative. 
With hindsight we can see that the British government was mistaken but, as Mr 
Hitchens points out in the article, it is not as if a king can campaign against 
his own government. If George VI was wrong to mistrust Churchill, how much more 
wrong would he have been to criticise a popular and powerful prime minister at 
his peak?

As Churchill remarked after the death of Neville Chamberlain: "It is not given 
to human beings, happily for them … to predict to any large extent the 
unfolding course of events. In one phase men seem to be right, in another they 
seem to be wrong." Mr Hitchens, who will likely go down in history as "a 
consistent friend of conceited, spoiled" George W Bush, would do well to 
remember the wisdom and humility of these words.

SC Johnson

London
 