
A senior officer has described allegations that British soldiers murdered and 
abused detainees after a fierce gun battle in south-eastIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> as "baseless rumours" spread by 
insurgents and encouraged by ignorance of the horrific injuries that can be 
inflicted by modern weapons.

Colonel Adam Griffiths also told a public inquiry into the incident, which 
occurred in 2004, that he questioned what he described as a "very unusual" 
order – to retrieve the bodies of dead Iraqis from the battlefield and take 
them to a British military base.

He was later told that the order was given in an attempt to identify the 
Iraqis to see whether any of them had been responsible for the massacre nearby 
of six British military police the previous year.

Griffiths, at the time a company commander in 1st Battalion, the Argyll and 
Sutherland Highlanders, is the first of scores of British army witnesses due to 
give evidence to the al-Sweady inquiry.

The inquiry in London – named after the family of alleged victim Hamid 
al-Sweady, 19, – is into claims that British soldiers killed 20 unarmed 
civilians and abused others at Camp Abu Naji after what became known as the 
battle of Danny Boy, a British military checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir, on 14 
May 2004.

The inquiry, headed by Sir Thayne Forbes, a retired high court judge, has so 
far cost more than £20m, and is due to be completed later in the year. 
Griffiths told the inquiry he had heard nothing to make him believe any of the 
detainees had been executed or mistreated. "I did not observe anything that 
appeared to be inconsistent with battlefield injuries," he said.

Griffiths recalled a meeting with other officers called to consider the 
allegations. "We discussed the devastating impact that modern weapons systems 
can have on the human body and in particular, the damage that can be caused by 
GPMG [general purpose machine gun]," he said.

Griffiths said one of his sergeants told him that "some of the dead … had such 
severe injuries as a result of this [rifle and machine gun] fire that limbs 
were in a few cases almost detached from bodies".

In a written statement to the inquiry he said: "I thought then (and this was a 
view shared by all present), and I still think now, that the rumours were 
baseless and caused by a combination of ignorance amongst the local population 
as to the traumatic injuries that can be suffered in combat and the 
misinformation spread by insurgents who wished to discredit the coalition 
forces."

He said he did not want his soldiers "to have to pick up the bodies of men 
they had just killed" – 12 were believed to have been killed by platoons under 
his command – and take them to the British camp. He said the order came from on 
high, perhaps his brigade commander, or higher.

He was told the reason was to see if any of them "had been involved in 
previous insurgent attacks such as the murder of six RMP [military police] at 
Majar al-Kabir in 2003".

Patrick O'Connor QC, for the Iraqis, questioned why Griffiths had not at first 
reported an injury, a badly bruised hand, to one of his soldiers, Private Dodd. 
Lawyers for the Iraqi detainees say they were beaten up by British soldiers. 
The International Committee of the Red Cross expressed concern about the 
treatment meted out to some detainees.

Griffiths earlier said he agreed that pre-deployment training of British 
soldiers about how to treat detainees was "a little skimpy". He later told the 
inquiry it was more than adequate. However, problems with training is known to 
be one of the issues included in a "lessons learned" study into the battle of 
Danny Boy.

The inquiry was forced on the Ministry of Defence in 2009 after high court 
judges accused it of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty 
of candour.
 