
Twenty years ago this Saturday, the Senate confirmed Clarence Thomas to the US 
supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>, installing 
the nation's second black justice by the narrowest margin for a century. 
Everything about those days in 1991 is grim. The sexual harassment allegations 
of Anita Hill, who bravely faced down not only Thomas and an all-white, 
all-male Senate judiciary committee, but a hostile media as well, have passed 
into history. Thomas's furious condemnation of his "high-tech lynching for 
uppity blacks" marked a low point in the public discussion of race in America, 
not least as he was being questioned to take over the seat of the great 
Thurgood Marshall.

Even before a National Public Radio reporter disclosed Hill's accusations, the 
confirmation was already a shambles. Thomas and his supporters had learned from 
Robert Bork's crashed-and-burned nomination in 1987 that frankness is not a 
virtue for a prospective justice. Thomas played it coy, telling the committee 
that he "could not remember" ever discussing Roe v Wade or other landmark 
supreme court cases. He set a precedent that all other nominees have since 
followed: say nothing, for as many days as it takes. Thomas turned the Senate 
confirmation history into aballet de cour, with the court's newest justice, 
Elena Kagan, taking content-free testimony to breathtaking extremes last year.

Since those very angry, very public days two decades ago, however, Thomas has 
largely disappeared from view.Recent controversy surrounding his wife Ginni, a 
Tea Party advocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/michaeltomasky/2010/oct/21/clarence-thomas-ethics?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and a staunch opponent of "Obamacare", began to revive interest in his 
personal life, but he remains an enigmatic presence. He refuses to attend the 
president's State of the Union addresses with the other justices, and unlike 
his benchmates Antonin Scalia and Stephen Breyer, he has never relished the 
public eye.

Thomas is the supreme court's quiet man. He has not asked a question at oral 
arguments since 2006, preferring to sit back in silence – sometimes gazing up 
at the ceiling – while his colleagues barrage petitioners on constitutional 
matters of the day. His public reserve, combined with his hugely contentious 
ascent to the high court and his tendency to vote in lockstep with the much 
more loquacious Scalia, have turned Thomas in the public imagination into a 
lightweight or a cipher.

Not even close. Thomas is nobody's sidekick: he may be mute, but he isn't 
dumb. More than any justice on the conservative bloc, Thomas has shown a desire 
and preparedness to strike down entire bodies of the law he disagrees with, 
even those dating to the founding of the republic.

According to Scalia himself, Thomas "doesn't believe in stare decisis, 
period." (The Latin phrase refers to the basic principle that contemporary 
justices should uphold precedent and only rarely overturn earlier decisions, 
allowing law to develop over time.) He is the court's true radical, and his 
carefully argued dissents, often buttressed with pages of discussion of 
colonial- and revolutionary-era life and law, envision an America free from 
equality protections, environmental regulation, prohibitions on cruel and 
unusual punishment, and pretty much anything else you might have thought the 
courts had accomplished since the invention of the radio.

In 2009, for example, eight of the nine justices signed a major ruling that 
upheld a key provision of the Voting Rights Act, the hallmark of civil rights 
legislation dating to 1965. The provision in question requires states and 
regions with a history of racial discrimination – not just southern states, but 
Alaska, parts of California and New Hampshire, and even Manhattan – to clear 
any changes to the voting system with a federal authority, in order to ensure 
that they do not disadvantage blacks and (latterly) other racial minorities. In 
his majority opinion, John Roberts, the chief justice, intentionally avoided 
the larger constitutional question the case posed, settling the case on narrow 
grounds. Scalia concurred, as did Samuel Alito, the court's other rightwing 
justice.

Not Thomas. The whole thing should go, he argued: racial discrimination is a 
thing of the past, and the federal government shouldn't be meddling in the 
first place with local electoral authorities. So why take it slow?

Thomas was also the lone wolf in Hamdi v Rumsfeld 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamdi_v._Rumsfeld>, one of the court's ringing 
decisions on limits to executive power. A majority of the court found that 
President Bush did not have the right to hold an American citizen indefinitely 
without trial by designating him an "illegal enemy combatant". Though the 
justices disagreed about the exact remedy, eight out of nine agreed that an 
American prisoner, regardless of what the executive calls him, retains his 
right to due process. Thomas, on the other hand, wrote a solo dissent: the 
president is commander-in-chief and can do whatever he needs to, including hold 
an American without charges or even the possibility of judicial redress.

And even when Thomas finds himself in the majority, he has not hesitated to 
try to broaden the scope of its decisions, placing his radical cards on the 
table when the circumstances don't remotely require it. Consider the 2007 case 
ofMorse v Frederick <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_v._Frederick> – which 
you might remember as the "Bong Hits 4 Jesus" case, after the bizarre phrase 
written in duct tape on a 14-foot banner that a student unfurled outside his 
school. When the student was suspended for a week, he claimed the school 
violated his right to free speech. Roberts, writing for the court's 
conservative bloc, held otherwise: a school has a responsibility to discourage 
drug use, and the first amendment didn't require the school to tolerate such a 
sign.

Thomas signed that opinion. But he also authored his own. The petitioner's 
first amendment argument was unfounded, Thomas wrote – because students have no 
first amendment rights at all. It becomes clear, Thomas insists, if you go back 
to the 18th-century schoolhouse, where, as he wrote, "teachers commanded, and 
students obeyed." Throwing out the student's petition was not enough, Thomas 
argued; the court should throw out all earlier protections for students' 
speech, which, so far as the justice was concerned, had no basis in the 
constitution.

It's a fun world Thomas envisions, even if much of his most radical thinking 
remains confined to his dissents. But time is on his side. Thomas, we should 
not forget, was the youngest person in decades to reach the US supreme court 
bench when he was confirmed so narrowly 20 years ago. He is now only 63: a 
decade younger than Stephen Breyer, 15 years younger than Ruth Bader Ginsburg. 
Barring a disaster or a highly unlikely change of heart, he will probably match 
John Paul Stevens's extended tenure. It seems plausible that he could become 
the longest-serving justice of all time.

There is something almost perversely admirable about Thomas's sweeping 
jurisprudence – so long as it never becomes the law of the land. If the 
anniversary of the confirmation of our cruelest justice has any upside, perhaps 
it can remind us that presidential and legislative elections have serious 
judicial consequences. And long-term ones. Judges on the German constitutional 
court serve a fixed 12-year span; in the two-year-old British supreme court, 
law lords will be bounced out at age 70. But here in America, our justices are 
with us for life.

And if the court's next member is chosen not by Barack Obama, but a Republican 
successor, then we might all soon be living in Thomas's brave new world.
 