
Major League Baseball’s historic season-opener in Sydney has got its draw 
card, with Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw to start against the
Arizona Diamondbacks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> 
on 22 March.


As the Sydney Cricket Ground was being transformed into a baseball diamond, 
the Dodgers were seriously considering leaving the highest-paid pitcher of all 
time at home to rest after he battled through a high workrate last season.


However, in a boost to the spectacle and credibility of the sold-out event, 
the superstar will make the trip and throw on opening night.


Dodgers manager Don Mattingly announced that Kershaw and fellow left-hander 
Hyun-Jin Ryu would be his starters for the Saturday and Sunday series in Sydney.


Kershaw is a two-time National League Cy Young award-winning pitcher and last 
month signed a record seven-year deal with the Dodgers worth a monster $US215m.


Ryu signed a six-year $US36m deal with the Dodgers last season and during last 
year’s playoffs became the first South Korean to start in aMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> post-season.


Kershaw’s stablemate at the Dodgers Zack Greinke last month said he had 
“absolutely zero excitement” for coming to Australia.


Speculation that Kershaw was to be rested only added to a perception that the 
Dodgers weren’t overly thrilled to be interrupting their pre-season.


There were concerns in the US that the 17-hour journey to Sydney and the tight 
turnaround before the teams flew home would be a strain on players, but it 
seems both the Dodgers and Diamondbacks are intent on sending their strongest 
line-ups.


Despite his negative comments, Greinke was a likely starter for LA until he 
injured his calf during a pre-season match.


The Dodgers are adamant Kershaw would have made the trip regardless of 
Greinke’s unavailability. Mattingly says Kershaw’s workload will still be 
managed carefully through the first month of the season.

Kerhsaw has struggled so far in spring training, but it was the same last year 
before he came out for the season-opener and pitched a shut-out against San 
Francisco.


Patrick Corbin and Trevor Cahill will start on the mound for the Diamondbacks 
in the two matches.
 