
Second seed Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> 
breezed into her sixth-consecutive Grand Slam quarter-final with another 
comfortable straight-sets victory at the Australian Open today.

Clijsters, who is yet to drop a set in the tournament, will meet Anastasia 
Myskina in a repeat of last year's quarter-final after beating Italian Silvia 
Farina Elia 6-3, 6-3.

Myskina, the ninth-seeded Russian, overcame American Chanda Rubin in a carbon 
copy of last year's fourth-round meeting.

Myskina recovered from a poor start and a misfiring serve to battle past the 
American 6-7 (3/7), 6-2, 6-2 but spent most of the match making frustrated 
comments in the direction of her coach Jens Gerlach.

"He's kind of like a wall there. He has to show me something, show some 
emotions to me," grinned Myskina, referring to her coach Jens Gerlach, who also 
happens to be her former boyfriend.

"You know, yeah, I can get really angry sometimes. But he knows me, he knows 
that I don't really mean it...the whole thing that happens on the court.

"You know, I am the way I am. If nobody likes me the way I am, I'm sorry. But 
I think, you know, I'm really nice - too nice," she laughed.

Myskina made just 28% of her first serves in a nervous opening set and Rubin 
capitalised to take the tiebreak, but Myskina then raced into a 4-0 lead and 
levelled the match before closing out the win with two more breaks to book 
another meeting with Clijsters.

Last year, the Belgian prevailed in their quarter-final meeting and is in 
similarly dominant form this year, having conceded just 14 games in four 
matches.

It took her 73 minutes to brush aside Farina Elia, the 20th seed, in her 
toughest match so far but she did so with a barrage of ferocious ground-strokes.

"I have had some tough matches against Silvia. She's the kind of player who 
doesn't give you a lot of space," said Clijsters.

"I felt like I was hitting the ball well and moving her from side to side. 
With her slice and everything, she kept the ball really low, which made it 
tough for me to hit a lot of winners.

"I felt like this was good. I had to move well, move around a lot and I really 
enjoyed it."

French schoolgirl Tatiana Golovin's dream run came to an end today at the 
hands of American Lisa Raymond.

Golovin, who only turned 16 yesterday, had reached the fourth round with 
victories over seeds Anna Smashnova-Pistolese and Lina Krasnoroutskaya but 
repeating the trick over Raymond proved a step too far.

The former doubles world No1 followed up her shock victory over Venus Williams 
in the last round and cruised into the quarter-finals 6-2, 6-0 in just 42 
minutes.

Raymond's win booked only her second Grand Slam quarter-final appearance, 
matching her achievement at Wimbledon in 2000.

"It would have been pretty easy for me to have the letdown after playing so 
well against Venus," she said.

"I've had very mixed results in Slams throughout my career. I've never really 
peaked at Slams. To be able to play as well as I have here feels great. 
Hopefully I've got a couple more rounds of tennis in me."

Golovin was given a wild card under a reciprocal arrangement between 
organisers of the Australian and French Opens.

"My goal was to get one or two rounds, so it's great I lost in the fourth," 
she said.

"I'm a little disappointed in my match. I wasn't moving very well and I had to 
play my best tennis against her if I wanted to win, and it didn't really 
happen."

Raymond will play Patty Schnyder, who reached the quarter-final of a Grand 
Slam for the first time since 1997 with a 6-2, 6-4 win over Nathalie Dechy.
 