
The fourth seed Kim Clijsters kept her Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> dream alive with a 6-1, 7-5 
victory over Daniela Hantuchova set-up a quarter final meeting with former 
champion Martina Hingis.

Clijsters, making her final appearance in Melbourne after announcing she will 
retire at the end of the season, dropped only nine games on her way to the 
fourth round and looked on course for another quickfire victory after storming 
through the first set in just 27 minutes.

But Hantuchova responded in the second set and looked to have earned a 
tie-break as Clijsters wasted several match points at 5-4. But the world No5 
came through, backed by a 76% first serve success rate.

Hingis recovered from a below-par first set to derail the 19th seed Li Na 4-6, 
6-3, 6-0 with an impressive recovery.

The sixth seed, who reached six consecutive Australian Open finals between 
1997 and 2002, had conceded only nine games in reaching the fourth round but 
lost her first service game as the rising Chinese star surged ahead in the 
first meeting between the pair.

Hingis, the five-time Grand Slam champion, hit back with a break of her own 
but again failed to hold serve as Li opened up a 5-4 advantage to seal the 
first set.

Hingis surged into a 2-0 lead in the second but Li, the world No16, quickly 
responded to level at 2-2 before the Swiss ace fought off five break points to 
hold serve.

The world number seven went to pick up a crucial break to level the match as a 
large amount of unforced errors slipped into Li's game - and Hingis took 
control of the contest.

Hingis started the decisive set in ideal fashion with a break and quickly 
wrapped up the victory.

Russian teenage sensation Anna Chakvetadze, the 12th seed, secured her place 
in the last eight with a straight sets 6-4, 6-1 victory over eighth seed Patty 
Schnyder.

Chakvetadze will face the No1 seed Maria Sharapova, who will regain her world 
No1 status at the end of the Australian Open, in the quarter-finals. The winner 
will then go up against either Clijsters or Hingis in the semi-finals.

Women's Singles fourth round

(1) Maria Sharapova (Rus) bt (22) Vera Zvonareva (Rus) 7-5 6-4
 (12) Anna Chakvetadze (Rus) bt (8) Patty Schnyder (Swi) 6-4, 6-1
 (4) Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> (Bel) bt 
(15) Daniela Hantuchova (Svk) 6-1, 7-5
 (6) Martina Hingis (Swi) bt (19) Na Li (Chn) 4-6, 6-3, 6-0
 (1) Maria Sharapova (Rus) bt (22) Vera Zvonareva (Rus) 7-5, 6-4.
 