
Negotiators in Paris are embarking on another all-night meeting to try to 
reach a new global climate agreement, with the French foreign minister, Laurent 
Fabius, telling them they were “extremely close to the finishing line”as he 
presented yet another draft text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/live/2015/dec/10/paris-climate-talks-cop21-draft-deal-negotiations-continue-live-blog>
.


The marathon talks have become an exercise in a diplomatic attrition, with 
Fabius giving countries two hours to look at the latest draft before yet 
another less formal meeting – known as an indaba (a Zulu word for meeting) 
beginning at 11.30pm Paris time.

He said this all-night session would be an “inaba of solutions” and 
negotiators would be given 30 to 45 minutes in a corner of the room to settle 
any impasse.

It comes after negotiators already met all through Wednesday night in two 
indabas, allowing all countries to once again vent their concerns.

Paris talks: new draft climate deal published - live blog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/live/2015/dec/10/paris-climate-talks-cop21-draft-deal-negotiations-continue-live-blog>
“I hope I will present a final text tomorrow … it will allow us to complete 
the final lap,” Fabius said before the negotiating teams began poring over the 
text, in which the French had narrowed options and chosen compromise solutions. 
“We must do this and we can do this … I think, dear friends, that we will make 
it.”

On Wednesday night each indaba had seats for about 80 negotiators, with more 
crowding in at the back. One, chaired by Fabius met until 5am Thursday. A 
second, chaired by the Peruvian environment minister, Manuel Pulgar-Vidal, met 
until 8am.


According to veteran negotiators the indabas had made sure every country felt 
their views had been heard.

“They spend about 80% of their time repeating their previous positions, maybe 
10% outlining new positions and only about 10% of the time compromising,” said 
a negotiator who took part in one of the meetings.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, turned up at the 
Fabius-chaired meeting about 2am Wednesday and had what observers described as 
an “animated” discussion with the US climate change envoy, Todd Stern, at the 
back of the room for about 20 minutes, possibly about separate informal talks 
on the issue of “loss and damage” – the idea that the agreement should 
recognise some countries will suffer irreparable harm from climate change.

The US is insistent any words about loss and damage should not suggest 
liability or compensation or open any possibility of legal action against US 
companies.

Australia was represented by officials on Wednesday night. The foreign 
minister,Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>
, was on call but spent the night hosting a dinner for Australian business and 
environmental leaders attending the conference.

Paris climate talks: deal in view but negotiations likely to go into overtime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/paris-climate-talks-deal-in-view-but-negotiations-likely-to-go-into-overtime>
The French presidency and the experts from the UN then spent Thursday once 
again carefully paring back the very many areas of disagreement to further 
distill the big political issues that it is hoped will form the basis of the 
final trade-off deal.

A group called Parisagreement.org has analysed this task by counting the 
numbers of brackets - indicating disagreement. When the Paris meeting began 
there were 1,609 sets of brackets. In the Wednesday night text there were 361. 
By Thursday night it was down to 50.

The key issues of dispute have been honed since the talks began 11 days ago.


 * Vulnerable island states and many countries who support the idea of an 
ambitious agreement are insisting it clearly recognise that climate science 
requires global warming to eventually be contained below 1.5 degrees. Several 
ministers told Wednesday night’s indabas that they would not go home with a 
vague “expression of sympathy” on the issue. While most negotiators are still 
holding back their final bottom-line position, some – including St Lucia’s 
environment minister, James Fletcher, are understood to have told the meeting 
that the inclusion of a 1.5 degree target was his before leaving. The latest 
draft seeks to resolve this issue, saying countries will “hold the increase in 
the global average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels and 
to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C, recognising that 
this would significantly reduce risks and impacts of climate change”. This is 
presented as the final option. 
 * Developing countries are insisting the agreement is clear about the funding 
they might receive to help reduce emissions and cope with locked-in climate 
change, with the $100bn a year in public and private finance now promised by 
2020 as minimum for post-2020 funding. The latest draft still contains 
different wording about how ambitious the funding aim should be. 
 * Developed countries including the US and Australia and vulnerable countries 
are insisting the agreement make it clear that eventually all countries will 
need to account for and report their emissions in similar ways, with regular 
reviews of national commitments. Developing countries want to keep the division 
set up in the 1992 framework climate convention between the requirements of 
rich and poor nations. This is not yet resolved. 
 * The dispute over loss and damage is also unresolved. 
The deputy chief executive of the Climate Institute, Erwin Jackson, said the 
conference was “on the cusp of getting the best possible outcome … but some key 
political issues remain to be resolved”.
 