
Police have named a climber who died after being caught in an avalanche in the 
Scottish Highlands.

Adrian Bankart, from Derbyshire, was climbing with a companion on Creag 
Meagaidh, a mountain range in Lochaber, when an avalanche occurred on Wednesday 
afternoon.

The 54-year-old was airlifted from the mountain but later died in hospital. 

Bankart was rescued with a second climber who remains in a serious but stable 
condition in Belford hospital, Fort William.

A Police Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> statement said: 
“The family of Mr Bankart would seek this opportunity to extend their gratitude 
to all emergency services and mountain rescue personnel who were involved in 
the incident.”

Efforts to trace two climbers missing on Ben Nevis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/18/ben-nevis-rescue-highlands-resume-search-avalanche-dies>
, meanwhile, remain suspended as high winds and driving snow prevent both 
ground and air searches.

Rachel Slater, 24, and Tim Newton, 27, both from Bradford, West Yorkshire, 
failed to return from an outing on Britain’s highest peak last weekend and 
treacherous conditions have hindered the rescue operation.

Members of Lochaber mountain rescue hope to get on to the mountain on Saturday.

Ground search for missing climbers remains suspended due to bad weather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/19/ground-search-missing-ben-nevis-climbers-halted-bad-weather-tim-newton-rachel-slater>
Team leader John Stevenson told BBC Radio Scotland’s Good Morning Scotland 
programme: “It is very frustrating and we’re trying to get something for the 
families mainly, and we’ve got nothing to go on.

“We don’t know where to look yet, so we’re just going to have to start 
basically at the beginning and just work our way around the hill.”

Slater’s family have flown from their home in Canada to be kept up to date 
with the search. In a joint statement with Newton’s family released on 
Thursday, they thanked search and rescue teams for their work.

They said: “The overwhelming response from members of the public and the 
climbing community has greatly assisted the search effort and we appreciate all 
the support and words of encouragement.

“As the search continues we remain hopeful Rachel and Tim will be found and 
reunited with their families and friends.”

The avalanche risk in Lochaber remains high, according to the Scottish 
Avalanche Information Service <http://www.sais.gov.uk/>, with new snow lying on 
top of frozen snow making the surface unstable.

Police Scotland said: “Conditions remain under constant review.

“Police and partners reiterate the appeal to anyone with any information that 
may assist the search effort to make contact. Climbers and walkers travelling 
to the area this weekend are asked to bear the search activity in mind and 
report anything they feel may assist via 101.

“An assessment of conditions will be made first thing on Saturday where 
consideration will be given to deploying mountain rescue personnel and all 
available resources.”
 