
Today, tremendous work is being done to develop the metrics of natural 
capital. All kinds of very smart people and organizations are making the 
"business case" for sustainability, making tortuous calculations as they 
analyze the life cycles, carbon production and water footprints of a variety of 
products, all in an attempt to make the best possible business and marketing 
choices.

This arduous work is being done – finally – by gifted and smart accountants, 
economists and supply chain and manufacturing experts, from theGlobal Reporting 
Initiative <https://www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx> to the 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board <http://www.sasb.org/> to the Carbon 
Disclosure Project <https://www.cdp.net/en-US/Pages/HomePage.aspx> to the World 
Bank'sNatural Capital Accounting 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/environment/brief/environmental-economics-natural-capital-accounting>
. I appreciate all of this work. We need it.

But, impressive as this work is, it is no replacement for having the courage 
to actually contemplate the state of the world around us. Right now, we are 
looking on with a mix of disbelief and ennui as extreme weather engulfs us. In 
some cases, we are trying to take what appear to be reasonable steps, mostly in 
order to protect our precarious perch in the world's economy. The trouble is, 
the time for reasonable has passed. We have somehow forgotten that if there is 
no nature, there is no business.

We are in a global environmental emergency, but we are behaving as if 
incremental improvements to "business as usual" will do. Talk to a scientist, a 
fisherman, a native of a low-lying island or a farmer stymied by drought, heat 
or floods. Or for that matter, talk to anyone who has been flooded in southern 
England or Pakistan; or who is making flood insurance payments in New Jersey or 
Florida; or who is witnessing the effects of drought in the southwest US or 
Iran; or who is being scorched by heat waves in Australia or Argentina.

This ripple effects of these environmental disasters continue across the 
economy, hitting investors whose livelihood relies on predicting commodity 
prices, managers who are counting on seasonal hotel occupancies, and insurers 
who are facing double digit losses from catastrophes. Their jobs are getting 
harder – and many are scared to death.

Everything is upside down, a very very dangerous spiral has begun, and we're 
nowhere near ready. Even in California, home of environmentally savvy governor 
Jerry Brown, voluntary statewide water rationing has only just begun three 
years into a drought. Voluntary!

My brother, a small businessman in Brooklyn, owns a factory that employs about 
50 people. He makes a good living, pays his employees well and has been working 
in his field (construction parts and machinery) for 35 years. He's much more 
conservative than I am, but he lives a fine life with a beloved family and 
demonstrates honor and courage in most everything he touches.

He took a very conservative approach to the recession and subsequent "end of 
any building at all" that he saw coming in 2008. Realizing that the boom years 
of the mid-2000s would not last, he saved for these rainy days, took care of 
his workers (kept them all on at four days a week despite virtually no new 
revenue for two years), invested his own money to support the business, slashed 
his own salary, and hoarded materials when times were flush. All this planning 
paid off: despite a very rough two years, he was able to withstand the 
recession. Now, business is booming again.

My brother's tactics were not about sustainability – they were about survival. 
Conservative, in this case, essentially means conserving resources to ensure 
long-term security. In my brother's case, from the time he became aware of the 
coming crisis, there was no "business as usual" in anything he did: he took 
emergency measures to protect his company, his workers and his future. And it 
worked.

Many companies are looking beyond sustainability to survivability in their 
radical approaches to environmental issues.KPMG 
<http://www.kpmg.de/docs/expect-unexpected.pdf> calculated that the 
environmental degradation caused by the world's 3,000 largest public companies 
totaled $2.15tn in 2008. This estimate undoubtedly antagonized many of the 
company's biggest clients.

Some companies are addressing sustainability. Unilever committed to double 
sales and halve its footprint between 2010 and 2020, and created a global 
advocacy team to help it achieve that goal.

Sometimes, this new knowledge spurs even more aggressive action. When Puma 
measured its 2010Environmental Profit and Loss 
<http://about.puma.com/puma-completes-first-environmental-profit-and-loss-account-which-values-impacts-at-e-145-million/>
 (EP&L) with the help of PricewaterhouseCoopers and TruCost, it learned that 
its profit would have been reduced by 72% if it had integrated environmental 
costs into its accounting.

Puma's parent company, Kering, is now pursuing an even deeper understanding of 
the company's real costs, and is creating an EP&L for all of its 16 luxury 
brands, including Yves Saint Laurent, Gucci and Stella McCartney. And, in 2012, 
Kering's vice-chair Jochen Zeitz and Sir Richard Branson formed theB Team 
<http://bteam.org>, an organization tasked with creating a business model for 
the 21st century – with the understanding that the current model will not allow 
us to survive.

All of these corporate leaders are behaving as if their survival is at stake. 
They dared to read the weather pages and register that the world their 
businesses inhabit is trembling from environmental damage. And they instructed 
their companies to take commensurate action.

Only by adding courage to sustainability will we survive.
 