
The Queensland seat of Fairfax is on a knife edge, with only 64 votes 
separatingClive Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer>
 and Liberal National party rival Ted O'Brien.

The mining magnate had a strong lead ten days ago on election night, but 
postal and pre-poll votes are flowing to the LNP and had slimmed the gap to 
just a handful by Tuesday afternoon.

Palmer has formally requested the Australian Electoral Commission conduct a 
recount in the Sunshine Coast-based seat, citing vote tampering and 
"irregularities" with the counting process.

The Palmer United party leader has over the past week accused both the LNP and 
AEC of vote fraud and applied for a federal court injunction to stop the count 
in Fairfax.The case was thrown out of court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/clive-palmer-vote-counting-fairfax>
.

Palmer has griped that there were 768 more Senate pre-poll ballot papers in a 
booth that did not have corresponding lower-house tickets.

"It would seem on the basis of the evidence that a fraud has been committed 
and that the AEC is now seeking to cover up this matter by creating and/or 
transferring ballots between booths," he said in a statement on Tuesday.

"Massive evidence is mounting to suggest this election has been rigged."

Palmer also aired his grievances on ABC television on Monday night, claiming 
former military officers were controlling the electoral commission and rigging 
the election.

Senator Nick Xenophon, who was also on the Q&A program, called on Palmer to 
apologise to the AEC.

"Clive Palmer would simply be a national laughing stock if his comments didn't 
impugn the integrity of the AEC," senator Xenophon said.

"This follows his previous unsubstantiated and baseless statements that 
Greenpeace is funded by the CIA and [Rupert Murdoch's ex-wife] Wendi Deng is a 
Chinese spy.

"The integrity and decency of the AEC is beyond question, and to publicly 
impugn divisional returning officers simply because they're former military 
officers is grossly offensive to both serving and former military officers."
 