
Billionaire Clive Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer> appeared on track to 
win a seat in federal parliament on Friday as the end of vote-counting in the 
Queensland seat of Fairfax drew near.

Palmer was 111 votes ahead of his Liberal National party rival Ted O'Brien on 
Friday afternoon, with about 570 votes left to count on Saturday morning.

Once the count is finished the seat's returning officer will determine whether 
a recount is needed.

The tourism and minerals magnate has warned he will challenge the result in 
court if he loses.

Palmer could join four other MPs on the House of Representatives crossbench 
and may also secure a Palmer United party senator, the former rugby league 
great Glenn Lazarus, forQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>.

Two other lower house seats remained close on Friday.

Labor MP Rob Mitchell was 319 votes ahead of the Liberals' Donna Petrovich in 
McEwen, with almost 2000 votes left to be counted.

And in the NSW seat of Barton, Labor candidate Steve McMahon was trailing the 
Liberals' Nic Varvaris by 489 votes, with fewer than 800 votes left to count.

Winners have been formally declared in 22 seats, including prime minister Tony 
Abbott's Sydney seat of Warringah, with dozens more seats to be declared next 
week.

The Coalition is likely to hold 90 seats to Labor's 55.

The first Senate results will be finalised next week, starting with Tasmania 
on Thursday.

The Northern Territory result is also set to be declared early next week.

But other states and territories are not expected to finalise their results 
until early October.

As counting continued on Friday, Labor looked likely to hold two seats in NSW, 
Victoria, Tasmania, Queensland and WA and one each in the ACT, Northern 
Territory and SA.

The Coalition was on track to pick up three senators in NSW, Queensland and 
WA, two in Victoria, Tasmania and SA, and one each in the NT and ACT.

The Greens are likely to retain Senate seats in Tasmania, WA and SA and pick 
up an extra seat in Victoria.

Other crossbench parties in the Senate could include the Liberal Democrats 
(NSW), Palmer United party (Queensland), Nick Xenophon (SA), Family First (SA), 
Australian Sex party (Tasmania), Australian Motoring Enthusiasts party 
(Victoria) and the Australian Sports party (WA).

But the final result will depend on complicated preference flows.
 