
The coalition government suffered its first Commons defeat on Tuesday night in 
a symbolic vote on the economy.

The loss, which was branded a "meaningless gesture" by a government whip, was 
the first inflicted on the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition since it 
took office in May last year.

MPs who had spent almost six hours debating the state of the UK economy voted 
by 213 to 79, a majority of 134.

The order paper motion, in the name of the prime minister, would not normally 
prompt a division, but well organisedLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs appeared to take government 
whips by surprise by forcing a vote and filed through the No lobby at 10pm.

Amid confusion in the Commons chamber, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, the chancellor, and Danny 
Alexander, chief secretary to the Treasury, urged fellow Tory and Lib Dem MPs 
to back the motion.

But despite their efforts the government conceded its first defeat, to the 
cheers of Labour backbenchers.

The government deputy chief whip, Alistair Carmichael, raising a point of 
order, said: "Is there any means by which the record tomorrow can record that 
the sort of meaningless gesture that we have just seen is as good as it gets?"

The Speaker, John Bercow, told MPs nothing "disorderly" had taken place.

He added: "The vote is what the vote is. It is not for me to interpret; people 
outside the house are free to do so as they wish."

Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, the shadow 
chancellor, called on the government to allocate more time for debating the 
economy in a session in which he clashed with Osborne over the gloomy economy 
outlook and last week's autumn statement.

Osborne laid out the measures taken to reinforce the country's fiscal 
credibility, keep interest rates low, and lay the foundations for a competitive 
and more balanced economy in the future following the Office for Budget 
Responsibility's latest economic forecast.

He said: "In the seven days since, I believe events have provided further 
confirmation of why these measures are necessary. Countries like Ireland and 
Italy have in the last week announced further budget measures, from VAT rises 
to pension age increases, reminding us of the value of getting ahead of the 
markets and not following them.

"The credit ratings of 15 eurozone countries have been put on negative watch. 
While here in Britain, our interest rates have stabilised, despite the 
deterioration of the fiscal forecast, so that largely we continue to borrow at 
below 2.5%."

But Balls said the chancellor had taken "an enormous gamble with the economy, 
with jobs, with people's lives".

"And the reality is his gamble has completely backfired," he added.

The shadow chancellor said the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) were concerned 
about the chancellor's plan if the economy continued to falter.

But Osborne hit back, quoting the OECD's chief economist as saying: "George 
Osborne's Plan A is working … the ambitious fiscal consolidation has bolstered 
credibility and helped maintain low bond yields, leaving room for automatic 
stabilisers to work."

The Office for Budget Responsibility's credibility was attacked by the Commons 
Treasury select committee on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/06/obr-attacked-mps-economic-forecasts>
 after the government economics watchdog was forced to admit its previous 
forecast of the economy's size in 2015 was out by £65bn. The government's aim 
of eliminating the structural deficit "by the end of a rolling, five-year 
forecast period" was also criticised.
 