
The Coalition government is split over landmark commonwealth intervention in 
land clearing in Queensland’s far north by environment department officials 
concerned about impacts on theGreat Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef>.

The Queensland Liberal National party senator Ian MacDonald told Guardian 
Australia he was “very concerned” about the department’s move toapply federal 
environmental scrutiny to clearing permits in Cape York 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/climate/feds-ban-land-clearing-over-great-barrier-reef-fears/news-story/ad5082301869baccb33c3836c45ee489>
, which were approved by the former Newman LNP state government in 2014.

The issue arose after the federal environment department decided the clearing 
of 2,900 hectares of land in Kingsvale needed to be approved under federal 
laws, despite neither the land holder nor the state government referring it to 
to the federal government.

The federal government made the decision, claiming the clearing had the 
potential to impact the world-heritage listed Great Barrier Reef, by increasing 
sediment run-off.

Queensland farmers bulldoze thousands of hectares of native vegetation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-farmers-bulldoze-thousands-of-hectares-of-native-vegetation>
The landholder is fighting the decision in the federal court, represented by 
theformer Newman government MP 
<https://www.comcourts.gov.au/file/Federal/P/VID768/2016/actions> David 
Kempton, and the new federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, will be the 
respondent.

MacDonald said he would raise the issue as a priority with Frydenberg, as a 
former Newman government MP spearheads afederal court challenge to commonwealth 
intervention <https://www.comcourts.gov.au/file/Federal/P/VID768/2016/actions> 
that targets Frydenberg as the respondent.


The matter is likely to raise tensions between 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/20/former-lnp-official-urges-landholders-to-hang-up-on-environment-officers>
 the federal Coalition and the Queensland LNP, as well as between the federal 
Liberal and National parties.

Former Cook MP David Kempton is the solicitor acting for grazier Scott Harris, 
whose permit to clear his Kingvale property hangs in limbo while the 
environment department seeks to assess it for impacts under the Environmental 
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act.


Conservationists welcomed the department’s move to require assessment of the 
clearing under the EPBC for potential harm through sediment runoff to reef 
waters downstream.

It is a step towards possibly overturning the state permit to clear 2,900 
hectares on Kingvale, which is 200km from the coast but next to rivers that 
flow into reef waters.

Harris also owns the Strathmore property in northwest Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, where he was approved 
to clear 58,000 hectares of savannah woodland.

Cutting pollution of reef waters is a key plank of the state and federal 
governments’ long term conservation plan for the reef, which is reeling from 
its worst ever coral bleaching event this summer.

Reducing pollution flowing onto the reef – including by reducing clearing in 
Queensland – forms part of the government’s Reef 2050 plan, which needs to be 
implemented in order to keep the Reef off UNESCO’s “world heritage in danger” 
list.

It comes also as the Palaszczuk state Labor government seeks to pass laws as 
early as next week to renew clearing restrictions that were axed by its LNP 
predecessor.

The Palaszczuk government considers current rates of clearing, at 300,000 
hectares a year to be unacceptably high and a key barrier to achieving national 
targets for cutting carbon emissions.

MacDonald told Guardian Australia he was concerned that uncomprehending 
commonwealth bureaucrats were overreaching in the use of their powers to target 
landholders whose plans were already assessed by the state.

“I’ve heard reports of the commonwealth department of environment pursuing 
substantial landholders who have been clearing exactly in accordance with 
permits granted by the Queensland government,” he said.

“I would be very concerned if a commonwealth department was using its powers 
to override carefully assessed permits given by the Queensland government.

“This to me smacks of another instance where Canberra bureaucrats who probably 
don’t even know where the Gulf of Carpentaria is trying to make rules without 
any understanding of the local ecology and environment.

“I intend to raise this matter with the new environment minister at the 
earliest possible opportunity as I did with the previous minister.”

The federal court challenge by Harris is due for a hearing on Friday.

Andrew Picone, the Northern Australia program officer for the Australian 
Conservation Foundation, said federal intervention at Kingvale was welcome but 
it was “just the tip of the iceberg”.

Almost 1m hectares had been cleared in Queensland over three years without 
referral to national environment law, Picone said.

“None of the projects that were waved through under Newman era legislation 
have had their environmental impacts properly considered.”

It showed the “urgent” need to change the state’s tree-clearing laws, given 
that “under the current system, federal intervention on every clearing proposal 
represents the only opportunity to have nationally significant environmental 
values properly assessed and protected”.

“We need to ensure that large scale clearing is stopped otherwise we will send 
species on the fast track to extinction.”

Australian Marine Conservation Society reef campaigner Imogen Zethoven said 
the department’s intervention was “a fantastic decision by the federal 
government and reveals the risk posed by the Newman tree clearing laws to the 
Great Barrier Reef”.

“When the heavy rains come, soil washes into rivers and into the reef, 
smothering corals and seagrass meadows, which are home to threatened turtles 
and dugong,” he said.

“Dirty turbid water makes it harder for corals to grow, which is especially 
serious for corals off Cape York, as they were hardest hit from the severe 
coral bleaching event last summer.”

Tim Seelig, the head of the Queensland Conservation Council, said federal 
intervention had been “a long coming, as conservation groups have been raising 
such concerns about several properties in reef catchments for more than a year, 
and have sought federal action”.

He said the “high-value agriculture” provision for clearing was “always a ruse 
to allow clearing for cattle grazing”.

“When the high-value agriculture permit system was introduced by the Newman 
government, it did not require proper environmental assessment, nor rigorous 
and independent agricultural assessment,” he said.

“We can’t have clearing like this destroying large areas of native woodland, 
especially in areas where run-off into the reef is a risk.”

Changes to land clearing laws in NSW break an election promise from Baird | 
Peter Cosier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/changes-to-land-clearing-laws-in-nsw-break-an-election-promise-from-baird>
Bruce Lindsay, a lawyer at Environmental Justice Australia, said the 
department’s action was welcome but “merely a procedural step” that did not 
automatically signal it would block the clearing.

 It had “merely used [its] powers under our national environmental law … 
because they contend the landowner has failed to meet his obligations to refer 
activities which may impact on matters of national environmental significance”.

 “This is precisely the sort of circumstance in which the federal government 
should be stepping in to seek the proper environmental management of actions 
that risk the health of major environmental assets such as the Great Barrier 
Reef,” Lindsay said.

“[This is] where there are real and substantial risks such as runoff and 
downstream damage, where the current Queensland land-clearing laws are not 
effective to manage the damage and where the actions are cumulative in nature.

“This is not just about one property-owner’s power to clear land.

“It is about the proper management of places of public importance which will 
suffer downstream impacts, in this case the world heritage listed Great Barrier 
Reef.

“[The owner] does not have absolute dominion over that land. He has 
obligations under the EPBC Act to manage it in a way that does not cause wider 
harm.”

 Kempton could not be reached for comment. 
 