
Cutting out coupons to get 10p off a can of baked beans is old hat. 21st 
century shoppers go online and use discount codes, but problems can arise when 
they don't use them as the retailers intended, or when they use secret codes 
meant for other customers.

The special offer code has mushroomed with the rapid growth of internet 
shopping. It is also known as a voucher code, discount code, promotional code, 
coupon code, an e-coupon or an e-voucher. Whatever it's called, however, it 
saves you money if you choose to get your retail therapy through the computer 
instead of a shopping mall.

A code usually comes in the form of a word or number, or both. You key it into 
a discount code box when you reach the online checkout, and at the click of a 
mouse the bill is reduced before your eyes.

There are specialist websites catering exclusively for 
a-penny-saved-is-a-penny-gained people. They aim to collect all the current 
codes, many of which have a fairly short lifespan, and encourage followers to 
share them with the rest of the price-conscious community.

Share and share alike?
 But not all codes are meant to be shared among everyone on the world wide web 
- some are for the benefit of specific or named customers. A code may be given 
to reward existing or regular customers, or awarded for your next purchase if 
you spend more than a certain amount. Or it may be given to you specifically as 
a goodwill gesture following a lapse in service standards, such as a late 
delivery.

Other codes are for general use but may have terms and conditions attached - 
for example, a condition that the code can be used only once per household, or 
it cannot be used in conjunction with any other offer.

Christmas last year saw a crop of cyber-code glitches. Sainsbury's offered 
discount codes for online drinks orders, which gave savings between £2 and £12 
on orders over £60. The offer was limited to one code per purchase, but some 
customers discovered that the Sainsbury's system allowed them to use multiple 
codes and save £43.

Word of the loophole spread rapidly on the internet grapevine before 
Sainsbury's became aware of its error. The supermarket giant had already 
dispatched some of the super-discounted orders before it then called a halt. 
Many bargain hunters were left disappointed after placing their orders.

Sainsbury's argued it had no legal obligation to honour the orders - they 
originally posted the voucher codes to named individuals and the terms stated 
that each voucher was to be used singly and only by the named person.

Legal standing
 As a general legal rule, your internet order becomes a binding contract when 
the retailer sends you confirmation of it. However, the law may have been in 
Sainsbury's favour in this case if it could show that customers had knowingly 
abused an error in its system and/or had acted in bad faith. The chances are 
that customers tempted to try and enforce their contracts in the civil courts 
would fail.

Indeed, there might be grounds for the retailer to invoke the criminal law 
against those it might claim had tried to defraud it, although in practice such 
a course of action would seem unlikely from any commercial organisation wanting 
to preserve its reputation.

Often it is a retailer's reputation, rather than a grey area of the law, that 
can come to the rescue of the customer. In December last year, for example, 
Thresher's offered a discount drinks voucher aimed at selected customers. 
Following a frenzied bout of emailing the voucher ended up with a much wider 
circulation than intended, but the firm accepted all downloaded vouchers, 
regardless of whether they were used by pre-selected customers or not.

In this case, there was speculation that the codes were used as a marketing 
ploy. Maybe the intention from the start was an old fashioned general discount 
that lowered profit margins but boosted overall sales. Or maybe this was 
adopted as a sales strategy when the scale of the voucher's use allowed the 
increased volume of sales to more than cover the reduced margin.

Terms and conditions

But London's most famous toy retailer, Hamleys, declined to honour online 
orders made before Christmas by customers who were "mistakenly" able to secure 
multiple discounts. It argued that the multiple discounts were outside the 
terms of its offer.

Retailers have been known to backtrack on an initial refusal to honour online 
pricing and discount code errors when threatened with legal action. They have 
calculated that the cost of meeting a sometimes greatly reduced price is less 
than the potential cost of a damaged commercial reputation, even if the law is 
on their side.

And that's where the power of the internet may come to the aid of online 
shoppers. Those who meet on the internet to share complaints as well as codes 
may find that divided they are likely to be picked off one by one, but united 
they stand to get the bargains they ordered.
 