
The only thing less fun than sitting with another round of pages to be 
red-penned and rearranged, is doing so while ice complicates the inside of your 
windows and your immobile extremities slowly sting, then throb, then numb, then 
become perhaps irretrievably blue and fragile. Writing is not a mobile activity 
and – rampant hypochondria and/or genuine illness apart – historically, it 
seems to involve being in bed more than might be considered entirely 
reasonable. The onset of winter always reminds me of my early days as a 
scribbler, reading about all those Russian and Irish and Parisian writers' 
lives in suitably louche and tormented novels, or short stories, or memoirs. 
One element they shared – beyond narcissism, absinthe abuse and athletic sexual 
angst – was the presence of one - or more than one - writer in a bed and 
occasionally putting pen to paper.

I began my writing career in bed and – especially in hotels – my bed-writing 
continues to this day. Initially, I thought this was my most stylish and 
convincing option and I couldn't afford to heat my tiny flat, so I wrote and 
then (in a number of different colours) rewrote my very short short stories 
while huddled under blankets in the far-off days before the convenience and 
added toasty glow of laptops. Best Beloveds, even the clanky old Amstrad 
(remember them?) was not yet a possibility.

This week, I have a choice of bed-writing in a Holiday Inn, or sitting next to 
a tiny portable heater in a university office so cold that no one else ever 
seems willing to occupy it. The office part of the equation means it's time to 
meet creative writing students at Warwick University again – and time to be 
reminded again of how horrible it is to begin seriously considering writing as 
a profession. I spent years either being mocked by a gnawing desire to write 
... well ... something; or having ideas that were bloody terrifying, or 
unwieldy, or just plain beyond my technical capacities. Panic was never far 
away. I started to write before I knew what I was writing about and then fell 
into a pit of aimless and bewildered prose – or I scared myself silly because 
it seemed entirely unavoidable that my protagonist would be a man, or an older 
woman, or a child, or just someone other than me when I didn't feel up to 
creating someone other than me that morning – or else I'd need to write in the 
first person, or cope with a major timescale, or lollop off into an experiment 
in magic realism.

Christ, it was appalling. And, of course, numerous psychological logjams and 
nervous perils never entirely leave, but just at the point when I was as 
inexperienced as I could get, I was doing to myself all the most punishing and 
self-defeating and unpleasant things that a writer can. I was worrying that my 
eventual readers would hunt me down and cause me harm. I was refusing to 
interrogate what had come to me to be expressed and therefore – unsurprisingly 
– finding myself unable to express it. I was doubting every word before it 
emerged. I was neither considering the overall structure and meaning of pieces, 
nor really focusing on the practical details of making them communicative in 
case they just melted away under scrutiny. I was, in short, being scared.

Being scared is perfectly normal when starting to write – it would be foolish 
not to have qualms about entering another person's mind and perhaps not being 
as entertaining and moving and eloquent as one should when given such a 
splendid, generous and intimate opportunity. And handing over what is, in 
effect, a dream – that's stressful. Here is something of me and from me, and I 
have committed to it utterly and it is now nakedly in your possession and if it 
doesn't please you then I will have failed on many, many levels. That's a hard 
thing to even consider, never mind put into practice. And yet, without asking 
our ideas to tell us more, and risking that they won't, without throwing 
ourselves into the matter completely, and risking that our very best just isn't 
good enough, then we never fully know what we can say and how we might say it 
best; we never find how good we can be and how we can grow beyond that; we 
don't do ourselves, or our work, or our readers justice. Which would be a 
shame. And – scary though it feels to work passionately for absent strangers – 
it's not coal mining, it's not being a nurse, it's not marching in London to 
defend the possibility of being a student, even though there might be bother, 
or batons, or horses.

That's the other memory Warwick University campus consistently awakes – one of 
being a largely pathetic, but occasionally active student. This is the place 
where I took part in my first demonstrations, first found out how large and 
unpleasant police horses can be, first realised that a policeman can shove you 
repeatedly in the back because he wants to, because he can, because it will 
annoy you, because he would like to start a fight, because he would always win 
the fight, because he's a policeman and you're not … It was an education. I 
wasn't at Warwick studying creative writing – such courses barely existed then 
and I wouldn't have dared go near one if they had – but I was studying. I was 
able to do so, because I received a grant. No grant, no university: it would 
have been that simple. No three years to start learning how my mind actually 
operated, to become slightly familiar with how I think, to strengthen my 
ability to analyse and criticise and imagine, to present my thoughts with any 
kind of confidence. Who knows how long it would have taken me to begin writing 
without the university experience, or if I would have been able to subsidise 
myself before my writing earned its keep without the, albeit slightly 
evanescent, backing of a degree? And I am, Dear Readers, otherwise 
unemployable. And I do, Dear Readers, love writing more than almost anything 
else. And I am not, Dear Readers, in any way domestic. So perhaps a life 
wasted, a life unfulfilled.

And yes, my life is – at a certain level – a big arty nonsense that can be 
sneered at from many angles. And being a student will always involve 
self-indulgence and silliness and blagging. But I don't think it's a strange 
coincidence that the only people actively out on the streets and opposing the 
rape of our society are those with the time and the novel encouragement to 
examine what's happening and find it wrong. There are other paths to 
enlightenment and confidence, but a university education isn't something I 
would lightly deny a fellow-citizen. And the lack of an adequate primary and 
secondary education is already stifling, crippling and – I don't mean this 
metaphorically – killing a generation of people I personally have no wish to 
injure.

Without analysis and criticism, we can't get to grips with what may or may not 
be wrong around us – without a muscular capacity to imagine, we can't construct 
better alternatives – without support, we can find it difficult to believe what 
we have to say should even be heard, that who we are should be expressed: 
whether that might involve a sonnet that proves you're as human as everyone 
else and therefore entitled to consideration, or a love letter, or a job 
application that changes your life, or the novel that sustains someone recently 
bereaved, or the joke or the song that made someone smile after a shitty day, 
or the slogan that will tell a nearby policeman – Your jobs are next.

I'm all right. I got my education, my library books, access to my voice and 
those of others – so many wonderful others. Which is partly why I feel others 
should have that joy, too. Something to boost the National Happiness Index, 
minimal investment required. Onwards.

AL Kennedy will be performing WORDS, her one-person show, for Amnesty 
International at17-25 New Inn Yard, London 
<http://maps.google.co.uk/maps?hl=en&client=firefox-a&hs=0Kw&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&q=17-25+New+Inn+Yard&um=1&ie=UTF-8&hq=&hnear=17-25+New+Inn+Yard,+Hackney,+Greater+London+EC2A+3&gl=uk&ei=rfH8TJm-EqGqhAfeur3pCg&sa=X&oi=geocode_result&ct=title&resnum=1&ved=0CBYQ8gEwAA>
 on 16 December at 7pm. All proceeds to Amnesty.

 