
Colin Austin, who has died of cancer aged 69, was one of the world's leading 
specialists on ancient Greek texts. Thanks to his technical expertise and power 
of conjectural divination, Colin had a remarkable gift for the reconstruction 
and interpretation of fragmentary poetic texts preserved on Egyptian papyri. 
The monumental edition of the fragments of Greek comedy which he completed with 
Rudolf Kassel set new standards of scholarly accuracy. The first volume of 
Poetae Comici Graeci, or "Kassel-Austin" as it is usually known, was published 
by De Gruyter in 1983; seven further large-scale volumes followed.

At the time, the remains of Greek comedy, other than the extant plays of 
Aristophanes <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aristophanes> and some 
Menander, were only available in editions which were either completely out of 
date or marred by fantastic and improbable reconstructions. Poetae Comici 
Graeci put hundreds of verses of Greek poetry into the mainstream, so other 
scholars could no longer think of them as inaccessible or unimportant. The 
fragments are accompanied by a full textual history and a commentary which 
always goes straight to the point and the problems.

Poetae Comici Graeci has already transformed the way in which the fragments of 
comedy can be used to shed light on Greek cultural and literary history. From 
the biting satire and high farce of the Old Comedy of classical Athens to the 
social comedy of Menander, the ancestor of the western tradition of the comedy 
of manners, Greek comedy reflects the evolution of both political structures 
and moral attitudes. Poetae Comici Graeci offers scholars in those fields a 
fresh start with some crucial evidence. It is unlikely to be superseded for 
many decades.

Colin was born in Australia to Lloyd Austin, an Australian professor of 
French, and his French wife, Jeanne-Françoise Guérin. The family moved to 
Britain when Colin was five and then to France. He was educated first in Paris, 
at the Lycée Lakanal, and then at Manchester grammar school and Jesus College, 
Cambridge, before moving to Christ Church, Oxford, whereSir Hugh Lloyd-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/dec/09/hugh-lloyd-jones-obituary> 
supervised his DPhil on Aristophanes, for which Colin edited Thesmophoriazusae, 
Aristophanes's play about the women of Athens' plans to take revenge on the 
playwright Euripides for the ways he has depicted them in his plays. Colin's 
commentary on Thesmophoriazusae was published by the Oxford University Press in 
a 2004 edition co-edited by S Douglas Olson.

While in Oxford his aptitude for papyrology was nurtured by Peter Parsons. 
When he returned to Cambridge in 1965, as a research fellow and director of 
studies in classics at Trinity Hall, his future academic path was set. His 
growing reputation led to invitations to transcribe and edit several important 
papyri, including Martin Bodmer's Menander codex, one of the main sources for 
the plays of a major poet who had otherwise been lost to the world. The fruits 
of these labours appeared in vastly improved texts of the Aspis and the Samia 
in 1969-70. Colin kept up his love for, and services to, Menander throughout 
his life. At the time of his death, he had been working frantically to complete 
a new edition of Menander's plays for the Oxford Classical Texts series.

Colin's particular gift lay not merely in the fine detail of fibres and ink 
smudges with which papyrologists must be concerned, but with filling in the 
gaps of broken lines with supplements. He revelled in what he saw as the 
supernatural nature of the gift he had been given, and he likened such 
conjecture to a mystery or a dream. A childlike wonder at what the sands of 
Egypt had preserved for us and the puzzles they set us shone through his public 
lectures in which he delighted to read aloud the newest piece of 
Menander-Austin.

One of his notable projects was a remarkable papyrus containing more than 100 
new epigrams by Posidippus, a poet of the third century BC, which was acquired 
by a Milan bank and of which the world only learned in 1993. Colin was asked by 
the Italian papyrologist Guido Bastianini to help with the editing and writing 
the commentary, and a lavish edition appeared in 2001, followed shortly 
afterwards by an editio minor of Posidippus by Austin and Bastianini. Much of 
this work was done while Colin was suffering from the effects of unstable 
angina; the major surgery it necessitated, and his excited devotion to the 
project, was to foreshadow the resolution with which he worked through great 
suffering at the end of his life.

Colin was appointed a lecturer in the faculty of classics at Cambridge in 
1969; a readership followed in 1988 and a personal chair 10 years later. In 
1983 he joined his father as a fellow of the British Academy. He served as 
treasurer of the Cambridge Philological Society for 40 years, and at Trinity 
Hall was a much- loved wine steward and praelector. If Colin felt a lack of 
sympathy with some aspects of academic life – computers and modern literary 
criticism were never to his taste – he was very generous with his time and his 
learning to those who shared his enthusiasms.

His greatest pride was his family and he took delight in writing Greek or 
Latin verse to accompany the marvellous batiks made by Mishtu, his wife of 43 
years. She survives him, along with their son, Topun, and daughter, Teesta.

• Colin François Lloyd Austin, scholar of ancient Greek, born 26 July 1941; 
died 13 August 2010

• This article was amended on 11 September 2010. The original referred to a 
translation of Thesmophoriazusae. This has been corrected.
 