
Attorneys in the Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> movie 
theater shooting case are making their final decisions about the jurors who 
will decide the fate of the man charged with killing 12 people and injuring 70 
others nearly three years ago.

Jury selection entered its final stage on Monday with the judge, prosecutors 
and defense attorneys questioning prospective jurors as a large group.

They will whittle the remaining candidates to 12 jurors and 12 alternates to 
serve in the months-long trial of James Holmes, who had a new, shorter haircut 
for the hearing and shaved the bushy beard he wore during the last round of 
jury questioning. He wore a brown shirt and reddish, tortoiseshell glasses.

Opening statements are scheduled for 27 April.

Holmes has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity to the attack on 20 July 
2012 at a Denver-area movie theater. His attorneys do not dispute that he 
pulled the trigger but say he was in the grip of a psychotic episode when he 
slipped into the cinema and opened fire while dressed from head to toe in 
combat gear.

Prosecutors say Holmes was sane and will ask jurors to convict him and 
sentence him to death. A jury could be seated as soon as Monday, but Judge 
Carlos A Samour Jr scheduled two days for group questioning.

Jury selection in the case began on 20 January and experts say it was among 
the largest and most complicated in US history. Court officials initially 
summoned 9,000 prospective jurors, who spent weeks filling out lengthy written 
questionnaires.

Hundreds of people were asked to return for one-on-one questioning, where 
defense attorneys, prosecutors and the judge questioned them, sometimes for 
hours, about their views on the death penalty, mental illness and other aspects 
of the criminal justice system.

Samour told attorneys last week that they could no longer press prospective 
jurors about those topics during group questioning. Instead, attorneys will 
probably ask questions about the rule of law and how prospective jurors gauge 
the credibility of witnesses who testify.

All but three of the 115 prospective jurors told to return for the final round 
reported to the courthouse in Denver on Monday. It is still possible the others 
could report for questioning.

The men and women who did report were mostly middle-aged, white and casually 
dressed.

Samour said he was impressed by the prospective jurors, many of whom told him 
they would rather not serve on the jury but would if needed, giving up four or 
five months of their lives.

“You are the reason we have the democratic society we relish today,” Samour 
told them, noting that one prospective juror moved her honeymoon from May to 
April and another agreed to get up at 3 am to get in five hours of work every 
day.

Samour, who is from El Salvador, also tried to put them at ease, poking fun at 
his accent and making a joke. “Now that you understand how long and inefficient 
jury selection is, do you understand why they never show it on Law and Order?” 
he said.

Thirteen people raised their hands when asked if they had a new hardship that 
could prevent them from serving, while others said they had a change of heart 
about being fair or following the law when it comes to sentencing. One would-be 
juror was excused after she left during a break, handing court officials a 
packet of medical documents.

Unlike in individual questioning, attorneys can dismiss potential jurors 
without giving cause during group questioning.

 