
Andrew Lawrence
London

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the many people who I 
expect bulliedAndrew Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/andrew-lawrence> as a young man; without 
you, he would not be one of the funniest and brightest young talents of the UK 
stand-up circuit. Lawrence continues to preview his latest offering, Don't Just 
Do Something - Sit There! this week. Not an act for the easily offended, the 
crux of Lawrence's ire is everything - mortgages, relationships, work and the 
general injustices of life - no detail of modern society is left unturned. His 
shows are wordy soliloquies in which each point has been laboured on and 
processed through Lawrence's unique comic mind to utter perfection, and then 
presented with perfect tone, rhythm and pace.

路 Fat Tuesdays at Salmon & Compass, E1, Tue 1

Comedy Night For Depression Alliance
 London

As someone who has suffered from depression all his adult life, I can assure 
you that it is no laughing matter. But if laughter is the best medicine, then 
tonight's bill could very well be the cure. It features the world's 41st best 
stand-up (according to Channel 4), Stewart Lee (pictured), a man at the peak of 
his powers and without doubt one of the masters of the form. He's joined by the 
wonderful Colin and Fergus, who apply all the classic rules of a double act 
while still seeming fresh, original and downright hilarious. Making up the rest 
of the bill is a cabal of middle-class favourites: Brummie, hairy comic Shazia 
Mirza; salty stand-up Lucy Porter; and camp, effervescent Hal Cruttenden.

路 Union Chapel, N1, Mon 30

The Penny Dreadfuls: Aeneas Faversham Forever
 London

If you like your comedy performed by men in waistcoats with a Victorian slant, 
then roll on up this weekend to the Penny Dreadfuls' new comedy play. The Penny 
Dreadfuls are a sketch collective comprised of three lads who met at Edinburgh 
University, a threesome of talented comedy performers and writers halfway 
between Python and the League Of Gentlemen. Their new show is about terror and 
intrigue in Victorian London, and you can expect to see all their writing and 
performing talents showcased to the max as you experience a truly charming 
Victorian-themed evening, only without the bothersome typhoid and cholera.

路 Greenwich Theatre, SE10, Sat 28

Edinburgh Preview Season At The Wilmington
London

'Tis the season of Edinburgh previews, when acts full of hope and optimism 
test the waters with a live audience to see if this is going to be their year. 
Previews are often a mixed bag: sometimes littered with exposition and 
apologies; other times a glimpse into the early stages of what will surely be 
an award-winning show. Either way, they are an experience. With its cabaret 
seating, The Wilmington Arms is a lovely venue to take in the shows, which is 
why we at the Fix have chosen to present a series of previews there. Sunday's 
double bill of nerds has Southend video shop proprietor Rich Sandling examining 
why video is more important than punk and Andrew "I'm not a Goth" O'Neill 
musing on the history of British industry.

路 Wilmington Arms, EC1, Sun 29
 