
The tragicomic life of Anna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anna-nicole-smith>, the glamour model who 
famously married a stupendously wealthy tycoon 63 years her senior, may seem a 
more likely subject for prurient farce than grand opera.

But, according to the Royal Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> 
House, it is perfect fare for transformation into a piece of lyric theatre, a 
grand musical and dramatic parable for our times.

So it is that one of the most celebrated names of British contemporary music, 
Mark-Anthony Turnage, is writing the story of Anna Nicole Smith as an opera, to 
be staged at Covent Garden in 2011. The libretto will be provided by Richard 
Thomas who, as the co-creator of Jerry Springer the Opera, is no stranger to 
controversy.

"It is not going to be a horrible, sleazy evening," Elaine Padmore, Covent 
Garden's director of opera told the Guardian. "It is not going to be tawdry; it 
is going to be witty, clever, thoughtful and sad.

"In broad outline, it will tell the story of her life, the people who 
influenced her, her progress ... Clearly the story is about a woman who met an 
ancient gentleman in a wheelchair, but it's not going to be a straight 
narrative; choices have been made about significant moments, selecting which 
incidents in her life are to be built up."

There will be no shortage of dramatic material. Smith, born Vickie Lynn Hogan 
in 1967, dropped out of her Texan high school, married a fellow worker at Jim's 
Krispy Fried Chicken - and then transformed herself, via a breast enhancement, 
into a glamour model and pole dancer.

She married J Howard Marshall when he was 89, and she 26. After his death she 
pursued what she argued was her share of her inheritance through the courts, 
fought by her late husband's son. She briefly became the (anti)heroine of her 
own reality TV show; her weight ballooned and she received liposuction. Three 
days after the birth of her daughter, of no certain father, her 20-year-old son 
by her first marriage died; five months later, in 2007, she was dead herself.

"It is not just a documentary about her, but a parable about celebrity and 
what it does to people," said Padmore. "It can be moving, it can be funny and 
it tells universal truths about human frailty.

"It is a very sad story - a larger-than-life American story, as was Puccini's 
Girl of the Golden West. It will be a slice of our times - of America in the 
pre-Obama days."

Padmore likened the work to Zeit-oper, the German subgenre of opera popular in 
the 1920s and 30s, in which socio-political issues of the times were tackled. 
Such works include Ernst Krenek's Jonny Spielt Auf (Jonny Plays On), a 
jazz-inflected tale of Alpine infidelity culminating in a fatal train crash.

Padmore also compared the story to the plot of Donizetti's classic, Lucia di 
Lammermoor, a tale loosely based on the life of a real 17th century Scot, Janet 
Dalrymple. In the opera, Lucia is forced to abandon her lover and enter into a 
politically expedient marriage - but she murders her husband and her lover 
takes his life. "We have Lucia di Lammermoor," said Padmore, "so why not Anna 
Nicole Smith? She also led a diva-like life."

Padmore added: "Just because a life has been in the tabloids does not mean it 
must be treated in a tawdry way on stage. The other way of looking at this is 
to point out that opera suffers from an image of being old, European, archaic. 
New works on popular topics are good: only look at the way composers like 
Philip Glass and John Adams have taken subjects and personalities from the 
news."

The project fits, said Padmore, into the Royal Opera House's policy of staging 
a new opera on the main stage roughly every other year. Its most recent 
premieres have been Harrison Birtwistle's Minotaur, and Thomas Adès' The 
Tempest.

Turnage, 48, is the composer of two previous operas, Greek (1988) and The 
Silver Tassie (2000), for which he won an Olivier award. His music, much of 
which shows a jazz influence, has been performed by British orchestras and has 
been championed by Sir Simon Rattle.

Musician and writer Thomas is best known for his music-theatre work Tourette's 
Diva and for writing Jerry Springer: the Opera, with Stewart Lee, which 
prompted fury from some Christian groups.

The work will be directed by Richard Jones, known for his visually spectacular 
and intellectually searching productions. "It will be a fantastic event for the 
Royal Opera and should appeal to a wide range of audiences," said Padmore.

Opera takes on its times

Mozart, The Marriage of Figaro (1786) Figaro, a servant, outwits his master. 
Napoleon called the original Beaumarchais play "the revolution in action".

Mascagni, Cavalleria rusticana (1890) Illicit love, pregnancy and murder among 
the Sicilian peasantry.

Janácek, Jenufa (1904) Illicit love, pregnancy and murder among the Moravian 
peasantry.

Puccini, Madama Butterfly (1904) Pinkerton, an American officer, marries and 
then abandons Butterfly, a 15-year-old Japanese girl.

Adams, Nixon in China (1987) Nixon and Kissinger confront Mao and Zhou Enlai.

Adès, Powder Her Face (1995) The downfall of the Duchess of Argyll, set in 
1990. Perhaps the only opera to contain an extended fellatio scene.

theguardian.com/charlottehiggins <https://www.theguardian.com/charlottehiggins>
 