
As I write, Best Beloveds, two comedy TV programmes, The Daily Show and The 
Colbert Report, are hosting a non-shouting political rally in Washington and 
outside my New York hotel, Central Park is filling with nippers dressed as a 
variety of demons, ghosts, witches, insects, pirates and cartoon characters. 
It's the Halloween weekend, US political discourse has appropriately crumpled 
into a terrifying shouting match within which anyone can say anything – the 
loonier the better – and there is, of course, at least one witch (retired) on 
the campaign trail. Having just trundled round the country, reading local 
newspapers and meeting regional reporters as I progressed, I am aware that 
conventional politicians are, at best, simply mud-slinging and, at worst, 
dodging arrest and/or releasing whatever witless and scary mouth-noise their 
reptile brain can conjure, secure in the knowledge that they will never have to 
defend any assertion, no matter how manifestly unhinged. Journalistic oversight 
is scant – and seems to come largely from the two light-entertainment shows 
above – and many candidates are being held in seclusion, lest they tell waiting 
reporters that the Liberal Media Elite are controlled by al-Qaida elk (those 
aren't antlers, they're communications antennae), that Obama's healthcare 
reforms cause cancer, that Jesus hates left-handed people – all of whom could 
choose to be right-handed if they really wanted – and that gravity is only a 
myth put about by atheist "scientists" in order to restrict the righteous and 
their natural ability to fly.

This isn't my country, but I am aware that UK politicians borrow all their 
plays (even – if not especially – the cruel and dysfunctional ones) from the 
US. Never have I been more tempted to opt out and join the merry throngs in the 
park, possibly dressed as – why not? – Scooby-Doo.

"Do you think UK politics has plunged into a new nadir of secrecy, sleaze and 
sadistically damaging cuts?" WrrIdunno. "Do you feel that while recreational 
fiction – a vital source of imaginative exercise, energy and companionship – is 
being devalued on all sides, political fiction is setting us adrift in a 
hideous bubble of dangerous crap?" You have Scooby Snacks? Me want Scooby 
Snacks. "You do realise you're not really a cartoon character, right ? You're a 
45-year-old adult. You have responsibilities." Scoobyscoobydoo …

I should, of course, never be trusted when I'm hopping about on the moral high 
ground. I am not a moral person – I am much more comfortable saying that my 
objections to political bullshit are professional. I have spent more than a 
quarter of a century trying to use words in ways that are communicative and 
precise. I have led I can't begin to count how many workshops and one-to-ones 
with the hope and intention of increasing accuracy and fluency among others, 
and have seen how liberating and powerful language can be when operated with 
honesty and generosity. (I know I'm in the fiction business, but honesty of 
approach and an understanding of reality is vital in the writer's relationship 
with the reader: the reader does agree he or she will be lied to, but nobody 
wants their intelligence insulted …) I also know that human beings are 
malleable and porous – subject us to malign and distorted fictions and we do 
not prosper, we become cruel. We can go very, very deeply wrong.

I have also spent more than a quarter of a century defending my corner of the 
arts against ridicule, censorship and cutbacks. As of Monday, I'll be returning 
– slowly – to a country where the arts have gone the way of education, adequate 
healthcare, transport and the rest. The means of communication the electorate 
can use and enjoy are becoming more and more inaccessible while the fantasies 
of those who seek to influence us become more and more powerful. As a reader 
and a writer and a voter and a person, I would rather this were not the case.

Sorry for being glum there, Dear Readers, but I do get tired of the people I 
vote for acting like occupying forces as soon as they gain power and if I don't 
tell you about it – remember, I've been in a lot of railway stations and trains 
in the past weeks – I will end up simply ranting and twitching at strangers in 
public places, which will render them uneasy. And it's not too late – that's 
the thing about imagination: wake it up and feed it and it'll change the world. 
Always.

Meanwhile, my own circumstances are not too gloomy. I am newly 45. (Like the 
pistol – as they delightfully say in Santa Fe …) Which is fine by me, and I am 
scribbling all over the initial manuscript of my novel and swaying, as usual, 
between tentative thoughts that the thing might actually just work and the 
impulse to seek out someone who will beat me severely for even attempting to 
impose upon the brains of others with more of my rancid nonsense. Yes, my last 
blog was all gussied up (not by me) with an air of finality, but you and I know 
that the end of the first draft is barely the beginning of the tinkering, 
fiddling and fretting, the rewrites large and small and frantic and 
middle-of-the-night and despairing and problem-solving and problem-generating – 
the ones that maintain continuity, the ones that adjust backwards for something 
you didn't find out until page 230, the ones that seem just a much better way 
of getting from A to F, the ones suggested by reading work-in-progress to 
audiences of (I must say) remarkably tolerant strangers and the ones which 
simply save me from myself.

And why is it that I can enjoy these happy torments? Because I got an adequate 
education, because I grew up in a house with access to books, was a child who 
could visit my local, well-stocked library and know it was full of wonders, 
unguessed-at beauties, the dry, exciting, papery scent of other worlds, because 
I got into publishing in 1990 when it was (barely) possible to bring out a 
collection of short stories as a first book, because there were magazine and 
anthology opportunities there for me which now no longer exist, because I could 
make ends meet for the first decade during which my writing did not in any way 
support me, because I was immensely lucky and a workaholic.

I would like today's new writers to have the chances I did – better chances 
than I did. I would like today's readers to have more choice, a wider variety 
of voices and subjects and characters. I can't say that I currently think they 
will. I also can't say we are powerless to alter our circumstances – imagining 
change is the first step towards creating it: the first act to reclaim our 
strength is only to think, to practise the habit of thinking, of exercising our 
interior liberty. Onwards.
 