
The development of a nationwide network of Community Learning Champions (CLCs) 
is considered crucial to persuading some of the most disadvantaged and 
underachieving adults to return to learning in order to enhance their lives.

Stephanie Picketts turned her life around through taking part in a creative 
arts project while living in sheltered accommodation. Her success inspired her 
to become a learning champion, and she has helped 30 fellow residents, all 
young homeless people, to attend courses.

"As an ex-resident, and from my own experiences of learning, I have an 
understanding of the barriers young people in this situation may face. When 
told about the CLC programme I recognised an opportunity to encourage, engage 
and motivate other people. It was empowering and inspirational," the 
20-year-old says.

Stephanie is also supporting about a dozen others she has introduced to 
learning, including those with mental health issues. She entered Coventry 
Foyer, a foundation that provides safe, supported housing to young people aged 
16 to 24, after dropping out from university, a decision which led to her 
falling out with her family.

Among those she is supporting is a young woman who is developing photography 
skills. Stephanie explained: "It has made a big difference to her confidence. 
Before she thought of college as unattainable, but now has faith in her 
abilities."

Stephanie is now back living at home and has decided to return to university 
to study for a degree in fine arts. She attributes her change of direction to 
the informal course she took at Foyer, which was run by the environmental 
regeneration charity Groundwork. "The impact was massive," she says. "It was 
the first experience I had of learning being enjoyable and positive."

Stephanie is one of 23 people trained as community learning champions in the 
Coventry area. They have recruited 500 learners through Groundwork's 
partnerships with neighbourhood and women's groups, faith organisations, 
libraries, parent groups and community events.
 