
“It’s been a way of life over the last two years,” sighs Alistair Brownlee as 
he bullet-points the jarring handbrakes on his career sincewinning Olympic 
triathlon gold in Hyde Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/07/london-2012-alistair-brownlee-triathlon>
. The appendix operation in the autumn of 2012. The “really bad” knee injury 
and persistent ankle issue that shortcircuited his training and patience in 
2013. And then this spring – when he had such plans and projects – the problems 
arrived in threes. “Over three weeks I was ill, I pulled my calf twice, and I 
fell over, cut my knee open, and got an infected leg,” he says. “Just little 
things compared to last year, but they slowed me down.”

But Brownlee has good news. The pains and strains have finally gone. The 
favourite for triathlon gold at the Commonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/12/jonny-alistair-brownlee-lead-england-triathlon-team-glasgow-commonwealth-games>
 is in shape to do himself justice. “To be honest, I haven’t – because of 
injuries – been able to put together a normal six-week block of training since 
London 2012 until recently,” he says.

“But now everything is fine. I’m fit and there’s nothing wrong, which is not 
something I’ve said very often in the last few years. The last few weeks have 
gone well.”

Even injured, undertrained and patched up, Brownlee has finished first in five 
of the nine individual triathlons he raced this year and last. No wonder with 
all systems firing again, he believes in his chances in Glasgow.

His biggest challenger – as so often has been the case – will be his younger 
brother Jonny <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathan-brownlee>. The pair 
no longer share a house, as they did before London 2012, but their 35 hours a 
week of training means they spend more waking hours together than many couples. 
“The worst time for Alistair was probably last year,” confides Jonny. “He got 
injured on the track doing a 10km in April and he was hurt all year and he was 
constantly uptight. But he’s fine now.”

Jonny, who won bronze at London 2012 before turning puce and puking up, is 
triathlon’s Mr Consistency. From July 2010 until May 2014 he finished on the 
podium in 21 consecutive elite-level races, an astonishing achievement, until 
two fifth places in Yokohama and then London led to some internal detective 
work.

“This year has been a bit of a strange one,” he admits. “But there’s no 
massive reason for that slight loss of form. I always planned to peak for the 
Commonwealths rather than being very fit at the start of the year and trying to 
sustain it. I also wonder if I trained too hard over the winter because there 
wasn’t much snow in Yorkshire. But I’m getting far, far fitter now, definitely.”

A final training camp in British Triathlon’s high-altitude base in St Moritz, 
where they also prepared for London 2012, went well, and they feel ready for 
whatever Glasgow throws at them. “I raced there a few times as a kid in 
national series races and we were up there in February,” says Alistair. “It 
should be a tough race because there’s not really any flat on the course. It’s 
really hard and hilly.”

Their plan is simple: go out hard on the swim and bike, drop the South African 
dangerman Richard Murray – who excels in running but struggles in the water – 
and make it a thrilling head-to-head contest between the pair of them.

“Murray’s a very good runner,” warns Jonny. “He’s beaten me twice this year, 
and was a world duathlon champion as a junior. He’s not the best swimmer but 
he’s improved. But if he swims a minute down, which he may well do, you might 
not see him at the front of the race.”

Have the brothers thought about crossing the line together, as they once hoped 
to do at London 2012? “We haven’t,” admits Jonny. “If it did happen it would be 
spur of the moment, with 50m to go.” Even then, he knows Alistair is so 
competitive that such a peace offering might be used as a dastardly opportunity 
to sprint clear.

Not so long ago, Alistair also had the grand ambition to double up in the 
triathlon and 10,000m in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/02/alistair-brownlee-commonwealth-games-injuries>
, and with some justification. At London 2012 he ran the 10,000m part of the 
triathlon in 29min 7secs – a time just one second slower than Great Britain’s 
Chris Thompson managed coming 25th in theOlympic 10,000m final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/mo-farah-team-gb-olympic-medals>
. And that was after a 1,500m swim, 40km bike ride, and despite swanning down 
the final straight in Hyde Park swaddled in a union flag.

Then in 2013, off the back of little training, he ran 28:32.48 on his 10,000m 
track debut – just 22.48sec off the time needed for England team for the
Commonwealth Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games>. 
However, the spring injuries meant he never got the chance to qualify. “Those 
injuries changed everything,” says Alistair. “If everything had gone right I 
would have raced the first few World Triathlon Series events and then attempted 
the 10km time. And given a perfect scenario and conditions I would have gone 
close.”

But he knows the time for regrets has passed. “My overwhelming feeling now is 
just being glad to be fit and out there racing,” he says, before adding a final 
warning to his rivals. “I think I can be as good and as fit as I was before.”

He knows, though, that his brother won’t be far away.
 