
When we fill up at the petrol station, we may think about the price of fuel, 
how far that fuel will take us, and possibly even the carbon our journey will 
emit. But how often do we consider the carbon footprint of the road that we 
drive on?

As you pull away from the petrol station, you may not be aware that you are 
driving on a revolutionary road that will make the asphalt under the tyres as 
important as the energy efficiency under the bonnet on Britain's journey to a 
low‑carbon future.

Britvic, Highland Spring and Tarmac are just some of the household names now 
in the low-carbon fast lane thanks to the Carbon Trust's Industrial Energy 
Efficiency Accelerator (IEEA) scheme. The programme is at the vanguard of the 
Carbon Trust's Clean Tech Revolution campaign which aims to help British 
businesses lead the second industrial revolution in the clean tech sector, 
which it says could be worth £127bn by 2015.

The IEEA will target British manufacturing with an investment pot of £15m over 
four years to help innovate low-carbon technologies and energysaving measures. 
These innovations will ultimately be a vital tool in tackling climate change as 
they are disseminated across industry to help Britain reduce carbon emissions 
by 80% by 2050.

Henrietta Stock, technology acceleration manager at the Carbon Trust, says: 
"Industry is responsible for 25% of the UK's total CO2 emissions. It's a big 
problem and it's difficult to deal with. In a manufacturing business, the 
majority of your energy use is in the process of making your particular 
product. Opportunities like more efficient lighting and heating controls which 
apply to your typical high street business aren't as relevant."

The Carbon Trust selected three manufacturing sectors – aggregates, animal 
feed and plastic bottle manufacturing – for a pilot scheme that was completed 
this year. The scheme will now be extended to 20 further sectors which are 
outside the EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) scheme, but still subject to other 
schemes such as the Carbon Reduction Commitment trading scheme, due to be 
introduced in April 2010, Climate Change Agreements and Climate Change Levy.

Aggregates, animal feed and plastic bottle manufacturing sectors together 
produce 3.62m tonnes of CO2 annually.But the Carbon Trust estimates that 
manufacturers in these three sectors could cut energy costs by £80m and reduce 
their carbon emissions by nearly half a million tonnes a year. The pilot phase 
found that up to 90% of energy demand was used in manufacturing, but the carbon 
output of these processes can be reduced by an average of 28%.

Aggregates annually produce 2.6m tonnes of CO2 and account for an astonishing 
1.7% of UK industry carbon emissions. Some 35% of this comes from transporting 
the aggregates from quarry to construction site, and 25% comes from asphalt 
manufacture alone.

Stock says: "Asphalt is a good example of a medium-scale energy user where the 
energy requirements of the manufacturing process are not very well understood."

Hanson Quarry Products is one of the UK's largest suppliers of asphalt and 
includes the Highways Agency among its clients. The company spends around £14m 
on asphalt production a year. Funding from the Carbon Trust's accelerator 
programme has enabled the company to continue its work on energy efficiency, 
says Martin Crow, Hanson's head of environment.

"As energy becomes more expensive," Crow says, "we have to find ways of saving 
money while tackling environmental considerations too, as customers become 
increasingly interested in the embedded carbon."

Embedded carbon is becoming of increasing concern with retailers further up 
the supply chain. This summer Tesco began adding carbon footprint labels on its 
dairy products, and more recently the supermarket gave the Carbon Trust 
accelerator scheme its backing.

Stock says: "All three of the sectors we targeted in our pilot phase – 
aggregates, plastic bottle manufacture and animal feed – impact on the carbon 
footprint of your pint of milk.

"Animal feed manufacture takes raw materials like wheat and other grains and 
turns them into a pellet that delivers just the right nutrients to dairy cows 
to maximise their production of milk. "Plastic bottle manufacture often takes 
place on the same site as the dairy, filling the bottles immediately with the 
milk. Transporting bottles of milk to the supermarket wears down roads over 
time, along with all the other traffic. This creates a demand for asphalt to 
repair and replace road surfaces."

The Food and Drink Federation and Dairy UK – both heavy users of plastic 
bottles and animal feed – have also given the accelerator scheme their backing. 
Energy consumption for the plastic bottle sector is around 755GWh with carbon 
emissions of approximately 400,000 tonnes of CO2. The Carbon Trust accelerator 
pilot found that new heating techniques could make up to 75% energy savings.

The animal feed industry, which has a UK carbon footprint of some 620,000 
tonnes of CO2 per year, has also embraced the accelerator scheme. Nigel 
Hillyer, from Carrs Billington, says that the Carbon Trust has provided 
valuable expertise to give the animal feed manufacturer "a fresh perspective" 
on potential ways to reduce its annual £2.5m energy costs.

"We already work at 80%-90% operational efficiency. It's about cost savings, 
but also from a moral position: customers are going to be asking what is the 
carbon footprint of what they are buying, and the farmer is then going to ask 
the feed supplier. It's a win-win situation with carbon: if you make carbon 
savings, then you make financial savings from reduced high-cost energy inputs."

As the government drives the UK towards 80% decarbonisation, industry will 
have to cut back its emissions by 21% by 2022. Reducing the carbon footprint of 
everything from the roads we drive on to the pint of milk we buy will all play 
a part on the revolutionary road to Britain's low‑carbon future, says Stock of 
the Carbon Trust.

She says: "The IEEA is a catalyst that brings whole industry sectors together 
to make step-changes in energy efficiency in a way that individual companies 
acting alone struggle to make. It also builds capacity and skills in energy 
management in those industries which help position them better for making 
long-term deep cuts in emissions."

Tonnes of advice

The accelerator scheme identifies areas for energy saving in the aggregates 
industry

Hanson is one of the UK's largest suppliers of aggregates and construction 
materials. Its quarry division spends around £30m on energy costs, and up to 
half of that is spent on the energy-intensive production of asphalt – one of 
the world's most versatile building materials that covers around 95% of roads, 
pavements, car parks and airport runways.

At Hanson, the average energy consumption is 110kWh per tonne of asphalt, but 
at its most energy-efficient plant in Penderyn, south Wales, just 70kWh is 
required to make one tonne. Hanson runs 40 plants around the country which 
produce an average of around 160 tonnes of asphalt an hour, with varying 
degrees of efficiency.

Heating aggregate accounts for more than 60% of all energy use on an asphalt 
manufacturing plant. The aggregate is first heated to dry it and allow it to 
bind with hot bitumen, a product derived from crude oil and traditionally 
heated to around 175C. The resulting "hot mix" has to be kept at a high 
temperature during transportation and while it is laid on roads and pavements.

Martin Crow, the head of environment at Hanson, says finding ways to increase 
burner efficiency, improving insulation so that heat is not lost during 
manufacturing and keeping aggregate dry before the production process, will be 
key in reducing energy demand across its 40 UK plants.

He says: "The accelerator scheme has provided valuable expertise in 
identifying areas where we can reduce energy demands. The project was to prove 
to the industry where we can make energy savings but backed by a bit of science 
rather than a gut feeling.

"Most of our asphalt goes to the Highways Agency and local authorities, and 
we're finding that clients are increasingly asking us about the energy 
efficiency of a particular site."

Hanson has also supported the Mineral Products Association in working with the 
Highways Agency on a database that will enable companies to calculate the 
carbon footprint of a section of asphalt, to meet this customer demand.

Mat Newton, energy manager, says that energy efficiency is becoming 
increasingly important industrywide as energy prices increase and environmental 
policies are enforced. He says: "One of the main aims of joining the 
accelerator was to raise awareness across the industry of the technology 
available and finding new uses for technology, sharing information and 
developing best practice. Sustainability credentials are important in the 
industry."

Clean tech spec

Carbon Trust accelerator findings and aims for the aggregates industry There 
are some 1,300 quarries in the UK producing £3bn aggregate products every year. 
The aggregates industry annually produces 2.6m tonnes of CO 2, accounting for 
about 1.7% of UK industry carbon emissions.

Stage one of the accelerator pilot found that in the aggregates industry:
● Transport accounts for 35% of CO2 emissions in the sector
● Asphalt production is responsible for 25% of emissions.

Stage two will look at:
● Development of a market for lower temperature-mixed asphalt. Mixing asphalt 
at lower temperatures could save 80% of energy required for a traditional 
hot-asphalt mix.
● Heat recovery for preheating combustion air systems. Some 12% of the input 
energy is wasted as hot air which exits from the stack. This is relatively 
low-grade heat and hot air which can contain particulates.
● Advanced burner control on the
asphalt plant. Between 1%-5% of input heat is lost as unburnt or partially 
burnt fuel. An advanced burner control system with oxygen measurement could 
control fuel ratio and increase energy efficiency by improving automation.
● Evaluating new low-carbon vehicles versus conventional in‑quarry vehicles. 
More than 20% of the emissions from the aggregates sector relate to material 
movement. Vehicle emissions could be reduced through hybrid technologies, 
suitable for the quarry environment.
 