
A funny thing happened to me on the way to autumn. I started to like cricket. 
At the beginning it was just the occasional diversion in an afternoon's channel 
surfing. Before long QVC and the Dating Channel had to wait.

By the fourth Test I had an appointment to view, settling into the sofa for an 
entire day, texting cricket lovers and, wait till you hear this, poring over a 
range of papers to read what the game's great philosophers had to say about it.

All my life I've been at best indifferent to this strange affair. It was slow, 
boring and incomprehensible with a nether, nerdy world of clammy-handed 
obsessives. But then it happened and the moment was pure Mills and Boon. "Miss 
Jones, take off your glasses - why Miss Jones - you're beautiful." The very 
things I'd dismissed were the fantastic things I'd missed and now me and Miss 
Jones, we got a thing going on.

Something else happened over the summer. During the series I found myself 
supporting England - not vaguely, not diffidently but actively and, last 
weekend, achingly.

All my sporting supporting life I have wanted England to lose. I'm not proud 
of it; in fact, intellectually, I'm rather ashamed but, as a mate once said 
when he told me of his affair, "I can't help how I feel." A lifetime's fear, 
loathing, jealousy and envy are squished up in a deep fried ball of sporting 
bile and wishful schadenfreude . I am certain that, like me, most Scots would 
support a Taliban XI against England.

I know it's pathetic but at least I know it's pathetic. It's downright puerile 
and, to many, it is utterly incomprehensible. Why take such delight in the 
sporting failings of the land of Dickens, the Beatles, my wife and our four 
little girls?

It's all down to our painfully narrow historical horizons. Every ball I kicked 
as a kid, I was Kenny Dalglish scoring the winning goal against the Auld Enemy 
("Tonight Cat, I want to be Kenny Miller"). If we couldn't stick it to them, 
somebody else had to. England's 1973 World Cup debacle against Poland still 
flutters my heart like an old lover. A friend, one of Britain's sharpest comedy 
writers, an urbane sophisticate but militant football Anglophobe, will recite 
the great Peter Jones radio commentary with misty-eyed glee.

Don't get me wrong, I'm all for British success. When the coxless four won 
rowing gold in Athens I was there with Radio Five Live and had a real swell of 
pride during the anthem. But on that occasion it was my anthem too. The 
Scotland/England thing is different.

As I try to explain to English friends, "You are Man Utd, we are Man City." 
The fact that they then say, "No you're not, you're Oldham Athletic," is 
immaterial. They clock it. It's a football thing. Oh yes, and a rugby thing 
too. Only last week the Daily Record referred to England's magnificent World 
Cup-winning side as "Sir Clive's Smarmy Army". Sometimes it's a class thing.

But did the cricket change me? Was the nasty little chip lifted from the nasty 
little chap? I tested my new found ecumenism last Wednesday night. I tried. 
Believe me, I tried. But as David Healy scored - just like the times when Chris 
Waddle, Stuart Pearce, David Batty or Gareth Southgate missed and when David 
Seaman turned to stone - I involuntarily leapt out of my chair and punched the 
air. The familiar, forgotten feelings rushed back and then the exiled Scots 
text-fest bleeped into action.

What's different about Test cricket? We don't play you and, if we are any 
good, we play for you and occasionally captain you - witness Douglas Jardine 
and Mike Denness. However, I was in Glasgow during the week trumpeting my born- 
again Anglophilia to anyone who would listen. I was laughed out of town.

I've still got ongoing emotional issues but I've made personal progress. I've 
grown up a little and I'll certainly beat the deportation rap. At last I pass 
Norman Tebbit's cricket test.

China's charms must not dazzle us

I bumped into the FA's executive director David Davies at Heathrow this week. 
He was enthusing about his trip to China with Sir Bobby Robson and Tony Blair. 
Sir Bobby went down a storm, he said, and all were treated royally.

Of course they were. In 1989 I went to lunch at Edward Heath's Salisbury home. 
I'll never forget the chummy picture of Ted and Mao in pride of place on the 
Steinway. Nice snap - especially if you're into posing with sadistic sexual 
predators and mass murderers.

I suppose it is right to encourage links in whatever sphere but I hope that by 
the time Beijing 2008 comes around we remember to look behind the smiles and 
beyond the five-star treatment. I hope the soft-focus schmaltz about the 
Olympic dreamwill not distract us from what Amnesty International describes as 
"serious and widespread human rights violations perpetrated across the 
country", a land where you get 15 years' hard labour for posting a "subversive" 
poem on the internet.

As for those who suffer on a daily basis - lawyers, journalists, Aids 
activists, mothers demanding justice for children slaughtered in Tiananmen 
Square, religious and ethnic minorities - I'm sure they're just as excited by 
the modern pentathlon as the rest of us. But let's not see or hear no evil just 
because thousands of beautiful Chinese children form the shape of a dragon and 
trill angelically that we are one world united in sport. Think of the 
orphanages. Think of the forced abortions.

Soldier of fortune

Brian Carney is a wonderful rugby league player who has been playing for Great 
Britain for two years and has now been named vice-captain for the forthcoming 
Tri-Nations series. I am confused. He was born in Cork, has already played for 
Ireland and will, as a matter of principle, not sing the national anthem any 
more than he would "expect some Englishman to sing Sinne Fianna Fail ". If, as 
he suggests, principle is at stake here, why is he representing a foreign 
country?

Rooney true blue to a fault

The warning signs were there when Wayne Rooney accepted his BBC Young Sports 
Personality of the Year award with a mouthful of gum? Why on earth no one with 
a basic sense of etiquette got him to take it out of his mouth and stick it 
under his seat, I do not know. Now David Beckham has suffered another kind of 
mouthful during the Northern Ireland match.

The England captain's interviews may be so faltering that he makes Michael 
Owen sound like Winston Churchill but even Beckham did not deserve that 
four-letter fusillade. I don't imagine he's been spoken to like that since Mrs 
Beckham last checked the text messages on his mobile. After that unfortunate 
but irresistible contretemps Wayne was on a roll. He went on to turn the 
half-time dressing-room air blue. He always said he would be Blue till he dies 
but no one thought he had that in mind.

Sir Alex Ferguson says you need players with a "bit of heart". A bit of brain 
would help as well.
 