
At least 30 soldiers and a boy were reported killed as heavy fighting erupted 
between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces over the separatist region of 
Nagorno-Karabakh. The fighting was one of the worst outbreaks since the end of 
a full-scale war over the region in 1994.


Since 1994, mountainous Nagorno-Karabakh – officially part of Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> – has been under the control of 
local ethnic Armenian forces and the Armenian military. Armenian forces also 
occupy several areas outside Nagorno-Karabakh proper. The sides are separated 
by a demilitarised buffer zone, but small clashes have broken out frequently.

Each side blamed the other for Saturday’s escalation. In a statement, 
Azerbaijan’s defence ministry said that 12 of its soldiers “became shahids” – 
Muslim martyrs – and that one of its helicopters had been shot down. The 
statement also claimed that more than 100 Armenian soldiers had been killed or 
wounded and that six tanks and 15 artillery positions had been destroyed.

If Azerbaijan is a democracy, why were we imprisoned for our views? | Intigam 
Aliyev, Rasul Jafarov, Anar Mammadli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/azerbaijan-democracy-imprisoned-political-prisoners-president-america>
The Armenian president, Serzh Sargsyan, told his national security council 
that 18 Armenian soldiers had been killed and 35 wounded.Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> had earlier claimed to have 
inflicted heavy damage on Azerbaijani forces, without giving figures. A 
statement from the Nagorno-Karabakh defence ministry claimed more than 200 
Azerbaijani soldiers were killed, but there was no corroboration for that 
figure.

“This is the most wide-scale military action that Azerbaijan has tried to 
carry out since the establishment of the 1994 ceasefire regime,” Sargsyan said.

David Babayan, a spokesman for Nagorno-Karabakh’s separatist president, said a 
boy of about 12 had been killed and two other children wounded in a Grad 
missile barrage by Azerbaijani forces. He also characterised the fighting as 
the worst since 1994.

The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, urged all sides to cease firing and 
“show restraint”, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov was quoted as saying by 
Russian news agencies. Russia’s foreign and defence ministers had contacted 
their Azerbaijani and Armenian counterparts in the hope of stabilising the 
situation, the ministries said.

“The situation along the entire length of the line of opposition between 
Karabakhi and Azerbaijani armed forces continues to be extremely difficult,” 
Armenian defence ministry spokesman Artsrun Hovhannisyan told Associated Press.

Years of negotiations mediated by the Organisation for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe have brought little progress in resolving the territorial 
dispute.

The negotiation efforts are led by a troika of envoys from the US, Russia and 
France. On Saturday, the envoys jointly issued a statement calling on both 
sides “to stop shooting and take all necessary means to stabilise the situation 
on the ground”.

Armenian forces also occupy several areas outside Nagorno-Karabakh. The sides 
are separated by a demilitarised buffer zone, but both claim frequent 
violations by the other.

The Armenian defence ministry said Azerbaijan had used aircraft, tanks and 
artillery to try to make inroads into Nagorno-Karabakh and that “Azerbaijani 
authorities bear all responsibility for the unprecedentedly supercharged 
situation”.

The Azerbaijani defence ministry said the fighting began when Armenian forces 
fired mortars and large-calibre artillery shells across the frontline. Ministry 
spokesman Vagif Dargyakhly told Associated Press that more than 120 shots had 
been fired, some of which hit civilian residential areas.
 