
Brian Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/apr/04/brian-cox-observer-profile>
: Science funding

Do you plan to maintain Britain's science budget below the European average?

We can be proud that British scientists maintain their long-standing position 
at the top of the European league tables. While it would be irresponsible to 
announce a future science budget before the election (we do not have access to 
the government books), we have said that we would allocate a multi-year Science 
and Research Budget to provide a stable investment climate for the Research 
Councils.

We would also postpone the Research Excellence Framework. The government's 
plan to link university funding to research impact has angered a lot of 
academics. There may be some disciplines – like engineering – where impact is 
appropriate. But there are real questions about how accurately it can be 
measured, how well it applies to each discipline, and what effect it might have 
on blue skies research. If we cannot find an impact measure which is robust and 
accepted by the academic community, then we will not proceed.

Finally, we think it's important to enable the private sector to create more 
high-tech jobs from our research discoveries. That's why we will refine the R&D 
tax credit, establish an investment bank for green technologies, target 
priority export markets and reverse the most damaging part of Labour's national 
insurance rise.

Alternative medicine

If the balance of evidence suggests that a treatment does not perform any 
better than placebo, should it be supported by the NHS?

It is right that taxpayers' money is used on treatments that have evidence to 
demonstrate their benefits. Indeed it would be wholly irresponsible to spend 
public money on treatments that have no evidence to support their claims.

Simon Singh: Libel

What will your party do to reduce the chilling effect of our libel laws on 
science? Currently there is no statutory public interest defence, so scientists 
risk running the gauntlet of London's High Court if they publish material they 
believe to be in the public interest, but that a major corporation or litigious 
charlatan believes to be libellous.

I welcomed the formation of the campaign for libel reform and the Court of 
Appeal's decision on Simon's case. We are committed to review and reform libel 
laws because we want to protect freedom of speech, reduce costs and discourage 
libel tourism. We have already discussed options for reform with Simon and 
others, and look forward to continuing that discussion in the next parliament.

Climate change/Energy

Should nuclear power be part of our country's strategy for reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions? How soon can we bring new plants online?

Nuclear power must form part of our future plans for energy security. We want 
to clear the way for new nuclear power stations, provided they receive no 
public subsidy, but Labour's long-standing refusal to take a decision means 
that new capacity will probably not be ready until the end of the decade. We 
also want to go further by helping people to go green. We will create a Green 
Deal, giving every home up to £6,500 worth of energy improvement measures paid 
for out of savings made on fuel bills.

David Nutt: Drug policy

To what extent should drug policy be based on scientific evidence? What 
evidence, if any, would you require to declassify a drug?

Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/science/drugs> policy, like all policies, 
should have a basis in evidence. We have no desire or intention of ignoring 
scientific advice. There may be times when ministers decide to take account of 
other considerations. What's important is that we maintain robust guidelines 
covering the treatment of scientific advice in government.

Animal testing

Is animal testing necessary? Are the ethical concerns outweighed by the 
benefits? How would you like to see regulations on animal testing change under 
your government, if at all?

In an ideal world we would not need animal testing, but we could not stop it 
today without halting important scientific research. We want to work to reduce 
the use of animals in scientific procedures. Many British scientists and 
businesses are already working to refine, reduce and ultimately replace the use 
of animals. We would work with European and other international partners to 
encourage those "three Rs".

Petra Boynton: <http://www.drpetra.co.uk/blog/> Public health

How will your party ensure public health/education campaigns are underpinned 
by evidence, and how will you evaluate their success? PR companies are 
increasingly influential in directing both the content and delivery of public 
campaigns, frequently at the expense of expertise from scientists, healthcare 
providers and academics.

I think we can learn a lot from countries like Sweden, Finland and the 
Netherlands where they seem to have a better record of monitoring the impact of 
public health policies. We need to embrace this good practice, and go further. 
We will mandate the publication of results from all national and local public 
health strategies online, along with tools which allow people to compare and 
benchmark performance. Wherever possible, we also want to ensure that national 
public health initiatives are funded on the basis of results.  We think this 
will encourage an innovative approach to public health campaigns – potentially 
helping to "nudge" people in the right direction.

Genetic engineering/Stem cell research

Should Britain be at the forefront of research in these areas? What benefits 
do you believe such research will bring for society?


Britain is leading the way not just in areas like genetics and stem cell 
research but also in areas like synthetic biology and nanotechnology. We must 
stay at the forefront of research so that we have the chance to create the 
jobs, treatments and consumer products that support our quality of life. The 
last Conservative government established the Foresight programme to identify 
new opportunities early on. David Cameron has rightly said that he wants the 
next Conservative government to act early, sensitively and intelligently so 
that scientific research can move forward within the boundaries set by 
parliament.

Ben Goldacre: <https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/badscience> 
Pharmaceutical regulation

Do you believe pharmaceutical companies should be forced to publish all the 
research data they have on the potential benefits and harms of drugs they 
manufacture?

It is vital that pharmaceutical companies provide the MHRA 
<http://www.mhra.gov.uk/> and Nice <http://www.nice.org.uk/> with all the data 
and information to ensure that the safety and clinical effectiveness of 
medicines can be swiftly and thoroughly assessed. However, a more important 
issue is the speed at which medicines reach patients, and that is why we have 
pledged to speed up the Nice process.

Pandemic readiness

Do you believe the swine flu pandemic posed a significant risk to Britain? 
What action would your government take if a similar situation emerged in the 
future?

Yes it did pose a risk. We would establish a much more robust public health 
infrastructure to deal with events like this. One of the big problems with 
swine flu was the confusion among the public about what official advice was. 
Our plans to give much more responsibility to local directors of public health 
should make a big difference on this.
 