


1. 30 St Mary Axe (the "Gherkin"), London <http://www.30stmaryaxe.com>

Just when it was assumed there was nothing left to do with skyscrapers except 
build them ever taller, Norman Foster (and his many collaborators) reinvented 
the typology as a giant vegetable. Despite the nickname, there's a refined 
beauty to the building. Opened in 2004, it pure, complete geometry comes to a 
triumphant conclusion in the giant glass cloche on top. The funny shape is far 
from arbitrary, though. This is a model of energy efficiency. An innovative 
natural ventilation system draws fresh air (warm in winter, cool in summer) in 
and up through six shafts spiralling round the building. The triangulated 
structure, meanwhile, enables virtually clear floors of office space inside, 
with interesting views up and down the shafts. The top-floor circular bar and 
restaurant is the best view in London.

Not open to the public



2. Lloyd's of London <http://www.lloyds.com>

The giant mobile phones and designer stubble of the 1980s City boom might seem 
antiquated, but Richard Rogers' radical office building, opened in 1986, still 
looks ahead of its time. The inside-out design never caught on, but in Lloyd's 
it made for a thrilling machine-like exterior – glass lifts, brushed steel 
cladding, exposed ducts and bespoke engineering details. The interior, 
meanwhile, is clear, simple and flexible. The central atrium is a glorious 
space, suffused with natural light and monastic calm, despite the buzzing 
activity of the resident insurance brokers. The inclusion of an 18th-century 
interior by Robert Adam on the 11th floor is a delightfully surreal touch.

Open by prior arrangement only, 020-7327 6586



3. Eden Project, Cornwall <http://www.edenproject.com>

Buckminster Fuller invented the geodesic dome – a lightweight shell made up of 
simple geometric elements – in the late 1940s, but it took another half-century 
before someone thought of covering a disused Cornish quarry with it. The 
invention of computers and lightweight materials helped. Using a hexagonal 
tubular-steel grid and pillows of transparent ETFE – a plastic that is 99% 
lighter than glass – Nicholas Grimshaw's collection of eight domes to mark the 
millennium lets the plants take centre stage.

01726 811911



4. Ruskin Library, University of Lancaster 
<http://www.lancs.ac.uk/users/ruskinlib>

Reconciling the abstraction of modernism with the historicism championed by 
John Ruskin, Richard MacCormac's powerful and sensual 1998 creation is mindful 
of the power of symbol and metaphor. The curved, protective walls, ringed by 
a small moat, enclose a space that's both church-like and ship-like. The Ruskin 
archive is housed in a building within the building, a double-height oak-framed 
box with panels of red plaster that "floats" between canal-like corridors 
running either side. Glass and slate panels in the floor evoke Ruskin's beloved 
Venice. For a small building, it's crammed with sensual delights.

01524 593587



5. Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, University of East Anglia, Norwich 
<http://www.scva.org.uk>

Norman Foster's engineering-led problem-solving ability produced in 1978 an 
arts building that is simplicity itself. It is a 130m-long box, open at both 
ends, and that's about it. The genius lies in the double frame of tubular 
steel, a system of prefabricated elements assembled like a Meccano set on-site. 
Foster tucked away all the extra bits – toilets, services, etc – in the space 
between these inner and outer skins, creating a clear, open interior for 
exhibitions and educational space augmented by a flexible, external cladding 
system. Compared to lumbering buildings of the past, this opened up an era of 
space-age lightness – it literally weighs a fraction of conventional structures.

01603 593199



6. Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh <http://www.scottish.parliament.uk>

In an age of attention-grabbing icons, Catalan architect Enric Miralles 
instead crafted a building "sitting in and growing out of the land of 
Scotland". Now the fuss about the cost has died down, Miralles' 2004 creation 
has been recognised as an enduring work of art. Miralles created a 
free-associative language of national forms here, drawing on inspiration such 
as upturned fishing boats and Mackintosh's flower paintings.

0131-348 5200



7. Storm Water Pumping Station, Isle of Dogs, London

What could have been an insignificant shed in Docklands sets a standard of 
civic virtue few other buildings measure up to. This 1988 building is 
postmodernism without the irony. The architectural language draws on everything 
from ancient Egypt onwards, but there's a purpose to these elements – the "jet 
engine" is an extraction fan, for example – and under the hand of 
philosopher-architect John Outram, they're combined into a complex, allusive 
narrative of storms, floods and nature.

Not open to the public 



8. Blue House, east London

Taking its cues from the language of pop culture as much as high art, this 
small but influential work, built from off-the-shelf materials, speaks of a 
more playful and relaxed alternative to the prevailing perfectionist modernist 
mainstream. You could call it postmodernism, but its designers, Fashion
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> Taste, 
wouldn't. The cartoony "house" shape on the facade, with regimented windows 
above, signify the building's live-work function like an advertising billboard, 
and while the exterior gives little indication of the spatial richness inside, 
it says plenty about the designers' personality, and their belief that 
architecture should have personality too.

Not open to the public



9. Selfridges, Birmingham <http://www.selfridges.com>

Strutting into Birmingham's Bullring like a catwalk model at a working men's 
club, Future Systems' freeform design reinvented the department store and 
revitalised the whole city. The exterior is thrillingly eye-catching – a 
curvaceous, figure-hugging blue number studded with aluminium discs, like giant 
sequins. But the 2003 building also caters to modern retail demands – there are 
virtually no windows so as to maximise display space inside. The central 
atrium, meanwhile, clad in sci-fi white plastic, with a ground-floor cafe, 
provides the perfect space for people-watching.

0800 123400



10. Kielder Observatory, Northumberland <http://www.kielderobservatory.org>

Architecture plays second fiddle to nature in this harmonious ensemble. Built 
in the most sparsely inhabited part of England, where the night sky has minimum 
light pollution, this strange wooden ship of an observatory does all it can to 
reduce its impact on the landscape. Opened in 2008, it is powered by solar 
panels and a wind turbine and its workings are low-tech. A place to consider 
the cosmos and our place in it.

07805 638469
 