
Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> had made the 
Australian Open his own with three wins in four years but his 26-match unbeaten 
sequence here was ended yesterday when Marat Safin took him off at the knees in 
five stupendous sets.

The American knew when he came the pressure was on, with three other reigning 
grand slam champions - Juan Carlos Ferrero, Roger Federer and Andy Roddick - 
arriving here with solid belief that his days were numbered. In the end it was 
the Russian, another young player, who brought him down.

At the beginning of the new millennium Safin had all but destroyed Pete 
Sampras's luminous career with a brutal straight-sets win in the US Open final. 
Sampras returned two years later to defeat Agassi at Flushing Meadows for his 
14th and final grand slam victory and the 33-year-old Agassi, holder of eight 
major titles, may not be done yet.

Asked if he would be back in Melbourne next year he said: "I have no plans to 
do otherwise." But it felt like the end of an era. Agassi took a little extra 
time to bow to the four corners of the court and wave farewell: "You never know 
when it's your last, so you want to say goodbye properly."

His wife Steffi Graf, sitting next to his long-time trainer, Gil Reyes, gave 
nothing away. No doubt part of her would love to see him win again, at Roland 
Garros, Wimbledon, Flushing Meadows or even back here. But it seems unlikely 
now, and he may join her in retirement later this year.

Agassi's serve has always been an immensely under-rated weapon but it never 
had the quality or power of Sampras's delivery. And last night it was the Safin 
serve - 33 aces in total - which gave the Russian the edge. Like Sampras he 
cruised through some games without expending too much energy and, although 
Safin, 24 this week, lost the plot in the fourth set, he came back from the 
brink of self-destruction to win 7-6, 7-6, 5-7, 1-6, 6-3 in three hours 42 
minutes.

Apart from that fourth set, when Safin's Russian core imploded and he railed 
against the perceived injustice of dropping a two-sets lead, he played, as he 
had in his five-set quarter-final victory over Roddick, with astonishing 
self-control and unbending self-belief. Safin has smashed more rackets than 
most but now, apart from one mini-tirade at the umpire and the clattering of 
one ball into the net after a point was lost, he was admirably restrained.

To be sure he mumbled and grumbled between points when Agassi was in the 
ascendancy, yet it was possible to believe his conversation with himself was 
constructive rather than a long rant about the world and its iniquities. When 
the fifth set began he had calmed himself and was seeing matters with cold 
clarity rather than through a red mist.

And it was Agassi who faltered. Five times previously in grand slam events, 
most famously against Andrei Medvedev in the 1999 French Open final, the 
American had come back to win after losing the first two sets. It seemed he 
might do it again until, in the fourth game of the final set, he missed a 
bread-and-butter forehand across court to go 3-1 down. Tiredness seeped into 
his limbs and, when Safin served for the match at 5-3, Agassi's resistance had 
all but vanished. A backhand down the line - so often Agassi's speciality - 
finished him off.

"I just could not feel any better. This was the best match of my whole life," 
said Safin, the 2002 runner-up here - the year Agassi missed - who began the 
fortnight ranked world No86, having lost most of last year through injury. He 
has two days to prepare for the final - "time to have a few beers to loosen up 
the muscles".

Whatever happens on Sunday, men's tennis, as vibrant as it has been for some 
time, is much the richer for having Safin back and contesting major honours.
 