
It is a list of guaranteed to gladden the hearts of anyone who thinks they 
have left it too late to write their first book. Baby boomers, including 
Sebastian Barry, Keggie Carew, Francis Spufford and Alice Oswald have swept the 
board of category winners for the 2016Costa book awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/costabookaward>.

Celebrating books across five categories – novel, first novel, children’s 
fiction, poetry and biography – the Costa awards pit the winners of each 
category against each other for the overall book of the year award, to be 
announced this year on 31 January.

Spufford, 52, who won the first novel award for Golden Hill, a vivid evocation 
of 18th-century New York described by the judges as a “dazzlingly original tale 
[heralding] a bold, invigorating new voice in fiction”, said cowardice had kept 
him from tackling fiction despite his award-winning career in other genres.

“I had the sense of fiction as the form in which you are most likely to expose 
your inadequacies in human experience and understanding,” he told the Guardian. 
Joking that publishing a novel in his early 50s was “more selfish than a 
midlife crisis”, Spufford said older novelists had advantages over younger 
rivals. “By now, you contain really quite a lot of distilled experience and 
that is to your advantage over people 20 years younger. But you do have to be 
able to remember what it was like to be younger than you are now.”

Carew, who has already made her mark as a fine artist, scooped the biography 
award with her debut Dadland, a memoir-cum-detective story about her father, 
Tom Carew. She said her late start as a writer was “a case of arrested 
development”, adding: “It is a debut book, but it is the book for me. I have a 
shed-full of stuff, but I always knew this was [the one] I was supposed to 
write.”

Described by the judges as “hilarious and heartbreaking”, Carew’s memoir 
follows her quest to uncover the truth about Tom as he descends into dementia. 
A law unto himself, she discovered that the man in whose “gravitational field” 
she grew up had been a Bulldog Drummond-style action man. Serving as a member 
of the elite Special Operations Executive, he had worked behind enemy lines in 
France and Burma during the second world war.

The 59-year-old said Dadland had taken years to write. “I stopped at one point 
and threw the first draft away. I had a really clear idea of what I wanted to 
do, but it was like grappling with a wild octopus bringing all the strands 
together.” Asked what advice she would give others starting out as writers, she 
advised: “I would say, ‘Don’t do it, it’s hell!’”

Though Carew was the oldest of the first-timers on the list, she was not the 
oldest overall: Irish novelistSebastian Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastian-barry>, now 61, took that 
accolade, winning novel of the year for Days Without End, about two teenage 
comrades - one Irish and one American - who get caught up in the civil and 
“Indian” wars.

The novel, praised in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/28/days-without-end-by-sebastian-barry-review>
 as “a work of staggering openness; its startlingly beautiful sentences … so 
capacious that they are hard to leave behind, its narrative so propulsive that 
you must move on”, puts Barry in the running for his second overall Costa win.

The Secret Scripture was Costa book of the year in 2008, and even before the 
category winners were announced, the Dublin-born playwright and novelist was 
bookies’ 2-1 favourite to take the overall prize for 2016 at the end of the 
month.

“It knocks your socks off every time, even in your 60s,” he said when it was 
shortlisted in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/22/costa-book-award-2016-shortlists-dominated-by-female-writers-rose-tremain-maggie-o-farrell-sarah-perry>
. “Winning the Costa changed my life. I was able to send my kids to university 
with that prize. To be at the cadet stage again, that is so exciting.”

Children’s book winner Brian Conaghan, who won with The Bombs That Brought Us 
Together, offers hope to unpublished writers with piles of rejection slips from 
literary agents and publishers, having received more than 200 refusals for his 
debut When Mr Dog Bites, which was published in 2014. The book went on to be 
shortlisted for the Carnegie medal.

Years as a frustrated unpublished writer had strengthened him, Conaghan told 
the Scottish Book Trust last year. “I spent years getting rejection after 
rejection - basically being told my work was rank rotten – so I’m pretty immune 
to reviews good or bad,” he said. His latest book was described by Costa judges 
as “a necessary take on modern life in extraordinary circumstances”.

Alice Oswald, 50, completed the five category winners, taking the poetry award 
with her seventh collection, Falling Awake. It explores life’s losing struggle 
with the gravity of nature and is designed to be read aloud. “She finds words 
for encounters with nature that ordinarily defy language,” wrote Observer
reviewer Kate Kellaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/24/falling-awake-alice-oswald-review-nature-notes-from-frontier-of-language>
.

All five writers receive £5,000 and are now in the running for the Costa book 
of the year, worth £30,000 and announced on 31 January.
 