
Two of the favourites for the Australian Open were forced to dig deep to 
survive gruelling third round ties Down Under, on a day in which eighth seed 
Albert Costa was sent tumbling out.

Costa fell to fellow Spaniard Felix Mantilla, a player he has beaten seven 
times in nine attempts, 3-6, 6-3, 4-6, 6-1, 6-3.

Fourth seed Juan Carlos Ferrero fought through the pain barrier in a five-set 
struggle with Fabrice Santoro before winning 4-6, 6-3, 4-6, 6-2, 7-5, while 
second seed Andre Agassi toiled to a four-set victory over Nicolas Escude.

Ferrero had to twice battle back from a set down to seal victory in a match 
lasting almost four hours.

"In the first three sets, I felt some pain in my adductor because I have had a 
few problems there," he said.

"It was because of this I was a little frustrated when I lost the first and 
third sets.

"But I served unbelievably in the fifth set. I think that was the key. I won 
all my service games easy in the fifth set and I was close all the time to 
breaking his serve," he added, having won 91% of first-serve points in the 
deciding set.

He plays 18-year-old Croatian Mario Ancic for a place in the quarter-finals on 
Sunday after the Croatian beat Australian qualifier Peter Luczak 2-6, 7-6, 6-4, 
6-2.

"I have never played against him. I only saw him play Roger Federer at 
Wimbledon," said Ferrero, referring to Ancic's surprise first round win over 
the Swiss last June.

"He has a very good serve, makes no mistakes from the baseline and he goes to 
the net a lot, so it is going to be tough."

Agassi relieved to survive

Andre Agassi paid tribute to Escude after his 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 victory over 
the Frenchman.

The number two seed admitted that he was relieved to come through his first 
real test of the tournament and keep alive his dream of becoming the first 
overseas male player to win four singles titles in Melbourne.

"I thought Nicolas was hitting the ball really well, timing it superbly on the 
returns and putting me under a lot of pressure," he said, having staved off 16 
break points against an inspired Escude.

"He's not a guy that you ever want near you in the draw. He's dangerous. He 
can put his destiny in his own hands."

Agassi, who had demolished South Korean Lee Hyung-taik 6-1, 6-0, 6-0 in the 
previous round, was in real danger of being taken to a fifth set by Escude when 
he trailed 3-1 in the fourth in sweltering conditions at the Rod Laver Arena.

But he broke back thanks to a wild, mid-court shot from Escude in the fifth 
game and secured the crucial break in the ninth to go up 5-4 after forcing the 
number 29 seed to drive a backhand into the net.

"You live by the sword and you die by the sword. He plays dangerously, risky. 
He's going to hit his shots and he's going to miss them," reflected Agassi.

"I needed to step up and play at his level - or better. I played the big 
points as well as I could have hoped to."

In contrast to Escude, Agassi converted seven out of 11 break points before 
finally closing out proceedings with a thumping forehand down the line on his 
second match point.

He now faces Argentine Guillermo Coria in the last 16 on Sunday.

"My experience has always taught me in these grand slams that you need to play 
well at the right time. Today I was happy to get through it more than anything."

Asked if he worried about peaking too soon, Agassi said: "Maybe my second 
round match was a case of playing better than I needed to. Today was a day that 
was a pretty dangerous one for me. I needed to play well."

Australian Open men's singles third round results

 4-Juan Carlos Ferrero (Spain) beat 28-Fabrice Santoro (France) 4-6, 6-3, 4-6, 
6-2, 7-5
 Wayne Ferreira (South Africa) beat Mardy Fish (US) 2-6, 3-6, 6-1, 6-4, 6-0
 2-Andre Agassi (US) beat 29-Nicolas Escude (France) 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4
 Felix Mantilla (Spain) beat 8-Albert Costa (Spain) 3-6, 6-3, 4-6, 6-1, 6-3
 12-Sebastien Grosjean (France) beat 24-Nicolas Lapentti (Ecuador) 6-1, 6-3, 
6-3
 Mario Ancic (Croatia) beat Peter Luczak (Australia) 2-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-4, 6-2
 Guillermo Coria (Argentina) beat Jarkko Nieminen (Finland) 7-5, 6-2, 6-2

 