
A caveat before you read any further: this is not one of those articles based 
on 'sources close to'Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>. I 
haven't 'run checks' with made-up Taiwanese components suppliers, nor have I 
stumbled across Tim Cook's WWDC briefing notes in a San Francisco bar.

What follows is pure, unsourced, unrequited wishlistery, based on a.) being a 
parent of children who enjoy using apps, and b.) writing a fair bit about the 
burgeoning number of apps aimed at them. It's what I'd like to see at some 
point – and if that's in an iOS 6 reveal at WWDC 2012, so much the better.

But yes. A bit of context first. iOS wasn't Apple's first brush with the games 
industry by any means, but it's fair to say the popularity of games from day 
one - Super Monkey Ball, anyone? - was something of a surprise.

As time went on, though, Apple responded by making more APIs available to 
games developers, launching the Game Center community platform, and giving 
games more prominent placement in its keynote events. It recognised an 
important apps category emerging on its platform, and put more focus on serving 
it.

So, kid-apps now are arguably where games were in those early days of iOS. 
Lots being made, from big brands and innovative indie developers alike, and 
lots of parents and children using them - but room for improvement on Apple's 
part in how it approaches the category.

As the banners have started to go up around San Francisco's Moscone Center 
venue for WWDC, which kicks off on 11 June, a couple of developer friends 
noticed that icons for some kid-apps featured prominently in the poster 
collages.

It got me thinking, if Apple was planning to do more in this area in iOS 6, 
what might it do?

Two quick wins would be a proper Kids Mode for iOS devices, triggered by a 
single switch in Settings (like Airplane Mode) locking up everything but 
pre-set Kids apps folders; and a dedicated Kids category on the App Store, 
gathering the apps that are currently scattered between Books, Games, Education 
and Entertainment.

More ambitiously, though, what about a Game Center-style platform for these 
apps to tie into? A mix of social features – the social being between children 
and their parents / family members, obviously – and achievement/reward 
mechanisms.

For example, features that help parents see how their children are progressing 
through apps, which ones have engaged their attention most, and the ability for 
children to easily share creations digitally with family members who aren't 
with them at that particular moment. Teachers too, potentially.

A bonus would be accurate recommendations of other apps that the child might 
like, based on their habits, and maybe even the ability to sign up for push 
notifications when favourite publishers bring out a new app.

All of this is possible right now, of course, in individual apps and in the 
platforms of an emerging clutch of startups (FingerPrint Digital 
<http://www.fingerprintplay.com/>, Yogiplay <http://www.yogiplay.com/>, Ruckus 
Reader <http://www.ruckusreader.com/>, KinderTown <http://www.kindertown.com/> 
andSmarTots <http://www.smartots.com/> being just five examples) who all have 
designs on being a social/progress/recommendations apps wrapper for children's 
apps – or at least one or two of the three.

Why should Apple build its own version, or buy one of these companies? To 
create a standard – a way that these features can work in the same way across 
children's apps on iOS, rather than fragmenting the progression data and 
expecting kids to learn different user interfaces for the sharing features.

Not every parent would go for it, and a platform that involves storing and 
making use of data on children's app usage is fraught with sensitivities 
– although this is possibly another argument for Apple centralising the idea.

Big brands (Sesame Street, Disney, Lego and so on) might also prefer their own 
branded platforms, but that's a similar discussion to the one Apple has had 
with big games publishers like EA, which is currently balancing its own Origin 
community with Game Center.

A Game Center for children, then. It may not be announced at WWDC 2012, but 
it's a thought for the future. And if Apple needs any more motivation, how 
about the prospect of Android getting there first thanks to apps likeFamigo 
SandBox <http://www.famigo.com/sandbox/>?

Being the most child-friendly smartphone and tablet OS hasn't been a 
high-profile selling point until now. As more parents consider their children's 
usage of apps, though, this could change.
 