
Councils across Britain have controversially called for new measures to deal 
with antisocial behaviour as they prepare for aninflux of Romanian and 
Bulgarian migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/27/migration-row-government-panicking-labour>
.

Local authorities in areas with high numbers of eastern European migrants have 
written an open letter toHome Office minister Norman Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/07/theresa-may-norman-baker-home-office-reshuffle>
 calling for an amendment to a bill going through parliament that would make it 
easier for police to arrest "aggressive beggars". The move will be seen as a 
sign that local authorities fear they will struggle to police the arrival of 
migrants from 1 January, when restrictions on Romanian and Bulgarian workers 
will be lifted. But it is likely to alarm pro-migration groups, who will see it 
as an overreaction to an issue whipped up for political purposes.

Mounting concerns about the impact of further immigration on the UK's benefits 
and health systems resulted in David Cameron pledging last week that "if people 
are not here to work – if they are begging or sleeping rough – they will be 
removed".

However, councils including Westminster, Slough, Southampton, Birmingham and 
Nottingham say that the government's antisocial behaviour, crime and policing 
bill, which becomes law next spring, will make this task more difficult by 
weakening existing powers to tackle the problem.

Under the proposals set out in the bill, antisocial behaviour orders (asbos) 
will be replaced by what are to be called ipnas (injunctions to prevent 
nuisance and annoyance). But, unlike asbos, these carry no automatic arrest 
trigger if they are breached. Instead local authorities, housing associations 
and police chiefs will have to apply separately for an ipna arrest warrant, a 
lengthy bureaucratic process.

"Effectively, the ipna will bark but won't bite," the councils warn in their 
letter to Baker, which is also backed by business and property interests 
focused on central London.

"[Aggressive begging] has been addressed in a variety of ways over the years, 
but none have really resolved the issue," the letter states. "An overly 
burdensome process together with an increasingly pressurised judicial system 
and the existence of legal 'grey areas' have meant that antisocial individuals 
and groups have been able to slip through the net, causing havoc in urban 
areas."

The councils propose that the bill should ensure that an automatic power of 
arrest is attached to an ipna when "antisocial behaviour is intentional, 
deliberate and persistent". The letter states: "We believe that, if we don't 
get this legislation right now, the repercussions could have far-reaching and 
significant consequences."

In a sign of growing concern over the issue within government, the Home Office 
has agreed to "stress-test" the proposals by conducting an analysis on whether 
they will help to curb aggressive begging.

Councillor Nickie Aiken, who has responsibility for community safety in 
Westminster, said that Romanian migrants were already costing the council 
£500,000 a year. She said that in the past week police had arrested 21 
Romanians, 15 of whom were already known to them. "I'm a great believer in 
freedom of movement, but not freedom to be antisocial," she added. "When you 
are dealing with the transient and ever-evolving population that we are having 
to deal with here in central London, then you need the ability to arrest them 
if they breach the orders."

Five years ago the council counted 21 rough sleepers in Westminster, 18 of 
whom were Romanian. This year it has counted 324 rough sleepers, of whom 297 
were Romanian.

Thinktanks <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/thinktanks> and human rights 
groups have expressed concerns at the demand, branding it a "Dickensian 
pre-Christmas wish" that would have to be countered by strict rules to prevent 
it from straying into racial profiling.

Shami Chakrabarti <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/shami-chakrabarti>, director 
of Liberty, said that the councils' proposal was unnecessary: "Haven't children 
and the poor been marginalised enough without nasty demands to arrest the 
vulnerable?

"So-called 'aggressive begging' is already an offence, as is any aggression. 
This Dickensian pre-Christmas wish is to detain offenders against our 
consciences, not criminal law."

But Phoebe Griffith, associate director at the Institute for Public Policy 
Research, said councils were right to raise concerns about such issues. "They 
are the most visible manifestation of the general unease about the scale of 
immigration into the UK," Griffith said.

"Dealing with them is important in order to reassure the wider public that 
measures are being put in place to address behaviours that, even if not 
criminal, cause anxiety and disruption to everyday life. However, antisocial 
behaviour measures should only be used as a final recourse and only within a 
framework that guarantees racial profiling is not tolerated and that other 
steps are put in place to shore up community relations."
 