
The Financial Services Authority (FSA) has fined private banking group Coutts 
£6.3m for mis-selling an AIG savings productbetween 3 December 2003 and 15 
September 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/aug/06/coutts-fianancial-services-authority-investigation>
.

Coutts, known as the bank to the rich, has been forced to compensate all 
customers who suffered a loss as a result of its failings in selling theAIG 
Life Premier Bonds 
<http://www.alicohnw.co.uk/AlicoHNW/default/templateWelcome.jsf>.

The City watchdog said clients were told they were investing in a simple cash 
fund that could be seen as an alternative to a bank or building society 
account. In fact, a significant proportion of the fund's assets were invested 
in riskier asset-backed securities.

When the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008 caused the value of some of these 
assets to nosedive and AIG's own share price plummeted, customers started a run 
on the fund.

It was suspended on 15 September 2008, when 247 Coutts customers still had 
£748m invested in the fund, but they were allowed to withdraw only half of 
their investment. On 14 December 2008 customers were given the opportunity to 
withdraw the remaining 50% but for less than its value.

The FSA said Coutts <http://www.coutts.com/>, now owned by Royal Bank of 
Scotland, failed by telling investors the AIG product was a cash fund and 
advisers were given inadequate training about the risks and features of the 
product.

The bank recommended the fund to some customers even though it might have 
exposed them to more capital risk than they were willing to accept and many 
customers were advised to invest too large a proportion of their overall assets 
in the fund.

The bank also failed to properly deal with questions raised from December 2007 
about its past sales of the fund and failed to undertake an effective 
compliance review of its sales of the fund after it was suspended and customers 
complained.

Tracey McDermott, the FSA's acting director of enforcement and financial 
crime, said: "Firms giving investment advice must ensure they make suitable 
recommendations.

"It is imperative that firms also ensure that clients understand the nature of 
the product they are buying and the risks it involves. It is disappointing that 
Coutts failed to reflect properly upon the impact of changing market conditions 
and what that meant for the advice they had given, and were giving, to their 
customers."

Coutts has agreed to settle at an early stage in exchange for a 30% discount 
on its fine. Its fine would have been £9m.

Rory Tapner, chief executive of Coutts, said: "We always strive to provide the 
highest level of investment advice to our clients and have therefore been 
disappointed that we did not meet our high standards of service in respect of 
this product.

"We had already implemented enhancements to our investment advice procedures, 
which provide reassurance that the past failings identified by the FSA will not 
be repeated."
 