
Phoenix Coyotes goalie Mike Smith scored a goal from his own crease with just 
over a second left to seal their 5-2 victory over theDetroit Red Wings on 
Saturday.

Smith was already having a good night before sending a wrist shot the length 
of the ice into the vacated Red Wings net. Smith made 31 saves before scoring 
his firstNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> goal.

Mike Ribeiro scored twice in the third to extend his point streak to six games 
and help the Coyotes storm back from an early 2-0 deficit. Martin Hanzal's goal 
at 7:08 of the third, in his 400th NHL game, put Phoenix ahead 3-2. That came 
2:01 after Ribeiro had tied it.

His third goal of the season with 6:46 remaining gave Phoenix a 4-2 lead 
before Smith capped the win in dramatic fashion.

Antoine Vermette started the comeback in the second after Pavel Datsyuk and 
Todd Bertuzzi gave the Red Wings the lead in the first.

Pittsburgh's Evgeni Malkin scored in the third round of the shootout and 
Marc-Andre Fleury made the deciding stop on Ryan Kesler asthe Penguins remained 
unbeaten at home with a 4-3 victory against theVancouver Canucks. Sidney Crosby 
scored his seventh goal of the season and had two assists, Chris Kunitz netted 
his fourth goal and added two assists, and rookie defenseman Olli Maatta scored 
his first NHL goal for the Penguins, who won for the 20th time in 22 home games.

Zack Kassian scored in the third period, and Alexander Edler and Brad 
Richardson added goals for the Canucks.

In Ottawa, Ryan-Nugent Hopkins scored two goals, including one into an empty 
net, to help theEdmonton Oilers beat the Ottawa Senators 3-1 and end a 
five-game losing streak.

Jordan Eberle added a goal, and Devan Dubnyk made 35 saves for the Oilers.
Chris Neil had the only goal for the Senators.

The New Jersey Devils became the last NHL team to win a game this season by 
beating theNew York Rangers 4-0 as Andrei Loktionov, Adam Henrique, Michael 
Ryder and Dainius Zubrus scored.

Carolina's Jiri Tlusty scored his first two goals of the season, and Cam Ward 
made 22 saves asthe Hurricanes held on for a 4-3 win over the New York Islanders
.

Tuukka Rask stopped 23 shots scored in the Boston Bruins' 5-0 shutout of the 
Tampa Bay Lightning, while Braden Holtby made 37 saves and Martin Erat assisted 
on threeWashington Capitals goals in a 4-1 win over the Columbus Blue Jackets.

Bryan Bickell sparked Chicago's big second period with his first goal of the 
season, helping theBlackhawks beat the Toronto Maple Leafs 3-1.

Seth Jones' goal with 1:27 left spoiled a 35-save performance by Montreal's 
Carey Price and helped the Nashville Predators to a 2-1 win over the Canadiens.

In other games, the Florida Panthers edged the Minnesota Wild 2-1 in shootout, 
theColorado Avalanche downed the Buffalo Sabres 4-2, the Los Angeles Kings beat 
theDallas Stars 5-2, and the San Jose Sharks were 6-3 winners over the Calgary 
Flames.
 