
Craig Kieswetter has labelled critics of England's rotation policy 
"small-minded" as the cricket-loving public of the north-east and Lancashire 
prepare to watch James Tredwell rather than Graeme Swann in the remaining two 
matches of the NatWest series against Australia.

England announced on Thursday morning, after the wash-out at Edgbaston had 
left them with an unassailable 2-0 lead in the series, that Swann has a sore 
elbow and will therefore be given an extra week's rest to allow him to prepare 
for the start of the Test series against South Africa in a fortnight. He has 
been replaced in the squad by Tredwell, the 30-year-old Kent off-spinner who 
therefore has the chance to add to his five one-day international appearances, 
the last of them in Colombo in March 2011.

This is a slightly different case from the decisions to rest Swann, Stuart 
Broad, Jimmy Anderson and Tim Bresnan at previous stages of the summer. But 
Kieswetter, who has been an ever-present throughout the one-day and Twenty20 
matches against West Indies and Australia, believes that they have all been 
fully justified.

"I think it's quite a small-minded way of looking at it," he said of the 
argument that paying spectators are entitled to expect England to field the 
strongest available team. "Obviously spectators want to see the big players 
playing but they also want to see England winning consistently. If everyone is 
playing every single game with the sort of schedules we are having to play now, 
there would be a lot more injuries. Then spectators would be just as upset that 
the bigger players are injured.

"There needs to be some sort of give and take between everyone. From the 
supporters' side of it we as players can see why they would be upset, like I 
said the players are upset themselves when they get rested, but it's about 
driving towards the bigger picture."

Meanwhile David Saker, England's Australian bowling coach who is one of the 
leading advocates of the rotation policy, is regarded by the tourists as a key 
factor in the problems their batsmen have encountered thus far.

"I have known David for some time and he has his fingerprints all over the 
England team," said Clint McKay, the low-profile seamer who played under Saker 
at Victoria. "He worked with us for a long period of time and was fantastic. 
It's no wonder England's bowlers are bowling so well and have so many around. 
He is great at summing up opposition batters and the knowledge of the game 
which he seems to have passed on to the England bowlers."
 