
How it changed for the better Perhaps no sport exists in the constant state of 
flux that does cricket. The game as it has been played over the last decade 
would be unrecognisable to previous generations, the rise ofTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> being the most striking 
development. Among the positive changes have been England's central contracts, 
which contributed massively to the Ashes wins of 2005 and this last summer. 
Also, the significant increase in revenue from the television deal with Sky has 
enabled investment not just in county cricket but also women's cricket, which 
has seen a massive growth, and minority areas of the sport.

How it changed for the worse There have been the scandals of match-fixing and 
the fraud ofAllen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>
. The political situation in Zimbabwe and terrorism in Pakistan, India and Sri 
Lanka has impacted hugely on cricket while there is evidence that the Future 
Tours Programme, the intensive schedule devised by the International Cricket 
Council is leading to player burnout and injury on a level not seen before.

Decade's top five

1 Australia Dominated Test cricket until the greats retired en masse, and won 
two World Cups.

2 Durham How to run a county club. Shrewd investment in development saw them 
rise in 19 years to four times county champions

3 England 2005 The only time in decades that England have beaten a side 
inarguably the best in the world.

4 England Women's team Proper investment has led to them sweeping all before 
them in the long and short form of the games.

5 Stanford All Stars Created 11 individual millionaires through winning a 
single match, an unprecedented payday for a team sport.

Event of the decade The 2005 Ashes. A nation united behind cricket. An immense 
occasion.

Most memorable moment Steve Harmison's first ball of the 2007 Ashes which went 
straight to second slip. Jawdropping. A balloon punctured before it had got 
airborne - England were done from that moment on.

2020 vision

The next decade will see either T20 become all-powerful or the bubble burst as 
overkill and a search for yet more instant gratification takes hold. TV money 
may decline pro-rata but Test cricket will return to free to air with the rise 
of digital channels. It is the decade in which Test cricket will stand or fall. 
There may be a reduction in counties, while at international level there could 
be a resurgent West Indies after a decade of unhappy decline.

To read our experts' reviews of the decade in other sports, go here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/the-decade-in-sport>.
 