
Ahead of the Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
, James Beshara, co-founder and CEO of Crowdtilt, spoke to us about the growth 
of crowdfunding, executing a successful campaign and how it's helping to 
transform the world through shared resources and collective action.

1) Can you tell us a little about Crowdtilt and your reasons for founding it?
Crowdtilt is an easy, versatile way to collect, fundraise or pool money with a 
group, whether you're renting a holiday home together, trying to save a local 
toystore orsending the Jamaican Bobsled team to the Sochi Olympics 
<http://www.sporttechie.com/2014/02/04/crowdtilt-accepts-30k-dogecoin-donation-putting-jamaican-bobsled-team-over-100k-olympics-fundraising-goal/>
. We started the company in 2012 in Texas and are currently based in 
California, but my inspiration for the business actually came from my first 
crowdfunding related startup in South Africa.

After studying development economics at university, I went on to do a research 
fellowship in Uganda, Rwanda, and South Africa. This led to my first 
out-of-college job working in poverty alleviation right outside Cape Town, 
South Africa. During this time, I saw a really interesting opportunity for 
people to invest in microfinance and microinsurance organisations that provided 
group loans online. (Keep in mind, this was before crowdfunding went 
mainstream; I don't think I had even heard the term before.)

I ended up building a site called Dvelo.org that let people lend money to 
these self-sustaining organisations and earn a return. Even more importantly, 
they could get their friends and family involved and pool their investments 
together to increase their impact.

After two years of working and building the site in Cape Town, I moved back to 
the US, and I realised that this was the next stage of the web: people 
collaborating with their networks on how to spend their money. That's when I 
knew crowdfunding was going to be a much bigger concept than just extending 
group loans to developing communities. It was potentially a decade-defining 
movement: our wallets, connected.

2) With hundreds of crowdfunding sites in existence, how is Crowdtilt 
different?
We differ from other platforms in two main ways. One is that we facilitate 
more bite-sized crowdfunding campaigns. Because our product is extremely social 
and easy to use, it's an ideal way for friends and family to split smaller 
goals of $200 to $2,000 (or whatever amount you choose), which can be applied 
towards paying for birthday gifts or summer time shares.

The other main difference – and one of my main areas of focus – is that we 
provide flexible tools for others to build on top of our platform. Since my 
co-founder and I are technical in nature, we often think about how developers 
would want to interact with Crowdtilt. As a result, we recently launchedthe 
first crowdfunding API, <https://www.crowdtilt.com/learn/developers> the 
company's first end-to-end open source crowdfunding tool, and we're about to 
launch our second set of APIs to making building on top of and integrating our 
technology even easier.

3) Since launch, you've run more than 100,000 campaigns across all your 
products. What changes have you made as the company has grown? Were any of 
these user-generated?
Last year, Crowdtilt wrote a blog post about the idea for an open source, 
customisable, free tool that could power crowdfunding locally and 
internationally. The post generated a ton of interest, including an email 
response from Soylent, a nutritional drink company that became an internet 
sensation that summer.Soylent had been rejected by Kickstarter 
<http://www.crowdfundinsider.com/2014/01/29806-self-crowdfunding-superstar-soylent-delays-shipping/>
 and they didn't want to build their own crowdfunding software, so they asked 
if our tool could be ready for them by the following week. We worked for three 
nights in a row, non-stop. The result? Our first Crowdtilt open platform 
project powered by our API.

Soylent has since surpassed $3m in orders from more than 20,000 supporters 
around the world, and it was one of the top crowdfunding campaigns of 2013. In 
February, we formally launchedCrowdtilt Open <https://open.crowdtilt.com/>, our 
open source, white-labelled enterprise tool. It is the first free, customisable 
crowdfunding solution which allows brands and businesses total control of their 
look and feel, user experience, funding goals, URL hosting, and communications.

4) What three tips would you give someone planning a crowdfunding campaign?
Focus on the first four hours. Whether it's crowdfunding a party-boat cruise 
with friends or launching a new product, we've seen that the first four hours 
are critical for building momentum. People only want to donate to campaigns 
that have traction and "social proof". So to help jumpstart a campaign, 
maintain a waiting list of potential donors that you know will jump onboard 
once the page goes live, inspiring others to follow suit. And don't be afraid 
to text your best friends for initial support.

Secondly, take advantage of three specific days during your campaign: your 
first day, the day it "tilts" and hits its initial goal, and the last day. Each 
of these moments is a chance to boost interest and multiply the donations and 
enthusiasm you receive, and incorporate these milestones into your campaign 
plan. Every hour you plan beforehand will pay incredible dividends when you 
launch.

Third, involve your supporters. The most important thing driving your campaign 
isn't the money or rewards – it's the community of lifelong supporters that 
you're building. These are the people who will be core to your campaign 
success. They want to be a part of your story, so get them involved: craft 
bulletproof email pitches that they can send out to their friends, and 
congratulate them when they help you hit milestones. Send thank you messages 
throughout the campaign (not after), and inspire them with exclusive updates 
that they can't get anywhere else. In short, involve your supporters as much as 
you can in making your goal happen.

5) How do you think crowdfunding is going to develop?
I honestly think crowdfunding is going to drive 10 to 15% of commerce on the 
web in five years. It has the chance to truly transform the world around us, 
but only if companies can provide beautifully simple, but still specifically 
tailored tools and supplementary experiences that serve a number of different 
audiences. It will definitely be a fun space to watch mature.

Like the idea of blogging 10 years ago, crowdfunding will start to spill into 
our daily lives from a consumer standpoint (think a Twitter-like tool for 
crowdfunding). At the same time, crowdfunding will also expand beyond 
individual users and be adopted by large brands and businesses, and be woven 
into the fabric of online commerce.

6) What's next for Crowdtilt?
International expansion!

7) Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the Guardian's 
Activate London <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-london> 
Summit?
Our team envisions a world shaped by crowdfunding and collaboration – one that 
can be positively transformed through shared resources and seamless collective 
action, where groups and communities can organise themselves to re-define and 
create their world together. It may sound buzzy, but it's truly how we see the 
future.

Quick questions:

What time do you get up in the morning? I get up each morning around 9am. This 
may surprise people but I tend to work well into the early hours of the morning 
because it gives me space and peace to focus.

What's the first thing that you do when you get to the office? First stop is 
the fridge to grab two Starbucks double espresso drinks.

How often do you check your email throughout the day? Constantly. I like to be 
in the know but try to only answer emails three times a day so I don't get 
sidetracked.

What do you do to relax? Meditation.

What app can't you live without? Spotify. I like to listen to jazz while I'm 
working.

What device can't you live without? My fly-fishing rod. Fishing is also a form 
of meditation for me.

What's your go to source for news? My wife, Cheney.

What's the favourite campaign that's run on Crowdtilt? I believe strongly in 
the potential for civic crowdfunding as an opportunity for communities to 
define their environments. I often think about the elementary school in Utah 
that lost its science programme because of a lack of resources. The parents of 
the students crowdfunded $34k to pay a science teacher so that their children 
got a better education.

James Beshara is co-founder and CEO of Crowdtilt. <https://www.crowdtilt.com/> 
He is speaking at this year'sGuardian Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 