
The signs were there in plain sight at the Liberty Stadium, the ones which 
suggest this is the end game. They reared with Gylfi Sigurdsson’s every 
intervention, a player whose influence as scorer and provider had been 
highlighted on posters pinned up on the walls back at Crystal Palace’s training 
ground. The pie-charted stats had screamed out a warning that the Icelander had 
contributed to 53% of Swansea’s goals. And yet, against rivals primed to 
stifle, here he was scoring the hosts’ first, assisting their fourth, and 
delivering the three set-plays which provoked such bedlam in the visitors’ 
pathetic mess of a defence as to ensure dismal defeat was plucked from the jaws 
of victory. Those percentages will need tweaking.

The clues could be spied just as clearly in Christian Benteke losing his man 
not once, not twice, but three times at those set-piece deliveries in a team 
that had apparently spent the bulk of the previous week working feverishly on 
tightening up at dead-ball situations. One of those errors might be written off 
as another careless lapse in concentration. Three suggested rather more 
troubling issues in play, and that the drilling has not worked. A lineup that 
had prioritised a first clean sheet since April ended up shipping five to a 
team who had started the weekend bottom and the 18th most prolific side in the 
division. The message is not sinking in. The same mistakes are being made every 
week. Discipline is shot to pieces.

Alan Pardew <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> can seek to 
clear the air with his players this week and might instigate the changes, 
whether in formation or personnel, he believes can make a difference against 
Southampton on Saturday. He could even sanction the appointment – tardy, 
perhaps, given there have now been a damning 13 concessions from set-pieces 
this season – of a defensive coach to supplement his backroom staff.

But the chaotic unravelling of that performance in south Wales suggested there 
can be no real way back. There was no evidence on show in Swansea to suggest 
Palace will be able to summon newfound resilience against Claude Puel’s team. 
But, even if this side somehow musters even a vaguely positive response in the 
next two games to appease those dissenting in the stands, the band-aid would be 
ripped off by defeats in daunting collisions with Manchester United and Chelsea 
in mid-December.

Swansea City stun Crystal Palace as Fernando Llorente settles 5-4 thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
Those games are both at Selhurst Park, where Palace have beaten only two teams 
in the league this calendar year. There simply is no respite at present and, 
while Pardew fights desperately to keep his job, every mini-revival will be 
played out with that nagging fear that the next dreadful winless sequence is 
lying in wait round the corner. Players are choking amid the anxiety, 
succumbing to basic errors where once they would have instinctively made the 
right choices. Some among the fan-base have pointed to Swansea being this 
team’s ‘Fulham moment’, a reference to the cataclysmic defensive display 
offered by Ian Holloway’s selection in a home game againstMartin Jol’s side 
back in October 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/21/crystal-palace-fulham-premier-league>
. Palace led, had their optimism punctured by two moments of brilliance, and 
offered only feeble resistance thereafter. Holloway recognised he was incapable 
of instigating a revival andwalked away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/oct/23/ian-holloway-crystal-palace-resigned>
. Pardew will not do likewise.

He has too much at stake here. Palace, as he suggested on Friday, are close to 
his heart, a club with whom he feels a special bond. They were supposed to be 
the antidote to the poison he experienced up at Newcastle, where he was always 
considered Mike Ashley’s puppet. He has benefited from the support of his 
chairman, Steve Parish, and the co-owner remains desperate for the man he 
appointed almost two years ago to arrest the team’s alarming slide and succeed. 
The pair are close, and Parish has regularly backed the 55-year-old in talks 
with the major shareholders, David Blitzer and Josh Harris, over the course of 
a dreadful year.

He could always point to the upgrade overseen by the management down at 
Beckenham, or the new level of professionalism introduced to the team’s 
match-day preparations, as evidence that the infrastructure was on the up as a 
result of Pardew’s influence. But, critically, those improvements have not been 
mirrored on the pitch.

There was a logic in seeking to be more expansive with the team’s style this 
season given Palace had lacked bite in front of goal through most of last term, 
and the manager had warned on the eve of the campaign that a period of 
“transition” awaited. But, even if that takes time, a team that used to pride 
itself on its resilience – albeit born of Tony Pulis’ input – has now been 
rendered frail, confused and rudderless. It cannot all be down to the absence 
of a left-footed left-back while Pape Souare continues his rehabilitation after 
a car crash, even if that has affected the team’s balance. Or the sale of Mile 
Jedinak, whose status in the dressing-room was significant but whose powers 
were probably on the wane. But the reality is that Pardew had demanded “four or 
five” of his players took on leadership duties at Swansea and, if their 
three-goal recovery in nine minutes hinted at previous strength, they were 
utterly meek and obliging when it mattered most.

The captain, Scott Dann, fronted up post-match and admitted “we can’t go on 
like this”. He was talking about the team’s defending but, other than 
organisation, rebuilding belief feels a considerable task. Aside from all that 
slackness at the Liberty, just as revealing had been Damien Delaney’s utter 
non-reaction on the Palace bench as coaching staff tore off in delight to 
celebrate the team’s equaliser at 3-3. The centre-half, one of those Palace 
players who remain from their Championship days and a veteran now working under 
his fifth permanent manager at the club, sat placidly surveying the scene from 
the back row of the dug-out, beanie hat tugged down and no hint of emotion 
flickering across his face. Those around him might have been hoodwinked into 
believing the comeback was gathering pace, but it was as if Delaney could 
foresee what lay ahead. Faith has been damaged, possibly beyond repair.
 