
US nuclear plant explosion: transformer failure caused fire but no injuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/10/us-nuclear-plant-shuts-down-after-fire>
Part of a nuclear power plant remained offline on Sunday after a transformer 
fire created another problem: thousands of gallons of oil leaking into the 
Hudson River.

At an afternoon briefing, New York governor Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> said emergency crews were 
out on the water near Buchanan, trying to contain and clean up transformer 
fluid that leaked from Indian Point 3.

“There’s no doubt that oil was discharged into the Hudson River,” Cuomo said. 
“Exactly how much, we don’t know.”

The transformer at the plant about 30 miles north of midtown Manhattan failed 
on Saturday evening, causing a fire that forced the automatic shutdown.

Cuomo said on Sunday that even after the blaze on the non-nuclear side of the 
plant was doused, the heat reignited the fire. It was again extinguished.

Oil in the transformer seeped into a holding tank that did not have the 
capacity to contain all the fluid, which then entered river waters through a 
discharge drain.

Joseph Martens, commissioner of the state department of environmental 
protection, said measures were taken to keep the oil from spreading, including 
setting up booms over an area about 300ft in diameter in the water.

The cleanup should take a day or two, Cuomo said.

A spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said several thousand 
gallons of oil may have overflowed the transformer moat.

The reactor was deemed safe and stable throughout, said a spokesman for owner 
Entergy. The plant’s adjacent Unit 2 reactor was not affected and remained in 
operation.

The Indian Point Energy Center in Buchanan supplies electricity for millions 
of homes, businesses and public facilities inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City and Westchester County.

“These situations we take very seriously. Luckily this was not a major 
situation. But the emergency protocols are very important,” Cuomo said on 
Saturday. “I take nothing lightly when it comes to this plant specifically.”

The transformer at Indian Point 3 takes energy created by the plant and 
changes the voltage for the grid supplying power to the state. The blaze, which 
sent black smoke billowing into the sky, was extinguished by a sprinkler system 
and onsite personnel, Entergy spokesman Jerry Nappi said. Westchester County 
police and fire were on site as a precaution.

It was not immediately clear what caused the failure, or whether the 
transformer would be repaired or replaced. Nappi said there were no health or 
safety risks.

Officials did not know how long the 1,000-megawatt reactor would be down. 
Entergy was investigating the failure.

Cuomo said there had been too many emergencies recently involving Indian 
Point. Unit 3 was shut down on Thursday morning for an unrelated issue – a 
water leak on the non-nuclear side of the plant. It was repaired and there was 
no radioactive release, Nappi said.

In March, Unit 3 was shut down for a planned refueling that took about a month.

“We have to get to the bottom of this,” the governor said.

Diane Screnci, a spokeswoman for the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, said an 
agency inspector was at the site on Sunday and the agency would follow up as 
Indian Point assessed the affected equipment.

She said there was no impact on the public, and it was not out of the ordinary 
for a transformer to have a problem.

The environmental watchdog group Riverkeeper issued a statement on Sunday 
saying the latest Indian Point accident proves that the plant should be closed 
for good.
 