
Author: Lewis Carroll was the pen name of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson 
(1832-1898). The son of a clergyman, Dodgson became a mathematician, holding a 
prestigious "studentship" at Christ Church college, Oxford. In his mid-20s he 
developed an interest in photography, at first concentrating on studies of 
prepubescent girls - including the famous 1858 picture of Alice Liddell, 
daughter of the dean of Christ Church.

At the same time, his publishing career began; his first piece as "Lewis 
Carroll", a poem, appeared in 1856. His relationship with Liddell gave rise to 
his most famous work, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865), which was an 
immediate and huge success, but his friendship with the Liddell family abruptly 
ended shortly before its publication. This and other unexplained difficulties 
over his relationships with young girls has prompted speculation over his 
possible paedophilia.

Dodgson wrote an Alice sequel, Through the Looking-Glass (1872), as well as 
the humorous poem, The Hunting of the Snark, in 1876. He died of pneumonia in 
1898.

Story: Arguably the best-known children's book ever created, Alice's 
Adventures in Wonderland arose from stories Dodgson told Liddell on a picnic in 
July 1862. In the written version, Alice is drawn into a dream world after 
falling asleep; she encounters a myriad of characters such as the White Rabbit, 
the Mad Hatter and the Cheshire Cat as she attempts to make sense of the 
contrary landscape around her. Through the Looking-Glass, published seven years 
later, is based on a chess game rather than Wonderland's playing cards, but 
contains equally memorable creations: Tweedledum and Tweedledee, the Jabberwock 
and the White Knight.

The film-maker: Jan Svankmajer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jan-svankmajer> (b1934) first worked as a 
marionettist in Prague's Black Theatre Group and made his debut short film, The 
Last Trick, in 1964. He joined the Czechoslovak Surrealist Group in 1970. In 
1972 he was banned from film-making, only resuming in 1977. His most 
significant short was Dimensions of Dialogue (1982), with animated human heads; 
it proved immediately influential. Alice was Svankmajer's first feature film, 
funded in part by Channel 4.

How book and film compare:  Alice is by no means a faithful adaptation of 
Carroll, but it uses the book's events as a framework for Svankmajer's 
ultra-tactile form of film-making, which mixes live and animated elements. In 
the film, Alice's "wonderland" is a large, shabby house; the White Rabbit is a 
stuffed animal that comes to life. Alice's adventures take place as she moves 
from room to room, and occasionally she turns into an animated, doll-like 
figure herself. Svankmajer represents Carroll's creations as the detritus 
rescued from some long-deserted attic, using clockwork toys, a children's 
theatre and other odds and ends.

Inspirations and influences: Svankmajer has always been drawn towards highly 
coloured, absurd narratives. Before Alice, he made idiosyncratic adaptations of 
gothic tales such as The Castle of Otranto (1977) and Fall of the House of 
Usher (1981); but Down in the Cellar (1982) is most immediately suggestive of 
Alice's style. Svankmajer's work undoubtedly looks back to the Polish animator 
Wladyslaw Starewicz, whose only feature film, Tale of the Fox (1930), made 
pioneering use of stuffed animals and folkloric storytelling.
 