
Dalibor Veselý, who has died aged 80, was one of the most important and 
inspiring teachers of architecture, and thinkers about the subject, of his 
generation. Those touched by his influence includeDaniel Libeskind 
<http://libeskind.com/>, architect of the Jewish Museum in Berlin, Eric Parry 
<http://www.ericparryarchitects.co.uk/>, the subtle and thoughtful designer of 
cultural and educational buildings, andSarah Wigglesworth 
<http://www.swarch.co.uk/>, a pioneer of sustainable design. Winners of the 
Stirling prize in 2013 and 2014 were educated by Veselý.

These architects have different styles, but they share the understanding that 
their discipline is of cultural and poetic significance. It goes beyond the 
functional, and the stylistic and aesthetic. They owe this insight to Veselý, 
as do many other architects, writers and educators, who have gone on to teach 
and run schools of architecture (to name but a few) in Philadelphia, Harvard, 
London, Manchester and Sheffield.

His greatest achievement was at the department of architecture at the 
University of Cambridge, where he ran design studios and lectured on history 
and theory from 1978 until 2005, but he also taught at the Architectural 
Association, London, from 1968 until 1978, and contributed to the universities 
of Essex, Pennsylvania and Princeton. At Cambridge he helped to create a 
graduate programme in the history and philosophy of architecture.

Veselý was consistent in his pursuit of his central idea: that such things as 
creativity, belief, history and science are interconnected manifestations of 
the same thing – humanity’s search to find our place in the world. They are 
also activities shared within cultures and across time. The physical spaces of 
cities have a particular role as the setting and embodiment of these searches, 
and as vessels for carrying their meanings from one generation to another.
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/education/architecture>, as something 
that includes the creative, the technical and the cultural, also has a 
particular role in bringing them together.

One example might be the stained-glass window of a medieval cathedral, where 
iconography is combined with the physical substance of the building, and where 
light is treated not simply as a technical issue, but as a manifestation of 
divine illumination. Another would be a Parisian cafe, a social and spatial 
idea that persists over time and in many different versions, but remains 
recognisable and consistent. Veselý also saw in surrealist art an ability to 
bring together the conscious and subconscious.

For Veselý it was a modern tragedy that these forms of understanding had 
become over-specialised, isolated from each other, and therefore fragmented, 
with drastic effects on architecture. There was something personal in Veselý’s 
sense of dislocation: he was born in Moravia (the son of a leading painter, 
Josef Veselý, and his wife, Bohumila Kořená), grew up mostly in Prague and, 
having lived through Nazi occupation and Soviet control, he went into exile 
following the invasion of 1968. He had been embedded in the physical and 
intellectual spaces of the Czech capital, and it was a source of happiness that 
he could visit it freely following the Velvet Revolution of 1989.

He studied architecture, engineering and art and his research into the Baroque 
earned him a PhD at Charles University, but his thinking was also shaped by the 
philosopher and dissident Jan Patočka, and by the circle of intellectuals and 
that included the future president of the country,Václav Havel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/18/vaclav-havel>. The German 
philosopherHans-Georg Gadamer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/mar/18/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
was also a friend and influence.

Veselý was dedicated to his pursuit of knowledge, ahead if necessary of family 
life, sleep, food and comfort. Students arriving for the first supervision of 
the day might find him recently risen from the couch of his small office, amid 
a dense tobacco-tinged fug. But he would be unfailingly alert and insightful 
and, as the writer Carolyn Steel, an ex-student of his, says, “there would be 
moments when things opened up that were magical for anyone who experienced it”.

He could be warm and generous, witty, a good friend and wonderful company. He 
was an accomplished violinist. He was fascinated by the absurdities of the 
world around him. As Peter Carl, his closest collaborator for many years, puts 
it, “he could move from Heraclitus to the pets of the Politburo in a flash”. He 
fashioned a distinctive version of English, in which he invested 
ordinary-seeming words like “continuity” and “situation” with rich meanings, 
and developed pithy catchphrases: “Why to bother?” he would say about the false 
trails up which architects lead themselves, or rather, in his strong accent, 
“Vy to bozzair?” “It’s just a bloody potato,” he would say, of unconvincing 
student projects.

Skilled though he was with language, much of what was important to him was not 
verbal but expressed better in music, drawing and in the understandings that 
exist between words in spoken conversation. This might be one reason why he 
took 30 years to write his one book,Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> in an Age of Divided 
Representation, eventually published in 2004. It is a dense read, but in it and 
his various articles can be seen someone who brought an unequalled breadth of 
culture and depth of thinking to his subject.

His honours and awards included an honorary fellowship of the Royal Institute 
of British Architects, which he received earlier this year.

He was married and divorced three times. His brother, Drahosh, a physicist and 
an important figure in his life, survives him.

• Dalibor Veselý, scholar of architecture, born 19 June 1934; died 31 March 
2015
 