 Dame Anita Roddick, who has died aged 64 after a brain haemorrhage, opened her 
first Body Shop in Brighton in 1976. The year is important. The beauty business 
was not then about bodies, which were merely the soaped tail end of the face 
and hair market, its lotions laboratory tested, industrially concocted and sold 
through chemists' chains or the phoney salons of department stores.
None of this connected with the 1970s change in how women wanted to pamper and 
present themselves. The Body Shop came from that radical sensibility that 
produced the self-help book Our Bodies, Ourselves (1973), much twaddle about 
sisterhood, and the notion, which Roddick traded on, that natural cosmetics 
could be feminist. She was always candid that nothing she made could stave off 
age or simulate gorgeousness, but you could have sensuous fun using it. She 
carried over that approach - a good time can lead to good works - to her 
business, and to her social and environmental campaigns.

It helped that she was dramatic, an actor hardly manqué. She was brought up 
the daughter of Gilda and Donny Perilli, Italian-Jewish immigrants with a cafe 
in Littlehampton, Sussex. Gilda later divorced Donny, and married his sunny 
cousin, Henry; she waited until Anita's 18th birthday to tell her daughter that 
Henry was her real dad. It didn't worry the girl - she was still an Italian who 
ate lots of tomatoes.

She went to a convent, then Maude Allen secondary modern school, failed to get 
into the Central School of Speech and Drama and, after teacher training college 
in Bath, taught English. Then a bold move: she travelled, taking jobs in Paris 
and Geneva to fund herself as far as Africa and the far east.

At the club Gilda ran back home, Anita was introduced to Gordon Roddick; they 
had a daughter, Justine, married in Reno, Nevada, in 1970, and wandered - 
before returning to Littlehampton to run a bed-and-breakfast and restaurant. 
How unserious their entrepreneurship was - and how far ahead of their times 
they were - is clear from Gordon's decision to take a gap of two years to ride 
horseback from Buenos Aires to New York.

His absence was her break. She had Justine, plus baby Samantha, plus a loan of 
£4,000 - arranged by Gordon because Anita, in her Bob Dylan T-shirt, had failed 
to convince the bank of her probity. Her premises in Brighton were so derelict 
that she joked that green became the Body Shop colour to camouflage the mould 
on the walls.

Roddick's 25 primary products were not so different from those of earlier 
cosmetic queens; it was the way she sold her Bedouin-recipe moisturiser that 
was new. She did not propose exotic fantasy: she did promise that the 
ingredients had not been tested on animals, were not synthetic, and - long 
before the Fairtrade movement - that they had been sourced directly from the 
world's ground-level growers rather than commodity brokers. Her lack of 
packaging was anti-waste - customers should return the plain bottles to be 
refilled; if she huckstered anything, it was the history of the ingredients and 
the anthropology of their cultivators.

She sold 50% of the business to a local garage owner to raise money for a 
second shop, and might not have gone much further than a few more, run by 
friends, had not Gordon ridden back, taken over the finances and suggested 
franchising branches. Most franchisees were women, and they, as much as 
Roddick, made Body Shops unprecedented places: you would go in for brazil-nut 
conditioner (Roddick trekked to research adornment rituals), and be made 
breathless both by the concentrated smells and the fervour for green issues and 
aid for the developing world.

Her balance of entrepreneurship and activism seemed even weirder in the mean, 
greedy 1980s. The Roddicks took the business public in 1984; she later 
understood that that had been a serious mistake, since its success was 
thereafter calculated only in terms of profits and growth. Her protests about 
social change and alternative, egalitarian business methods did not seem to 
square with her new role as a pioneer female entrepreneur.

Of course, there was a reaction. By the 1990s, she was the fourth richest 
woman in Britain, author of an autobiography, Body and Soul (1991), and a 
reliable source of quotes on ethical consumption and of finance for pacifist, 
ecological and human rights causes, among them Amnesty International, Friends 
of the Earth and the Big Issue. She was routinely derided as being left and 
green only to promote Body Shop or herself.

In 1992 she successfully sued over a television documentary that claimed she 
had lied about animal testing; in 1994 Business Ethics magazine challenged her 
record on green standards and fair trade - and the share price fell. She felt 
no contradiction in joining anti-globalisation protesters who rocked the 1999 
World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle, but they were less sure about the 
sincerity of an anti-multinationalist who headed a company with 2,000 outlets 
in 55 countries.

She began to edge away, standing down as chief executive. Last year, the 
Roddicks outraged the finance pages and users of Jojoba cleanser alike when 
they sold the Body Shop to L'Oréal for £625m, of which they received £118m. 
That she intended to give it away, plus her own £50m or so, through the 
charitable Roddick Foundation, did not silence accusations of betrayal, though 
she was confident she could persuade L'Oréal to adopt her sort of ingredients.

But she was also relieved to be rid of the old monster, possibly because she 
had been diagnosed in 2004 with hepatitis C, contracted through a tranfusion 
during Samantha's birth in 1971. It gave her cirrhosis of the liver, an 
appointment with a transplant, a sudden urgency about life and another chance 
to campaign, against ignorance of the disease. She was awarded the OBE in 1988 
and made a dame in 2003. Gordon, Justine and Samantha survive her.

John Elkington writes: "I love her like fury, but it's like being trapped in a 
brown paper bag with a bluebottle," a relative commented of his wife - and that 
was Anita for me. Like all true entrepreneurs, she fired on all cylinders, all 
the time. Working close to her would have driven me mad, but working alongside 
her in an extraordinary nexus of ethical, social, environmental and 
international development movements has been one of the great privileges of my 
life.

I cannot remember when our paths first crossed, but I covered her work in my 
1987 book The Green Capitalists, when she said: "There is something magical 
about small companies run by people whose thinking was forged in the 60s. You 
sit down and ask not only how the business should be run, but also what should 
be done with the profits."

At the time, many thought she was new to the game of green capitalism. She 
wasn't: "Although some people may think we are recent converts, the reality is 
that these concerns were always there ... the Body Shop dates from 1976 and we 
were already featuring Greenpeace's anti-whaling campaign in 1977."

In 1988, Anita supplied the foreword for The Green Consumer Guide, which I 
wrote with Julia Hailes and which sold 1m copies around the world. We were 
building on what she and Gordon had done at the Body Shop - and what groups 
like Friends of the Earth had done in areas like tropical timber products and 
CFCs. "Don't just grin and bear it," she encouraged readers. "As consumers, we 
have real power to effect change. We can ask questions about supply and 
manufacture. We can request new or different products. And we can use our 
ultimate power, voting with our feet and wallets - either buying a product 
somewhere else or not buying it at all."

Anita helped us as we grew SustainAbility from 1987, advising business on 
sustainable development, but there was nothing special in that - she helped 
legions of people. Many thought her unreasonable, even crazy. But that's 
typical of people who change the world.

Yes, she could get up people's noses, castigating old-style capitalists as 
"dinosaurs in pinstripes," and yet selling the Body Shop to L'Oréal, in which 
one of her least favourite companies - Nestlé - had a stake. But what a woman, 
what a heart, what a sense of humour, what a troublemaker!

Deborah Bee writes: Anita was an odd mix of seriousness and mischief, utter 
self-belief and vulnerability. People made assumptions about her and simply got 
it wrong. The dippy-hippy, crazy, mouthy, square-peg-in-a-round-hole image 
conjured up by the business press became a routine pain in the backside for her 
- although she was all that, but in a wholly positive way.

This is the Anita I knew. Motivated by her mother's astonishing work ethic, 
she was always driven to work twice as long as anyone else - and at twice the 
speed. If she came to stay, by 7.30am the bin would have been sterilised, the 
wooden floor partially polished with hemp oil - "as an experiment to see what 
else hemp oil can do!" - and the contents of my makeup bag that weren't the 
Body Shop would be laid out for explanation. "What are you doing with a 
Clinique eyeliner?" And by the end of her visit my children would have learned 
several new swear words because she maintained that, as their godmother, that 
was her role.

She had no understanding of cynicism, which meant that if she saw an injustice 
she would never say, "Well, that's just the way the world is," but would do 
something about it. Never feted by liberals, she could never see two sides; 
there was right and wrong, and nothing in-between.

Anita was an instinctive trader. At the start of the Body Shop, she had no 
real interest in the cosmetics industry, but saw a business opportunity that 
made sense. Her stance against animal testing was not so much driven by a love 
of animals as by complete incomprehension of why animal testing was necessary 
in the first place.

Her political activism within the Body Shop sparked many campaigns that 
filtered around the world through her 2,000 or so stores. After she ceased 
being a shareholder, her mission was to dedicate the money she had made to the 
causes she believed in. I'm sure her biggest regret would be that she failed to 
die poor, that she didn't have the time to give her money away.

Last week Anita finished a DVD that tells the story of the Body Shop from her 
perspective. She wanted to "set the record straight," she said, "while I still 
have time." It's a celebration of the creativity and pioneering spirit that 
effectively changed the world of business. It is also an account of her 
regrets. When the Body Shop went public, the company expanded and made her very 
wealthy. But the targets set by the City meant that the organisation was forced 
to grow too fast. In retrospect, she wished she'd stayed small and had more 
control. She was also frustrated by a raft of City lawyers whose fear of 
litigation saw off many of Anita's best campaigns.

The sale to L'Oréal was almost universally perceived as a sell-out. Anita knew 
it was a controversial decision and agreed only on the understanding that the 
Body Shop would be ring-fenced within the L'Oréal group. She also truly 
believed that she stood a good chance of being a Trojan horse and having an 
influence on the way that L'Oréal does business. The fact that she made £118m 
out of the deal was lost on her. Most people would buy a yacht; she went on 
holiday with a file of good causes to argue over with Gordon.

Which brings us to Gordon. Anita and Gordon were a buy-one-get-one-free 
package. Throughout their 37-year marriage, they were always just a step apart, 
absolutely devoted to each other in a unique partnership that combined 
integrity, huge intelligence, creativity and extraordinary altruism. At the 
last count, they have been responsible for setting up three orphanages in 
Romania, an organic farm cooperative in Nicaragua, numerous health and 
education projects in India, a brazil-nut cooperative in Brazil, a healthcare 
initiative in Nepal, a shea and cocoa butter cooperative in Ghana, a 
soap-making factory in Scotland and more and more and more. To all the critics 
who say she was an opportunist, I say, how many orphanages have you built?

To have died so suddenly was, for Anita, a great way to go. As Sam always 
said: "My mum won't die, she'll explode."

John Morrison writes: By the time I started working with the Roddicks on 
business and human rights issues in 1997, Anita already symbolised what had 
never really been seen before: the CEO activist. The Body Shop's first human 
rights campaign came with Amnesty International in 1988 to mark the 40th 
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Next came campaigns 
on indigenous peoples, and then the support for Ken Saro-Wiwa and his struggle 
in Nigeria from 1993. The murder of Saro-Wiwa and other Ogoni leaders at the 
hands of the Abacha regime in 1995 was a personal blow to both Anita and Gordon 
- as well as the staff and customers of the Body Shop who had campaigned for 
their release.

The late 1990s maintained the focus on Nigeria (and campaigns against 
corporate complicity there), but also saw a wide range of global activities in 
support of human rights: when the company came to commemorate the 50th 
anniversary of the universal declaration, 3 million customers across 34 
countries gave thumbprints to support imprisoned human rights defenders.

And it was in Anita's house that the concept of the Business Leaders 
Initiative on Human Rights (BLIHR) was first developed in late 2002, so that 
from the following May there was a body in existence to encourage responsible 
companies in this field.

· Dame Anita Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick>, 
entrepreneur and activist, born October 23 1942; died September 10 2007
 