
Deep shadows stretch across Formula One as a new season is marked by the 20th 
anniversary of Ayrton Senna's death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/apr/24/formulaone.formulaone2004>and 
continuingconcern for Michael Schumacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-schumacher>. The German driver, who 
won a record seven world championships, remains in a coma three months after he 
suffered a skiing accident in France. Despitehopeful statements this week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/12/michael-schumacher-small-signs-recovery>
Schumacher's future seems bleak – and lies in murky contrast to the supreme 
figure who raced ahead of Senna in the last weeks of the Brazilian's life.

Senna won three titles and he is still revered for his romantic intensity and 
brilliant driving. His almost mythic status is about to be rekindled by 
bruising memories of his death at Imola, in 1994, when he struggled to keep 
pace with Schumacher. Their differences and similarities aredescribed vividly 
by Damon Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/damonhill> – Senna's 
team-mate at Williams and the British driver who emerged as the greatest threat 
to Schumacher as he closed in on his first world title. Hill was one point 
behind Schumacher when they began the final race of 1994's sombre season. Yet 
his hopes of winning the title ended when Schumacher appeared to cause a 
deliberate collision.

In 1996, though, Hill emulated his father, Graham, in becoming world champion. 
That victory was the culmination of three difficult years for Hill as, in the 
wake of Senna's death, his life andFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> changed forever.

Hill is relieved racing is now a lower-risk business but he makes a telling 
point when wondering whether the sport features similarly compelling 
characters. "Can we say there is the same gravitas to Formula One today?" he 
asks during a long and absorbing interview.

I offer a layman's perspective that F1, despite its current unpredictability, 
appears to lack drivers with the complexity and depth of Senna and his 
predecessors. "It's an interesting comment and I think people feel that. Maybe 
we have to ask why there is not so much admiration and respect today. There's a 
lot of talent and experience but drivers are being cloaked by the sport in this 
media-mad world. When you talk about the philosophical, layered characters of 
Senna,[Niki] Lauda and [James] Hunt  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-blog/10305927/Niki-Lauda-I-wish-James-Hunt-could-have-seen-Rush-because-he-would-have-enjoyed-it.html>
 I don't think we've got anyone like that today. It comes back to the 
life-and-death question."

Without the existential threat of danger and death, have drivers become bland 
in a sponsor-driven business? "I think so. I watched this fascinating 
documentary about Peter Revson [who died before the South African grand prix in 
1974]. Part of the reason they raced then was because it was so dangerous. I 
say 'they' because I'm not sure I would've wanted to be a racing driver in the 
1970s. It was grim. But that risk kicked something into life that's not there 
today."

Hill's comments are persuasive for they are framed by his certainty that, 
after Imola, racing had to change. He is also quietly emphatic that he would 
not have won the drivers' title had Senna lived. "I was uncomfortable when I 
won the BBC's Sports Personality of the Year [in 1994 and 1996]. As a racing 
driver I wanted to be at the front but I was thrown into that situation. It was 
highly unlikely I would've held Ayrton at bay."

Yet no other driver was as close to Senna and Schumacher during the pivotal 
moments of that tragic season. Apart from being Senna's team-mate he pushed 
Schumacher hard and sometimes, most memorably at a rain-soddenSuzuka 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WThBkjDzRGM>, out-drove him. "At Suzuka I had 
to win to stay in the championship," Hill remembers. "I drove at a level I 
never reached before or after again. Experience counts for a lot but I didn't 
have any. I only got into Formula One aged 31. Look at Kimi Raikkonen and 
Jenson Button. They're 34 and began in F1 in 2000 and 2001. I did pretty well 
against people my age but I raced Michael Schumacher with no experience and I 
was almost 10 years older. Maybe I didn't do so badly."

In keeping with his modest character and his current role as an expert analyst 
for Sky Sports, Hill prefers to consider the wider ramifications of 1994 and 
how that desolate weekend changed F1 so profoundly – forRoland Ratzenberger 
<http://sidepodcast.com/post/the-forgotten-man-roland-ratzenberger>, the 
Austrian driver, lost his life the day before Senna. "We had to wrestle with 
the question of 'How do we justify this sport?' And the answer is we can't 
unless we do something about safety. Max Mosley [the former FIA president] and 
Sid Watkins [then F1's chief medical officer] worked very hard to encourage the 
application of the genius of F1 technology to safety.

"Some people are ambivalent but the sport can be proud of changing its 
approach to risk. It used to be very cavalier – and we had that Lauda and Hunt 
approach. In my father's day it was even worse. I was 15 when my dad died [in a 
plane crash] but lots of his friends were lost on the track. I learned from my 
dad how to cope with tragedy. The death of Roland and Ayrton took people's 
breath away because they weren't used to that experience – Elio de Angelis was 
the last driver to have been killed, eight years earlier. But for my mum it was 
regular occurrence – as shocking and appalling as it was. There was nothing 
heroic about it but that's how the sport was. But, at Imola, the whole weekend 
seemed to be a crucible for everything that could go wrong. There was a lot of 
fear and trepidation."

Hill remains convinced that Senna, who had failed to score a point in a new 
car in the championship's opening two races, made a simple human error as he 
approached the Tamburello corner too fast. "This is the lesson of Imola," Hill 
suggests, recalling thatAutosport's cover that week had asked whether Senna 
could "stand the heat" of Schumacher's challenge. "People are always looking 
for a reason for what happened. There are lots of reasons but you can't forget 
that Senna had left the team [McLaren] which had given him the bulk of his 
success. He was settling into a new team and we were having setup issues with 
the car. And then, of course, you've got this new guy,Michael Schumacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-schumacher>, running rings around 
him. Maybe, at 34, he felt it slipping away.

"It was very difficult for Ayrton. In 1993 he had produced what was described 
asthe greatest race anyone had ever driven – at Donington 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/f1/motorsport/story/26366.html> – where he had made 
everyone else look ridiculous in the wet. So he'd underlined his credentials as 
this living god in a racing car and then Schumacher turned up. At Imola Ayrton 
was pondering who Michael Schumacher was – as much as he was reflecting on his 
own career."

Senna was also distressed by Ratzenberger's death. "Ayrton was incredibly 
sensitive and he was conflicted. I think he wanted to know what life meant – 
and death is a part of life. Our lives were on the line and so he wanted to 
know what happened to Roland. That's why he was exceptional. Most drivers say: 
'I don't want to be dealing with that.' But Ayrton took his responsibilities 
seriously.

"And he really was a mythic figure in his own lifetime. The Japanese and the 
Brazilians saw him as a god. His passion was undeniable and I sincerely believe 
he wanted to make the world a better place. Ayrton was heroic in that sense 
because he felt deeply and compassionately and he was struggling as to how best 
he could use his position to help people."

Senna still ignored his own failings. Hill laughs as he remembers, in 1993, 
"being called into Ayrton's motorhome because he hadn't approved of what I'd 
done on the first lap of a race. It was like being summoned by the head. I 
walked in, cheeky as you like, when I should have been kissing his feet. But I 
thought: 'This is too good to be true – being told by Senna how to drive 
safely.' I could see the irony even if he couldn't. In a sly way he was 
advising me that racing was dangerous. But great sportsmen like Senna are blind 
to themselves. They believe that only they can do what they do."

Did Schumacher have that same sense of entitlement? "Yes – except that Michael 
was much cooler about his racing. Michael didn't exude passion like Ayrton. He 
was quite clinical but he had oodles of confidence. The difference was that 
Ayton seemed to need battles to galvanise him – with Alain Prost and even his 
own team. Michael worked instead with his team and used their talents to help 
him."

Schumacher was still intent on undermining his rivals – and in 1994 he 
insisted haughtily that: "Hill is not world-class." Hill winces. "That one 
still hurts," he says with a rueful smile. "Part of me thinks he was probably 
right."

A fierce competitor like Schumacher, surely, would not have made such a 
scathing comment had he not considered Hill a serious threat. "That's what 
Georgie [Hill's wife] always said. But it does undermine you because it plants 
the seed in the minds of those who employ you."

Even when Hill was about to win the 1996 world championship, Williams told him 
they woulddispense with his services 
<http://www.motorsportmagazine.com/halloffame/graham-damon-hill/damon-hills-fall-from-grace-at-williams/>
. But I remind the 53-year-old how shocked Schumacher looked when Hill outdrove 
him in Japan in 1994. "It's difficult to say this when he's in hospital now 
but, at Suzuka, he'd had to pack away all his balloons and party-poppers."

Everything hinged on that final race in Adelaide but, at the end of a 
traumatic season, Hill was denied the chance to beat Schumacher.The German's 
car careered into a wall while leading <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> and, 
as Hill tried to overtake him, it seemed as if Schumacher turned into his path 
to force a joint retirement. "Michael came from a school of racing influenced 
by Ayrton's career when he managed to determine the outcome of a championship 
with a crash. In karting that was seen as a legitimate tactic. At the time I 
thought I'd screwed up. But when you look at the replays it's clear he must 
have been aware his car was damaged."

Did Schumacher ever discuss the incident with Hill? "No. But we did have a 
giggle when I was a steward at Monaco in 2010 and we had to make a ruling 
against him. I had death threats after that – but I actually defended Michael."

Hill endured testing times alongside Schumacher and Senna but his respect for 
their lofty place in racing history is obvious. And so it is understandable why 
we spend an hour reflecting on their achievements, and separate tragedies, 
before turning to this season. "F1 is in a state of flux at the top. I would 
say anyonein a Mercedes [meaning Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton and Nico Rosberg>] looks 
good. The intriguing thing will be whether the new regulations suit Lewis's 
style. But after all the debate, about him moving to a new team last year, this 
looks a very insightful move. He looks immensely strong."

Adrian Newey, who designed the Red Bull cars that turned the past four years 
into a procession, was at Williams when Senna lost his life.That death scarred 
the British designer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/16/adrian-newey-ayrton-senna-death?>
but his genius remains intact. Does Hill expect Newey to solve Red Bull's 
problems? "Knowing Adrian, he will have made the packaging of the ancillaries 
to the new power unit so stringent it's difficult to get it to work at the 
moment. But when it does they'll be well up front again. Sebastian Vettel's 
enjoyed the luxury of domination so this will be a big test for his 
temperament."

There is interest again in Formula One but, for Hill and many more of us, the 
lost and complex shadows of Senna and Schumacher will be much harder to forget 
in this dark anniversary year.

Sky Sports F1 will screen all 19 grand prix weekends live on TV, Sky Go and 
Now TV
 