
Somewhere between Tottenham Hotspur's £109m summer transfer gamble and the 
fact that the family firm where the club chairman, Daniel Levy, cut his 
commercial teeth was called Mr Byrite is a bad joke struggling to get out. But 
as Spurs dispense with the services of yet another manager amid a febrile 
atmosphere at White Hart Lane, the decision-making of the man who hired then 
firedAndré Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> 
is being loudly called into question by fans for the first time.

Given the high turnover of managers – the new man will be Levy's eighth in 12 
years since the Enic Group bought Spurs from Sir Alan Sugar – they are 
increasingly, inevitably looking to the boardroom as well as the dugout for 
answers.

Levy looked on with a face of thunder from the director's box as Spurs 
succumbed 5-0 to Liverpool on Sunday. But if Villas-Boas is being held 
responsible for the failure of the seven players – brought in to replace Gareth 
Bale at a combined cost of £109m – to gel sufficiently quickly, then Levy's own 
role also deserves scrutiny.

Widespread admiration at Levy's ability to walk a financial tightrope and 
produce a Spurs side capable of challenging for the top four is rapidly being 
replaced by a creeping unease at the methods of their sometimes prickly and 
frequently inscrutable chairman.

It was Levy who took the bold decision to fire Harry Redknapp following a 
fourth-place finish and hire Villas-Boas. It was Levy who, with his prized 
hard-headed negotiator's hat on, played cat and mouse all summer with Real 
Madrid over Bale despite the player making clear that he wanted to leave. And 
it was Levy who appointed Franco Baldini as technical director in an 
unshakeable belief that a continental structure is the only sensible one for a 
top club in the modern game.

While Joe Lewis, the publicity-shy tax exile who owns a majority stake in 
Enic, would expect to be consulted on all key decisions, it is Levy who runs 
the club on a week-to-week basis.

A Cambridge University graduate, Levy was involved in the family business – Mr 
Byrite was eventually rebranded Blue Inc and sold in 2006 – and in property 
development before teaming up with Lewis to form Enic. Together, they bought 
and sold stakes in a dizzying array of clubs in the first flush of football's 
ill-fated flirtation with the stock market before concentrating their attention 
on Spurs.

Despite Levy's reluctance to explain himself in public – the only interview he 
has granted the Guardian in recent years was when Spurs were on the back foot 
in the battle for the Olympic Stadium and needed all the publicity they could 
get – he is increasingly exposed.

Firing Redknapp, a popular manager even if some of his lustre had faded for 
fans by the time of his departure, and pinning his colours to Villas-Boas just 
four months after the Portuguese had been sacked by Chelsea, was a daring call.

A pattern has emerged. In 2008 Juande Ramos won the club's first silverware in 
nine years in the shape of the Carling Cup, but seven months later he was 
sacked following the sale of Dimitar Berbatov. Then came a scramble for late 
close-season replacements and a disappointing start to the following season.

Fast forward to 2012 and the hiring of Villas-Boas was supposed to be the 
blueprint for long-term success. Along with a state of the art training centre 
and a new ground, Levy envisaged the club challenging permanently for the 
biggest honours instead of peering through the glass and occasionally breaking 
in. But within 18 months the relationship between the boardroom and training 
ground broke down irretrievably.

The outstanding questions include: among Levy, Baldini and Villas-Boas, who 
took the final decisions when it came to deciding how to spend that £109m and 
when and how to sell Bale?

Levy has become famed for his transfer window dealing, extracting maximum 
value from the sales of Michael Carrick, Berbatov, Luka Modric and – most 
spectacularly and most profitably – Bale. Yet in each of those cases, his 
desire to maximise income has arguably been at odds with the best interests of 
the playing squad. He deserves his reputation as a tough negotiator and, in an 
era when players and agents hold too much power, has been rightly lauded for 
standing up to them. But on a wider strategic level, Levy has also failed to 
make the leap the club is crying out for – progress on a new, larger, more 
profitable stadium. With their north London neighbours having made the move to 
the Emirates and West Ham having beaten them to the Olympic Stadium, the 
redevelopment of White Hart Lane has become an urgent priority.

Having arguably misunderstood the political subtleties of the battle for the 
Olympic Stadium and become embroiled in a long stand-off over how much public 
money would go into the Northumberland Park development, Levy must show 
meaningful progress in the next 12 months on and off the pitch.

He is not shy of making big decisions, but what is changing is the faith Spurs 
fans have in him to make the right calls. For Levy, the ultimate 
behind-the-scenes operator, the risk is that he becomes the story.
 