
A few years ago, Danny Glover sat in his car and cried. The Hollywood star and 
political activist had just heard the news that his friend, Jean-Bertrand 
Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected president, had been toppled in a 
coup backed by the US and France. "It was 28 February 2004 and I sat in that 
parking lot crying uncontrollably, knowing that we'd have to start building 
again."

Glover fixes me with tired eyes as we sit in an upstairs room of the 
Crossroads Women's Centre in London's Kentish Town on a rainy Saturday 
afternoon. He has just flown in from the US and the same evening will give a 
speech at the centre during a fundraiser for theHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti> Emergency Relief Fund.

In the years since Aristide was ousted, Haiti has suffered floods, mud-slides, 
hurricanes, an earthquake in 2010 that killed tens of thousands, followed by a 
cholera outbreak that killed nearly 6,000. Infrastructure has collapsed, gang 
violence remains rife and the UN has described the human rights situation as 
"catastrophic".

"When I talk about Haiti, it breaks my heart," says Glover. "Yet when I think 
about the Haitian people's resilience, it heals my heart at the same time."

This is Glover's great theme and his deepest conviction: that there is 
something special and indomitable about the Haitian people. "You've got to know 
your history," says Glover. "The great American abolitionist Frederick Douglass 
said the Haitian revolution was the first victory against the worldwide system 
of slavery. Not Wilberforce. Wilberforce may have understood that, in an 
emerging capitalist society, slavery had gone through its evolutionary purpose, 
but it was the Haitians who struck the first blow.

"I know that blood runs through them from that time. And since the moment they 
organised that revolution, they have been defecated on, they've been 
undermined, yet they keep organising. And you look in their faces and they 
could well have been the faces that stood facing Napoleon's army."

Glover found out about the 1791-1804 Haitian revolution led by Toussaint 
L'Ouverture in the early 1970s when he read The Black Jacobins by CLR James, 
the Trinidadian socialist historian (and sometime Manchester Guardian cricket 
correspondent). By that time, Glover was already a protest veteran who, as a 
member of the black students' union at San Francisco State University, had 
participated in a five-month strike to establish a black studies department. 
But it made an enormous impact on him.

For more than 30 years, Glover has been trying to make a biopic about the 
leader of the Haitian revolution. True, the story of L'Ouverture has been told 
before, notably in a play by CLR James that was staged in London's West End in 
1936 starring Paul Robeson, and more recently in a French TV series starring 
Haitian actor Jimmy Jean-Louis. But Glover believes his treatment will be the 
first to "have the epic scale these events require".

But when will we see this directorial debut? In 2006, Glover assembled a cast 
including Wesley Snipes, Angela Bassett, Chiwetel Ejiofor and Mos Def, and 
planned to shoot his film in South Africa and Venezuela, thanks to $18m (£11m) 
from one of Glover's heroes, Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez. Six years on, 
filming has not started. "We'll get the film done," says Glover. "We came so 
close so many times, you could almost taste it, man. We came that close and 
we're going to do it."

Why is the project so important to him? "Imagine a revolt where all those 
people who were enslaved and dispossessed in Africa, America and round the 
world, heard what had happened? You imagine what that meant to them?"

Glover met Aristide in 1992 when the former Catholic priest was ousted as 
president for the first time. Shortly after that coup, Glover was flying to 
Oakland to attend a rally for him. "I still had my makeup on when I got to my 
seat on the flight at Burbank airport. I look over to my right and there he is. 
I said: 'President Aristide! I'm going to a rally for you!' He always says: 
'The look on your face when you saw me.' He's been my brother and friend since 
that moment."

What about Aristide's alleged human rights abuses and corruption? "He's a 
human being – none of us is perfect. But whatever he has done, he has never 
done with the intention of harming his people. He built more schools than at 
any time since the revolution; he improved healthcare. Each time he's come 
back, he's put his life in danger. He could have stayed in exile."

But, to the disappointment of many – including Barack Obama – Aristide didn't. 
Last year, Glover flew with Aristide from South African exile to 
Port-au-Prince. "It's shameful the South Africans may have worked with US and 
France to stop him returning," says Glover. When they arrived at 
Port-au-Prince, Glover was in Aristide's car as they drove from the airport. 
"That car could only move as fast as people around allowed it. That was one of 
the most moving things in my life. That's one story I'm going to tell my 
grandson."

Does his country's stance on Haiti outrage him? "A great deal of US policy is 
centred around exclusion and destabilisation. You take the largest party out of 
the process [Aristide's Fanmi Lavalas] – what kind of an election is that? We 
have a very interesting dilemma in Haiti at the moment. The current president 
Martelly was the choice of the state department and France and Canada, but if 
you'd had a free election, he would never have been elected."

How does he feel now about the US's first black president whose 2008 candidacy 
he endorsed? Glover laughs. "I'm not into personality worship. It's essential 
that you clearly denounce those things you disagree with. Everything he has 
done in terms of war, I'm opposed to. How much of that is him following the 
line and how much his own thought processes, we don't know. The bottom line is 
I think he's a good man."

Glover recalls that in 2002 or 2003, as a member of the board of the Algebra 
Project, a US scheme to improve maths skills among disasdvantaged children, he 
took part in a discussion on the future of education in Chicago. "A young state 
senator walked in and got involved in the discussion. I have to believe he'd 
come there because of a sincere desire to learn more and do something about 
that. He hasn't delivered. We're still waiting."

Glover and I are sharing a sofa in an upstairs room. Below there's a 
conference going on called Invest in Caring Not Capitalism: The Wages for 
Housework Campaign 40 Years On. It's been organised by a group called Global 
Women's Strike, one of whose leading members is Selma James, women's rights 
campaigner and CLR James's widow, who is promoting her new book Sex, Race and 
Class – the Perspective of Winning: A Selection of Writings 1952-2011.

Glover, despite his gender, feels at home. "Like Selma was saying, I'm into 
building caring as opposed to capitalism." The world knows Glover as Detective 
Roger Murtaugh in the Lethal Weapon film franchise, as the brutish husband 
Albert Johnson in The Color Purple, as maverick alien-battling narcotics cop 
Michael Harrigan in Predator 2, as the laughably impotent US president in the 
eco-disaster movie 2012 and as Nelson Mandela in the TV movie. He's just about 
to start work on Stephen Frears' HBO film about Muhammad Ali's refusal to fight 
in Vietnam in which he will play Thurgood Marshall, the first African-American 
US supreme court judge.

But it also knows him as an actor who has said "hey" to radical political 
intervention activism more times than Angelina Jolie, George Clooney, Mark 
Ruffalo and Sean Penn combined. He's regularly on picket lines, campaigning for 
prisoners, speaking against US militarism and giving talks at Occupy protests. 
In 2004, he was arrested outside the Sudanese embassy in Washington during a 
protest about Darfur. In 2010, he called on all actors at the 2010 Academy 
awards to boycott Hugo Boss in support of a pay dispute. He's been an 
ambassador for Unicef, fought against apartheid through a campaign group called 
the TransAfrica Forum and sits on the boards of several groups, including The 
Black Aids Institute and the Jazz Foundation of America.

At 65, he could readily spend weekends dozing poolside in California rather 
than busting his hump at a fundraiser in this rain-soaked dime of a country. 
Where did that enduring political commitment come from? Glover locates it in 
January 1959 when he witnessed how his parents, Carrie and James, both postal 
workers, celebrated the Cuban revolution with their union. "I was a 12-year-old 
kid watching these workers celebrate. I never forgot that. I was around that 
union a lot and surreptitiously, vicariously listened to what they talked 
about, how they would strategise about an action. All that was part of my 
acculturation as a child."

A few years later, Glover disappointed his parents. "About 1964 I supported 
the Nation of Islam because of Malcolm, you know? My mother was a Christian and 
said the Nation of Islam are nothing but a bunch of hoodlums. She was a mother 
looking out for her child. Plus, she was trying to grapple with the 
generational dynamics of what was happening. Her maturation was grounded in the 
civil rights movement."

But how did this rad activist become a movie star and befriend one of 
Hollywood's most disreputable conservatives, Mel Gibson? "I never thought I was 
going to be a Hollywood star." During his 20s and early 30s he worked in 
community development projects in San Francisco. Stage acting was a sideline. 
Then he discoveredAthol Fugard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/athol-fugard>
, the South African writer best known for Brecht-inflected anti-apartheid 
plays. "Once I started doing Fugard, I became more entrenched in my political 
work. I could see how you could use your work as an actor as a platform. He 
became my writer."

In 1982, he was seen, aged 36, in an off-Broadway production of Fugard's 
Master Harold … and the Boys by Robert Benton. The film director cast Glover in 
his 1984 Depression-era picture Places in the Heart as a black hobo turned 
farmhand opposite Sally Field, who won an Oscar for her performance as a Texan 
widow struggling to run the family farm. His movie career then took off. The 
following year he starred opposite Whoopi Goldberg in Steven Spielberg's 
adaptation of Alice Walker's novel The Color Purple, as Celie's abusive husband.

It is his performances opposite Gibson as an LAPD cop in four Lethal Weapon 
movies, though, that made Glover most famous. What's his take on the charges of 
homophobia, antisemitism, domestic violence and racism against his former 
co-star? "Mel's my friend. I can't pass judgment on a man's life. I know my 
working relationship with him was wonderful – absolutely unequivocally.

"We don't agree on everything. My take on women's rights may be different from 
his. I know Mel is a wonderful human being, a wonderful father. When I've asked 
him to do things on a couple of occasions, he's done them for me. When I asked 
him to help raise money for the UN's development programme, he came through."

Glover yawns. "Are we good?" he asks, ever avuncular. "Because I think I'm 
done." He needs a nap before he makes his fundraising speech for Haiti in the 
evening.

Downstairs, the afternoon's panel discussion about the struggles against 
poverty, ecological devastation, military occupation, war, asylum and 
immigration is in full flow. Glover won't be part of it, even though his 
radical credentials are unimpeachable. A few minutes later, I return to find 
all 6ft 4in of him curled up on that sofa asleep. It would have been a shame 
to wake him.
 