
Somerset’s South African director of cricket, Dave Nosworthy, is to leave the 
club at the end of the season, a year earlier than scheduled.

Nosworthy left the Highveld Lions in 2012 to succeed Brian Rose at Taunton, 
after working with South Africa’s Under-19 and A-teams. He has been unable to 
ridSomerset <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> of the bridesmaid tag 
they wanted to shed after several near-misses in their bid to add to the 
Twenty20 Cup they won in 2005, and this season they failed to qualify for the 
quarter-finals of either the T20 or the Royal London One-Day Cup.

Somerset still remain in mathematical contention for the County Championship 
title they most prize but a damaging defeat against Warwickshire has left them 
35 points behind the leaders, Yorkshire, with only three games to play – the 
first of them at home to bottom of the table Northamptonshire, starting on 
Sunday.

Guy Lavender, Somerset’s chief executive, said: “Both the club and Dave have 
decided that is in the best interests of Somerset CCC to part company at the 
end of this season. We still have a critical part of the season remaining and 
all of our immediate efforts are focused on beating Northampton.”

Lavender said that Somerset have already begun the search for a successor. 
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles>, who has been 
considering his options since being sacked by England in April, would be one 
obvious and attractive contender – although he has been non-committal over 
whether his plans would involve a return to county cricket. The fact he has 
spent a fair chunk of the summer working for the media in India could be 
interpreted as a preference to stay in the international game.

Nosworthy said: “I believe the time is now right for me to return home with my 
family for a number of personal and business reasons, and for me to redirect my 
own personal energies and ambitions.

“I believe I have done as much as I can and that the time is now right to step 
down.

“There has naturally been some highs and some lows but what has been most 
pleasing to me has been the emergence of some of the younger players who have 
seemed to flourish and have really come through in recent months.”

Yorkshire are considering handing a Championship debut to Matthew Fisher, who 
became their youngest player in one-day cricket last season and is only 16, in 
the Roses match at Old Trafford, which starts on Sunday.

“Matthew is an outstanding talent and has a huge future in the game,” the 
Yorkshire coach, Jason Gillespie, said of Fisher, who played for England 
Under-19s in the winter and was awarded his second-team cap this week.

He is joined in a 12-man squad by Karl Carver, an 18-year-old left-arm spinner 
who made his debut at Warwickshire this season, with the Division One leaders 
clearly expecting Lancashire to prepare another turning pitch for a game that 
is equally important for them in their battle with Durham to avoid relegation.

Gary Ballance, who was released from England’s one-day squad to play in 
Thursday’s Royal London quarter-final defeat by Durham at Headingley, has now 
returned to international duty. Lancashire are missing their England pair Jos 
Buttler and Jimmy Anderson, and Kabir Ali and Kyle Hogg are injured.

Yorkshire confirmed on Friday that the member who died after suffering a heart 
attack during the quarter-final was David Gronow, a 70-year-old who was a 
popular league cricketer in Huddersfield and also the club historian of 
Huddersfield Giants rugby league club.
 