
Henin-Hardenne wins 2-6, 6-2, 6-3 Davenport for once buggers up the return on 
Henin-Hardenne's first serve, and she slings a long forehand in for good 
measure on the second. Justine clearly doesn't like the easy route though, 
double-faulting to keep things interesting. One whipped backhand = two match 
points: and another long forehand from Davenport converts the first. Justine 
Henin-Hardenne makes the semis despite an erratic performance. She faces a 
similarly off-colour Sharapova in that match. Should be interesting - you'll be 
able to follow that on Guardian Unlimited [plug, plug].

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 3* - 5 Henin-Hardenne A wide backhand from 
Davenport for 0-15... an easy smash for Henin-Hardenne for 0-30... pfffwp. 
There goes the tension as HH's forehand sails wide. And that'll be 30-30 with a 
lovely forehand from Lindsay. It'll be down to the Belgian hold if she wants to 
take this set.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 2 - 5* Henin-Hardenne Stunning, whipped 
forehand from Henin-Hardenne, I actually made a noise and now the rest of the 
office is looking at me the way I look at people who sing on the bus. I feel 
quite the twit. But what a shot. She's in danger of being broken straight back 
though, her serve letting her down again to see Davenport to 15-30. Rescued 
with one of those lovely backhands she's known for, that's more like it. But 
we're back to deuce again kids: fabulous serve - a fourth ace - hands HH the 
advantage... and a fifth ace makes it 5-2.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 2* - 4 Henin-Hardenne Henin takes the 
initiative by keeping Davenport skipping to and fro across the baseline, but 
you can't legislate for a dead straight Davenport forehand down the line. Ah! A 
superb passing shot from Henin-Hardenne! Two break points! Will she waste them 
like before? First one: yep. Second one: yep. Third, after nabbing the 
advantage: yep. Fourth, after bagging the advantage again: finally. Crikey. I'm 
almost ready for my pension.

"I really hope Henin-Hardenne beats Davenport," says John in an internet cafe 
in Nairobi. "She always seems to be smiling and has an awesome backhand." You 
could be in luck if she holds from here, John.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 2 - 3* Henin-Hardenne Justine's halfway to 
Chokesville now. Lindsay took the first point, so HH opts to send her this way 
and that in the hope of the ankle winning a few points for her. It didn't and 
she has to come back from 0-30. Let's try the ankle again - bingo! - Lindsay's 
limping and it's 30-30. After a lengthy exchange of the advantage, HH holds.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 2* - 2 Henin-Hardenne Clever little drop shot 
from HH - Lindsay won't risk her ankle by chasing it. But she probably wasn't 
banking on that gorgeous backhand return from Henin off her next serve. Luckily 
for her, the Belgian overhits two forehands and we're back at 30-30, before a 
desperate Justine backhand sets her up for a smash. Oops, foot fault, deuce. 
Easy hold from there though.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 1 - 2* Henin-Hardenne Henin-Hardenne rustles up 
a second serve to rival most of her firsts today, deep enough to have Davenport 
in a spin, but the American strikes up a chorus of Anything You Can Do by 
knocking a backhand right into the corner and out of HH's reach. And that's 
followed by a beautiful backhand return, it dips just before the line and Henin 
gives up mid-sprint. If she can break now... and she does! Magnificent rally! 
Game o - ah, I've already used that. Damn.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 0* - 2 Henin-Hardenne Exquisite cross-court 
forehand from HH, from outside the tramlines she puts it on a line I doubt she 
can even see. Lindsay's showing the first signs of losing her rag, flapping at 
shots disconsolately - she's now notched up 30 unforced errors to 
Henin-Hardenne's 21, and she's broken. Gulp.

Third set [6-2, 2-6] Davenport 0 - 1* Henin-Hardenne There were moments in the 
first set when I doubted we'd see a third, but here we are, and the momentum, 
what little there is of it, is arguably with Justine Henin-Hardenne. I'll give 
you 3-1 that we see the trainer before this match is out. New balls! Lindsay 
comes up with a peach of a backhand down the line, but it's another of those 
long forehands that lets HH hold with relative ease.

"Okay you win," says Mike Cassidy in France. "Turning off the computer and 
going downstairs to watch the third set. To hell with the deadline." Losing a 
reader is me winning? I don't rate my lot in life sometimes.

Davenport won the first set 6 - 2, Henin-Hardenne takes the second 6-2 
Davenport was on the brink of an easy hold when Henin-Hardenne mustered a 
perfect stretching forehand to make things deucy. And she lobs her way to 
advantage, looks to have won the set with a forehand that somehow slinks into 
the net, takes advantage again thanks to a long forehand from Davenport (how 
many times have I said that this morning?), and a double fault wraps up the set.

Davenport 6 - 2, 2 - 5* "How is Davenport's injury looking?" wonders Stephen 
Knowles. Well, she's looking ginger at times but I think she's confident that 
as long as she dictates play in the third set, she can last the distance. She 
didn't train yesterday though, so who knows. Meanwhile, on court, a 
hold-your-breath rally sees HH scamper onto an attempted lob and whip a 
backhand into the body, which Davenport can only wallop wide. She still breaks, 
however.

Davenport 6 - 2, 1* - 5 Millimetre-perfect backhand from Davenport after a 
rally she dictated from start to finish, but Henin-Hardenne responds with a 
similarly well-measured forehand. Two break points... agonisingly close with 
the first, her backhand return clipping the net and opting to stay on her side, 
and she surrenders the second by whipping a backhand straight into Lindsay's 
racket. Deuce, advantage LD, deuce, Eurosport liken Henin-Hardenne's ponytail 
to a squirrel's tail, advantage HH, and she'll be serving for the set.

Davenport 6 - 2, 1 - 4* A wide, searching forehand from Henin-Hardenne and we 
have a limp from Davenport: could that ankle injury be starting to take its 
toll? She's certainly opting out of more and more shots, which is coinciding 
nicely (for the Belgian) with Henin-Hardenne's improving serves. She rounds 
things off with a delicious backhand down the line and she should see this set 
out if she can carry on like this.

Davenport 6 - 2, 1* - 3 Davenport eases into the game with a backhand that 
drops inside the line and just behind a scampering Henin-Hardenne, but fails to 
hold to love thanks to another of those sloppy forehands she seems to succumb 
to. And another. A brilliant, zinging rally ends with a delicately placed drop 
shot from Henin-Hardenne and deuce, but Davenport closes it out to hold for the 
first time in this set.

Davenport 6 - 2, 0 - 3* Justine's found her rhythm, it seems, even if the 
first serves are still spilling all over the court. She's finally finding the 
angles - a piercing cross-court forehand forcing a mistake from the American, 
before a well-timed backhand sees her to 3-0 in the second set. Who said a 
porcine American and a small Belgian couldn't entertain? I'm on the edge of my 
seat!

Davenport 6 - 2, 0* - 2 Brilliant return from Henin-Hardenne, magnificent, and 
any other lovely words you can think of. A rare double fault from Davenport 
hands Justine two break points, the first of which goes smack! into the net 
with an attempted backhand return. The second isn't wasted, mind and it's game 
on.

Davenport 6 - 2, 0 - 1* Wow! An ace from Henin-Hardenne! She hasn't held serve 
yet in this match... and she won't do if she let's those double faults creep 
back in. A long forehand return and another poor forehand volley from Davenport 
help her over the line.

First set Davenport 6 - 2 Henin-Hardenne threatens, for all of five seconds, 
to put pressure on the Davenport serve, but flings another backhand out of 
court, followed by a forehand heading in the same direction. Things improve 
when she pushes the American wide to the line then sticks a forehand in the 
opposite direction [like Davenport's going to chase that], but an ace sees 
Davenport to the first set.

"Don't take it personally," says David Allison. "The nation's Guardian readers 
all just arrived at our incredibly right-on jobs and are wondering if drinking 
seven fair trade coffees in a row will make us feel better about third world 
debt. It's hard to get involved in a game between a porcine American and small, 
dull looking Belgian."

Davenport 5 - 2* Henin-Hardenne Still the first serves are flying anywhere but 
in from Justine, but she's slowly starting to vary her shots enough to draw a 
jog from her opponent and Davenport sticks a feeble forehand into the net. 
Henin-Hardenne fires a corking serve down the middle of the court, but she's 
pushed deep past the baseline by Davenport and can't find a way over the net 
with her forehand. Another double fault puts Davenport in the frame to serve 
for the set, and Justine is proper miffed, as they might say, somewhere. 
Probably.

"About getting no emails," says Marika in South Africa. "You try listening to 
cricket commentary, keeping up with the tennis and actually get some work 
done!" Sorry about that, like.

Davenport 4* - 2 Henin-Hardenne Play's being held up by tardy Aussies... 
doesn't put Lindsay off her serve though: she couldn't have wedged it any 
deeper into the corner and Henin-Hardenne is helpless. A double fault and then 
a long forehand helps the Belgian to spy a blinkering light somewhere at the 
end of the tunnel, and a superb backhand return that Davenport doesn't even 
move for hands her two break points. And she takes the first! Things could be 
more interesting.

Davenport 4 - 1* Henin-Hardenne Gorgeous backhand from Henin-Hardenne, just as 
we were all wondering when she was going to start pushing Davenport into a 
trot. Still it's the American dictating the play though, scattering 
groundstrokes from one spot, and this could well be set over.

Davenport 3* - 1 Henin-Hardenne Davenport is playing well, her serves are 
finding the lines, her groundstrokes, much as I prefer a bit of spin, are 
flying into all the right corners, and frustration is nagging at 
Henin-Hardenne's play. Her usually delicate-but-powerful groundstrokes are 
being slung high, wide and anything but handsome - I was about to say, until 
she foundthe most delightful backhand cross-court lob. Doesn't help her keep 
things level, mind.

Davenport 2 - 1* Henin-Hardenne Wonderful stuff for the first point, each 
groundstroke more elegant than the last until Davenport summons a humming 
forehand straight down the line. Another double fault from Henin-Hardenne 
presents Davenport with three break points...she looks menacingly over the 
net... and takes the second just how she likes it - without moving: another 
double fault.

I'm trying not to take the lack of emails personally, by the way. 

Davenport 1* - 1 Henin-Hardenne Davenport isn't having much joy on the first 
serve either but Henin-Hardenne fails to take advantage with a wild backhand. 
Luckily for her Davenport thwacks a simply backhand volley way out of court to 
see her to 30-30. After letting things slip with another sloppy forehand Henin 
takes it to deuce with a beauty of a forehand volley over the shoulder and 
cross court and too far for Davenport to scamper. It looked unlikely, but 
Henin-Hardenne's broken straight back.

Davenport 1 - 0* Henin-Hardenne Henin-Hardenne gets us going with a long serve 
and Davenport duly wallops the weaker second serve to take the first point. The 
Belgian gets her moving around court to take the second and the third comes her 
way after a decent rally that she rounds off with a great cross-courter 
searching for the line. Double fault levels things up again, and she's pushed 
to a second serve that Davenport gobbles up to take a break point. The record 
for the longest rally is in serious danger here: but it's Davenport coming out 
on top despite that all-too obvious injury. Henin'll have to improve her first 
serve to get anything here.

News Davenport is carrying a crocked left ankle, apparently, but Eurosport are 
still plumping (sorry, couldn't resist) for her as favourite. If Henin-Hardenne 
is on song, I think it'll be closer that they think, but if she's not, we all 
know how average she can look. Davenport beat Henin-Hardenne five times between 
1999 and 2002, but she hasn't beaten her in five meetings since then. Nearly 
time!

A word of warning I'm having all manner of technical issues here, so I 
apologise in advance for any expletives you may happen upon. I know, I know, 
think of the children.

Morning And a very bloody early one at that. Maria Sharapova's already through 
to the semis after a scrappy affair against Nadia Petrova, and whoever wins 
here gets to play her - not normally a good thing but she's so off-colour in 
Australia I'd say that's a nice route to the final. I won't lie, I'd quite like 
Justine Henin-Hardenne to win. I just like the cut of her jib. Lindsay 
Davenport is what my mother used to call a "clodhopper". But that probably 
means she'll batter the Belgian in about 38 minutes, eh?
 