
On 21 December 1880, the famously prolific Anthony Trollope 
<http://www.anthonytrollope.com/> wrote to his son Harry: "I finished on 
Thursday the novel I was writing, and on Friday I began another. Nothing really 
frightens me but enforced idleness. As long as I can write books, even though 
they be not published, I think I can be happy." The novel he started that week 
wasThe Fixed Period 
<http://www.anthonytrollope.com/books/works/fixed_period_the_/> and it was 
published in March 1882, the last year of Trollope's life. It received mixed, 
somewhat baffled reviews, and sold only 877 copies, making a loss for its 
publisher. It has not been any more popular since then. The story is set in the 
future, in 1980, on an imaginary antipodean island called Britannula, and 
therefore lacks the subtle observation of a recognisable social world for which 
Trollope's fiction is cherished. It has a first-person narrator, a technique he 
used before only in a few short stories, and in a style very like the urbane, 
sympathetic authorial persona of the earlier novels. The narrator ofThe Fixed 
Period is earnest and humourless. Most disconcerting of all to Trollope 
aficionados is the novel's subject: the effects of a law passed by the youthful 
Britannula Assembly making euthanasia compulsory for everybody between the age 
of 67 and 68.

The Fixed Period has been largely ignored by those who go to Trollope for a 
superior kind of comfort reading, and dismissed as an aberrant minor work by 
most critics and biographers. The article on him in theNew Oxford Dictionary of 
National Biography describes it as "worthy of mention only as being so much out 
of Trollope's normal line". John Sutherland has described it as "the oddest 
item in all Trollope's fiction". In Trollope's oeuvre it is certainly unique, 
but also oddly relevant to some of our own current social, economic and ethical 
concerns. Due to advances in medicine and public health, Britain, like many 
other countries, has experienced a rapid rise in life expectancy in recent 
decades, which means that more and more old and retired people must be 
supported for longer by the working population, a situation that has been 
exacerbated by the global credit crisis, with a consequent rise in unemployment 
and fall in the value of pension funds. At the same time there is increasing 
public controversy and private uncertainty about the legitimacy of assisted 
dying in certain circumstances. It is fascinating to see an astute Victorian 
mind exploring these issues in the form of fiction.

In an introductory chapter, the narrator summarises the history of Britannula, 
an uninhabited island that was settled by a group of young emigrants from New 
Zealand (a country Trollope visited in 1875). The colony prospered and was 
granted independence by the British government. The narrator was the first 
speaker of its assembly, and at the time of writing is the country's president. 
He is a fervent advocate of the Fixed Period for rectifying "two mistakes … 
made by mankind; first in allowing the world to be burdened with the continued 
maintenance of those whose cares should have been made to cease … and the 
second, in requiring those who remain to live a useless and painful life." The 
aim of compulsory euthanasia is to convert death into a civic duty carried out 
with honour and dignity. For one year before their demise the old "would be 
prepared for their departure, for the benefit of their country, surrounded by 
all the comforts to which, at their time of life, they would be susceptible, in 
a college maintained at the public expense; and each, as he drew nearer to the 
happy day, would be treated with still increasing honour." It is a kind of 
utopian (or dystopian) version of the almshouses inThe Warden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099528654/the-warden> 
(1855), Trollope's first successful novel. As to the expense of such a system, 
the narrator calculates that the savings that would accrue to the community by 
the elimination of its non-productive members would more than compensate. To 
his regret, however, this bold social experiment was thwarted before it could 
be put to the test, as he proceeds to relate.

This narrator is John Neverbend. Trollope liked to give some of his characters 
obtrusively symbolic names, wilfully violating the conventions of realism. 
(Henry James, who deplored the habit, said of Mr Quiverfull, the father of 14 
children inBarchester Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780141199115/barchester-towers>
, "We can believe in the name and we can believe in the children. But we cannot 
manage the combination.") A name such as Neverbend is, however, appropriate in 
a fable of this kind. He is obsessed with his vision of benign euthanasia, and 
unable to empathise with the growing repugnance of the population as the time 
draws near to put it into practice. He is deeply offended when people refer to 
the method to be used ("certain veins should be opened while the departing one 
should, under the influence of morphine, be gently entranced within a warm 
bath") as "murder" or "execution". He is shocked when his friend Gabriel 
Crasweller, who voted for the law when it was framed, shows signs of reluctance 
to be "deposited" in the college, and even lies about his age. Neverbend 
regards voluntary euthanasia as a more effective way to banish the fear of 
death than religion can offer, and says to Crasweller: "How best can we prepare 
ourselves for the day which we know cannot be avoided? … Let us turn the 
inevitable into that which shall in itself be esteemed a glory to us …" To 
which Crasweller replies flatly: "But I am nine years older than you."

Although Neverbend is humourless, for the reader there is humour, and also 
pathos, in the clash of his high-flown rhetoric with the instinctive reactions 
of others, including his own family. Neverbend is a zealot, but not an 
insensitive one. As the opposition to the Fixed Period grows, he actually 
begins "to ask myself whether I was in all respects sane in entertaining the 
ideas which filled my mind", but steadies his resolution by remembering the 
example of great men such as Galileo and Columbus, whose radical ideas were 
mocked and rejected in their own time.

Halfway through the book there is a long episode about a cricket match played 
between Britannula and a touring team from England, which gives Trollope an 
opportunity to indulge his penchant for amusing names (Lord Marylebone and Sir 
Kennington Oval) and to fantasise about the future development of the game. In 
1980 it is played by teams of 16 players, with mechanical aids such as a "steam 
bowler" and a "catapult", which require the batsman to wear wicker helmets and 
other protective clothing. The match is won by Britannula thanks to Neverbend's 
son's innings of 1,275 runs obtained with his special "spring-bat". Trollope's 
speculations about other technological developments in the world of 1980 are 
sparse and rather timid. Transport in Britannula is still mainly horse-drawn, 
though Neverbend does have a steam tricycle capable of 25mph. Trollope is more 
prescient about communications: the British naval officers have a little device 
that works very like a mobile phone, and there is another which allows voice 
messages to be sent across oceans and emerge as text. But the novelist is not 
really interested in the science-fiction possibilities of his story. The 
cricket match is introduced mainly to provide some humour and narrative 
excitement, and to foreshadow a second visitation from Britain – a gunboat sent 
to forestall the implementation of the Fixed Period law.

It arrives in Britannula's harbour just as Neverbend is conducting the 
sullenly compliant Crasweller to take up residence in the College. The officer 
in charge of the landing-party intervenes and forbids the president to proceed, 
invoking the threat of the gunboat's "250-ton swiveller". Neverbend submits, 
vainly protesting against this exercise of brute force, and is informed that 
the island is to be made a Crown colony again, with a new governor to ensure 
that the law of the Fixed Period, unacceptable to the mother country, is 
repealed, while he himself must go into exile in England. The narrative we have 
been reading is in fact written on his voyage there.

To readers prepared to suspend their usual expectations of a Trollope novel, 
The Fixed Period is an absorbing, thought-provoking and entertaining tale. But 
what prompted Trollope to write it? To most of its first reviewers it seemed 
like an extended joke in dubious taste, but when a friend referred to it as "a 
grim jest" Trollope gripped him by the arm and exclaimed: "It's all true – I 
mean every word of it." Because of its first-person narrative method the import 
of the novel remains ambiguous, but the remark shows that Trollope wished it to 
be taken seriously. His letters at that time show him gloomily conscious of 
declining health. He had driven himself hard for years, getting up at five in 
the morning to write for three hours every day before beginning his work as a 
civil servant, and he was also a keen huntsman and enjoyed social life. This 
regime took its toll, and by the late 1870s he was overweight, short of breath, 
and probably suffering from high blood pressure. Two days before finishingThe 
Fixed Period he wrote to a friend: "I am now an old man, 66, and shall soon 
have come to the end of my tether."Victoria Glendinning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/victoriaglendinning> quotes a letter to 
his brother Tom, written in 1881 or 82: "The time has come upon me of which I 
have often spoken to you, in which I shall know that it were better I were 
dead," and John Hall, editor of a collection of his letters, quotes words from 
another that seem particularly significant: "It will sometimes take a man more 
than 5 years to die." Trollope was not afraid of death, and said so 
emphatically to his brother: "There is nothing to fear in death – if you be 
wise. There is so much to fear in life, whether you be wise or foolish." What 
he feared particularly was evidently the living death of senility and/or 
physical helplessness.

It is a fear that haunts our own era. The advances in medicine that prolong 
our active lives also make it more likely that we will succumb to various forms 
of dementia, or survive a stroke for years in a helpless and barely conscious 
state. It is a fear to which writers are perhaps particularly sensitive, partly 
because they have highly developed imaginations, and partly because, like 
Trollope, they may become addicted to the exercise of their art and dread its 
withdrawal. It seems likely that he used the fable ofThe Fixed Period to 
explore and relieve his own anxiety by turning it into speculative fiction. 
Suppose a rational plan were devised to abolish the pains and problems of old 
age: what might it be like and how would it be received?

There is more than enough irony in the presentation of John Neverbend to 
prevent us from identifying his views with those of the implied author, but 
there is sympathy too, and Trollope allows him to argue his case logically and 
eloquently. The reprieved Crasweller argues effectively on the other side, 
affirming the human instinct to cling to life, and evoking the peculiar horror 
of awaiting a fixed date for one's death. Interestingly Neverbend boasts 
proudly to the British visitors that Britannula has abolished another 
institutionalised form of that suffering, "the stain of capital punishment", 
which makes him seem inconsistent, but more humane. At the end he feels 
betrayed but also secretly relieved at being removed from his invidious 
position, and concedes that "the Fixed Period, with all its advantages, was of 
such a nature that it must necessarily be postponed to an age prepared for it."

Trollope's odd novel proved, in one respect, uncannily prophetic of his own 
demise. Neverbend recalls that when the Fixed Period law was being framed there 
was a long debate about the age at which it should be applied. Eventually this 
was fixed at 67½, though some flexibility was later allowed. At the beginning 
of November 1882, the year in whichThe Fixed Period was published, Trollope 
suffered a severe stroke, which paralysed his right side and deprived him of 
speech, but the fate he had feared was mercifully brief. He died in a nursing 
home on 6 December, five months short of his 68th birthday.

• This article was amended on 17 December 2012, to include the phrase "a 
situation that has been exacerbated by the global credit crisis" in the fifth 
sentence of the second paragraph.
 