
The Boston Bruins remained unbeaten and opened the season by earning points in 
five straight games for the first time since 1990 when they beat theCarolina 
Hurricanes 5-3 in the NHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> on Monday.

Zdeno Chara had a goal and two assists, Nathan Horton had a goal and an 
assist, Tyler Seguin had an empty-net goal and an assist and Brad Marchand 
scored a short-handed goal for the Bruins. David Krejci scored the tiebreaking 
goal with 1:50 left after Horton rang the post. Rookie defenseman Dougie 
Hamilton's cross-ice pass found Krejci in the left circle and he snapped the 
puck past Cam Ward for his first goal of the season.

Eric Staal and Jeff Skinner scored 50 seconds apart late in the second period 
to help the Hurricanes erase a two-goal deficit, but their two-game winning 
streak ended. Anton Khudobin stopped 29 shots in his first start of the season 
for the Bruins.

Jeff Carter scored the Los Angeles Kings' first power-play goal of the season 
and added the only score in the shootout to help beat theVancouver Canucks 3-2. 
Defenseman Slava Voynov tied it with 43.2 seconds left in regulation for the 
defending Stanley Cup champions, who have won two straight after a winless 
start. Jonathan Quick stopped 21 shots for the Kings, including all three 
Vancouver attempts in the shootout.

Chad Johnson earned his first NHL shutout in his Phoenix Coyotes debut as the 
Nashville Predators were beaten 4-0. Johnson, called up from Portland of the 
AHL last week after Mike Smith was hurt, had 21 saves in a game dominated 
defensively by a Coyotes team that entered the game allowing an NHL-high 20 
goals in five games. The Predators were shut out for the second time in three 
games and have scored just 10 times in six games this season.

Devan Dubnyk made 37 saves and the Edmonton Oilers scored all of their goals 
on the power play to defeat theColorado Avalanche 4-1. Ales Hemsky, Jordan 
Eberle, Shawn Horcoff and Nail Yakupov, into an empty net, scored on the man 
advantage for the Oilers. The Avalanche have lost two in a row to start a 
four-game road trip.

The Columbus Blue Jackets ended a four-game losing run by beating the Dallas 
Stars 2-1. Czech veteran Vinny Prospal scored the winner from a hard angle at 
1:22 of the third period, pumped his fist, glided across the ice on one knee 
and celebrated as if he had just scored the tiebreaking goal in the Stanley Cup 
finals. Instead, he just helped Columbus take a step toward respectability.
 