
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is under 
fresh pressure from both sides of the house to call an EU referendum before the 
election, as the prominent Labour MP Tom Watson joined a Tory campaign for an 
early vote.

Watson, a former Labour minister and campaign director, said he was planning 
to supportAdam Afriyie <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie>, a 
Tory backbencher, who is leading calls for an in-out poll before 2015.

The move has been firmly rebuffed by No 10, which said the prime minister 
would in no circumstances allow a referendum before he had had a chance to 
renegotiate Britain's relationship with EU. Cameron is supporting a bill by 
James Wharton, a backbencher, which sets out a plan to hold a referendum before 
the end of 2017.

However, Afriyie is not satisfied with this timetable, arguing that voters are 
suspicious that they are not being allowed to have a say on Britain's EU 
membership straight away. He is planning to table an amendment to Wharton's 
bill calling for a referendum on 23 October 2014.

The Windsor MP has been the subject of speculation that he would like to be 
leader of the Conservative party. Speaking on Sky News's Murnaghan programme, 
he said it was "media tittle-tattle" that he wanted to succeed Cameron and 
insisted he was loyal to the leadership, but said he could not "sit quietly" 
while the referendum was put off until 2017.

Watson added fuel to the row by saying "a lot of people" in both Labour and 
the Conservatives wanted a referendum sooner.

"I don't want to add to the PM's panic, but I will probably be supporting Adam 
Afriyie with his amendment," he told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show.

"I think there are a lot of people on both sides of the house who think we 
need clarity on this now. The country has asked for it for a long time, 
business has been saying there's a lot of uncertainty and parties have got to 
draw up their manifestos for the 2015 general election and they will be very 
difficult, depending on the outcome of a referendum."

Watson's move will also add to pressure on Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, who 
has not yet made it clear his views on a vote.

"He's kept his options open. He's said he will take that decision at a later 
date, but I just don't know," Watson said. "It would be down to him and Douglas 
Alexander but now I'm on the backbenches, I think I might support Adam."

A number of Tories argue an early EU referendum would stop voters turning to 
the UK Independence party in 2015 if they do not believe Cameron will stick to 
his promise after the election.

Afriyie claims delaying a poll poses "significant dangers", including building 
support for Ukip, and argues he has the support of "many MPs from across all 
the main parties" for an early referendum.

"It's in our national interest to resolve this issue as soon as possible to 
create the certainty and stability our country needs for the future," hewrote 
in the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2446209/How-Im-going-force-PM-hold-referendum-Europe-NOW-An-incendiary-intervention-Euro-vote-leading-Cameron-rebel-Adam-Afriyie.html>
.

"Only by setting an early date can we kickstart EU renegotiation talks and 
give the British people what they so clearly want – a say on our country's 
future with Europe.

"The political establishment are naturally hesitant but we have nothing to 
fear by giving people a chance to have their say, either way, on our future 
relationship with Europe."

Questioning Cameron's tactics, he wrote: "The fact is, the British people are 
not convinced there will be a referendum at all if we wait until after the next 
general election.

"So many things can change. They don't understand why we can't have one right 
away – and that makes them suspicious.

"Many people think delaying the vote is just a tactic to allow all the 
political leaders to kick the can even further down the road.

"In reality, the British people are unsure whether the Conservative leadership 
would be able to stick to its promise of holding a referendum after the 
election, especially if in coalition once again."

Despite his protestations of loyalty, Afriyie's move is being seen as a 
challenge to Cameron's authority.

Speaking on the BBC's Marr Show, Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, dismissed the 
prime minister's promise of a poll before 2017 as a way of "kicking the issue 
into the long grass".

However, Theresa May, the home secretary, defended the government's plans, 
saying Cameron was planning a "serious negotiation" before taking the option of 
a new settlement to the British people.

The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> (referendum) bill 
easily cleared its first Commons hurdle in July after Labour and the Liberal 
Democrats avoided voting on the issue.

Wharton said the rebel amendment would "make it far more difficult to navigate 
the challenging procedural hurdles we need to overcome and I hope its sponsors 
might rethink their approach".

"We need to build as broad a base of support for the bill as we can if we are 
to get it through parliament and the policy of a renegotiation, followed by an 
in-out referendum, is the right one to do that and the right one for the 
country.

"I hope MPs will decline to support it as the ultimate impact might well be to 
kill my bill, which would only help those who don't want any referendum at all."

Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg have dismissed the bill as a stunt designed to 
shore up the prime minister's position with his rank and file – pointing out 
that it has virtually no chance of becoming law.

In May, 115 Conservative MPs backed a rebel amendment to the Queen's speech 
criticising the failure to include a referendum bill in the government's 
legislative programme.

Cameron said that was impossible because of being in coalition with the 
pro-European Lib Dems, but has thrown his weight behind Wharton's bill.
 