
What? You're staying in Klosters? How very downmarket. For a week each 
January, the swanky Swiss ski resort favoured by Prince Charles and George 
Osborne becomes a poor relation toDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, the neighbouring Alpine venue for 
the World Economic Forum, where prices rocket into the stratosphere for 
anything from a matchbox-sized hotel room to a spaghetti bolognese. If you're 
in Klosters, you're a cheapskate.

There's a definite pecking order to the annual jamboree of global leaders. The 
creme de la creme of the world elite get a chopper in from Zurich airport. Mere 
chief executives of multinational companies arrive by limo. Meanwhile, charity 
leaders, religious figures, journalists and hoi polloi trundle up the mountain 
around icy hairpin bends in complementary shuttle buses.

With 2,500 of the world's elite in town – ranging from Dmitry Medvedev to José 
Carreras, theGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> guys and 
Morgan Tsvangirai – you'd have thought the place would be a venue for lively 
debate. But in fact, the prevailing impression is consensus. Everybody's hoping 
the euro will survive, predicting the rise of Asian economic might, anxious to 
"risk-proof" the financial system against future shocks, eulogising green 
energy and enthusing about social networking. Oh, and nearly everybody hates 
bankers – except the bankers themselves, who are getting increasingly antsy.

JP Morgan's chief executive, Jamie Dimon, complained bitterly last week that, 
as governments tighten regulations and politicians rage against bonuses, many 
people wanted bankers just to "bend down and accept it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/27/jp-morgan-boss-banker-bashing>
". Standard Chartered's Peter Sands suggested that financial regulators were 
insisting on the equivalent ofever tighter seatbelts on aircraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/26/banking-leaders-condemn-city-reforms>
 – which are usually irrelevant if a plane actually crashes.

The boss of one of Britain's top law firms moaned that "no single human" could 
understand the totality of the regulatory structure any longer. And Goldman 
Sachs's president, Gary Cohn, opined sagely, as if unstoppable extraterrestrial 
forces were at work, that a crackdown on reckless behaviour by banks would 
force financiers to establish more unregulated hedge funds. Regrettably, there 
might be no option but "regulatory arbitrage" in search of laissez-faire 
structures, said Cohn, sounding for all the world as if he had no influence 
over the matter.

It was left to Nicolas Sarkozy to body-slam the money men with a ferocious 
assault on Anglo-Saxon finance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/27/davos-sarkozy-breakup-euro-unthinkable>
 which, he said, defied common sense and amounted to "a game of Russian 
roulette with our money, our savings". What, the French president asked, is the 
point of having rules if bankers simply make it their lives' missions to 
circumvent them? He reminded bankers that although they may be frustrated by 
slimmer profits and pay packets, the actions of a reckless financial industry 
had left "tens of millions of people unemployed who were in no way to blame and 
who paid for everything".

There are many reminders here in Davos that the global financial crisis and 
economic slowdown have hastened a realignment in global power. George Osborne 
talked of a "two- or three-speed recovery" with emerging markets bouncing back 
much faster than the west.

The French president used Davos to push his case for putting India, an African 
nation and a Latin American country on the UN security council. He asked why 
the dollar should remain the world's dominant currency and questioned whether 
structures established after the second world war were fit for the 21st century.

A poll commissioned by CNBC found that 48% feel the west is in decline, while 
only 27% think it isn't. And Medvedev declared that responsibility for global 
development now lies with the rapidly growing "Bric" economies – Brazil, 
Russia, India and China – shortly to be joined by South Africa, turning the 
grouping into "Brics".

In the bars and restaurants of Davos, those spheres of broadening influence 
were evident last week. A Russian cocktail night hosted by Medvedev's Skolkovo 
Foundation drew a big crowd, as did the Africa dinner hosted by Kofi Annan, 
Jacob Zuma and Tsvangirai. The South African delegation was easily spotted: 
they proudly wore scarves in the colours of their national flag everywhere.

The global head of the McKinsey management consultancy, Dominic Barton, 
observed that as these rapidly developing nations grew in stature, further 
economic shocks and price bubbles were inevitable: "I can't think of a country 
that got to a GDP-per-capita level of $10,000 without some sort of financial 
crisis along the way."

In a moment of relative frankness, Dimon accepted the need for a new financial 
order, predicting that in hundreds of years' time, people would look back at 
economic management in 2011 and view it with the same amazement that we look 
back on doctors "bleeding" patients in ill-fated efforts to cure ailments. 
Amazingly, he doesn't seem to believe that his own industry's game, memorably 
characterised by Sarkozy as "pass the parcel where everyone who passes the 
parcel makes a profit", will be viewed with the same disdain.
 