
In the village of Shadal Bazar in Afghanistan’s eastern district of Achin, 
dozens of people had gathered at the home of Haji Raees, a prominent elder, to 
celebrate his return from the hajj pilgrimage.


At around half past three on Wednesday morning, a US airstrike hit the 
guesthouse where the male guests were asleep, killing at least 15 people and 
injuring another 13.

That much seems uncontested. What remains a matter of dispute is the identity 
of those who died: according to the United Nations,at least 15 of those killed 
were civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/us-drone-strike-kills-civilians-isis-afghanistan>
, but local authorities said the only victims were militants of the Islamic 
State militant group.

A statement from the provincial governor of Nangarhar said 18 Isis members 
were killed, and that no women or children were among the casualties.

Suspected US drone strike targeting Isis killed civilians in Afghanistan, UN 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/us-drone-strike-kills-civilians-isis-afghanistan>
However, when the Guardian visited Jalalabad provincial hospital on Friday, 
the nine casualties still receiving treatment included a 12-year-old boy and 
two elderly men.


Dozens of men gathered to visit the injured said all victims were civilian, 
and produced a list with names of 14 casualties.

“If we were Daesh, do you think we would get together here?” said Obaidullah, 
a university student, using the Afghan term for Isis.

One man, Zarghun Shah, recalled the incident from his hospital bed where he 
was recovering from leg wounds, alongside his 12-year-old nephew Bilal. After a 
night of conversation and feasting on grilled sheep, both had been woken up 
around 3.30am by the explosion, and were caught in a rain of shrapnel. Bilal 
was injured in his shoulder and legs. His father was killed.

The US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> has yet to 
admit any wrongdoing. In a statement on Thursday, the US forces in Afghanistan 
said the incident was under investigation, but added that Isis puts civilians 
at risk by “deliberately surrounding themselves with civilians and dressing in 
female attire”.

Achin is one of four districts in Nangarhar province where Isis has gained 
significant control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/07/taliban-young-recruits-isis-afghanistan-jihadis-islamic-state>
. Still, locals from Shadal Bazar insisted the militants never operated less 
than a mile from the village, and there were police checkpoints nearby the 
house.

“There is no Daesh in the village and every night the police go on patrols,” 
said another recovering victim, Mohabad Khan, whose lower body was paralyzed 
when shrapnel hit his spine.

While Nato’s combat mission in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is over, the US has a mandate 
to kill or capture identified Isis or al-Qaida terrorists. While US airstrikes 
have put Isis on the defensive in Nangarhar, the military releases little 
information about drone strikes. Almost all are conducted in remote rural areas.


The provincial governor claimed that Haji Raees, the man whose house was 
targeted, was an Isis “facilitator”. However, villagers disagreed vehemently.

“If the authorities can prove that even one of these men were Daesh, they can 
imprison us. We will accept that,” said Herat Khan, the village chief.

Haji Raees himself survived with minor injuries but was unavailable for 
interview as he was attending a funeral in the village for his son Hekmatullah, 
a school principal who was killed in the strike.

Another of Haji Raees’ sons, Zabiullah, said he didn’t know why anyone would 
target his family’s house. “Everyone knew people were coming to congratulate my 
father,” he said.

At least one other person working with the government security forces was 
killed, and a driver who had worked for the Red Cross for over a decade was 
gravely injured, according to villagers.


Moallem Mashoq, district governor of Achin, said the US military had not 
coordinated with local security forces before the strike.

The US military has refused to comment on the UN’s allegations. A spokesman, 
Brig Gen Charles Cleveland, told the Guardian: “I want to emphasize that United 
States Forces Afghanistan takes all allegations of civilian casualties very 
seriously and we take every possible measure to avoid civilian casualties in 
all of our operations.”
 