
"Dead cat bounce" is an expression in foreign exchange markets to describe the 
behaviour of sharply discounted currencies that suddenly seem to recover. It is 
a warning not to be misled: dropped off a tall enough building, the deadest cat 
will bounce just a little.

Does that describe yesterday's English revival at Leeds? It would be as easy 
to tear down as it would to build up: a victory in a dead Test, abetted by a 
sporting declaration, in conditions as suited to batting as the previous day's 
had been suited to boating. Although it may lead to a television documentary 
some 20 years hence entitled 100 Per Cent Butchery, it probably means as little 
about the English game's long-term health as it proved did Headingley '81.

Yet the day was not entirely out of keeping with a series in which an 
excellent cricket team from Australia has beaten a good cricket side from 
England. Part of the Australian achievement in retaining the Ashes has been to 
prevent England sustaining its potential rather than merely brushing against it 
at intervals. A subtle release of Australian pressure and urgency - for there 
is no doubt that its bowling and outcricket were below par yesterday - and a 
state closer to equilibrium prevails. As Adam Gilchrist observed succinctly 
afterwards, in a tone suggesting some unfamiliarity with the words: "It felt 
like Test cricket."

It would be wisdom after the event to criticise Gilchrist's declaration. There 
is a story told about England's famous Test win at Port-of-Spain in March 1968 
following a charitable closure; when Garry Sobers arrived at customs in 
Georgetown for the next Test and was asked if he had anything to declare, he 
allegedly replied: "Not again."

One hopes that Gilchrist will not feel the same way. One could not have 
planned for Mark Butcher's innings any more than one could make contingency for 
a Lara or a Laxman. Certainly Gilchrist was altogether more nobly motivated 
than the last captain to issue such a challenge to a team led by Nasser 
Hussain, who it turned out had picked up a leather jacket and a fistful of rand 
for his trouble.

Gilchrist's on-field performance may, however, come under greater scrutiny. 
His use of Glenn McGrath for only eight overs after lunch and his faith in 
Brett Lee seemed hard to follow, while his failure to patrol the point and 
third man regions was costly. He also gave his untidiest display behind the 
stumps since Edgbaston. In the looming discussion about the successor to Steve 
Waugh, questions remain about what would be his triple burden as captain, 
keeper and key batsman. It might be like appointing as chief executive of 
Qantas someone who was already piloting the planes and passing out the peanuts 
as well.

Hussain, by contrast, was a figure of increasing authority yesterday. While 
Butcher's innings was a freak of nature, his skipper's influence was at the 
outset not less significant. As he did for Essex against the Australians at the 
end of June, he pulled Gillespie for an early six. The ball took an eternity to 
retrieve, as either an English supporter rubbed it on the concrete or an 
Australian smothered it in the juice of a Murray Mint, which seemed to 
underscore the blow's authority.

Hussain's body language was similarly positive. Some batsmen wander to square 
leg between deliveries, some prod away at a length; Hussain seldom deserts his 
post and steps punctually into line.

More positive body language was visible at intervals during this match behind 
the Rugby Stand. Under the supervision of Australia's physiotherapist Errol 
Alcott, Steve Waugh could be seen jogging back and forth; he also led 
Australian slip catching practices and batted a number of times in the nets. 
This series has produced one astounding comeback; Waugh's could be the second.
 