
England won a great victory on a magnificent stage here yesterday, beating 
Australia by 12 runs in a match that was over in three days' play and seemed 
like three weeks.

Asked to make only 175 to win, Australia reached 130 for three with the Waugh 
twins well set and appeared to have the game, and the series, sewn up before 
their own complacency and an astounding effort from the England pace attack saw 
seven wickets fall for 32 runs in a breathtaking finale.

England will now go to Sydney for the final Test, beginning on Saturday, 
knowing that the Ashes may have been lost but another win will square the 
series.

The hero was Dean Headley, a bowler occasionally profligate but as honest as 
the day is long - and they were long here - with a big heart and a capacity to 
produce destructive spells. Second-innings figures of six for 60 represent the 
first time he has taken five wickets in a Test innings. More specifically he 
took five for 26 in an unbroken spell of 10 overs, four of them in a dizzy 14 
balls that broke the back of the Australian innings.

He scarcely had the energy to drag himself from the field at the end. His 
effort was crowned by Darren Gough, who applied the coup de grace with maximum 
efficiency.

The digital clock on the giant electronic screen read 7.33 when Gough 's 
reverse-swung yorker thumped into Glenn McGrath's feet for the lbw decision to 
finish the match and a session that had begun with the start of the Australian 
innings precisely four hours and just over 46 overs earlier, probably the 
longest unbroken period of play in Test match history.

It was brought about by an anomaly in the new International Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council ruling that legislates for 
time to be made up if play is lost to inclement weather.

A session then that was already to be elongated by the statutory addition of 
half an hour was extended further when the England innings was ended slightly 
less than 30 minutes before tea, bringing the scheduled interval forward by 
that length of time. More time was added when, with 14 runs still needed, three 
wickets in hand but, crucially, Steve Waugh at the crease in a burgeoning 
partnership with Matthew Nicholson, Mark Taylor opted to claim another 
discretionary half-hour (actually eight more overs) in order to finish the 
match.

England required only 10 deliveries as, in quick succession, Headley had 
Nicholson caught at the wicket and Gough yorked Stuart MacGill and McGrath to 
spark scenes of celebration from the large English support.

The game had seemed beyond England ever since Steve Waugh's and MacGill's 
ninth-wicket partership on the second evening of play gave Australia a 
first-innings lead of 70. When England were then bowled out by tea yesterday 
for 244 they seemed to have even less hope.

Yet there were pockets of resistance: Alec Stewart completed a half-century to 
go with his first-innings hundred before being caught at silly point, Nasser 
Hussain played superbly for 50 before smacking a catch to point, and Graeme 
Hick made 60 good runs before he was yorked by Damien Fleming.

But what really gave England their first sniff was an innings from Alan 
Mullally, who not only got off the mark but clumped McGrath for a couple of 
boundaries, making 16 of a last-wicket stand of 23 with Angus Fraser.

It gave England something to bowl at in the knowledge that in the past 36 
years no side has chased 200 successfully at the MCG and that Australia have a 
blind-spot when it comes to chasing low totals: Headingley 1981 Edgbaston that 
same year The Oval at the end of the last Ashes series when, in their pursuit 
of 124, Caddick and Tufnell blew them away for 104 and agains the South 
Africans at Sydney in 1993-94 when Fanie de Villiers did the same as they lost 
by five runs in pursuit of 117.

Australia began auspiciously and positively with a first-wicket stand of 31 in 
six overs between Taylor and Michael Slater. They were going to take this game 
by storm and Headley, who opened the bowling with Gough , was on the verge of 
being replaced if nothing happened. Then from nowhere he found a shooter that 
thudded into Slater's pads, so obviously out that the batsman decided life was 
too short to wait for a decision from Steve Bucknor and gave himself out.

It was the spark. Five overs later Mullally, who was to bowl a testing and 
crucially economical 10-over spell himself, got Taylor hooking to long leg, 
where Headley had time to contemplate the meaning of life before the ball 
plummeted into his hands. Next ball 41 for two ought to have become 41 for 
three when, with the batsmen having crossed, Justin Langer edged the ball very 
low to Hick's right at second slip only for the chance to elude him. The 
subsequent third-wicket stand of 62 between Langer and Mark Waugh seemed to 
have sealed the game.

A moment of magic changed it, for Langer, pulling Mullally viciously to square 
leg, was astounded to see Mark Ramprakash, recalling the breathtaking effort 
that did for Jacques Kallis at Headingley last August, hold a catch as good as 
anyone has witnessed.

It was phenomenal and in Taylor's estimation fired England up. Headley had 
Mark Waugh caught by Hick for 43 and then, with the score on 140, had Darren 
Lehmann caught at the wicket, Ian Healy caught by Hick once more and Fleming 
leg-before wicket.

Nicholson played calmly and, with the bowling tiring, Steve Waugh began to 
take control. His only mistake in the game proved a big one. Having decided to 
carry the game to its conclusion, he saw Nicholson spar and offer a catch to 
Hegg then, rather than protect MacGill, he once more allowed the tailender the 
strike. In the first innings it had worked in the second, with Gough running 
out of the fading sunlight and into the shadow of the giant stands, it failed. 
Waugh was left stranded.
 