
One late night too many caught up with Lleyton Hewitt as he crashed out of the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 7-5, 6-3, 
6-3 to third seed Novak Djokovic. Hewitt's five-set epic with Marcos Baghdatis 
had not finished until 4.33am on Sunday morning and although he broke early in 
the first two sets Djokovic had the extra class and energy to seal the match.

"I was very, very, very nervous," Djokovic said afterwards. "In the first set 
I was lucky, but then afterwards I relaxed and tried to be aggressive and take 
control of the match which I did. Of course, Lleyton was very tired from the 
Baghdatis match a couple of nights ago, so I took my opportunities."

Hewitt admitted that his body clock had been affected by Sunday's late finish. 
"I didn't feel too bad," he said. "I felt ready when I had to go on the court. 
I started pretty well. As the match went on, maybe I lost that sharpness a 
little bit."

Roger Federer had staved off sleep to see some of Hewitt's marathon with 
Baghdatis but the defending champion showed few signs of tiredness as he beat 
No13 seed Thomas Berdych in straight sets 6-4, 7-6 (9-7), 6-3.

Federer did lag slightly in the second set when Berdych held two set points. 
"He was playing better [than me] in the second set, honestly," said Federer. 
"He got an early lead, then played well in the breaker. In the end, maybe he 
made a wrong shot selection. It's unfortunate for him, but jeez, it's good for 
me to win in straight sets."

Federer had looked imperious in the first set, dropping just four points on 
his own serve, and after his scare in the second was again dominant in the 
third as he broke Berdych to love in the sixth game before serving out the 
match in complete control.

The Swiss will play James Blake in the last eight after the American beat 
19-year-old Marian Cilic 6-3, 6-4, 6-4. It was a particularly satisfying win 
for Blake, who had previously failed to reach a grand slam quarter-final 
outside the US Open.

Blake's has failed to beat Federer in their seven previous meetings, but says 
he has been given hope by Janko Tipsarevic, who took the defending champion to 
five sets earlier in the tournament. "It just shows that there are enough guys 
out there that on their best day can give him trouble," said Blake. "It 
hopefully can raise my spirits to know that I can do the same but I've always 
felt that. Every time I've stepped out on the court with him I've felt if I 
play my best, I give myself a shot."

Also through to his first Australian Open quarter-final is David Ferrer who 
beat fellow Spaniard Juan Carlos Ferrero 7-5, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1.

Men's results, fourth round: 

(1) Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> (Swi) bt 
(13) Tomas Berdych (Cze) 6-4, 7-6 (9-7), 6-3
 (12) James Blake (USA) bt Marin Cilic (Cro) 6-3, 6-4, 6-4, (5) David Ferrer 
(Spa) bt (22) Juan Carlos Ferrero (Spa) 7-5, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1
(3) Novak Djokovic (Ser) bt (19) Lleyton Hewitt (Aus) 7-5, 6-3, 6-3
 