
The final entries for Champions Day are, of course, dominated by horses from 
high‑profile stables but one of the most interesting runners comes from a 
relatively unsung yard just outside London. Librisa Breeze, a grey possessed of 
an astonishing turn of foot, is based near Radlett in Hertfordshire with Dean 
Ivory and will try to give his trainer a first taste of Group One glory in the 
Champions Sprint.

This counts as a major step up in class for Librisa Breeze, who has been 
running in handicaps, but anyone who saw his latest success would understand 
why connections are now tempted to tilt at something better. As he entered the 
final furlong that day atAscot <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> a 
fortnight ago, he was near the back of the 18-runner field and seemingly stuck 
behind toiling rivals but somehow passed the lot when Robert Winston was at 
last able to find a way through.

Frankie Dettori in Champions Day scare after mount escapes starting stalls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/racing-ascot-champions-day-frankie-dettori>
It was an effort that provoked strong words from the Racing Post’s normally 
conservative “close-up” analyst: “Tremendous burst when in the clear and 
stormed into the lead final strides.” But the focus of the racing world that 
day was on Group One action at Newmarket and at Chantilly, where Arc weekend 
was under way, so the performance has not perhaps had due recognition.

“It was a little bit special,” Ivory reflected on Thursdayas he inspected 
yearlings at Newmarket’s Book 3 sale. “Like there was rocket fuel in there.”

Librisa Breeze was, until Monday, also being considered for the handicap that 
closes Saturday’s card and would probably have started favourite. But Ivory 
feels it is time to aim rather higher.

“It looks a really hot race,” he conceded, and there is no arguing about that, 
with Quiet Reflection, Mecca’s Angel and Shalaa in the lineup. “And it’s hard 
to say what chance he would have because he only ran two weeks ago.

“He’s come out of the race very well but, until he runs, you wouldn’t know. 
Stepping back to six furlongs isn’t a problem. The softer the ground, the 
better.”

Bookmakers have Librisa Breeze sixth in the Sprint betting, from 14 runners, 
at odds of 10-1. That counts as being quite well fancied, by the usual 
standards of Ivory’s Group One runners.

Tropics was sent off at 66-1 when Ivory pitched him into the July Cup a couple 
of years ago but managed to finish second, having been right in the argument at 
the furlong pole. T he following year, at 25-1, he was second in the same race, 
beaten just a nose.

Ivory feels that he has unfinished business with Saturday’s contest, since 
Tropics was also second in it in 2014, while Sirius Prospect was third in 2012, 
despite rearing in the stalls. “This might just be the one,” he said of Librisa 
Breeze. “We’ll see. I’m always hopeful. I always thought he was going to be a 
real good horse but what’s surprised me about him is the speed and how he 
finishes off his races.”

Hugo Palmer has Galileo Gold in peak condition for Queen Elizabeth II Stakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/galileo-gold-ascot-hugo-palmer-queen-elizabeth-stakes>
Librisa Breeze’s task is made slightly less intimidating by the absence of 
Limato, who was favourite for the Sprint until being withdrawn yesterday. 
Connections say they will go instead to the Breeders’ Cup in search of faster 
ground.

The QEII also has a new favourite, Minding having taken over from Ribchester 
at the top of the betting after being confirmed for the mile race rather than 
the longer Champion Stakes. Aidan O’Brien’s filly is down to 2-1 from 3s, while 
eight of her dozen rivals are now available at bigger odds than Thursday 
morning.

The Champion Stakes field has been reduced by eight to a manageable 11, though 
that may still be enough to provoke traffic problems at the first bend. The 
Irish raiders Fascinating Rock and Found, who werefirst and second last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/17/talking-horses-saturdays-best-bets-plus-the-latest-racing-news>
, have been given the two widest stalls. The favourite, Almanzor, will break 
from stall one on the inside, which might be a tricky berth if his recent 
hold-up tactics are to be maintained.

Silvestre de Sousa, who became champion jockey last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/03/champion-jockey-elect-silvestre-de-sousa-title-shot>
 after being ditched by Godolphin, will wear the royal blue silks in the 
Champion Stakes after being booked by Saeed bin Suroor for Racing History. 
De Sousa had his first ride for Bin Suroor since 2014 when winning a Chelmsford 
maiden on Hersigh last week. “It’s good news, he must be back in the good 
books,” the jockey’s agent, Shelley Dwyer, said.
 