
Ariel Sharon's passing away marks the end of an extraordinary eight-year 
journey from life to death after the former Israeli prime minister suffered a 
massive stroke at his farm in the Negev desert.

Since 2006 Sharon had lain in a vegetative state in a private room at a 
long-term care centre near Tel Aviv, tended round the clock by dedicated 
nursing staff and watched over by two plain-clothes agents from the Shin Bet, 
Israel's internal security agency.

He never regained consciousness, although doctors and family members insisted 
he showed a limited response to stimuli. He was dependent on fluids and 
nutrients delivered through a feeding tube, although he breathed without the 
assistance of the artificial respirator stationed in his room.

The delicate question of how long the former prime minister should be kept 
alive without hope of recovery was rarely discussed openly. According to his 
son Gilad, medical staff urged the family to allow him to die in the aftermath 
of the stroke, declaring "the game was over".

The family rejected the advice. "I would never be able to forgive myself if we 
did not fight to the end," Gilad Sharon wrote in a biography of his father 
published in 2011.

The cost of Sharon's medical care was recently estimated 
<http://www.jpost.com/National-News/Ariel-Sharons-family-to-pay-part-of-his-medical-costs>
 at $456,000 (£277,000) a year. The bill was paid entirely by the state until 
2011, when a parliamentary committee decided it should be shared between the 
government and the Sharon family.

The stroke that in effect ended Sharon's life was blamed largely on his 
voracious appetite. Throughout his political career – but with increasing 
urgency as the prime minister grew older and bigger – Sharon's medical advisers 
repeatedly warned him of the dangers of obesity. They cautioned him to curb his 
legendary consumption of food and cigars, and to take regular exercise. The 
injunctions were heard and ignored.

A typical meal with friends and family would include hamburgers, steak, lamb 
chops, shish kebab and an array of Middle Eastern salads, followed by chocolate 
cake, according to the Israeli media. An adviser said he had "been told he 
needs to go on a diet since 1965".

He was a regular customer of a rundown restaurant in Beit Jala, a Palestinian 
Christian village next to Bethlehem, trapped behind the imposing concrete wall 
that Sharon built, where the mouthwatering smell of barbecued chicken permeates 
the neighbourhood. According to the owner, Nakhle Qaabar, Sharon's unmistakable 
form materialised twice in the restaurant itself, but mostly he would dispatch 
a government driver to fetch a super-sized takeaway.

The lifestyle took its toll.

On 18 December 2005, the prime minister was rushed to hospital after suffering 
a stroke. He was examined and treated, and discharged after two days with 
surgery to repair a small hole in his heart scheduled for early January.

On 4 January 2006, the night before that appointment, Sharon suffered another 
stroke at his beloved ranch in the Negev desert. A paramedic urged that he be 
taken immediately to the nearest hospital, in the city of Be'er Sheva. But 
Sharon's personal doctor, Shlomo Segev, who had been consulted over the phone 
by Sharon's son Gilad, countermanded this with an instruction to keep him at 
the ranch until Segev could get there from Tel Aviv.

Half an hour later, Sharon collapsed in the bathroom. An ambulance was 
summoned to take him to hospital in Be'er Sheva, but its departure was delayed 
when security personnel could not manoeuvre the stretcher carrying the prime 
minister into the vehicle.

As it was finally about to leave, Segev arrived and redirected the ambulance 
to the world-class Hadassah hospital on the edge of Jerusalem, 55 miles (90km) 
away. En route, the doctor rejected the offer of a helicopter transfer.

By the time Sharon arrived at the Hadassah, his condition had seriously 
worsened. He was operated on for seven hours, the first of several marathon 
surgical procedures, but never regained consciousness.

After four months at the Hadassah, the former prime minister – whose 
successor, Ehud Olmert, had by this time won a general election – was moved to 
the Sheba Medical Centre where he remained until his death. According to those 
close to the former prime minister his health fluctuated, although he never 
emerged from his coma. He breathed independently, according to Dov Weissglas, a 
former close aide to Sharon. "He is breathing spontaneously, not on a 
respirator,"he told the Guardian six years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/22/israelandthepalestinians.mainsection>
. "If you disconnect him from the feeding machine, it means he would die slowly 
out of hunger and thirst – no one on earth will do it. He is very much alive, 
in terms of somebody who is in a coma."

Gilad, his wife, Inbal, and his brother, Omri, took turns to visit Sharon 
every day, insisting that they saw signs of response when they read aloud or 
played music in his hospital room. According to friends, the brothers were 
convinced their father might make a miraculous recovery.

"His children and the doctors who are treating him see different signs that he 
is aware, that he knows what is going on," Reuven Adler, a family friend, told 
the Guardian in 2007. "It's difficult to tell if he listens, if he sees. They 
tell me: 'We saw an improvement today,' or: 'He reacted fantastically today.' 
The two sons are very serious guys. They are not imagining these things."

Four years later, Gilad was still optimistic. "When he is awake, he looks at 
me and moves fingers when I ask him to," he toldthe New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/21/world/middleeast/6-years-after-stroke-ariel-sharon-still-responsive-son-says.html?pagewanted=all>
 in 2011. "He lies in bed, looking like the lord of the manor, sleeping 
tranquilly. Large, strong, self-assured. His cheeks are a healthy shade of red. 
When he's awake, he looks out with a penetrating stare. He hasn't lost a single 
pound; on the contrary, he's gained some."

A year ago, medical experts said Sharon had exhibited "robust activity" in his 
brainduring tests <http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4337599,00.html>. 
Scans showed the former prime minister responding to pictures of his family and 
recordings of his son's voice. However, doctors said the chances of him 
regaining consciousness were almost zero.

Sharon's kidneys began to fail last month, and a decision was taken not to put 
him on dialysis. Other vital organs subsequently showed signs of failure. 
Although his doctors spoke in recent days of his strong heart and his fighting 
spirit, they knew it was only a matter of time.

The former soldier and political leader is expected to be laid to rest at the 
ranch in the Negev desert that he loved dearly. On a hill, under a willow tree, 
lies the grave of his second wife, Lily, who died in 2000. The following year,
an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/nov/07/israel1>, he said, with tears in 
his eyes: "One day, I will be buried here too, next to my wife." Eight years 
after he last uttered a word, his wish is about to be realised.
 