
Last week, when the high court of Singapore convicted the British author Alan 
Shadrake for contempt, he knew that he faced the possibility of imprisonment 
for the offence. Today that became a reality whenthe 75-year-old was sentenced 
to six weeks in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/16/alan-shadrake-jailed-contempt-singapore>
 and fined for "scandalising the judiciary" for remarks in his book Once a 
Jolly Hangman: Singapore Justice in the Dock. The book includes an interview 
with Darshan Singh, the former chief executioner at Singapore's Changi prison, 
who was said to have executed 1,000 prisoners over half a century.

However, the central theme of the book is Shadrake's claim that Singapore's 
legal system does not accord equal treatment to those suspected of capital 
offences. The death penalty is mandatory for a number of offences including 
murder and possession of drugs over a certain amount. InSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>, as a result, he asserts that the 
question of who lives and who dies is an arbitrary lottery.

He explains that this is because the manipulation and decision-making takes 
place at the time of investigation and prosecution. Those who are rich, 
powerful or likely to have the backing of a significant trade partner escape 
charges that carry the death penalty. Those who have no influence behind them 
are charged with capital crimes, convicted, sentenced to death and executed. If 
his analysis is correct, it makes a mockery of the claim that the law is 
applied equally to all and without discrimination.

With a population of 5 million, Singapore has one of the world's highest per 
capita execution rates. While official figures are not produced, according to 
Amnesty International there have beenat least 400 executions over the past two 
decades <http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA36/001/2004>.

Shadrake's case highlights two important issues. First, the power to punish a 
person for contempt on the ground of "scandalising the court" is in many parts 
of the world a rare offence. Legitimate criticism of judicial conduct is 
protected by the right to free expression and in turn strengthens public 
confidence. In Britain the judiciary has been subject to heavy and sometimes 
personalised criticism arising from miscarriage of justice cases. But it has 
never sought to invoke a criminal prosecution for "scandalising the judiciary".

The prospect of judges punishing someone in the matter of a book criticising 
the legal system creates a very dangerous precedent. The judiciary should not 
be judges in their own cause. To convict a man for writing a book of this 
nature, and furthermore to imprison him, fails to deal with the issues he has 
raised; and this is the second point.

Shadrake seeks to place the application of the death penalty in context. He 
argues that politics, international trade and business determine who lives and 
who dies at the gallows; and that foreign nationals, whose cases may result in 
negative political and economic fallout, have succeeded in escaping execution.

He highlights the execution of the migrant Filipino maid Flor Contemplacion 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flor_Contemplacion> – whose treatment brought 
relations between the two countries to such a crisis point that Shadrake says 
the next Filipino maid could not be executed – and the case ofJulia Bohl 
<http://articles.cnn.com/2002-03-28/world/singapore.drugs_1_drug-trafficking-drugs-ring-death-penalty?_s=PM:asiapcf>
, a German woman who escaped the death penalty although she had originally been 
arrested for possession of drugs that carried a capital charge. Shadrake claims 
that because of the likely repercussions, the authorities eventually charged 
her with a lesser offence to which she pleaded guilty and for which she was 
ultimately sentenced to five years in prison.

The book has drawn important attention to serious issues that surely require 
further investigation. Such disturbing details are of general concern and 
provide a strong basis for self-criticism by the Singapore government and 
perhaps even a commission of inquiry. Instead Shadrake finds himself convicted 
of an attack on the judiciary. He has suffered because he chose to write a book 
that has brought to the fore the politics of the death penalty. Let us hope he 
has not suffered in vain.
 