
The Def Jam label holds an almost mythical status within hip-hop. How come? 
After all, it was far from the first to put out rap music and, though it 
released numerous seminal records (Run DMC, Public Enemy, EPMD), there are 
perhaps not so many as you might think.

Still, there is no label whose fortunes seem so intertwined with hip-hop's 
own, tracing the genre's growth from cottage industry in the 80s via blue-chip 
market leader in the early noughties to today's clumsy and somewhat grotesque 
behemoth (last year Def Jam even signed execrable tweeny rappers N-Dubz).

Maybe it's simply because Def Jam has outlived its peers, or maybe there's 
something particularly iconic about that logo – the D that looks like a halved 
12-inch vinyl and the J resembling the arm of a turntable. Most likely, though, 
the label's ongoing significance is best summed up by Def Jam's co-founder 
Russell Simmons. In his 2002 autobiography, Life and Def, published three years 
after he sold his share in the company to Universal Music for $120m, he wrote: 
"My life has largely been about promoting the anger, style, aggression and 
attitude of urban America to a worldwide audience."

As with Simmons, so his offspring, because Def Jam has always seemed to 
recognise the worth of hip-hop music, while simultaneously acknowledging that 
the genre's value transcends music alone. It was Def Jam that launched Run DMC, 
with their box-fresh Adidas spawning a sneaker revolution. It was Def Jam that 
cut loose the white juvenilia of the Beastie Boys' first album, Licensed to 
Ill, and, of course, the righteous polemicising of Public Enemy. It was Def Jam 
who appointed Jay-Z CEO in 2004, arguably the musical equivalent of hiring a 
poacher to mind your grouse.

What's more, Def Jam's very origins seem curiously appropriate to hip-hop, a 
bastardised marriage of sounds, styles and sensibilities that probably 
shouldn't work, but does.

Go back to 1983 and Rick Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rick-rubin> 
is a 20-year-old, heavy-set, heavy-metal head from a Jewish Long Island 
neighbourhood. He fancies himself a musician and forms a high-school punk band 
calling themselves the Pricks, but Rubin's musical skills are notable mostly by 
their absence. He transplants to New York City, initially studying philosophy 
at NYU, and befriends Jazzy Jay, a prominent DJ in Afrika Bambaataa's Zulu 
Nation, who teaches him the basics of hip-hop production. Rubin borrows a 
little cash from his wealthy parents and together he and Jay produce It's Yours 
for rapper T La Rock. It's the first release on Def Jam (though distributed by 
Arthur Baker's Streetwise label) and it sells in its thousands from the nascent 
company's first office – Rubin's Greenwich Village dorm room.

Simmons, meanwhile, is a 26-year-old former dope dealer from Queens turned 
hip-hop impresario, arguably at a time before the industry merited such a 
thing. He's putting on block parties in Harlem and managing the likes of Kurtis 
Blow and Run DMC, the band that included, of course, his younger brother, 
Joseph "Run" Simmons.

Jay introduces Rubin to Simmons at Danceteria, the legendary Manhattan 
nightclub then on 21st Street, where rock kids, new wave hipsters and B-boys 
mix side by side. Simmons is impressed by Rubin's ear for a hit record, Rubin 
by the older man's evident street smarts and business savvy. Investing a few 
thousand dollars each, Def Jam proper is born. The first official release (with 
a Def Jam catalogue number) is LL Cool J's I Need a Beat, after the 16-year-old 
mails a demo to the NYU dorm. It's written by LL, Rubin and a friend of Rubin's 
called Adam Horovitz, then part of a thrash punk outfit called theBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys>. It sells more than 100,000 
copies and within a year Simmons has cut a distribution deal with major 
label, Columbia (the first of its kind in hip-hop).

Of course, Def Jam's success throughout the rest of the decade owed much to 
being in the right place at the right time – it didn't just move hip-hop into 
mainstream culture, but benefited from that movement, too. Nonetheless, 
hindsight illuminates a number of clever decisions that didn't necessarily look 
so obvious at the time; none more so than pairing Run DMC withAerosmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith> on the cover of Walk This Way, 
the video which finally took hip-hop on to the notoriously rap-phobic MTV.

By its ever-shifting, essentially non-hierarchical nature and the newly 
democratised world of music production in which it evolved, hip-hop was never 
going to have its Motown, which bestrode the genre and dominated (even named) 
its output. But Def Jam? It was about as close as hip-hop got.
 