
"There are moments when I wake up and read the newspapers and think: 'I tell 
you what, you do the fighting and I'll do the talking'." This was David Cameron 
responding to comments from top navy and RAF officers suggesting they could not 
continue coping with the demands being placed on them.

They were intervening publicly in the running dispute over the defence budget 
as British jets and ships were daily bombing targets in Libya. Not long before, 
Cameron had brushed aside concerns expressed privately by the defence chiefs on 
the wisdom of embarking on the Libya adventure.

His intervention raises the most serious question, far too often avoided 
because of its delicate constitutional implications, of when and how should the 
heads of the armed forces confront their political masters.

One of the many tragedies of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan - the latter in 
particular - is the reluctance of the service chiefs, and notably the army's 
generals, to warn ministers of the problems ahead. That they didn't, and the 
reasons why not, are explored in a extremely timely book published today. In 
Losing Small Wars, BritishMilitary <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> 
Failure in Iraq and Afghanistan (Yale University Press) , former intelligence 
officer Frank Ledwidge catalogues the failings and mistakes surrounding those 
two hopelessly unplanned and misconceived operations.

The failure to foresee, even to contemplate, the disasters provoked by the 
invasion of Iraq have been well documented, not least in evidence to the 
Chilcot inquiry. General Jonathan Shaw told Chilcot that Basra was "Palermo 
rather than Beirut", a comparison dismissed by Ledwidge, as "nothing more than 
self-delusion". Yet the generals did not heed any of the lessons, and they did 
not properly prepare their troops, before agreeing to deploy thousands to 
Helmand in 2006. They failed to do so because they were so desperate to wipe 
out the memories of southern Iraq, and try and restore their reputation 
especially among the US military.

They were also worried about what government ministers might be thinking. "The 
approach taken by senior British commanders", Ledwidge writes, "reflected more 
of what might be called a 'Yes, Prime Minister' culture than the required 
application of professional critical thought, let alone a will actively to 
challenge their masters". He quotes the observation by General Andrew Mackay 
who left the army prematurely soon after commanding British troops in Helmand, 
that senior officers allowed themselves to be "too acquiescent in rolling over 
to political bidding".

As a result, commanders resorted to the army's traditional "crack on" culture, 
charging in, ill-equipped and under-resourced, the prospect of medals their 
just reward. Ledwidge quotes from a 2009 study by the Royal United Services 
Institute which produced an extraordinarily telling statistic - a survey of 
more than a hundred army and Royal Marine middle-ranking officers showed that 
over a fifth - 27% - did not know what their government wished to achieve in 
Afghanistan or what their role was there.

Ledwidge says he has "no hesitation in calling the high command of the armed 
forces to account for...nothing less than dereliction of duty" He adds: "Yet no 
senior officer has been held to account; none has been dismissed; none has 
resigned; none has been removed from his position".

Sir Sherard Cowper-Coles, Britain's former ambassador in Kabul, has described 
the military's briefings as "misleadingly optimistic", adding: "Officials and 
ministers who questioned them were acciused of being defeatist or disloyal in 
some way". Tony Blair told Chilcot that "the very first thing is I ask the 
military for their view, and in their view in this instance [Iraq] was that 
they were up for doing it and that they preferred being right at the centre of 
things".

General Sir David Richards, the chief of defence staff, has called for more 
"strategic thinking", notably in the National Security Council set up by 
Cameron immediately after he took office last year. Ledwidge quotes the maxim 
that strategy "is the art of matching ends and means". With more than a hint of 
cockiness,

Cameron says he has "robust" discussions with Richards and his top brass. So 
far, they have shed more heat than light. Certainly there is no evidence that 
any of the strategic discussions, so vital for the future shape of Britain's 
armed forces and which Richards says he wants, has taken place.
 