
Abbey National's 15 turbulent years on the stock market ended last night as 
the bank's shares were delisted following its £9bn takeover by Banco Santander 
Central Hispano.

Abbey's 1.8 million shareholders will now swap one share in the former 
building society for one of the Spanish bank's. They will also receive 31p in 
cash for each of their Abbey shares on December 14.

After an usually large number of shares changed hands on its last day as a 
stock market-listed company, the 155-year-old institution became the first 
high-street bank to fall to a European rival. It becomes part of the 10th 
largest bank in the world.

While its new Spanish owners have pledged to keep the Abbey brand and its 
branch network, and improve its offers to customers, Abbey is forfeiting its 
independence after a disastrous foray by the previous management into high-risk 
bond investments and a costly expansion into life insurance.

For some analysts, Abbey's departure from the stock market - where it made its 
debut in 1989 - was a sad day.

Mark Thomas, banking analyst at the investment bank Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, 
said: "It's a very sorry end to what was a fundamentally good business. The 
country boy came to town and got mugged.

"It was a very nice, good business, which management tried to make exciting 
and failed."

When Abbey floated in 1989 it was the first building society to become a bank. 
It took almost a decade for any fellow building societies - such as Halifax and 
Northern Rock - to join it on the stock market.

Some 5.5 million customers received free shares at 130p, at the time 
increasing the number of private shareholders in Britain by more than half. 
Yesterday, the shares delisted at 643.5p - more than the price at which they 
were given away but below 1999's highs of £14.

The 1.8 million private investors who are now becoming Santander shareholders 
have had a rollercoaster ride as Abbey's management - led by the then chief 
executive, Peter Birch, and later Ian Harley - diversified away from mortgages 
and savings into areas as diverse as life insurance, by buying Scottish Mutual 
and Scottish Provident, and risky bond trading.

Most of the riskier investments have been shut down, although Abbey still owns 
Porterbrook, which supplies rolling stock to train operators.

Before he was ousted, Mr Harley tried to take over Bank of Scotland before 
Lloyds TSB made a spoiling bid for Abbey, which was blocked by the competition 
authorities. Other suitors were never far away, however, and Luqman Arnold, 
parachuted in as chief executive in 2002, and the chief operating officer, 
Stephen Hester, are now both leaving after making £4m and £2.5m respectively on 
share options.

The sale to Santander has not been without controversy. Lord Burns, Abbey's 
chairman, faced a stormy shareholder meeting and yesterday Royal Bank of 
Scotland ended its historic relationship with Santander after the Spanish 
bank's executives resigned from its board and vice versa.

Lord Burns, who is staying, described yesterday as a "momentous day". It was 
also a day picked by friends of Richard Chang, an Abbey employee who 
mysteriously fell to his death from the bank's headquarters in July, to protest 
outside the head office and appeal to witnesses.

Abbey investors will now receive a booklet explaining how to trade their new 
Santander shares. They will not receive share certificates but Crest Depository 
Interests entitling them to Spanish shares. While this may take some getting 
used to, it might at least avoid a rerun of the fiasco during flotation, when 
hundreds of thousands of share certificates were lost and some were found 
burning in a skip.
 