
The party leaders began this election year with bold talk of change, renewal, 
and new starts as they tried to put the expenses scandal and the annus 
horribilis of 2009 behind them. It seemed almost enough to make one think this 
election could be the one where the landscape shifts.

Almost. But the squabbling, plotting  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourleadership> and point scoring that 
has dominated politics this week showed that we are still in the land of 
business as usual. When you strip away the rhetoric, where is thenew politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform>, the big 
idea, the radical change that will inspire new confidence in our democracy?

David Cameron has promised us a new policy announcement a week until the 
election; you can be sure that the others will be at least as frenetic. But 
apart from the odd nudge and wink about an alternative voting system there is 
little to excite voters whose increasingly common response is to shrug and say 
of their elected representatives, "They're all as bad as each other". Although 
the promises might win popularity contests, where is the real engagement in 
trying to outdo one another with weekly pledges to cut taxes, abolish quangos 
or send more helicopters to Afghanistan?

This old-style top-down approach to campaigning, repackaging ideas and 
presenting them as radical plans seems to be the only way our current 
politicians know how to do politics. We need to stop the tub thumping and 
listen to how ordinary people want their democracy to function.

This weekend – 9 and 10 January – presents a perfect opportunity to do just 
this. On Saturday,Power2010 <http://www.power2010.org.uk/home> will bring 
together 200 people, representative of the UK as a whole, to debate and define 
a manifesto for democratic reform, seizing an historic opportunity to reshape 
the way we are governed.

This is the second stage of what is becoming the UK's greatest ever democratic 
brainstorm, through which Power2010 has generated nearly 4,500 submissions for 
reform from ordinary citizens since September 2009. This weekend, the maestro of
deliberative democracy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deliberative_democracy>, 
Professor James Fishkin <http://comm.stanford.edu/faculty/fishkin/> of Stanford 
University, will work with the delegates to help them agree their top ideas 
from those submitted. Fishkin's methodology has been developed over almost two 
decades and has been used in the US, Canada, Japan, Greece, Poland, Japan, the 
EU and now in China to engage the public in crucial decision-making. His 
political science colleagues back in California will work through Sunday night 
to provide the results of the deliberative process back to us here in the UK.

This is the first time a deliberative poll has been undertaken where the ideas 
were set by the people. And after the event, the top priorities will be put 
back out to the public for them to vote on. The ultimate choices will form a 
pledge, which every general election candidate will be asked to support, to 
ensure the next parliament is a reforming one.

So if people want fixed-term parliaments, then that is what we will put into 
the pledge; or if they want a ban on high donors funding political parties, the 
would-be politicians will be asked to commit to making this happen. And so the 
list will go on.

As a citizen, I ask myself, what would I prefer? To be told week after week by 
party leaders what will be good for the country and by implication good for me? 
Or to sit down with other members of the public, argue, debate, then finally 
agree what the issues are, and then together work out the best way to solve 
them? We have to find new ways of engaging people in politics; an invitation to 
vote every four or five years is not enough. Leaving it to the political class 
to decide the rules of the game, the shape and workings of our political system 
is not good enough.

It's a no-brainer. And since our politicians are citizens too, it should be a 
no-brainer for them. Let's forget the phoney war, and make 2010 a real year of 
political and democratic change.
 