
I bought a designer dress in the sales and when I got home I found a hole in 
the side seam. It looks like a design fault rather than a tear, and I don't 
think it can be repaired. Can I take it back?
Fiona

The first thing you should do is check your rights with Consumer Direct, a 
government-funded consumer rights helpline (consumerdirect.org.uk 
<http://www.consumerdirect.org.uk> or 0845 404 0506). In this instance, did you 
check there was nothing written on the product ticket that stated it was a 
faulty item? If there wasn't, then you're perfectly within your rights to 
return it, though most stores have a 28-day return policy and if you leave it 
too long the store can claim that you didn't act when you discovered the fault 
- and you were therefore happy with your purchase. As long as you're prompt, 
you have a right when buying anything at any price to expect that the goods are 
of a satisfactory quality unless otherwise stated at time of purchase. It 
sounds like a quick examination of your dress will show it can't be repaired 
and that a refund is the best solution.

I want to get my boyfriend some swimming trunks like those Daniel Craig wore 
in Casino Royale. Do you know where I can find them?
Astrid

If you want to spend the money and get the Bond factor, the trunks in the film 
are by La Perla Uomo. If you'll settle for something similar, Calvin Klein has 
simple fitted trunks. Or, for the beach poser who likes attention, there's 
Diesel's bold photo-print trunks or Topman's brown leaf-pattern swimshorts, 
which have a vintage Fifties feel. Online, there'sfigleaves.com 
<http://www.figleaves.com>, which has a great selection of men's swimwear. 
Check out labels like Sloggi Aruba, Speedo and Hom. If you'd like these trucks 
to be practical, too, Energie's designs include a selection of shorts made of 
super-fast-drying fabrics - although I doubt your boyfriend will need this if, 
like Bond, he's on the beach in the Bahamas.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 