
On finishing the story missions in Bungie’s online shooter, Destiny 
<http://www.destinythegame.com/uk/en>, many gamers had the same reaction: “Wha 
... what?!” Most of us got the quasi-mystical backstory concerning a gigantic 
moon-like Traveller imbuing the human race with super tech skills; and we 
understood that a force named “the Darkness” has been chasing the Traveller 
across the universe. But it was never really clear what the heck was going on 
beyond those airy concepts. How are the Guardians revived and who are they? 
What the heck is the deal with that royal family living in the space junkyard? 
And why do the Ghosts sound like Peter Dinklage waking up from a really long 
sleep? Also, what the hellare the Ghosts? So many mysteries.

There are, of course, rumours 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2014/09/29/was-this-the-original-storyline-for-destiny>
 that the Destiny story mode was originally much more dense, but that Bungie 
was forced to jettison great chunks of content as the planned release deadline 
loomed (hence the relegation of lots of narrative detail to the Grimoire cards, 
which you have to go online and READ). Of course, no one will ever confirm 
this, so what we’re left with is a very obtuse story experience and a rather 
unsatisfying conclusion. But withHouse of Wolves 
<http://www.destinythegame.com/expansions/expansion-two>, which is set to add 
five new story missions to the game, Bungie says it is determined to set things 
straight.

“One of the first things we set out to achieve with this expansion was a very 
clear, simple story,” says creative director, Christopher Barrett.

It is one that we can pay off via what the player is doing in the missions. 
The dialogue takes the player on a journey and there’s a clear villain that 
players understand – they’re able to capture him at the end. It’s a compelling 
story that has everything players need.”

Barrett conceded that Bungie will still be adding Grimoire cards to provide 
deeper lore for those who want it, but the main thrust of the story is all 
there. The new missions and quests will focus around the Reef and its rulers, 
who now seek revenge on the Fallen for having a bit of a rebellion. Petra Venj 
of the Queensguard and Variks, a Fallen loyal to the Queen, are set to be major 
characters. “One really cool aspect of the Variks character is that he speaks 
the Fallen language,” says lead designer, Matt Sammons. “As you come across 
enemies, he’ll translate what they say, so you get more of a sense of all the 
backstory we’ve built for the Fallen; you have this insight into their world.”

Bungie isn’t saying much else about the story content, just that the team has 
been working to improve the gameplay diversity of the missions, as well as the 
“sandbox” feel of the environments, making them more rewarding as explorable 
spaces. A new vehicle has been added, a heavy version of the pike, complete 
with a canon and, as Barrett puts it, “a few other tricks that you’ll discover 
when you play it”.

Added to this is perhaps the major new feature of the House of Wolves, the 
Prison of Elders, a set of co-operative three-player challenges, set in a 
series of vast arena spaces. Fireteams need to take on waves of increasingly 
difficult enemies before facing a major boss battle. There are five unique 
challenge bosses, as well as a culminative Level 35 giant named Skolas The Fell 
– all have their own defensive and offensive capabilities. During a demo 
session at Bungie HQ we were shown one of the newcomers, an ultra centurion who 
has a shield that cycles through different vulnerabilities, so players have to 
keep switching their weapons. “We wanted to make sure we didn’t just create 
giant bullet sponges,” says Barrett. “We know that has been a critique of the 
game and we feel that ourselves. We wanted to make these encounters much more 
dynamic and much more interesting in terms of strategy.”

The Prison of Elder challenges are split into different Guardian XP levels. 
The opening Level 28 version has a matchmaking system which means anyone can 
get in and play with strangers. After this, the level 32, 34 and 35 versions 
require players to come in with a pre-set Fireteam. Having experienced them we 
can see why. The challenges all work in the same way – you access the arenas 
series and have to beat every wave of enemy that comes at you – but the 
difficulty level gets extremely high so communication and intricately planned 
teamwork are a must. The reward, of course, is great handfuls of exclusive 
exotic and legendary loot.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgUz8ajMDAmw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgUz8ajMDAmw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgUz8ajMDAmw&media=>
 House of Wolves teaser 
We completed the basic Level 28 Prison of Elder challenge – a series of five 
arenas packed with enemies. In one area, a dramatic wasteland of trashed Vex 
transport gates and twisted machinery, there’s a swarm of goblins and 
minotaurs, complete with floating mines that explode on touch and leave a 
stasis field that slows down anyone who runs through it. The next arena is a 
foggy green-hued bone yard seething with thrall and acolytes: on the second 
wave the game adds a Critical Objective which involves destroying one or two 
large mines before they detonate and kill you all. Later we fight in a sort of 
steampunk inferno, littered with wrecked spacecraft and crawling with 
centurions. We also meet a variety of new shanks, including one that explodes 
in your vicinity; elsewhere there are shanks with line rifles and shanks with 
gun turrets. They’re pretty annoying. At one point we also find a Fallen relic, 
the powerful Scorch Cannon, a sort of grenade launcher that gives us a timed 
boost in firepower, like the Sword of Crota in the story campaign.

It’s fun stuff, relentless and demanding, and doing a very good job of 
providing the sort of tense Horde mode action we’ve been enjoying since Gears 
of War 2. And for Bungie, it’s there to provide a sort of transitional activity 
for intermediate players. “It’s kind of a bridge between Strike-level 
difficulty and Raid difficulty,” says Sammons. “With the match-made version you 
can get in and have fun quickly - you can get the sense, the rhythm of how it 
works, and then be ready for the challenge modes which are getting closer to 
the Raid level of difficulty.”

Destiny – what House of Wolves brings to competitive multiplayer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/29/destiny-house-of-wolves-trials-osiris-multiplayer>
Ah yes, the raids. Many Destiny fans were disappointed to see that there 
wouldn’t be one in House of Wolves. You get new multiplayer maps, and the fresh 
Trials of Osiris PvP challenge, as well as the new story missions and the 
Prison. But no raid. Why is that? “We love raids,” says Sammons. “Bungieis 
working on raids – raids will come in the future. But for House of Wolves, we 
really focused on what we wanted the end game to be – and that was Prison of 
Elders for us. We feel it’s addressing our entire audience.”

Barrett says that the need to bring the PvP experience up to the same level of 
value as PvsE was another objective with the package. “We wanted to create 
rewards that are enticing and compelling as those seen in Raids,” he says. “So 
now the best PvP players in the world are going to be wearing stuff that only 
they can get.”

We also saw another brief addition to House of Wolves, a single Strike mission 
named The Shadow Thief and set on the Moon’s Ocean of Storms. It’s a super 
quick skirmish against ogres, reaver vandals, and a boss that continually warps 
to fresh locations; all set in a familiar warren of caverns and computer 
workstations. Beyond all this, of course, there are the systemic changes, 
including gear ascension that increases the maximum light capabilities of all 
weapons as well as legendary and exotic gear.
 A close encounter during the new House of Wolves strike mission Photograph: 
Activision 
“We also created a whole bunch of new bounties that Petra will be offering, 
and those tie in to the new public events,” adds Barrett. “The other thing we 
wanted to do was create more variety for players, so with the Prison of Elders, 
there are new challenges that come out every week so you can’t shoot through 
everything in the a couple of days. Petra’s bounties rotate, too, so you get 
new ones after the first week. We’re trying to pace things out a little bit.”

I guess it’s up to every fan to decide whether this is enough, though for 
committed players, House of Wolves does offer up a good range of content. It 
also doubtless represents the ongoing pattern for Destiny: additional strikes, 
challenges, gear and weapons, along with multiplayer maps and modes – but also 
a few reactive features that respond to fan feedback. Bungie is keen to stress 
how important that part is.

“As the game is released into the wild, we play it ourselves and understand it 
better as players,” says Sammons. “When we were developing House of Wolves we 
had that perspective in mind: what would we like to see as players of the game?”

 * Keith Stuart attended a press trip to Bungie in Seattle with other European 
journalists. The travel and accommodation costs were met by Activision.  