
The Reef is open. That’s the high concept behind House of Wolves, Destiny’s 
second downloadable content package. The strange floating junkyard that players 
glimpsed all too briefly during the game’s story missions will provide the core 
of the expansion, and the focus of its new competitive (PvP) and co-operative 
(PvE) content.

Here lurk the Awoken, a human race that once fled to the outer reaches of the 
galaxy when the period of glorious galactic expansion was brought to a 
cataclysmic end by The Darkness. Now the tribe lives among the abandoned 
remains of a thousand derelict starships, ruled over by a Game of Thrones-like 
royal family. The Fallen, one of the alien races seeking to invade Earth, has 
rebelled against the Awoken, and now their queen has enlisted the help of the 
Guardian to seek revenge: her key target, the Fallen sect known as the House of 
Wolves.

It’s a typical Destiny narrative – obtuse and shrouded in backstory – but, as 
Bungie revealed in a recent Twitch stream, it provides an intriguing new social 
space (The Reef’s Vestian Outpost), new bounties, new quests and a new activity 
named the Prison of Elders. The developer isn’t revealing any more about the 
new co-op content right now; instead, it has been showing of its four new 
multiplayer maps and – the most interesting addition – the Trials of Osiris 
weekly event, a gruelling 3v3 elimination contest that will run every weekend.
 Players can earn unique weapons, armour and other items by blasting through a 
Trials weekend. Photograph: Activision 
It works a little like Counter Strike, or Search and Destroy in Call of Duty. 
Teams compete in a series of matches, and the first to five wins claims the 
victory. There are no automatic respawns, but players are able to revive downed 
teammates after a thirty-second wait. The more teams you defeat, the better 
your haul of rewards at the end of the trials – and according to Bungie, the 
competition will have its own unique weapons and armour.

The idea behind Trials is to create a PvP equivalent of raids – in other 
words, a challenge aimed at experienced players with a lot of high-end 
equipment. And as with raids, there’s no matchmaking – you need to come in with 
two equally skilled friends. For a lot of players this will be a prohibitive 
rule, and may well cause a whole new wave of anger and frustration from the 
community, many of whom are now using third-party group finding websites to 
create raid parties. But for Bungie, it’s all about rewarding experienced teams.

“We wanted to increase the level of investment in PvP,” explains design lead, 
Lars Bakken. “The trials experience is a way of creating a PvP endgame, so 
power matters: you have come in with your best gear. But you can also earn the 
best gear in the game by playing in Trials. So if PvE is less interesting to 
you, but you care about winning and you like getting the best stuff, this is 
another way to get to the endgame. We wanted multiple ways for you to get 
there.”

To enter the event you need to purchase a ticket called the Trials Passage – 
then if you lose three Trials, you’re bumped out of the competition and have to 
pay 100 glimmer to come back. During play, you may also be randomly given 
Passage Coins that can be used to buy buffs. One lets you start with a game in 
hand, one scrubs your first loss off the records and another makes one win 
count as two.

We played on the small Burning Shrine map with its mass of interconnected 
walkways and central battle zone. Immediately, with the loss of auto-respawns, 
the feel of the game changes. It’s much more guarded and cautious, and using 
scenic advantages like higher platforms for better sight lines, becomes a much 
more pressing consideration. In our matches, super abilities also came to the 
fore, providing the decisive attack in a number of rounds. Basically, this is 
no place to come with teammates who don’t know the maps and don’t work closely 
together to spot enemies.

Once you’re done, you visit new character Brother Vance at the Vestian 
Outpost, basically the Trials overlord, who hands out the tiers of rewards. It 
looks like there are six tiers at the moment, from Stone up to Gold, each 
offering an array of exclusive goodies.

“Trials came about pretty organically,” says PvP design lead Derek Carroll on 
the origins of the event. “We were trying to create more of a hardcore mode, 
just something different from what we’ve done before, but something that was 
still very Destiny. If Control and Rumble are at one end of the spectrum in 
terms of intensity and personal responsibility, Elimination is on the extreme 
other end: every second-to-second decision you make matters to you and your 
team – they know thatyou died, not just somebody!”

The team had already started tweaking the rulesets with the Skirmish and 
Salvage modes, but this time they then started looking outside of PvP 
altogether. “I remember at one point someone saying, ‘what would it be like if 
we actually added wipes, like wipes from the Raid or from Strikes, into PVP?’,” 
says recalls Bakken. “We thought: ‘oh that’s interesting’. So under the hood, 
Trials is using the technical underpinnings of what happens in a wipe – that’s 
how the rounds work. The first time we did that we thought, OK, this is pretty 
cool and we went from there. We’ve had to bring in new UI elements, all the 
additional stuff that tells you whether you’re winning or losing, the mid-round 
carnage report, all of those things came out of the mode feeling completely 
different from anything we’d had before.”
 The new Black Shield map. Photograph: Activision 
Beyond Trials of Osiris are the four new multiplayer maps: Black Shield, 
Thieves’ Den, Widow’s Court and thePlayStation 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> exclusive Timekeeper. 
The Mars-based Black Shield is an old Cabal firebase on the moon of Phobos. 
It’s a tiny map, a dense clutter of narrow passageways snaking around the 
building’s exterior, with Mars looming in the background. Thieves’ Den, 
meanwhile, is a Fallen hideout in the Ishtar Sink on Venus, another 
claustrophobic rat run, with small rocky chambers interlinked by narrow 
passageways that open up on to a sheer cliff face (this offers a few 
hair-raising leap points, allowing quicker access to other areas – if you’re 
confident in your jumping skills). Here, the Control mod capture points are 
only a few metres apart so it’s a constant frantic firefight.


The most interesting of the generally available maps though is Widow’s Court, 
set in one of Earth’s irradiated dead zones. The remains of a beautiful gothic 
town provide the backdrop to a much larger and more open environment, complete 
with rusted vehicles and overgrown road networks. One of the control points is 
in a beautiful cathedral building, while the others are in miniature 
courtyards, so the longer sight lines are countered by some blind corners and 
risky cover positions. It’s less frenzied than the others, offering a more 
tactical experience.
 The Thieves’ Den is an isolated Fallen hideout on Venus; the players are 
wearing some impressive custom gear. Photograph: Activision 
Finally, the PS4-only Timekeeper is another smaller map, this time taking 
place within an enormous Vex machine in Merdian Bay, Mars. Once again it’s a 
labyrinth of arched tunnels and overlooked chambers – one of the control points 
has a sort of gallery above it, allowing for some easy potshots against unwary 
objective players. When you do get outside, you see the desert dunes rolling 
out endlessly toward the red horizon.


For Bungie, though, it seems the greatest concern has been to align the 
Crucible experience alongside the PvE content – to make it as valuable and 
relevant to longterm players. “One of the things we’re doing with House of 
Wolves is making sure Crucible no longer feels sub-optimal in terms of your 
investment in the game,” says Bakken. “Across the board we doubled the marks 
and reputation gains for every match, everywhere in the Crucible. We doubled 
the amount of engrams you get, so you’re going to see blues drop. We added in 
12 new purples just in the reward stream so you’re going to see legendaries 
drop just by playing in the Crucible.
 Widow’s Court is the largest and most visually compelling of the new maps, 
set in a ruined European city. Photograph: Activision 
“Beyond that, we took the idea of the daily Crucible featured play list, which 
shows up on the main page of the Director, and changed it all. So now, each 
day, by completing one game in the daily featured list, you get a reward 
package that includes motes of light, passage coins which allow you to buy 
buffs in the Trials of Osiris experience and then engrams as well. Playing one 
game in that daily featured PvP list is just as good as playing in the daily 
story or doing patrols and turning in bounties: it’s going to give you a 
package of goodies.”

The big question, of course, is whether all of this represents enough new 
stuff for Destiny players to fork out another £20. Bungie is keeping the 
cooperative content under wraps right now, so that’s a tough one to call. 
Certainly, there is an attempt to address some of the complaints about the 
Crucible here – that for many players, it doesn’t feel as rewarding or relevant 
as PvE. The new Trials, the new rewards systems and a flush of new items will 
help, and the maps are ... okay.

It’s interesting though that, Bungie is also going to be making the Dark Below 
maps available to all Destiny players when House of Wolves comes out. It’s an 
admittance, perhaps, that you can’t get away with a Call of Duty-style map pack 
economy with such a vast and complex game as Destiny – you can’t feed these 
fans on multiplayer real estate. People were looking to House of Wolves for a 
new raid and they’re not going to get that. At the moment, we only have half 
the story about what they’re getting instead.

 * Thanks to Eurogamer <http://www.eurogamer.net/> for some assistance on this 
article. Keith Stuart attended a press trip to the Bungie studio in Seattle 
with other journalists from Europe. Travel and accommodation costs were met by 
Activision
 