
A “sick old man” on dialysis treatment was forced to live under a tree in 
Alice Springs for more than a week after he was evicted from the only hostels 
available to patients from remote communities and not provided with any 
alternative accommodation.

Advocates said Noel Charlie’s case was shocking and that he was just one of 
many people suffering in an under-resourced system which offered little or no 
safety net in theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory>.

Charlie, from Kiwirrkurra 850km to the west, was living at Aboriginal Hostels 
Limited’s (AHL) Alyerre home and having dialysis treatment for five hours every 
second day. It is understood he was given multiple warnings about smoking in 
his room and clashing with other residents, and the hostel decided to evict him 
on 12 February.

However, no alternative arrangements were found and Charlie was left to sleep 
rough, where he faced being fined by the council.

When Guardian Australia met him last week Charlie was seeking respite from the 
midday heat of almost 40 degrees at Purple House, a not-for-profit clinic 
offering dialysis treatments to Indigenous people living in remote areas.

“I’m sitting down [under] the tree, like a kangaroo or a dog. No 
air-conditioning, no cold water,” he said of his camp.

“I’m from the bush, I’ve got no house, like the first time I’ve come to this 
town it’s because I’ve got no kidney.”

Sarah Brown, the chief executive of Purple House, said the hostel’s decision 
to evict Charlie after repeated warnings was understandable, but the solution 
should not be to render a sick man homeless.

There is a lack of “cultural safety [and] cultural awareness” which Brown said 
made it incredibly difficult for people like Charlie who have lived in the bush 
all their lives.

“[His] kidneys fail and he has to come in here to hospital and you end up in a 
hostel where there’s lots of rules, and you can’t cook for yourself and you’ve 
got no control … It’s like everything becomes regulated. People have no 
agency,” Brown told Guardian Australia.

Brown said increasing numbers of people on dialysis were coming in for 
treatment and that this was the last place many of them would see before they 
died. “That demands a different sort of care and understanding,” she said.

In 2012-13, 18% of Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> had 
indicators of chronic kidney disease, according to Kidney Health Australia, and 
were almost four times more likely to die from it than non-Indigenous 
Australians. The rate of end-stage kidney disease is almost 20 times higher for 
Indigenous people in very remote areas compared with non-Indigenous people.

The day after Guardian Australia met Charlie, Purple House and an aged care 
advocate found him accommodation at a homeless men’s shelter, where he stayed 
over the weekend, but it is only temporary.

Richard Farrell, the social services division manager at Tangentyere Council, 
said there used to be a safety net for people like Charlie in Alice Springs – 
the intervention and case management service (ICMS) – until it lost funding. 
The ICMS used emergency funding to find accommodation and case-manage 
vulnerable people like Charlie.

“[The government] wonders why they’ve got these issues,” Farrell told Guardian 
Australia. “They cut funding and the sector tells them these are going to be 
the consequences, they say: ‘No, no, no, we know better’, and then two years 
later you’re back to square one at the very beginning of the problem again,” he 
said.

The result is more cases like Charlie – “a sick old man who’s here for 
dialysis and has no safe, stayable accommodation so he’s going to get sicker,” 
said Farrell.

AHL provides 120 beds across three of its hostels for renal patients in Alice 
Springs. It told Guardian Australia that while it could not discuss specific 
cases, “AHL does take its duty-of-care responsibilities to ensure the safety 
and wellbeing of all our residents very seriously. In a case where a resident 
is found to be unsuitable, AHL will explore every possible option in working 
with the resident and other organisations for a suitable outcome”.

The spokesman said AHL worked closely with support services including 
accommodation, “to make sure that residents in our care can access the full 
range of services they need”.

Purple House called for resources to be allocated or diverted to provide 
remote health clinics with dialysis units, enabling people like Charlie to 
receive treatment in their home area.

Brown argued that Purple House could offer remote dialysis treatment cheaper 
and more efficiently if the government diverted funds to them. There would be 
no need for the accommodation support, interpreters and social workers required 
when people travel to Alice Springs. Purple House’s operation in Kiwirrkurra 
currently receives no government funding.

Kiwirrkurra, described as Australia’s most remote community, has two dialysis 
units and Purple House tries to rotate patients through Alice Springs so they 
can at least spend some time at home while receiving treatment.

Charlie said he was “on a mission” to see his people receive treatment in 
communities.

“They want more dialysis in Kiwirrkurra and more machines in their country. 
Because a lot of people … they die on the machine, not on their country,” said 
Charlie.

“They’ve been dying in Broome and Perth and then come back to their own 
country. Same in Kiwirrkurra, Warburton, Yuendemu.”

The NT government told Guardian Australia “a schedule of new health centres” 
would see one or two new dialysis units in Ngukurr, Galiwinku, Numbulwar and 
Robinson river. One health centre has already opened at Ntaria, and 
construction is about to begin at Elliott and Canteen creek, a spokeswoman for 
the health minister, John Elferink, said.

The department was unable to respond to questions about accommodation services 
by deadline.
 