
Dialight is rarely in the market spotlight but that all changed following a 
disappointing trading update.

The lighting and signal company's shares plunged 225p to £11.50 as it said 
contract delays would hit its full year profits, especially in its obstruction 
lighting business, used to highlight wind turbines, towers and the like. The 
shortfall meant 2013 profits would be in line with last year, the company said.

Analysts at N+1 Singer said operating profits were now likely to be around 
£20m in 2013, down from the £23m it previously expected. It said:
 It is disappointing that the revenues in obstruction are unlikely to meet 
expectations this year. As highlighted [previously] Dialight would have needed 
to generate £12m in obstruction sales in the second half of 2013 to achieve 
guidance (and consensus), which although we did not think would be easy, we 
thought it was achievable. Given these delays management have guided in a 
shortfall resulting in operating profits being closer to £20m. Our forecasts 
for 2013 will revert to such guidance, however we place our target price and 
recommendation under review. 
Overall markets were fairly directionless, ahead of next week's US Federal 
Reserve meeting which could see America's central bank turn off the money taps, 
which had previously been supporting the market. Syria fears were still in the 
background, with early reports of rocket launches in the area reminding 
investors that nothing had yet been resolved. Poor eurozone industrial 
production figures also dampened investor enthusiasm.

So the FTSE 100 finished just 0.55 points higher at 6588.98.

Engineering group Amec topped the FTSE 100 risers following news it had 
withdrawn from the bidding for oil and gas specialistKentz.

Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> had an approach worth between 
565p and 580p a share rejected by Kentz last month, and had until 16 September 
to decide whether to proceed. In the event it has decided there are better 
options elsewhere. It said it had a strong pipeline of opportunities, and would 
also consider returning cash to shareholders in the fourth quarter, depending 
on the progress of any acquisitions. All that helped send Amec's shares 20p 
higher to £10.78.

German group M+W had also approached Kentz, but had so far made no further 
approaches. The 16 September deadline still applies in this case.

Kentz shares dropped 50.5p to 499p.

On a busy day for retailers, Morrisons climbed 5.3p to 302.5p, despite the 
supermarket group reporting a 10% drop in first half profits. It has missed out 
on two key growth areas, online and convenience stores, but is now belatedly 
tackling the problem. It has linked up with online grocerOcado, and also plans 
to open 200 M local stores by the end of 2014. It also plans to cut back on 
spending on opening new superstores. Darren Shirley at Shore Capital said:
 We reiterate sell; in the medium term though we see today's statement as more 
positive for the UK grocery sector as Morrison follows Tesco's lead in being 
more judicious with its capital, potentially leading to improving industry 
returns and cash flows.

Cantor Fitzgerald also issued a sell note, but there was some positive comment 
from Jefferies, which said:
 As expected Morrisons reported a mixed first half given the margin effort of 
reversing the fourth quarter trading pressures and the increasing revenue costs 
of growth initiatives. Still, undemanding valuation and a clear reduction in 
capex intensity from here onwards point to an improving outlook (admittedly 
partly reflected by the near 20% share price rebound of the past three months).

Meanwhile Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> edged up 1.8p to 
372.9p after a 16.4% rise in third quarter sales.

Elsewhere Home Retail rose 8.8p to 172.7p as the Homebase and Argos business 
reported better than expected second quarter sales. Homebase's DIY sales 
benefited from the warm summer weather while Argos beat expectations with a 
2.7% rise.

Next also moved higher, adding 15p to £52.05 following an 8.2% rise in first 
half profits, helped by a strong performance from its Directory business.

Conversely, Aggreko fell 41p to £16.10 as Deutsche Bank cut its price target 
but kept its buy rating. The bank said:
 Contracts in power projects have been hard to come by over the past 12 months 
but we are still of the view that the lack of contract conversion is an issue 
of timing rather than anything structural. Although we have no precise 
visibility on the timing of contracts being signed, we think it is right to 
take a cautious stance given emerging market GDP and foreign exchange weakness. 
We therefore move to a scenario whereby underlying pretax profit is broadly 
flat in 2014 versus 2013, implying an 11.6% cut to our 2014E earnings per share 
which now sits at 83.3p. Our target price falls to 1870p from 2100p, but we 
retain our buy recommendation as we expect better contract conversion in 2014.

Imperial Tobacco added 12p to £22.79 as it announced ex-KPMG vice chairman 
Oliver Tant as its new finance director. Martin Deboo at Investec said:
 We see this as a positive event for shareholders. The appointment brings an 
end to an unwelcome period of uncertainty. While we don't know Tant personally, 
his reputation, experience and profile all suggest that he has both the skills 
and clout required to help chief executive Alison Cooper to steady this at 
times errant ship. We re-state our buy recommendation.

Finally Real Good Food, whose businesses include sugar distributor Napier 
Brown, Renshaw baking ingredients and jam maker R&W Scott, rose 0.25p to 47p 
after a positive annual meeting statement.

The company, which also owns the Whitworths sugar brand, said the first half 
performance had been in line with expectations, and it planned more cost 
efficiencies at its sugar handling plant.

The company's partner Omnicane, a Mauritius sugar producer, which owns 22% of 
the business, has plans to introduce Real Good Foods consumer brands into its 
existing heartland, as well as African markets.
 