
Jared Diamond <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jared-diamond>, two-time 
winner of the Aventis general prize for science books, is in the running for an 
unprecedented third win with Collapse - How Societies Choose to Fail or 
Survive, an investigation into humanity's destructive instincts.

His book is one of 13 on this year's longlist for the Aventis general prize, 
which recognises the best in popular science writing, announced at the London 
Book Fair this morning by Fiammetta Rocco, literary editor at the Economist and 
member of the judging panel.

Diamond previously won the prize in 1998 with Guns, Germs and Steel and in 
1992 with The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee.

Other early frontrunners on the longlist for the general prize include 1995 
winner John Emsley, who is back on the longlist with The Elements of Murder - A 
History of Poison, a gripping exploration of the history and science of 
poisoning, filled with gruesome, page-turning anecdotes.

Michael White chalks up his second longlist appearance with The Fruits of War 
- How War and Conflict Have Driven Science. David Bodanis, meanwhile, makes his 
Aventis debut with his well-received populist history of electricity, Electric 
Universe - How Electricity Switched on the Modern World.

"This year's submissions were of remarkably high quality, which made the job 
of picking out just a dozen books especially difficult. In fact, the longlist 
has 13 books because we didn't want to lose a single one," said Rocco, 
following the longlist announcement. "The diversity of subjects, the excellence 
of the writing, the singularity of individual voices - all of these remind us 
that writing, and reading, about scientific ideas can be a tremendously 
exciting experience."

Broadcaster and journalist Nick Ross, chair of this year's judging panel, 
agreed. "This stuff is so accessible it is sometimes hard to put down, and the 
science is so absorbing and surprising it can make fiction seem dull," he said. 
"Science writing used to be full of impenetrable jargon, but these books are a 
joy."

The other judges on this year's five-strong panel are Johnny Ball, best-known 
for his science programmes for children, Steve Jones, winner of the Aventis 
prize in 1994, and Anjula Mutanda, consultant psychologist on ITV's This 
Morning.

Now in their 18th year, the Aventis prizes - consisting of the general prize 
and the junior prize, for the best book written for under-14s - are managed by 
the Royal Society, the UK national academy of science, and supported by the 
German charitable trust the Aventis Foundation. The general prize shortlist 
will be revealed on April 11, and the winner will be announced at a ceremony on 
May 16.

The longlist in full

Electric Universe - How Electricity Switched on the Modern World by David 
Bodanis (Little Brown)

Collapse - How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive by Jared Diamond (Allen 
Lane)

The Elements of Murder - A History of Poison by John Emsley (OUP)

The Gecko's Foot - Bio-inspiration: Engineering New Materials from Nature by 
Peter Forbes (Fourth Estate)

The Silicon Eye - How a Silicon Valley Company Aims to Make All Current 
Computers, Cameras, and Cell Phones Obsolete by George Gilder (WW Norton)

Parallel Worlds - The Science of Alternative Universes and Our Future in the 
Cosmos by Michio Kaku (Penguin)

Power, Sex, Suicide - Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life by Nick Lane (OUP)

Venomous Earth - How Arsenic Caused the World's Worst Mass Poisoning by Andrew 
Meharg (Macmillan)

Empire of the Stars - Friendship, Obsession and Betrayal in the Quest for 
Black Holes by Arthur I. Miller (Little Brown)

Seven Deadly Colours - The Genius of Nature's Palette and How it Eluded Darwin 
by Andrew Parker (Simon & Schuster)

The Truth About Hormones - What's Going on When We're Tetchy, Spotty, Fearful, 
Tearful or Just Plain Awful by Vivienne Parry (Atlantic Books)

Stalking the Riemann Hypothesis - The Quest to Find the Hidden Law of Prime 
Numbers by Dan Rockmore (Jonathan Cape)

The Fruits of War - How War and Conflict Have Driven Science by Michael White 
(Simon & Schuster)
 