
I'm afraid there's sad news for those of you who emailed asking whether we 
could have another journalism masterclass from News of the World journalists 
Dan Wootton and Tom Latchem, whose pious pronouncements on the ethical 
responsibilities of the fourth estate werehighlighted here last week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/jun/30/reidernator-shows-not-beaten-yet>
. As the paper's showbiz and TV editors, you may recall, Dan and Tom had 
frothed themselves into complete indignation at journalist Johann Hari, and 
used the exposure of his quote-lifting to dispense all manner of furious 
140-character lectures on journalistic standards and what it means to be a 
"proper journalist". Naturally, we all hoped this could become a weekly 
symposium, and I'd loved to have brought you their always-trenchant views on 
any trifling media stories that may be drifting through our transoms this week. 
But what can I tell you? They've suddenly clammed up, bar amoronic statement 
from Wootton 
<http://danwootton.tweetboard.com/my-personal-statement-on-news-of-the-world-phone-hacking-i-m-not-going-to-lie-having-a-column-in-2465909435/>
 on Thursday, in which he claimed "I do NOT work for the newspaper you are 
reading about." Well he doesn't now, but doubtless he'll be in the same job at 
the Sunday Sun, or whatever the amusingly cynical News of the World replacement 
will be called.

Still, there are always the News of the World's archives, should we be in need 
of intrigue. Stephen Fry once said reading Harry Potter was like "swimming in 
chocolate", so Lost in Showbiz will leave you to extrapolate what reading 
through some of the News of the World's output from the phone-hacking era feels 
like.

Earlier this week, you see, I wondered idly about that "exhaustively thorough" 
News International investigation into phone hacking, which you will recall 
turned up absolutely zero incidents of potential wrongdoing. Having a few 
minutes to spare, I decided to conduct my own painstaking investigation into 
possibly suspicious stories, by doing a cuttings search. The search terms I 
chose were "phone" and "messages" – I do hope you can keep up with the tech 
wizardry – and I limited the trawl to the 12 months after Milly Dowler was 
murdered.

Now, the Guardian's archive system is rather creaky (they doubtless have 
state-of-the-art over at News International), so it took a full three seconds 
before my search revealed the story making specific reference to the details of 
a message left on Milly Dowler's voicemail, along with a slew of other 
articles. That Milly voicemail story carried the byline of Sarah Arnold, who 
also wrote the now-notorious interview with the Dowler parents, in which they 
spoke of their (falsely nurtured) hope their daughter was still alive.

And now for a moment of bathos. Scanning the article list, I noticed another 
byline for Arnold, concerning actor (and now Britain's Got Talent judge)Amanda 
Holden <http://www.officialamandaholden.com/>, who had been partying at new 
year in Barcelona. There, she had apparently texted and called her former lover 
Neil Morrissey "18 times in one day".

One really does have to marvel at the precision of that figure – but a 
perfectly innocent explanation is provided by a handy anonymous source at the 
same party. "When we realised it was Neil on the other end we started keeping 
count of the calls as a bit of a joke," says this beady-eyed onlooker. "We got 
to 12 and she must have made half a dozen before that."

Mmm. Alas, that would not be the first time that Amanda's call volume and 
timings were laid bare in bizarre detail, with the archive yielding references 
to her and another man making "almost 100 text and phone calls – sometimes 10 a 
day", and to the fact that she had been "constantly phoning" Morrissey during 
the period her then husband was in theCelebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Big Brother house. "As 
soon as Les [Dennis] was out of the picture Amanda was on the phone," we 
learned, "and the calls became more and more frequent while he was on TV". It 
goes on. In fact, week after week, the level of detail is remarkable – in fact, 
you really couldn't do better if you were sitting with a print-out of her phone 
records in front of you.

This is all immensely low-level compared to the Dowler horror, you'll be 
saying – and it most certainly is. But since 2009, Amanda has actually been 
contracted as a columnist for theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>. Following a break after a 
tragic miscarriage earlier this year, she had been due to return to the paper 
imminently and with much fanfare. A call to her agent seems necessary.

Has Amanda been contacted by Operation Weeting and informed that her phone may 
have been hacked, Lost in Showbiz asks? She has, confirms Alison Griffin; about 
seven weeks ago. Was she surprised? On this, alas, Alison cannot comment.

But Lost in Showbiz has spoken not to an invented "onlooker", but to a genuine 
source close to Amanda's management during those years, who insists that she 
was aware of constant hacking of her phone, but like many celebrities of the 
time felt completely powerless to stop it. Whether she eventually resigned 
herself to the violation as a cost of doing business is hard to say.

But for Lost in Showbiz, it would be a sadness if she continued to be fed by 
the hand that bit her, as it were, as it would imply that despite all this, 
there will endure a frightened, defeated co-dependence between public figures 
and the tabloid press – the precise compromised relationship that initially 
made so many people assume, quite wrongly, that phone-hacking didn't matter if 
it was only celebs being hacked, as they didn't really count.

Far be it from this column to go completely gooey over the entertainment 
industry, but celebrities do count, and while there are wildly varying degrees 
of collusion between them and the press, no amount of that negates their right 
not to have their most private interactionsillegally monetised by Rupert 
Murdoch.

So let's hope Amanda resists invitations to sign up to any future incarnation 
of a Murdoch Sunday tabloid – and they'll be begging the likes of her to 
legitimise it, you can be sure – without provoking the catastrophic assault on 
her reputation that would have been standard in days gone by (ie last week). 
And as a recovering Murdoch employee itself, Lost in Showbiz can assure her 
that every day feeling clean(ish) and serene(ish) is a total positive. Let this 
column be your sober sponsor, Amanda!
 