
Well, I am still not what you'd call healthy, but I'm not as ill as I was when 
I last blogged. Every morning I take a handful of pills and every evening 
likewise and I no longer feel as if I am going to fall off the world if it goes 
any faster. Should you be interested, I am now operating through the tail end of
labyrinthitis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/labyrinthitis/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, while I 
nurse a brand new sinus infection and submit to a regimen of major antibiotics 
to knock out the H.Pylori that my doctor had forgotten to tell me was busily 
swimming about in my interior and preparing to give me stomach ulcers. I can 
breathe and see and the tinnitus has stopped, so I can hardly complain, 
although naturally I am complaining at every possible opportunity – it fills in 
the time I would usually spend overworking.

Yesterday – while I was feeling suitably sorry for myself – I received a 
letter from HMP Long Lartin, a prison which houses, among others, a number of 
inmates who are being detained without trial. They haven't had their day in 
court, their guilt or innocence has not been established, because they have 
fallen into the legal and moral vacuum that holds people who are thought to 
have been associated with terrorist activity. You'll probably be aware of how 
strangely easy it can be to end up somewhere more or less unpleasant, more or 
less indefinitely, and branded as a terrorist threat.Recent revelations about 
those held in Guantánamo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/series/guantanamo-files-documents> tell 
familiar stories of information obtained under torture, of captives taken for 
money, of minors and pensioners being detained, of a number of innocent Uighurs 
held prisoner for years and of how simply choosing to wear a particular brand 
of watch can be seen as definitively incriminating. It's somehow unsurprising 
that for some time the navy spokesman for Gitmo was one Lt Mike Kafka.

My letter was from Syed Talha Ahsan 
<http://www.cageprisoners.com/cases/uk/item/767-syed-talha-ahsan>, a man with 
Asperger's syndrome, who campaigned for, among other things, the release of 
former Guantánamo detaineeMoazzam Begg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/moazzambegg>. Ahsan has been imprisoned 
since July 2006 following an extradition request from the US government, using 
the 2003 Extradition Act. The act means that requests do not have to be 
supported by any prima facie evidence. He has not been found guilty of any 
crime in the UK.

Perhaps you find all of this as disturbing as I do, but Talha's letter wasn't 
about his situation. It was letter like many others I receive: from a writer 
who wants advice. Talha Ahsan is a writer, a poet who wants to transfer his 
skills to short fiction. He doesn't know when he'll be extradited and so 
wonders if a correspondence course would be a good idea. He tells me another 
prisoner has now been held in detention for 13 years – plenty of time for study 
– but perhaps he doesn't have that long, he has no way of knowing.

When I write back to Ahsan this evening, I will tell him what I would tell any 
other writer – that courses aren't necessary, that the idea of teaching 
creative writing is relatively new and, in some cases, simply a way that 
institutions can make money from the hopes of would-be authors while delivering 
very little of use. As beauty and happiness and sex have all been commodified 
so, to an extent, has imagination. A whole plethora of courses, magazines, DVDs 
and computer programmes have sprung up to extract funds from people who would 
formerly have simply found themselves unable not to write and would have 
proceeded accordingly. Those same people rarely have funds to spare and should, 
above all, be defended from shabby tricks, spurious "methods" and intellectual 
manipulation. I'd be the last one to suggest that artists should be indulged, 
or that their whims be taken more seriously than anyone else's. Still, I have 
to say that writers – especially new writers – are horrifyingly vulnerable. 
They are caught up in a passion they can't yet control, they are generally 
unable not to read whatever they can find, unable not to seek any kind of 
guidance that might reassure, unable not to chase the sense of an unexpressed 
voice in their lives, unable not to embrace the joys and pains of a way of life 
devoted to making musics and wonders and worlds for others. This means they can 
be very easily abused and, of course, makes the abuse repellent.

Fortunately, just that voracious reading and experimenting and searching and 
fretting will eventually turn them into writers. It will fit them for a life of 
changes and of perpetual education. In 25 years of writing, I have come across 
countless hopeful authors who doubted their abilities because they hadn't gone 
to university, hadn't a library of How-To books, hadn't sat at the feet of a 
master and imbibed wisdom in a suitably furnished study. In fact, they were no 
more or less able than the others who had done many, if not all of those 
things. There are courses that are worthwhile and books that are helpful, 
depending on the writer's personality. There is still a little free assistance 
out there, despite the unending cuts, and more established writers are often 
quite generous with their time if they are asked for assistance. I would also 
recommendRaymond Carver's Fires 
<http://www.fivethousand.com.au/read/fires-raymond-carver-2/>, a book which 
prepared me for writing before I even really knew that I wanted to be a writer.
Chekhov's letters <http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/c/chekhov/anton/c51lt/>, if 
you can find them, are full of insights, humour and proper humility.RL 
Stevenson's essays on fiction 
<http://www.amazon.ca/R-L-Stevenson-Fiction-Anthology-Literary/dp/0748607773#reader_0748607773>
 are wonderful, passionate, sensible and humane. Reading a book about writing 
written by someone of whom you have never heard, who wants you to visualise 
gardens or polish your aura, or indulge in make-work exercises, or shut your 
eyes and try scribbling with whichever hand would be least natural might not be 
a good bet.

I will tell Ahsan these things. I have never met the man and only know him 
through his poems, tender and fierce pieces that deal in part with pleasures he 
can't have: a choice of food, the touch of a lover's skin, the ability to be 
where he would like. I know that writing has always been a consolation to me, a 
refuge and a source of strength. I know that writing can express the humanity 
of those who are written out of life elsewhere. I know that the simple act of 
sending a letter to a prisoner can change him or her and how they are treated. 
Amnesty's and PEN's work is centred on the effectiveness of the written word. 
But how do I talk about these things to someone enduring something I can't 
imagine and know that I couldn't withstand? How do I talk about the humanity of 
writing, that it is a triumph of beauty, when humanity's treatment of Ahsan has 
been so ugly? Onwards.
 