
George Sawle gathered his breath. It was the first time he had brought Cecil 
Valance home and he was keen to distance himself from his family's 
petit-bourgeois gaucheness.

"You must be Cecil!" shouted Daphne, George's 16-year-old sister. "George is 
so excited to have met someone so aristocratically bohemian as you at 
Cambridge. Please read me some poetry about Corley, my country estate."

"Come, now," said Freda, George's mother. "We must let our guest change into 
his pressed silk undergarments."

"Don't worry, Mrs Sawle," Cecil replied. "I'm happy to read some of my own 
verse after dinner. But first George and I should go for a stroll to ponder the 
imminent war with Germany."

"Few people ever enter this area of the woods," said George.

"Then let me take you the Oxford way," Cecil smiled, stripping naked.

"I thought you would never ask."

"Your poetry was wonderful," Daphne said.

"You're very beautiful," Cecil gasped, forcing his tongue into her mouth.

"No, no! That's not nice!" Though in a way she felt it was.

The Sawles felt a sense of deflation in their humdrum lives after Cecil's 
departure. "Oh look," said Daphne. "Cecil's left me a poem: 'I've written a 
poem / That's not very good /Though after I've died / It will give everyone 
wood.'"

* * * *

"Come on," said Lady Valance to her children, Corinna and Wilfie. "We must 
prepare for the great weekend when Sebby Stokes comes to Corley to talk to us 
all for his biography of Cecil. But we must not keep Sebby too long as he has 
to deal with the General Strike."

As the guests arrived, Daphne felt a sense of dread. It had felt normal in 
1917 to marry Cecil's brother, Dudley, after Cecil had been shot on the Somme, 
but she was now embarrassed by the attention she received as the person for 
whom the greatest ever war poem had been written. And Dudley had turned into 
such a brute, and was almost certainly having an affair with Eva.

George looked sadly at Cecil's tomb, remembering the length and strength of 
Cecil's membrum virile. "Ah there you are," said his dreary wife.

"I want to make love to you," said Eva to Daphne.

"Good lord, you're a lesbian, after all. I'm very flattered, but I shall have 
to decline as I'm hoping to elope with Revel, who I suspect may be a queer but 
I'm hoping to turn him."

"I wonder what Sebby will put in Cecil's biography," Dudley sneered brutishly. 
"I bet it's not as funny as my book about him."

Daphne reflected on how the war had changed everything. It didn't matter if 
Cecil had been a good or bad poet, Sebby would laud him anyway. After all, he'd 
almost certainly fucked him as well.

* * * *

Paul Bryant looked at a colleague in the toilet. Once the Sexual Offences Act 
was passed, he'd be able to do what he liked with him.

"I need some help in the garden," said Mr Keeping. Paul thought this was an 
unusual way for a bank manager to deploy his staff, but demurred.

"I'm Corinna," said Mr Keeping's wife. "Why don't you come to my mother 
Daphne's 70th birthday party?"

Paul was transfixed as Corinna and Peter Rowe played a duet. "I love Cecil 
Valance's poetry," said Paul.

"Well, it just so happens that I teach at Corley, which is now a boy's 
boarding school," said Peter, "so if you'd like to visit, we could bugger one 
another behind Cecil's statue."

"Did you know that I went on to marry Revel before marrying someone else, 
leaving an impossibly complicated family tree that I don't expect you to 
follow?" said Daphne.

"That's just as well," said everyone.

* * * *

"Did you hear about Corinna and Mr Keeping?" said Paul. "Terrible news."

"I can't say that I had," Peter replied. "And neither will anyone else, 
because that's the nature of other people's lives. You seldom find out 
everything."

"The trouble is that now we're in the 1980s, the reader has realised we're not 
nearly as interesting as the characters in the first half of the book. Still, 
I'd better press on with my biography of Cecil. My hunch is Corinna might have 
been Cecil's child, even though that would mean she had a 14-month pregnancy."

"Cecil would fuck anything," said George, "though you'd better not trust me, 
as I've got Alzheimer's."

* * * *

Rob was looking for someone to cruise at Peter's funeral. "Isn't that Paul 
Bryant, the famous writer over there?" he said to a stranger. "Didn't he make 
his name writing a biography of Cecil Valance, the crap poet?"

"Yes. Though I've heard Paul tells lies about himself, too."

Digested read, digested: Cecil Gay Lewis
 