
Some adults relish the social aspect of joining a class when they return to 
learning. For many others, however, research shows that use of a computer in 
the comfort of their own home is much more appealing. Studying online means 
that they can work where  and when they choose, away from the bustle and 
competition of the classroom.

But not everyone has that choice. Would-be adult learners who do not have 
access to the internet are among the key targets of a national campaign, Race 
Online 2012 (raceonline2012.org), which hopes to inspire and support everyone 
in the UK to go online. The campaign is the brainchild of Martha Lane Fox, 
e-commerce businesswoman, who last year was appointed UK digital champion by 
David Cameron.

"I don't think you can be a proper citizen of our society in the future if you 
are not engaged online," says Lane Fox.

Currently almost one in five people in the UK – 9.2 million – do not have 
internet access, and Lane Fox is using the prospect of a digitised 2012 
Olympics to try to galvanise as many people as possible to get online. The 
independent campaign runs on a small budget (remaining unaffected by government 
ICT cuts, Lane Fox insists), and is working with 1,100 partners across the 
public, private and charitable sectors to put a positive message across about 
the benefits of going online – including savings in shopping and holidays, 
opportunities to study and pursue interests. The campaign has enlisted around 
100,000 "digital champions" to offer support, and is working on providing 
low-cost starter-kits.

Four million of those not yet online are both "socially and digitally 
excluded", including 1.9 million low-income families with children, say 
campaign organisers. While some older people may take the view that they don't 
need the internet, for those doubly excluded, internet access could be a 
lifeline, Lane Fox believes.

Research by UK Online Centres shows that people who are online achieve better 
grades in exam results and are 25% more likely to get a job.

"It's very important that middle-class people do not underestimate the value 
and the empowerment of being given access to the internet," Lane Fox argues. 
"For adult learners, it's fundamental: it's raising the chance of becoming a 
learner on your own terms, and finding courses you can do at your own pace. 
That can be extremely rewarding and significant."
 