 Anna Nicole Smith's talent for controversy - and legal drama - has survived 
beyond her death, with three separate people launching court bids for custody 
of her remains.
The body of the former model, who spent more than a decade battling for the 
fortune of her late oil tycoon husband, is currently at a medical examiner's 
office in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

Smith, 39, who had a history of drug problems, died last Thursday after 
collapsing in a hotel room. The cause of her death is still unknown.

Smith's long-term companion, Howard K Stern, claims he is executor of the 
former Playboy model's will and wants her buried in the Bahamas next to her 
son, Daniel, who was found dead in September last year, aged 20.

Her estranged mother, Vergie Arthur, wants Smith buried in her home state of 
Texas, while a third claimant, the photographer Larry Birkhead, wants DNA tests 
conducted on Smith's remains so he can prove he is the father of her 
five-month-old daughter, Dannielynn.

There is also a fourth potential participant in the battle. Prince Frederic 
von Anhalt, husband of the actor Zsa Zsa Gabor, says he had a decade-long 
affair with Smith and also wants a DNA test for paternity of Dannielynn.

The child stands to possibly inherit a fortune. Smith married the Texas oil 
tycoon J Howard Marshall in 1994 when he was 89 and she was 26. She had been 
fighting his family over his fortune since his death in 1995.

A Florida judge ruled last night that Smith's body would remain where it was 
while the competing claims were fought out.

"This body belongs to me right now," said the circuit court judge Larry 
Seidlin, warning that it could be a long process. "We're going to have 
hearings, as many hearings as we need," he said. "This is just a warm-up."

Mr Birkhead said he wanted DNA to be taken from Smith's body to be compared 
with samples from Dannielynn to make sure the baby had not been secretly 
switched with another one to foil tests establishing her paternity.

"We don't care about the body," one of Mr Birkhead's lawyers, Susan Brown, 
said.

Mr Stern's lawyers claim he is authorised to make her funeral arrangements. 
The petition includes affidavits from Smith's bodyguard, her doctor, a 
neighbour and a friend stating that she wanted to be buried next to her son.

"I think we all know Anna wants to be next to Daniel, and anything else is a 
tragedy," said Krista Barth, a lawyer for Mr Stern.

Among the evidence being presented by Mr Stern's lawyers is a transcript of an 
interview Smith gave to the television show Entertainment Tonight in October in 
which she disparaged her relationship with her mother.

"You want to hear all the things she did to me? You want to hear all the 
things she let my father do to me or my brother do to me? Or my sister?" she 
said, according to the transcript. "All the beatings and the whippin's and the 
rape? That's my mother. That's my mom."

Ms Arthur's lawyer said this did not matter. "Since the dawn of civilization, 
the next of kin has been given the rights and responsibility of their dead," 
her lawyer, Stephen Tunstall, said.

While the claimants battle it out, the local medical examiner has warned that 
Smith's corpse is decomposing and should be released soon.

A separate legal battle is being fought over the custody of Dannielynn. On 
Tuesday, a Bahamian judge issued an injunction keeping the baby in the country 
until the custody case is resolved.

Ms Arthur, who wants to be named guardian of her granddaughter, sought the 
order because she says Mr Stern could take the child from the Bahamas.
 