
I am having breakfast in a lively café in Cape Town overlooking the ocean, one 
of an all-white cast of health breakfast fanatics. It is the morning after the 
opening of a new theatre in Cape Town, the Fugard, named after the great South 
African playwright,Athol Fugard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/athol-fugard>
. Unusually for this time of year, it is a still day: I see offshore a sort of 
mirage, a low piece of land, floating in the waters of Table Bay. It takes me a 
few moments to register that this is Robben Island. The symbolism and the 
symmetry of the moment – and the ironies – begin to back up:The Island is one 
of Fugard's most enduring plays; Robben Island itself has become a place of 
pilgrimage in honour of Mandela, the world's premier secular saint, and only 
two days ago South Africa was celebrating the 20th anniversary of Mandela's 
release from Victor Verster Prison.

The Fugard opened with the Isango-Portobello theatre company's tried and 
tested success,The Magic Flute, which has toured Europe to acclaim. Then came 
The Train Driver, Athol Fugard's first play for some years, written expressly 
for the theatre and directed by him. He has described it as the most important 
play he has written.

The theatre was funded by Eric Abraham, husband of the philanthropist and 
Granta publisher Sigrid Rausing, to provide a permanent home for the company, 
most of whom come originally from the bleak township of Khayalitsha out on the 
Cape Flats and who were until recently rehearsing in a church hall. The days of 
making do are behind them: this wonderful, small theatre, fashioned from a 
Victorian gothic church and some warehouse buildings, is lavishly equipped with 
rehearsal rooms, dressing rooms and much more, using old and new materials for 
a fusion which is very chic – old bricks left exposed, some National 
Theatre-style concrete panels, some Wilton's Musical Hall-style plaster left 
rough and unfinished, and painted oil drums in the reception, which serve as 
bar tables and nod towards township life. The theatre, on the edge of the void 
that was District Six, cost close to £4m. Abraham had never met Fugard until 
the day before the opening.

The opening was delayed for a while by the arrival of the president's 
protection squad, large men, some with wires leading to their ears, who came to 
check out the place before the arrival of deputy president Motlanthe, Trevor 
Manuel, the former finance minister and patron of the Fugard, and six other 
cabinet ministers. Alan Rickman and Janet Suzman were two of the invitees. 
Rickman, according to the publicity, had to get permission from the producers 
of Harry Potter to leave Hogwarts. Fugard himself was there, grizzled and 
looking a little bemused. Everybody who is anybody in Cape Town was on hand: 
this was District Six's most glamorous night ever.

Once District Six was an area with a very louche reputation – a place where a 
10th of Cape Town's population of 600,000 lived in a rich mix of religions and 
races, with legendary dives and superb jazz musicians. This was also the home 
of the Silvertree Boys Club, whose most famous product is Basil D'Oliveira, 
CBE. I used to come from my posh boarding school to the club to teach boxing, 
although I am not certain that in a street fight the boys would have turned to 
me for help.

In 1966 the apartheid government declared the area white under the terms of 
the Group Areas Act, one of the regime's many fantastical schemes to maintain 
white supremacy. District Six was duly scheduled to be demolished, and over the 
next few years the inhabitants were shipped out to the desolate Cape Flats, not 
far away, but another world of howling wind and blowing sand, and the buildings 
of District Six, apart from mosques and churches, were razed. It always struck 
me as perverse that the nationalist government would have regarded the 
destruction of a church or a mosque as sacrilegious while ruthlessly destroying 
the houses of real people.

By the end of the 70s the job was complete. Forty years later, just a few 
hundred metres from the president's grand Cape Town residence, there is still a 
gaping hole that speaks eloquently of the apartheid madness. To this day, it 
has never been rebuilt, although land claims are finally being settled after 
years of wrangling. These claims are understandably a feature of the newSouth 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, overwhelmingly 
involving dispossessed Africans.

District Six was the home of the Cape Coloured and Malay peoples, a place of 
enormous symbolic importance – Cape Town's Sophiatown. It harks back to a time 
when there was a growing and vibrant homegrown Cape Town culture, which owed 
little to Africa: as far as Capetonians were concerned,Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> started some way to the north and 
east. District Six produced two fine novelists in Richard Rive and Alex la 
Guma, and many jazz musicians, including Abdullah Ibrahim, known as Dollar 
Brand until his conversion to Islam.

So I wondered how this new theatre was going to position itself in relation to 
District Six, as its company is almost entirely African. You can't simply, I 
thought, parachute yourself into a place of huge local significance, and claim 
some sort of kinship. I had also been reading Rian Malan's bookResident Alien, 
which pours scorn on liberal endeavour and liberal good intentions, 
particularly if the liberals in question are the sort who favour health 
breakfasts in places such as fashionable Green Point and draw comfort from cosy 
cultural manifestations of the Rainbow Nation, while out there hundreds of 
thousands die of Aids, crime is desperate, unemployment nudges 40% and 
corruption in the ANC is endemic. Malan, I thought, would not approve of any 
elision between the ANC and District Six.

But another voice spoke to me, and it said that culture can transcend 
sloganising, which is reaching a very high pitch as the Fifa world cup 
approaches, and culture can lead, incrementally, to a more hopeful society. It 
is not the property of one or other party, but the property of all. I appear to 
be sloganising myself, but it seems to be a fact that the ANC still believes it 
is on the moral inside track, as much a spiritual movement as a political 
party, with the struggle as its most sacred myth.

The company's director, Mark Dornford-May is a Yorkshireman, once a director 
at the Royal Shakespeare Company, who has lived in South Africa for 11 years 
now. He has always loved opera, and his award-winning adaptation ofCarmen was 
later filmed by him on location in Cape Town and released in Xhosa without 
subtitles. Dornford-May is married to his joint musical director and star 
soprano, Pauline Malefane. He speaks, he says, fairly good Xhosa, a language 
that, for starters, demands mastery of three different sorts of clicks – 
dental, lateral and palatal. He and Pauline have two young children with a 
third on the way. In a sense, I thought, they are the new and longed-awaited 
South Africa.

I asked Fugard about District Six: would the company be dealing specifically 
with its history as a theme? He said simply that they would choose good plays 
and musical adaptations, on any subject. But I think it is clear that the aim 
of the theatre is to uplift and involve the local communities. It's a quite 
tricky, protean word, "communities". So far the combining of classical works –
Carmen, The Mysteries and The Magic Flute – with African rhythms and dance has 
worked very well for the company. Nadine Gordimer once suggested to me that if 
there was to be a cultural fusion in South Africa, it would come first in 
music. And the great advantage of musical fusion is that it avoids the 
difficult questions of culture that JM Coetzee made explicit inDisgrace, namely 
that there can be no true understanding without common values and a common 
language.

Once the VIPs had found their seats, the cast wandered on to the raked stage, 
andThe Magic Flute began, the overture played on six African xylophones. From 
the first note there was great liveliness in the performance. Pauline Malefane 
was astonishing as the Queen of the Night, dressed in a huge, Elizabethan gown. 
(Simon Rattle has twice invited her to sing with the Berlin Philharmonic.) At 
the interval there was a palpable sense of excitement, an awareness that 
something very important was going on right here in Cape Town.

The reason for the sense of triumph is plain: this was not some 
cobbled-together, feel-good musical, but a serious work, done to a very high 
standard – a work of substance in a theatre that is both elegant and 
professionally run. There was a sense that, far from being another hopeless 
case, South Africa is a place full of hope and possibility.

Afew weeks later I spoke to Fugard. He said that he had never expected to live 
long enough to see a free South Africa – it was a miracle. And he recalled his 
days back in the 50s at the University of Cape Town, discovering District Six 
and finding the vibrancy of life there seductive.

He was at pains to emphasise that he has never turned his back on South 
Africa, although he lives in San Diego, to be close, he said, to his family. "I 
can only dip my pen into the inkwell of South Africa," he says. The country is 
on his mind constantly, a preoccupation common to most expatriate South 
Africans. He finds the ANC government deeply disappointing after his years of 
unwavering opposition to what went before. There is no sense of the right road, 
he said; the government is split; the organs of state are being manipulated by 
leading ANC figures and the reluctance to criticise Mugabe saddens him. But he 
takes modest comfort from the free press and the independent constitutional 
court, although even that independence is under threat.

His new play was suggested to him by a newspaper story about a woman who 
dragged herself on to a railway track with her three children and lay down in 
the path of a train, such was her despair. It has been, he says, an enormous 
challenge to write and direct a new play at the age of 77. When we spoke he was 
in the final stages of rehearsals, and confident that the two principal actors 
were going to be wonderful. Its bleak plot is typical of his life's work: a 
white man, the driver of the fatal train, disturbed by the deaths of the woman 
and a child, wanders into a graveyard and talks with the black gravedigger. 
They grope for some common understanding and humanity. And that, it seems to 
me, is the challenge South Africa is facing, writ small.
 