
Oliver Wainwright highlights the problems for architectural education created 
by the higher student fee regime (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/27/pressure-builds-change-schools-architecture?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 28 July), which I also recognise. I would differ with him, however, on his 
implied criticism of the quality and approach of UK architectural education. 
The UK, and London in particular, is the global hub for architectural and 
advanced engineering design. One reason that it is so attractive to global 
firms to set up offices here is the quality of the graduates coming out of the 
UK's excellent schools. Architectural and engineering practices play an 
enormous role in tutoring students, which leads to an education that covers 
both conceptual exploration and practical execution. The result is employment 
rates for the graduates of the best schools of around 95%, even in the midst of 
one of the worst recessions on record.

Another key component of the UK's success is the diversity within and between 
schools. We educate all stripes of architect and this is what a flourishing 
industry needs. Wainwright neglects to mention the risk entailed by the EU 
directive on recognition of professional qualifications currently under review 
in Brussels, which may try to impose a one size fits all structure on the whole 
continent.

As to whether some schools are excessively unrealistic: there is a common 
misconception among architects and non-architects alike, that somehow design 
can be reduced to a technocratic task. This is not so. Architectural design is 
above all a multi-disciplinary team activity. The fanciful and visionary 
landscapes that adorn the walls of student summer shows are a part of the 
process used to train people in team problem-solving in areas of great 
uncertainty and complexity. The proof of the educational recipe lies ultimately 
in the place that London holds internationally in this field. It is 
flourishing, world leading, diverse and often extremely hard to understand. 
Something to be cherished and protected from Eurocrats and bean counters alike.
Professor Alan Penn
Dean, Bartlett faculty of the built environment 
<http://www.bartlett.ucl.ac.uk/>, UCL 

• Apart from the extremes of wealth, a significant problem resulting from the 
high property prices in Virginia Water (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/27/surrey-town-virginia-water-seven-figures?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 28 June) is the architectural vandalism that is being wrought on parts of the 
neighbourhood. The demolition of classic mid-wars houses and their replacement 
with ugly, box-shaped mansions with massive, ungainly porticos, designed to 
cater to the whims of wealthy foreign buyers, is turning some roads into a 
toytown-looking pastiche. Or at least that is how it seems from the more humble 
perspective of adjacent Englefield Green.
Professor Chris Elders
Egham, Surrey
 