
As Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> posed at the net for the 
obligatory pre-match photograph, the young Serb rested his hand on the small of 
the world No1's back. It was a tiny gesture but one that spoke volumes about 
Djokovic's confidence, signifying his feeling of equality with the great man - 
obviously not in terms of achievements and titles won but regarding the here 
and now. He clearly felt he was ready to bring Federer's run of 10 successive 
grand slam finals to an end, but nobody was prepared for the nature of the 7-5, 
6-3, 7-6 defeat.

So the Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
will hail a new champion tomorrow. The chances are it will be Djokovic, the 
world No3, for whom it will be his second successive major final, having lost 
to Federer in the US Open last autumn. But the crowd seems sure to be behind 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, the young Frenchman with the Muhammad Ali looks who has 
captured the imagination of all who have watched him with his dynamic attacking 
play and elan. It will be the young improviser (Tsonga) against the even 
younger master technician (Djokovic) and that could prove a heady mix. They 
have not played each other before, so nobody can be the least sure how they 
will match up. It could be explosive.

That could not be said of Federer. Whereas Tsonga obliterated Rafael Nadal in 
his semi-final, Djokovic watched as Federer self-destructed. This is not to say 
that the 20-year-old Serb, one week younger than Andy Murray, did not play 
well. In particular he served beautifully, spearing the ball time after time 
over the highest part of the net into Federer's backhand. But it was the 
fragmentary nature of the world No1's forehand which so shocked everybody. The 
zip was almost entirely missing and he buried shot after shot into the net, and 
low into the net at that. Rarely, over the past five years, has the Swiss 
played so poorly and never at this stage of a major championship.

When Federer was beaten by Marat Safin in the 2005 semi-final the huge Russian 
played the match of his life and the result might have gone either way. Against 
Djokovic Federer was suddenly as tentative as he often has been against Nadal 
on clay. Once he had failed to serve out the first set at 5-4, a game which 
included three horrendously mishit forehands, it seemed that the self-belief 
leached out of the champion as quickly as the light faded from the city skies.

Nobody can be sure how much the stomach illness, which prevented him playing 
his usual warm-up exhibition in Kooyong, affected Federer. Certainly he did not 
move as well as he normally does and this affected his shot-making. When he 
went for the turbo-charger nothing kicked in.

"The illness might have had an effect, I don't know. I definitely did not feel 
as quick. But I don't want to blame this defeat too much on my own play. He 
came up with shots at the right time and he deserves to be in the final."

Normally Federer plays the big points so well and that was something missing 
in this tournament. He only squeezed through against another Serb, Janko 
Tipsarevic, in the third round, winning 10-8 in the fifth. "I've created a 
monster. People expect me to win every tournament," he said. Something similar 
happened to Pete Sampras and, although Federer did not talk about the pressure 
on him as he closes in on the American's all-time record of 14 grand slam 
titles, he would not be human if it did not affect him.

Perhaps losing here, where he has won the title for three of the past four 
years, may indirectly help him win the French Open, the one major to elude him. 
Or perhaps Australia has witnessed the changing of the guard. All that is 
certain is that Djokovic and Tsonga will be the names on everybody's lips this 
weekend. The Frenchman has never been in a singles final on the main tour, 
never mind won a title, yet here he is one match away from being the first man 
from France to win a grand slam title since Yannick Noah at Roland Garros in 
1983. It would be extraordinary.

Djokovic, who also reached the semi-finals in Paris and at Wimbledon last 
year, has everything in his favour and is indisputably the current third-best 
player in the world. And yet Tsonga, 22, who lost nearly two years with a 
chronic back injury, has the kind of big-serving, net-attacking game that can 
upset the best of players and the best of plans. And his confidence is sky high 
after his brutal destruction of Nadal, achieved with a brio which was wonderful 
to behold.

It will be a different sort of pressure for Djokovic who, unlike against 
Federer, will now be expected to win. "Tsonga is just an amazing athlete and we 
both have nothing to lose but it is a little strange to reach the final of a 
slam as a 20-year-old and to be the favourite," he said. "Obviously Tsonga is 
living the dream and for him it's simply a fantastic achievement. It's going to 
be interesting to see who handles the pressure better but I'm confident."

Djokovic is well aware of the dangerous trap that may open up for him 
tomorrow. He has only one day to prepare and to adjust mentally to the fact 
that he has just beaten the best player in the world but has not, as yet, won 
the title. Two Swedes, Mats Wilander and Stefan Edberg, won the title here in 
the Open era as teenagers and, if Djokovic defeats Tsonga, he will be the third 
youngest men's champion. The Serb is remarkably mature and has an iron will. 
Tsonga is in unknown territory but it is by no means beyond him to knock 
Djokovic's wise head clean off his young shoulders.

The finalists

Novak Djokovic, Serbia

Age: 20

Turned pro: 2003

Career prize money: $4.8m

Career titles: 7

Born: Belgrade, Serbia

Seeded: 3

Grand slam titles: 0

Previous meetings: 0

Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, France

Age: 22

Turned pro: 2004

Career prize money: $0.5m

Career titles: 0

Born: Le Mans, France

Unseeded

Grand slam titles: 0
 