
The stature of Serbia's 20-year-old Novak Djokovic, the world No3, is being 
further enhanced at this year'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. He has yet to drop a set 
on his way to the last eight and rarely gave the 15,000 in the Rod Laver Arena 
a semblance of hope that their own Lleyton Hewitt might conjure up a victory 
against the odds. Djokovic won 7-5, 6-3, 6-3 and, even if Hewitt had not been 
kept on court until 4.34am on Sunday in his previous match against Marcos 
Baghdatis, he would probably have fared little better. This was the new 
generation sweeping away the old, even though Hewitt is only 26.

Hewitt was a phenomenon, playing his first Australian Open at 15 and winning 
the first of his two majors, the US Open, when he was Djokovic's age. He has 
always dearly wanted to win his home championship and lost in the final three 
years ago to Russia's Marat Safin. Now he will not. Time moves on and Hewitt, 
no longer in the world's top 20, has been left behind. "The best set of wheels 
in the world" was how Pete Sampras once described Hewitt's game of electric 
counter-attack. Now some of those wheels have fallen off, and Australian men's 
tennis looks set for some lean years.

Djokovic had a wonderful 2007, reaching the semi-finals at the French Open and 
Wimbledon and then making his first major final, at the US Open, pushing Roger 
Federer hard before the Swiss claimed his 12th grand slam title. The man 
Djokovic defeated to reach that final was Spain's David Ferrer and the two will 
lock rackets again tomorrow for the chance of a likely semi-final against the 
world No1.

An ill-judged attempted drop shot in the second set tie-break by Tomas Berdych 
cost him the chance of levelling his fourth-round match against Federer, who 
will now play James Blake of the US. The Czech is best remembered for defeating 
Federer in the early stages of the 2004 Athens Olympics, although he has lost 
all their five meetings since. "Tomas is always a dangerous player and thank 
God he didn't win that second set," said Federer, who won 6-4, 7-6, 6-3.

After his five-set victory over Janko Tipsarevic on Saturday Federer again 
displayed uncharacteristic waywardness, as if his mind was still not entirely 
focused. Whether Blake will be able to unearth underlying weaknesses seems, at 
first glance, unlikely. Federer holds a 7-0 head-to-head advantage over the New 
Yorker with an English mother, and Blake has won only one set against him.

The stomach complaint the Swiss suffered just prior to the tournament does not 
appear to have had any lasting effect, and his struggles against Tipsarevic may 
have been mental as much as anything. "I think that could be because he has set 
the bar so high," said Blake. "I know that once he gets deep into a slam his 
mind is thinking about winning it and nearer to that Sampras record, and he 
isn't going to give me anything for free."

Ana Ivanovic, Serbia's women's No3, has a personality as engaging as that of 
Djokovic and the 20-year-old is establishing herself as a challenger for the 
highest honours, all done with a smile never far from her lips. Her 
breakthrough at grand slam level came on the clay at Roland Garros, where she 
reached her first major final before losing out to Justine Henin. Rather than 
spend hours in introspection, Ivanovic brushed defeat aside, recognised she had 
lost to the best clay-court player of the decade and moved on.

She is now in her fourth major quarter-final, against Venus Williams tomorrow, 
after defeating the young Dane Caroline Wozniacki 6-1, 7-6. The American has 
won comfortably in their past two meetings, and Ivanovic said: "I've never 
played anyone who covers the court as well as Venus, her retrieval skills are 
amazing. Shots that against lesser players would be winners come back with 
interest."

Britain's Jamie Murray and Liezel Huber of the US were beaten 6-2, 6-4 in the 
second round of the mixed doubles by the fifth seeds, Nenad Zimonjic of Serbia 
and Tiantian Sun of China.
 