
Novak Djokovic came from behind to win the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Sunday, overcoming 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga by three sets to one, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2).

The No3 seed Djokovic had started out as favourite but could find no answer to 
Tsonga's power in an exciting first set, which hinted at the unseeded 
Frenchman, playing in his first ever final, providing a fairytale finish in 
only his fifth ever appearance in a grand slam tournament. However, after 
steadying the ship in the second set, Djokovic raced away from Tsonga, before 
surviving a late rally to clinch his first grand slam victory on a fourth set 
tie-breaker.

The first set of tennis was closely contested, as both players recovered from 
shaky starts before finding the level that had seen them so unexpectedly reach 
the final. Tsonga, who swept Rafael Nadal aside in the semi-final, looked as 
though he might succumb to nerves as he contrived to lose his very first 
service game. However, his opponent, who was equally impressive against the 
world No1 Roger Federer in his previous match, returned the compliment in the 
very next game committing three unforced errors to bring the match back to 
parity at 1-1.

Amateur night ended there, though, as the next eight games represented an 
absorbing set of exciting baseline rallies and booming groundstrokes. Tsonga 
squandered two break points at 2-1 while Djokovic forced deuce on the Tsonga 
serve at 3-3 but there was little to separate the two players, meeting for the 
first time, save for Djokovic's preponderance of unforced errors and erratic 
first serve. Too often he was forced to send down a second serve, which Tsonga 
punished brutally. And Tsonga took the first set in style, returning the Serb's 
tame smash on 30-30 before lobbing him from the baseline on set-point.

Djokovic responded well to the setback, reducing his unforced errors from 12 
to five in the second set and opting to chase fewer winners. The tactic worked 
well even though his opponent looked to be dominating with his booming serve 
and powerful forehand until losing his way at 3-3. Djokovic set up break point 
with a ferocious backhand and Tsonga slipped on the next point handing the 
advantage and effectively the second set to the 20-year-old from Belgrade.

The match now began to swing the way of Djokovic, who was finding his 
momentum, first serve and vast range of pinpoint baseline shots. Tsonga 
survived two break points in the third game but twice went for the ambitious 
winner rather than biding his time - a tendency that ultimately was to prove 
his undoing. Soon he found himself 3-1 down and, further frustrated by 
Djokovic's endless ball-bouncing when serving, began to commit myriad mistakes.

In the face of flagging form Tsonga began to cling on desperately and, despite 
showing great tenacity to fight back from 0-40 and survive six set points in 
the game, eventually sent a weak volley into the net to cede the third set. 
Djokovic could smell blood now and won an emphatic first game of the fourth set 
to love, but Tsonga also held serve and the pair exchanged two breathless 
rallies at 2-2, which resulted in Djokovic calling for a trainer and a massage. 
If the Serb's hamstring was tightening up, his serve certainly was not. At 3-3 
Djokovic sent down a 209km/h torpedo before utilising his backhand slice two 
points in succession to foil the tiring Tsonga.

Tsonga had to serve to stay in the match at 4-5 and responded valiantly, 
holding his nerve to take the game, marked by an electric crosscourt winner 
that hit the line. However, the Frenchman blew his chance to break Djokovic, 
who committed three nervous unforced errors, in the very next game, when he 
decided against playing into an unmanned court on set point. The grateful Serb 
took full advantage going on to hold serve.

Undaunted, the gutsy Tsonga held serve again to take the final set into a 
tie-breaker, which he again tried to force with some aggressive shot-making. 
However, two attempted winners found the net and then his untimely second 
double fault, immediately after a challenge, took him 5-1 down. Again the 
Frenchman went for his winners, while Djokovic stuck to percentage tennis, and 
the Serb held on to take the tie-breaker 7-2, and his first grand slam title.
 