
Novak Djokovic will face Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Sunday's Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final after the No3 seed 
produced a superb performance to oust the world No1 and 12-time grand slam 
winner Roger Federer in straight sets in today's semi-final.

Djokovic took the tie 7-5, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5) to seal his second appearance in a 
grand slam final. That Federer was his victim was fitting - his previous slam 
final ended in defeat to the Swiss at the US Open last year.

Though the Serbian's performance was impressive, Federer, who had been on a 
19-match winning run at Melbourne Park, will be disappointed with his display. 
The uncharacteristic unforced errors he produced throughout the match gives 
fuel to those who claim that he no longer has the air of invulnerability that 
has marked his career. Sunday's final will be the first Federer has missed 
since the French Open in May 2005. He has featured in the last 10, winning 
eight of them.

"It's unbelievable to beat the No1 player in the world, probably the best this 
court has seen," said Djokovic. "I am very proud. It's very difficult to play 
against a player who is so dominant on any surface. He has been so successful 
in the last couple of years in Australia and he had the crowd behind him. I am 
amazed at the way I coped with the pressure and I played my best tennis."

The Serbian took two hours and 27 minutes to end that run and is yet to drop a 
set in the tournament. He will be odds-on favourite to take the title.

Federer, though, began the stronger and broke his opponent in the seventh game 
of the opening set, but struggled to consistently time his shots, allowing the 
20-year-old Djokovic to break back. The Serb then rattled off the next two 
games to take the set 7-5.

That pattern continued into the second set, with Federer missing two forehands 
to give Djokovic the break in the fourth game. Djokovic then broke again to 
take a 5-1 lead and, though Federer was able to claw one of those breaks back, 
served up an ace to take a two-set lead.

Federer began to show flashes of his undoubted genius in the third set and had 
a set point against serve in the 12th game. Djokovic held out, however, and in 
the tension of the tie-break was able to hold his nerve, taking his first match 
point against the serve.

"I think he made the more important points today, it was a bit unfortunate for 
me," Federer admitted. "It depends a lot on form, you can't always play your 
best. There is no doubt I have played better before. I've created a monster 
that I need to win every tournament. Still, the semi-finals isn't bad."
 