 When guests come round, the usual thing is to offer them a cup of tea and 
invite them to relax on your sofa.
But with more than 1,000 people arriving at architect Peter St John's 
Islington home tomorrow, the social niceties will have to be ditched.

The masses will descend on Mr St John as part of London Open House, when a 
vast and fascinating range of the capital's finest buildings throw their doors 
open to the public.

The annual celebration of architecture features both grand public offices and 
headquarters such as the Foreign Office and the Channel 4 building, and an 
extensive contingent of private homes such as Mr St John's.

The architect, of Caruso St John, designers of the Walsall Art Gallery, first 
invited the public to come and admire his decor two years ago.

"It is a kind of mad and slightly narcissistic thing to do," he admitted. 
"Deep down all architects have a deep need for people to look at and be 
interested in their work."

While he hoped it would encourage public appreciation of the "built 
environment", Mr St John conceded that it also appealed to "a natural 
fascination with what other people's houses are like".

With 40 people coming in every 15 minutes, it was exhausting but also a lot of 
fun, especially for his children who did a roaring trade selling biscuits.

As there is little of value to steal, he was not overly concerned about 
potential burglars. "We have a few friends standing around trying to make sure 
nothing disappears, but people were generally very well behaved."

Several other architects, including Nicholas Burwell, David Russell, Marcus 
Lee, and Tom Pike, are also opening up their homes.

Among the public buildings making their debut this year are the University of 
London's Senate House, the Royal Institute of International Affairs, popularly 
known as Chatham House, and Macks Mews, a 19th century paper factory converted 
for housing.

Many of the 550 buildings involved are normally closed to the public, or have 
very restricted public access.

For the Open House weekend, now in its eighth year, the buildings' owners 
allow visitors in free of charge.

In 1999, more than 450 buildings were open to the public and 320,000 visits 
were made over the 48-hour period. This year more than 500,000 are expected to 
take up the opportunity.

Some of the best-loved attractions include Imagination, originally an 
Edwardian school and now headquarters for a design and communications company 
in Bloomsbury; and Marlborough House, designed by Sir Christopher Wren and 
originally home to the dukes of Marlborough.

London Open House, which is sponsored by the Guardian, follows the Heritage 
Open Days last weekend when over 2,500 heritage sites across the country opened 
their doors to the public.

Mr St John's home, 11 Orleston Mews, N7, is open to the public on Sunday only, 
from 10am to 4pm. For details of other locations and times check the London 
Open House website atwww.londonopenhouse.org.  <http://www.londonopenhouse.org.>
 