
When I was 17 years old, I engaged in a battle with the director of my sixth 
form. Having done well in my AS-levels, I wanted to continue with all four 
subjects to A2. He refused to allow it.


“You only need three to get into university,” he insisted. “Any more is going 
to be too much work for you. Your grades will suffer.”

In the end I was able to continue with four regardless, but the episode 
resurfaces in my mind every time a new academic year comes around.

In spite of the staggering inflation of tuition fees, more 18-year-olds went 
to university this year than ever before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/15/record-number-students-university-women-deprived-areas>
. And withAS-levels soon to be gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jun/19/as-levels-scrapped-exam-reforms>
, it could become increasingly difficult to stand out from the swathe of other 
well-qualified applicants. But is keeping four A-levels the answer?


How much do universities really value an extra full A-Level?

While taking an extra A-level provides much in terms of personal development, 
additional learning and breadth of subject knowledge, it is debatable whether 
it has value in purely academic terms. No university explicitly requires 
students to continue all subjects into the second year.

Dunstan Hadley, a representative of the esteemed Russell Group of 24 leading 
UK universities, explains that each university has its own admissions process 
and there is no set formula for successfully gaining a place.


What’s most important, he says, is that students meet the entry requirements – 
which is ordinarily three A-levels.

He stressed that universities review applications as a sum of their parts, 
taking personal statement, references and relevant experience into 
consideration. Admissions tutors are also aware that students do not always 
have the opportunity to study four A-levels.

Rather than requiring prospective undergraduates to hold an additional subject 
at A2 level, some universities in the Russell Group have instead opted to 
introduce the A* grade into their conditional offers in order to attract the 
very best students.






When is it better to take three?


Dr Malcolm Fairburn, of King’s College London’s physics department, explained 
that the preferences of admissions tutors can change year-on-year.

“Every department has a different philosophy, shaped by the attitudes of the 
admissions tutor, as well as statistics from previous years,” he says. “At the 
moment at KCL, we only concentrate on the first three A-levels. The fourth 
A-level would only become relevant if it was a borderline case.”

He stresses that if somebody was struggling to make the required grades - in 
this case, AAA - then they might be better concentrating on just three A-levels.

“If the student is a borderline case and they are doing four A-levels, they 
probably should have dropped one at AS-level to get better marks in the first 
three,” he says.

Claire Mulley, media relations officer at the University of Durham, agrees 
that an additional A-level may not lead admissions tutors to regard an 
applicant more highly. “Applicants are not automatically considered to be 
stronger because they have taken more than three A-levels,” she says.

Is it ever worth taking four?


Some admissions tutors approve of taking four A-levels because it can 
cultivate a student’s potential.

Dr Alice Taylor is admissions tutor and lecturer in medieval history at King’s 
College London, where a typical offer to study history is three A grades at 
A-level.

“We don’t favour four above three,” she told me of the admissions process. 
“Our offer is three A-levels – but if a student has four, that’s great, and 
gives them a bit more breathing space when it comes to achieving the offer in 
question.”

Four A-levels is not a requirement for entry to Cambridge, says Adam Patel, a 
fourth-year languages student at Cambridge University who took four A-levels. 
However, Patel says that employers like it. “I don’t think having four made any 
difference to my application,” he says.


“I chose to do maths as my fourth A-level, mainly because I found that it 
didn’t require much revision outside of the classroom. So rather than have so 
many free periods, it seemed silly not to try and get an extra qualification – 
it wasn’t a huge burden on my time.”

While it may not have made a huge difference to his academic life before 
university, Adam is now noticing positive responses from prospective employers 
as he nears the end of his degree.

“I can honestly say it’s made no difference at Cambridge considering I’m 
studying languages, but now that I’m applying for jobs it definitely shows 
another side to me that employees like.”

While extra A-levels can be a good way of demonstrating time management and 
broad interests, ultimately the general consensus seems to be that going above 
and beyond the required three A-levels is not needed to get into university – 
and may ultimately put required subjects at risk.

If gaining a place at a prestigious university is your priority, it’s probably 
more beneficial to focus on achieving the three top grades they want – because 
that’s a requirement you can’t avoid.

 * Did you study three or four A-levels? What do you think is the best number 
of A-levels to take?
 