
For a crack team of analysts from ratings agency Standard & Poor's it must 
have been a plum assignment when they flew to St Peter Port last year to judge 
the credit-worthiness of Guernsey's government. At a cost to Guernsey's 
taxpayers of £50,000, they produced a fact-filled 11-page report with a 
top-notch verdict bestowing a coveted triple-A sovereign credit rating on the 
affluent Channel island.

This splendidly insightful piece of work was not very difficult for a simple 
reason – Guernsey has no debt. The government of the cash-rich island, where 
unemployment is 1.3% and the average house costs £346,000, does not owe any 
money and isn't planning to borrow any in the foreseeable future.

S&P's report solemnly lists Guernsey's debt ratio for each of the past five 
years, and forecasts it up to 2012 in the future: in each column, 0% of GDP. 
The analysts muse: "Fiscal flexibility is a crucial factor underpinning our 
opinion of Guernsey's creditworthiness."

It would be bizarre, to say the least, to give Guernsey anything other than an 
AAA rating – so obvious that Guernsey's similarly debt-free neighbour, Jersey, 
has decided S&P's services are a waste of money and has not bothered to splash 
out 50 grand to be rated. Welcome to the peculiar world of sovereign credit 
ratings.

Created through a 1941 merger of Standard Statistics with Poor's Publishing, 
New York-based S&P is the largest of the world's three primary rating agencies, 
ahead of Moody's and Fitch. It startled the world's financial markets last week 
by making a big call when it put the United States' triple-A rating on "outlook 
negative". That's not a downgrade. It's the step before "credit watch 
negative", which is the step before a downgrade – which, if it happened, would 
not be to anything as alphabetically drastic as a "B", merely going from AAA to 
AA.

S&P is worried about whether America's warring congressional politicians can 
reach a constructive deal on tackling a national debt of $14tn. The agency's 
throat-clearing was sufficient to send global stock markets down by more than 
1% and trigger frenzied financial reassurances from United States treasury 
secretary Tim Geithner.

For all their limitations, flaws and inadequacies, the three big credit rating 
agencies still have a near hypnotic hold on the financial markets. That's 
despite their flakey track record: on the international front,Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> commanded a triple-A rating from 
S&P until March 2009 and was rated double-A until November – the month the 
country appealed to the European Union for a bailout. Iceland, Portugal and 
Greece were marked down a little bit earlier. But on corporate bonds, the 
picture is worse – billions of dollars' worth of US mortgage-backed securities 
carried AAA ratings in the run-up to the financial crisis which exposed them as 
investment arsenic.

Politicians on both sides of the Atlantic have probed ratings agencies and 
urged reform. Critics say they have a fundamental conflict of interest: they 
are paid by the people they rate. One proposal mooted in Washington was for 
agencies to be randomly assigned to financial instruments, rather than selected 
by the companies issuing debt. But that, say the agencies, would mean an end to 
competition and leave little incentive to do the job well. Another idea is for 
investors to pay to see ratings. But that would mean wealthier market 
participants gain access to potentially crucial information more easily than 
the ordinary punter.

Business thinktanks including the New Economics Foundation and Re-Define want 
more competition in ratings. The European commission is consulting on a 
proposal to create an EU-sponsored, Europe-wide ratings agency. And Jules 
Kroll, founder of corporate detective agency Kroll Inc, is trying to smash the 
dominance of the big three by creating his own "sceptical" rating operation.

But little has changed to date. And these flawed credit ratings remain 
hard-wired into the core of the financial system. A new Basel III era of 
international banking regulations, intended to bolster capital adequacy, will 
force banks to comply with a 7% capital ratio. But that's capital as a 
proportion of "risk-weighted" assets, and assets with a triple-A credit rating 
officially carry a risk weighting of zero. That means that, even under these 
new enhanced rules, a bank could have had an infinite amount of Irish 
government debt on its books without any impact on its security rating.

The business of ratings is a lucrative game. Moody's last year reported 
earnings of $507m (£307m) on revenue of just over $2bn – a profit margin of 
25%. Among its biggest investors is Warren Buffett, who knows a moneyspinner 
when he sees it. The Sage of Omaha has glibly defended ratings agencies, 
declaring that they "made the same mistake as 300 million other Americans" in 
failing to spot a housing bubble and a global financial crisis. That's good 
enough for him. But is it good enough for the rest of us?
 