
Two of the most famous clubs in Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> came from a long way back to earn 
spots in the post-season on Thursday.

The Los Angeles Dodgers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-dodgers>
 with their new owners turned around a disastrous first half of the season to 
win the National League West pennant, three months after sitting in last place; 
the Boston Red Sox and their new manager wiped away memories of a last-place 
finish last season in the American League East to ensure at least a playoff 
berth.

Burdened by high expectations and a horrible start, the Dodgers relieved their 
pent-up pressure with a joyful celebration after becoming the first team this 
year to clinch a playoff spot. Hanley Ramirez homered twice as they rallied to 
beat theArizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> 7-6.

"I want to keep going," Ramirez said. "I think that we've got a couple of more 
steps to do. We've got to keep working and stay together all the way through to 
the end."

Ramirez was back in the lineup after being sidelined five of six games with an 
irritated nerve in his lower back. He's played 1,090 regular-season games but 
will be making his first trip to the postseason. Only three active players have 
played more games without making the playoffs.

Despite an NL-high payroll of $214 million-plus on opening day, the Dodgers 
got off to a 30-42 start and were last in the division, 9½ games behind the 
first-place Diamondbacks, before play on June 22. Los Angeles has gone 58-23 
since, including a 42-8 run that coincided mostly with dynamic Cuban defector 
Yasiel Puig's call-up to the majors.

"This is a great accomplishment for these guys," manager Don Mattingly said. 
"We put a great team together and a big payroll with huge expectations. A lot 
of time that falls apart and it had a chance to fall apart during the season, I 
thought. The players came together, we got healthy, and then we just rolled."

The Dodgers trailed 6-3 in the sixth and A.J. Ellis hit a tie-breaking homer 
off Josh Collmenter (4-4) leading off the eighth. J.P. Howell (2-1) got two 
outs for the victory.

There were celebrations at Boston after a 3-1 win over Baltimore got the Red 
Sox into the playoffs for the first time since 2009.

Coming off a last-place finish and a 69-93 win-loss record last season their 
most losses since 1965, the Red Sox have rebounded under first-year manager 
John Farrell and ensured at least a wild-card berth in the postseason. They 
lowered their magic number to two for clinching the AL East.

Boston scored all its runs in the second on Stephen Drew's two-run homer and 
Dustin Pedroia's RBI single.

The Pirates had a 1-0 win over the Padres, with Pedro Alvarez hitting his 
NL-leading 34th homer as they moved a game in front of Cincinnati for the top 
wild-card spot in the NL. Pittsburgh moved within one game of first-place St. 
Louis in the NL Central.

Washington kept alive its slim hopes of reaching the playoffs with a 3-2 win 
over the Florida Marlins. Despite winning 11 of 13 in a belated run, the 
Nationals trail Cincinnati by five games for the final NL wild-card spot with 
nine games remaining.

At Denver, Corey Dickerson's RBI triple with one out in the bottom of the 15th 
inning gave Colorado at 7-6 win over the Cardinals. Charlie Blackmon finished 
with four hits and Troy Tulowitzki and Todd Helton homered for the Rockies in 
equaling the second-longest game in Coors Field history.

In other games, San Francisco's Madison Bumgarner struck out 10 in seven 
innings of four-hit ball as the Giants edged the Mets 2-1, and the Cubs beat 
the Brewers 5-1 at Milwaukee to end a five-game losing streak.

At Toronto, the New York Yankees lost for the fifth time in six games, losing 
6-2 to the Blue Jays.

Hiroki Kuroda lost his fifth straight decision, allowing two runs in the third 
inning and a solo home run to Anthony Gose in the sixth. Adam Lind added a 
three-run homer in the seventh off Joba Chamberlain.

New York, which began the night 2½ games behind for the second AL wild-card 
berth, is in danger of missing the playoffs for only the second time in 19 
seasons.

Detroit, meanwhile, pushed its AL Central lead to 6 1/2 games with a 5-4 win 
over the Mariners. Prince Fielder had three hits and scored the tiebreaking run 
in the seventh inning on a close play at the plate for the Tigers, who trailed 
4-3 after Seattle's Dustin Ackley hit a three-run homer in the fifth.

The Indians edged the Houston Astros 2-1 with Matt Carson's single with two 
outs in the 11th inning giving Cleveland the win as it closed within a 
half-game in the AL wild-card race.

Texas and Tampa are tied atop the AL wild-card race after the Rangers beat the 
Rays 8-2 in Florida to split their four-game series.

The Rangers won the season series with the Rays 4-3, earning home-field 
advantage should the teams finish in tie for the two wild-card spots. They each 
have 10 games left.

Yu Darvish won for the first time in seven starts since Aug. 12. Darvish 
(13-9) made it through five innings despite walking six.
 