
Dogs can remember what their owners have been up to, say researchers probing 
the nature of canine memory.

A team from Hungary have discovered that dogs are able to recall their owner’s 
actions, even when they were not specifically instructed to do so, suggesting 
that dogs, like humans, have what is known as “episodic memory” – memories 
linked to specific times and places.

Why dog trainers will have to change their ways
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/jul/17/dog-training-john-bradshaw-animal-behaviour>
“I think that dog owners more or less suspect, at least, that dogs can 
remember events from the past - what is novel is the type of memory they can 
use for doing so,” said Claudia Fugazza lead author of the study from the 
MTA-ELTE Comparative Ethology Research Group. “This study shows that they can 
use a type of memory that allows them to recall and remember events that were 
not known to be important.”

To probe the nature of doggy memory, Fugazza and colleagues employed 17 dogs 
of various breeds that were used to being trained to copy their owner’s 
movements.

In the first step of the study, the dogs were exposed to six different objects 
and watched as their owner carried out a previously unseen action with one of 
three of the items, such as climbing on a chair or touching an umbrella. The 
dogs were then commanded to mimic the action with the words “do it!”.


In the second step, the dogs were trained to lie down after seeing their owner 
interacting with one of the six objects. The owners then carried out an 
unfamiliar action with one of the three items used in the first step. In 
response the dogs lay down, expecting a command to do so – but instead, after a 
delay, they were unexpectedly given the “do it!” commanded. The test was 
carried out twice for each dog, using different actions, once with a one minute 
delay and once with an hour’s delay.

The results, published in the journal Current Biology 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(16)31142-3>, reveal 
that while the dogs were more likely to imitate their owners when expected to 
do so, they were also able to imitate actions when the command was sprung upon 
them.


While 94.1% of dogs successfully mimicked their owner when expecting to do so, 
58.8% correctly copied their owner when unexpectedly asked to “do it!” a minute 
later, and 35.3% correctly copied their owner when unexpectedly given the 
commanded an hour later.

Dogs feel jealous of rival pets, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/23/dogs-jealous-owners-attention-study>
The authors note that the rapid drop-off in success rates over time, together 
with evidence that the command was unexpected, shows that the dogs were 
recalling events that had not been imbued with importance – suggesting that 
they were relying on a type of episodic memory. The conclusion, they add, is 
backed up the dogs’ ability to mimic actions despite having never physically 
done them before.


“Traditionally episodic memory has been linked to self-awareness but as we do 
not know whether dogs are self-aware we call it episodic-like memory,” said 
Fugazza.

Laurie Santos, an expert in canine cognition from Yale University who was not 
involved in the research, praised the design of the study and said the work 
offered new insights into canine memory.

But, she added, it was not clear whether dogs are capable of remembering 
events with the same level of detail and context that humans do. “When I think 
of my last holiday dinner, there’s a richness to that where I remember where I 
was, and when, and who I was with and so on,” she said. “It’s not yet clear 
from the current study if dogs have that richness, but the paper is a nice step 
to starting to test these important questions.”
 