
Once upon a time bands released an album, toured it, then recorded a different 
one and toured that. Meanwhile their fans wished they'd done a bit more of the 
old one. Thanks to no one buying records any more, bands are having to pander 
more to what their fans want. The forward-thinking people atAll Tomorrow's 
Parties 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/30/all-tomorrows-parties-belle-sebastian-interview>
 were the first to twig to the possibilities, launching theDon't Look Back 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2007/sep/03/dontlookbackisaboutmoret>
 series in 2005. The idea was beautifully simple: bands performed their classic 
album in full. Amazing. The Stooges played. So did Dinosaur Jr. So did the 
Lemonheads. It was all quite special. But now, of course, everyone's doing it – 
and if you can really contemplate spending an entire evening out of your 
painfully short life watching Ocean Colour Scene plod through Moseley Shoals 
then, honestly, get some help. Happily, though, some records will never, not 
ever, get played again live. We celebrate them here …

Ministry – With Sympathy (1983)
 Ministry - (1983) With sympathy 
Long before they honed their monolithic industrial metal sound, Ministry were 
just another of the 80s new wave proletariat. Their debut, With Sympathy, is a 
full-on synth-pop onslaught, lacking any of the pulsating menace of their later 
releases. Presumably in an attempt to maintain their metal cred, the band have 
tried their utmost to airbrush it from history. Lead singer Al Jourgensen has 
famously described the album as "an abortion", and it remains alone in 
Ministry's early output in not receiving a re-release. Fortunately for the 
curious, With Sympathy can be heard in full onSpotify 
<http://open.spotify.com/album/25mM8RQO7ys3MlUtYUDfK5>.

The Flaming Lips – Zaireeka (1997)
 Flaming Lips - Zaireeka 
An album that's near-impossible to listen to properly, yet alone perform, 
Zaireeka stands as a monument to the frenzied imagination of Wayne Coyne. With 
the intention of creating a "multi-dimensional" form of music, Coyne stumbled 
upon the idea of releasing an album that could only be heard properly if played 
simultaneously on four stereos. Sensing that performing Zaireeka live would be 
all-but-impossible, the Lips instead devised the Boombox Experiments tour, 
where 40 devices pre-loaded with the album were switched on simultaneously. For 
those poor souls with only 39 boomboxes, Coyne has promised an iPhone app later 
this year.

Mariah Carey – Glitter (2001)
 Mariah Carey 
Glitter is no turkey – it's sold somewhere north of 3m copies. But Carey had 
just signed a deal with Virgin Records for $80m, so you, literally, do the 
math. Semi-autobiographical in focus, the album was a dog of monumental 
proportions, weak songs failing to carry a catastrophically weak concept (girl 
from wrong side of the tracks makes it in the big, wide blah blah blah). The 
accompanying film was so moribund the poster claimed "In music, she found her 
dream, her love, herself", and so hackneyed that one critic called it, "the pop 
equivalent of Chernobyl". Virgin quickly paid Carey $49m to go away. Don't 
expect her to revisit this one.

Kiss – Music From The Elder (1981)
 Kiss: Music from the elder 
An object lesson in how to completely alienate your fanbase. This was Kiss' 
attempt to gain some serious credibility: it featured no songs about love guns 
or rocking all night; instead there were torturous rhymes, grim medieval 
overtures, and tunes co-written with knockabout jokester, Lou Reed. "It sure 
was an interesting Genesis record," Gene Simmons quipped. The Elder tanked so 
hard on release there was no tour to support it and guitarist Ace Frehley hated 
it so much he said, "I listened to it, took the tape and smashed it against the 
wall." Frehley then left the band for 15 years.

Goodie Mob – World Party (1999)
 Goodie Mob 
By album three, the Goodie Mob were running out of steam: you only have to 
look at the appalling cover to see how badly wrong things were going, and 
deciding on some spurious, thugged-out gangsta theme didn't help. But the 
reason you'll never hear this album getting a deeply respectful concert in its 
honour is thanks to band member Khujo's line, "The world would be a better 
place if it was less queers" from the song All A's. "That album was the most 
shameful moment in my entire career,"Cee-Lo Green 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/14/cee-lo-green-interview?INTCMP=SRCH>
 said later. He left. The band's next album was called One Monkey Don't Stop No 
Show. Nice.
 