
Rather like the All Blacks performing the haka, a full-scale tantrum by 
Britain's business elite can be majestic in its fury. So it was difficult to 
ignore the histrionic reaction afforded to Jack Straw'sBribery Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/bribery-act>, which got royal assent in the 
dying days of the Labour government.

The act, intended to update a patchwork of anti-corruption legislation dating 
back to 1906, clamps down on backhanders, sweeteners and brown envelopes 
lubricating the progress of transactions and is largely aimed at British 
companies operating overseas.

The backlash was so vigorous that you would have thought the government was 
banning boardroom biscuits. Business leaders began fulminating about corporate 
hospitality. Could entertaining a client in a box at Lord's become illegal? 
What about buying dinner at Claridge's for a government official? Consultants 
at PricewaterhouseCoopers enthusiastically joined in, musing that Christmas 
gifts of champagne or gold fountain pens could conceivably lead to imprisonment 
in Straw's new era of joylessness. The CBI tersely declared that the 
legislation was "not fit for purpose". Britain's biggest drugs company, 
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), wondered whether it would be hampered from inviting 
Chinese doctors to speak at conferences.

The alarmism succeeded in temporarily delaying implementation. A measure of 
common sense was restored last week by guidance from the justice secretary, 
Kenneth Clarke. It's not rocket science, according to Clarke's officials: 
corporate entertainment is fine as long as it's not explicitly intended to 
induce improper behaviour – so "an invitation to foreign clients to attend a 
Six Nations match at Twickenham" is "extremely unlikely" to be considered 
corruption.

Ethical campaigners smell a rat. Chandrashekhar Krishnan, executive director 
of pressure group Transparency International UK, says the "hysteria" over the 
anti-bribery laws was absurd: "There's no reason prosecutors are going to go 
chasing after people because they're taking each other out for lunch."

The backlash, he reckons, was all about jurisdiction. Multinationals are 
squabbling about the definition of the constituency covered by the law. Many 
foreign companies listed on the London Stock Exchange are likely to escape on 
the grounds that they don't have significant operations in Britain – even if 
they're using capital raised in the UK to grease the palms of dodgy 
bureaucrats. And subcontractors, or part-owned subsidiaries of UK firms, look 
set to escape the crackdown.

The Bribery Act prohibits both offering and requesting a bribe. And it 
requires companies to put safeguards in place to prevent bribes being paid on 
their behalf by third parties. It's not an insignificant problem – a 2007 World 
Bank report estimated that bribery cost the global economy $1tn annually, with 
the burden falling disproportionately on impoverished nations.

Still, some experts remain unhappy. Charles Carr, managing director of risk 
specialists K2 Global Consulting, says the act is erratic, muddled and 
contradictory. According to Carr, anybody who has done business in Moscow or 
Beijing knows that winning a big contract can involve an "enormous evening" of 
hospitality. "The thing is that everybody is doing it," he says. "If you don't 
do it, you're losing advantage to competitors who have no restrictions on how 
they behave."

That's true – but, ultimately, a good reputation should pay off. Bribery 
scandals leave a stain for a long time – just ask BAE Systems or Siemens, both 
of which have paid hundreds of millions of pounds to settle corruption 
prosecutions. As GSK's chief executive, Andrew Witty, remarked on these pages 
recently, the most talented graduates leaving university face a choice of 
employers – and they don't want to work for companies with tainted reputations.

Still, passing laws is the easy bit. Enforcing them is tougher, and complex 
international investigations are pricey. TheSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> had its budget cut from 
£44m to £40m this year and it's set to fall to £31m by 2014. Only £2m extra has 
been earmarked to enforce the Bribery Act. Let's hope our detectives are flying 
on Ryanair.
 