
 The author: Elmore "Dutch" Leonard (b1925) grew up in Detroit and became an 
advertising copywriter. He also sold stories - initially westerns - to the pulp 
magazines, and published his first novel, The Bounty Hunter, in 1953. His work 
found favour in Hollywood - two cowboy movies, 3.10 to Yuma and The Tall T, 
were adapted from stories before the end of the decade. In 1961 he became a 
full-time writer, switching to crime as the western market dried up, with The 
Big Bounce (1969) his first entry in the genre. Leonard's 1985 novel Glitz 
proved a critical and commercial breakthrough and a string of now-classic crime 
novels followed, including Rum Punch (1992), for which he returned to 
characters first introduced in his 1978 novel, The Switch. Leonard's reputation 
took another leap with the success of the 1995 film of Get Shorty, setting off 
a scramble of film adaptations, including Out of Sight (1998) and the upcoming 
release Be Cool.

The story: Rum Punch is the code name given by a Miami hustler, Ordell Robbie, 
to the transfer of the profits from his illegal gun-selling operation into the 
US from his safety-deposit box in the Bahamas. His regular courier, an air 
stewardess called Jackie Burke, is arrested by federal agents, and agrees to 
help them get evidence against Ordell. A bail-bondsman, Max Cherry, arranges 
Jackie's bail; he subsequently falls in love with her, and helps her arrange a 
sting, in which she manages to make off with half a million of Ordell's 
dollars. Adroitly, the pair manage to play Ordell off against the agents 
tracking him; Ordell is killed, and the feds don't realise the money has gone.

The film-maker: Quentin Tarantino (b1963) gained a reputation for violent, 
funny scripts before getting his own directorial project, Reservoir Dogs 
(1992), off the ground. Its immediate cultural impact (despite low box-office 
figures) was followed by the icon-defining success of Pulp Fiction (1994), 
which became arguably the key film of its decade. Tarantino optioned three of 
Leonard's novels in the wake of Pulp's success, including Rum Punch. 
Tarantino's obsessive cinephilia led him to champion overlooked corners of 
movie history, resulting in the casting of two marginalised icons in the lead 
roles: blaxploitation heroine Pam Grier, star of Coffy (1973) and Foxy Brown 
(1974), and Robert Forster, best known for Medium Cool (1968) and 1970s 
American TV show Banyon.

How book and film compare: Most obviously, Tarantino changed location (to 
California) and the ethnicity of the title role: Burke becomes Brown, 
presumably a homage to Grier's Foxy Brown character. Otherwise, he sticks 
relatively faithfully to Leonard's original plot. He does, however, downplay 
the romantic connection between Max and Jackie, restricting it to a single, 
regretful kiss in the very last scene.

Inspirations and influences: Tarantino's interest in 1970s blaxploitation 
cinema is arguably the strongest influence onJackie Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie-brown> - he attracted criticism on its 
release for repeated use of the word "nigger". But he also incorporated 
elements for which he has become renowned: audacious narrative timeshifts, 
violence and freewheeling dialogue. Tarantino's success in remodelling genres 
encouraged him to look even further afield, leading to the two-part 
samurai/kung-fu/manga homage Kill Bill (2003/4).
 