
ROUND-UP

Birchall double gives Dover another scalp

Another non-league side making a name for themselves were Dover, conquerors of 
Gillingham in the first round and victors over another League Two club,Aldershot
, in this. Two goals from Adam Birchall gave them a 2-0 win and put them in the 
third round for the first time.

Aldershot created a number of chances early on, although Dover had a goal 
ruled out for offside after Olly Schulzer had headed in. Birchall put the Kent 
side ahead with a neat shot into the corner nine minutes after the break and 
secured victory from the penalty spot after Danny Hylton had handled in the 
area.

Luton sealed a place in the third round draw in an enthralling 2-2 draw at 
Charlton. Joe Anyinsah gave Charlton an early lead but two goals from Andy 
Drury, either side of Johnnie Jackson's strike, ensured a Kenilworth Road 
replay for the non-league side.

The Conference leaders AFC Wimbledon were beaten 2-0 at home by Stevenage 
thanks to goals from Josh Walker and Yemi Odubade. Wimbledon also had Ed Harris 
sent off for a second booking seven minutes from time.

Tamworth threatened a shock at Carlisle, leading first 1-0 and then 2-1 but 
two goals in the last four minutes took the League One team through. Tom 
Marshall had put Tamworth ahead, Gary Madine equalised and Danny Thomas 
restored Tamworth's lead. But Francois Zoko and then James Chester, in the last 
minute, brought late agony for the Conference side.

League One promotion challengers Huddersfield and Southampton both saw off 
lower placed opponents in style, with 6-0 and 3-0 wins overMacclesfield and 
Cheltenham respectively.

Two goals from the veteran midfielder Tommy Miller helped Sheffield Wednesday 
beatNorthampton 3-2 while the under-fire Walsall manager Chris Hutchings 
endured more woe as his side, bottom of League One, lost 1-0 atTorquay.

Southern Premier League side Swindon Supermarine's fine Cup run came to an end 
atColchester, for whom David Mooney scored the only goal.
 