
It may be old age, but it has been mighty hard getting the body into that 
strange rhythm which enables it to cope simultaneously with an English winter's 
night and a Test match coming from the eastern half of Australia.

 On the first two nights I dozed fitfully and actually dreamt what would 
happen next. I went to sleep with one Australian wicket down, dreamed there 
were four out - and, lo, it was true. Next night (truly) I had a dream about 
killer rabbits emerging from their burrows, and woke to hear that Damien 
Fleming had scored 71.

 On the last night I couldn't sleep at all. The contest between the 
Australians and God to see whether they could secure victory before the 
thunderstorm was riveting. Shame England had ceased to be participants.

 Before getting to the message, a word first about the medium. Shorn of the 
responsibility of broadcasting to Australia, the commentators on Radio Four and 
Sky have been able to indulge themselves as 'uswes' (pronounced UZZ-wee). An 
uswe (note to OED: to be credited to Mr Gerald Mortimer of the Derby Evening 
Telegraph) is a sports writer or broadcaster who refers to teams as 'us' or 
'we' instead of maintaining a pretence of objectivity.

 As ever, the Test Match Special commentators have been a great deal better 
than most of the Sky ones (specialist subject: the bleedin' obvious). 
Unfortunately it is almost impossible both to listen and watch. For some 
technical reason, radio scoops television by a couple of seconds. So if you try 
the old trick of switching the TV sound down and listening to the radio, you 
get this eerie effect - a form of Calvinist predestination - whereby you hear 
what will happen before, as far as you are concerned, it actually has.

 When the England tail are batting, it is rather reassuring to know in advance 
that they have survived a ball mostly, it is infuriating. If the BBC cared 
enough about cricket to invest in one of those tape-delay mechanisms used by 
local radio stations to stop people swearing on phone-ins it would probably 
double the audience.

 So what is the message from Brisbane? It was, for once, roughly as predicted 
here. Sure, England were lucky to come away with a draw, but if you will excuse 
a moment of uswe-ing it was damnably overdue this year after Barbados, and 
indeed Edgbaston. England are not patsies on this tour. For long periods they 
can match and outmatch Australia. But there are crucial areas of weakness which 
will make it desperately hard for them to win. And it is weakness in the head 
which is crucial.

 People talk, casually, about a spin bowler's 'guile'. It is as essential to 
his livelihood as for a pickpocket or a fox. England chose Robert Croft to tour 
and not Phil Tufnell the Aussies thought it crazy, but it happened. So the 
management must at least pretend to believe in the choice. It is no use at all 
if Alec Stewart's attitude is "Right, lads, it's nearly lunch. Crofty's 
bowling. Scatter".

 It is by no means obvious that the team for Perth should comprise seven 
batsmen and four seamers. The pitch can vary from perfect firmness to something 
resembling the Flanders countryside in 1917. But the most consistent feature is 
the afternoon breeze, and someone will have to bowl into it. It ought to be 
Croft's job.

 This is a very hard turnaround. Three days between Tests 2,000 miles and two 
time zones apart is, as the Aussies say, a big ask. If it's any consolation, 
it's tough for them as well. There's only one Western Australian (Justin 
Langer) in the team. Most of the others get a bit spooked by the Perth pitch 
too.

 But the Aussies are much better at hiding their insecurities. After South 
Africa had a near-miss at Old Trafford they visibly went to pieces. Australia 
look like they know they will get us next time. England have to believe in 
themselves and one another, and let the Aussies see it. Otherwise they are 
doomed.

 It's easier for us here. For a Perth Test you can set the alarm for about 
6.30am and catch half the day's play. I slept 10 hours on Tuesday night, so I'm 
ready. Not so sure about the lads out there.
 