
Reliance on voluntary action by alcohol firms to tackle drink-related harm has 
been a failure, a hard-hitting report warns. The “public health responsibility 
deal <https://responsibilitydeal.dh.gov.uk>” unveiled during the last 
government has resulted in broken promises and too little being done to reduce 
problems such as underage drinking, the report concludes.

The scathing assessment by the Institute of Alcohol Studies 
<http://www.ias.org.uk> (IAS) states: “[The responsibility deal] appears to 
have been the main element of the UK’s alcohol strategy in recent years and has 
been used by the industry to resist more effective policies. If this is the 
case, the responsibility deal has worsened the health of the nation, and so 
must be considered a failure.”

The break with decades of regulation began under then coalition health 
secretary Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/mar/15/lansley-health-strategy-flounders-refuse>
 in 2011. He hailed it as a groundbreaking public-private partnership that 
would reduce alcohol problems. But the IAS, a non-industry-funded thinktank, 
found that, under the deal, drinks producers have shunned policies that would 
work but would also hit their sales, promoted approaches that do not work, and 
exaggerated how much difference the policies they have adopted have actually 
made.

“The RD has systematically focused on relatively ineffective interventions 
that are unlikely to reduce alcohol consumption. It has set up its pledges in 
ambiguous terms that resist assessment,” says the report. “The alcohol industry 
has obstructed rigorous evaluation of the RD, through the unreliability of its 
progress reports, and more damningly through its misconduct in the official 
evaluation process.”

Katherine Brown, IAS director and one of the report’s authors, said that both 
hospital admissions and deaths due to alcohol had continued to rise, in spite 
of overall alcohol consumption falling slightly. “Perhaps most worryingly, the 
report indicates that the deal may have delayed evidence-based actions that 
would save lives and cut crime, such as minimum pricing. To call this a ‘public 
health responsibility deal’ for alcohol is laughable, as almost every 
independent public health body has boycotted it.”

The RD’s failure meant it would be “absurd for this government to continue 
with such a farcical initiative. With alcohol costing our society £21bn each 
year, we can’t afford to keep prioritising the needs of big business over 
public health,” she added.

The report claims there is no evidence that a key industry pledge – improving 
the labelling of cans and bottles to include drinking guidelines, warning 
labels and unit alcohol content – is working.

Recent Department of Health-funded research by the London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine found that firms involved in the RD “are not fully 
meeting their commitments” on labelling, and that “labelling information 
frequently falls short of best practice, with fonts and logos smaller than 
would be accepted on other products with health effects”.

The report does praise drinks firms for agreeing to stop advertising within 
100 metres of schools. It also hails genuine “progress” on the number of 
alcohol products carrying warnings about drinking during pregnancy, safe 
drinking guidelines and the number of units contained.

The Portman Group, an industry-funded body, criticised the report for “taking 
no account of official government data showing the achievements of the 
Responsibility Deal and repeating previous claims which we have already told 
the IAS are factually incorrect”.

“By working in partnership with government, drinks producers and retailers 
have taken 1.3 billion units of alcohol out of the market, limited the number 
of units of alcohol in single-serve cans, and voluntarily labelled 80% of 
products with important health information, and over 90% with a warning about 
drinking when pregnant,” a spokeswoman said.

Since 2010 there has been a 24% drop in alcohol-related violent incidents and 
13% fall in the number of 11-13-year-olds who have ever had a drink, she added.

A Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
spokeswoman said: “Under the Responsibility Deal we have seen over a billion 
units of alcohol removed from the market, through improving consumer choice of 
lower alcohol products, and nearly 93% of all alcohol products now carrying 
drinking in pregnancy warnings.

“More importantly, we have seen the number of people drinking above the 
current guidelines in England fall over recent years. However, we also 
recognise that more needs to be done, and we will continue to challenge 
industry to go further.”
 