
I’m not a perfect parent by any means – and in fact, if anyone can tell me how 
to get a three-year-old to sit still long enough to eat an entire meal, please 
let me know – but sharing the limited space of a small flat (and a bedroom) 
with my daughter means that I’ve had to get the issue of how to organize kids’ 
stuff pretty well sorted out.


I’ve talked at great length about how and why to reduce possessions, so this 
week I’m going to share some ideas for how to effectively sort and store the
things youdo have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/16/buy-me-once-online-store-lifetime-guarantee-product-reviews>
 and how to keep their numbers manageable.


Toys

Ideally, loose toys should live in one or two designated spots in your home. 
For my daughter, Olive, and I this means a cute canvas hamper in her room and a 
small basket in our living room. At the end of each day, it’s her 
responsibility to put her toys away, or I take them away for a few days. That 
isn’t designed as a punishment but as a way to ensure that she doesn’t have 
more toys than she’s able to properly take care of.

The secret to spring cleaning: don't just organize your stuff – get rid of it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/15/secret-to-spring-cleaning-better-mental-health>
After birthdays or holidays, when Olive is inevitably gifted a few new toys, 
we sort through her basket and donate a few older ones that she no longer plays 
with to make room for the new stuff. We’ve done this for a year or so with 
surprising success, and I’ve really enjoyed including my daughter in the 
process of understanding when we have too much and being able to give it to 
others.

Arts & crafts

Creating a finite amount of storage space works well to organize the results 
of your child’s prolific creativity, too. To display the artwork my daughter 
brings home from preschool, I tied little gold binder clips to colourful string 
and attached it to our wall. This setup is inexpensive and simple to create, 
and makes it easy to switch out her old masterpieces for new ones. The idea 
here is the same as the toy bins; if you don’t impose sort sort of limit on how 
much you can keep, it’s hard to know when enough becomes too much.

Mementos

For keepsakes, I bought a cardboard file box and outfitted it with hanging 
folders. There’s one folder for each year of her life, filled with things like 
her newborn hospital bracelet, photos, birthday cards and those favourite art 
pieces. Having designated folders stored all in one place allows me to save 
important mementos in a compact, organized and easy-to-locate way.

Clothing

Kids’ clothing can create a massive storage struggle if you don’t stay on top 
of it, especially in smaller spaces. Kids grow like weeds – sticky, illogical 
little weeds – so to keep up with my daughter’s constantly changing size, I 
always have a box at the top of our closet for items that need to be consigned 
or donated.

Getting a three-year-old dressed each day is battle enough without having to 
also wade through drawers of too-small options; keeping her clothes current 
means I can easily see when I need to go to our local secondhand store to stock 
up on pants or T-shirts.

Go easy 

Finally, and most importantly, go easy on yourself if you find it tough to let 
go of your kid’s stuff. I do, too.

I still have almost everything Olive wore for her first year. I look at those 
tiny onesies and they aren’t just clothes, they’re reminders of when she was 
seven pounds instead of 40; when she was still so much a part of me instead of 
the wild, intelligent, independent creature she is today. There’s nothing wrong 
with holding on to meaningful items to remind you of when they were small. The 
key is maintaining a balance, making a regular practice of letting go, and 
ensuring that thethings you own don’t begin to own you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/15/secret-to-spring-cleaning-better-mental-health>
.
 