
We should have suspected it might come to this. The capacity for the 144th 
Open Championship to tear up scripts was apparent even before a ball was struck,
Rory McIlroy’s withdrawal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/08/rory-mcilroy> removing the 
tantalising prospect of a battle with Jordan Spieth.

Tom Watson was supposed to wave farewell to the Open in front of tearful 
masses afternoon. If there was a weather issue, wind was the forecast danger 
rather than a deluge of water.

The theme of completely altering narratives has continued. The cascading of 
12mm of rain on to the Old Course within 30 minutes early morning flooded the 
venue, triggering delays of more than three hours. Greens staff did wonderfully 
well to limit the break to that; mermaids and paddle steamers were all that the 
1st and 18th fairways lacked around 7am. As an esteemed golf correspondent once 
noted, they really should consider playing this major in summer.

The practical upshot will be was that Spieth, Dustin Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dustin-johnson>, Tiger Woods and others have 
to return at 7am to complete their second rounds. No cut line could be 
confirmed until then but it inevitable that Woods will fall on the wrong side 
of it. Another surprise? Perhaps not. Round three will be played in threeballs. 
Labelling this event messy barely seems to do it justice – which is a shame.

It concluded in near darkness on the second day with some players evidently 
irked or confused by the situation. Some simply took it upon themselves to walk 
in from 9.35pm onwards. Johnson, the leader at 10 under par, will restart his 
second round midway through the 14th hole. Spieth, one of his partners, is five 
adrift.

Watson was denied the audience his goodbye deserved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/17/the-open-2015-day-two-live-golf>
, having taken to the 1st tee only shortly before 5pm. The scene was 
emotionally charged but belated, coming moments before 10pm.

Johnson and Spieth had to sit on their hands for an hour longer than Watson. 
If predicted wind gusts reaching 45mph arrive, further chaos will ensue. Recent 
events have rather taught us, though, not to bank on that. The fun of the 
unknown has become a tale in itself. On the links a war of attrition is already 
under way.

Danny Willett is Johnson’s closest pursuer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/danny-willett-2015-open-golf-second-round-st-andrews>
 on nine under, the leader of those to have reached the halfway point. Paul 
Lawrie and Jason Day hover with menacing intent at eight under while still in 
the midst of their second rounds; the 2010 winner here, Louis Oosthuizen, is 
minus seven after the 11th.

As the wind – this course’s protection against world-class golfers – whipped 
up around the Eden Estuary, there could be no expectation of a tsunami of 
birdies. Those afforded the earlier Friday tee times were delighted with the 
sanctuary of the clubhouse by the time a batch of marquee names took to the 
course. The wind reached its peak shortly before 9pm.

But within that latter group the shivering Johnson held firm. It took until 
the 11th hole of round two for him to drop his first shot of this Open. Even 
that aberration owed plenty to the gusty backdrop.

Earlier a notable charge came from Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott>. The former Masters champion has 
a habit of peaking in high-profile events, a point illustrated by a 67 which 
moved him to seven under par. And yet it seems to have taken the return of the 
caddie Steve Williams to Scott’s side to kickstart the 35-year-old’s 2015.

Scott’s determination stems from the Open he handed to Ernie Els 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/open-2012-ernie-els>, three 
years ago. “I’m very motivated,” he admitted. “I definitely let that one slip 
and would love to be sitting here having won the Open but I’m going to have to 
work hard for it.

“You know, I think I’m playing with a little bit of a chip on my shoulder.”

Willett and Marc Warren hardly arrived in Fife as undercover agents. What they 
have in common is the belated realisation of undoubted early potential. Warren 
is seven under through 36 holes, alongside Scott, Robert Streb and Zach 
Johnson. Luke Donald reached eight under but proceeded to bogey his closing two 
holes.

Willett, who signed for a second round of 69 after Thursday’s 66, has recorded 
10 rounds of par or better in a row on the Old Course. His combined score over 
that period is 41 under par, with an 18-hole average of under 68. He could 
become the first ever Yorkshireman to raise the Claret Jug.

Warren, like Willett, has course and distance specialism; he finished fifth 
here in the2011 Dunhill Links Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/02/michael-hoey-dunhill-links-championship>
, thereby regaining the full European Tour status he had lost during a lean 
spell.

Warren spent days one and two in the company of Padraig Harrington, a two-time 
Open champion, who summed up the morning rather well. “Unfortunately the town 
of St Andrews drained into the 1st fairway,” he said. And what to do in such a 
scenario? “I snuck into one of the Tour vans and slept for an hour and a half.”

At three under par, aided by a second round of 69, the Irishman still has a 
chance to win again. “I’ve won two of them already, so it’s not going to be 
life-changing or anything like that but it would be nice,” said Harrington of 
challenging over the closing 36 holes.

“It would be nice to get into contention coming down the stretch and perform. 
We’ll see what happens. It’s a long way off and I’m going to need a big 
weekend. Could be a pair of 65s I need over the weekend, who knows? But 
obviously the weather will determine quite a lot.”

It already has.
 