
A British national of Somali origin was being questioned in the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> today after he was arrested on 
suspicion of being involved in terrorism. He was held at Schiphol airport in 
Amsterdam after flying in from Liverpool on his way to Uganda.

Jonathan Evans, the head of MI5, warned last week of a growing number of 
British nationals going to Somalia to train and fight. They mainly travel via 
Kenya, Dubai or Yemen, though there is growing evidence they are now going 
through Uganda, counterterrorism officials suggest.

It is not believed that the arrested man was involved in a plot in Britain, 
but Evert Boersma, from the Dutch prosecutors' office, said the arrest followed 
a tip-off from British authorities. He said the man was suspected of possible 
involvement with a foreign terrorist organisation, but did not specify which.

The man flew in on Sunday morning on a KLM flight, Boersma said. "He had 
already boarded his connecting flight for Uganda when he was arrested." Another 
spokesman for the Dutch prosecutors' office said: "The man was en route from 
Liverpool to Entebbe in Uganda when he was arrested. The possible involvement 
of this man with a foreign terroristic organisation is being investigated."

Security at Schiphol has been tightened since last Christmas Day, when it was 
the departure point for a Nigerian student, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, accused 
of trying to blow up a plane over Detroit by setting off explosives hidden in 
his underwear. He was tackled by passengers and crew, and is now charged in the 
US with attempting to blow up Northwest Airlines Flight 253 with 278 passengers 
and 11 crew members aboard.

Last month, two Yemeni men were arrested at the Amsterdam airport after flying 
in from Chicago, on suspicion they may have been conducting a dry run for an 
airline terror attack. The two were held for several days then released after 
an investigation turned up no evidence to link them to a terror plot.

The Somalia-based Islamist militia al-Shabaab claimed responsiblity for a 
suicide attack on people watching the World Cup final on TV in Entebbe, the 
Ugandan capital. It said it was revenge for the presence of Ugandan troops in 
the African Union peacekeeping force backing the Somali government against the 
militia.
 