
The Department for Work and Pensions has denied that the government risks 
breaching its self-imposed cap on welfare spending because of the rising cost 
of disability benefits.

Leaked documents obtained by the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-27927842> 
earlier this week suggested that the government was running out of options to 
cut costs, while employment and support allowance (ESA) costs continued to rise.

Internal government memos reportedly said that the ESA was "one of the largest 
fiscal risks currently facing the Government", leaving it "vulnerable to a 
breach" of the cap, which was set at £119.5bn for 2015-16. According to the 
documents, the cost of ESA was projected to rise by nearly £13bn between the 
current financial year and 2018-19, largely due to people moving on to the 
benefit from jobseeker's allowance, which has more sanctions for misconduct.

The documents also suggested that people were staying on ESA for longer than 
expected because of the severity of their illnesses and disabilities. Setting 
out a range of options for cutting costs, one memo reportedly conceded that 
there was "not much low-hanging fruit left".

However, the DWP has denied that it is in danger of breaching the cap on 
welfare spending, calling the suggestion "outrageous". A spending cap breach 
would be a major embarrassment to ministers, forcing them to explain to 
parliament why spending has gone over the cap and to ask MPs to approve 
additional spending.

A DWP spokesman said: "These are spurious scenarios and do not reflect our 
forecast of future spend provided at the budget. It is outrageous to somehow 
link these to us potentially breaching the welfare cap."

Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Dame Anne Begg, chair of the work 
and pensions select committee, had said on Friday that large groups of people 
appeared to have been "parked" on the benefit in the "work-related activity" 
group, which covers all those found neither to be fully fit for work nor so 
disabled that they cannot be expected to look for employment.

The decision of Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> to withdraw 
from its contract to conduct fitness assessments of claimants was slowing down 
the process, she said, and urged ministers to find a replacement "in the next 
few months" to ensure continuity.

Begg said ESA was not an improvement on incapacity benefit and ministers 
appeared to have "believed their own rhetoric" about large numbers of claimants 
being fit for work. "It doesn't appear as though it's actually doing any 
better. A lot of the complaints and criticism of incapacity benefit can now be 
laid at the door of employment support allowance – the fact that the help to 
get people into work and to overcome the barriers to work doesn't seem to be 
there for large groups of the people, who are effectively being parked in the 
WRA (work-related activity) group," she said. "The Work Programme statistics 
suggest thatonly 5% of that group are actually getting jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/15/work-programme-mental-health-ippr-thinktank-benefit>
."

She added that the "constant reassessments" required for the ESA were proving 
difficult to sustain. "One of the top-heavy elements of ESA was the constant 
reassessments. A big criticism of incapacity benefit was that people were put 
on it and left and nobody reassessed them. With the ESA there is constant 
reassessment, but that is expensive and it's putting a burden on the health 
assessors employed by Atos in order to keep up with the numbers."

She said ESA had tightened the criteria, but "instead of lots of people 
languishing on incapacity benefit, they've found when they've reassessed them 
that these people actually are quite ill or very disabled". She added: "That 
shouldn't have come as a surprise to the government, but perhaps it believed 
its own rhetoric when it's been talking about these large numbers of people who 
could be moved into work but haven't been. Actually, the system is not giving 
them the help in order for them to do that."

The DWP said 1 million claimants of incapacity benefit had been found fit for 
work and 160,000 fewer people were claiming sickness benefits than in 2010, 
while 700,000 more people were looking or preparing for work.
 