
There may never be enough hours in the day to get everything done, but at 
least the forces of nature are conspiring to help out.

Astronomers who compiled nearly 3,000 years of celestial records have found 
that with every passing century, the day on Earth lengthens by two milliseconds 
as the planet’s rotation gradually winds down.


The split second gained since the first world war may not seem much, but the 
time it takes for a sunbeam to travel 600km towards Earth can cost an Olympic 
gold medal, as the American Tim McKee found out when he lost to Sweden’s Gunnar 
Larsson in 1972.


For those holding out for a whole extra hour a day, be prepared for a long 
wait. Barring any change in the rate of slowing down, an Earth day will not 
last 25 hours for about two million centuries more.

Researchers at Durham University and the UK’s Nautical Almanac Office gathered 
historical accounts of eclipses and other celestial events from 720BC to 2015. 
The oldest records came from Babylonian clay tablets written in cuneiform, with 
more added from ancient Greek texts, such as Ptolemy’s 2nd century Almagest, 
and scripts from China, medieval Europe and the Arab dominions.


The ancient records captured the times and places that people witnessed 
various stages of solar and lunar eclipses, while documents from 1600AD onwards 
described lunar occultations, when the moon passed in front of particular stars 
and blocked them from view.


To find out how the Earth’s rotation has varied over the 2,735-year-long 
period, the researchers compared the historical records with a computer model 
that calculated where and when people would have seen past events if Earth’s 
spin had remained constant.


“Even though the observations are crude, we can see a consistent discrepancy 
between the calculations and where and when the eclipses were actually seen,” 
said Leslie Morrison, an astronomer on the team. “It means the Earth has been 
varying in its state of rotation.”


The Earth formed from a spinning cloud of dust and gas 4.5bn years ago, but it 
is thought to have received an extra rotational kick when a Mars-sized object 
crashed into the young planet and knocked off the material that became the 
moon. In that cataclysmic event, a day on Earth may have leapt from six hours 
to 24 hours.


But astronomers have long known that Earth’s spin is slowing down. The main 
braking effect comes from tides caused by the moon’s gravity. “The heaping up 
of water drags on the Earth as it spins underneath,” said Morrison. As Earth’s 
rotation slows, the moon’s orbit grows by about 4cm a year.


Tidal braking is not the only force at work though. The astronomers found that 
Earth’s spin would have slowed down even more had it not been for a 
counteracting process. Since the end of the most recent ice age, land masses 
that were once buried underslabs of frozen water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/09/melting-ice-sheets-changing-the-way-the-earth-wobbles-on-its-axis-says-nasa>
 have been unloaded and sprung back into place. The shift caused the Earth to 
be less oblate – or squished – on its axis. And just as a spinning ice skater 
speeds up when she pulls in her arms, so the Earth spins faster when its poles 
are less compressed.


Changes in the world’s sea levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/11/climate-change-longer-days-glaciers-north-south-pole>
 and electromagnetic forces between Earth’s core and its rocky mantle had 
effects on Earth’s spin too, according to the scientists’ report inProceedings 
of the Royal Society 
<http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/lookup/doi/10.1098/rspa.2016.0404>. The 
different forces seem to drive cycles in the Earth’s rotation spanning decades 
to centuries, with one cycle repeating every 1500 years.


“Geological processes occur on long time scales which makes direct observation 
of their evolution extremely difficult on human timescales,” said Jon Mound, a 
geophysicist at Leeds University who was not involved in the research. “This is 
a particular problem for phenomena such as the Earth’s rotation which don’t 
leave direct evidence in the geological record.”


“In many ways this is an amazing result that ties together a wide range of 
investigations at opposite ends of the scale of technological sophistication to 
determine to high precision an extremely small effect,” he added.
 