
LeBron James scored 31 points, while JR Smith made eight three-pointers and 
added 28 to lead theCleveland Cavaliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-cavaliers> past the top-seeded 
Atlanta Hawks 97-89 in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals on Wednesday 
night.


Intent on bringing Cleveland their first NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> title, James sealed the victory with a 
soaring dunk in the final minute. But Smith was the one who ignited the 
Cavaliers, going eight of 12 from three-point range.

For the Hawks, it was the second straight series in which they’ve lost the 
opening game at home. Cleveland will look to take command of the series in Game 
2 on Friday night.

Jeff Teague led Atlanta with 27 points. But the night really turned sour for 
the Hawks when DeMarre Carroll, their leading scorer in the playoffs, went down 
with what appeared to be a left knee injury driving to the basket with 4:59 
remaining. He was helped to the locker room, not putting any weight on his knee.

The Cavaliers took control when Smith knocked down back-to-back threes in the 
third quarter. Cleveland outscored the Hawks 22-4 over the final five minutes 
of the third quarter and the first two minutes of the fourth. In fact, the Cavs 
scored the first 11 points of the final period for their biggest lead, 85-67.

Carroll’s injury left the crowd in silence and could be a huge blow for the 
Hawks. Not only was he their main defender on James, he has turned into an 
offensive force in the playoffs, averaging more than 17 points coming into the 
first Eastern Conference final in Atlanta history.

Cleveland slowed the pace down the stretch, looking to milk the clock, and 
nearly squandered the big lead. Atlanta closed to 91-87 with about a minute 
remaining, but James got loose from Paul Millsap out near the arc, took off 
down the lane uncontested and slammed home a dunk to finish off the Hawks.

Smith has been a huge addition for the Cavaliers since he was acquired in 
January as part of a three-team trade with New York and Oklahoma City, a player 
once known for his selfishness learning to work well with within the confines 
of a team led by James.

When the Cavaliers really needed Smith in Game 1, he seemed to make every 
shot. Looking to get off to a quick start in front of their raucous home crowd, 
the Hawks jumped out to a nine-point lead in the first quarter. Atlanta shot 
61% and James went to the bench with about three minutes remaining in the 
period after picking up his second foul.

The Cavs hit just 35% in the opening quarter, but a dominating performance on 
the boards kept Atlanta from pulling away. Cleveland outrebounded the Hawks 
15-6 over the first 12 minutes, actually yanking down more offensive rebounds 
(seven) than Atlanta’s total output.

James returned in the second quarter and began to take control of the 
Cleveland offense. He scored 14 points in the period on seven-of-nine shooting, 
taking advantage when the Hawks tried to bait him into a third foul by guarding 
him with smaller players. James kept driving to the basket but managed to avoid 
a lot of contact.

Cleveland was poised to take a lead into halftime when Tristan Thompson dunked 
off a slick pass from Matthew Dellavedova with four seconds remaining. But 
Dennis Schroder wisely let the inbounds pass roll to nearly midcourt without 
picking it up, which prevented the clock from starting.

The second-year guard finally scooped it up, bolted into the lane, and rifled 
a pass to Kent Bazemore wide open in the corner. He sank the jumper as the horn 
sounded, leaving the teams tied 51-51 at the break.
 