
LeBron James scored 30 points and the Cleveland Cavaliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-cavaliers> took total command of 
the Eastern Conference final even without injured star Kyrie Irving, routing 
the Atlanta Hawks 94-82 on Friday night for a 2-0 lead with the series heading 
to Ohio.

The Cavaliers made it a blowout with a dominating third quarter. James scored 
11 points, the Hawks shot just 32% (seven of 22), and Cleveland led by as many 
as 20 before settling for an 84-66 lead heading to the final period.

Irving was scratched before the game because of an ailing left knee. He wasn’t 
missed a bit.

James assumed many of the ball-handling duties, taking advantage of DeMarre 
Carroll clearly not being at 100%after he went down with a knee injury late in 
Game 1. Carroll started after being carried off the court just two nights 
earlier but hardly looked at his best.


He wasn’t the only one struggling. The Hawks looked totally outclassed for one 
of the few times all season. The Cavaliers can wrap up the best-of-seven series 
simply by winning at home. The next two are in Cleveland, beginning with Game 3 
on Sunday night.

Tristan Thompson led another dominating performance for the Cavaliers on the 
boards. He had 16 rebounds and Cleveland finished with a 47-39 advantage.

When Thompson dunked off a pass from James with just under five minutes 
remaining, the Cavaliers had a 93-74 lead and many Atlanta fans began heading 
for the exits, perhaps believing they had seen their team for the last time in 
this most unexpected season. Atlanta won a franchise-record 60 games to claim 
the top seed in the East, but the Hawks were picked apart by the best player in 
the world.

The Cavaliers are two wins away from returning the NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> Finals and taking another crack at 
their first championship. This is why James returned to his de facto hometown 
after spending four years in Miami, leading the Heat to a pair of titles. The 
Cavaliers assembled a Miami-like trio with James, Irving and Kevin Love, but 
the King is doing just fine on his own with Irving hobbled and Love out with a 
season-ending injury.

The Hawks had hoped that Carroll’s appearance would provide an emotional 
boost. An injury that looked much more serious when he helped off the court in 
Game 1 turned out to be only a sprain, and he drew a big cheer from the crowd 
when he did his customary sprint across the court during the opening 
introductions.

But at less than full speed, Carroll had no chance trying to guard James, who 
made 10 of 22 shots including a pair of three-pointers. When the Hawks began 
collapsing toward the lane, trying to give Carroll help, James always seemed to 
fine the open man — often lurking behind the 3-point arc.

James had 11 assists, and the Cavaliers finished 12 of 30 beyond the arc. The 
King just missed a triple-double, grabbing nine rebounds.

Dennis Schroder led the Hawks with just 13 points. Carroll managed only six 
points in just under 34 minutes.

Carroll wasn’t the only one hurting. Kyle Korver got his right ankle rolled 
going for a loose ball late in the third quarter and didn’t return. Al Horford 
banged his knee early in the fourth and hobbled to the bench, though he was 
able to finish out the game.

It didn’t really matter. By the end, the Hawks had cleared their bench.
 