
Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> has claimed that the 
autumn statement, in which the government was forced to admit that its deficit 
reduction plans were badly off course, will prove to be a game-changer that 
will see voters increasingly turn to Labour.

The shadow chancellor says he believes his party is ahead of the electorate on 
the issue, and will reap the benefits in 2012.

In an interview with Fabian Review, Balls also expresses distaste at 
politicians doing photoshoots with their children. His remarks were published 
the day after theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader, 
Ed Miliband, was pictured at home with his family, although the Balls interview 
was conducted weeks earlier.

The two men admit they have an amicably different view about how much to 
protect their children from public scrutiny. Miliband was seen on the front 
page of the Daily Mirror cuddling his younger son, Samuel, while his wife, 
Justine, held two-year-old Daniel. Balls says he and his wife, Yvette Cooper, 
the shadow home secretary, will not involve their son and two daughters in such 
publicity.

"The most precious thing for me and us is definitely protecting our children 
so that they can be who they want to be," he says. "However short-term, 
tactical and tempting it might be to have pictures on the front of a Sunday 
magazine, we would never, ever do that."

A behind-the-scenes debate is under way inside Labour, grappling with the 
question of why the party is still behind the Tories in the public's opinion of 
their economic competence, and why it is still taking the blame for the 
economic slowdown.

Some are arguing that Labour has to recognise that more needs to be done to 
explain how it will bring the deficit under control after 2015, rather than 
emphasising the need for short-term Keynesian measures to boost the economy.

Balls says: "You have to prepare the ground so that when the question is 
asked, you are the answer."

He says that is what Miliband is doing. "I think it [will prove] a 
game-changer in people's understanding. When a government [takes office], you 
really want to believe these new guys are going to make it work. Then suddenly 
people realise that not only is there lower growth and high unemployment, but 
that the one thing this government said it would do was to borrow less, and now 
it is borrowing more. In the next six to nine months, people are going to say, 
'What's the alternative?' Our opportunity starts now."

Balls said he would begin next year to set out how Labour would cut the 
deficit, but added that voters were more concerned about their immediate 
position. Both the Conservatives andLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> are committed to the 
same level of spending cuts after the 2015 general election – roughly £15bn – 
but Nick Clegg has insisted his party will decide its own preferences, separate 
from the Tories, as to how these cuts will be made

The shadow chancellor said that he had been to see New Labour figures 
including Tony Blair to discuss how to prepare an economic strategy.

Balls reveals the vindication he felt when the chancellor had to admit in the 
autumn statement how much higher borrowing was going to be in the future. "To 
have a moment whenGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> had to stand up and say it 
had gone so wrong, and to have a chance to explain why, was very important for 
me. I've been waiting to do that response for a year.

"There were times when Cameron and Osborne were fidgeting, and the whole of 
the Conservative and Lib Dem backbenches were silent because they all know this 
isn't working. That was the completely best thing about it for me.

"Implementing strategy takes time. It's always difficult when, for a period, 
you get ahead of where the public are."

Balls said the public has not yet fully understood that the government plan is 
not working, or even delivering on its own terms of balancing the books by 
2015. He said it would take time to filter through.

The shadow chancellor cited the early years of New Labour in 1993-94, when 
Blair and Gordon Brown were frustrated that their ideas made no headway, 
despite the crisis after the Major government suspended Britain's membership of 
the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) and increases in tax.

That backdrop to eventual victory in 1997 has helped persuade Balls that 
voters will eventually be won over by his argument. "I've said to Ed [Miliband] 
a number of times: 'You have to be good at opposition. You've got to be the 
answer to the big question.'

"The best moment he's had so far on doing that politically was phone hacking, 
though maybe that wasn't a cut-through moment for my constituents in Morley in 
quite the way it was in Westminster."

He says he is convinced that there are Liberal Democrats who would like to 
pull the plug on the coalition, but says he is not making a formal offer of a 
coalition on behalf of his party.
 