
Fiction

A new novel from Alan Hollinghurst, the first since his 2004 Booker-winning 
The Line of Beauty, and the final instalment of Edward St Aubyn's blistering 
Melrose series have already made this a strong year for fiction. So the chance 
to hear these authors (both fairly elusive creatures on the literary circuit) 
discuss their new works,The Stranger's Child and At Last respectively, will be 
among the hottest tickets in town. Book this minute.

Undoubtedly one of the most inventive and enjoyable novels from the US so far 
this year is the Pulitzer prizewinningA Visit from the Goon Squad by Jennifer 
Egan; I look forward to hearing her discussion with Karen Russell, another 
arresting new voice from the States and one of the New Yorker's "20 under 40".

Anyone who has ever attended a Colm Tóibín event will know that he is not only 
one of the most wonderful writers at work today, but surely the most 
spellbinding performer: to hear him read from his exquisite short-story 
collectionThe Empty Family is a treat not to be missed.
Lisa Allardice (Editor, Guardian Review)

Fiction

Top of the must-see list for me are three great Scots. Alasdair Gray opens and 
closes the festival, with a talk that will range from his 1981 classicLanark to 
his new mural in a Glasgow subway station, followed by the first public reading 
of his playFleck, a version of Faust, featuring performances from writers 
includingWill Self, AL Kennedy and the man himself. Then there's the wonderful 
Ali Smith presenting her playful, puzzling new novel There but for the, and the 
unclassifiableAlan Warner giving a sneak preview of his forthcoming novel The 
Dead Man's Pedal, not to be published until next year.

There's a Norse flavour to my next two picks: Neil Gaiman talks to Audrey 
Niffenegger about his brilliant American Gods, which blends road trip with 
Norse mythology, whileAS Byatt explains how memoir and myth came together for 
her next book, a retelling of Ragnarök, the Twilight of the Gods.

Finally, C author Tom McCarthy is a genius at tracing myth through modernism – 
he promises to explain "how writing works" using Ovid, Rilke, Cocteau and a 
dash of Kraftwerk.
Justine Jordan (Deputy editor, books)

Non-fiction

Terrific writers of hugely different kinds find themselves jostling together 
under the banner of non-fiction. Sex is a subject that catches the eye: smart 
and funny columnistCaitlin Moran promises feminism with jokes; Catherine Hakim, 
whose much-hypedHoney Money is to be published in September, will ask "how we 
use our sex appeal to get ahead" – lucky those, who find themselves with 
"erotic capital" to spare.

History is well represented: Ian Kershaw, author of a magnificent multi-volume 
life of Hitler, will discuss the end of the Third Reich;Niall Ferguson has 
captured attention with his "killer apps" history of the west.AC Grayling, who 
has recruited Ferguson for his highly controversial New College, is bound to 
attract a crowd, friendly or otherwise, for a talk on his "secular bible".

Jon Ronson's splendid The Psychopath Test has had us all identifying possible 
candidates in our workplaces and homes, a topic on whichDorothy Rowe and Simon 
Baron-Cohen are qualified to comment. And who better to get to the sharp end of 
politics thanSteve Bell, John Pilger and Polly Toynbee?
Paul Laity (Deputy editor, Guardian Review)

Crime

Edinburgh's crime fiction pedigree is second to none stretching back to James 
Hogg'sConfessions of a Justified Sinner and Robert Louis Stevenson's Dr Jekyll 
and Mr Hyde, not to mention Arthur Conan Doyle's birth in the city in 1859. The 
tradition lives on and is well represented at this year's book festival. 
Opening day seesAlexander McCall Smith  discussing Precious Ramotswe and the No 
1 Ladies' Detective Agency as well as, closer to home, young Bertie from 44 
Scotland Street.

McCall Smith's gentility is something of an exception in modern Scottish crime 
writing. ForIan Rankin's Rebus, the city was always less "the Athens of the 
north" and more "all fur coat and nae knickers". Rankin will talk about Rebus 
as well as his new protagonist, the teetotal police complaints inspector, 
Malcolm Fox. Glasgow-bornDenise Mina and Kirkcaldy's Diamond Dagger-winning Val 
McDermid show that unpleasantness is not just a matter for the capital, and 
crime from even further north gets an airing withJo Nesbø, who seems to be 
doing rather well despite labouring under the title of "the new Stieg Larsson", 
andKurdo Baksi, friend, colleague and now biographer of the original Stieg 
Larsson.
Nicholas Wroe (Guardian Review)

Poetry

Scottish poets are out in force this year – a blessing for festivalgoers, 
given the strength of the poetry scene north of the border. As well as reading 
from his new novel, A Summer of Drowning, John Burnside will discuss his latest 
collection, Black Cat Bone, out this August. Robin Robertson will be reading 
from across his body of work, Don Paterson is in town to discuss his guide to 
Shakespeare's sonnets, and Jackie Kay – a festival favourite, and one of mine – 
will be talking about Fiere, the companion volume to her memoir Red Dust Road, 
which tackles the questions of identity and belonging that the memoir raised.

We will also be treated to audiences with two poets laureate: Carol Ann Duffy 
will present poems from her forthcoming collection, The Bees, and Liz Lochhead 
will be making her first appearance at the festival since her appointment as 
Scotland's makar. Last but very far from least, the matchlessMichael Longley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-longley> will be over from Belfast 
to read from his talismanic new collection, A Hundred Doors. Not to be missed.
Sarah Crown (Editor, theguardian.com/books)

Children's

Two writers from two different continents who consistently produce exciting 
and inventive work in a range of media are the hot tickets for me on the 
children's programme this year. US-basedNeil Gaiman, author of the Sandman 
comics,American Gods and The Graveyard Book (and a recent episode of Doctor Who
) is not to be missed (and you can't miss the hours-long signing queues he 
inspires).

Australian Shaun Tan, fresh from winning both the Astrid Lindgren prize for 
his children's books and an Oscar for his short film, always provides 
fascinating insights into his work, which includes the wordless graphic novel
The Arrival.Looking to the homegrown talent, newly minted children's laureate 
Julia Donaldson is famed for bringing her picturebooks to life – something she 
wants to do more of as part of her laureateship – so her discussion with three 
of her illustrators, includingAxel Scheffler of Gruffalo fame, promises to be 
entertaining. I'm also looking forward to the pairing of another laureate, poet
Carol Ann Duffy, with a musician in a session about her new book The Gift, a 
lyrical journey through the life of one girl.
Michelle Pauli (Editor, theguardian.com/childrensboks)
 