
Forget about the comics, what about the jokes? Each year at the Fringe - or 
the EdinburghComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy> Festival on the 
Fringe as it's now called by the powers that be (subvert! Call it ECFoF!) - you 
can take the temperature of the comic world by the gags that are told. And this 
year it seems the matter of most pressing concern to our comedians isaccess to 
wi-fi.

Amidst an admirably prodigious output of reviews from the Independent's Julian 
Hall this morning, a theme emerges.Andrew Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/andrew-lawrence> gets four stars for a show 
where "cynicism and bile… are the order of the day", and it seems he turns some 
of it onto people "who think that having no wi-fi is tantamount to Victoriana". 
A three-star review for Mark Olver's hour about the delights of rambling (both 
sense of the word are applicable) reveals that Olver feels guilty for wasting 
his life, a crucial observation being: "I spend an hour-and-a-half each day 
looking for a wireless signal in my flat".

Fortunately for us all, the provision of broadband is not the only subject 
engaging comedians at this year's fest. Shona Craven claims in the Herald that 
"shows making reference to the credit crunch, property programmes [shurely so 
2005?] and Shannon Matthews can be found all over the Fringe". She then goes on 
to review three thematically similar shows about thetravails of new dads. Alun 
Cochrane, admittedly a consistently rounded performer, comes out best with four 
stars for his unsentimental take on parenthood, mixed with a spiel against 
modern selfishness. Dan March, by contrast, and his tale of discovering he had 
become a dad via MySpace, gets just two stars.

There's another review that falls one point short of the ultimate condemnation 
this morning and, surprisingly, it's forStewart Lee. His follow-up to last 
year's dramatisation of the travels of Boswell and Dr Johnson offers a comic 
take on the tangled relations between Elizabeth I and Sir Walter Raleigh. 
There's galleons for hats, and Simon Munnery in drag, but still, writes Dominic 
Maxwell in the Times, "The result … is an undernourished hour that might muscle 
its way into your affections in a smaller, scuzzier room, but which looks stiff 
as an iron ruff in the Cow Barn".
 