
If you asked me on GCSE results day what I thought the world of A-levels would 
bring, I would have been optimistic. But then, I didn’t know what to expect.

Like many students across the country, I spent the last few years learning 
about Pythagoras’s theorem, and that mitochondria is the powerhouse of the 
cell. However I learned nothing that would prepare me for the future beyond my 
GCSE exams. With the benefit of hindsight, there are a few things I wish 
someone had told me.

1. The jump from GCSEs is enormous 

In fact, it’s anything but a jump - more of a plummet into an alternate 
universe of sleepless nights and enough work to induce tears. Perhaps if the 
increase in work-load had been highlighted to me before, I wouldn’t have been 
as stressed as I was in the initial weeks.

2. Sticking to your deadlines is a necessity, not a choice 

Marina Gjoni, a sixth form student at Cedars Upper School, says it’s important 
to be organised when it comes to your studies. “It didn’t take me long to 
realise just how quickly work can pile up. I learned how important it is to get 
everything done in time,” she says. “I found that by writing everything down in 
a diary and setting up a timetable to meet my deadlines, I felt much more at 
ease and in control.”

3. There’s more to free periods than social gatherings 

I wasted my first month of free periods sat around a table eating Doritos, 
struggling to get past level 33 on Candy Crush. While I did eventually complete 
the level, I didn’t finish any of my essays. From the beginning, it’s important 
to find the right balance between spending time with your friends and 
dedicating time to your studies.

Is campus life really right for you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/21/is-campus-life-really-right-for-you>
4. Everyone is too caught up in their own appearances to worry about yours 

I admit to being someone who spent more of the first few weeks of sixth form 
worrying about my appearance than my education. Back then bad grades seemed 
more appealing than social exile for a bad outfit. However, it didn’t take me 
long to discover that people are too wrapped up in their own appearance to 
focus on anyone else’s.


5. Getting work done is down to you, and only you 

At A-level, unlike in previous school years, teachers don’t usually chase you 
up on work you haven’t done and lessons you’ve missed. They’ll expect you to be 
able to complete tasks and meet deadlines on your own, which is a lot harder 
than it sounds.

Yasmin Syed, a 17-year-old student at Brighton Hove and Sussex sixth-form 
college, notes the upside to this newfound responsibility. She says: “Not 
having teachers badger me for work actually motivates me to meet my deadlines. 
It also teaches me independence and more efficient time management.”

6. Maintaining friendships is important 

Studying A-levels can be stressful. So you’re going to need your friends now 
more than ever. However, when you first start university it’s easy to become so 
caught up in your studies that you begin to neglect friendships. While this is 
unintentional most of the time, it can lead toproblems down the line. If 
someone had told me this, I would have tried to find a healthy balance between 
friends and school work from the start.


7. Get involved in everything you can 

Here's what I think you should know before starting university
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/02/heres-what-i-think-you-should-know-before-starting-university>
“I didn’t want to get involved in anything at first,” says Holly Wright, a 
17-year-old student at City and Islington College. “But after a while, I began 
to appreciate that extracurricular activities give you something else to focus 
on and improve your CV and personal statement.”


If, like me, your strongest achievement is getting through an entire Netflix 
series in two days, don’t panic. It’s never too late to get involved in a sport 
or activity, and you’d be surprised how nice it is to have something to focus 
on other than your next deadline.


8. You’re allowed to have fun. 

In the months leading up to September, I was told that the next two years 
would be some of the toughest of my life academically. This meant that I 
entered my A-levels with the mindset that my life would be all work and no 
play. What I was not told, was that I was entitled to having a day off and to 
time to myself. It’s important to reward your efforts and know your limits, 
because after all your mental and physical health should always be the 
priority. This is something that isn’t emphasised enough to students. It can 
definitely be something that can make or break your success.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter @GdnStudents
 <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 