
The headline in Saturday’s Italian daily newspaper, La Repubblica, seemed to 
sum it all up: “A surprise ending to the never-ending trial, but that night 
remains a mystery.”

When prosecutor Mario Pinelli wrapped up his case against Amanda Knox and 
Raffaele Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito> last 
week, he said it was the evidence of Meredith Kercher herself – her body, which 
had been constrained, sexually assaulted and stabbed multiple times – that 
proved that three people were involved in her murder.

But on Friday all of the shell-shocked parties in this long-running crime 
story learned that guilt had not been accepted by Italy’s highest court, which 
issued an annulment of the case against Knox, an American citizen, and her 
Italian former boyfriend, Sollecito, late on Friday after 10 hours of 
deliberation.

The decision took everyone by surprise – even Knox’s lawyer, who had 
passionately argued for it – because the court of cassation generally only 
rules on procedural issues, not the merits of the case or facts established by 
lower courts. The rare acquittal signalled that Italy’s highest court was 
itself fed up, wanting to bring a permanent end to what critics have said was a 
gross miscarriage of justice and a case that left Italy’s judicial system 
accused of being a “circus”.

The judges’ legal rationale will not be known for at least 90 days, when a 
full summary will be issued, but it is likely that two issues guided their 
decision: the lack of any convincing physical evidence and inconsistent and 
improbable theories over motive.

It has also never been clear how the pair, who had claimed to be having sex, 
smoking cannabis and watching the French filmAmélie at the time of the murder, 
became accomplices of Rudy Guede, the then 21-year-old drifter who is now the 
only person to have been convicted of Kercher’s murder. Known as a petty 
criminal to local police in Perugia, his DNA was found at the crime scene and 
he was sentenced to 16 years in 2008 for his part in the killing. He is now 
eligible for day release.

The persistent theory put forward by prosecutors was that Guede could not have 
acted alone. In the first trial against Knox and Sollecito, prosecutors 
described a brutal scenario: Sollecito had held down Kercher while Knox held a 
knife to her throat as Guede tried to rape her. But those early claims by 
prosecutors that Knox and Sollecito, neither with a criminal history, were 
involved in a drug-fuelled sex attack seemed unconvincing. Later, other 
prosecutors in subsequent trials said that the crime was the result of a spat 
between Knox and Kercher over the cleanliness of their shared flat.

One of the remarkable aspects of Friday’s decision is how the supreme court – 
which went out of its way to say Knox and Sollecito were innocent, not merely 
that there was a lack of evidence to convict them – will address those earlier 
assumptions about how many attackers there were that night in November 2007.

It was a point that was emphasised by a devastated Francesco Maresca, the 
attorney for the Kercher family.

Speaking outside the court on Friday night, he said: “This is not so much a 
defeat for the prosecution as a defeat for Italy’s justice system. The judges 
said there is a lack of proof, and whoever acted with Guede has not been found.”

Arline Kercher, Meredith’s mother, made only a brief comment after the 
verdicts, saying she was “very shocked” by the court’s decision. “They have 
been convicted twice, so it’s a bit odd that it should change now,” she said. 
The family had not gone toItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> for 
the hearing but had gathered on Friday night to wait for the result. Meredith 
left two older brothers and a sister.

Also expressing his deep disappointment at the verdict was the Congolese bar 
owner falsely accused of the murder who said the decision was a triumph for 
being “American and rich” rather than for justice.

Patrick Lumumba, 42, said the surprise ruling was motivated by political and 
diplomatic reasons. Days after the murder Knox told Italian police that Lumumba 
was the killer. He spent two weeks in jail and said his life and business in 
Perugia were shattered by the allegation. She was later sentenced to three 
years in prison for the false claim. Lumumba told theObserver: “This is not 
good for justice, I think it shows the power available for rich people – she’s 
American and rich. For a country like Italy, this is not good. I think there 
were diplomatic problems with the US and it makes things difficult with the US, 
so they let her go free.

“Amanda is free because she is American, but Americans are human like 
everybody. I am feeling very bad [about the acquittal].”

He now lives in Poland with his wife after losing his bar in Perugia and 
struggling to find a job. He still believes that Knox holds the answer to the 
case. “What Amanda did I don’t know, but I think she knows why Meredith died.”

In their ruling, the judges made clear that the allegedly suspicious actions 
were not enough, in the absence of substantial DNA evidence, to convict the 
27-year-old of murder.

TWISTS AND TURNS IN A LEGAL LABYRINTH

2 November 2007 British exchange student Meredith Kercher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher>, 21, is found dead in her 
student flat in Perugia, Italy.

6 November 2007 Kercher’s flatmate, Amanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox>, 20, and her then boyfriend, 
Raffaele Sollecito, and local pub owner Patrick Lumumba are arrested.

October 2008 Rudy Guede from Ivory Coast is jailed for 30 years (later reduced 
to 16 years) after admitting a part in the murder. Knox and Sollecito are 
indicted.

4 December 2009 Knox and Sollecito are convicted of murder and sexual assault 
and jailed.

3 October 2011 The pair are freed after a forensic evidence report finds that 
the DNA evidence used against them was unreliable.

26 March 2013 The acquittal is overturned, charges reinstated and a retrial is 
ordered.

30 January 2014 A court in Florence upholds the guilty verdicts. It finds that 
Kercher was killed by multiple attackers and the fatal wound was probably 
delivered by Knox.

27 March 2015 The Italian supreme court acquits Knox and Sollecito.
 