
Electra Private Equity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/electraprivateequity> is an investment 
trust you wish you’d put a few quid into a long time ago. Even if you had 
bought just before the financial crisis in 2008, you would have doubled your 
money by now. And if you had the sense to back the trust the following year, at 
the bottom of the market, you would have enjoyed a ride from £7 to £36 a share.

Electra, in other words, is not obviously in need of a shakeup led by an 
activist investor. Yet that prospect is now in view. Edward Bramson from 
Sherborne Partners succeeded in getting himself and a sidekick voted on to 
Electra’s board on Thursday. He failed a year ago, when he owned 20%. Now, 
armed with almost 30%, he has managed to crawl over the line.

Indeed, the narrowness of Bramson’s victory is striking. Of 16.6m votes cast 
in his favour, he controls 10.7m, and co-investors in his Sherborne fund 
(notably Aviva Investors and Fidelity) have 4m. That leaves about 2m floating 
voters who thought Bramson was just what Electra needed. By contrast, some 
14.4m votes backed the board, in effect endorsing chairman Roger Yates’s view 
that Bramson made “ill-judged, ill-informed and ill-founded” claims about 
Electra’s business.

Yates resigned on the spot after the vote, which was the correct course, since 
the two men clearly couldn’t coexist in the same boardroom, but he was right in 
his assessment of the raider. A year ago Bramson claimed there was £1bn of 
hidden value to be unlocked at Electra, but offered no evidence to support the 
boast. This time he mostly grumbled about the supposed lack of independence of 
Electra’s board, and its relationship with Electra Partners, the firm that 
manages the funds. But again, the arguments were unclear and his data 
unconvincing.

The suspicion is that Bramson’s real aim is to gain back-door control of 
Electra without paying a takeover premium. Hold on, the Sherborne camp would 
argue: his interests are directly aligned with other shareholders’. In theory, 
yes; in practice, one doubts it.

Investment trusts work best when there are clear lines of responsibility – a 
board appoints a manager of the funds and then holds that manager accountable. 
Bramson’s past remarks suggest he wants to meddle in that relationship by 
making day-to-day decisions about how portfolio companies should be managed. 
That might produce a quick gain or two, and the fizz of superficial success; 
but, over time, Electra would become a different beast, less able to stick to 
its long-term path.

Bramson has only two boardroom seats out of eight, so won’t necessarily have 
everything his own way, but momentum is on his side. Good luck, Kate Barker, 
the new chair, in keeping the peace; it looks an impossible task, especially 
when two supposedly reputable City investment houses like Aviva and Fidelity 
are prepared to swallow a prospectus as thin as Bramson’s. Activism is a fine 
thing when it’s done well, but Electra was the wrong target. A grubby day for 
the City.

A mistimed transformation

The curse of the “transformational” deal strikes again. It was only in 
February last year thatAmec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> 
unveiled its £1.85bn purchase of Foster Wheeler, marrying its engineering 
operation, servicing oil and gas explorers and producers, with a company plying 
its trade towards the refinery end of the industry. The dreaded transformative 
label was applied by chief executive Samir Brikho to describe the wonders the 
takeover would bring.


Some 12 months after completion, Amec’s share price has halved, and now the 
dividend is going the same way. It’s being chopped in half to save £85m, a 
decision the City had failed to see coming – hence the 23% plunge in the share 
price on Thursday.

Shareholders clearly placed too much faith in Amec’s previous confidence in 
managing its way through a “lower for longer” period for the oil price. Ian 
McHoul, Amec’s finance director, now says customers talk of “lower for even 
longer” and put even more pressure on contractors. The dividend must join the 
list of savings Amec is trying to make.

By way of defence, the company could argue that the heaviest pressure is being 
felt upstream, where old Amec is concentrated, rather than in Foster Wheeler’s 
activities. In that sense, the new arrival has added defensive qualities. But 
that’s too charitable. The takeover – funded half in shares and half in cash – 
also saddled Amec with debts of £1bn. Foster Wheeler may have been the right 
target, but the timing and price were horrible.

Freshfields, the panel and the party

You know Freshfields – splendid legal chaps, members of the lawyers’ Magic 
Circle. Well, Freshfields, or Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer in full, now has 
another distinction: it is the first legal firm to receive a censure from the 
Takeover Panel, a body that has existed for 47 years.

The breach of the rules may not sound serious outside the Square Mile. 
Freshfields, plus investment bank Credit Suisse, failed to consult the panel 
about the existence of a concert party, or relationship between two parties. JP 
Morgan got a milder telling-off.

The details of the tale need not detain us (they relate to the formation of 
Bumi, a Nat Rothschild mining venture shambles, via two acquisitions in 
Indonesia in 2011). But this may be an occasion when censure works better than 
a regulatory fine. Freshfields and the others must wear their rarely imposed 
badges of dishonour – and the time it took the panel to reach its conclusions 
suggests the offenders fought this ruling every step of the way.
 