
These have been busy weeks for supporters of change in Britain's 
first-past-the-post electoral system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/electoralreform>. But what are the 
chances that major electoral reform will actually be passed? Evidence here 
doesn't get us far in answering this. It is useful to explore what has happened 
recently in other countries.

Until the 1990s, international experience would have suggested that a 
significant move towardsproportional representation (PR) 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportional_representation> in Westminster 
elections would be very unlikely. Electoral systems were decided by 
politicians. Politicians pursued their own interests. Where a new system would 
serve those interests – as was true on several occasions in France and Greece – 
change occurred. But in a country like Britain, where two large parties 
dominate politics and benefit from the status quo, no force existed that could 
trigger change.

More recent evidence suggests a rather different story. In the mid-1990s, 
electoral reforms took place in Italy, Japan and New Zealand not because 
politicians wanted them, but because popular revulsion with the state of 
politics forced change through in the face of most politicians' opposition. In 
Belgium, Sweden and elsewhere, existing systems have been adjusted to assuage 
popular disaffection.

So do these recent experiences suggest a viable path towards reform in the UK? 
In part, reform advocates can be optimistic. Major electoral system changes 
have occurred when a wave of public anger has engulfed the political system. In 
Italy and Japan, reform followed massive corruption scandals that implicated 
all corners of the political establishment. In New Zealand, voters lost 
patience with politicians who, once elected, ignored their manifesto 
commitments and enacted radical economic restructuring without voters' consent. 
All these reforms occurred in the wake of recession, when voters were in no 
mood to tolerate politicians' misdeeds. In these respects, conditions in the UK 
today closely mirror those that have allowed reform to occur elsewhere.

But the international experience also suggests that voters' current anger will 
not be enough to force electoral reform. First, anger has to be sustained. 
Initially, politicians can dodge the fire, paying lip service to reformist 
desires without significantly altering the rules of the game. The UK will 
probably have to experience further political failure before major change can 
happen.

Second, electoral reform will not occur unless its supporters can convince 
voters that changing the electoral rules will address the sources of their 
anger. In Italy and Japan, the prevailing electoral systems kept the same 
parties in power for decades, allowing corrupt networks to build and shielding 
politicians from the cleansing effects of competition. In New Zealand, 
first-past-the-post in a highly centralised political system concentrated 
overwhelming power in remarkably few hands. In all these cases, reformers could 
persuasively argue that electoral reform would solve these problems.

By contrast, recent referendums in Canada produced large majorities for 
keeping first past the post – not because Canadians are greatly enamoured with 
their current political system, but because electoral reform was not the 
solution to the problems they perceived.

British reformers argue that our current system produces safe seats, and that 
safe seats lead to weak accountability and complacency. But it is no accident 
that this argument has failed to catch the public imagination. Some forms of 
proportional representation would reduce the number of safe seats. But they 
would also make it harder for voters to throw a government from office. If we 
want to eliminate safe seats, the more obvious solution is the introduction of 
recall elections or open primaries to chose candidates.

There are strong arguments for proportional representation, but they have 
little to do with the expenses scandal. First-past-the-post concentrates power, 
weakens parliament and marginalises minorities. Until a crisis occurs that 
brings these ills to the forefront of public attention, first-past-the-post is 
likely to maintain its hold on our political system.
 