
With the death of the writer and Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel at the age of 87, 
the last of the three unforgettable voices of the tragedy of the Jewish people 
during the Third Reich has been silenced. Anne Frank andPrimo Levi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/primolevi>, born in the decade after the end 
of the first world war, came from the assimilated world of western European 
Jewry: Frank, born in Frankfurt, spoke Dutch and lived most her life in 
Amsterdam. Levi was born to a cultured Jewish family in Turin in northern 
Italy, and studied chemistry. Their outlook was modern by comparison with that 
of Wiesel, born in Sighet, Romania, in the Carpathian mountains, who had a 
traditional religious upbringing. His grandfather was an Orthodox Jew, a 
Hassid, who infused his grandson with a passion for the mystical traditions of 
Jewishness.

Frank died, probably of typhus, in Bergen-Belsen. In 1945, Levi spent 11 
months at Buna-Monowitz, the subcamp at Auschwitz run by the SS on behalf of 
the IG Farben chemical company, before it was liberated by the Red Army in 
January 1945. Wiesel was freed in April 1945, when US army troops arrived at 
Buchenwald. To his death, Wiesel carried on his left arm his Auschwitz tattoo, 
A-7713.

Wiesel and Levi were both at Auschwitz in 1944-45, though Levi had no 
recollection of meeting Wiesel at that time. They met at a cultural congress in 
Rome, and became friends, though at the concentration camp they were 
“unacquainted and unaware of each other”. They exchanged letters. One of Levi’s 
biographers, Ian Thomson, suggested that Levi was somewhat envious of the 
acclaim that Wiesel received for his books in the US.

If, as he suspected, Wiesel had parlayed a celebrity cult out of his survivor 
status, Levi perhaps failed to see what that celebrity made possible: Wiesel 
had a platform that enabled him to rebuke PresidentRonald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ronald-reagan> for a planned visit to an 
SS cemetery at Bitburg, Germany, and to confront President Bill Clinton with 
the need for US intervention to prevent a holocaust in Kosovo and the Balkans. 
And to ask the more excruciating question of why the Americans did nothing 
while genocide was taking place in Rwanda. Wiesel was a public man and what he 
did with his fame had a significant impact on American life.

Wiesel’s family had long lived in the Sighet ghetto – he was the son of 
Shlomo, a shopkeeper, and his wife Sarah (nee Feig) – and in 2014 he extended 
his blessings on the opening of aHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> learning centre in his childhood 
home. There were no more Jews in Sighet: 13,000 had been transported to their 
deaths. Wiesel hoped the centre might help the world, and sotto voce, the 
Romanian population, to remember and learn from their fate.

That was his theme, in a lifetime spent in teaching, lecturing and the writing 
of more than 40 books, translated into many languages: there was a need to 
remember, and throughout a long life Wiesel challenged the world to accept that 
imperative. Given the chance by President Jimmy Carter, Wiesel steered the 
Presidential Commission towards the creation of a Holocaust Museum in 
Washington. It was opened in 1993. His fame was far from effortless. In the 
dozen or so years after 1945, there was little interest in books about the 
Holocaust. American publishers thought there was no readership in America for 
downbeat books about mass murder. Those who had been so moved by Anne Frank’s 
story were not confronted by the reality of Bergen-Belsen. Wiesel thought that 
Night, his classic work, was an antidote to the powerful sentimentality of 
Frank’s diary. “Where Anne Frank’s book ends,” he wrote, “mine begins.”

After the second world war he went to Paris, studied at the Sorbonne and 
became a journalist. Written originally in Yiddish, the manuscript of what was 
then titled And the World Remained Silent was 900 pages long. Even with the 
support of Nobel laureate François Mauriac, the Editions de Minuit text of what 
became La Nuit (1955) sold poorly. The manuscript was cut, and cut again.

Wiesel moved to New York in the mid-1950s and got a job working for the Jewish 
Daily Forward. The first American edition of Night (1960) had a print run of 
3,000 copies. Despite powerful reviews by literary heavyweights such as Alfred 
Kazin, there was little interest in the book, and poor sales.

How an unknown Jewish author from Transylvania, writing for a struggling 
Yiddish-language newspaper in New York, eventually came to receive the 
Presidential Medal of Freedom and other honours is highly instructive. How did 
he become, in the words of Barack Obama, “the conscience of the world”?

Wiesel despaired of the kitsch and vulgar melodrama that surrounded the 
representation of the Holocaust in American culture. “The truth of Auschwitz 
remains hidden in its ashes,” he wrote in the New York Times in 1989.

But Night, based upon his experiences, raised complexities that might have 
derailed his career. Called a memoir by his publishers, the book was first 
categorised as fiction, then as non-fiction. The accusations of plagiarism that 
swirled around Jerzy Kosiński’s The Painted Bird (1965), which was admired by 
Wiesel, and of deception concerning other accounts of Holocaust experience 
discredited the genre. However, the award of theNobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nobelpeaceprize> in 1986 led to Night 
selling some 400,000 copies annually in subsequent years, and its choice by 
Oprah Winfrey for her TV book club in 2006 brought it to a new readership.

He was believed to have lost $15m of his personal assets, and those of the 
Elie Wiesel Foundation, when the Bernie Madoff ponzi scheme fell apart in 2008. 
“We have seen worse,” he told Oprah. They were stunned when hundreds of 
Americans sent him money in response to his misfortune. As for Madoff, “It 
didn’t make me more pessimistic.”

In 1969 he married Marion Erster Rose, also a Holocaust survivor. She survives 
him, along with his son, Shlomo.

• Elie (Eliezer) Wiesel, writer, born 30 September 1928; died 2 July 2016

• This article was amended on 7 July 2016. If Primo Levi was somewhat envious 
of the acclaim that Elie Wiesel received for his books in the US in the early 
1980s, it would not have been because of the award to Wiesel of the Nobel peace 
prize. That came in 1986, and the year is now noted elsewhere in the piece. 
Jerzy Kosiński’s The Painted Bird was a novel rather than a memoir, and the 
mention of it and other controversial accounts of Holocaust experience has been 
modified accordingly.

 