
One of the world’s greatest innovators, Elon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>, says the key to tackling 
climate change and driving clean energy innovation is a carbon price very 
similar to the one Australia abolished.


Addressing students at the Sorbonne University on the sidelines of the Paris 
climate summit, the electric car, powerwall battery and space tycoon said he 
believed a phased-in carbon price would halve the time it took the world to 
transition to clean energy, something that would make a huge difference to 
dangerous climate change.

The obvious solution to runaway global warming was to remove the effective 
subsidy of not pricing the damage done by carbon pollution, Musk said, urging 
the students to lobby governments to implement the policy.

“To make it neither a left nor right issue we should make it a revenue-neutral 
carbon tax – increasing carbon tax and reducing tax in other areas like 
consumption taxes or VAT and in order to give companies time to react it should 
be a phased-in approach,” he said.

Australia approved coalmine because it isn't a 'neo-colonialist' power, Greg 
Hunt claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/australia-approved-coalmine-because-it-isnt-a-neo-colonialist-power-greg-hunt-claims>
“If countries agree to a carbon tax and it’s real and it’s not super 
watered-down and weak, we could see a transition [to clean energy] that has a 
15- to 20-year time frame as opposed to a 40- or 50-year time frame. We could 
probably cut it in half and that would have a huge impact on the … welfare of 
the world … It really matters whether we do this transition sooner or later.

“For developing economies they could leapfrog the fossil fuel situation with 
power lines, you could have remote villages with solar panels and a battery 
pack, just like mobile phones, a lot of countries just didn’t do the landlines, 
they skipped right over landlines.”

Musk said Australia would be the first mass market for his powerwall battery 
storage technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/18/australian-homes-among-first-to-get-teslas-powerwall-solar-energy-battery>
 because it had “such a large percentage of homes with solar panels and 
Australia correctly prices energy at a consumer level – people pay more during 
peak times than non peak – so the economic incentives are aligned for 
consumers.”

Musk’s firm Tesla <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> has said its 
7kWH home energy storage units would be available by the end of the year in 
Australia.

The businessman and inventor warned that getting rid of the “hidden carbon 
subsidy … of enormous size, $5.3tn a year according to the IMF” would continue 
to encounter tactics by fossil fuel companies similar to those used by the 
tobacco industry for many years.

And he called on governments to “set the rules of the game” to help start-ups 
to grow into mid-size companies.

Addressing the charge that a carbon tax would also help his electric car and 
solar companies, Musk said: “If what I really cared about was my net worth I 
would never have invested in a car company … it has to be one of the dumbest 
way to invest money, and solar is not far behind it … because we have these 
crazy rules in place.”

He said his concerns about the climate had been elevated by the widespread use 
of fracking.

“Fracking has elevated my concern about the carbon problem dramatically … I 
always thought the scarcity of oil would drive up the price … Unfortunately 
some smart inventors, I wish they could have invented something else … the net 
result is the accessible oil and gas reserves are dramatically higher, maybe by 
a factor of 10, and that is crazy for the climate,” he said.

The businessman and inventor has been calling for a carbon tax to drive clean 
power investments for years.

His own companies having reportedly received billions in subsidies as 
startups, but Musk argues a carbon tax is a better policy lever.

The LA Times calculated 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-hy-musk-subsidies-20150531-story.html> 
companies owned by the billionaire, including Tesla Motors Inc, SolarCity Corp 
and Space Exploration Technologies Corp, known as SpaceX, had benefited from 
about $4.9bn in government support.

Paris diary: Planet COP 21 is a strange place but it has nothing on Planet Oz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/02/paris-diary-planet-cop-21-is-a-strange-place-but-it-has-nothing-on-planet-oz>
Innovation to drive advances in clean energy technology has been a theme of 
the Paris meeting,with the billionaires Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, Richard 
Branson and other high-profile entrepreneurs pledging to spark a “new economic 
revolution” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/bill-gates-breakthrough-energy-coalition-mark-zuckerberg-facebook-microsoft-amazon>
 based around clean energy with an investment drive for renewables, and the US 
president, Barack Obama, and 20 other leaders promising to double their 
research and development spending on renewables.

Musk said he had not been asked to join the initiative.

Attending the Paris summit earlier in the week, Malcolm Turnbull said 
innovation was the key to tackling climate change, but has refused to 
countenance changing his climate policies.

“We’re optimistic because we believe that we have, as a global community, as 
humanity, the ability to innovate and imagine the technologies that will enable 
us to make these big cuts in greenhouse gas emissions and, at the same time, 
continue to deliver the energy, particularly in countries that have little or 
no energy resources available to them, enable us to continue to do that,” he 
told the meeting.

“So this is a time for technology. This is a time for innovation. And that’s 
why we were so pleased to discuss that with Bill Gates, one of the handful of 
people that we could truly say has created the modern era. It was great to talk 
to him today and hear his passion for the role of technology and innovation in 
meeting this global challenge.”

Turnbull promised to use next week’s innovation statement to double 
Australia’s spending on clean energy research and development to $200m.
 