
My years of work as a radical environmentalist in concert with multinational 
business has inspired me to believe that we can change our mindset from "Why 
don't they?" to "Why don't we?" So many engineers and executives demonstrate 
courage, tenacity and creativity when faced with regulation or resource 
constraint in the pipeline.

Real opportunities for transformative change lie in preparing for crises. The 
National Academy of Science's new report, Abrupt Impacts of Climate Change, 
states:

 "To willfully ignore the threat of abrupt change could lead to more costs, 
loss of life, suffering, and environmental degradation … The time is here to be 
serious about the threat of tipping points so as to better anticipate and 
prepare ourselves for the inevitable surprises."

Before Hurricane Sandy hit the US's north-east in 2012, scientists and 
meteorologists warned of a likely devastating weather event on the eastern 
seaboard at some point. By day one after the storm, it was clear that we would 
spend more than $100bn on recovery. You didn't need an expert to imagine the 
financial devastation. But you did need serious analyses and one helluva 
backbone to make smart, tough decisions on infrastructure, relocation and 
rebuilding.

So taxpayers (federal, regional and local), businesses and families spent this 
huge sum of money, and we will likely have to spend it all over again in the 
near future. These difficult expenditures were almost obligatory despite strong 
leadership from local governors and mayors. We were simply not prepared for 
this predictable event. We do not have our transition agenda in place.

We are already between a rock and a hard place and we have no Plan B. We must 
now have the hard discussions to identify what we would need to do – and what 
we would be prepared to do – under exigent circumstances in a global (or local) 
emergency. We talk about a world of increasing population and constrained 
resources, yet we continue our high-carbon lifestyles, with business as usual 
and poorly directed government subsidies.

This is not how we operate in other situations. In healthcare, for example, we 
immunize ourselves with vaccines (from tetanus to smallpox). The entire 
insurance industry's business model is based on high-impact, low-probability 
events. But when it comes to climate change, we fail to considera black swan 
event 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/22/books/chapters/0422-1st-tale.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 that will create significant trauma, as well as transformational 
opportunities. Nothing is more urgent than being ready to seize these 
opportunities.

In our everyday lives, we have grown accustomed to the face of environmental 
degradation, from air pollution (more costly than tobacco in healthcare 
dollars) to water pollution (the FDA advises against eating king mackerel, 
swordfish and more, because of heavy-metal contamination). We can and must 
realize a world with a thriving low-carbon and low-waste economy – despite how 
hard and costly the early investments will be.

These investments may not satisfy short-term earnings pressures or public 
budget cycles, but will absolutely lower costs in energy, waste, water and 
healthcare in the medium and long term. This high price seems a fair trade for 
a decent life for our children and a modicum of stability for our fundamental 
public and private institutions.

My fellow environmental activists and I always say, "Business as usual cannot 
continue." And now, many businesses – and the National Academy of Sciences – 
say the same thing as fiercely and straightforwardly. Unfortunately, one or 
more of these events will likely happen within the next five to 10 years:

Extreme weather devastates 20% of the world's wheat, rice, corn; an entire 
marine ecosystem collapses; major energy outages/shortages interrupt basic 
survival systems; social upheaval caused by lack of food, water, energy or 
financial security; another nuclear/oil spill/chemical event; water shortage ot 
drought causes mass migrations; large industries/economies collapse, a big 
resource war follows

Sorry, I'm not with you to buy you a drink after this list. What are our 
choices? We could do nothing new and pray for the best. This is a bad option.

But we have two choices that already have leadership, momentum and money on 
the table.

First, we can start radical transformation of business as usual to incentivize 
decisive action and investment for low-carbon, low-waste technologies.

Second, recognizing that science indicates that abrupt changes will arrive 
before we fix or even identify the problems, we can start scenario planning so 
that next time a major storm hits a coastal region, we prioritize the 
protection of natural systems along with the protection of people, property and 
profits in the rebuilding process.

I'd argue, of course, that we must do both. These steps make up the essence of 
a transition agenda that includes both resilience and an altered view of our 
landscape, both figuratively and literally.

Paul Romer, the Stanford economist has eloquently said, "A crisis is a 
terrible thing to waste." Indeed, climate-change-accelerated devastation will 
yield newly fertile ground if we are ready. We should hope for strange 
bedfellows; patent-pooling frameworks that enable competitors to collaborate; 
decentralized and low-impact food and energy systems; accounting rules that 
prevent the biggest polluter from making the biggest profit and insurance that 
recognizes the value of ecosystems. In short, the rules of business must be 
harmonized with the laws of nature.

I have three Chinese cookie fortunes on my refrigerator. Here are their words 
of wisdom:

"Turbulence is a life force. It is opportunity. Let's love turbulence and use 
it for change."

"Struggle as hard as you can for whatever you believe in." 

"It is necessary; therefore, it is possible."
 