
What happened to Emily Field is unlikely to find its way on to the news. But 
the story of how one young woman with organ failure was denied help when she 
most needed it – and the subsequent battle between the Department for Work and 
Pensions (DWP), the outsourcing firmAtos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos>, and a mother – tells us exactly how 
rotten Britain’s social security system has become.

Now Britain needs clothes banks too. What sort of society are we living in? | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/britain-clothes-banks-poverty-sharewear>
Field, who is 28 years old and lives on the outskirts of Reading, has had type 
1 diabetes since she started primary school. Over the past three years Field’s 
health has deteriorated rapidly – she’s struggled with chronic fatigue, pain 
and failing eyesight – and in the spring of 2015 she was diagnosed with 
diabetic kidney disease. By Christmas, doctors told her she was at “end stage”. 
“In essence, my daughter’s dying,” Field’s mum, Louise Hughes, tells me. “She 
won’t live for much longer without dialysis and a pancreas and kidney 
transplant.”

I speak to Hughes, 53, at her home in Gwynedd, north-west Wales, as she waits 
for her daughter to have her latest surgery. “Her entire life is needles, blood 
tests and procedures,” Hughes says. Field is too weak to move much and has had 
to postpone treatment because of her failing immune system (she currently has 
tonsillitis and the flu).

“Emily looks almost unrecognisable to how she was two years ago,” Hughes, 
says, showing me an old photo of her hugging her fiance Tim. “My beautiful 
girl. She’s so mentally and physically frail now.”

Field had to give up her career as an artist when her eyesight first 
deteriorated. Last year, she took azero-hours contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/17/what-are-zero-hours-contracts-google-answer>
 stacking shelves in a pawnshop to try to get by but was sacked when she 
couldn’t physically do the work. Hughes tells me her daughter now has no money 
to live on.

After Emily had a PIP rejection last time, she said she’d kill herself. She 
said, ‘I can’t do it any more, Mum’

“I buy her a Tesco shop once a week and I send her bits, like mascara or 
shampoo. I can’t afford much more,” she says. “Emily’s fiance pays her bills 
because she’s literally got nothing. She’s been asking Tim for money for 
sanitary towels.”

In a so-called civilised country, this is where the welfare state is meant to 
kick in: the safety net that can’t stop us from getting ill but can make sure 
we have money to pay the rent and buy food if we do. Instead, Hughes tells me, 
her daughter has been left without either of the Conservative government’s key 
“reformed” sickness benefits.

Last year, the jobcentre told Field she wasn’t eligible for employment and 
support allowance because her fiance works more than 16 hours a week. Two weeks 
ago – while she was waiting for a double organ transplant – Field’s rejection 
for personal independence payments (PIP) was confirmed. Looking through the 
rundown of the assessment sent to Atos’s customer service department, it is 
filled with references to Field’s appearance (“well kept”) and scatterings of 
medical detail in broken sentences (“she goes to the renal clinic … She has 
blood tests, it hurts her and stresses her out … she goes to eye clinic”).

Staggeringly, this was the third time Field had been turned down for PIP in 
two years – this goes up to four if we include the time the DWP lost the 
paperwork and she had to reapply. In 2014 – by the second time Field was judged 
as not needing the benefit – her health had deteriorated to the degree that 
Hughes had to become her daughter’s appointee because she didn’t have the 
strength to apply herself.

“You get an hour to prove to the DWP you’re sick enough to squeeze a few 
pounds from them,” Hughes says. “All of this with a so-called Atos health 
professional who’s never met you.”

She pauses. “After Emily had a [PIP] rejection [last time], she said she’d 
kill herself. She said, ‘I can’t do it any more, Mum’.”

When the government is failing your family, what do you do? Hearing that the 
Atos chief, David Haley, would be at thepublic accounts committee inquiry 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/atos-capita-apologise-disabled-people-7303804>
 into outsourced disability assessments at the start of this month, Hughes went 
on a mission: she travelled from Wales to London – stopping overnight at her 
sister’s in Bristol – walked into the building, and told Haley about her 
daughter in person. Next, she went to the DWP offices themselves – carrying a 
blown-up copy of a letter from Field’s consultant. She tells me a uniformed 
security guard threatened her with the police.

Phil Brehaut has Parkinson’s. Threatening to cut his benefits won’t help | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/sickness-benefit-cuts-incentive-work-parkinsons-disease>
A week later, back in Wales, Hughes rang the DWP. She was told that Field had 
been awarded PIP – the enhanced rate for both the care and mobility part of the 
benefit. “On 29 January, they said she didn’t meet the benefit requirements. 
And now suddenly she does?” Hughes says. “She went from four points to 20 
overnight.”

When I contacted Atos it said that it had conducted a review of Field’s case 
after receiving her mother’s complaint via the complaints process. It felt the 
most recent assessment “could have better reflected the changing and worsening 
impact of her daughter’s condition” and “provided renewed advice” to the DWP so 
it could look again at the decision.

When I speak to Hughes a few days later she tells me that more than £3,000 – 
six months of backdated benefits – was put in her bank account the same week. 
Haley and Atos’s chief medical officer have also contacted Hughes asking to 
meet her.

It’s worth pausing on that. This month the government gave a severely ill 
woman the help she was entitled to – not through a competent benefit assessment 
– but after her mother crossed the country to confront the boss of an 
outsourcing firm because she believed it was the only way to make it happen.

“It’s like they’re patting me on the head and they think they can get away 
with it. They forced Emily into poverty for two years,” Hughes says. “Where’s 
the transparency? Where’s the accountability? It’s practically corrupt.”

• The headline, subheading and text of this article were amended on 19 
February 2016. An earlier version said that Emily Field’s mother had to “battle 
Atos’s boss for benefits”. Atos have asked us to point out that a letter they 
sent to Field’s mother which “made clear we had changed our advice to the DWP” 
and apologised was sent on 2 February, the day before she met David Haley, 
though she had not seen it.
 