
Emmanuelle Riva <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emmanuelle-riva> is not 
given to sentimental nonsense. Finding herself an international star at 85, 
however, does have a fairytale element about it, admits the surprise star of 
the surprise hit French filmAmour.

"This film is such a wonderful, marvellous, extraordinary gift. I cannot tell 
you how happy I am. Completely happy," Riva says. "The whole thing is like a 
fairytale. Everybody knows there are very few roles for older actresses. Almost 
none, in fact. And that is what makes all this so exceptional."

Riva will not be at the Bafta awards ceremony at the Royal Opera House in 
London on Sunday, where she is nominated for a best actress award. She is 
saving herself for the Gallic equivalent, the Césars, in a fortnight. Then the 
Oscars – on the day of her 86th birthday – beckon.

The acclaim for Riva and Amour are exceptional in an industry that has always 
preferred its mainstream stars to be fresh of face, lithe of figure and 
delivering their lines in English. Riva, the oldest nominee ever for best 
actress category, has a very Gallic disdain for such public adulation. "I 
cannot possibly come to London. How can I? I have to go to the Césars and the 
Oscars and already I am so, so tired and so, so harassed," she says with all 
the good grace she can muster. "For five months people have not left me alone. 
I have done 15 interviews a day, sometimes. After the Oscars I intend to rest 
and I can tell you that I cannot wait until it is after the Oscars."

What? A star who cannot wait for her 15 minutes in the spotlight to be over? 
Riva is not being curmudgeonly (well, not much), but it is easy to forget that 
she is not playing at being an octogenarian. Besides, she enjoyed global 
recognition more than half a century ago in the cult 1959 filmHiroshima Mon 
Amour, the Alain Resnais film seen as a catalyst for France's nouvelle vague 
movement.

In that film, in which 30-year-old Riva plays an unnamed French woman talking 
to her young Japanese lover about the bombing of Hiroshima, it is her voice, 
poetically repeating the same lines, that is etched on the memory long after 
the black-and-white credits rolled. Speaking from her Paris flat, 54 years on, 
Riva's voice is still as mellifluous and as gently mesmerising.

In Amour, directed by Michael Haneke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke>, she is Anne, a retired piano 
teacher in her 80s seeing out her twilight years in the bourgeois comfort of a 
chic Paris apartment with her husband, Georges, played by the equally veteran 
French star Jean-Louis Trintignant, until a series of strokes spark dementia, 
physical disability and a slow dismantling of her body and mind. With the 
exception of one scene, the film is set in the couple's flat, adding to the 
sense of walls closing in on the devoted couple.

The critics have raved about Amour: to some it is a "beautifully calculated 
demise" or "old age that refuses to be swept under the carpet and mindlessly 
'othered' "; to others it shows "Haneke's flair for the emotionally brutal" and 
is an "overlong unblinking meditation on life's last act".

Riva says she knew she wanted the role as soon as she read the script. "I knew 
intimately that I could do it, that I had arrived at a point in my life to do 
it. It seemed like a miracle. Haneke had seenHiroshima Mon Amour. Clearly he 
wanted to see me again after all these years. I was in his head perhaps. He 
thought I could play Anne, so we met for lunch. Afterwards we filmed one scene; 
the scene in the kitchen when Anne has her first absence. Haneke said it was 
the most difficult scene in the film. Afterwards we looked at the rushes. He 
had seen other actresses, this was only natural, but he said it was me who had 
touched him most.

"He had already chosen Trintignant to play the husband. When I knew it was 
Trintignant I thought we would work well together on the film. And we did. 
Nobody who has seen the film can doubt that this is a couple who love each 
other, a couple everyone can believe in."

She adds: "I would have been very unhappy if he [Haneke] had chosen someone 
else for the role. As it was I was very happy. Totally happy throughout the 
whole two months of shooting."

Riva, the only daughter of an Italian signwriter and his wife, was born in 
eastern France. She decided as a child she wanted to be an actress, but for a 
girl living in a provincial village, from a modest family with no connection to 
the world of theatre or cinema, it seemed an impossible ambition.

"My father wanted me to continue my studies. To do what … who knows? I knew my 
passion was acting. But in the meantime I had to do something so I learned to 
sew. My parents certainly didn't decide my destiny was as a seamstress, as some 
have written."

Legend has it that Riva's father was painting a shop sign when the owner, who 
also ran the local amateur dramatics group, asked if he knew of a young girl 
interested in taking a role in the next play. Afterwards, Riva, then in her 
early 20s, left for Paris where she enrolled in acting school.

"I would have liked to have started acting at 17 years old, but it was a 
miracle in itself that I even got started at all."

After Hiroshima Mon Amour, described by director Eric Rohmer as "the most 
important film since the war, the first modern film of sound cinema", Riva 
shunned many "commercial" roles "Because I turned down offers, they stopped 
calling. They forgot me. You make an empty space and the empty space comes to 
you," she once said.

Haneke told the New York Times last year: "As a young man I'd been captivated 
by Emmanuelle Riva inHiroshima Mon Amour. But after that I lost her from view."

In the past half century, Riva did not completely disappear. She worked on the 
stage until 2001 and had roles inThree Colours: Blue and Skylab, the Julie 
Delpy drama, and wrote books of poetry, but even in France she was known only 
by serious cinephiles. Which makes her second 15 minutes of fame even more 
extraordinary.

"Of course I am totally in this role. I don't have any regrets because I 
couldn't have done a role like this at 40 years of age. This film arrived at 
the exact age of my life. What regrets could I possibly have?" she says.

Riva is weary of journalists' questions. I ask if she prefers to be called 
Madame or Mademoiselle; the French divas Catherine Deneuve and Jeanne Moreau 
are said to prefer Mademoiselle.

"What do you mean do I prefer being called Madame or Mademoiselle? Are you 
trying to find out if I am married? If so I can tell you that I have never 
wanted to be married and you can call me Mademoiselle or Madame as you wish. 
Perhaps at my age Madame has more charm, it's more dignified. But I could call 
myself Mademoiselle."

She insists she had no idea Amour would be such a success and to think so in 
advance would just "rot my head".

"How could I say no to this film? A project so marvellous, of such quality 
with such a director. I didn't ask questions, I just said yes," she says. "They 
said the film's story would make people afraid, would put them off. It hasn't. 
The truth is this story could happen to anyone. It could happen to me, it could 
happen to you; it's about the very important subjects: life, love death."
 