
When you think about the role of technology in children's lives your first 
thoughts might not necessarily always feel positive. The digitally advanced 
world that we now live in creates considerable risks for children including 
cyber bullying and exploitation. It is absolutely vital that strong measures 
are in place to protect children in the online world. However, when the online 
technology sector puts the right systems in place to protect children, the 
incredible technological developments that have been made in recent times can 
open up a wealth of opportunity for children and young people, and in some 
cases, develop innovations that can in fact empower them and actively protect 
them from danger.

UNICEF, the world's leading children's organisation, has an innovation unit 
where we are developing our use of technology in the most innovative ways to 
protect children. One such way is using SMS technology to register children at 
birth. Birth registration provides the starting point for the recognition and 
protection of every child's fundamental rights to identity. Children whose 
births are unregistered may not be able to claim basic services such as access 
to education and health services and be adequately protected from violence, 
exploitation and trafficking. SMS has so far been used as a way of collecting 
data for birth registration in countries including Uganda, Nigeria and Senegal.

UNICEF Uganda is also empowering young people through a system called 
U-report. Young people across Uganda can sign up for free through mobile phones 
to share information via SMS about the needs and concerns of their communities, 
helping to influence the provision of services and the decisions of 
politicians. This has already proved invaluable when there was an outbreak of 
an epilepsy-related illness known as 'nodding disease' which mainly affects 
children under 15, in the northern districts of Uganda. UNICEF noted an 
increase in messages about the disease from U-reporters in those areas and the 
U-report team was able to inform affected communities about symptoms and 
available treatment. There are currently over 200,000 U-reporters in Uganda, 
with over 400 new joiners each day.

The technology sector has a unique opportunity to have a hugely positive 
impact on children. The International Labour Organisation's latest global 
trends for youth report, makes tragic reading. An estimated 73.4 million young 
people around the world are expected to be unemployed in 2013 and this picture 
is only set to get worse. The one sector that continues to grow and therefore 
create employment is the technology sector. This sector could provide amazing 
opportunities for the next generation. At UNICEF we are currently working with 
Barclays on the Building Young Futures programme. This aims to benefit 74,000 
young people in Brazil, Egypt, India, Pakistan, Uganda and Zambia offering them 
personalised financial and enterprise skills training, career guidance, 
mentoring and work placements with the aim of supporting them through to work 
or setting up their own businesses. Over the next three years in rural Western 
Uganda we are setting up 50 youth resource centres which have connected solar 
powered computer kiosks which young people can use to hone their skills and to 
research and develop their business plans. This is a great example of how the 
latest developments in technology can help to empower children and young people.

UNICEF works with businesses to create systematic change for children across 
the globe. We believe technology has a vital role to play in empowering young 
people and want to see more businesses in the technology sector working in 
partnership with development agencies to digitally connect children in rural 
and urban areas. We want to build on the positive impact that the technology 
sector can have for children and young people and their rights. We hope that 
the technology sector wants that too.

David Bull, executive director, UNICEF UK

Copy on this page is provided by UNICEF, supporter of the children: the next 
business agenda hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/child-rights-business>
 