
Edwin Encarnacion homered and drove in four runs as the Toronto Blue Jays 
matched a team record by winning their 11th straight game Sunday, finishing a 
three-game sweep of the Baltimore Orioles with a 13-5 win. Toronto also won 11 
straight in 1987 and 1998.

Ryan Flaherty hit two homers but Baltimore lost for the fifth time in eight 
games and allowed a season-high in runs. Josh Johnson (1-2) was winless in his 
first seven starts with Toronto, receiving just 13 total runs of support and 
losing twice. This time, Johnson allowed four runs and seven hits in six-plus 
innings, walked one and struck out five.

Also in the American League, the Seattle Mariners downed the Oakland Athletics 
6-3 after pinch-hitter Kendrys Morales had a game-ending three-run homer in the 
10th inning. Raul Ibanez gave the Mariners the lead with a two-run homer in the 
first inning and added a solo shot in the third, his team-leading 17th. It was 
his second multihomer game this season and 18th of his career.

The Kansas City Royals took advantage of a pair of errors by the Chicago White 
Sox to score three times in the eighth inning and rally for a 7-6 win and avoid 
a three-game sweep. In other AL games, theDetroit Tigers beat the Boston Red Sox
 7-5, theMinnesota Twins defeated the Cleveland Indians 5-3 and the Tampa Bay 
Rays downed the New York Yankees 3-1.

In interleague play, Ryan Sweeney had a career-high six RBIs, including a 
three-run homer, as theChicago Cubs routed the Houston Astros 14-6, while the 
Pittsburgh Pirates edged the Los Angeles Angels 10-9 over 10 innings and the 
Texas Rangers beat the St Louis Cardinals 2-1.

In the National League, Mat Latos matched his career high with 13 strikeouts 
as theCincinnati Reds salvaged the finale of their three-game series with a 4-2 
victory over theArizona Diamondbacks. Choo Shin-soo hit a leadoff home run and 
Brandon Phillips added a two-run shot in the first inning off Randall Delgado 
(0-1). That was plenty of offense for Latos (7-1), who allowed a run on six 
hits with one walk in 7 2-3 innings.

Brian McCann hit an early grand slam and the Atlanta Braves got solo home runs 
from Chris Johnson and Jordan Schafer in a 7-4 victory over theMilwaukee Brewers
. Beaten 2-0 by the Brewers on Friday and Saturday, the Braves entered the game 
scoreless in 24 consecutive innings. The streak came to a quick end when McCann 
smacked a two-out shot to left-center in the first inning off Alfredo Figaro 
(1-2) for his 10th career slam.

In other games, the Los Angeles Dodgers downed the San Diego Padres 3-1, the 
New York Mets blanked the Philadelphia Phillies 8-0, the Colorado Rockies edged 
theWashington Nationals 7-6 and the Florida Marlins were 7-2 winners over the 
San Francisco Giants.
 