
England responded to a good old fashioned pasting in an aggressive and 
thoroughly worthy fashion at the Oval yesterday evening. Faced with making 442 
even to avoid the possibility of a follow-on in the final Test of the summer, 
Marcus Trescothick put bat to ball in his uncomplicated fashion and in the 18 
overs available before the close had made 55, helping England reduce the 
deficit by 80.

It did not come entirely without cost, however. Mike Atherton, who had been 
pretty much a spectator during an opening partnership of 58, had made just 13 
when in Shane Warne's third over he received one of those speciality leg 
breaks, spun like a dervish, that pitched outside his leg stump, and as he 
groped forward, broke across the face of his bat to clip the top of the off 
stump.

Comparison will inevitably be made with the "ball of the century" to Mike 
Gatting, but the fullness of time has served to show that such deliveries from 
Warne have been less the exception than the rule. Atherton, in what may - may 
only - be his penultimate Test innings, trailed off rather disconsolately, but 
there will be plenty more of the same done to others before this match is done.

In a series that has been played at a frenetic pace, Trescothick's vibrant 
riposte put the stamp on yet another heady day that produced 397 runs from 88 
overs for the loss of just three wickets, two of them gifted to England on a 
silver platter with a parsley garnish.

Bowlers have had more than their fair share of helpful pitches this series but 
there will be those, seamers in particular, who will be grate ful to see the 
back end of what yesterday, with the deep haze of the first day replaced by 
searing sunshine, had become an offering as benign as it gets.

Australia had begun the day on 324 for two, and by the time Steve Waugh pulled 
the plug on the innings 40 minutes after tea, had taken that on to 641 for 
four, the highest total against England on this ground since West Indies made 
692 for eight half a dozen years ago, and exceeded here by Australia only in 
1930 when Don Bradman made 232, and 1934 when he made 244.

In the light of this, the England bowling figures should only be viewed after 
the children have gone to bed. All four main operators topped the hundred, the 
heaviest punishment going to Phil Tufnell whose single wicket, taken on 
Thursday, cost 174.

If the honours went to Justin Langer on the first day, then they belonged to 
the Waugh twins yesterday. Both made centuries, Mark's the 20th of an 
illustrious career and Steve's the 27th of one which transcends illustrious to 
touch greatness.

Only once in the 13 matches between the sides on this ground since the Don 
bowed out with tears in his eyes and a blob in the scorebook have Australia 
beaten England and that in 1972 when the Chappell brothers Ian and Greg made 
118 and 113 respectively in the first innings.

If Steve Waugh needs to look for omens (and why should he with the players he 
has?) then he need gaze no further than this. For the Waugh's fraternal 
hundreds in the same innings is not a novel experience: at Sabina Park in 
Kingston, in the spring of 1995, Steve made a brilliant double century, the 
only one of his career, and his brother 126 to clinch a memorable series win.

Yesterday Mark creamed his way elegantly to 120 (he is the batting equivalent 
of haute couture to lesser players' high-street chain), with two sixes and 16 
fours, some as near slogs as he is capable of achieving. But he attempted one 
too many, stepping away contemptuously to wallop Darren Gough through the 
offside and losing his middle stump.

By that time Steve had reached 98, the pair having added 197 for the third 
wicket, and despite an eternity spent scrambling the two runs to reach his 
ninth century against England, he was still there unbeaten on 157 when he 
called a halt to the carnage.

There had been help besides for Adam Gilchrist, promoted above Damien Martyn 
to force the pace (rather like jumping out of a Porsche and into a Ferrari), 
had walloped 25 before smacking a wide slow full toss from Usman Afzaal 
straight to extra cover (thereby giving Afzaal a first Test wicket with only 
his third ball). Then Martyn, when he did get in, helped himself cockily to an 
unbeaten 64 from 54 balls, the majority share of an unbroken fifth-wicket stand 
of 107. Langer, hit on the head on the first evening, but raring to go 
yesterday, did not even get the chance to carry on.

Steve Waugh's was a phenomenal effort by a remarkable cricketer. Just what is 
it that drives him beyond even the ethic of the baggy green and the team, 
personal pride in his performance, and the memory of actually having lost a 
series to England? Fewer than four weeks ago at Trent Bridge, in setting off 
for his first run, he tore his right calf muscle in two places, and was out of 
the game.

Perhaps in that lies the key to yesterday's innings, played effectively on one 
leg, for as he was stretchered from the field in Nottingham the jeers and 
catcalls came raining down. You can bet he took note. No way am I going to let 
that be this country's last sight of me, he would have said to himself. It is 
the "stuff you" ideal. It is why seven of his centuries against England have 
been on these shores. He wants to rub English noses in it and yet again he has 
done it.

On his debut in this country he made 177 not out and now, on what is very 
likely to be his swansong (he will surely not bat in a second innings if there 
is one), he has 157 not out. There is a satisfying symmetry to things now. The 
point has been made and salute him for having the courage to make it.
 