
Every international match is apt to be described as a learning experience but 
the lessons here were all in humility. WhileEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> proceed happily enough at the 
head of Group Six, this was the proof that a side ranked eighth in the world 
cannot always determine the character of a match against opponents rated 100 
places lower.

England, apart from haplessness in front of a target well protected by Dmitri 
Kramarenko, performed respectably. Two goals felt insufficient by comparison 
with the eight dispatched by Poland againstAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> last Saturday but the score 
was always likely to be forgotten and Sven-Goran Eriksson will linger instead 
over the disciplinary record.

Michael Owen collected a booking in the second half that will see him 
suspended from the qualifier with Wales at Cardiff in September. It was telling 
that the Real Madrid striker should receive his caution for attempting to turn 
in a cross with his hand. It was the act of an exasperated man.

Through no fault of Owen's, much interest had been taken in his rise in the 
record books and a goal would have been his 30th for England, putting him on a 
par with Nat Lofthouse, Tom Finney and Alan Shearer. It is hubris even for 
outsiders to speak of such matters and Owen suffered, even though he had never 
bragged about his prospects.

When a flowing move by Steven Gerrard, Joe Cole and Kieron Dyer delivered the 
ball to him in stoppage time, it was preordained that Kramarenko would deny 
Owen. The goalkeeper had rallied since the fusillade from Poland.

Owen's wastefulness throughout the night was mesmerising because it is so 
alien to his nature. That, surely, was an ephemeral spectacle and there should 
be more lasting significance in David Beckham's busy and menacing display. The 
captain thus confronted accusations of waning energy and impact.

He came top of a popularity poll, judging by the way the rest of the side 
flocked to congratulate him on scoring England's second goal. There might also 
have been sighs of relief since Azerbaijan had not been wholly supine. When the 
game was goalless, Gurban Gurbanov had put a shot wide after being released by 
Rail Malikov in the eighth minute.

With England 2-0 ahead, Nadir Nabiyev could have provoked annoyance when he 
beat the offside trap but Paul Robinson saved his attempt. If not superior to 
Northern Ireland, Azerbaijan had learned from England's 4-0 success against the 
Irish at Old Trafford. The visitors were far more successful at curbing Joe 
Cole.

Just before England repaired to the dressing room at the interval the match, 
like the fans, jeered at them. Beckham, booked when he burst back on to the 
field to hit a pass after he had just gone off to replace a boot which had come 
off, was even more galled to learn that he had been ruled offside just before 
Owen tapped in his cut-back in first-half stoppage time.

It had, at least, been an occasion when the target was identified. England 
generally behaved as if they were groggy inside the penalty area. Owen 
impersonated a man visiting the six-yard box for the first time and a series of 
headers were inaccurate to varying degrees.

Kramarenko at least made saves from most of them. Owen reached one from a 
Beckham delivery and when Joe Cole, in the 18th minute, set him up with an 
inswinging cross the Real striker put it against the goalkeeper, from where the 
rebound came off Beckham's knee to hit a post. Late in the first half Owen's 
inaccuracy was more severe as he put an Ashley Cole cross well over.

Others faltered less conspicuously and Frank Lampard came close with a good 
drive that clipped the outside of the woodwork. England left the field to jeers 
at half-time but the breakthrough was made in the 51st minute. It depended on 
the irrepressibility of Wayne Rooney. His taste for adventure never wanes and, 
from the left, he was happy to take on and beat both Zaur Hashimov and the 
sweeper Rashad Sadigov before pulling the ball back. Gerrard was ready with the 
technique to deliver the sure finish that others had not contrived.

That opener dispelled the paranoid fear that England could fail here. The lead 
was extended after 62 minutes. The episode started with a penalty appeal when 
Beckham went down under a challenge by the substitute Vugar Guliyev.

While his protests went unheeded Azerbaijan, with undue confidence, tried to 
go on the attack. Possession was lost and Lampard instantly freed Beckham to 
record a goal with a confidently taken shot. The captain's complaints over the 
penalty had turned to exclamations of happiness.

Eriksson seemed satisfied. He could be seen commenting to his assistant Steve 
McClaren that Lampard had made the opening with a long pass. It is likely that 
the manager felt that England should have been varying their approach and 
occasionally using that directness to surprise Azerbaijan.

In practice Kramarenko, who made a particularly fine save from one of Rooney's 
efforts, had been a greater problem. England, bloated with an excess of 
possession, might well have been more comfortable if this had been a closer 
contest.
 