
Routing Australia, rather than preparing for the Tests to come against South 
Africa, will be England's priority when they aim to put the seal on a 
successful month of one-day cricket under the Old Trafford floodlights on 
Tuesday.

"I can honestly say there's been no talk about South Africa," said Graham 
Gooch, the batting coach, ahead of a day-night match in which England will be 
aiming to clinch the NatWest series 4-0 with a record-extending 10th 
consecutive win in 50-over cricket, discounting a couple of washouts. "Every 
time you play Australia you want to win, every time you beat Australia it 
brings confidence to your dressing room."

Victory would also make a significant difference to England's place in the 
official 50-over rankings. The abandonment of the third match of the series at 
Edgbaston may have scuppered the ambitious goal of displacing Australia from 
the top of the rankings with a 5-0 whitewash, but a 4-0 win would lift England 
to third, behind South Africa only on fractions and within a single point of 
Australia. That would leave either England or South Africa with the opportunity 
to overtake the Aussies in the three one-day games that follow their Test 
series in August.

On the other hand an Australia victory at Old Trafford would consolidate their 
position at the top with 121 ranking points, and leave England in fourth on 115.

There is a third possibility, of course, this being Manchester in July. Both 
teams were confined to the indoor school at Old Trafford for their practice 
sessions on Monday by persistent morning drizzle, and although the forecast for 
Tuesday is slightly less depressing, there is a considerable danger of further 
frustration for both teams and the 16,000 optimists who have bought tickets for 
the first international fixture at Lancashire's new-look ground.

It remains a noisy and not especially appealing work in progress, with the old 
paddle-steamer pavilion encased in scaffolding ahead of a substantial extension 
next winter, and the new building for players and media in front of the tram 
tracks at the opposite end of the ground – which is bright red to match The 
Point, the huge hospitality building that has provoked so much debate over the 
last couple of years – not available until August, in time for a Twenty20 
international against South Africa.

But two new double-decker stands will be used for the first time in this game, 
the official opening night for last Friday's t20 game against Yorkshire having 
been a complete washout.

"I've always liked coming to Manchester," added Gooch. "I was up the other end 
to Gatt when Shane Warne played his first Test here – that was exciting. The 
new stands and pavilion complex looks impressive but I hope they don't neglect 
the old pavilion because it's going to look a bit odd against the new stuff. I 
hope they make a successful new development and become a world-class venue like 
they want to."

England have released Jonny Bairstow from their squad to allow him to play in 
Yorkshire's County Championship fixture against Hampshire in Southampton.

"The management are quite keen on Jonny getting some four-day cricket," said 
Gooch, refusing to speculate on what that said about Bairstow's chances of 
retaining the no.6 position for the first Test against South Africa at The 
Oval, given Ravi Bopara's impressive recent one-day form. "It's fair to say 
that Ravi was in the selectors' thoughts before he got injured, so I'm sure he 
will be back in their thoughts — as will Jonny Bairstow, James Taylor and Eoin 
Morgan. Bopara's been playing cricket, so I don't think he's done his chances 
any harm. But I don't select the side."

Australia will have to make at least two changes from the team beaten in 
Durham at the weekend, after Shane Watson and Brett Lee flew home with calf 
injuries. Mitchell Starc, the left-arm seamer who has been called up after 
impressing with Yorkshire in recent weeks, is one possible replacement for Lee, 
although Mitchell Johnson also declared himself fully recovered from "my little 
foot injury" and desperate to return to the attack.

"We've got one more chance to show England and ourselves that we're good 
enough," said Johnson. "I think you're going to see a different side. We just 
need to have that fire in our belly."

Teams for the fifth NatWest Series match between England and Australia at Old 
Trafford, starting at 2pm tomorrow

England (from): AN Cook (capt), IR Bell, IJL Trott, RS Bopara, EJG Morgan, C 
Kieswetter (wkt), SR Patel, TT Bresnan, SCJ Broad, ST Finn, JM Anderson, JC 
Tredwell, CR Woakes.

Australia (from): MJ Clarke (capt), DA Warner, MS Wade (wkt), GJ Bailey, DJ 
Hussey, SPD Smith, MG Johnson, CJ McKay, JL Pattinson, BW Hilfenhaus, MA Starc, 
XJ Doherty, PJ Forrest.

Umpires A Dar (Pak) and I Gould (Eng)

Third umpire M Erasmus (SA)

Match referee J Srinath (Ind)
 