
After four painful defeats in a row, England finally salvaged some pride with 
a crushing 225-run victory over Australia to win the fifth Ashes Test.

Andy Caddick, who had been so out-of-sorts earlier on in the series, produced 
his best bowling ever in a Test match to take 7-94 in the second innings and 10 
wickets in the match, as Australia crumbled to 226 all out in their second 
innings, chasing 452 to win.

Australia resumed the final day at 91-3, needing to bat through the entire day 
on a crumbling SydneyCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground 
pitch to save the test, but folded quickly to be all out 48 minutes after lunch 
in just 54 overs.

Their defeat was their first on home soil against any country in more than 
four years - and their heaviest loss to England since they were beaten by an 
innings and 14 runs at Melbourne in December 1986.

Set a near-impossible 452 to win after England's man of the match and player 
of the series Michael Vaughan struck a masterful 183 in the second innings, 
Australia's hopes of at least forcing a draw disappeared when they lost five 
wickets in the first session.

Caddick triggered the collapse when he trapped Bichel leg before wicket in the 
second over after the seamer had failed to add to his overnight score.

Waugh marched on to the ground to another standing ovation after his first 
innings century but failed to repeat his heroics as he departed for six, 
playing on to a short-pitched delivery from Caddick that rolled off his boot 
onto the stumps.

Damien Martyn followed soon after for 21, just two more than his overnight 
score, when he nicked a ball from off-spinner Richard Dawson into the gloves of 
wicketkeeper Alec Stewart. Martin Love, playing in just his second test, 
avoided the dreaded pair with an early boundary but managed just 27 when he was 
bowled by Durham fast bowler Steve Harmison.

Gilchrist, another first-innings centurion, belted seven fours in a defiant 
knock before his luck ran out on 37 and he gloved a Caddick bouncer to Mark 
Butcher at third slip, leaving Australia teetering on the brink at 183-8 at 
lunch.

Lee whacked nine boundaries and a six in a defiant display abefore Caddick had 
him caught behind then bowled MacGill to complete the victory.
 