
Since miracles don't happen twice in the space of two decades, prepare for 
Australia to descend on the Oval unbeaten and - the Leeds weather permitting - 
still contemplating a whitewash. Steve Waugh, their injured captain, so dry and 
deadpan for a decade - or so it seemed from afar - actually believes in his 
players enjoying themselves on tour, but when the Test matches come around this 
lot are less likely to be demob-happy than any of their predecessors.

Waugh constantly sets new goals for his men. Not content upon winning the 
series, he insists that his team seeks to improve every time it enters the 
Test-match arena. He's not too obsessed that his side should be regarded as the 
best ever, but he does have a sense of history. 'Maybe people can make a 
judgment about that in ten years' time. For the moment, we just want to try to 
keep improving and adding new dimensions to our game,' he said on Friday. Mere 
victory against this England side is not enough.

Waugh has not ruled out the possibility of playing at the Oval himself, though 
he has not been able to bring himself to consult in-depth with the team physio 
to assess how quickly his calf injury is recovering. Waugh is aware of his 
mortality; he knows that the Oval represents his last chance of playing a Test 
in England (he will be 40 when the next Ashes series takes place here) but he 
has no doubt that the hunger and the reflexes are still intact.

Whether the appetite of the some of the English players is so strong will be 
occupying the minds of the selectors over the next few days. At the end of this 
match they must choose the team for Thursday's Oval Test, after which they must 
announce their squads for the winter. Whispered consultations with the senior 
players are under way, while beyond the selectorial huddle there have been 
calls for the heads of the majority of the England players after such a 
desultory performance. in the Ashes series. Only Marcus Trescothick and Mark 
Butcher (of the regulars) and Nasser Hussain (of the occasionals) have escaped 
mention.

There is the usual cry for an overhaul. Mike Atherton and Alec Stewart, it is 
argued, should be discarded - even for the Oval Test - to prepare for the brave 
new world. It is a fanciful idea, which would be an insult to the Australians.

The intentions of Atherton and Stewart will be uppermost in the selectors' 
minds and they must surely hope that both of them pass on the message that they 
want to go to India this winter, even if some of the armchair critics are 
beginning to lose patience. Atherton, despite his modest record in this series, 
is still an automatic choice. India would provide an invigorating challenge for 
him (he hardly played because of the whims of the tour selectors when England 
last toured there in 1993). Atherton is a consummate player of spin bowling, 
though he has rarely had a chance to demonstrate that in this series. He did so 
in Pakistan. Certainly, he should be picked if available.

Opinion appears to have been divided about whether Stewart should travel. I 
think he should go; until his defiant display yesterday, just about everyone 
else - except perhaps the selectors - had sug gested he should be jettisoned. 
He may not be a brilliant player of spin, but he is still the best option 
behind the stumps. The man-boy who is being groomed to replace him, Jamie 
Foster of Essex, is not ready yet.

Atherton and Stewart may be easy scapegoats, but this bloody-minded old pair 
cannot be held responsible for the feeble attempt to regain the Ashes because 
of their longevity. England needs them to keep going a little longer.
 