
Routing Australia, rather than preparing for the Tests to come against South 
Africa, will be England's priority when they aim to put the seal on a 
successful month of one-day cricket under the Old Trafford floodlights on 
Tuesday.

"I can honestly say there's been no talk about South Africa," said Graham 
Gooch, the batting coach, ahead of a day-night match in which England will be 
aiming to clinch the NatWest series 4-0 with a record-extending 10th 
consecutive win in 50-over cricket, discounting a couple of washouts. "Every 
time you play Australia you want to win, every time you beat Australia it 
brings confidence to your dressing room."

Victory would also make a significant difference to England's place in the 
official 50-over rankings. The abandonment of the third match of the series at 
Edgbaston may have scuppered the ambitious goal of displacing Australia from 
the top of the rankings with a 5-0 whitewash, but a 4-0 win would lift England 
to third, behind South Africa only on fractions and within a single point of 
Australia. That would leave either England or South Africa with the opportunity 
to overtake the Aussies in the three one-day games that follow their Test 
series in August.

On the other hand an Australia victory at Old Trafford would consolidate their 
position at the top with 121 ranking points, and leave England in fourth on 115.

Read the full preview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/09/england-australia-odi-fifth-old-trafford>
.

Preamble The old jokes are the best, right? Well. For the last week we've had 
to endure banterlicious discussion of whether Andy Murray is British or 
Scottish – a joke that was funny for about 72 seconds, in 2005 – and now, after 
a cricket summer that had been drowned by the weather, we have a game in, yes, 
Manchester. And it's raining! The forecast is less than great and, while the 
game isn't yet a write off, play won't start at 2pm as scheduled.

There will be an inspection at 3pm. The cut-off point for play to start is 
just after 7pm.

2pm Mark Boucher has brought forward his retirement from international cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/10/mark-boucher-retires-south-africa-eye-injury>
 because of the horrific eye injury he suffered at Somerset yesterday. What an 
unspeakably brutal twist of fate. He ends, almost unbelievably,one short of 
becoming the first man to reach 1000 dismissals in international cricket 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?class=11;template=results;type=fielding>
. Instead he stuck in the nervous 990s, with 555 in Tests and 444 in ODIs and 
T20s. He will also end on 147 Test caps. The plan was for him to reach 150 on 
this tour and then retire.

Boucher was the tough guy of the South African team from 1997 to 2012, a 
player who was not always liked but who was respected by every opponent he 
faced. The first line ofhis Cricinfo profile 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/southafrica/content/player/44111.html> says it 
all: "A man to go to war with, but never against."Here's a supreme tribute to 
Boucher <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/mar/07/the-spin-mark-boucher>, 
written by Rob Bagchi earlier in the year.

2.05pm "It's rained here in Manchester persistently all night and all day and 
continues you do so now," says Ian Rogers. "Go home, forget it, nothing to see 
here."

2.10pm "A journalist described Boucher as a 'hard bastard' on the radio 
earlier today," says Ravi Nair. "Affectionately. So not always little friend of 
all the world. But... Still a legend, no? Love him or hate him. And worrying 
about his eye. Wouldn't wish that on anybody."

2.15pm "Just as I'm coming round to the fact that England have an excellent 
Test team, and a more-than-useful T20 one, they've gone and got good at ODIs 
too," says Ant Pease. "It's either that or Australia have been pretty shoddy 
this tourette (is that the right word?). All Ido know is that when I read a 
piece on Cricinfo saying that having identified Bresnan batting at 7 to be a 
weakness, Australia are yet to bowl at him, my first thought was to feel a bit 
sorry for them. Sorry! For the Aussies! From an English cricket fan exposed to 
the 80s and 90s! There's something deeply wrong with the world, and I blame 
Andy Flower."

2.20pm "Please let me be the first (I'm sure I'm not) to say how sad the news 
about Mark Boucher is today," says Simon Brereton. "I could scarcely believe it 
when I saw he'd played 150-odd Tests. That has to be some kind of record, I 
said, when I remembered in this day and age Tendulkar has all those records 
sown up. But not many remember when (current ICC head-honcho) Dave Richardson 
retired how sad we were and unimpressed by young Mark's first few games, but 
it's not sentiment now that would put him in my (not your) all-time XI. We will 
miss you Mark. That is all.."

Cricinfo picked John Waite 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/southafrica/content/player/47857.html> in their 
all-time South Africa XI. Denis Lindsay was a fantastic keeper-batsman too, but 
I don't think anyone would argue too strongly if you put Boucher in.

2.31pm It's not raining in Manchester at the moment. The delay is because of a 
wet outfield, but there is a snifter of optimism that we might get some play.

2.45pm "I know he's been slagged off many a time on the boards here, but Mark 
Boucher really was a great servant of cricket in South Africa," says Duncan 
Bonnett. "Given the nature of cricket and cricket politics in South Africa over 
the years, it's remarkable that a brief period aside, he's been a fixture in 
the team when all around him were being skewered for cricketing and 
non-cricketing reasons. He'll leave a pretty big hole in the side. In terms of 
the best 'keeper from our shores of all time, a mention has to be made of Ray 
'Jet' Jennings: another abrasive character from the golden (although unproven) 
era of South African cricket from the seventies through to the eighties. He had 
remarkable reflexes, was a great keeper and handy (at times) with the bat too."

Very true. Dave Richardson was a fine keeper-batsman too. I'm still haunted by 
the thought of Brian McMillan and Richardson turning a score of 150 for six 
into 350 against England.

2.49pm "While we await the end of the ersatz Ashes, the Somerset versus 
Proteas match (thank goodness for twitcher and Aunty) seems to be tremendous 
fun. Also our lovely England women are playing the series decider against India 
tomorrow. I presume you know about the wonderful '50 shades of Grey' mystery on 
their long coach trip from Truro to Wormsley yesterday?"

No, what's this? And what's 50 shades of Grey?

2.59pm I've just realised what Fifty Shades of Grey is. As you were.

3.01pm Rob has dashed off to Waterstones, rambling about an "urgent purchase", 
but you're not missing much: the umpires have inspected, and will do so again 
in an hour's time. The outfield isn't fit for play at the moment.

3.13pm "50 shades of grey <http://yfrog.com/z/kevyrraxj>," says Lorraine Reese.

3.14pm "Afternoon," says Mark Jelbert. "Is Fifty Shades of Grey the weather 
forecast?"

3.18pm "This," says Jos Roberts, "is all you need to know about said tome 
<http://www.thedailymash.co.uk/news/arts-entertainment/men-puzzled-by-porn-that-you-read-2012061931006>
."

3.52pm Hello. I've been faffing around,  reading Fifty Shades of Grey in 
record time researching this week's Spin, but you haven't missed anything. The 
next inspection is at 4pm.

4.02pm The umpires are inspecting as we type.

4.08pm Sky are showing highlights of the thrilling first CB Series final 
between Australia and England in 2007. If you are really, really workshy/bored,
you can relive it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/feb/09/overbyoverreports.cricket>. The 
one thing I remember about that OBO isdesperately needing the little boys' room 
for the last hour. You really needed to know that.

4.11pm "If we do get some play and England win the series 4-0 will it be a 
greywash?" says Kevin Perkins. "And if so what shade will it be?"

4.14pm Some good news: play will start at 5.30pm. If it doesn't rain frogs in 
the meantime.

4.15pm THe match will be 32 overs per side.

4.20pm "'Faffing'?" sniffs Matt Dony. "Is that what you call it these days? 
Sounds like you might need the little boys room now!" That's his exclamation 
mark, not mine.

4.21pm "50 Shades of Delay is more appropriate!" "Ha! Brilliant," says Ben 
Timpson, who won't be here all week because we've just booted him out the fire 
escape.

4.50pm Pop quiz, hotshot: guess what's happening in Manchester?

4.51pm Yes, yes it is raining. Not heavily, but the covers are back on.

5pm "Miserable," says Mike Atherton, hiding under a Sky Sports umbrella out in 
the middle. "Nothing to commend it at all. Raining, not too heavily, but very 
miserable." He's talking about the direction of the weather and adds, with a 
smile, that "nothing much good comes from Liverpool". Yes, he is a Manchester 
United fan. Yes, he was joking. Yes, I will work my eyeballs out with a pencil 
if there is faux outrage over this.

5.10pm The covers are off again, and apparently we are still on a for a 5.30pm 
start.

5.14pm "Shouldn't you have used the time afforded by this rain delay to pen 
'50 shades of Gary' – a collection of Mr Naylor's most memorable homoerotic OBO 
comments," says Nick Smith. Do we really need to cap it at 50?

England have won the toss and will bowl first, for obvious reasons. Tim 
Bresnan is out with a sore elbow, so James Tredwell comes in. Australia make 
two changes, with Xavier Doherty and Steve Smith replacing the injured pair of 
Brett Lee and Shane Watson. The wicketkeeper Matthew Wade moves up to open.

England Cook (c), Bell, Trott, Bopara, Morgan, Kieswetter (wk), Patel, Broad, 
Tredwell, Anderson, Finn.

Australia Warner, Wade (wk), Forrest, Clarke (c), Bailey, Hussey, Smith, 
McKay, Pattinson, Hilfenhaus, Doherty.

Here come the players. I must be honest, I had no expectation of play today so 
I haven't had time for my pre-OBO finger-exercise routine.[Brent] Get your 
excuses in early [/Brent].

1st over: Australia 1-0 (Wade 1, Warner 0) A bit of early swing for Anderson, 
on his home ground. Can we really refer to home grounds for centrally 
contracted players? Anyway, the new opener Wade drives the second ball for a 
single, the only run from a good first over.

"My abiding memory of Boucher," says Nagarjun K, "will be that of White 
Lightning going mental over his dropped catch <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> 
in '98." And the lovely touch when Donald then ran up from fine leg to pat him 
on the bum. It will definitely be in the Joy of Six: sporting bumpats.

2nd over: Australia 2-0 (Wade 2, Warner 0) The magnificent Steven Finn starts 
with two stunning full-length deliveries that growl past Wade's outside edge. 
The fourth ball jags back to leave a tattoo on Wade's inner thigh. Finn is in 
the top three of the ODI rankings, which prompts a magnificent stat from 
Bumble. "First England pace bowler to be in the top three since ... Alan 
Mullally!" Mind you, the official ICC site hasFinn at tenth in the rankings 
<http://www.relianceiccrankings.com/ranking/odi/bowling/>, so maybe Bumble's 
caught a sniff of the wrong whitewash. Presumably Finn is set to go into the 
top three when they update the rankings at the end of this series.

"The woman next to me on the train this morning was reading 50 Shades of Grey 
on her Kindle," says Ant Pease. "Not wanting to ruin her ladyporn experience, I 
helpfully pointed out that at best, the kindle can only render 16 grayscale 
shades, so she might not be getting the most out of the book. How does that make
me the loser?" Has anyone actually read this thing? What is so special about it?
Is it unisexual?

3rd over of 32: Australia 2-0 (Wade 2, Warner 0) I think I'm right in saying 
that, if England win today, they will have a chance to go No1 by beating South 
Africa later in the summer. But I'm not certain as the relevant webpage seems 
to be down. England's bowling attack are in perfect working order though – 
how's that for a dreadful segue – and Anderson zips one off the seam past the 
groping Wade's outside edge. An excellent maiden.

"Best hope it's a prevailing sou'westerly," says Sean Clayton. "From my mobile 
weather centre (a train somewhere near York), it's bloody horrible over God's\ 
Allah's\ the Flying Spaghetti Monster's Own County..." It looksokay at the 
moment. Imagine if it welts down during the Olympics.

4th over of 32: Australia 8-0 (Wade 2, Warner 5) Warner misses a booming drive 
at anothersnorter from Finn but gets it right next ball, punching an 
authoritative drive down the ground for four.

"If England's First XI are at or near the top of the rankings, where would 
their
Second XI be in a Second XI ranking?" says Gary Naylor. "Miles ahead, I 
venture. When one looks at other countries or the IPL, the shallowness of 
talent (with the possible exception of Indian middle order batting and 
Australian pace bowling) is marked. It may just be cyclical, or it may be a 
sign that talented schoolkids in other countries are turning to other sports." 
I don't really know enough to comment. Is our depth of batting really that 
strong, though? There is scarypotential, but if chickenpox took out three of 
the top six for next week's first Test, who would we bring in?

5th over of 32: Australia 9-0 (Wade 2, Warner 6) Wade is beaten by another gem 
from Anderson, on a perfect length and angling away off the seam. Anderson has 
figures of 3-1-2-0; outstanding in a 50-over game, never mind a 32-over contest.

"My wife's book group have decided to read Fifty Shades of Grey in order to 
annoy a conservative voting bloke in their midst," says Matthew West. "She 
informs me that it is absolute bollocks. She has declined to clarify whether 
that is just reference to a chapter involving teabagging." And with its first 
teabagging reference, the once proud Guardian Over-by-Over reached its nadir. 
(I was going to say 'if it's good enough for John Waters it should be good 
enough for us', as teabagging is an, a-hem, important part of the brilliant 
film Pecker, but then I remembered Pink Flamingos.)

6th over of 32: Australia 13-0 (Wade 2, Warner 10) Finn beats Warner with yet 
another wonderful delivery that boings away off the seam. "Cor!" says Bumble. 
"Oh hoo!" When Finn bowls that full length he really brings to mind Jason 
Gillespie in his snarling pomp. After five dot balls, Warner inside edges the 
last ball of a sensational over for four, just wide of the diving Kieswetter.

In an unrelated development, look at this for a Twenty20 match 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/571786.html>!

7th over of 32: Australia 22-0 (Wade 4, Warner 17) Warner flicks a shortish 
delivery from Anderson cleverly behind square for four. The next ball is 
fuller, seams back and cuts Warner in half. These are such difficult conditions 
for batting, especially in a reduced-overs game where you have less time to 
just hang in there.

8th over of 32: Australia 24-0 (Wade 5, Warner 18) A Halley's Comet moment. 
Jimmy Anderson has dropped a catch. Wade edged a drive at the new bowler Broad 
to the left of Anderson at slip, but he put down a sharp chance at shoulder 
height. "Old Trafford looks a picture," says Gary Naylor. "Unfortunately, a 
picture by Jackson Pollock."

9th over of 32: Australia 31-0 (Wade 7, Warner 23) Finn switches ends and is 
driven through the covers for four by Warner, who has done extremely well to 
score at almost a run a ball (23 from 25) in these conditions. Wade has been 
far less convincing at the other end – and he has just been dropped for the 
second time! He pushed at a good delivery from Finn that bounced more than he 
expected and went very low to the right of Tredwell at second slip. He was a 
little slow to get down and couldn't get his hands under the ball.

"Rob, how can you even ask! Test match, 50/50 or even T20, Rob Lewis in 
Istanbul and my good self on the steamy west coast of Turkey are with you 
forever. In contrast to my home city of Derby – 15 degrees and flooded – Rob 
and I are sipping our ice-cold beers on the balcony: it's a mere 36 degrees in 
Turkey today. But you won't print this, so you can wave goodbye to that box of 
Turkish delight I purchased for you today", writes the ever-perky Wayne Trotman 
in Izmir, who even writes the 'writes the ever-perky Wayne Trotman in Izmir' 
for me. Now that's the kind of reader I like.

10th over of 32: Australia 42-0 (Wade 8, Warner 32) Pick that out! Warner 
launches a length ball from Broad high over mid on for six. Warner looks in the 
mood tonight, and if he bats most of this innings Australia will have a very 
good score. Such statements of the offensively obvious are why they pay me the 
big bucks. Oh dear, Warner has been put down by Samit Patel, a dolly at third 
man. He got in the perfect position to take the ball after Warner slashed Broad 
up and over, but the ball went straight through his hands and into his chest. 
Whatever he achieves in international cricket, and he is extremely talented, 
Samit Patel will never be able to lose his Frank Spencer gene.

"I would not worry about heavy rain during the Olympics," says Ian Copestake, 
"as like many other parts of the capital the weather will be cordoned off."

WICKET! Australia 43-1 (Warner LBW b Tredwell 32) James Tredwell, playing his 
first game for England since the World Cup, strikes with his fourth ball. 
Warner simply missed a sweep at a very full delivery that turned and would have 
hit middle stump. He fancied the review but Wade rightly talked him out of it. 
That was pretty plumb, and it's an excellent wicket for England. Warner looked 
dangerous and made 32 from 32 balls.

11th over of 32: Australia 44-1 (Wade 9, Forrest 1) The new batsman Peter 
Forrest avoids consecutive golden ducks, and then avoids consecutive ducks with 
a single to leg off his second ball. "In reference to that Bangladesh v. 
Bangladesh A T20, you don't see an economy rate of 36.00 very often, do you?" 
says Lee Rodwell. "We've clearly answered that question of who has the best 
Second XI in international cricket."

12th over of 32: Australia 45-1 (Wade 9, Forrest 2) Forrest survives a huge 
LBW shout from Broad. It looked plumb, but when Aleem Dar shakes his head you 
know it's not out. Hotspot shows there was indeed an inside edge. If society 
could clone one human being in any field, surely it would have to be Aleem Dar? 
He is insanely good. Just one from Broad's over, and Wade has now crawled to 9 
from 36 balls. He has the capacity to make up for those lost balls later in his 
innings; he certainly needs to do so because if he gets out now it could be a 
match-losing innings.

13th over of 32: Australia 45-1 (Wade 9, Forrest 2) A maiden from Tredwell to 
Forrest. Australia are struggling here.

"Banter," is the email subject written by Phil Sawyer, who knows that string 
vests aren't the only way to get a gentleman OBOer's attention. "I've got a 
riff for you, Rob dearest. If this game goes past 9pm it'll clash with my 
weekly dose of Hells Kitchen USA. Yes, I know. I hate me too for watching it. 
But for some reason I find I get a guilty pleasure out of my fix of Gordon 
Ramsey swearing indiscriminately at fist pumping American wretches who are 
completely blind to their own inadequacies (or, indeed, those of Chef Ramsey, 
as they insist on calling him). What are your other twos of readers' guilty 
viewing pleasures? The kind of thing that, if you admitted to watching at a 
dinner party, you know you'd have to leave shortly afterwards, never be invited 
back, and have to find new friends afterwards." There are rumours that one OBO 
writer refuses to make plansbetween 9 and 10pm on a Monday night 
<http://www.tvwise.co.uk/2012/05/e4-sets-uk-premiere-date-for-revenge/>, but I 
have no comment to make on the subject.

14th over of 32: Australia 48-1 (Wade 11, Forrest 3) A leading edge from 
Forrest off Broad falls short of cover, and then he misses an attempted hook. 
Three from the over, and between them these two have made 14 from 52 balls.

WICKET! Australia 49-2 (Forrest run out 3) This might be a blessing in 
disguise for Australia. The hapless Peter Forrest, who came back for a second 
to long on, was beaten by a sharp throw from Patel and a superb piece of work 
from Tredwell, who took the ball in front of the stumps and swivelled smoothly 
to dislodge the bails a fraction before Forrest was home.

WICKET! Australia 49-3 (Wade st Kieswetter b Tredwell 12) Two wickets in three 
balls! James Tredwell is having a fairytale return to the England side. Wade 
charged down the track and was beaten by a ball that turned a long way past the 
edge, with Craig Kieswetter doing the necessary behind the stumps. Wade looks 
accusingly at the pitch, although I'm not sure why. He has gone for a miserable 
12 from 41 balls.

15th over of 32: Australia 52-3 (Clarke 1, Smith 2) Tredwell has figures of 
3-1-6-2, to go with the run out. He's a crecit to the bald community.

 "I have an answer to Phil Sawyer's query," says Ian Copestake, "but it 
involves the word "porn," so I'll leave it."

WICKET! Australia 55-4 (Clarke run out 1) This is turning into a farce. 
Michael Clarke plays tip-and-run into the off side, and he is well short when 
Eoin Morgan collects the ball on the run and detonates the stumps at the 
non-striker's end. Wonderful fielding, and Morgan wheels away with one hand in 
the air like Ian Rush in his bristling-couponed pomp. It won't show on 
Statsguru, but there are few better feelings for a fielder. Australia have lost 
four for 12 in five overs.

16th over of 32: Australia 56-4 (Smith 5, D Hussey 0) "As you watch more of 
the Twenty20 stuff than is probably good for you, are there ever instances when 
a struggling batter has removed himself to let the next one have a go," says 
Ian Copestake. "It came to mind as Forrest and thingy were struggling." None 
that I know of, although it may well have happened somewhere. Ordinarily they 
simply hit out or get out. And it'sThirtytwo32, Ian, not Twenty20.

17th over of 32: Australia 61-4 (Smith 8, D Hussey 2) Samit Patel comes into 
the attack and the new batsman Hussey gets a leading edge just wide of short 
extra cover. This pitch is certainly turning.

18th over of 32: Australia 71-4 (Smith 18, D Hussey 2) Steven Finn is back, 
presumably to harass Steven Smith. In fact Smith drives very pleasantly down 
the ground for four, the first boundary for eight overs. HE gets anoither off 
the last ball, tickling a short ball off the hip. A fine over from Australia, 
ten from it.

"Does Man v Food still count as a guilty pleasure following its appearance in 
The Guide, or is it now ironically hip?" says Tom Hopkins. "If it helps one way 
or the other, it comes with a special hand signal (no, not one of those ones)."

19th over of 32: Australia 77-4 (Smith 21, D Hussey 6) Smith and Hussey 
scamper six from Patel's over. They are both very quick between the wickets and 
have regrouped purposefully since that collapse.

"How's this for a predicament: flew from Kathmandu (my home for the past three 
years) today, heading optimistically for Colombo, my home to be," says Tony 
George, and you know where this story is going. "Owing to a total screw up on 
the visa front (by the organisation I shall be working for, rather than yours 
truly, for once) , I'm sat in Delhi airport, stuck in limbo Tom Hanks-stylee as 
they won't give me a boarding pass. I have, at least, convinced them I need 
access to their computer, which I am using to follow the OBO on the sly. 
Looking like I'll be sat here for another, ooooh, 20 hours though. Anyone had 
worse? I imagine something similar in the old Delhi airport would've been in a 
different class. And the only effing smoking room's closed for refurbishment." 
I'm sensing rancour.

WICKET! Australia 77-5 (Smith c Kieswetter b Bopara 21) A bonus wicket for 
Ravi Bopara with his first ball of the match. Smith, who had played well to 
reach 21 from 20 balls, got a thin edge down the leg side and Kieswetter took a 
smart low catch. Smith shakes his head in disgust as what Dame Fortune has just 
done on his bonfire.

20th over of 32: Australia 80-5 (D Hussey 6, Bailey 3) It's hard to know what 
a good score is in these conditions, but it's definitely not 79 for five.

21st over of 32: Australia 86-5 (D Hussey 9, Bailey 6) 
"Well, there was I, merrily trying to dig a tree stump out of my garden (don't 
ask) when the radio tells me that they're actually deigning to try and play 
cricket," says Alan Titchm  Amy Clements. "So I duly tune to TMS, to hear that 
the Aussies have apparently given up playing any cricket, and somewhat 
sarcastic commentary about how it helps to actually run between the wickets 
when at the crease... So, what's the verdict on this Aussie side? Have Clarke, 
Hussey et al just given up? Or are Englandreally that superior? (I don't 
actually think we are, though we undoubtedly have a cracking side.) Anyhoo, 
it's not looking like anything other than 4-0 to the Poms in the series at the 
moment, is it. Shame, I was rather hoping that we'd get a contest out of this 
one day series..."

Now now, remember John Buchanan saying that 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/wc2007/content/story/288260.html>. Australia must 
be better than we have seen in this series. It seems there has been a 
combination of factors: being caught cold during an off-season tour, not having 
Mike Hussey, the moving ball, and of course England playing some formidable 
cricket. It's also easy for an ODI series to get away from a team mentally if 
they go behind – especially if they are the touring side and start thinking of 
the children and the flight home. Look how often England have been panned 5-1 
or 6-1 in the last decade, including in Australia in 2010-11.

WICKET! Australia 86-6 (D Hussey c Kieswetter b Bopara 9) Ravi Bopara is going 
through Australia like a dose of salts. The world has mislaid its final marble. 
Hussey, trying to glide a widish delivery to third man, doesn't get enough on 
it and Kieswetter takes a simple catch. Bopara has figures of 1.1-0-3-2.

22nd over of 32: Australia 87-6 (Bailey 6, Pattinson 1) 
"Kieswetter's rather upped his game in the keeper stakes this series," says 
Phil Sawyer. "Is it possible that knowing he's not going to have to open the 
batting has relaxed him and left him more able to concentrate on his 
performance behind the stumps?" I suppose that's possible, yeah. He has always 
taken some brilliant catches, but in this series he hasn't had the accompanying 
howlers. Still, he is mainly in the team for his batting and he does have a lot 
to learn at No6. (That's not a criticism, it's a completely new role for him in 
the England team.)

REVIEW! Australia 89-6 (Pattinson not out 2) I know it's been a wet summer, 
but nobody expected Australia to be such a shower. It's almost too much to 
bear. England have been all over them from the moment Eoin Morgan got going in 
the first ODI. Is this another wicket? Pattinson pushed defensively at a 
straight delivery from Tredwell, bat hidden behind the pad. Ian Gould said not 
out but England chose to review the decision. It was bouncing over the stumps, 
so that's an excellent piece of umpiring.

23rd over of 32: Australia 89-6 (Bailey 7, Pattinson 2) That was the last ball 
of the over. Tredwell's figures are 4-1-8-2.

24th over of 32: Australia 90-6 (Bailey 8, Pattinson 2) Pattinson snicks a low 
full toss from Bopara on the bounce to Kieswetter, and is beaten outside off 
later in the over. Try explaining that sentence to somebody who doesn't like 
cricket.

"Australia will be fine," says Ian Copestake. "They are just going through a 
transitional decade." We'll regret such gloating one of these centuries  days, 
quite possibly next summer.

25th over of 32: Australia 93-6 (Bailey 10, Pattinson 3) Bailey shovels 
Tredwell over his shoulder for a single, despite Kieswetter anticipating the 
shot and attempting to catch it. Pattinson survives a huge LBW shout later in 
the over. England have used their review, although it doesn't matter as it 
pitched just outside leg before turning a mile to hit Pattinson on the pad.

"I honestly worry for the character of the nation's young cricket fans," says 
Peter Harmer. "They'll be starting to think this is how cricket works. I'm sure 
my early years of cricket-induced fear were character building. I didn't 
realise 'England middle order' could be said without being followed by 'batting 
collapse' until I was 15 and that set me up perfectly for the rest of life's 
disappointment." It's so true. The 46 all out is fractionally above puberty, 
being dumped for the first time and discovering Hold On by Wilson Phillips on 
the list of formative experiences.

26th over of 32: Australia 96-6 (Bailey 12, Pattinson 4) Three singles from 
Bopara's over. England are rattling through the overs.

27th over of 32: Australia 99-6 (Bailey 14, Pattinson 5) And now just three 
singles from Tredwell's over. "Hey, man, like someone who resents all of George 
Lucas' work post-1984, I was there at the beginning and I will throw at least 
as much doo at the Aussies as I had to sift through in my sensitive years," 
says Ian Copestake, who has a lot of doo still to throw.

28th over of 32: Australia 104-6 (Bailey 17, Pattinson 7) Stuart Broad 
replaces Ravi Bopara, who has daft figures of 4-0-8-2 in the match and 
19-0-57-4 in the series. Five from the over; Australia are dealing purely in 
singles at the moment.

"Bonsoir Robert," says Michael Plevin. "I've just discovered that my local 
English pub in Grenoble (called Shakesbeer. Get it?) is showing the cricket. 
They even serve a reasonable pint of Youngs. I'm here with a mélange of 
European scientists. They seem more confused than interested and can't 
understand my smug grin. I guess they didn't suffer the same way we did in the 
1990s."

29th over of 32: Australia 113-6 (Bailey 25, Pattinson 8) Bailey gives 
Tredwell's first ball the charge and strong-arms it impressively over long on 
for six. Tredwell's comeback is impressive, however, with only three singles 
from the last five balls of the over. And his comeback to international cricket 
has been extremely impressive. He ends with figures of 7-1-23-2, to go with 
that neat run-out of Forrest.

WICKET! Australia 120-7 (Pattinson c Kieswetter b Finn 13) Pattinson 
bottom-edges a slower ball from Finn through to Kieswetter, who takes an 
excellent catch diving forward. There was a long delay while the decision went 
upstairs – and there was a bit of confusion as the replays s suggested the 
third umpire might have been checking whether there was an edge. Except he's 
not allowed to do that because England have already used their review. The Sky 
chaps don't seem to think there's any controversy, however, and that the third 
umpire was only checking whether the ball carried. It did.

30th over of 32: Australia 120-7 (Bailey 27, McKay 0) That was the last ball 
of the over.

31st over of 32: Australia 133-7 (Bailey 36, McKay 4) The penultimate over of 
the innings, bowled by Broad, costs 13. Bailey flicks consecutive deliveries 
past short fine leg for four and then McKay edges through the vacant cordon for 
another boundary.

32 overs: Australia 145-7 (Bailey 46, McKay 5) Australia take 12 from the last 
over, bowled by Anderson. Baileyjust gets outside the line of an inswinging 
yorker, thus surviving a big LBW shout – and that's an important reprieve 
because he launches Anderson for a mighty six over long on and then clouts 
another boundary back over the bowler's head. Bailey played a very good 
innings, 46 not out from 41 balls, and England need146 to win. It's pretty much 
a Twenty20 target with an extra 12 overs to bat, so you would expect them to 
clinch a 4-0 victory, even though batting conditions aren't the easiest. See 
you in 10 minutes.

INNINGS BREAK

WICKET! England 5-1 (Bell c b McKay 4) Australia get the early wicket they 
need. Ian Bell clips Clint McKay straight to midwicket, where George Bailey 
takes a routine catch. That's a soft dismissal, and Bell's first failure in his 
new role as opener.

1st over: England 5-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 1, Trott 0) In other 
news, I've just accidentally fingered an utterly rancid grape in my punnet, and 
my fingers now smell of vinegar. Urgh.

2nd over: England 7-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 2, Trott 0) The ball is 
still moving around, and this could be a much tighter chase than some of us 
envisaged. Cook leaves an inswinger from Hilfenhaus that doesn't miss off stump 
by much; then he digs out an excellent yorker.

"Hold On by Wilson Phillips? Ooh, good call, Rob," says Phil Sawyer, who 
almost certainly has a different song in mind. "A couple of years ago I finally 
pursuaded my father to let me have his collection of old soul and R&B 45s as my 
rather premature inheritance. I'm sure he thought I'd immediately be hawking 
them on Ebay. Little did he suspect I'd spend my evenings keening over them, 
Gollum style. I think I might even occasionally mutter 'my precious' when I 
hold in my handsthis gem from Sugar Pie Desanto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_bIjXU2hw0>."

3rd over: England 13-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 8, Trott 0) Cook gets 
the first boundary, flashing a wider delivery from McKay through the covers. 
"When the conversation turns to the Higgs Boson it will be the turn of Michael 
Plevin's new drinking buddies to wear the smug grins and shake their heads at 
his being more confused than interested," says Marie Meyer.

4th over: England 19-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 8, Trott 6) A lovely 
stroke from Trott off Hilfenhaus is half stopped by Warner a backward point, a 
brilliant effort that saves two runs, but he flicks the next ball off the thigh 
to get his first boundary.

REVIEW! England 19-1 (Cook not out 8) Cook is given out caught behind by Aleem 
Dar but I think the noise was bat on pad. Cook certainly thought so – he 
reviewed the decision straight away, and he was right to do so. The noise was 
indeed bat on pad and there was no edge, so Cook survives. Aleem Dar has made 
his first mistake since 2006.

5th over: England 20-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 9, Trott 6) "Ah. 
Ahem," says Phil Sawyer. "Yes, I was thinking of a different song entirely.Hold 
On by Sam and Dave <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fN4DHY_9gOs>, in fact."

RAIN STOPS PLAY. 5.4 overs: England 24-1 (target: 146 from 32 overs; Cook 13, 
Trott 6) James Pattinson replaces Ben Hilfenhaus and is cut fiercely for four 
by Cook. The rain has started falling, so we might not be on for long. In fact 
that's it for now. The crowd are booing but the umpires don't really have any 
option.

8.39pm We need to have 20 overs in the England innings for the match to be 
completed. I don't know what the cut-off point for a restart is, however. It 
doesn't look great. What an ill-smelling wet dog of a summer.

8.45pm Ah, it looks a bit better now. Most of the covers have come off. The 
players need to be back on the field by 9.17pm, so we should be okay. England 
will have a revised target.

8.49pm The players are coming back out. England's revised target is 138 from 
29 overs.

6th over: England 25-1 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 14, Trott 6) James 
Pattinson bowls the last two balls of his first over, with Cook pushing a 
single to leg.

7th over: England 26-1 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 15, Trott 6) 
Hilfenhaus replaces McKay and bowls a good over at a cost of just one. This is 
going to be a very late finish, near 11pm potentially. There goes another wild 
night of abandon.

8th over: England 31-1 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 16, Trott 10) Trott 
cuts Pattinson classily for four, a much needed boundary for England. The 
target is now 107 from 21 overs.

9th over: England 33-1 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 17, Trott 10) Cook and 
Trott are happy to play the long game, even in a 29-over chase, although Trott 
does slam Hilfenhaus a fraction short of mid on.

"Where's Peter Siddle these days?" says Harry Tuttle. "I'm hoping late night 
talk radio." They're just talking about him on Sky. He's Australia's attack 
leader in the Test side, a completely different bowler since the former bowling 
coach Craig McDermott introduced him to the joys of a full length.

WICKET! England 34-2 (Trott b Clarke 10) Michael Clarke has brought himself on 
to bowl. We should see a few overs of spin in this innings from Clarke, Doherty 
and maybe Smith, as the ball turned for Tredwell and Patel. And it has 
certainly turned there! Trott, trying to sweep, missed a ball that ragged 
sharply andjust clipped the off bail. That's a fantastic delivery.

10th over: England 35-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 18, Bopara 1) A fine 
start from Clarke. One over, two runs and one wicket.

11th over: England 43-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 22, Bopara 5) 
Left-arm spin from both ends, with Xavier Doherty replacing Ben Hilfenhaus 
(4-0-11-0). Cook and Bopara work him for eight low-risk runs, including a 
clever tickle off the pad for three by Cook.

12th over: England 45-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 23, Bopara 6) Another 
excellent over from Clarke goes for just two singles. He might well bowl his 
six overs straight through here.

13th over: England 48-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 24, Bopara 8) The 
Essex boys aren't risking any big shots at this stage, with the required rate 
still below a run a ball. Three more singles from Doherty's over. England need 
90 from 96 balls.

"It's a bit strange when you think about but Australia's best spinner since SK 
Warne is Michael Clarke," says Gary Naylor. "Nathan Lyon looks a prospect 
though." Clarke has been so impressive on this tour, especially as captain. 
He's a captain who never lets the game take a nap, which is extremely rare.

14th over: England 58-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 27, Bopara 15) The 
weather looks fine now so I'm sure we'll get a result in this match. Cook back 
cuts Clarke nicely for three and then Bopara, dancing back in his crease, 
flashes him majestically through extra cover for four. Ten from the over.

15th over: England 62-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 29, Bopara 17) Nudge, 
scamper. Repeat four times. "Right, I admit to being baffled by the D/L method, 
but accept whatever I'm told about what the target is," writes Shaun Pollock . 
"But what I'm not capable of right now (it's just too late / I'm a bit crap / I 
missed that class at school / the cat sat on the calculator / I can't be arsed 
and there's a friendly OBO writer to do these things for us) is working out 
what our run rate needs to be at the moment. So, Smyth, what do we need?" Oh, 
you mean if it starts raining now? Aleem Dar knows. England must be ahead of 
D/L at the moment. But I don't think it's going to come into play. If it does 
you'll hear it here 12th.

16th over: England 64-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 30, Bopara 18) 
Australia need a wicket and Bopara is playing the spinners beautifully, so 
Michael Clarke replaces Michael Clarke with James Pattinson. Just two from the 
over.

17th over: England 73-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 32, Bopara 25) Bopara 
laps Doherty neatly round the corner and hares back for two, and a high-class 
cover drive for four from the same batsman makes it nine from the over. England 
need 65 from 72 balls.

18th over: England 80-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 39, Bopara 25) Cook 
smashes a pull for four of Pattinson. Seven from the over; England are going 
really well at the moment and are strong favourites. The weather seems to be 
closing in again, although we only need to have two more overs for there to be 
a result.

"Speaking of Clarke's captaincy skills, who was the last great Aussie 
captain?" says Sean Clayton. "I'd have to go for Tubby Taylor. Ponting was too 
reactive (and too easily wound up) while Steve Waugh had such a good team 
around him that he wasn't tested as a captain that often." Waugh was the 
perfect captain for that group of players; I don't know if it's fair to judge 
him on what he didn't do because he tailored his approach to that team. And few 
captains have led by example better than Ponting. But, yes, Taylor was the last 
classical, imaginative captain before Clarke, definitely, and quite possibly 
the last great one. He was asensational captain.

19th over: England 86-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 44, Bopara 26) Cook 
touches the new bowler McKay off the hip for four to bring up a fine fifty 
partnership and prompt a less than fine blast of Chelsea Dagger the Fratellis 
over the tannoy. He survives a muted shout for LBW later in the over. It was 
missing off.

20th over: England 89-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 46, Bopara 27) Steve 
Smith comes into the attack, another gamble from the ever adventurous Michael 
Clarke. Cook fails to punish a full toss and there are just three from the 
over. Even if the apocalypse arrives now, we will have a result. England are 
currently ahead of Duckworth/Lewis.

21st over: England 92-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 46, Bopara 30) Cook 
misses a big flash at McKay, whose fifty over costs just three. England need 46 
from 48 balls.

22nd over: England 98-2 (target: 138 from 29 overs; Cook 50, Bopara 32) Cook 
works Smith round the corner to reach another excellent half-century, this one 
from 68 balls. Six from the over. England need 40 from 42 balls.

23rd over: England 104-2 (need 34 from 36 balls; Cook 51, Bopara 36) Bopara 
clunks the new bowler Pattinson over mid on for a couple to bring up the 
hundred, and then scampers back for two more to deep cover. Six from the over.

24th over: England 114-2 (need 24 from 30 balls; Cook 56, Bopara 41) Steve 
Smith is replaced by Xavier Doherty, and Bopara sweeps him expertly for four. 
He has played the slow bowlers so well in this innings. Cook then lifts one a 
fraction short of Pattinson, running round from deep mid on. Ten from the over.

25th over: England 123-2 (need 15 from 24 balls; Cook 56, Bopara 50) Bopara 
clouts a short ball from Pattinson thrillingly to cow corner for a one-bounce 
four. The next ball is full, in the slot and blitzed through extra cover for 
four more. A neat glide to third man brings him to a majestic 50 from only 51 
balls. He has never played better for England, and he will surely bat No6 in 
the Test series against South Africa.

WICKET! England 126-3 (Cook c Clarke b Hilfenhaus 58) Cook falls, edging an 
attempted cut to Clarke at slip. That was a smart catch from Clarke. England 
need 12 from 19 balls.

26th over: England 130-3 (need 8 from 18 balls; Bopara 51, Morgan 4) Morgan 
waves his first ball imperiously for four. The way he is batting right now, he 
has the world's address.

"Australia have never lost an ODI series 4-0 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?class=2;filter=advanced;orderby=lost;team=2;template=results;tournament_type=2;type=team;view=series>
," says Olly Winkles. What is this feeling? Is it me feeling sorry for 
Australia? Surely not?"

27th over: England 137-3 (need 1 from 12 balls; Bopara 52, Morgan 8) The 
impressive McKay postpones the inevitable, with Bopara surviving an LBW appeal 
after originally being given not out.

ENGLAND WIN BY SEVEN WICKETS WITH 11 BALLS TO SPARE That's it! England have 
beaten Australia 4-0 for the first time in any form of the game. Amazing stuff. 
I would sit and bathe in such a wonderful victory but I have to do a 
train-dash. Thanks for your emails; night.
 