
So unappetising do they look that the uninitiated often mistake them for dried 
out dog's mess. But in France and Italy, truffles change hands for thousands of 
pounds a kilo – and they are growing, in abundance, in Britain. An unnamed 
Wiltshire farmer has told Country Life magazine he is harvesting up to 100kg 
(220lb) a year from a four-hectare (10-acre) site on his land, selling the 
black fungi to restaurants for up to £150 a kilo.

According to Dorset-based Truffle UK <http://www.truffle-uk.co.uk/>, which 
imports continental truffles and also cultivates them here, the fungi tend to 
grow best in south-facing beech, oak, birch and hazel woods, on chalk or 
limestone. Particularly favourable sites in Britain, the company says, include 
the Chilterns and North and South Downs, as well as Hampshire, Wiltshire and 
westwards into Dorset, and the area between Hull and Lincoln.

But you could find truffles almost anywhere: the two varieties native to 
Britain, the apple-sized summer truffle ortuber aestivum and the 
stronger-tasting Burgundy truffle ortuber uncinatum, found from October to 
December, have been recorded by theBritish Mycological Society 
<http://www.britmycolsoc.org.uk/> from Brixham in the south to as far north as 
Darlington. Both are black, roundish in shape, and covered in polyagonal warts. 
Inside, the summer truffle's flesh, brown with white veins, tastes and smells 
mild; the winter truffle's flesh is marbled grey/black and smells very strong.

Britain's once-thriving truffle industry largely collapsed over the past 150 
years or so as modern farming methods took their toll on the hedgerows and 
woodland where the warty delicacy thrives. Nor have the fungi traditionally 
been a prized ingredient in British cuisine (in France, the great 18th-century 
food writer Brillat-Savarin long ago anointed them "the diamond of the 
kitchen").

That, sadly, explains why neither of the subtler-tasting English truffle 
varieties is currently fetching the kind of prices paid for the black Perigord 
truffle, ortuber melanosporum, which regularly changes hands on French farmers' 
markets for as much as €1,000 (around £800) a kilo, and up to €4,000 at retail. 
And not even the Perigord comes close to matching the astronomical sums forked 
out for the legendary Alba madonna, ortuber magnatum. Twice in the past five 
years, specimens of this legendary Italian white truffle have changed hands for 
$100,000 (around £62,000) a pound.

But truffles are steadily gaining in popularity this side of the Channel. The 
good news is, the more subtle, delicately flavouredaestivum and uncinatum are 
much easier to find than their continental cousins, which tend to grow several 
centimetres deeper to be closer to water. In France and Italy you typically 
need a pig, or at least a specially trained labrador. Here, a dog will 
certainly help sniff out truffles lying just beneath the ground. But in our 
damper climes – which means especially this year – the fungi often break 
through the surface.

Just make sure you don't mistake them for dog's doos.
 