
As usual England won. They secured their fourth victory against Australia, a 
Duckworth/Lewis affair, thanks to an accomplished alliance of Essex men, 
Alastair Cook, one-day captain extraordinaire, and Ravi Bopara. Their polished, 
impeccably paced 92-run partnership was sufficient to shepherd England towards 
a target reduced by inevitable Mancunian rain.

Thus Australia were defeated 4-0 in the series and it is hard to argue against 
the proposition that it would have been 5-0 but for the abandonment at 
Edgbaston. Had they won there, England would now be the No1 one-day 
international side in the rankings.

It was hard to imagine what Cyril Washbrook would have made of it all. The new 
lights were on; the square has been turned around; giant red hospitality boxes 
have appeared beyond the boundary, and we could just about see the peg where 
Washbrook once hung his blazer.

The old pavilion is now half-demolished — though it will be rebuilt in time — 
and the walls of the old changing rooms are currently visible. Out on the 
hallowed turf the players undertook what began life as a 32 over game in their 
fluorescent gear; the umpires wore pink anoraks. Actually it is not so 
difficult to guess what Washbrook would have thought of this night-time 
spectacular played out on a building site.

But on Tuesday night for 15,000 hardy Lancastrians there was relief that there 
was some cricket. It did not start until 5.30pm; the temperature just crept 
into double figures and there were always flecks of rain in the air. But that 
is as good as it gets in the summer of 2012.

Cook won the toss and chose to field. Tim Bresnan was omitted and James 
Tredwell took his place. This seemed like an admission that England were not 
treating this match as if it were a life and death struggle; that they wished 
to reward Tredwell for trekking around various continents as an uncomplaining 
understudy.

This analysis was soon proven to be rubbish. Tredwell, the unassuming 
off-spinner from Kent, dismantled the Australian upper-order, taking two quick 
wickets and nonchalantly completing a run-out as if he was playing in a benefit 
match at Tunbridge Wells. Moreover he was as mean as Derek Underwood.

It was something of a mystery that Tredwell was bowling at the Australian 
openers when he began his spell. Jimmy Anderson and Steven Finn beat the bat 
repeatedly in their opening spells but somehow David Warner and Matthew Wade 
survived. They were aided by three dropped catches, the one area of English 
mediocrity in this series.

Anderson at first slip put down a hard one, Tredwell at second slip a very 
hard one and Samit Patel at third man a very straightforward one. It may not 
have amused Patel that he committed his gaffe in front of a Specsavers 
advertising hoarding, but this cheered everyone else up.

Somehow Australia had managed to reach 43 without loss when Tredwell made his 
first intervention in his first over.

Warner swept and missed and Umpire Gould raised his finger.

Then Tredwell casually gathered the ball in his right hand in front of the 
stumps and whipped off the bails; Peter Forrest, who has had a chastening 
expedition to England, was out by six inches.

Better was to follow. Tredwell soon defeated Warner, who advanced down the 
pitch, then swung and missed as the ball turned past his outside edge. Craig 
Kieswetter had time to examine the skies to check whether any more rain was 
imminent before removing the bails.

Australia struggled to recover from these setbacks. Michael Clarke was run out 
by a direct hit from Eoin Morgan at cover and it was left to George Bailey to 
strike a few blows at the end of a limp innings.

England soon lost Ian Bell, clipping the ball into the hands of square leg, 
and then Jonathan Trott, who missed a sweep. But Cook and Bopara paced the 
chase with the confidence of men accustomed to winning.
 