
No Shane Warne, no Glenn McGrath and quite possibly no Jason Gillespie either. 
It is all enough to give Steve Waugh another migraine.

Should it be deemed wise to rest Gillespie's troublesome ankle for the fifth 
Test, starting tomorrow but with the World Cup imminent, Australia's captain 
would be deprived of a trio who have taken 1,057 Test wickets. The likely 
replacements - Andy Bichel, Stuart MacGill and Brad Williams - have only 115 
between them.

That is a scenario about which England can only have dreamed. The Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> series is long since dead but there 
is the embarrassment of a whitewash to avoid - a result craved by Waugh in what 
may well be his last series.

If it is those wonderful Australian bowlers who really do make the big 
difference, tomorrow is the time to prove it. Since the first Test of the 
1992-93 series against West Indies 119 matches ago, no Australia side has gone 
into a game without Warne or McGrath, never mind Gillespie.

England have their problems, too, brought about by the side injury picked up 
by Craig White, who has enjoyed a profitable series with bat and ball. Without 
Andy Flintoff there is no adequate alternative and as a result England, it 
seems, will be forced go through their perennial process of trying to fit a 
quart into a pint pot.

At the SCG in the past two seasons Australia have played two front-line 
spinners in Tests - Warne and MacGill against South Africa last year, MacGill 
and Colin Miller against West Indies in 2001 - and they have taken 27 of 40 
wickets to fall.

Even if England had two spinners of Test calibre - and with Ashley Giles 
injured and Richard Dawson out of his depth, one would be a luxury - it would 
be hard to fit both into a side who require a third seamer to replace White 
while also maintaining the integrity of their batting line-up.

The return of Alec Stewart, recovered from a hand injury, in place of James 
Foster may go some way to offsetting the problem even though it would a little 
harsh on the understudy. Apart from keeping his mouth inappropriately shut on 
the last morning, Foster had a good game with the gloves even if he was found 
out a little with the bat.

Stewart could come in at No6, behind five specialist batsman, and with Robert 
Key and John Crawley both acquitting themselves well at the MCG, Mark Butcher 
may be forced to step down. His last 14 Test innings have brought him just 372 
runs at 26.57, which is unacceptable.

Into White's place at No7 may step Somerset's Ian Blackwell, an all-rounder 
who is regarded as a one-day specialist. His robust left-handed batting might 
prove a useful counter to MacGill's prolific leg-break while his gentle 
left-arm spin, more than handy with well-set fields, would offer the 
counterpoint to Dawson.

The seam attack may be completed with the reintroduction of Alex Tudor, who 
played in Sydney four years ago and has recovered from the blow to his left eye 
inflicted by Brett Lee in the third Test. The alternative, Matthew Hoggard, has 
scarcely done enough to replace the confidence sapped from him by Matthew 
Hayden and Ricky Ponting in the first two Tests.

Steve Harmison and Andy Caddick, meanwhile, will be instructed to produce the 
same spark that they found at the MCG on Monday but, if at all possible, in the 
first innings.

Caddick, like a number of others in this Test, may find that this is his last 
chance to stay in the reckoning for next summer, when the rebuilding must 
begin. Harmison, James Anderson, Simon Jones and Martin Saggers are all waiting 
in the wings. Stewart, moreover, will in all probability be playing the 126th 
and final Test of a career that began with a win in Jamaica 13 years ago and 
which has brought him much honour since.

Then there is Waugh, whose future has dominated the sports pages here like no 
other topic. It is the nature of the man to want to go on his terms, and he has 
even expressed hopes of touring India in 18 months' time. But his brief innings 
on Monday, in contrast to the incendiary effort in the first innings, was 
watched almost in embarrassment as he hopped and jerked around like a 
marionette. Someone was telling him something and the hope is he was listening.

There is still time for great deeds, however. His 156th cap equals Allan 
Border's world record; 69 runs would give him 10,000 in Tests; an unbeaten 119 
would give him 29 Test centuries - the same as Bradman - and return his average 
to 50, a figure maintained if he scores 169 for once out and 219 twice 
dismissed. Odds, anyone, that he achieves the lot?

 England (possible): MP Vaughan, ME Trescothick, RWT Key, N Hussain*, JP 
Crawley, AJ Stewart (wkt), ID Blackwell, AJ Tudor, RKJ Dawson, AR Caddick, SJ 
Harmison.

 Australia (from): SR Waugh*, JL Langer, ML Hayden, RT Ponting, DR Martyn, ML 
Love, AC Gilchrist (wkt), SCG MacGill, JN Gillespie, AJ Bichel, B Lee, BA 
Williams, GB Hogg.

 TV: live on Sky Sports 2, midnight

 