
For Englishmen in Chittagong it seems a long time since the players scurried 
off the field rapidly – though not quite as promptly as they would have liked – 
on Saturday night in the match against New Zealand. Now England face a critical 
fixture against a side who have beaten them in their past three ICC tournament 
fixtures, Sri Lanka, the most impressive team in this group.

It is a huge challenge for Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> and Stuart Broad and their 
young side. As Ravi Bopara, an unlikely veteran in this company, observed "It 
is a must-win game for us", before adding predictably – since he has seldom 
given the impression that he is heavy on attention to detail – "I don't think 
we know the mathematical side of it. We have to win."

In fact it is possible for England to proceed in this tournament if they lose, 
but it is unlikely. "Winning against Sri Lanka would be a big thing for us, a 
big confidence boost," said Bopara. Of that there is no doubt. England are the 
underdogs again.

England and Sri Lanka have the ill-fated second slot, when it has so far gone 
pear-shaped. On Saturday there was the match-spoiling storm; on Monday the 
power-cuts to the lights and the Dutch batting (plus a later thunderstorm, 
which would have affected a "normal" game).

So we do not quite know what the conditions will be like around 10.30pm, when 
the match should be nearing its conclusion. We expect heavy dew. "We're bowling 
with wet balls, catching wet balls, batting with wet balls," Bopara assured us. 
Whoever wins the toss will bowl first, just as the captains in the early game 
here should probably bat first, though Brendon McCullum took the alternative 
route against South Africa on Monday.

England appear genuinely sanguine about the dew, perhaps because Sri Lanka 
rely more on their spinners – Ajantha Mendis and Sachitra Senanayake – than 
they do. However the Sri Lankans have coped with this impediment many times 
before.

The expectation is that both sides will retain their previous XIs. The fact 
that poor Ian Bell has been laid low with a stomach complaint does not seem 
very relevant – except that one of England's crucial, senior batsmen in the 
other formats is hardly likely to start the summer with a spring in his step 
given his futile travels of the last month.

Giles looks sanguine enough, too, given that there is that interview in the 
offing followed by the appointment of a permanent coach at the end of April. 
The players here are always keen to stress how much they are enjoying working 
with him but Giles has the hindrance of being associated with the old regime 
that failed so starkly in Australia. In such circumstances being the deputy can 
be most unhelpful.

Theoretically the outcome of three T20 matches should not have much influence 
on Giles' future. In practice, absurd though it may seem, if England win all 
three Giles will certainly be appointed. Lose all three, which would include 
defeat to the Netherlands, and he might be struggling.

As things stand he is the likeliest man to get the job and this should not 
alarm anyone. Giles has some experience now; he has enjoyed some success with 
Warwickshire; he is a very decent man, but he is not a magician. In some ways 
his task would be so much simpler if he were the undisputed man in charge 
rather than the caretaker or the No2.

Moreover, it is easy to overestimate the impact that a cricket coach – as 
opposed to a football manager – can have. In the simplest terms there are three 
categories of cricket coach. There are a handful who can manifestly enhance a 
team for a while. These include Duncan Fletcher, Andy Flower, Darren Lehmann – 
a recent climber – and at county level it is hard to argue withPeter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores> and, after his brief spells at 
Kent and Warwickshire, John Inverarity.

Then there are those who are clearly competent, being both well-organised and 
conscientious. Give them good players and there will be good results. They 
ensure that their players perform close to their potential. In short they don't 
muck things up. Finally there are those coaches who do manage to make things 
worse. They don't last very long.

Currently Giles sits somewhere near the top of the second category – with 
power to add. Indeed if Stuart Broad were to raise the trophy into the Dhaka 
skies on 6 April he may well have squeezed into that first category. But there 
are some very substantial obstacles ahead, beginning with the Sri Lankans on 
Thursday.
 