
Unlike the previous four Tests of this Ashes series there was much about the 
opening day of this final match that reminded me of fair dinkum Test cricket.

To begin, the captain who won the toss elected to bat, without hesitation or 
reservation. None of that spin doctoring about using the early moisture for 
your experienced seam bowlers, who then serve up bowls of unadulterated tripe. 
The pitch was hard, dry, brown and even, which gave Nasser Hussain little 
option.

The ground and surrounds deserved a proper game. The SCG is a cricket ground 
rather than a sports stadium and the people of New South Wales and abroad were 
in holiday mode and filled the house to see England, strangely, give a spirited 
account of themselves.

Early wickets fell through excellent bowling and superb catching rather than 
ill-disciplined or timid batting and a recovery was staged by the bulldog 
skipper and a man fighting for his cricket future.

Australia fired on all cylinders for a while, then sputtered and coughed 
thanks to poor catching and weary bones. But they never made the task easy for 
England, who soldiered on at a trot rather than a gallop.

Jason Gillespie looked stiff and sore, as if he had just finished three days 
in the field and was operating on the reserve fuel tank. Even so his 21 overs 
were all quality. The honest toiler Andy Bichel huffed and puffed without 
blowing many houses down while MacGill's 31-over stint must nearly be a record 
for a leg-spinner on the first day of a Test match anywhere.

England's middle order has had a habit recently - certainly since early 
November - of falling in a heap. Yesterday they did no such thing. Hussain and 
Mark Butcher added 164 after Marcus Trescothick and Michael Vaughan, the two 
batsmen most expected to thrive, fell early and cheaply.

Perhaps their resurgence of self-belief came from the promising denouement to 
the Melbourne Test. Ninety-five minutes of competitive fervour may have 
re-ignited a spark of confidence, or was it that the flat, moisture-free 
surface could give the batsmen an advantage that outweighed the skill of the 
bowlers?

More likely it was the fact that Australia's two finest bowlers of this era 
were missing from the starting XI for the first time since 1992-3. It is hard 
to believe that it has been a decade since an Australian team had not contained 
one or other of Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath. McGrath's unerring darts and 
Warne's flight, turn and consistency have been integral parts of the successes 
enjoyed by the teams of Allan Border, Mark Taylor and Steve Waugh.

The winning percentage under Waugh has been phenomenal. The key ingredients in 
the stream of wins have been fast scoring and highly penetrative bowling. 
McGrath and Warne have more than 900 wickets between them, their replacements 
for this game, MacGill and Bichel, have 110.

Undoubtedly the England team meeting prior to this match centred around 
Australia having a much weakened attack. Warne's hypnotic hold goes back to Old 
Trafford 1993; McGrath's water torture dates from the following series. They 
have had their hands around English throats for a long time and their influence 
is not easily broken.

Hussain and Butcher did not look totally free of the McWarne hoodoo because 
the substitutes were not donkeys, but nor were they thoroughbreds. This does 
not deride MacGill and Bichel, who have made solid contributions to their 
teams, but it puts into perspective the loss of legends. The relief is not just 
physical but hugely psychological.

England without Ian Botham were a much poorer team not simply because Beefy 
would supply runs and wickets but because the opposition felt a wave of freedom 
to express themselves in his absence.

Yesterday England could not attain the run rate of around four an over that 
Australia so often aim for, which would turn 264 for five into 320 or more. But 
it was another step on the journey to equality that began in the last session 
at the MCG.

The second day looked like being critical to England's chances of saving and 
then winning this game. If MacGill and Bichel were allowed easy wickets, then a 
new age of suppression could take hold.

On the other hand, if Alec Stewart and John Crawley could dig in and head 
towards 450 while making the understudies feel inadequate, then England would 
have a chance of avoiding the whitewash and packing their partially repaired 
confidence in the suitcase for the journey home.
 