
Another day, another gold for Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> and Jodie Stimpson – but 
this time it was the relay triathlon and four of England’s troupe were centre 
stage on the podium at Strathclyde Country Park. Jonny Brownlee and Vicky 
Holland were the others to be crowned Commonwealth champions after a resounding 
victory in a race that had everything from bravura to belly flops.

The Brownlee brothers, Stimpson and Holland had competed in the individual 
disciplines here only on Thursday but – like the rest of the field – one day of 
rest had to suffice before a second afternoon of endurance that made for 
captivating viewing.

In the end England’s contingent emerged as comfortable winners in a shortened 
version of the full triathlon. In a repeat of the scenes earlier in the week it 
was Alistair Brownlee who strolled down the home stretch draped in two crosses 
of St George, high-fiving spectators and crossing the line 49 seconds ahead of 
South Africa’s Richard Murray to secure a memorable gold, taking the spoils in 
the first relay triathlon at a major championship.

This time, though, Brownlee left the flag of Yorkshire with the waiting crowd 
before crossing the line. This victory was not his alone but one also with 
roots in Gloucester and the Black Country, won in a cumulative time of 1hr 
13min 24sec as all four athletes completed a 250m swim, 6km cycle and 1.6km run.

“It feels a bit strange to win a gold medal finally but it’s nice,” said Jonny 
Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee>, so often used to 
following his older brother through the finishing stretch. “I want to win but I 
normally get beaten by Alistair, so to get a gold medal is pretty special.”

Alistair said: “It’s very different for us doing something as a team. Although 
we race together all the time, to be able to share an achievement is really 
good. We’ve raced so many relays together over the years and we really enjoy 
doing it. It’s fantastic to be able to do it on a major scale like we did 
today.”

Stimpson and Holland won gold and bronze respectively in the individual event 
on Thursday and both produced impressive performances. Holland started 
England’s effort and Stimpson took the third leg, as all the athletes cheered 
on their team-mates after negotiating the shortened course themselves. “Myself 
and Vicky are on cloud nine – we are riding high,” Stimpson said. “It’s so 
exciting; it’s not only exciting for the spectators, it’s brilliant to be a 
part of. It’s definitely full on; but it shows weaknesses. You have to be 
strong and you can’t have a weak link in the team.”

Holland said: “You know you’ve got the best two guys in the world on your team 
and that’s a great place to be in. But equally it adds to a little bit of the 
pressure because you don’t want to mess up.”

This was the inaugural triathlon relay at a major championship and one that 
was watched by hordes of spectators on the banks of the loch. Australia were 
edged out of silver by South Africa, finishing three seconds behind their 
southern-hemisphere adversaries, but there was only jubilation for all the 
teams that achieved a podium finish.

New Zealand were brief leaders and, although Jonny Brownlee struggled in the 
transition zone after earning a significant gap on the bike, he had soon 
regained his place at the front of the pack. Stimpson extended England’s lead 
with a dominant display of running and Alistair Brownlee could afford to ease 
up towards the end with victory assured.

“We’d love to see this in the Olympics,” said Alistair, who unsuccessfully 
campaigned with his brother to get the relay event into the 2016 Games. “I 
think it’s a fantastic Olympic event. The inclusion of men and women racing 
together, there’s the team element, the tactical element – it’s short, fast and 
good to watch.”

Entertainment was certainly not in short supply as athletes tapped each other 
in before darting along an extended runway to dive into the water. Some efforts 
were more refined than others, with the adrenaline rush of starting the race 
too much for certain competitors.

Some dives were more suitable to a municipal pool than a Commonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games> but the crowd were the 
beneficiaries. Every running leap was met with an expectant cheer, and the odd 
guffaw, with Mauritius the worst culprits in the belly-flop stakes.

Jonny Brownlee said: “Everyone always gets that wrong. I raced the Youth 
Olympics in Sydney in 2009 and I ran down and I did a flip because it was a lot 
further than I thought. I actually did a somersault in the water. Now I just 
run a bit slower.”

Stimpson said: “I actually practised that when we were warming up because I 
had never done the third leg before. I didn’t want to end up on my face when I 
was running in and I didn’t want to bomb in.”

England, though, avoided embarrassment and emerged on top yet again.
 