
Fans will be permitted to travel to Wembley after the Metropolitan police, 
Brent council and Football Association officials agreed that England'sWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier against 
Andorra tomorrow night would go ahead as planned.

It was confirmed today that, despite the Rail Maritime and Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Union Workers' strike that has 
cancelled London Underground services, a behind-closed-doors notice under 
section 10 of the council's stadium licence and regulations would not be 
issued. This industrial action had led to fears that the match could not be 
policed safely.

"The game will kick off at 8.15pm as planned tomorrow," said the FA's chief 
executive, Ian Watmore. "It will not, repeat not, be played behind closed 
doors." Only 70,000 tickets have been sold for the match at the 90,000-seat 
Wembley.

"Since the threat of a tube strike started last week we have worked very 
co-operatively with all those parties involved," Watmore added. "I'd like to 
thank them for their help. Supporters should plan to travel as early as 
possible. The turnstiles will now open earlier, at 5.45pm, to limit disruption.

"Supporters attending should be prepared that, due to the planned industrial 
action, travelling inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> will not be 
straightforward and they should expect a disrupted journey."

Watmore confirmed there will be no park-and-ride facilities and warned that 
car parking at Wembley is severely restricted. "We are advised that no 
additional transport will be available on the evening and trains will not be 
stopping at the Wembley overground station," he added. "Given the strike, the 
journey home will be difficult, and supporters should make their own 
arrangements and not rely on public transport.

"As a special measure, refunds will be made available to all ticket holders 
who decide not to attend this game. We are obviously disappointed that our 
supporters are going to be inconvenienced in this way. We looked at all the 
options and this is the best way of putting it on."
 