
JÜRGEN KLINSMANN, USA, German, 7-2

Optimist Was the catalyst for the revolution in German football when his 
young, likable side reached the World Cup semi-finals in 2006. Smart and 
effortlessly charming, he has already won the English public over once as a 
player.Pessimist He’s German which, in the current climate, may not be entirely 
conducive to uniting the country. The number of USA fans desperate for him to 
take theEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> job suggests 
there might not be that much substance behind those immaculately pressed shirts.



GLENN HODDLE, unattached, English, 11-2

Optimist The best of both worlds: an English coach with a continental 
approach. Hoddle reads a game like he has written it, has experience of the job 
– and the endorsement of Gary Lineker, Alan Shearer and Harry Redknapp must 
count for something.Pessimist Why don’t we just dig up Sir Walter Winterbottom? 
The last time Hoddle was a manager, Wayne Rooney was a 20-year-old with a 
natural head of hair. Struggled with man-management even before the Washbag 
Generation and he’ll break Twitter if he puts his foot in his mouth again.

Jürgen Klinsmann, a coach in search of a style, will not save England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/01/jurgen-klinsmann-england-football-team-manager>
SAM ALLARDYCE, Sunderland, English, 8-1

The optimist’s view Reportedly the choice of Sir Alex Ferguson, who knows a 
thing or two about management. Allardyce has overachieved to a remarkable 
extent throughout his career and with access to better players would adapt his 
tactics as he did at Bolton.

The pessimist’s view Reportedly the choice of Sir Alex Ferguson and we know 
how good he is at picking managers. Have you ever dreamed of a strikeforce of 
Andy Carroll and Jermain Defoe? No, nor have we.

LAURENT BLANC, unattached, French, 12-1

Optimist A natural coach who quietly cleaned up a far bigger mess when he 
became France manager in 2010. He is urbane, available, knows English football 
and has a spectacular CV as a player and a manager.Pessimist Winning Ligue 1 
with PSG is about as worthy as remembering your own name after two pints. They 
failed consistently in Europe and his France team couldn’t even beat Roy 
Hodgson’s England at Euro 2012.

EDDIE HOWE, Bournemouth, English, 12-1

Optimist A fresh face for (yet another) fresh era, Howe is easily England’s 
most impressive young manager. He is eloquent, routinely walks on water in 
Bournemouth and believes in fast, attacking football.Pessimist More like Eddie 
Who? Does not yet have the profile or experience to manage the elephantine egos 
in the England squad. Giving him the job at such a young age could ruin a 
potentially great coaching career (see Hoddle, Glenn).

England players are keen for an overseas appointment as next manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/england-players-are-keen-for-an-overseas-appointment-as-next-manager>


ARSÈNE WENGER, Arsenal, French, 12-1

Optimist He started his work in England by changing the DNA of Arsenal, so who 
better to change the DNA of the England team? His teams play beautiful 
football, he is used to winning at Wembley and he’s 66 years old. Could that be 
an omen?Pessimist No, it couldn’t but it does mean he’s past it. It’s 2016, not 
2004 and England don’t need any help when it comes to specialising in failure. 
Wenger is bad enough when he can buy any defender in the world; imagine the 
mess if he inherited Gary Cahill and Chris Smalling.

ALAN PARDEW, Crystal Palace, English, 20-1

Optimist Has plenty of experience of a big job with unrealistic expectations, 
and Newcastle’s thundering decline since his departure reflects well on him. 
Pardew is generally a very good man-manager, which is easily the most important 
part of a national manager’s job.Pessimist Tournaments are played in the second 
half of the season, when Pardew’s teams tend to fall off a cliff, and he’ll 
traumatise a nation if he starts busting a groove on the touchline to celebrate 
a last-minute equaliser at home to Malta.



CLAUDIO RANIERI, Leicester, Italian, 25-1

Optimist After last week’s misery, English football could do with a bit of 
dilly ding, dilly dong. Ranieri would instantly restore a feelgood mood and is 
a far better coach than people realise, even after Leicester’s miracle.Pessimist
He’s got a great international record, hasn’t he? Four games in charge of 
Greece, including a defeat at home to the Faroe Islands, before he got the 
sack. You wouldn’t wish the England job on your worst enemy, never mind one of 
the good guys like Ranieri.

SLAVEN BILIC, West Ham, Croatian, 33-1

Optimist The star of Euro 2016 in this country and he was only a pundit. 
Charismatic, tough, intelligent, witty, Bilic is a bouncer with an IQ of 150. 
If he said jump, you’d intuitively know how high. The closest candidate on the 
apparent shortlist to rugby’s no-nonsense Eddie Jones.Pessimist Theo Walcott 
once scored a hat-trick against his Croatia team. Just let that marinate for a 
second. Also believes in a thing called Andy Carroll and for all his charm as a 
manager he has won the square root of bugger all.



DAVID MOYES, unattached, Scottish, 40-1

Optimist England could be the Everton of international football, a team living 
off former glories and in the shadow of a more successful neighbour and Moyes 
was easily the most successful Everton manager of the last 25 years. A pair of 
hands so safe they should be sponsored by Durex.Pessimist He’s the Scottish Roy 
Hodgson: an excellent manager of middling teams who is out of his depth when he 
goes up a level. And he’d ban oven chips.

DAVID BECKHAM, unattached, English, wildcard

Optimist Other countries have had great success appointing a legendary player 
with no coaching experience, especially Germany. Beckham is intensely 
patriotic, is statesman-like and has experience of playing in five major 
leagues. OK, four plus MLS.Pessimist Not even Beckham’s balls are sufficiently 
golden to pull this one off. He has no coaching experience apart from showing a 
few kids how to kick straight on Sky Sports. And Wembley doesn’t have its own 
catwalk.



LARS LAGERBACK, Iceland, Swedish, wildcard

Optimist Managers often sign players who do well against their team, so why 
shouldn’t CEOs do the same? Lagerback has never lost to England in seven 
matches and is a specialist in overachievement.Pessimist Let’s just naturalise 
the whole Iceland team while we’re at it. Lagerback is 68 in a fortnight and 
has never managed a major team or country. If that doesn’t rule him out, the 
fact he appears to be of entirely sound mind means he would have no interest in 
the England job whatsoever.
 