
Inevitably there was a backlash. Inevitably, too, for the most part it came 
from Justin Langer, a chap who until now on this tour had been unable to hit 
his hat, never mind peak form.

By the time bad light ended the first day of the final Test eight overs early, 
Australia had batted to 324 for two, a position as dominant as any they have 
carved out for themselves this summer. It might have been better had not Langer 
been hit on the head by a bouncer from Andy Caddick shortly after completing 
his eighth Test century and been carted off to the infirmary for scans.

"He walked to the car," the Australian media man informed the press. "First 
Aussie to walk this summer," commented someone drily. But after play, as the 
crowd drifted away, there he was happy as Larry and, by the look of him, 
gunning to get in again.

 He and Matthew Hayden had set the day's agenda by scoring 158 for the first 
wicket after Steve Waugh - fit enough to satisfy himself - had won the toss yet 
again; Nasser Hussain has now lost all but one of his last 15. And by the time 
England saw the back of Langer, albeit temporarily, he and Ricky Ponting had 
added 78 for the second.

Mark Waugh took over the baton in imperious manner adding a further 56 with 
Ponting, who was back to the form he displayed during the one-day series until, 
on 62, he presented Jimmy Ormond with his first Test wicket by slashing a catch 
to first slip.

Mark Waugh, though, will resume this morning with his twin, and he has already 
hit seven boundaries in reaching 48. Earlier, when 32, he exceeded the 7,422 
career runs of David Boon to take fourth place in the Australian pecking order, 
behind only three captains past and present in Allan Border (11,174), Steve 
Waugh (9,141 now) and Mark Taylor (7,525), whom he may well pass today.

Stung by the result at Headingley, Australia are in no mood to offer charity 
of any kind; already England will recognise the uphill nature of their task to 
stay in the game.

The pitch, as Hussain surmised on Wednesday, was dry but as with some Oval 
surfaces of recent vintage it lacks a certain amount of substance. Towards the 
close of play Phil Tufnell, who had an indifferent return to the Test scene and 
had reverted to the tired old ploy of bowling over the wicket and into the 
bowlers' rough, spun one sharply across Mark Waugh's bows, stimulating the 
interest of Shane Warne. He as much as anyone will be a handful.

The adjective "nuggety" might have been devised for Langer and he celebrated 
his century in a leaping fist-punching fashion that conveyed his total joy not 
just at being back in the fold but taking centre stage. At the start of the 
series he had been hurt deeply when his captain had sat him down and told him 
that he was being dropped in favour of Damien Martyn, so this was a cathartic 
exercise as much as anything, with utter determination transformed into 
achievement.

They call it character. If it was scratchy at the start, then there is no 
surprise in that for until yesterday he had made only 200 runs on the tour. As 
his stay of more than four hours progressed, however, his range of strokes 
expanded until he powered his way through the nineties and on to his century 
with three fours in four Tufnell deliveries.

If this was a good first-day batting strip then the conditions were not 
entirely against the bowlers. By the time play began, the humidity was hanging 
thick in the air so that the familiar London landmarks in the distance - 
Millennium Eye, Palace of Westminster, Jeffrey Archer's penthouse - were partly 
obscured by the haze. It remained so all day. The ball should have swung and 
did so, although none of the England seamers was able to exploit it as well as 
they might, with Darren Gough again trading runs but getting nothing in return, 
Caddick patchy and Ormond steady enough but lacking in imagination, although he 
can and no doubt will learn.

An away-swing bowler without a variation is like a leg-spinner without a 
googly: he becomes predictable and batsmen of this quality simply line him up. 
That, should he go to the academy in Adelaide this winter, is something that 
will be drilled into him. Suffice to say his off-spin, of which he bowled four 
overs, will not trouble Harbhajan Singh on the winter tour to India.

Tufnell's return was altogether less satisfactory and will have done little to 
enhance his chances of gaining a place on the tour. He is a purveyor of 
variations in flight rather than spin, but from his very first delivery, which 
Hayden met down the track, the Australians ensured that he was not able to 
settle into a rhythm.

Not one of his 24 overs was a maiden, nor did any seem likely to be as he 
conceded almost five runs an over. Even his wicket owed more to Hayden's 
impetuosity than the bowler's subtle art, as the left-hander fetched a delivery 
from outside off stump and clumped it low but unerringly to Marcus Trescothick 
at deep midwicket.

This summer has already seen off one old stager in Graeme Hick and, unless 
something drastic happens today, another may well follow.

Fifth Npower Test

 AUSTRALIA  First innings

M L Hayden c Trescothick b Tufnell  68 

 Swept to square leg 184min, 125 balls, 9 fours 

 J L Langer retd hurt  102 

 Late on hook at Caddick and struck on helmet 260min, 186 balls, 12 fours, 1 
six

 R T Ponting c Atherton b Ormond  62 

 Back-foot force to slip 126min, 102 balls, 8 fours 

 M E Waugh not out  48 

 87min, 64 balls, 7 fours 

 *S R Waugh not out  12 

 35min, 31 balls, 1 four 

 Extras (b9 lb7 nb16)  32 

Total  (for 2, 82 overs) 324 

Fall: 158, 292. 

 To bat: D R Martyn, A C Gilchrist, S K Warne, B Lee, J N Gillespie, G D 
McGrath.

 Bowling: Gough 17-3-50-0; Caddick 19-5-84-0; Ormond 21-3-60-1; Tufnell 
24-0-112-1; Butcher 1-0-2-0.

 ENGLAND:  M A Atherton, M E Trescothick, M A Butcher, *N Hussain, M R 
Ramprakash, U Afzaal, A J Stewart, J Ormond, A R Caddick, D Gough, P C R 
Tufnell.

 Umpires:  R E Koertzen and P Willey.
 