
On the face of it the trip to the Caribbean does not look like the most 
daunting of missions. There are three 50-over matches in Antigua and three T20s 
in Barbados. So the cricket, if not the venues, will bear some similarities to 
what England will experience in Chittagong next month when the World T20 gets 
under way.

The opposition may be the World T20 champions, yet West Indies had lost five 
T20 fixtures in a row before they just managed to defeat Ireland in Jamaica on 
Friday (mind you, England have won only one of their last five, so it hardly 
seems a clash of titans).

So this has the makings of a lovely little trip with a fresh, young side 
devoid of many world-weary cricketers. But it is never that simple. As usual 
there are sub-plots. England travel with their T20 squad plus Nottinghamshire's 
Harry Gurney. As captain Stuart Broad said on departure they have to "blend" 
very quickly. No doubt the team ethic will be admirable but does this England 
squad have sufficient quality and experience? One source of encouragement is 
the knowledge that it is possible to win the World T20 on a roller-coaster run 
when everything clicks just at the right time.England did that in the Caribbean 
in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/16/england-australia-world-twenty20-final>
 with Paul Collingwood (now one of the coaches) in charge and Kevin Pietersen 
scoring most of the runs. So did West Indies in Sri Lanka in 2012.

If somehow England were to win in Bangladesh then the interviews for the head 
coach position, which take place immediately after the tournament, would surely 
be an attractive prospect forAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles>. It may not be logical that 
Giles' credentials for the job should be judged by what happens in the next 
month in a variety of white-ball matches but there is a certain inevitability 
about that. If England won the World T20, or even made the semi-finals with 
such a callow squad, then Giles would be in credit. If they flounder badly, 
that interview will be trickier.

In the Caribbean it will be intriguing to see how England's T20 specialists go 
about the three 50-over matches at the start of the tour. The "old firm" of 
Alex Hales and Michael Lumb have never played a 50-over match for England but 
they will surely have their chance in Antigua. Meanwhile the newcomers, Stephen 
Parry and Moeen Ali, will want to become embedded rapidly.

The Lancastrian Parry, 28, has played only six first-class matches in his 
life. So here is the ultimate white-ball specialist, who has the advantage that 
his opponents will be none too familiar with his left-arm spin.Ali, 26, is a 
more conventional pick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/06/moeen-ali-england-odi-t20-stephen-parry>
 in the sense that he plays in all formats at Worcester, where he had an 
exceptional season in 2013 as an aggressive left-handed batsman and an 
off-spinner, eager to bowl and learn. Essentially Ali has displaced Samit Patel.

It is possible to imagine England's batsmen prevailing, especially if Eoin 
Morgan and Jos Buttler are on top of their games and Ravi Bopara finds that 
touch of magic when the match is still in the balance (he played quite 
sublimely in a match that was already lostagainst Australia in Hobart at the 
end of January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/29/australia-beat-england-opening-twenty20>
).

It is trickier to envisage England having the depth of bowling required to 
prevail. International batsmen have never been so easily duped by Jade 
Dernbach's variations as county cricketers are. There is no mystery among the 
spinners. So Broad will have his hands full in the field. He will have to lead 
the way with the ball himself and he might be well advised to give himself a 
few more bowling options than Giles and his selectors provided in the recent 
white-ball matches against Australia.
 