
Preamble Hello. There are two ways of looking at this game: it's either one of 
the most pointless fixtures in the history of World Cup qualification, orthe 
most pointless fixture in the history ofWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualification. The 
tube strike has lent farce to what was already such a formality that, in the 
build-up, a couple of the England players so nearly deviated from their tedious 
assertion that "there are no easy games in international football anymore". 
Andorra are ranked 196th in the world, behind Djibouti and the Seychelles, and 
it is palpably a matter of how many England score. I'm going for five.

Team news: Beckham starts! One of the players on a yellow card ahead of the 
next qualifier against Croatia, Emile Heskey, is rested, but the other, Glen 
Johnson does not. This may well be because the alternative was Gary Neville, 
whose birth certificate says 1975 but whose body tells a different story. 
Anyway, Peter Crouch comes in for Heskey and David Beckham starts in place of 
the suspended Gareth Barry, his 100th start for England and his first in a 
year. Smart choices in the short-term, these: on a night whenAndorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> will pack their defence, England 
have the option of a more rudimentary approach. Joleon Lescott, rather than 
Matthew Upson, will partner John Terry for 90 minutes of standing still and 
counting the crowd.

England (4-2-3-1) Green; Johnson, Lescott, Terry, A Cole; Beckham, Lampard; 
Walcott, Rooney, Gerrard; Crouch.
Substitutes: Robinson, Neville, Bridge, Young, Wright-Phillips, Defoe, C Cole.

Andorra (10-0-0) Alvarez; Ayala, Ildefons Lima, Sonejee, Antoni Lima, Txema 
Garcia, Jimenez, Andorra, Vieira, Moreno, Silva.
Subs: Fernandez, Gomez, Escura, Moreira, Rodriguez, Genis Garcia,
Vales.

Referee Hendrikus Nijhuis (Netherlands)

"Lescott won't be standing around admiring the crowds," begins Eddy Nason. "He 
and Terry are in there as set-piece specialists for this game. The top two 
goalscoring centre-halvesEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
have at their disposal. Oh, and a certain D. Beckham in to provide corners and 
free-kicks. Coincidence?" Nope. Capello's so good he comes up with specific 
tactical plans to beatAndorra.

So, in lieu of a football match, does anyone have anything to talk about?

Crowd watch Plenty of utter nuggets present and correct. It's about two-thirds 
full I reckon.

Come on then Let's get this nonsense over with.

1 min England kick off from left to right. Can we go home yet?

2 min Andorra are, as expected, playing with 10 behind the ball and don't even 
press the ball until it enters the final third. David Pleat, on ITV, says he 
has never seen a more defensive international team.

3 min First chance for England. Gerrard plays a lovely ball to Rooney, whose 
first touch spins it around Antoni Lima and into the box. His third touch is a 
floated chip towards the far post, but Alvarez tips it over.

4 min Moments later, Walcott gets in on the right of the box. His volley is 
beaten away by Alvarez and Rooney, two yards out in front of an open goal, 
can't quite react quickly enough and his header flies off the crossbar.

GOAL! England 1-0 Andorra (Rooney 4) That didn't take long. Johnson coaxes a 
deep cross to the far post, where Rooney is free to plant a header back whence 
it came and under Alvarez. A nice goal, that, and Rooney is now the joint 
top-scorer in European World Cup qualification with seven.

6 min "Do we know anything about Capello's capello (hair)?" muses Gary Naylor. 
"For a man turning 63 next week, it looks suspiciously Grecian 2000ed. Rather 
like George Graham and John Gregory, his face appears to be getting older, 
while his hair, creepily, stays the same age."

7 min There is a surprisingly buoyant atmosphere actually. It's as if some 
people in this country have a decent supply of serotonin in their bodies.

9 min That's why Beckham and Crouch are in the side: Beckham clips an 
excellent free-kick to the far post, where Crouch plants a relatively 
straightforward header well over the top. He should have hit the target there.

11 min Gerrard's speculative low shot from the left corner of the box is 
smuggled wide of the near post by the besieged Alvarez. I don't think it will, 
but thiscould easily end up 10-0, as England are all over Andorra like a cheap 
rash.

12 min "Does anyone know what prompted ITV to switch the music on their 
football coverage from, 'It's a beautiful day, don't let it get away' to a song 
containing the lyrics, 'Trying to make ends meet, you're a slave to money then 
you die'?" wonders Raja Dasgupta, not entirely unreasonably.

13 min "Bugger this waste of time," says Damon Pettitt, "the important 
information we need is how did you get on in thepop quiz 
<http://www.thelondonpaper.com/going-out/event/if-when-why-what-pop-quiz/the-good-ship/09/06/2009>
 on Tuesday, and is it worth a trip down?" Sixth out of 10, but we did only 
have three of a possible five team members. It's dead, dead good though: very 
imaginative questions and cheap hops as well.

14 min England, Gerrard in particular, are starting to showboat just a 
fraction. He was free in the box there, 12 yards out and to the right of goal, 
but tried a fancy chip and slipped over when in a normal game he would have put 
his foot through it.

17 min "Let me be among the first to congratulate The Guardian online for 
finally offering an auto-refresh option on its MBM commentary pages," says 
James Raiswell. "When I think about the number of times I've had to hit 
command-R (or F5 in my awkward PC days) it just... I mean... I'm angry thinking 
about it, frankly. So it's with some delight that I say to you and your staff, 
sir: welcome to 2003!" Plans are afoot to get Guardian writers on Friends 
Reunited as well.

18 min The intensity has dropped a wee bit after that blistering start.

19 min "Wayne Rooney's beard," announces Craig Smaaskjaer. "He looks like a 
Glaswegian drug dealer auditioning for the part of Zak Dingle." For readers 
outside Britain, Zak Dingle is... no, I don't think I can do justice to him on 
here.

20 min "Ildefons Lima: discuss," says Rick Buur. "He is the man who provoked 
Ruud van Nistelrooy intothis action <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTtBzu5lF8k>
 and who provoked Arshavin into getting a red card that made him miss the first 
two matches of Euro 2008. The last ten years he has been spending the whole 90 
minutes of every Andorra match trying to kick every, much better, striker 
within reach. My question: what is the purpose of Ildefons Lima? Is he just 
doing his job or is he a symbol for the shambles that is the qualification 
system for the big international tournaments? Discuss."

Obviously I have no idea, but thanks for the reminder of that richly comedic 
van Nistelrooy incident. I love the childlike glee of Lima's face when van 
Nistelrooy misses the penalty.

21 min Andorra cross the halfway line, but only because Antoni Lima punts the 
ball into touch down the line. Dear Lord.

23 min "I actually like having to refresh," says Stephen Armson. "The act of 
hitting F5 fills me with a delicious sense of dread/anticipation during vitally 
important fixtures. I suppose that's why you lot have made it optional, for sad 
no-lives like me."

24 min This is relatively poor from Englasnd now, if it's possible to describe 
a team as 'poor' when they are having 90 per cent of the possession. They just 
lost their way between the 10th and 15th minutes when they started arsing 
about, and they haven 't got it back. There was a chance there, though: Rooney, 
receiving Johnson's pass with his back to goal on the six-yard box, turned 
Antoni Lima adeptly but seemed to put himself off balance as well and dragged 
his shot wide of the near post.

26 min Robert Green touches the ball for the second time this evening.

GOAL! England 2-0 Andorra (Fwank 29) That's better. Johnson slips Walcott in 
behind the defence on the right-hand side of the box, and his pullback is 
perfect for Lampard, running into the box, to sidefoot first-time through the 
legs of Alvarez from 15 yards. What a season he has had, and how selflessly he 
has adapted to his new role with England - a role that hasn't stopped him 
scoring three in his last four games.

33 min Andorra have a shot. Sergi Moreno spanks it high and wide from 35 yards.

34 min "I don't know whether I should be feeling sorry for you because you 
came 6th out of 10, or because you could only muster two teammates, despite the 
fact that you'd previously advertised your participation in the event on an 
OBO," sniffs Mac Millings. It's not my fault my other imaginary friends were 
stranded because of the tube strike. Anyway, Millings, I'd like to see your 
imaginary friends recognise the intro to some acid-skiffle number from the 
Sixties.

35 min Lescott, under extreme pressure from Xavier Andorra, heads Beckham's 
wide. He might have scored. He'll live.

38 min England are passing the ball around, but it's not exactly Leeds 7-0 
Southampton <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wweh3ROiqWI>. Andorra are 
stunningly inept.

GOAL! England 3-0 Andorra (Rooney 39) Such a simple goal. Johnson, who is 
having a field day, curves over a cross that dips late and Rooney, whose 
movement took him away from Antoni Lima, sidefoots a crisp, classy half-volley 
past Alvarez from 10 yards. It's his 10th of the season. It's amazing what 
happens when you play him in his best position. What a shame he is frequently 
compromised at club level because of two of the laziest chancers you'll ever 
see on a football field.

40 min An Andorra player is booked. I missed who, sorry. From the free-kick 
for which the player whose name I don't know was booked, Beckham - who has 
never scored for England at Wembley - curves a free-kick over the wall but 
Alvarez plunges to save. Ah, in fact it was Andorra (the player) who was booked.

42 min Sometimes you feel like a team has more than 11 players, so adeptly do 
they cover space. With Andorra it seems like they have fewer. Despite placing 
10 men behind the ball there are frequently huge gaps, particularly in wide 
areas. Johnson especially has taken advantage.

43 min The crowd is just shy of 59,000, which is a very decent effort.

44 min Andorra, who are amusingly chippy for such an incredibly useless team, 
try to pick a fight with Lescott for playing on when Moreno was down. Alvarez, 
the keeper, is booked, and Antoni Lima is constantly sledging Crouch, who is 
looking at him with the same sort of bemusement with which most people look at 
him.

45 min Oscar Sonejee gets away with a handball in his own box. It wasn't 
deliberate, but his hand was well away from his body. That could and probably 
should have been given.

Half-time: England 3-0 Andorra "This is starting to feel rather 
disconcerting," begins Phil Sawyer. "Normally in a home game against this kind 
of opposition it would still be 0-0 and the crowd would be booing by now. 
Instead we're 3-0 up and there's a carnival atmosphere. As an England 
supporter, I'm now so far out of my comfort zone I suspect I may have slipped 
into another dimension."

Half-time chit-chat

Richard O'Hagan: "Just how bad are Andorra? Surely there should be a quality 
test, like in cricket? Basically, if you make Glen Johnson look like an 
international footballer, you aren't allowed to be in Fifa." And if you make 
Gary Neville 2.0 look like one, you go in front of a firing squad.

Clare Davies: "Mac Millings has the sort of friends, Rob, who could sniff out 
and recognise any obscure Sixties riff from a distance of fifty yards. Naylor 
is one of them. Need I say more?" I bet he wouldn't have got Papa Don't Preach 
in the intros round.

Scott W: "Question from my girlfriend, Rob: is there any hope of an 
international version of the chalkboard tool? Also, she'd be dead chuffed if 
you gave her a shout-out. She likes your hat. She's called Michelle." HI 
MICHELLE!!!!! I have heard about these mysterious things called girlfriends. 
They seem to make people happy. Where can you buy them? As for the chalkboards, 
it's not really my domain so I'm not sure - not, as far as I'm aware, for the 
forseeable future at least.

Alex Wiffen: "Really, what's the point of Rob Green? They should raffle it off 
to the public. Sent from my BlackBerry® wireless device."

Joe Pearson: "You know, I have a Blackberry etc too, but don't use that 
annoying tag line. Get into your settings, Alex, and cut it out! Jeez."

Nina Bell: "This is really just a bit like watching someone I really really 
like kick a puppy."

R Smyth: "Can I have a BlackBerry® wireless device please?"

T Man: "No."

R Smyth: "Please."

T Man: "No."

R Smyth: "Go on."

T Man: "No."

R Smyth: "Why not?"

T Man: "No."

R Smyth: "Bu-"

T Man: "No."

R Smyth: "Okay. Sorry."

46 min Andorra kick off. Jermain Defoe and Ashley Young are on for Rooney and 
Gerrard. I bet Rooney loved that.

47 min Within 66 seconds of coming on, Young pulls down Johnson's cross, comes 
inside Ayala but then screws a shot hopelessly high and wide.

48 min Antoni Lima, making his final international appearance, comes off and 
is replaced by Marc Vales. What a peculiar little substitution: he came out for 
the second half wearing the captain's armband and then did one after 90 seconds.

49 min Johnson's pass finds Defoe, whose pace takes him away from Vales, but 
from a prohibitive angle he screws his shot across the face of goal. He should 
probably have taken a touch and looked for Crouch.

50 min Lalalalalala.

51 min "Rob, I'm sad to report that you can't buy girlfriends in most 
countries," begins Phil Powell. "They do tend to cost a fortune though! Honk, 
Honk! I'm here all week, try the veal."

52 min The atmosphere is fantastic at Wembley. England fans aren't always the 
easiest to like but fair play to them tonight.

55 min Defoe, ahead of the near post and facing away from goal originally, 
heads Cole's sharp cross wide. A half-chance at best.

56 min "Rob, I'm playing a drinking game based on how many things you can name 
of a certain category," hics Alexander Netherton. "I reckon if I chose my 
nadirs I'll have a headstart. Nadirs? Yes please, sixty."

57 min Robert Green touches the ball for the third time.

58 min "How come when Chelsea, despite their claims to be one of the best 
teams in the world, stick ten men behind the ball against Barcelona, ITV extoll 
the performance as solid, sensible, workmanlike etc," begins Ronan Hayes. "But 
when Andorra, who are part-time and make no such claims do likewise they are 
patronised to within an inch of their lives by the commentator twats?"

59 min Two chances in 30 seconds: Crouch's flying volley is deflected over the 
bar and, when the resulting corner is cleared and fed back in from a deep 
position by Beckham, Lescott fresh-airs a great chance from six yards. In his 
defence it went through a crowd of bodies so he probably saw it late.

60 min "Can there be anything more contemptuous than some displaying to all 
and sundry that he's important enough to have a Blackberry?" says Mark 
Thorogood. "Sent from my iPhone."

62 min Lampard's fierce, carefully struck 30-yarder is beaten by away by 
Alvarez, and Walcott's follow-up hits Crouch and flies wide.

63 min Peacekeeping visionary Ildefons Lima is booked and will miss Andorra's 
next game. Meanwhile England make their final substitution: Wayne Bridge 
replaces Ashley Cole.

64 min Robert Green gets his fourth touch.

65 min Young skins Ayala, runs inside the box and then waits and waits before 
sweeping a cross along the six-yard box. Defoe looks set to stab it in but a 
defender, not sure who, gets round in front of him to smother it away.

66 min "iPhone, BlackBerry, Twitter, it's all for gimps," says Paul Neilan. 
"Sent by fingers."

67 min John Terry heads Beckham's corner just wide of the near post. A decent 
chance for one so accomplished in that position. It's England's 22nd attempt on 
goal. Andorra have had one.

68 min Johnson, who has been excellent tonight, plays another splendidly 
penetrative pass, but a very slight touch from Sonejee stops it reaching Defoe, 
who would have been one on one. I think Johnson probably is an 
international-class right-back in an attacking sense, as there is a lovely 
cleanliness to his work going forward, but there are still concerns about him 
defensively.

70 min An exceptional reaction save from Alvarez denies Defoe, although he'd 
been flagged offside.

71 min Crouch, having been wound up all night by Lima, shoves him in the neck. 
Lima goes down risibly, but Crouch would have been off had the referee seen it.

72 min"Just your fingers, Paul Neilan (66 min)?" says Mac Millings. "Was it a 
handwritten message that you crumpled up into a ball and threw? Sent by 
shouting." So let me get this straight: I'm conducting an online, 
cross-continent festival of homoeroticism between two strangers? I hate my life.

GOAL! England 4-0 Andorra (Defoe 73) Beckham takes a short corner to Johnson, 
who beats his man and stands up a cross for Defoe to flick a header into the 
far corner from seven yards. Johnson has made three goals and played the 
penultimate pass for the fourth. And to think they call full-backs defenders.

GOAL! England 5-0 Andorra (Defoe 75) Beckham's fairly soft free-kick isn't 
held by Alvarez, and Defoe is sniffing around to ram it in gleefully from five 
yards. Even Michael Owen would have scored from there.

78 min Crouch, who has had a total shocker given the opposition, can't sort 
his feet out in front of goal and Walcott's sharp cross goes right between his 
legs. That was a sitter.

79 min Andorra are really going for this: Julia Fernandez, a defender, 
replaces their only striker Fernando Silva.

GOAL! England 6-0 Andorra (Crouch 80) Crouch couldn't miss that time. Defoe, 
on a hat-trick, mishit his shot and it drifted across the box, six yards out, 
where two defenders and the keeper left it to each other. Crouch took advantage 
to prod it between Alvarez's legs. A laughable goal.

81 min "Despite his porn-star moniker, I have no desire to engage in anything 
homoerotic with Mr Mac Millings," says Paul Neilan. "Sent by manicured fingers 
on keyboard resting on violet-silk dressing-gowned thighs. Having said that, I 
bet your life still hasn't gotten any better in the last few seconds, Rob. "

83 min "Is it possible to go to Andorra for a month to have your children?" 
says Rob McEvoy, making me an offer I'll struggle to refuse in the current cli- 
oh, you mean in a general sense? "Then, when their in their twenties, your 
pretty much guaranteed to have a child playing international football. Is this 
cheating, or worth it for free tickets?"

84 min The crowd are shouting 'shooooooooot' every time Beckham gets the ball. 
He's never scored at Wembley for England you know! As good an egg as Beckham 
is, this love-in is slightly nauseating.

85 min "Thank you, Paul Neilan," says Mac Millings. "Sent by my left hand."

88 min Andorra's keeper Jesus Alvarez, who is also retiring after this game, 
is replaced by Victor Rodriguez. He's making a right meal of it, shaking hands 
with everybody and clapping the crowd. You'd think it was Pele!

90 min Defoe heads Young's cross over the top from seven yards, a very decent 
chance.

"HA!" says Paul Neilan. "I take my hat off to Mac Millings... amongst other 
things

Full time: England 6-0 Andorra That was the final touch of the match. 
Congratulations to England on winning the 2010 World Cup. Thanks for your many 
emails, which made a not particularly mouth-watering assignment much easier. 
Night.
 