
It's the fast bowling wot won it. There were many factors behind England's 
sensational Ashes success this summer but it was the trio of Andrew Flintoff, 
Steve Harmison and Simon Jones, all capable of genuine pace, backed up by the 
more conventional swing of Matthew Hoggard, that was the vital ingredient.

And on Tuesday the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board, who can hardly be accused of 
laurel resting, will start the process of replacing them. Some of the country's 
best young quicks will attend the national academy at Loughborough as part of 
the ECB's fast-bowling programme.

Troy Cooley, the academy's fast-bowling coach, said yesterday: "They will be 
put through their paces and tested in a three-dimensional way. Their actions 
will be photographed, measured and digitalised so by the time they leave we 
will have a full technological profile of them."

For all its professionalism and preparation, the ECB was dismayed that it had 
to delve back into prehistory when Jones was unfit for the Test at The Oval. 
Andrew Caddick, Dominic Cork, Ryan Sidebottom and Darren Gough were among the 
names mentioned as a possible replacement; in the end they picked a batsman, 
Paul Collingwood.

The men in the England wings include Chris Tremlett, John Lewis, James 
Anderson, Sajid Mahmood and Kabir Ali. But next week, at Loughborough, they 
will be concentrating on the development of a new wave of exciting talent who 
might just be ready in time for the next home Ashes series.

The most exciting of these is Mark Footitt, 19, from the county champions 
Nottinghamshire. The director of cricket Mick Newell says: "Mark bowls left-arm 
and is very quick. What has impressed me is that whatever level he's played at 
people have been surprised by him."

The club coach Paul Johnson says: "Mark's got real, raw pace. He played 
against Glamorgan this season and rattled a few helmets. He even gave players 
as good and as experienced as Sourav Ganguly, Michael Powell and David Hemp the 
hurry-up.

"He's lean and skinny and a shade over six foot. He doesn't swing it very much 
but in the matter of getting it from A to B he's very good. And with people 
like Greg Smith, Ryan Sidebottom and Chris Tolley [the Notts academy director] 
we know a thing or two about left-arm bowling at this club. Greg, something of 
a father figure, has helped him a lot on the mental side of the game, too."

Stewart Burrows, the club's cricket development manager, said yesterday: 
"We've been working with Mark since he was eight years old and playing with a 
soft ball. He can now deliver a very quick cricket ball."

He already bowls at "85mph-plus," according to the England Under-19 coach Andy 
Pick, who had his own fab-four fast bowlers this season, with Footitt, Tom 
Smith, Stuart Broad and Adam Harrison -the first three have been included in 
the academy squad to tour the West Indies in the new year.

Broad is with Leicestershire and is the son of the former England opening 
batsman Chris. "He bowls right-arm and swings it away at a handy pace," says 
Pick. "Tom, from Lancashire, bowls close to the wicket and moves it off the 
seam at 80mph." Both Broad and Smith are 19 and viewed as potential 
all-rounders."

But these are only the leaders of the brat pack. Others who have impressed 
Pick include Lancashire's Andy Miller, who is not so quick but who both swings 
and seams it. Then there is the young giant at Kent, David Stiff, a hit-the- 
deck bowler who moved down from Yorkshire.

At Glamorgan, in addition to Adam Harrison, Huw Walters burst into the first 
team this season. Maurice Chambers, at Essex, has also caught Pick's eye. "He's 
quick and only 18 and was unlucky not to get a place in the England academy 
squad," he says. "And there are a number coming through at Durham, in addition 
to Liam Plunkett, who we already know. Danny Evans, Luke Evans and Luke 
Anderson are all interesting prospects."

Of the older bowlers, Newell says: "The one who has impressed us most is Sajid 
of Lancashire. He doesn't play all the time but he's always bowled well against 
us and is full of good pace and aggression. Tremlett, when he gets it right, is 
a real handful. He's got everything going for him, including bowling on a Rose 
Bowl pitch that's not generally great.

"But he does need a lot of revving up. Against us he bowled well and took a 
hat-trick. But while he bowled aggressively against our tail-enders he was not 
so aggressive against our top order. He might need Shane Warne to get into his 
ear."

The message is clear for the likes of Tremlett and Mahmood - if they don't 
make the most of their chances this winter a whole new generation may sweep 
them away and keep the pressure on the big boys.

"The future is looking very bright indeed," says Cooley.
 