
Never let it be said that England visits to Antigua are without incident.

It was against them at the wonderful old Recreation Ground that Viv Richards 
scored what remains the fastest ever Test hundred, and where Brian Lara, not 
once but twice broke the record for the highest individual Test innings. On 
another ground, adjacent to the airport terminal building and now surrounded by 
security fencing, an England XI contested, and lost, the infamous Twenty20 for 
$20m match set up by the crooked former financier Allen Stanford.

When last they were here, the Test match at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium, 
the ground purpose-built, with the aid of Chinese money, for the 2007 World 
Cup, was abandoned after 10 deliveries because the bowlers were getting bogged 
down in the sand, with the match transferred, on a wing and prayer, to the 
Recreation Ground, a triumph of community organisation. And even as that match 
progressed, the Stanford empire was beginning to crumble.

This visit, as a preliminary to the World T20 that follows on directly (the 
team have a four hour Gatwick stop-over before flying straight on to 
Bangladesh), is not without its piquance, the fallout from the sacking of Kevin 
Pietersen still lingering. Pietersen's contribution with the bat to England T20 
cricket over the past few years has been non-existent so a team without him is 
far from the exception, but this really does represent the start of the new era.

There is new management in place at the very top of the pyramid, a new 
national selector, and inAshley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles>, a head coach of the one-day 
side with his eyes on the job as Andy Flower's replacement in all three 
formats. A successful showing in Bangladesh (which does not necessarily mean 
winning) would enhance his credentials; flounder, though, and it could scupper 
him. Some support staff will be nervous about their futures, too. Suddenly, 
what had seemed like a rather pleasant way to begin a campaign that will take 
them to Chittagong and Dhaka, has attained all sorts of sub-plots.

In an ideal world England would be playing T20 matches throughout the three 
weeks in Antigua and Barbados. That they were unable to secure this, and will 
be playing three ODIs in Antigua, has much to do with the tour firms who as 
ever with England trips to the Caribbean, have secured them considerable 
support, but with the trips sold on the quota of 50-over cricket.

England, though, have a T20 squad, led by Stuart Broad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad>, and minus, of course, the 
current ODI captain Alastair Cook, who only returned to training with Essexon 
Monday. Without question Cook needed a rest from cricket, but these three 
matches, albeit against a West Indies side without Chris Gayle and Kieron 
Pollard, will give Giles a chance to see how the team function without him.

It has long been a contention on these pages that Cook might be better not 
playing international one-day cricket, not because he does not have the game 
for it (although it is surely not as versatile as the modern version demands) 
but because of the impact it could have on his Test batting, if the habits of 
one-day cricket become ingrained. Broad may not be the answer when it comes to 
ODIs because his fitness record is so unreliable, but Eoin Morgan could push a 
strong case in future.

The intriguing thing about the three matches at the Sir Vivian Richards 
Stadium is how England, and indeed West Indies, approach them. Do they play as 
straightforward ODIs, given that some of the players at their disposal are 
considered T20 specialists only? Then again, do they play them as ODIs but do 
so with a T20 slant? Or finally, do they just go hell for leather, pretend they 
are T20s even if they are not, and see what happens?

The third option is the most appealing although it is the least likely, and 
could produce a disaster of an innings in a format where 300 is becoming the 
benchmark total, but it could also produce an outcome of such volatility that a 
huge total could eventuate. But it is the second that England will adopt, not 
so much in the manner of the start in the powerplay overs(athough that is an 
area that needs urgent addressing), or in the intuitive variations that are 
required in T20 bowling, but in the intensity shown in the field. Fielding in 
T20 is light years away from what even 10 years ago was considered outstanding. 
The capacity to produce this over 50 is something at whichPaul Collingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-collingwood> as deputy head coach on a 
short-term contract, will be aiming.

His own attention to detail is already showing. After the team had completed 
their fielding drills and departed, Collingwood was to be found out in the 
middle of the ground,, range-hitting into the stiff westerly wind, the better 
to judge the percentages of hitting aerial shots in that direction.

When England played their games at Bridgetown in particular, during 
Collingwood's triumphant World T20 campaign, it was to their credit that they 
struck their sixes downwind and unlike some opponents, did not attempt to do so 
into the breeze. These things matter.
 