
2.30pm: TfL advise fans to walk; some trains will serve Wembley 

Transport for London says a limited number of underground and overground 
trains will be stopping at Wembley.

"We are doing all we can to keep trains running on the Jubilee and 
Metropolitan Tube lines through Wembley Park station, but services will be 
reduced," say TfL. "London Overground trains will be running a limited service 
which will serve the nearby Wembley Central station.

"Journeys today will be difficult, so if supporters can travel to Wembley 
without relying on public transport as their sole means of travel, they should 
consider that option, including walking for at least part of the journey."

Wembley's turnstiles will now open earlier, at 5.45pm, to ease the disruption 
and the game will kick off at 8.15pm as planned. TfL also warned of "serious" 
road congestion before and after the match, adding that no additional parking 
facilities were being laid on at or around the stadium area. Bus services are 
likely to be delayed due to road congestion.

12.30pm: Overground services restricted for safety reasons

Fans trying to reach Wembley for tonight's World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying tie 
between England and Andorra are not only now facing a tube strike – overground 
rail services will also not be serving the stadium.

London Midland and Chiltern Railways have announced that fears of overcrowding 
due to the tube strike have prompted the decision, saying that services will 
already be full, regardless of the match.

Chiltern said: "We will not be stopping any services at Wembley Stadium 
station on from 1200 until the end of service. We will unfortunately not be 
providing a service for those going to see theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> game at Wembley Stadium. The 
increased volumes of traffic using London Marylebone to get to and from work in 
lieu of the London Underground will mean that our services will be 
substantially busier. The large volumes of anticipated Wembley traffic in 
addition to this would be unsustainable from a safety perspective.

"Unfortunately this will also affect the evening journey of those who commute 
to/from Wembley Stadium station. The Football Association has advised that 
refunds will be made available to ticketholders who decide not to attend this 
game because of the tube strike."

Follow live updates on the travel situation on the news blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/jun/09/london-tube-strike>.
 