
The England cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> finally did something 
to expunge the overburdening memory of the turnaround at Headingley in 1981 - 
by achieving a victory measuring almost as much on the Richter Scale. Convinced 
of their invulnerability, Australia set England a mere 315 for victory. It 
seemed like just another insult but this was the one that finally got the 
bully's face slapped.

This victory will not alter the destination of the Ashes but it transforms the 
mood of the summer and, for 48 hours at least - the final Test starts at the 
Oval on Thursday -the mood of English cricket.

It will transform for ever the reputation of Mark Butcher, uncertain of his 
place yesterday morning, who scored 173 not out. It was an innings fit for him 
to earn a plinth in the fairly empty pantheon of great modern English centuries 
against Australia, perhaps behind only Derek Randall at Melbourne in 1976-77 
and Ian Botham, here and at Old Trafford, in 1981.

England won the fourth Test by six wickets, with 19.4 overs to go, ending 
their terror of being whitewashed by Australia for the first time since they 
faced Warwick Armstrong's team 80 years ago. But it was the style and 
confidence of their performance that was so compelling: the seven-stone 
weaklings played like giants. Butcher is 29 on Thursday and has spent his 
career like dozens of other recent English Test batsmen, more out of the team 
than in, more winned against than winning.

When his innings was in its pomp yesterday, he looked like Brian Lara in full 
cry. Nearly all his 24 boundaries came off the back foot, flashed in an arc 
between third man and cover. On a normal day, he would have thinned one of them 
into the slips cordon. It was not a normal day.

Gradually - after lunching on coffee and a couple of fags - Butcher saw the 
ball bigger and bigger and a mistake seemed ever more improbable. Even so, the 
coach Duncan Fletcher applauded his century with his usual air of a man who has 
lossed a quid and found sixpence. Only at the end was the joy unconditional.

While Butcher's shares have gone sky-high, Adam Gilchrist suddenly looks less 
of a blue-chip certainty to captain Australia. It is rare enough for any Test 
to be won against a declaration unless one captain is in the pay of the 
bookmakers. Ithas happened only once before in Ashes Tests: when Australia were 
famously set 404 on this ground in 1948. England have only once made more to 
win a Test: 332 at Melbourne in 1928-29. Australian captains do not normally 
make this kind of mistake though Gilchrist, in his charming, cheery way, did 
make it clear that the other players had supported the declaration.

He is in good company when it comes to losing Tests that do not matter all 
that much. This was England's sixth win over Australia since the wind started 
to blow so fiercely from the south in 1989; all but one of the six (Edgbaston 
1997) have come with the Ashes already decided.

But there was no hint that Australia purposely took their foot off the 
accelerator, and nothing about the day felt second-rate. There is an improbable 
recent trend that on the rare occasions when Tests in England last until the 
final day, a big crowd turns up. And Headingley yesterday was almost full. It 
was a different kind of crowd, too: younger, more mixed, more interested.

Many of those who book in advance for Test cricket come primarily for a day on 
the booze. This lot came, spur of the moment, because they wanted to see the 
game. It was a lovely, fresh afternoon. For some reason, Headingley has more 
expressive cloudscapes than any other cricket ground and, briefly, the old dump 
almost looked beautiful. And the spectators saw what they wanted, but hardly 
dared to imagine.

If there was any 11am expectation (unlikely - England were backable at 16-1) 
it would have evaporated at 11.02. Glenn McGrath resumed the over uncompleted 
on Sunday night; Mike Atherton pulled the first ball of the day for four, 
blocked the next then gloved the third to Gilchrist. He departed, for perhaps 
the antepenultimate time, and the 18th time to McGrath, with an enigmatic 
Athertonian smile: good ball; bit of a shame; only a game.

Marcus Trescothick was caught at about ninth slip, driving, seven overs later, 
and the familiar procession seemed in prospect. But then Nasser Hussain joined 
Butcher. At first Hussain was the more impressive of the two: he has not looked 
this good in two years. Butcher's strokes were flashy, even streaky. But then 
the great left-handers can appear to be taking chances even when the ball is 
going smack off the middle.

Australia had their moments, as did the pitch: one ball from Jason Gillespie 
took off and flew away for four byes. After lunch, the Aussies shifted up a 
gear and Brett Lee started raining down 90mph bouncers. Hussain got bogged 
down; Butcher never did. He brought up the 150 with two amazing square-carves 
off McGrath and from then on faltered only when he tried to re peat his 
first-innings trick and run himself out, this time on 97.

They put on 181 before Hussain was caught behind, maybe unjustly. The other 
Surrey Mark, Ramprakash, came in and saw it through almost to the end. 
Butcher's strokeplay grew ever more extravagant, Australia ever more ragged and 
bewildered. One four off Gillespie went through Damien Martyn's legs; the 
bowler just stood there, scratching his head.

The end came too quickly for Australia even to think of their last card: the 
new ball. One amazing day. One new-found hero. Savour it until Thursday at 
least. Warwick Armstrong, Donald Bradman, Ned Kelly, Edna Everage - where are 
your boys now?

England's biggest fourth innings wins

 332-7  v Australia, 1928-29, Melbourne 

 315-4  v  Australia, 2001, Headingley 

 307-6  v New Zealand, 1996-7, Christchurch 

 298-4  v Australia, 1894-5, Melbourne 

 282-9  v Australia, 1907-8, Melbourne 

 263-9  v Australia, 1902, the Oval 

 251-8  v South Africa, 1999-00, Centurion* 

 247-2  v South Africa, 1998, Trent Bridge 

 237-3  v Australia, 1962-3, Melbourne 

 225-7  v West Indies, 

1997-8, Port of Spain Centurion Test tainted by admission of a rigged 
declaration
 