
Eoin Morgan's flair with the bat and England's persistence with the ball gave 
them first blood in the five-match series as they beat Australia by 15 runs.

Morgan made an unbeaten 89 from 63 balls with four sixes and five fours, 
propelling England to an unlikely 272 for five after Alastair Cook and Ian 
Bell, with 40 and 41 respectively had battled hard on a difficult morning for 
batting, adding 74 for the first wicket, and Jonathan Trott had made an 
inscrutable 54.

In reply, Australia had reached 96 for one before the 20th over was out, and 
with the beefy left-hander David Warner already starting to boom out his runs, 
looked to have the game in hand. But two wickets in three balls from Jimmy 
Anderson, including that of Warner for 56 to a fine catch by Craig Kieswetter, 
began the process of working their way through the order. Tight bowling pegged 
them back so that the run rate climbed gradually and by the time, through the 
captain Michael Clarke and wicketkeeper Matthew Wade, they had worked their way 
into a position to contemplate a charge for the line, Tim Bresnan was starting 
to reverse swing the ball from the Nursery End. A running calamity saw Wade run 
out for 27 to end a partnership of 57, and then Bresnan had Clarke lbw for 61. 
It left the way clear for he and Stuart Broad to mop up and put the house in 
order.

Morgan's man of the match award was a given and represented an emergence from 
the dark side with a winter of torment at the crease, and weeks spent sitting 
on his backside watching rather than playing for Kolkata Knight Riders in the 
Indian Premier League, but distant memories. Intensive work in the latter part 
of the winter and again on his return to England has paid dividends already for 
he looks a different player to the floundering individual who so struggled 
against Pakistan in the UAE.

Over the previous IPL season he had developed a disconcerting deep squat as 
the bowler entered his delivery stride, in the manner of a weightlifter, 
apparently as a device to help him get more force and elevation into his shots. 
So pronounced had this become though that on occasion there were fears that 
having ducked down he might not be able to get up again.

His resultant bobbing head was contrary to all the fundamentals of good 
batting, and the twist of his back foot that accompanied it, so that it faced 
down the pitch, so squared him up that he became increasingly vulnerable when 
forced to play away from his body outside off stump. It was a technical mess, 
habits that had crept up on him. Now though he stands more upright and just 
looks a batsman once more.

This was a beautifully measured innings that he played, first of all in 
partnership with Trott, with whom he added 68, and then one of 83 from only 59 
deliveries with Kieswetter as he ransacked the Australian bowling at the end of 
the innings.

Here Australia may have contributed to their own downfall. The use of a 
variety of slower deliveries has become a mainstay of the shortest form of the 
game, in which bowlers have to second-guess batsmen and bowl accordingly and in 
Brett Lee and Clint McKay they have two seasoned practitioners. There are 
occasions however where the simplest things, yorkers for instance, can work 
best.

Neither seamer got their deliveries sufficiently on the mark and Morgan took a 
heavy toll. He had already hit the teenager Patrick Cummins back over his head 
for the first six of the day, and he followed up by twice carting slower balls 
from Lee over the midwicket boundary in front of the Warner Stand, and then 
clobbering his next delivery, from McKay, into the Mound Stand. In all, he 
plundered 34 runs from the last 11 deliveries he faced, ultimately the 
difference between the two sides.
 