
A German court has rejected a request by Turkish president Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan for a preliminary injunction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/recep-tayyip-erdogan-turkish-president-injunction-german-media-chief-axel-springer-poem>
 preventing the head of German publisher Axel Springer repeating a derogatory 
term.

Erdoğan’s lawyer, Ralf Höcker, told Reuters on Tuesday that Erdoğan had sought 
the injunction after chief executive Mathias Döpfner’s public support for a 
controversial poem read out by comedian Jan Böhmermann on German television in 
March.

But the court said in a statement it had rejected it on the basis of “the 
defendant’s right to free expression of opinion”.

New press freedom call on Turkey to drop prosecution of journalists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/apr/01/new-press-freedom-call-on-turkey-to-drop-prosecution-of-journalists>
Erdoğan is known for his sensitivity to criticism and Turkish prosecutors have 
opened more than 1,800 cases against people for insulting him since he became 
president in 2014. That sensitivity has also made itself felt on the 
international stage, raising tensions withGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> at a time when the two countries 
are grappling with a huge influx of Syrian refugees.

Erdoğan’s office was not immediately available for comment when contacted by 
Reuters. The Turkish leader has repeatedly said his opponents are free to 
criticise him but that those who stray into insult will face legal action.

German chancellor Angela Merkel has drawn heavy criticism for allowing German 
prosecutors to pursue a case against Böhmermann at Erdoğan’s behest.

Under Germany’s criminal code, insults against foreign leaders are not allowed 
but the government can decide whether to authorise prosecutors to go ahead.

In the poem, Böhmermann suggested Erdoğan hits girls, watches child 
pornography and engages in bestiality.

Döpfner expressed solidarity with Böhmermann in an open letter published in 
German newspaper Welt am Sonntag in April, saying he had laughed out loud over 
the poem and “wholeheartedly” supported what the comedian had said.

If the court in Cologne had agreed to grant the injunction, Döpfner would have 
been banned from repeating a sexually crude term to describe Erdoğan that was 
first used by Böhmermann and subsequently quoted by theAxel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> chief.

The court said its decision did not address the legality of the Böhmermann 
poem, which is still under investigation.

A spokeswoman for Springer said Döpfner had simply “wanted to defend the 
freedom of art and satire in his open letter”.

Höcker had told Reuters earlier that he expected the Cologne district court to 
reject the injunction, and would recommend Erdoğan appeal to a higher court. It 
was not immediately clear when a follow-on lawsuit could be filed.

Höcker’s law firm said on Monday it had won a preliminary injunction against 
German director and producer Uwe Boll, who in a video posted online, defended 
Böhmermann’s poem and said Erdoğan should be shot.

“Mr Erdoğan is a human being and human dignity is inviolable,” Höcker said in 
that statement, adding that this was placed above the freedom of press, art and 
opinion in the German constitution.

 