
Who knew that Eric Cantona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eric-cantona> 
was quite so influential? The former footballer turned cod philosopher has 
called for a mass bank run on 7 December – and his message has sparked an 
online campaign spanning 24 countries.

The former Manchester United striker thinks the days of placard-wielding 
protests are over. Instead, to create a "real revolution", he favours a 
co-ordinated withdrawal of funds to bring down the entire financial system.

This is daft. Backers of Cantona's call include David Icke, the snooker 
commentator who famously quit the BBC to launch a career as a new-age speaker 
claiming that giant reptiles control the planet. But an interview on French 
television in which Cantona outlined his Stop Banque campaign has been viewed 
hundreds of thousands of times – and nearly 10,000 people have signed up to the 
campaign's Facebook page.

Cantona's campaign will probably flop. Let's hope so, because it's not very 
wise. There are plenty of reasons to be angry at the way in which banks are 
run: they took reckless risks in the run-up to the financial crisis, developed 
ever more opaque derivatives, and senior executives paid themselves far too 
much. The people of Ireland went on the march yesterday to protest at an 
economic crisis sparked, to a large extent, by banks feasting on an 
unsustainable property binge.

But destroying these institutions in one fell swoop would serve nobody. It's 
impossible for everybody to withdraw their savings on the same day, because 
bank branches and cash machines would quickly run out of cash and close. Even 
if such a campaign were to succeed, it would simply prompt governments to spend 
billions more bailing out the banks, forcing them to implement even tighter 
austerity measures. If they didn't, then anybody who hadn't heeded Cantona's 
call to withdraw their savings would lose all their money.

Perhaps this would further the cause of anarchy. But it's not very well 
thought through. There's nothing evil about the concept of banks – they exist 
to look after our savings and to provide investment for businesses. Let's tame 
them, not destroy them.
 