
Google's former chief executive Eric Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/eric-schmidt> told jurors on Tuesday 
that he was confident that the Android smartphone platform was developed 
legally, and that top executives at Sun Microsystems did not object to the 
project now at the centre of a high-stakes court battle.

"My understanding was what we were doing was permissible," he said. "From the 
sum of my experiences and interactions, I was very sure what we were doing was 
legally correct."

Schmidt, now Google's executive chairman, took the stand in the trial of 
Oracle against Google over the use and development ofAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, which now powers around 300m 
smartphones and tablets around the world.

Oracle, which acquired Sun in 2010 after bidding for it in 2009, sued Google 
in August 2010, saying Android infringed on its copyrights and patents for the 
Java programming language.Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>
 countered that it does not violate Oracle's patents and that Oracle cannot 
copyright certain parts of Java, an open source software language.

In court on Tuesday, Oracle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oracle> 
lawyer David Boies showed Schmidt a 2005 presentation given to Google's top 
managers that said Google must take a licence from Sun. Schmidt said he could 
not recall being told that was the case.

Schmidt said at one point that Google derived enough advertising revenue from 
Android to fund the operating system and a whole bunch more.

"The goal was to get as many users as we could on a powerful new platform that 
could exploit the Web," Schmidt said of Android.

But Schmidt did not specify how much money Google gets from Android; the 
company has fought to keep that figure out of the glare of the courtroom 
spotlight, although US District Judge William Alsup, presiding over the case, 
has said that such data is not off-limits and can be demanded in evidence.

So far Oracle's lawyers have not sought to elicit it, although that might 
emerge in any damages claim later in the case.

Greater ease

Unlike Google chief executive Larry Page, who testified last week, Schmidt 
appeared much more at ease while parrying questions from Boies about the 
development of Android.

Reports from the courtroom suggested that he was able to hold the jury's 
interest far more effectively than previous witnesses, including Page and 
Android chiefAndy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin> – 
who preceded him on the stand – in explaining the sometimes deeply complex 
topic of program code and classes, and application programming interfaces 
(APIs).

Oracle claims that Google has infringed 37 Java APIs in Android. Judge Alsup 
ruled earlier this week thathe will decide on whether APIs can be copyrighted, 
but said it would be up to the jury to decide whether Google's use of the APIs 
in Android – which have essentially identical names and, apparently, functions 
as those in Java – are fair use of a limited amount of a copyrighted work, or 
infringement.

Schmidt said that Google did not need a licence from Sun to create its own 
version of Java. Boies pointed out that Google was the only company yet cited 
which used Java's APIs without a licence.

Schmidt said that Google had planned to use Java from the start of the project 
– but disagreed on the characterisation of the computer language and platform.

"An interface is a specification. A name," he said. "There's a collection of 
those names that forms the standard that Java uses. We – Google – implemented 
those interfaces in our own way."

Challenged on whether Google had copied the 37 APIs, Schmidt responded: "We 
used the interface names, which is how one does this, and then did our own 
implementation of those services."

Oracle has pointed to lines of code that are the same in Android's source and 
in Java as evidence of direct copying rather than a clean room implementation 
of the language, and suggested that makes Google liable to license Java.

"Are you saying the only thing you copied was the names?" asked Boies.

"Yes," said Schmidt.

Final exam

Boies's examination of Schmidt was the final part of Oracle's case on 
copyright.

At one point, Schmidt asked Boies to repeat a question, saying he wanted to be 
sure he answered it truthfully. "I want you to answer truthfully," Boies 
replied, prompting Schmidt to laugh.

Boies had been less happy earlier in the day with Rubin. Boies had cited an 
email from Rubin at the time when Google was developing Android in which Rubin 
wrote: "I think a clean room implementation is unlikely because of prior 
knowledge … anyone with specific knowledge especially those from Sun are 
tainted and would be bad."

Google has hired a number of former Sun staff in recent years, including for 
the Android project.

But courtroom observers described Rubin as having sidestepped questions from 
Boies, who wanted to show that Google knew developing its own version could 
fragment Java. Rubin said he didn't recognise the lawyer's use of the word 
fragmentation.

Rubin then testified to Google's lawyer that the team had considered using 
Javascript, Python and Lua to implement Android.

But he said that his experience from his first mobile startup, Danger 
(subsequently sold to Microsoft after Rubin had left it) had highlighted the 
benefits of Java – it was a well-known brand name with wide compatibility, and 
was taught at many universities worldwide.

He said he had led preliminary negotiations with Sun about implementing Java 
on Android in 2005.

In one telling email to a Java licensing account manager at Sun, Rubin wrote 
that allowing Android to go open source could mean a really close partnership. 
"As discussed, the two companies [Google and Sun Microsystems] are aligned 
against a common industry bully" – apparently a reference to Microsoft.

Google then called Schmidt straight back to the stand as its first defence 
witness, where he was questioned by Google lawyer Robert Van Nest.

Schmidt told him that in 2006 Sun wanted roughly $30m (£18.6m) to $50m to 
develop a mobile platform jointly with Google. Such a deal would have saved 
Google time in getting Android to market, Schmidt said.

"We would have paid that simply to resolve it," he said. The period predated 
Apple's release of the iPhone, though Schmidt may have been aware of its 
development because he then sat on Apple's board.

Instead, Schmidt said: "It's hard to relate to that now, but we were very 
concerned Microsoft's mobile strategy would be successful."

Microsoft at the time was driving hard with its Windows Mobile platform, which 
was attracting a growing number of handset makers, leaving Nokia, Microsoft, 
Palm and BlackBerry maker RIM as the key platforms in the market.

Microsoft's power in the mobile market has since withered in the face of the 
onslaught of Android, which now powers more than 50% of smartphone handsets 
being sold worldwide.

But, Schmidt said, negotiations between the two companies faltered. 

Rubin later testified that while Google wanted to make the software platform 
open source, Sun wanted to impose restrictions to which Google was opposed.

Alone with Android

After Google developed Android on its own and announced it at the end of 2007, 
Schmidt said he had multiple meetings with Sun chief executive Jonathan 
Schwartz, who never expressed any disapproval about Android.

Google has argued that Oracle launched the lawsuit only after Oracle decided 
it would be unable to develop a smartphone on its own.

The trial, expected to last at least eight weeks, has been divided into three 
phases: copyright liability, patent claims, and – if the jury determines that 
there has been infringement by Google – damages.

Early in the case, estimates of potential damages against Google ran as high 
as $6.1bn. But Google successfully narrowed Oracle's patent claims and reduced 
the possible award. Oracle is seeking roughly $1bn in copyright damages.

The jury will deliberate on copyright liability before moving on to hear 
evidence about patent infringement.

Since the start of the trial, the US Patent Office has upheld one of the 
patents that Google had contested; that means that Oracle will be able to 
assert three rather than two patents during the second part of the case.

Judge Alsup may also decide some of the copyright issues.

Updated to clarify that Alsup will rule on whether APIs can be copyrighted.
 