
There is no end in sight for more than 800 law enforcement officers from 
state, local and federal agencies who are now in the tenth day of searching for 
Richard Matt and David Sweat, two convicted killers who escaped from the 
Clinton Correctional Facility in upstateNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>.


Personnel including corrections officers, rangers from the national forest 
service, FBI and US marshals have all been drafted into the search, and New 
York governorAndrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> 
has offered a reward of $100,000 for information that might lead to their 
arrest.

New York state police have reportedly said they had been sent nearly 900 
leads, including one that hinted the pair were headed to the neighbouring state 
of Vermont; though Cuomo has also said that they could well be “in Mexico by 
now”.


On Monday, Cuomo also announced that there would be a “thorough investigation” 
into the factors leading to the escape, led by New York state inspector-general 
Catherine Leahy Scott.


“Capturing these killers and returning them to state custody remains our top 
priority – however, it’s critically important to examine the circumstances that 
enabled these inmates to escape in the first place,” Cuomo said in a statement.


In the meantime, one person is now in court charged with providing the pair 
with the equipment they needed to escape. Joyce Mitchell, a prison employee who 
has been charged with providing contraband - materials that Matt and Sweat used 
to escape on 6 June, including hacksaw blades, chisels, a punch and a 
screwdriver - and criminal facilitation.


Prosecutors say Mitchell, a prison tailoring shop instructor who had 
befriended the inmates, had agreed to be the getaway driver but backed out 
because she still loved her husband and felt guilty for participating.


Mitchell made her second court appearance in Plattsburgh on Monday, where she 
waived a preliminary hearing. The case against her is now headed to a county 
court.


“Basically, when it was go-time and it was the actual day of the event, I do 
think she got cold feet and realised, ‘What am I doing?”’ Clinton County 
district attorney Andrew Wylie said Sunday. “Reality struck. She realized that, 
really, the grass wasn’t greener on the other side.”


Wylie said there was no evidence the men had a “plan B” once Mitchell backed 
out, and no vehicles have been reported stolen in the area. That has led 
searchers to believe the men are still near the maximum-security prison in 
Dannemora.


If the pair haven’t fled to Mexico, as Cuomo hinted, they might be getting 
more desperate, according to Erik Kulik, a wilderness survival expert. “Most 
fugitives at this point are getting desperate,” he told the Guardian. “It’s 
possible they’re just good at what they’re doing, or possible too that they’ve 
received some assistance on the outside.”


This is a possibility that law enforcement have clearly considered too. “Make 
no mistake,” Cuomo said on Monday. “Any individual found to have assisted in 
this escape will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.”
 