
The austerity measures being pursued by a number of European countries have 
led to very little gain, official figures show.

Several countries at the forefront of the economic crisis saw borrowings rise 
last year, even though they followed the strict fiscal tightening prescribed by 
international creditors to keep their debt levels down, according to figures 
from Eurostat, the EU's statistics office.

Though the cumulative level of government deficits fell last year, mainly 
because of Germany swinging into a budget surplus, many countries have 
continued to reel from the costs associated with recession.

Spending cuts and tax increases have helped to reduce deficits across the 17 
EU countries that use the euro, but the region's debt burden rose after 
economic growth flatlined and fewer companies and households paid taxes.

Of the four countries that accepted financial assistance, Portugal and Spain 
saw their deficits swell in value terms and in proportion to the size of their 
economies. Portugal's deficit increased to 6.4% of GDP in 2012, from 4.4% the 
year before; Spain's jumped to 10.6% from 9.4%.

Greece managed to make further inroads in cutting its borrowings, but the 
deficit rose to 10% of its annual GDP from 9.5% as the country remained mired 
in a deep recession. Only Ireland, widely viewed as the poster child of 
austerity, saw its deficit fall under both criteria – it stood at 7.6% of GDP 
against 13.4% the year before.

Overall in the eurozone, the deficit dropped in 2012, to about €353bn (£302bn) 
from €391bn the year before, with Germany posting a dramatic improvement. 
Europe's biggest economy posted a €4.1bn budget surplus last year compared with 
a €20.2bn deficit in 2011. As a result, the budget deficit of the whole 
eurozone fell to 3.7% of the region's annual GDP. In 2012, eurozone debt was 
worth 90.6% of the region's annual GDP, up from 87.3%.

Overall borrowing in the eurozone stands well in comparison with the US, which 
has a budget deficit worth about 7% of annual GDP.
 