
Campaigners for Britain to remain in the EU are turning to student unions for 
help, asking them to attempt to mobilise their members in a turnout drive that 
could swing the overall result.

The Labour MP Alan Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson> 
has written to every student union president arguing: “You are best placed to 
speak directly to your peers about why this referendum matters to them.”

He adds: “So I am writing today to ask you to enter the fray in this battle to 
keep Britain in the EU.”

The intervention follows a poll by the National Union of Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> that found three out of four 
back the campaign to stay inside the union, while only 14% support the idea of 
Brexit.

The figures back up the general trend that the majority of young people want 
Britain to remain in the EU, while more old people want Brexit, which worries 
in campaigners because younger voters are significantly less likely to turn out.

Johnson writes: “This is the biggest political decision of my lifetime and 
will have a profound impact on current and future university students, and 
Britain’s ability to have a thriving higher education sector producing world 
class research. The impact of this decision will also be profound on our 
economy and the jobs available to students when they graduate.”

He calls on the unions to run active, engaged voter-registration campaigns. 
“TheEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has championed peace, 
democracy, free speech and the rule of law on our continent for 70 years. Many 
thanks in advance for your help to ensure that Britain remains a member.”

The NUS is providing support for student unions across the country to campaign 
on the referendum, including providing policy briefings and carrying out a 
voter-registration drive.

Megan Dunn, the NUS national president, said: “We must make sure the student 
voice is too powerful to be ignored in this referendum. We travel, work, and 
study abroad to a greater degree than previous generations while politically we 
are involved in pushing for innovation in climate change, international 
development and global justice. The EU advances and protects the values that 
Britain’s young people believe in and is a force for tolerance and respect.”
 