
Helen Mirren harked back to a golden age of European cinema in her speech at 
the silver anniversary of the European film awards on Saturday night. "Thank 
you for the great honour of recognising that I, too, am a fucking whore," she 
said, after being handed an achievement in world cinema award by her sometime 
co-star Michael Gambon. "And very, very proud of it."

Mirren's words were an echo of a description of the acting profession coined by
Jeanne Moreau <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/09/features.review3> 
when picking up an equivalent honour five years ago, and brought gales of 
laughter and applause from the 1,000-strong audience in Malta. In her address, 
Mirren explained that it was actors such as Moreau, as well as Claudia 
Cardinale and Liv Ullman, who had inspired her early in her career, after an 
accidental viewing of L'Avventura at a seedy cinema in Brighton, her first 
experience of a non-Hollywood movie. "I wanted to be a woman like them," she 
said.

Speaking to the Guardian after the ceremony, Mirren expressed scepticism as to 
whether UK film-makers still looked to Europe aspirationally. "I think we have 
the great misfortune in Britain of speaking American. We're always looking over 
there to sell our movies. And the brilliance of European film is that they 
can't do that because Americans won't watch movies with subtitles – they're 
idiots, really, the general public, they won't watch dubbed films either. So a 
[European] film has to be spectacularly successful to be shown in America."

But she also felt Britain and America's common tongue might be creatively 
detrimental. "In a weird way it's kind of paralysed us. The best movies [we 
make] are the truly authentic British movies, without looking at the American 
market – by Ken Loach, by Andrea Arnold. They look the other way; they see 
themselves as European film-makers."

The European film awards <http://www.europeanfilmawards.eu/en_EN/home> – "or 
as some people in America call it, 'the what?'" quipped the German host, Anke 
Engelke – are administered in Berlin and were founded 25 years ago by the 
director Wim Wenders as an alternative to the Oscars. In his opening address, 
Wenders advocated greater investment in European cinema as a cure for the 
economic and identity crises from which he felt the continent was suffering. 
"With cinema we can rightfully own and convey the European dream."

Voted for by more than 2,700 academy members, the EFAs cheerlead for the 
continent's storytelling flair, with large portions of Saturday evening's 
ceremony devoted to videotape of luminaries such as David Puttnam and Ken Loach 
lamenting what is perceived as Hollywood's stranglehold over global 
distribution and proposing solutions. The Turkish-German director Fatih Akin 
went so far as to advocate forced screenings of European movies, and the 
Austrian auteurMichael Haneke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke> 
echoed the sentiment by noting that "if you serve someone mashed potatoes, it's 
possible he won't much like spinach".

Haneke's latest serving of green vegetables, Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147440/amour>, the story of two retired 
Parisian music teachers coping after one of them suffers a stroke, was the 
unsurprising big winner of the evening. The film took best picture, best 
director, best actor and best actress, having already picked up the Palme d'Or 
at the Cannes film festival, and looks likely to break out of the 
foreign-language film "ghetto" at next year's Oscars to be a contender in 
mainstream categories.

At a press conference following the three-and-a-half-hour event, Haneke 
dismissed interest in awards buzz and was courteously curt about the importance 
of any formal accolade. "It's very pleasant. The respect of any viewer is 
important to me." He declined to talk about any future projects, as "you don't 
talk about eggs that have not yet fallen from the chicken".

During the ceremony the Austrian director spoke in his native German, rather 
than English, "to preserve my identity", and thanked his wife, main actors and 
producer. Neither of the film's leads could be in Malta's capital, Valletta, to 
pick up their gongs; Jean-Louis Trintignant was on tour in a play and 
Emmanuelle Riva was suffering from flu.

Elsewhere at the awards, UK cinema loomed large, with Tinker Tailor Soldier 
Spy picking up two awards, for Alberto Iglesias's soundtrack and Maria 
Djurkovic's production design. The director Jim Sheridan presented the 
cinematography award to Sean Bobbit for his work on Steve McQueen's sex addict 
drama Shame, with Bobbit also picking up the best editor award in the absence 
of his Shame colleague Joe Walker, who has just completed work on McQueen's 
latest film, Twelve Years a Slave. In a text message, Walker said he 
appreciated the recognition because, unlike most Brits, he always wanted to be 
considered European.

But there was disappointment for Broken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147439/broken>, the directorial debut 
of the British theatre director Rufus Norris, which had lead the pack before 
the ceremony withnine nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/06/broken-british-independent-film-award-nominations>
 but came away empty-handed.

The Danish director Thomas Vinterberg won the best screenwriting prize for The 
Hunt, his drama about a primary school teacher wrongly accused of child abuse, 
and the documentary prize went to Manuel von Sturler for Winter Nomads, a study 
of Swiss shepherds; he dedicated his award to one of the subjects, currently 
tending their sheep.

The most warmly received speech was that of one of the producers of the 
people's choice award winner, which included a marriage proposal to his 
girlfriend. The award went to Hasta La Vista, about three disabled virgins who 
go on a wine tour anticipating it will become a sexual odyssey. The proposal 
was successful.

The EFA founders Wenders and Marisa Paredes ended the ceremony by announcing 
Bernardo Bertolucci as the recipient of the lifetime achievement award, and 
giving a precis of his career accompanied by clips. Bertolucci's films were 
frequently concerned with sex, said Paredes, "because he loves woman [sic] and 
also a little bit of afraid of them".

The director took to the stage in a wheelchair and was greeted with a standing 
ovation. "My mouth is too dry for long speeches," he said. "Long life to 
European cinema and a long life to the European Film Academy awards."

• This article was amended on 3 December 2012. Film director Fatih Akin was 
described as Turkish, as he was born in Germany. This has been corrected.
 