
Kolbeinn Sigthorsson scored a glorious winner as Iceland completed a superb 
comeback to beat theCzech Republic 2-1 in their Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> qualifier in Reykjavik and go 
top of Group A.

The home side dominated the game with their physical play but Borek Dockal 
gave theCzech Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> the 
lead 10 minutes into the second half, thumping a rising right-foot shot into 
the top left corner after he was teed up by Tomas Necid.

Jolted into life, Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> 
equalised five minutes later when Aron Gunnarsson dived to head home and, when 
Sigthorsson danced round Petr Cech and scored the winner in the 76th minute, 
the home crowd went wild.

The result puts Iceland within touching distance of qualifying for their first 
major tournament, as they now top the group on 15 points after six games, with 
the Czechs second on 13.

The Czechs started brightly, passing the ball fluidly and finding space 
between the Icelandic lines, while Necid wasted their best chance of the first 
half, heading a superb cross narrowly wide after 15 minutes.

That effort forced the home side into action and all of a sudden Iceland’s 
high-pressure tactics and hard-tackling style started to click.

The closest they came to scoring in the first half, though, was via a brace of 
Gylfi Sigurdsson free-kicks within the space of a few minutes midway through 
the half, with Cech saving the first and the second flying just over.

Iceland continued to bully the Czechs and Johann Gudmundsson could have scored 
a late third after a lung-bursting dash up the right. But, even though Cech 
parried the ball away for a corner, the celebrations were soon under way as 
Iceland’s remarkable run continues.

Holland lie third in the group behind the Czechs after dragging their own 
qualification campaign back on course with an unconvincing 2-0 win overLatvia 
in Riga. The goals came in four second-half minutes, with PSV Eindhoven’s 
Georginio Wijnaldum putting his side ahead in the 67th minute and his club 
team-mate Luciano Narsingh adding a second, running on to Daley Blind’s pass in 
the 71st minute.Turkey are a further two points behind after beating the 
group’s bottom team,Kazakhstan, 1-0 in Almaty.

In Group B Wales’s qualification hopes were boosted as third-place Israel lost 
3-1 inBosnia & Herzegovina. Two goals from Edin Visca and an Edin Dzeko penalty 
revived the hosts’ slender chances of reaching the finals in France, though 
only afterIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/football/israel> had taken the 
lead against the run of play, through the 25-year-old winger Tal Ben Haim, who 
volleyed in a sliced Dzeko clearance in the 41st minute.

The visitors’ advantage lasted only a matter of seconds, Visca running on to 
Mensur Mujdza’s pass to equalise in the 42nd minute. Dzeko put the hosts in the 
lead in first-half stoppage time and Visca put the match to bed with a header 
from close range in the 75th minute.

Cyprus drew level with Israel on nine points, two behind second-placed Belgium 
and one ahead of Bosnia & Herzegovina, with a comfortable 3-1 win over pointless
Andorra. Again they had to come from behind, after Dossa Núnior’s own-goal put 
the Andorrans ahead in the second minute. It was not a good night for the 
defender, who also missed a second-half penalty, but a Nestor Mytidis hat-trick 
ensured that his team did not suffer.

No team changed positions in Group H, as the top three sides – Croatia and 
Italy, who fought out a 1-1 stalemate in Split, and Norway, held 0-0 by 
Azerbaijanin Oslo – all drew. Bulgaria are now two points behind the Norwegians 
after a 1-0 victory inMalta, where Ivelin Popov volleyed in the only goal in 
the 56th minute, though they, too, missed a penalty, Ilian Micanski dragging 
his effort wide in first-half stoppage time.
 