
Ragusa - Sicily

Stunningly located on a rocky outcrop in the far south of Sicily, Ragusa's 
sandstone houses, domes and towers spill down its hillsides. From here you can 
explore surrounding wineries and towns. Less than half an hour away is the 
spectacular small Baroque city of Modica where La Gazza Ladra specialises in 
nuovo-Siciliano dishes such as citrus-scented duck with fennel purée and 
celeriac, and has a wine list strong on small local producers.

Stay at Locanda Don Serafino in Ragusa (0039 0932220065, locandadonserafino.it 
<http://www.locandadonserafino.it>, doubles from €135 B&B), an intimate 10-room 
hotel.
Fly to Catania with thomsonfly.com <http://www.thomsonfly.com> or 
flythomascook.com <http://www.flythomascook.com>.

Essen - Germany
 A former coking plant in Zollverein, Essen, now a Unesco world heritage site. 
Photograph: Heinz Wohner/Getty Images/LOOK 
Once a centre for the coal and steel industries, Essen's chimneys no longer 
pump out smoke - instead its former plants have been turned into cultural 
centres, housing collections of art that, in some cases, have become 
Unesco-listed attractions in their own right. The Gasometer Oberhausen (
gasometer.de <http://www.gasometer.de>), a central gas storage facility, now 
houses exhibition halls (Out of this World - Wonders of the Solar System runs 
until January 2010); and Zollverein (zollverein.de <http://www.zollverein.de>), 
once the world's biggest coal mine, is now a Unesco site. Essen is one of 
several cities making up the Ruhr region, which together have been designated 
European Capital of Culture 2010. They're all within easy reach of each other 
by local transport and include Bochum with Germany's largest concentration of 
bars and restaurants.

Stay at The Ruhr Hotel (0049 201 778053, ruhrhotel.de <http://www.ruhrhotel.de>
, doubles from €89 B&B ) is fairly standard looking but well located in the 
museum district.
Fly to Dortmund from Luton with easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>.

Lodz - Poland

The trouble with Lodz, even the locals used to say, was that unlike Warsaw it 
wasn't devastated in the second world war - so the ugly old industrial town 
(the Polish Manchester) missed out on a much-needed makeover. That's changed 
now: a combination of EU funds and private enterprise has transformed the city. 
The gloomy old hulks of obsolete textile factories have become handsome museums 
and shopping malls, and among the tourist targets are the Lodz film school, 
where Polanski and Kieslowski studied, imposing wartime memorials, and the 
majestic, sprawling Jewish cemetery. You'll be thirsty after that lot, so head 
for Ulica Piotrkowska, the three-mile long high street with its 90-odd pubs.

Stay at The Revelo hotel (0048 42 636 86 86, revelo.pl <http://www.revelo.pl>, 
doubles from £70 B&B), a restored city centre art nouveau mansion that's all 
polished parquet and period furnishings.
Fly to Lodz from Edinburgh or Stansted with ryanair.com 
<http://www.ryanair.com>. 

Montpellier - France

Had Montpellier enjoyed a Roman heritage - the odd sun-pickled amphitheatre, 
decaying column or redundant aqueduct - it might have sent a stronger signal to 
the tourist radar. Instead, most visitors flock to Nîmes, Uzès and Arles, or go 
east to the Riviera hotspots or west to showboating walled Carcassone, leaving 
France's eighth largest city to the scholars and students - it has the 
country's oldest university and 43% of locals are under 30. So take to two 
wheels to check out the buzzy, cafe-drenched Place de la Comédie, compelling 
Musee Fabre and the startling 1980s housing of Antigone. Such innovative 
projects have seen progressive Montpellier lauded as the "Rome of Tomorrow." 
Quelle irony.

Stay at Hôtel du Parc (+33 467 41 1649, hotelduparc-montpellier.com 
<http://www.hotelduparc-montpellier.com>, doubles from €53 room only. Breakfast 
costs €10), an atmospheric family-run Languedoc manor that's chocca with 
original features and period touches.
Fly to Montpellier with easyjet.com or ryanair.com. 

Mantua - Italy 

Often overlooked in favour of Florence, Rome and Venice, the art cities of 
Parma, Ravenna, Mantua, Padova and Ferrara in northern Italy have their own 
rich history and artistic heritage. Mantua, for example, surrounded by three 
lakes, was the seat of the Gonzaga family from the mid 14th century, and the 
impressive palazzos reflect the ambitions of the dynasty. Renaissance art and 
architecture abounds and the city was home to Andrea Mantegna whose Mantuan 
masterpiece was painted in the city's castle. It has a wide selection of 
restaurants serving local specialities and wines (head to L'Ochina Bianca on 
via Finzi). In 1586, the poet Torquato Tasso wrote: "This is a very beautiful 
city and one worth travelling a thousand miles to see." His words still ring 
true.

Stay at  Casa Poli where three nights' B&B cost from £612pp, including BA 
flights from Gatwick to Verona or Bologna and car transfers, with Kirker 
Holidays (020-7593 1899,kirkerholidays.com <http://www.kirkerholidays.com>) 

Teruel - Spain

The people of Teruel, a coquettish city one hour's drive inland from Valencia, 
once campaigned for better roads under the slogan "Teruel exists" - just in 
case their compatriots had forgotten this little jewel. Teruel bears two 
special imprints from the past. Mudejar architecture, the Spanish hybrid 
created by Moorish artisans working for Christian architects, dots the 
cityscape in churches, the cathedral and the medieval centre. Outside town it 
is dinosaur footprints that bring visitors, especially Dinopolis (dinopolis.com 
<http://www.dinopolis.com>) - a combined theme park and research centre. La 
Tierreta restaurant combines local produce with avant garde cooking.

Stay at The Parador hotel (00 34 902 54 79 79, parador.es 
<http://www.parador.es>, doubles from €104) on the outskirts of town. 
Fly to Valencia with easyjet.com or ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>. 

Akureyri - Iceland 

Reykjavik might hog the limelightwild nights, fresh crop of hotels and 
thriving arts scene, but from next June, when Iceland Express begins direct 
flights from Gatwick, Akureyri will emerge from the shadows to offer a slightly 
surreal take on the long weekend break. Iceland's second city, swaddled by a 
dramatic fjord just below the Arctic Circle, has a stack of galleries (one 
street, Kaupvangsstraeti, is known as Art Canyon), a burgeoning foodie scene 
with the likes of Rub 23, Strikio and Friorik V, whose chef trained at London's 
River Cafe, and a nightlife where you might bump into Sigur Ros on the 
dancefloor.

Stay at The functional rather than hip Hotel Edda Akureyri (00354 444 4900, 
en.hoteledda.is <http://en.hoteledda.is>, open summer only) and be sure to head 
out of town for whale watching, lava landscapes and boiling mud, at the Myvatn 
Baths, northern Iceland's equivalent of Reykjavik's Blue Lagoon.
Fly with Iceland Express (0118 321 8384, icelandexpress.com 
<http://www.icelandexpress.com>) from Gatwick.

Yerevan - Armenia 

Founded in 782BC, the capital of Armenia is one of the world's oldest 
continuously-inhabited cities. Crammed to the gills with history, it nestles in 
the shadow of Mount Ararat and has a medieval centre but it's Yerevan's 
religious heritage that is its main claim to fame. The city is dotted with 
early monasteries and the museum of Matenadaran holds 1,600 ancient religious 
manuscripts. Known as the City of Cafes, it's also a great place for a post 
history lesson surj (Armenian coffee) or freshes (fruit smoothie). You can also 
tuck into something a tad stronger - the southern chunk of the former soviet 
union is a specialist producer of famously high-strength wines and brandies, 
with most of the production in the Ararat Valley and the spectacular hills 
above.

Stay at The Hotel Hrazdan in Yerevan with The Traveller (020-7436 9343, 
the-traveller.co.uk <http://www.the-traveller.co.uk>). A three-night "Taster 
Weekend" costs from £995pp, including flights from Heathrow with British 
Midland, transfers, accommodation and optional guide.
 