
Chechhee Sherpa was cooking dinner when her husband called from Everest. Just 
23, Abiral Rai was working for the first time on the mountain, carrying loads 
for his New Zealand client in preparation for an attempt on the summit in May. 
He told Chechhee that he would be up at 2am on Friday to climb from Base Camp 
through the notorious Icefall to Camp 2 in the Western Cwm, the last major 
staging post before a summit attempt.

When she woke next morning to clear blue skies in Kathmandu, her day suddenly 
darkened. A friend in the Sherpa village of Namche Bazaar called to say there 
had been an accident in the Icefall and many Sherpas were dead. Chechhee's 
blood ran cold.

As news spread, it quickly became clear that this would be among the worst 
tragedies since climbing on the mountain began in 1921. According to Ishwori 
Paudel, owner of Himalayan Guides, 12 climbers were confirmed dead by Friday 
evening and four were still missing. At least four Sherpas were injured, one of 
them critically. According to a Sherpa at Base Camp, search and rescue efforts 
would resume at first light. Six of Paudel's Sherpas were among the dead and 
missing.

A 13th body was found on Saturday. Officials said that they did not expect to 
find any survivors.Nepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> tourism 
ministry official Dipendra Paudel said search teams were trying to locate 
bodies buried under snow.

Chechhee knew that Abiral could be among the casualties. Newly pregnant, she 
suddenly faced the prospect of being a widow.

She immediately called the office of Himalayan Ecstasy, the agency in 
Kathmandu working with Abiral. He was safe, they said, but another in his team 
had not been so lucky. Later that morning Abiral, using the 3G network that 
covers the mountain, called home on his mobile phone to reassure Chechhee he 
was alive.

The details of what happened on Everest at around 6.45am are still unclear, 
and according to agents in Kathmandu, expedition organisers were busy with the 
ongoing rescue effort. But the account of the accident Abiral gives is 
harrowing. He says he left Base Camp at 3.30am, later than he told Chechhee, 
carrying a kitchen table on his back for the mess tent at Camp 2. "None of the 
clients had been on the mountain yet."

Less than 200m from Camp 1, he and four other Sherpas he was climbing with 
discovered that three aluminium ladders that had been tied together to bridge 
an obstacle had been damaged. They stopped for an hour to reset the fixed 
ropes. "There was a traffic jam at the ladders. If we hadn't been held up then 
maybe no one would have been killed." Behind him, Abiral says, he could see up 
to 60 other Sherpas climbing towards him.

Out of the darkness, 400m above his head, Abiral heard an ominous crack and 
the sound of falling ice. A vast serac – or ice cliff – split from the 
mountainside and toppled towards them. Trapped in a bowl in the glacier they 
had nowhere to run to for safety.

There were five Sherpas on the rope with Abiral. Two of them were hit by the 
ice and swept away, including his friend Akash Tamang, one of the expedition's 
cooks. "It all happened in front of my eyes. I just happened to be in a safe 
place. I didn't even get hit by the wind of the avalanche." Behind him, a large 
group of Sherpas weren't so lucky. Twelve bodies were discovered in the same 
location attached to the same rope, in the same depression in the glacier.

Jiban Ghimire, owner of Shangri-La Nepal, lost four of his team with one still 
missing, some of them working for an NBC crew filming the attempt by wing-suit 
flier Joby Ogwyn to base jump from the top of the mountain.

Civilian rescue helicopters removed the bodies using lines to lift them from 
the glacier, although Abiral Rai says there were fears among the Sherpas that 
the operation might dislodge more ice. The dead were flown to Pheriche, where 
the Himalayan Rescue Association runs a health post, before the Nepalese army 
flew the bodies to Namche Bazaar and Lukla.

Base camp is currently crowded as the peak climbing season on Everest 
approaches. A weather window in May allows the greatest chance of success.
 Dawa Tashi Sherpa, below, among survivors, is being treated in intensive 
care. Photograph: Prakash Mathema/AFP 
Last year more than 500 climbers reached the summit of Everest. On 19 May 
about 150 climbed the last 915m to the peak within hours of each other, causing 
lengthy delays as mountaineers queued to descend or ascend harder sections.

Officials have cut mountaineering fees for many other peaks while requiring 
each climber scaling Everest to bring back 8kg of rubbish in an attempt to 
clean up the "roof of the world".

Last year officials floated the idea of installing a ladder on the famous 
Hillary Step, a crucial stretch of technical climbing at nearly 8,840m 
(29,000ft) on Everest, named after its first climber, Sir Edmund Hillary.

Though such innovations are anathema to many purist climbers, some Sherpas 
welcome them. The impact Everest's worst ever accident will have on the Sherpa 
community is audible in Jiban Ghimire's cracked voice as he lists the villages 
in the Sherpa homeland that lost sons. "Two from Thamo, one from Phurte, one 
from Taksindu."

Families were gathering last night in Namche and Kathmandu for the Buddhist 
funeral rites. Monks pray over the dead and choose an auspicious time for the 
bodies to be cremated. After 49 days, another ceremony is held for the souls of 
the dead to escape Bardo, or purgatory, and move on to their next life.

Those few weeks will be a testing time for the Sherpa community and for 
climbing on Everest. The death of so many Sherpas in one accident has dealt a 
huge blow to this tight-knit community. They now face a dilemma. While the 
mountains are sacred to Sherpas, Everest is also their workplace. Climbing and 
trekking has transformed Khumbu, the region closest to Everest. According to UN 
figures, levels of poverty in the district around Namche are the lowest in 
Nepal.

Yet the price being paid for this prosperity is much too high for some. Jemima 
Sherpa, daughter of the first Sherpa to get a PhD, tweeted: "There are the 
tragedies, and there are the tragic vanities that lead to them." Ang Tsering, 
president of the NepalMountaineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mountaineering> Association and a community 
leader, said no decision had yet been reached on whether the climbing season 
would continue. "This is such a sad day. I can't really explain."

Ang Tsering added that he had attended an emergency meeting at the home 
affairs ministry that included the deputy prime minister. "The government will 
be looking at ways to minimise this kind of accident in the future. They also 
immediately released funds for the families of the dead." Officials, rescue 
workers and expedition organisers met at Base Camp on Friday afternoon to 
co-ordinate the rescue effort and discuss what will happen next. For Abiral 
Rai, his expedition is over. "I'm done with the mountains."
 