
The Nepalese government is considering cancelling all expeditions to the 
summit of Mount Everest for the rest of the year as rescuers abandoned their 
search for three Sherpas believed to have been killed along with 13 othersin an 
avalanche on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/18/everest-avalanche-sherpas-killed>
.

The avalanche has raised concerns in Nepal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> about the scale of the climbing 
business and the dangers to the Sherpa guides. This year, 334 climbers from 
around the world were given permits, costing $10,000 (£5,958) each, to climb 
Everest. Filming permits and other fees bring in more money to the government 
in Kathmandu. If the expeditions are cancelled the government will have to 
refund the fees.

"This is an unprecedented situation," the tourism ministry spokesman Madhu 
Sudan Burlakoti told journalists. "We do not know what to do if they want their 
tax back. We will hold further discussions before deciding anything on this 
issue."

Sherpas have also been angered by the government offering families of the 
victims $400 (£238) which will only cover funeral costs.

Expedition leaders, politicians and leading Sherpas have agreed to lobby the 
government to improve compensation for guides. Sherpas feel they do not get a 
fair share of climbing royalties but are expected to take a disproportionate 
amount of the risk and demonstrations are planned before the funerals take 
place this week.

Mingma Sherpa of Seven Summits Treks warned that there would be no Sherpa 
involvement in mountaineering in the future if their social security concerns 
were ignored. "Sherpas are the backbone ofMount Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/everest> expeditions but the government 
neglects them," he told the Himalayan Times. "We the Sherpas strongly urge the 
government to immediately act to support the families of deceased Sherpas. A 
permanent mechanism at government level is required."

Sherpas are an ethnic group in Nepal and have helped foreigners climb the 
country's towering peaks since before Sherpa Tenzing Norgay and New Zealander 
Sir Edmund Hilary became the first to reach the top in 1953.

The high numbers of climbers has led to tensions on the slopes. Following an 
attack on three European climbers last year, the tourism ministry established a 
government post with liaison officers and security personnel to keep the peace.

Sherpa anger at their exploitation, particularly among the young, is straining 
relationships with foreign commercial expedition leaders. Among those killed on 
Friday was Dorje Khatri, a campaigner for Sherpa rights who had previously 
carried the flag of a porter's union to the summit.

With the working conditions of high-altitude workers in the forefront of the 
public's mind, organisations representing them have been quick to add to the 
pressure on the government.

In addition to the $400 offered by the government, the families of Sherpa 
guides killed will receive $10,000 from mandatory insurance policies. Those 
working as cooks and other staff will get $5,000.

Ben Ayers, the Nepal country director for the dZi Foundation and a longtime 
advocate for trekking porters' rights, said that fees should be increased to 
ensure Sherpas are properly insured: "If the lives of Sherpas were insured at a 
comparable rate to foreign climbers, that might change the way people think 
about the risks they face on the mountain. That would be a start. It would 
increase the cost of climbing Everest by a few hundred dollars but so what? If 
that meant fewer people on the mountain that would be a good thing, too."

• The picture caption with this article was amended on 22 April 2014. An 
earlier version said the picture showed the avalanche that killed at least 13 
people on 18 April. In fact it was taken in 2012. The picture has also been 
removed for copyright reasons.
 