
A jump off the top of Everest by an American wearing a wingsuit has been 
cancelled following the avalanche that killed 13 people on Friday, the company 
planning to televise the event has said.

The Discovery channel had hoped for big ratings for the stunt by Joby Ogwyn, 
and had scheduled several hours of coverage in the runup to the jump, as well 
as worldwide live coverage on the day.

Discovery Network spokeswoman Laurie Goldberg said on Sunday the jump would 
not go ahead and that the network's thoughts and prayers went out to the Sherpa 
guides who were the victims of the avalanche.

Ogwyn was already at Everest in advance of the jump, which was scheduled to be 
televised live on 11 May.

Earlier he had said he would be going ahead with the jump. "Today is a 
brighter day," he wrote in a Facebook post on Sunday morning. "We are staying 
on the mountain to honour our friends and complete our project … We must honour 
them and take care of our friends and their families. This project had become 
much bigger now."

It emerged on Sunday that the Nepalese government was considering cancelling 
all expeditions to the summit of Everest for the rest of the year.

The bodies of 13 local Sherpa guides have been pulled from the snow and 
another three are thought to be still buried in Friday's avalanche, the worst 
single accident in the mountain's history.

Another nine were rescued alive from the avalanche, which hit the group of 
Sherpas as they hauled gear up the mountain for international climbers who were 
waiting at Everest base camp below.

The avalanche has raised concerns in Nepal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> about the scale of the climbing 
business and the dangers to the Sherpa guides. This year, 334 climbers from 
around the world were given permits, each costing $10,000 (£5,958), to climb 
Everest. Filming permits and other fees bring in more money to the government 
in Kathmandu. If the expeditions are cancelled the government will have to 
refund the fees.

"This is an unprecedented situation," tourism ministry spokesman Madhu Sudan 
Burlakoti told journalists. "We do not know what to do if they want their tax 
back. We will hold further discussions before deciding anything on this issue."

Sherpas have also been angered by the government offering families of the 
victims $400, which will only cover funeral costs.

Expedition leaders, politicians and leading Sherpas have agreed to lobby the 
government to improve compensation for guides. Sherpas believe they do not get 
a fair share of climbing royalties when they take a disproportionate amount of 
the risk and demonstrations are planned before the funerals take place this 
week.

• The picture caption with this article was amended on 22 April 2014. An 
earlier version said the picture showed the avalanche that killed at least 13 
people on 18 April. In fact it was taken in 2012. The picture has also been 
removed for copyright reasons.
 