
"Don't worry, this will out-crunch the credit crunch. There's a new investment 
in town and it will see you through the bad times and make the good times even 
better. Just look at who's promoting it, one of the world's most successful 
international entrepreneurs. (Yes, I know there are rumours about that bank 
default in Austria, but come on, you don't get to the top without breaking a 
few bankers' toes). But this is also a great breakthrough – his new patent – 
not only will you make fantastic profits, but you'll also be bringing advantage 
to the disadvantaged. And everyone is backing it – look at all the famous names 
on the board, anyone who's anyone is behind this. If they reckon it's good, it 
must be."

That was basically the pitch when Gus Melmotte 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/masterpiece/waywelive/whoswho/augustus_melmotte.html> 
hit town in 1875 and convinced everyone to invest in his South Central Pacific 
and Mexican railway. Everyone wanted to believe and the share price shot 
through the ceiling. The clever few sold out at the top, the rest lost 
everything.

That's the story of Anthony Trollope's The Way We Live Now 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Way_We_Live_Now>. At the time, it was his 
least successful novel – his readership didn't want to discover that everyone, 
simply everyone has their price. Now, it's reckoned to be his masterpiece – 
it's angry and it's honest and it's all too recognisable.

And how did Melmotte convince investors that it was gilt-edged? He simply 
ensured that his board of directors was packed with aristos – in 1875, they 
guaranteed probity.

"His talent was to pander to the vanities of those self-important noblemen, 
exposing their judgment as worthless." Except that isn't Trollope. That's Tom 
Bower, summing up howConrad Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/conradblack> did it. Black's board was 
equally packed with the great and (allegedly) good – former state governors and 
one-time secretaries of state. It was these men who nodded through all of 
Black's shenanigans without a second thought. Noblemen? Worthless? What's 
changed?

Nothing's changed, which is why it has been almost too easy to dramatise 
Trollope's story and set it right here right now, in the world of 2008 high 
finance and low cunning. In 1875, Gus Melmotte is Jewish, the necessary alien 
who might save British aristocracy from decades of remortgaging. In 2008, 
Ghassan Mehmoud is from somewhere east of Suez, oil-rich and apparently backed 
by sovereign wealth.
In 1875, it was a railway opening up the heart of Mexico. At that time, 
railways could not only generate enormous profits but also give investors the 
feelgood factor, that they were bringing Christian trade and civilisation to 
the poor and needy. In 2008, Mehmoud gets his hands on a patent for a medical 
breakthrough, a new formulation which will put antibiotics out of business: 
massive, inflation-proof profits and that ever-elusive feelgood factor.

And who are today's noblemen? Just who would give you the confidence to 
invest? Well, just flip through Hello! magazine or watch the faces fronting the 
ads on afternoon TV. These are today's noblemen – famous for being famous, the 
people with little talent and less financial acumen, but who will put their 
name to anything in return for an attendance fee.

The Way We Live Right Now <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/arts/whour_drama.shtml> 
starts today on BBC Radio 4 and continues daily at 10.45am, repeated at 7.45pm, 
Monday to Friday, until July 4.
 