 The on-going scrap over the spoils of the dead former Playboy model Anna 
Nicole Smith reached a turning point yesterday when the paternity of her baby 
daughter Dannielynn was finally put beyond doubt.
DNA tests confirmed the baby's natural father to have been Smith's former 
boyfriend, Larry Birkhead, a California-based photographer. The DNA expert who 
carried out the test on behalf of the Bahamas courts, Dr Michael Baird, said 
that the result was 99.999% in favour of Mr Birkhead, which he described as 
"pretty good".

Satellite television crews and throngs of tourists to the Bahamas were treated 
to the sight of Mr Birkhead gloating outside the courtroom in downtown Nassau. 
"I hate to be the one to tell you this," he said, clearly loving it, "but I 
told you so."

He said that, while nothing had been determined except parentage, "I'm the 
father. My baby's going to be coming home pretty soon. I'm going to the toy 
store."

The settlement of Smith's affairs has been marked by exceptional acrimony 
since she died of an overdose in a Florida hotel room in February. Amid the 
wrangling, the spectre of the $500m fortune which she was claiming from the 
estate of her late husband, the oil tycoon Howard Marshall, was never far away.

Aspersions flew over how she died, and there was an unseemly tussle over the 
location and manner of her burial. The paternity of her child - and with it the 
right to pursue the claim for the Marshall money - was also questioned within 
hours of her death. Several men stepped forward to claim the child was theirs.

Florida courts eventually turned Smith's body over to Dannielynn, and a 
temporary guardian ordered Smith to be buried in the Bahamas, next to her son, 
Daniel, 20, who died in September of an apparent drug overdose.

Even now, litigation is likely to continue over who has custody rights over 
Dannielynn, with the case expected back in the colonial courthouse.

Howard Stern was the model's long-term partner, and is listed as the 
seven-month-old's father on her birth certificate. But last night he accepted 
the DNA test, and said he would not fight custody. "This whole process has been 
very difficult," he commented.

He has made threatening noises to pursue legal action against elements of the 
media and against Smith's mother, Virgie Arthur, who speculated that he might 
have been involved in her death. Mr Stern vowed to prevent Mrs Arthur from 
gaining any access to the child.

"I'm going to do everything I can to make sure he [Birkhead] gets sole 
custody," he said.

For her part, Mrs Arthur said that she was only concerned about the safety of 
her "little granddaughter". "I am happy that she knows who her real father is, 
and I'm looking forward to working for her best interests."

"This has been a roller coaster," she added. "We've lost a grandson. Please 
don't forget that."

Court hearings over custody were to begin on Friday, and Mrs Arthur confirmed 
she still intended to press ahead with a claim for custody over the child.
 