
Great idea, the Open Champions' Challenge. The weather today, not so good. 
Whatever else Scotland does well the old country does nothing more impressively 
than its unpredictable weather systems. This one was a real doozy, as our 
American cousins say, pelting rain hurling in off a wild sea, the wind whipping 
everything and everyone daft enough to venture outside. "Real golfing weather," 
grinned the smug anoraks. "Give us a break," squealed the drenched rest of us.

This latter group included most, if not all, of the 26 former champions 
gathered in St Andrews and scheduled to play four holes to celebrate the 
championship's 150th anniversary. Fifty years ago,Arnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer> flung open his curtains in 
his room at Rusacks Hotel beside the 18th fairway and looked out on a dreary 
day of rain. Today he had someone else open the curtains but from the same 
hotel the old champ, now 81, grimaced at much the same sort of dull scene.

"I had the urge to play despite the weather," he said shortly after the 
Challenge had been cancelled by an apologetic R&A. "I always have the urge. 
Someone asked me this morning how I was hitting it and I told them: 'I am 
hitting it so hard I can hear it land.'"

That 1960 Open was Palmer's first. He ended up second to Kel Nagle, who 
finished with two birdies to win by a shot, but he was hooked and his 
enthusiasm for the Open was to revive a competition that had declined in 
stature and relevance as the years rolled by and the Americans stayed at home. 
Post-Palmer, they came in their droves and everything changed.

"I look out here at you guys and I think back to the reporters who were here 
50 years ago. Hell, I could count them on the fingers of my own hands and I 
knew them all by name.

"To see how this thing has grown over those 50 years is fantastic. When I 
arrived here the first thing I saw was a line of 14 mowers cutting the 18th 
fairway. In '60 they had three mowers and they cut the entire course with them.

"Plus there wasn't a green blade of grass to be seen. Now look at it. I 
thought I was at Augusta not St Andrews when I saw all that green out there. It 
used to be brown but now it looks beautiful and the conditioning is superb."

The chance to see this posse of ex-champions, men like Palmer and Roberto de 
Vicenzo of Argentina was compelling for the many thousands who pay some small 
attention to the old game. De Vicenzo won his Open at Hoylake in 1967 and then 
missed out on a Masters play-off the following spring when he signed for the 
incorrect score, was disqualified and summed it all up by saying "what a stupid 
I am".

Severiano Ballesteros, of course, was slated to attend until his cancer 
stepped between him and a public that would have swept him up in their emotion 
and carried him somewhere better than the dark places he has inhabited since 
collapsing at Madrid airport. He recorded a message via the BBC that would have 
been broadcast at the end of the Challenge and that would have resonated long 
into the night.

The R & A announced later that they had donated the event's £50,000 prize fund 
to the Seve Ballesteros Foundation which channels funds into medical research.

All this was lost todayby an unrelenting band of low pressure that gripped 
Fife tight and refused to let go. Peter Thomson, five times an Open winner but 
now struggling physically, put his name down to play. He was not going to swing 
a club but he was going to skipper one of the groups from his wheelchair. Yes, 
it was really was going to be one of those days.

Sir Nick Faldo told us how disappointed he was that the day had been scrapped. 
"The last time they staged this [in 2000] I played with Sam Snead so that was 
special. At one point today I suggested we just play two holes, not four – the 
first and 18th – but it was too brutal out there even for that. Pity."
 