
In March this year, as I was about to turn 72, I set off to visit family in 
Phoenix,Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>. I was headed 
there from Tucson when I took a wrong turn. I kept driving until my hybrid car 
ran out of petrol and then electricity, leaving me stranded in the middle of 
nowhere. I took out an atlas and realised I was in a high-altitude area in the 
White Mountain Apache Reservation, surrounded by deep canyons.

I planned to stay in the car with my dog Queenie and my cat Nike. We had jugs 
of water, crackers, crisps, cans of olives and a jar of Nutella that I had 
packed for the journey. We spent the first two nights inside the car huddled 
underneath layers of clothing to try to stay warm. On the third day we had very 
little food and water left. Queenie and I set out to search for more, leaving 
Nike in the car.

I grew up hiking and exploring the outdoors with my parents, so knew what to 
take with me. I brought along a tote bag filled with the food I had left. I 
also took items I carry in my car: binoculars, my phone, a pocketknife, a 
lighter, a book of matches, a compact mirror a toothbrush and tissues. I also 
took a lip balm and lipstick and used them as sunscreen, as well as a hat.


Queenie and I hiked to high ground; it took us almost the entire day. At the 
top, I used my binoculars to look for water and any sign of human habitation, 
but didn’t see anything, so we started hiking down and stopped about halfway to 
spend the night. I set up a campfire and huddled next to Queenie to try to stay 
warm. I was wearing a jacket, trousers and boots. That was a very cold and 
windy night.

The next morning I finally spotted a creek, hiked down to it, and Queenie and 
I drank as much water as we could. We spent the next few days walking 
downstream. I have scoliosis, which meant it was difficult to walk, but I kept 
going.

I know how to distinguish edible plants from toxic ones, so I ate bitter 
clovers, along with dandelions and a large green leaf that looked like romaine 
lettuce. Four days into being stranded – on my birthday – I spotted a small mud 
turtle swimming in the creek. I jumped into the water, scooped up the turtle, 
killed it using my pocketknife, built a small campfire and cooked it. It was 
the only protein I ate during the entire time I was lost.

When I heard helicopters flying overhead I used a compact mirror to reflect 
the sun’s rays, waved my arms, jumped around and shouted frantically to draw 
their attention. At one point, I set two trees on fire. I formed a help sign 
using branches, white rocks and bones from the carcass of an elk I had found. 
But none of it worked – I grew angry when they didn’t see us. I thought I was 
never going to be rescued.

Queenie and I had lost so much weight that we looked like walking skeletons. I 
was ready to give up when, nine days in, I felt God telling me I’d be rescued 
before sunset.

The sun was just disappearing when I saw a helicopter coming down. I would 
finally be rescued. But Queenie had disappeared. As soon as the helicopter 
landed, one of the rescuers ran towards me. She grabbed me and held me while I 
cried. She assured me that both Queenie, whom they found just before me, and 
Nike, were safe.

Experience: I was stung by one of the deadliest creatures on Earth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/29/stung-by-one-deadliest-creatures-earth-experience>
I later learned that a search for me had begun six days earlier, after my car 
and Nike were found. About 30 people scoured the area on foot for days and 
there were aerial searches. Hopes were dwindling when finally my boot prints 
were spotted. A helicopter crew then discovered my help sign and as they 
rounded a bend in one of the canyons, they finally saw me, next to a signal 
fire, waving my hands.

I was airlifted to hospital where I was reunited with my son Jeff and daughter 
Erin. I cried my heart out when I saw them. Jeff said: “Mom, you stink, but I’m 
glad you’re alive.” Doctors couldn’t understand how I had survived nine days. I 
suffered from exposure, but was otherwise in good health and discharged that 
night.

Within days of being home, I was surprised by the floods of reporters keen to 
interview me. All I wanted was to relax and take in the fact that I had 
survived. I really thought I was going to die out there.

• As told to Griselda Nevarez. Do you have an experience to share? Email 
experience@theguardian.com <>
 