
Ian Mansfield, Charities Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

Borrowing is not a last resort: Lending should not be considered a last 
resort. Indeed, many occasions when this situation occurs result in the finance 
provider not looking favourably as the underlying performance has deteriorated 
and would struggle to support a funding request.

Trustees can be skeptical: In our experience, many financial directors have 
come from a financial background and recognise the importance of having 
alternative growth strategies and ways of achieveing these, including the use 
of finance. However, at trustee level, a significant number still hold the 
belief that being a charity means "we don't borrow". This can (and has) led to 
interesting discussions at board level that have resulted in changes of opinion 
within the charity and the belief that borrowing is bad. I think maybe 
executives are closer to market trends, while some trustees are a little 
further removed.

Things to consider before approaching a lender: A common pitfall is a charity 
requesting finance without a form of plan ie they have a need and have decided 
to borrow without thinking about the term of the loan, the type of loan 
(fixed/variable rate) or the impact of interest rate changes. Market research 
and forward planning for the service to be offered needs to have been 
quantified and evidenced for the lender to be comfortable and, more 
importantly, for the board to be comfortable that investment in this area is 
the correct path to follow.

David Hopkins, Charities Aid Foundation

Don't view loans as an income stream: We as charities should never fall into 
the trap of seeing a loan as an income stream. Borrowing will work best – as 
suggested – where there is a clear and coherent strategy in place to use the 
loan to reduce costs or secure effective income streams rather than a bail-out 
mechanism.

The sector needs to talk about borrowing more: I suspect examples and case 
studies will be the way to shift the mood music here and the increasing 
coverage given to traditional lending and social investment in the sector will 
be important. I know, for example, our colleagues inCAF Venturesome  
<https://www.cafonline.org/charity-finance--fundraising/banking-and-investments/social-investment.aspx>
have developed a good collection of case studies that have been useful in 
helping CEOs considering taking on a loan to make the case internally.

What you should include in your business plan: We look for a business plan. 
This will vary in complexity depending upon the size of the charity, but will 
fundamentally provide the background information on the borrower, what they 
want, what for, how it will be repaid, and alternative sources of repayment 
plus a sensitivity analysis to show "what if". The plan should also include 
income and expenditure, balance sheet and cashflow actuals and forecasts. This 
can then be used to frame a discussion with the bank about the type of facility 
(for example, short or long, secured or unsecured) and the terms that are most 
appropriate.

Talk to other charities: Don't fall into the trap of seeing a loan as a 
replacement for a grant. Test your financial assumptions as much as possible 
and, if possible, spend some time researching and talking to other charities 
that have walked the path you intend to as part of your process.

Helena Wilkinson, Price Bailey <http://www.pricebailey.co.uk/>

Borrowing must be affordable and achieve your aims: There can be a significant 
downside if the borrowing proves to be too much and the charity is not 
delivering on its business plan and is struggling to meet any repayments. The 
pressure on the remaining charity's resources, its management and reputational 
issues spring to mind. Therefore any borrowing needs to be affordable, based on 
sound principles and almost guaranteed to achieve.

Social investment is on the rise: More boards are starting to mention social 
investment, which is one form of borrowing, and how this can be apllied to 
them. The recent government consultation on the introduction of a new tax 
relief to encourage investment in social enterprises, with a view to 
introducing legislation in the finance bill 2014, may open up the level of 
future borrowing in charities as a result.

Make sure your constitution allows for borrowing: The charity and trustees 
need to look at their constitutions to see if they have the appropriate 
authority in their governing document regarding loans, mortgages or borrowings 
and whether they are any restrictions imposed. They may not be allowed to 
borrow even if they wish to without first updating their constitution.

David McHattie, Barclays 
<http://www.barclayscorporate.com/sector-expertise/public-sector/not-for-profit-charities.html>

The climate is changing: With the increasing move to commercial contracts with 
payments in arrears, away from upfront payment of grants, there is an 
increasing working capital requirement in the charity sector. Some of these 
needs can be met from charity reserves, but these are increasing in size and 
scale, leading to a number of charities seeking working capital facilities 
similar to corporates.

Reema Mathur, Stone King <http://www.stoneking.co.uk/>

Put your decisions on record: Look at bank borrowing as one of the financing 
options available, and discuss and record the reasons why trustees decide that 
borrowing is the best option for the charity.

Nigel Morrison, Grant Thornton <http://www.grant-thornton.co.uk/>

Smaller charities can still seek internal financial advice: If the charity 
does not have a financial expert on its board or at its disposal, then the 
auditors or solicitors would be an obvious starting point where objective 
professional advice will be available to the charity.

Charities will be treated like for-profit organisations: In my experience 
banks will approach a request from a charity in the same way they would if it 
were a for-profit organisation. I think this fact may sometimes come as a 
surprise to trustees. It is also clear that banks have increased the scrutiny 
they apply to lending requests and this again applies as much to charities as 
any other sector – the bar has been raised and charities need to react 
accordingly.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the voluntary 
sector network, <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> click 
here <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 