
Manchester United may no longer provide Ryan Giggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ryan-giggs> with the platform to show off 
his wonderful talent though last night the Wales captain used the international 
stage to deliver a timely reminder to Sir Alex Ferguson.

Giggs, who has fallen down the pecking order at Old Trafford this season, 
capped a vintage display with two exquisite goals as Wales recorded their first 
competitive back-to-back wins since March 2003. Victory also ensured that John 
Toshack's side avoided the ignominy of finishing bottom of Group Six, though 
that scenario never looked likely here as Wales comfortably disposed of
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan>.

It was the first time that Giggs had scored twice in a match for Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>. "He's a little bit like the pied 
piper at the moment," said Toshack. "There were four or five moments of quality 
and you can see that he's enjoying himself. He started to feel his back a 
little bit late on, so we substituted him, but once again he's given a 
man-of-the-match performance."

The Wales manager, who added that Giggs's injury was not serious, was also 
delighted with David Vaughan. The Crewe midfielder impressed on the left side 
with his penetrating runs and will no doubt figure prominently in Toshack's 
future plans. The 2008 European Championships was always the focus for Toshack 
when he took over last November and he is confident that Wales can approach 
qualification, which gets under way in September next year, with confidence.

Giggs's first goal here arrived inside three minutes when he stepped forward 
to curl a sublime 25-yard free-kick into the top corner after Vaughan was 
up-ended, though it was his second effort that roused the home fans. Having 
picked up the ball just inside the visitors' half the mercurial winger set off 
on a meandering run that left three defenders trailing before he cut inside to 
bend a superb shot past Dmitry Kramarenko.
 