
Ayrton



With his prodigious abilities and utterly uncompromising personality, grand 
prix racing will never see another driver in the mould ofAyrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna>. The Brazilian's death while 
racing for Williams in the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix – on the sport's darkest 
weekend, in which Roland Ratzenberger had also been killed and Rubens 
Barrichello injured – brought to a premature end a career that had looked 
likely never to be bettered.

Having travelled to Britain for his early racing career, Senna beat Martin 
Brundle to the British Formula Three crown in 1983 and was offered testing 
roles at top F1 teams including Lotus and McLaren for the following year. But 
he was determined to race and took a seat at Toleman, which led to a debut 
season where he would have won the Monaco GP had it not been red-flagged.

A move to Lotus for '85,'86 and '87 brought a clutch of victories, before he 
joined McLaren – the team with which he would win his three world titles, 
before the move toWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> in '94. 
Senna often talked about his faith but even that could not explain how he was 
able to achieve the incredible times over a single qualifying lap that became a 
trademark. He was not an angel – as his feud with Alain Prost proved – but fans 
would rarely fail to adore him.

Bruno



Ayrton once famously said: "If you think I'm fast, wait until you see my 
nephew." The son of his elder sister Viviane, Bruno gave up karting following 
his uncle's death but returned to the track 10 years later.

Having competed in junior categories including Formula BMW and British Formula 
Three, he finished second in theFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> feeder series, GP2, in '08, 
before his grand prix debut with Hispania in 2010. A part-season with 
Lotus-Renault followed last year before he signed with Williams, bringing the 
legendary Senna name back to the British team.
 