
The City of London wouldn't be the same without Foreign & Colonial. The Square 
Mile's venerable fund manager was founded in 1868 – the year William Gladstone 
first became prime minister, the last public hanging took place in England and 
the US banned slavery. Its name conjures up Middle England, chalk-striped suits 
and bowler hats. But a very ungentlemanly boardroom coup took place last week.

In a fit of pique, shareholders in F&C Asset Management voted to sack two 
directors, including chairman Nick MacAndrew, a 30-year fund management 
veteran, and install at the head of the boardroom table an opportunistic New 
York-based corporate raider, Edward Bramson. The US incomer built a 17% stake 
in F&C through a Guernsey vehicle called Sherborne Investors and has been 
agitating for change.

Publicity-shy Bramson, 59, was born in London but moved to the Big Apple 35 
years ago. He specialises in US-style "proxy battles" – hostile tilts for 
boardroom control – at poorly performing businesses. He will not be relocating 
to London, saying he has both a wife and a stable of horses on the other side 
of the Atlantic, and cheerfully admits he doesn't have a strategy for F&C: "I'm 
not being evasive, but I honestly don't know what we're going to do."

F&C has £106bn of customers' money under management. Its ethos, set by its 
founders in Gladstone's era, is to give "investors of moderate means" an access 
to the global capital markets, and a chance to invest in opportunities distant 
from Britain's shores. Frankly, though, for all this hoity-toity puff, it's 
been a bit of a dog lately. Before Bramson popped up on the share register, 
F&C's stock had slumped 73% in three years, its earnings per share had fallen 
41% and its dividend had been cut by three-quarters.

There are good grounds for shareholders to stamp their feet. F&C overpaid for 
two recent acquisitions, Thames River Capital and REIT Asset Management. But 
the company has been hobbled by factors outside its control. One of its largest 
shareholders, Dawnay Day, went bust, and it was demerged from parent Friends 
Provident in 2009 after a tortuous 14-month process. Both sagas prompted F&C's 
clients – pension fund managers – to sit on their hands before committing their 
funds.

Defenders of the departing management feel F&C was turning a corner; funds 
coming in exceeded money flowing out in the final quarter of 2010, for the 
first time in four years. So it was a canny moment to muscle in. The newly 
installed chairman seems to relish declarations of indecision. "There isn't a 
plan," he said. "We'll spend the next few months trying to work out what to do 
next." That doesn't inspire confidence.

Bramson has a track record as a turnaround merchant – past successes include 
the telecoms firm Spirent and chemicals company Elementis (although he's had 
failures, too, such as underperforming US fitness firm Nautilus). Most of his 
adventures have been in industry: closing a factory here, marketing a new 
product there. Fund management is different. Analyst Stuart Duncan of Peel Hunt 
points out: "Investing is a people business. It's got to be a happy ship." 
Bramson's first job will be to make sure F&C's Belgian chief executive, Alain 
Grisay, stays.

Shareholders in one of the City's oldest companies have truly taken a leap in 
the dark. TheFinancial Times has dubbed it "the defenestration of Primrose 
Street". Bramson has effectively seized control of F&C without making a bid, or 
paying the usual takeover premium. He's got one of the City's treasures on 
trust.

These coups are rare in Britain. Once in a while, hostile entrants manage to 
unseat directors – at Eurotunnel in 2004, at pub firm Mitchells & Butlers last 
year. They're much more common across the Atlantic, where billionaire 
investor-agitators such as Carl Icahn, Ron Burkle and Bill Ackman made their 
names by muscling their way into boardrooms. Those activist attacks often 
culminated in corporate break-ups, with goods and chattels sold off for a 
short-term buck. Bramson has weeks, rather than months, to set out a strategy 
for F&C or the business risks losing talent and cash. The City is watching: 
let's see how this is done New York-style.

Chrysler sets a new standard for ingratitude

If you think Britain's bailed-out banks are ungrateful, take a look at 
Detroit-based carmaker Chrysler, which owes $5.8bn to US taxpayers as a result 
of a rescue package that averted liquidation two years ago.

"I want to pay back the shyster loans," Chrysler's chief executive, Sergio 
Marchionne, told an industry conference on Friday. This wasn't an accidental 
outburst: he went on to repeat the word "shyster" twice more.

Chrysler is obliged to stump up $3.4m a day in interest repayments, which 
Marchionne, who also runs Chrysler's Italian alliance partner Fiat, considers a 
"thorn in my side". I'd like to see RBS try this flavour of rhetoric.
 