
Fabio Capello is considering recalling the old guard of David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham> and Gary Neville for this 
evening's World Cup qualifier against Andorra as England seek to extend their 
perfect record in qualification with a seventh successive victory.

The Italian coach has lost the suspended Gareth Barry in midfield and appears 
likely to ask Beckham to earn his 112th cap in the deeper-lying central role he 
has been playing while on loan at Milan from Los Angeles Galaxy. The 
34-year-old former captain started the friendly against the Czech Republic at 
Wembley back in August but has not begun a competitive game for his country 
since the European Championship qualifying tie in Estonia a little over two 
years ago and is expected to take advantage of Barry's absence.

Neville, surprisingly recalled to the squad for the qualifier in Kazakhstan on 
Saturday but prevented from featuring in that win after suffering a toe injury, 
has not played forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> since 
earning his 85th cap in the friendly defeat to Spain at Old Trafford in 
February 2007 under Steve McClaren, but he may get the nod at right-back with 
Glen Johnson one booking away from a one-match suspension.

The Portsmouth defender would miss the autumn qualifier against Croatia, 
currently second to England in Group Six, should he be cautioned this evening 
and so is unlikely to be risked.

"Gary is fit enough to play and has been training like the other players," 
Capello said. "Beckham is one of the options I have in midfield. I've seen him 
play some games for Milan in that position, with three midfielders in the 
centre. I like it. It's not a problem for David. In fact, he played for me at 
Real Madrid in central positions twice. It is possible to play him in there 
instead of Gareth Barry, but we also have [Shaun] Wright-Phillips. I could also 
put Steven Gerrard there, but I'd prefer him nearer the box because he can 
shoot from long distance."

Beckham's ability from set pieces may also prove critical given Andorra's 
stated intention to stifle and sit deep in defence. The side ranked 196 in the 
world went in 0-0 at half-time in England's opening group game in Barcelona 
last September and their tactics will be no more ambitious this time around.

Theo Walcott, due to link up with the England Under-21s squad ahead of the 
European Championship which begin next week, will start on the right. "Theo 
will be very important because we have to attack, and wide areas are very 
important," Capello said. "He needs to play. At the moment, all that matters is 
that we win this game.

"I watched Andorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> play Belarus 
and, for 80 minutes, they played with 10 men in front of their box defending. 
In the first game against them we only scored our first goal in the second 
half. I just hope we score quickly because, after that, you can play without 
pressure."
 