
What is a 'fair trade' holiday? 

It's about contributing to the income of the local community and providing a 
more authentic, intimate way of travelling, so travellers come back not talking 
about what bar they went to but what they discovered on their holiday. 
Travellers are yearning for a sense of what makes us culturally different not 
what maximises our cultural invasion. There has to be a stop to tourism that 
sullies the destination, which gives nobody in the local community a benefit. 
Fair trade holidays help support the local community, from the employment of 
local guides to eating in local restaurants and drinking in the local bars.

Give me some examples. 

There is a huge dichotomy. On the one hand, there are already examples of fair 
trade holidays: Tribes Travel, for example, ensures that 75% of all the money 
it makes stays within its holiday destinations. On the other hand, the business 
model for the big tour operators is about vertical integration where they 
control almost everything - agencies, hotels, flights, even the local ground 
transportation - and they get the lion's share of the profit. Out of every £100 
you spend on a holiday to an all-inclusive resort, £88 remains in the UK host 
business. What's fair about that?

Do you think people care? 

We tend to forget that tourism is a product and it is the experience of the 
cultural and natural heritage - the flesh and blood of the local people - that 
we often remember most from our holiday.

Should there be a fair trade holiday kitemark in travel agencies? 

People buy a product first and foremost because they like it, and then there 
is a big leap of faith to when they feel sympathy with the company. The 
community trade label has definitely worked for commodities like coffee, and it 
could work with fair trade travel, but there is more of a need for publicising 
it as an alternative to the package groups, to make consumers aware that they 
have a choice. If I want to take my daughters and their families away on 
holiday, I'll always go first to sites likeResponsibletravel.com 
<http://www.Responsibletravel.com>. But it's not necessarily for everyone; 
we're in the minority, albeit a growing one.

How can the travel industry become more responsible? 

 Tourism is at least 10 years behind other sectors in terms of social 
responsibility. As far as I'm aware, the big tour agencies haven't published 
policies on the environment and on waste [see below]. That is something we set 
up in the Body Shop over 10 years ago.

Companies also have a responsibility to put a percentage of their profits into 
giving something back. There is an enormous responsibility in stopping the 
destruction of wildlife and stopping the huge swelling of holidaymaker towns, 
especially in emerging destinations. The east European market hasn't been 
opened up yet, but when it does they should start with a really strong model of 
how they want responsible travel and what they expect from visitors.

There should also be regulation in the industry. In particular, hotels should 
also be much more environmentally friendly. There has to be a real change in 
the methodology of how hotels are run to preserve water, energy and other 
natural resources. It's very interesting going to countries such as New Zealand 
where they're already doing that.

Do you think things are changing for the better? 

There has been a real influence on young people, whose travel is experiential. 
For them, their values change when their experiences change; travel is like a 
university without walls.

The demographics of this country are also changing. After retirement, people 
in their late 50s, 60s and 70s are re-educating themselves through travel on 
tours, cruises, etc. For them, it is about learning and discovery, and they 
have defined interests, such as photography, archaeology and culture. People 
crave knowledge, discovering new cultures and finding friendships on holiday 
with people with whom they have a common interest.

What can holidaymakers do to be more responsible? 

Clean up their own mess! Support the local community by visiting markets and 
listening to local music in the local cafes and bars, and avoid buying anything 
in the resort hotels. There's a magic to discover in the local. It's also great 
to discover the smaller tourism companies, such as the eco-farms in Italy and 
the rural tourism enterprises in Spain.

There are also alternative ways of travelling, such as by train, especially in 
Europe, where the speed of the net work is so convenient. It's a wonderful way 
of culturalising before you actually arrive at the destination.

What's the best example of a responsible/fair trade holiday you have taken? 

I love going on holidays where you work and support the local community. I've 
taken my family on holiday with River League Wilderness Rafting Expeditions 
(001 800 440 1322,riverleague.ca <http://www.riverleague.ca>). They operate 
small group trips to the wild rivers of North America, bringing diverse groups 
of people to at-risk wilderness areas for biodiversity research, education and 
recreation. Everything is a light step and they are a perfect example of 
responsible tourism: they are a campaign group, an activist group and an 
advocacy group, and they are the coolest rafters in the world.

'The biggest breakthrough in the sustainability of mass tourism for years'

Leading tour operators have given their commitment to develop more 
eco-friendly holidays. Members of the Federation of Tour Operators (FTO), which 
includes Thomas Cook, TUI, MyTravel, First Choice, Kuoni, Cosmos, Virgin 
Holidays and Kosmar, have agreed to report publicly on how they are integrating 
principles of sustainable development into their corporate policy.

The FTO, whose members represent over 65% of the British overseas inclusive 
holiday market, has appointed a full-time responsible tourism coordinator, 
Chris Thomson, to facilitate the integration of a responsible tourism programme 
for its members so they can monitor the environmental, cultural and social 
impacts of tourism.

Thomson said that the stimulus for change has come not from consumer demand 
but from the investment community. He said: 'Investors are now taking note of 
environmental and socio-economic issues, and banks are beginning to put 
conditions on loans. By signing up to this commitment operators are pre-empting 
their future requirements.'

Responsibletravel.com's Justin Francis welcomed the move: 'It's the biggest 
breakthrough in the sustainability of mass tourism for years. Though the 
evidence will be in two years' time when we see how the policies have 
translated into visible improvements in the destinations.'

FTO members have agreed to report their results within 12 months.

Going greener

The following companies are known for their environmental and social policies. 

Tribes Travel (01728 685971, tribes.co.uk <http://www.tribes.co.uk>) ensures 
that 75% of the cost of its holidays remains within the destinations. An 11-day 
wildlife safari to northern Tanzania costs £1,930pp including flights.

Ramblers Holidays (01707 331133, ramblersholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.ramblersholidays.co.uk>) provides low-impact walking and 
sightseeing holidays that, where possible, use small family-run hotels, local 
transport and local food. All profits not needed for the running and 
development of the company are channelled back into community projects. A 
20-day tour from Ho Chi Minh City to Hanoi costs from £1,622pp, including 
flights.

Exodus (020-8675 5550, exodus.co.uk <http://www.exodus.co.uk>) works in 
association with Friends of Conservation (020-7592 0110,foc-uk.com 
<http://www.foc-uk.com>) to support environmental and social projects. A 17-day 
'Land of the Tiger' safari in Northern India costs £1,375pp (plus a £70 local 
payment fee), including flights.

The Adventure Company (01420 541007, adventurecompany.co.uk 
<http://www.adventurecompany.co.uk>) assesses the environmental and social 
impacts of all its tours. It also links up with charities, such as Plan 
(plan-uk.org), which works with communities to improve health and sanitation. 
An11-day Essential Peru tour, including an optional visit to a Plan project, 
costs from £1,279pp with flights.

Himalayan Kingdoms (0845 3308579, himalayankingdoms.com 
<http://www.himalayankingdoms.com>) supports the International Porter 
Protection Group and sends strict guidelines to all its agents on porters' 
clothing, wages and conditions. In addition, 10% of the cost of the Save The 
Tiger Tour to the Royal Chitwan National Park in Nepal is donated to the 
International Trust for Nature Conservation. The 10-day Save The Tiger Tour 
costs £2,050pp including flights.
 