
The family of April Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> has 
endured some tough milestones: the first Christmas without her, the spring day 
when she would have turned six, and the harrowing trial of the man who abducted 
and murdered her.

There will be many more to come, not least the time when April's only remains 
– a few fragments of bone found in Mark Bridger's wood burner – will be 
returned, but those close to the couple say the pair have stayed strong for the 
sake of their other children and because they want to see justice done.

Detective Sergeant Hayley Heard, one of the two family liaison officers who 
have been at the side of Paul and Coral Jones since April vanished, said: 
"Their lives have changed forever. I don't know if they will ever be able to 
move on or get closure. But I think because they have got other children they 
have to carry on."

The couple have sat in court throughout Bridger's trial, even staying in the 
public gallery when the explicit images of child sexual abuse found on the 
killer's laptop were shown.

"They are so brave in the manner in which they have conducted themselves. They 
have listened to some dreadful evidence," said Detective Constable Dave 
Roberts, the second family liaison officer. "But it's almost a need that they 
have to know exactly what evidence there is. They've shown great fortitude. As 
a couple they are a very strong unit."
 April disappeared from her home town of Machynlleth while playing with a 
friend. Photograph: Reuters 
There were times when it was too much. Coral Jones left the court in tears 
when her panicked 999 call to the police, in which she could be heard 
hyperventilating, was played. She also had to leave at the end of Bridger's 
three-day stint in the witness box, when he repeatedly refused to say what he 
had done with April's body.

But the family stayed put when other small, but telling, details came out – 
that April's last meal was spaghetti on toast; that she watched her favourite 
Disney film, Tangled, just before she went out to play that evening; that the 
police took a DNA sample from her junior toothbrush so they could establish 
that it was her blood found at Bridger's home.

During the trial it became clear how precious April had been. She was born 
prematurely, which may have led her to have mild cerebral palsy. But her 
parents were thrilled that April was doing so well at school and cling to the 
memory of her being a flower girl at their wedding not long before she was 
abducted.

In their police statements, read in court, they recounted how April, who could 
be headstrong, had asked to go out to play on her treasured bicycle on 1 
October. "She kept on and on and had a little tantrum," Coral Jones said. "I 
eventually gave in. I told her I didn't want her out for long. That was the 
last time I saw her."
 April Jones with the bike she was playing on when she went missing. 
Paul Jones said of April (still using the present tense, though the couple 
were told within 24 hours that she was probably dead): "She is quite stubborn 
when she gets something in her mind." He added: "I can't think of any reason 
why Mark Bridger would take April, he is a father too. I don't understand why 
he would do this to her."

What now of the future for April's family? As the family liaison officers 
said, her parents have stayed strong, partly for the sake of their children. 
April's 10-year-old brother was the one who raised the alarm, while her three 
teenage half-sisters must come to terms with the fact that Bridger had 
collected images of them from Facebook and filed them along with his images of 
child sexual abuse and pictures of murder victims.

April's parents have made it clear they would like Bridger's rented cottage – 
where they believe she died – knocked down, though it is in private hands, so 
out of the authorities' control.

The police stopped short of carrying out tests on the bone fragments that may 
have revealed more because this would have destroyed them, and they wanted to 
be able to give the family some of April's remains.

The expectation is that they will be handed to the family, and, if they wish, 
they can arrange a burial. There will be many more difficult times to bear.
 