
All that glitters is not gold in post-Hapsburg Vienna, but all that is gold in 
the famous Golden Auditorium of the Musikverein, hallowed high temple of music, 
glowed on Thursday night for the last ever performance by the pianistAlfred 
Brendel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel>. Sometimes only the 
German language will suffice, and the occasion was described in speeches 
afterwards as an "Abschiedfest" - a farewell festival.

Brendel, 77, has lived in London for decades and was born in Czechoslovakia, 
but the Austrians claim him as their own. Largely self-taught, he first played 
at the Musikverein in March 1950, aged 20, and performed almost exclusively in 
the city until his landmark appearances in London during the 1970s. But it was 
to Vienna that Brendel elected to return to say goodbye to his devoted public.

There may be other contenders to the title "greatest pianist in the world", 
but Brendel must be the greatest living interpreter of Mozart, and his choice 
of the composer's Concerto No 9 was itself a statement of defiant joy and 
pathos. Mozart's first great concerto for piano - his invention, effectively - 
is the first in music history to forge a real contrapunctal dialogue between 
the instrument and orchestra (in this case a lambent Vienna Philharmonic under 
the baton of Sir Charles Mackerras).

Brendel, who believes in what he calls "responsibility to the composer, and 
particularly the piece", performed the soloist's part almost operatically; the 
Andantino especially is like an aria, with the piano as tragic heroine. As the 
pianist and the Philharmonic played, people began to stand, ignoring those 
behind them.

Each city of music has its distinctive final embrace that refuses to let a 
loved one go. Had this been Moscow, we would have stamped; in London, a 
veritable rose garden would have landed on stage. In Vienna, the hardest place 
to win a standing ovation, the Austrians rose and applauded, and simply 
continued to do so.
 