
 Author: Born in Texas, Patricia Highsmith (1921-1995) grew up in New York, 
raised by her grandmother after her parents separated. Her first novel, 
Strangers on a Train (1950), made an immediate impact, especially after Alfred 
Hitchcock released his celebrated film adaptation in 1951. Highsmith created 
her most enduring character with The Talented Mr Ripley  (1955) which spawned a 
number of sequels - Ripley Under Ground  (1970),  Ripley's Game (1974),  The 
Boy Who Followed Ripley (1980), and  Ripley Under Water  (1991). Highsmith led 
a flamboyant lesbian lifestyle, and left America for Europe in 1963. She lived 
first in England, then moved around regularly before settling in Locarno in 
Switzerland. She was diagnosed with lung cancer in the early 1990s.

 The story: Tom Ripley, an impecunious but ambitious American, secures a trip 
to Europe to look up a tenuous acquaintance of his, Dickie Greenleaf, and 
persuade him to return to the US. Ripley hardly knows Greenleaf, but insinuates 
himself into his bohemian life in the Italian village of Mongibello. Look-ing 
for financial and social advantage, he drives a wedge between Greenleaf and his 
friends - principally Marge, a writer - and the two men head off travelling 
together. Ripley kills Greenleaf on a boat trip, then assumes his identity and 
begins living the lifestyle to which he has always aspired. Ripley then murders 
Freddie Miles, another friend of Greenleaf, after his suspicions are aroused. 
Finally, Ripley forges Greenleaf's will, inherits his money, and ultimately 
escapes any consequences for his actions.

 The film-makers: Initially an architecture student, René Clément (1913-1996) 
began writing for Jacques Tati in the 1930s, before breaking into features with 
the Resistance drama La Bataille du Rail (1946). The success of  Gervaise 
(1956) saw him co-opted into Hollywood in a big way - The Sea Wall (1958),  The 
Love Cage (1963). The French-language  Plein Soleil (1960) was very much out of 
step with his later career. The little-known Alain Delon was cast in the lead 
role - and it was the combination of Plein Soleil and  Rocco and His Brothers 
(1960) that propelled Delon to stardom.

 How the book and film compare:  Plein Soleil skips over The Talented Mr Ripley
 's early chapters, excising Ripley's encounter with Greenleaf's father and his 
awkward arrival in Mongibello. The film dilutes the sexual ambiguities of the 
novel - both Greenleaf and Ripley are very heterosexual, emphasised in a scene 
when they pick up a local woman for a carriage ride. Consequently the Marge 
character plays a very different role - in the book, she is an unrequited lover 
of Greenleaf, while in the film they are having a tempestuous relationship. 
Much of the film's action takes place on a yacht - which is central to the 
film's shock ending.

 Inspirations and influences:  The Italian "dolce vita" lifestyle was arguably 
the dominant social phenomenon of the period. The claustrophobic boat-set love 
triangle would soon find a more direct treatment in Roman Polanski's debut film 
Knife in the Water (1962). The Ripley novels would remain of enduring interest 
to film-makers, with high points being Wim Wenders's oblique adaptation of 
Ripley's Game ,  The American Friend (1977), and Anthony Minghella's faithful 
treatment, The Talented Mr Ripley (1999).
 