
The father of an Iraqi allegedly murdered by British soldiers has told a 
public inquiry that when a doctor opened an army body bag containing his 
19-year-old son he saw "blood pouring out of his chest".

His son Ahmed had "gunshots on the side of his stomach … his hand was broken 
[and] the bag was full of blood", Khazaal al-Helfi told the inquiry on Monday 
into allegations that British troops murdered up to 20 unarmed prisoners and 
abused others following a fierce battle with Iraqi insurgents in May 2004.

Helfi was giving evidence to the al-Sweady inquiry, named after the family of 
another 19-year-old Iraqi allegedly killed by British troops following a fierce 
gunfight with Iraqi insurgents.

It is known as the battle of Danny Boy, the name British soldiers gave to a 
checkpoint three miles (5km) north-east of Majar al-Kabir in south-eastIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> on 14 May 2004.

The inquiry was forced on the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> after high court judges 
accused it of "lamentable" behaviour and serious breaches of its duty of 
candour. The judges said the MoD had failed to disclose crucial information 
relating to the allegations and to set up a proper investigation as required by 
the Human Rights Act.

Helfi told the inquiry that the last time he saw his son was when he left home 
on 14 May 2004 to get petrol for his motorbike. When Ahmed failed to return 
home that night he assumed his son was staying with his uncle who lived nearby.

The next day, after his uncle and other relations said they had not seen 
Ahmed, he said he frantically searched for his son, visiting hospitals and 
police stations before seeing his name on a British army body bag.

Helfi was questioned by lawyers representing British soldiers and the MoD 
about apparent inconsistencies in his written statements to the inquiry, his 
oral testimony and his earlier statements to the British military police.

At times visibly upset, Helfi was asked whether it was possible his son had 
taken part in the battle with British troops. He replied: "He had no weapon. He 
had nothing to do with such battles. I know him perfectly well … Ahmed had no 
interest in guns."

Asked what motivated him to demand compensation, Helfi said he had been told 
to ask for it. "I had to file a complaint because of the incident," he told the 
inquiry.

The Iraqi families and their lawyers accuse the troops of meting out "truly 
shocking" treatment to civilians. The soldiers and MoD strongly reject the 
allegations.

UK officials have suggested that the soldiers wanted to bring the bodies of 
dead Iraqis and others wounded and detained after the battle to their base, 
Camp Abu Naji, to identify them and see if there was any evidence that they 
were involved in the earlier brutal murder nearby of six British military 
police personnel.

Jonathan Acton Davis QC, counsel to the inquiry, is expected to question 44 
other Iraqi witnesses.

The inquiry, which has cost nearly £17m so far, is due to continue until the 
end of 2014.

[This article has been amended at the request of the inquiry.]
 