
A new list of approved suppliers to the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has heightened fears of a 
multi-billion pound land grab by a handful of corporations.

Competition for contracts to supply support services to the GP-led 
commissioning groups will be dominated by management consultancies, outsourcing 
giant Capita, and the US health insurer UnitedHealth. NHS England insists that 
the companies bidding for the support contracts will supply a range of back 
office functions, cutting procurement times and allowing doctors to focus on 
how best to spend their £70bn share of the NHS budget.

David Cameron has said the plan “is to put the power in the hands of local 
doctors so that they make decisions on behalf of patients based on what is good 
for health care in their local area”.

But groups opposed to the further privatisation of the NHS claim the reality 
is that the scope of the private firms is being dramatically expanded so that 
they will be allowed to provide services that, until now, have been undertaken 
by the NHS. They say that the move will end up costing taxpayers more and 
result in conflicts of interest as a number of the private firms are also 
advising the GPs’ commissioning groups.

NHS England has rejected these claims.

Four companies dominate the list of approved suppliers published last week. 
Capita, KPMG, PwC and UnitedHealth, the previous employer of NHS CEO, Simon 
Stevens, are now listed as suppliers to six of the nine regional consortiums 
set up to help GPs’ commissioning groups procure services. Ernst and Young is a 
supplier to four consortiums while McKinsey has been named as a supplier to 
five. All are members of the Commissioning Support Industry Group, which is a 
low-profile body that affords them regular access to the senior NHS officials 
overseeing the creation of the new market in commissioning services.

“Andrew Lansley [the former health secretary] promised GPs they would be in 
the driving seat, but the reality is that instead of handing the power and the 
money to GPs his reforms have handed them to corporations,” said Dr Jacky 
Davis, founder member of Keep Our NHS Public and co-author of the bookNHS For 
Sale.

“This announcement marks the final step in giving the private sector the 
power, influence and a big slice of the NHS budget. There is now a massive 
conflict of interest with private companies like UnitedHealth, KPMG and 
McKinsey in charge of the GPs’ budget and increasingly buying care from the 
self-same private sector. The Tories have put Dracula in charge of the blood 
bank.”

Although there is little detail on the value of the contracts at stake, 
anecdotal evidence suggests that the financial rewards for companies that win 
them are significant. One regional consortium set up to help GPs’ commissioning 
groups, the Arden & Greater East Midlands Partnership, paid KPMG more than a 
quarter of a million pounds a month for the first six months of 2014.

Davis said the NHS market was already estimated to be costing the English NHS 
between £5bn and £10bn a year: “The NHS market is a failed experiment that has 
wasted billions of pounds and untold amounts of clinical time, benefiting only 
private companies while diverting money from patients to shareholders’ pockets. 
GPs don’t want it, patients certainly don’t want it, but the government is 
pressing ahead with it regardless.”

However, Bob Ricketts, director of commissioning support services for NHS 
England, said that he was “delighted about the range of quality providers” that 
had been approved to supply the NHS with services. In addition to the big 
private firms, the list includes charities, telecoms operators and voluntary 
groups.

“I genuinely believe that these organisations have brought together the best 
services in the market to offer commissioners everything they need to deliver 
the vision of the Five Year Forward View,” Ricketts said.

He suggested that patients would benefit from the new framework for suppliers 
that had been put in place. “Local commissioners have been asking for a faster, 
simplified approach to choosing and changing their commissioning support 
provider. The framework will cut a typical procurement process to only three 
months.”
 