
If Roger Federer and Chile's Fernando González take their brilliant semi-final 
form into tomorrow'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final then the fireworks 
that lit up the night skies on Australia Day will be as nothing compared with 
what may happen in the Rod Laver Arena. Federer obliterated Andy Roddick and 
yesterday González similarly crushed Tommy Haas of Germany 6-1, 6-3, 6-1.

González hit 42 winners and made only three unforced errors. "In the past I 
usually made three winners and 42 unforced errors," he grinned. The wild man 
from Santiago with the white bandanna and designer stubble has always been 
eminently watchable if mightily unpredictable. Then, last year, along came the 
American coach Larry Stefanki who calmed him down, instilled patience and has 
now guided González to his first grand slam final.

Take any opponent other than Federer, and the 26-year-old Chilean would, on 
this form, have a brilliant chance of achieving what his fellow countryman 
Marcelo Ríos, also coached by Stefanki, failed to do here in 1998 when he lost 
in the final against Petr Korda. Ríos, nevertheless, became a national hero, 
something González has experienced having teamed up with Nicolas Massu to win 
the doubles at the 2004 Athens Olympics, with Massu also taking the singles 
gold.

Win or lose, González will climb to a career-high ranking in the top five. 
Yet, despite his wonderful form over the past 12 days, including a 
straight-sets quarter-final victory over the world No2 Rafael Nadal, it would 
be a cataclysmic shock if Federer lost. They have played nine times with the 
world No1 winning the lot, and dropping only two sets.

So for González to win a set would be a considerable achievement, Federer 
having yet to lose one here. Bjorn Borg was the last player to win a slam title 
without losing a set, at Roland Garros in 1980.

Victory would move Federer into joint fifth place among all-time slam winners 
alongside Bill Tilden, with 10. This is just one behind Borg and Rod Laver, who 
was here to see Federer beat Roddick. Federer would also be the first man in 
the Open era to win three consecutive majors twice, and thereby set himself up 
to hold all four slam titles at the same time by winning the French Open, the 
one major to elude him.

Federer will not see tomorrow's final as a gimme. González has the power, 
notably on the forehand, to overwhelm anybody, though Federer will doubtless 
test the Chilean's new-found patience to the limits. Haas, playing in his third 
Australian Open semi-final, was never able to get under González's skin; 
Federer will.

Haas tried to attack the Chilean's sliced backhand, but found it difficult to 
know when to come to the net. Federer will be less reluctant. But González, 
"Gonzo" to many, remains optimistic. "My backhand has improved a lot and I'm 
much fitter. I used to panic if I stayed too much on the backhand. Now I can 
stay there and wait for the other guy to make a mistake or I can create an 
opening.

"I'm playing much better now than the last time we met. I'm going to give it 
everything and on my forehand side I feel I can do whatever I want. It's going 
to be a tough, but I'm playing at a great level."

There was a British success here yesterday as Graeme Dyce of Scotland teamed 
up with Finland's Harri Heliovaara to win the boys' doubles. Dyce, 17, from 
Edinburgh, has a scholarship at Nick Bollettieri's Florida academy and hopes 
this win will be a launching pad like Andy Murray's US Open junior singles 
title in 2004. "This was just doubles and I'd like to try and win in the 
singles later in the year. But to win a junior slam is to win a junior slam," 
said Dyce, the British boys' No1 who was originally coached by Murray's mother, 
Judy.

"Andy's a real inspiration," said Dyce. "He's come from the same sort of 
background, worked with the same sort of people I've worked with. It gives you 
a self- belief that people can come from Scotland and can get to the top in the 
tennis."

Head-to-head

Roger Federer Switzerland

Age 25

Career prize money $28.6m

Born Oberwil, Switzerland

Seeded 1

Grand slam titles 9 Wimbledon 2003; 04, 05, 06; US Open 04, 05, 06; Australian 
Open04, 06

Fernando González Chile

Age 26

Career prize money $4.7m

Born Santiago, Chile

Seeded 10

Grand Slam titles

Head to head

Federer leads 9-0: 2004 Indian Wells, R32, Hard, Federer 6-3 6-2; Hamburg, 
R16, Clay,Federer 7-5 6-1; 2005 Monte Carlo, R16, Clay, Federer 6-2 6-7 6-4; 
French Open, R32, Clay, Federer 7-6 7-5 6-2; Wimbledon, QF, Grass, Federer 7-5 
6-2 7-6;2006 Monte Carlo, SF, Clay, Federer 6-2 6-4; Toronto, SF, Hard, Federer 
6-1 5-7 6-3;Madrid, F, Hard, Federer  7-5 6-1 6-0; Basle, F, Carpet, Federer 
6-3 6-2 7-6.
 