
World No1 Roger Federer broke down in tears as he claimed his seventh grand 
slam title with a four-set victory against unseeded Marcos Baghdatis, winning 
5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 6-2.

"I don't know what to say," he said on court. "I would like to congratulate 
Marcos first, well done."

Pausing to gather himself, he added: "I hope you know how much this means to 
me. It is all coming out now, I have had some hard speeches but this is a rough 
road now.

"I want to congratulate Marcos and his team on a great effort and my team and 
the hundreds and thousands of fans who came out, you make it so special. 
Without you it is not the same."

Federer suffered an early shock when Baghdatis, who had stunned everyone by 
reaching the final, beating three top-10 players in the process, claimed the 
first set 7-5.

And Baghdatis took a 2-0 lead in the second set after breaking Federer's serve 
- the Swiss committing an unprecedented 48 unforced errors throughout the 
match. Federer had experience and a wealth of winning shots to draw on, though, 
and he soon found his rhythm, breaking back and taking a vital break at 6-5 to 
level at a set a piece.

Baghdatis remained a spirited competitor but was knocked by Federer's recovery 
and clearly tired as the match went on. Federer, who has not been in top form 
this week, didn't need to step much above third gear to take the third set 6-0 
after making the early break.

The Cypriot's exhaustion saw him pulling up with cramp in the fourth set and 
Federer quickly found himself 3-0 up. Though Baghdatis managed to hold two 
service games for the first time since the second set, Federer closed out the 
set 6-2 to pick up another trophy. He is now the first player since Pete 
Sampras in 1993-94 to win three consecutive grand slam titles.

Baghdatis will jump from 54 to 26 in the world ranking following his outing 
here. "Its a dream come true," he said above the noise of his cheering fans. 
"It's just amazing. I love everybody watching in Cyprus. Kisses."
 