
World No1 Roger Federer put on another superb performance as he beat Japanese 
qualifier Takao Suzuki 6-3 6-4 6-4 in the second round.

But the the top seed, unbeaten since the second round of the Olympics in 
Athens, had to recover from a break down in the opening set in a 
toughter-expected victory.

Indeed, the defending champion's reaction to another superb passing shot on 
match point proving how tough a contest he had faced.

"It was a fantastic atmosphere and a fantastic match," said the 23-year-old, 
who fired 35 outright winners and just 10 unforced errors. "I had a lot of fun 
tonight.

"Thanks to the way Takao played it was very entertaining and I'm already 
looking forward to the next time I play him.

"I had to play a good match to win as usual. Just good enough is not enough 
these days...even from me!

"He was up a break in the first set and I had to play a great point to break 
back. Who knows what would have happened if he kept playing so well? I could 
have ended up losing the set and maybe the match."

Andre Agassi breezed into the third round at Melbourne Park, dropping just 
four games in the process against Rainer Schuettler.

Agassi was expected to face a tough test against the German, the man he beat 
to win his last grand slam title in Australia in 2003.

The 34-year-old American, who will play Taylor Dent in the last 32, had been 
hampered by a hip injury in the build-up to the championships but made light 
work of the world No40, running out an easy 6-3, 6-1, 6-0 winner.

Fourth seed Marat Safin also had a comfortable win in round two, defeating 
Bohdan Ulirach in straight sets.

Having dropped just three games in his opening match, the Russian was almost 
equally ruthless today, quickly wrapping up a 6-4, 6-1, 6-3 victory with his 
10th ace.

Safin, who will take on Mario Ancic in the last 32, said he is enjoying his 
best ever start to a grand slam after finally putting into practice everything 
he has learnt from his erratic career.

"I think this is my best start. I am playing well, I worked hard in pre-season 
and I am ready," he said. "Also I get older a little bit, I have more 
experience, I know what to do.

"I try to be a little bit more focused on what I'm doing and it's working. I 
have a good coach (Peter Lundgren) and I've been learning from my mistakes for 
a long time and now is the time to take advantage from it."

However, 16th seed Tommy Haas crashed out of the tournament after blowing a 
two-set lead against Karol Beck.

The German looked set for a place in the third round when he took the first 
two sets in searing heat on the Rod Laver Arena.

But as the temperature reached 95 degrees, Haas wilted under a relentless 
onslaught from his Slovakian opponent, who eventually recorded a 5-7, 2-6, 6-2, 
7-6, 6-3 victory in just over three and a half hours.

Another seed to fall was Croatian Ivan Ljubicic, the 22nd seed beaten in four 
sets by Marcos Baghdatis of Cyprus.

Elsewhere there were wins for seeded trio Tommy Robredo, Dominik Hrbaty and 
French Open championGaston Gaudio, but former world junior No1 Gael Monfils was 
sent packing by Belgium's Olivier Rochus in straight sets.
 