
Top seed Roger Federer survived a five-set scare against unseeded Tommy Haas 
to reach the quarter-finals of the Australian Open. The world No1's game 
inexplicably fell apart after he opened up a two-set lead, before he regained 
his composure to win 6-4, 6-0, 3-6, 4-6, 6-2.

Federer looked to be cruising to his fourth consecutive straight-sets win when 
he ripped through the first two sets in an hour before the German staged a 
remarkable fightback to force the match into a deciding set. The Swiss got the 
crucial break in the sixth game when Haas missed an easy volley and broke again 
in the eighth game to advance to the quarter-finals.

He will now play Russian fifth seed Nikolay Davydenko, who overcame earlier 
errors to put on a powerful baseline display and beat Dominik Hrbaty 4-6, 4-6, 
6-4, 6-2, 6-3. Slovakian Hrbaty had already played three five-set matches in 
getting to this stage and tired quickly as Davydenko booked his spot in the 
last eight.

"I'm happy with the way I played tonight. I thought the first two sets I 
played perfect tennis but after that he played pretty good," said Federer. "It 
was a pity I couldn't close it out in three but I'm happy with the way I played 
in the end and it's a good feeling to have. He was the guy who had to react and 
work. I was two sets up and never really close to losing. I just thought if I 
could get one break it would change the match and the momentum and it did."

Elsewhere, Nicolas Kiefer and Sebastien Grosjean both advanced to the 
quarter-finals, conserving energy with straight-set victories.

Kiefer worked hard to secure his 7-6 (7/4), 6-3, 6-3 win over Argentinean Juan 
Ignacio Chela, turning on a strong performance against a gritty competitor who 
had already claimed the scalp of Lleyton Hewitt. The pair exchanged breaks in 
an error-strewn match but it was the German who claimed the important points.

Grosjean triumphed over compatriot Paul-Henri Mathieu, racing to a 7-5, 6-2, 
6-2 win over his less experienced opponent. Both players struggled to hold 
their early service games but after Grosjean found the all-important break to 
take the first set 7-5, Mathieu's resistence crumbled.
 