
Ever so quietly, away from the attention of British tennis fans whose gaze has 
been fixed firmly on the bottom half of the draw, a young Swiss player has been 
making menacing progress. Roger Federer, 20, is through to the last 16 having 
completed his third straight sets win yesterday over the dangerous German 
Rainer Schuettler.

In Switzerland, Federer is regarded as the real thing, while his compatriot, 
Martina Hingis, suffers from the same stigma that the Canadian-born Greg 
Rusedski does in Britain - a home player when she's doing well, a Slovak 
immigrant when the Williams sisters are punching holes in her elegant but 
fragile game.

There is little fragile about Federer's game and now that he is no longer 
prone to the fits of pique that once threatened to compromise his special 
talent he is looking capable of fulfilling the promise that was first 
recognised in him by his father, Robert. He was four when he first picked up a 
racket and it was only his competing passion for football that might have seen 
him pursue a different career. By the age of 10, though, he was enrolled at the 
Swiss Centre ofTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>, where, as a 
German speaker in a French-speaking part of the country, he took time to 
settle. Once over this, he was soon meeting all the expectations placed in him.

Tall and athletic, with power and touch in his right arm, and with a wide 
range of strokes, Federer's outstanding early achievement was to win the junior 
Wimbledon title as a 16-year-old. Here was real evidence of the possibilities 
that lay ahead. Brought up on clay courts, he adapted impressively to grass's 
special requirements to establish himself as the world's most capable junior.

The only worry was his temperament, a McEnroe-esque attitude towards authority 
and failure but without being able to put that fury to constructive use. A 
turning point came in London two years ago when he played in a tournament with 
Goran Ivanisevic and watched the Croat self-destruct surrounded by splintered 
rackets. He understood then that 'carrying on like an idiot', as he put it, was 
counterproductive. 'I felt embarrassed at times and my coach told me it was 
affecting my game.'

Crucially, Federer realised that the only person who could put things right 
was him. 'When people asked me when I was going to stop behaving like that I 
told them it wasn't their job to tell me to shut up, it would have to come from 
me.

'I realised that racket-throwing didn't help my game. It's nice to be 
important but it's more important to be nice,' he added, and if that sounded a 
trifle contrived the reality and benefits of his self-reformation were soon 
plain for all to see.

Last year, he returned to Wimbledon to achieve the best result of his career 
so far, and one for which he will always be remembered. On the second Monday, 
he became only the second player in nine years to beat Pete Sampras at the All 
England club and the first to do so in 32 matches. It was a per formance of 
great maturity as he saved nine break points in a five-set contest and ended 
any lingering doubts that he would revert to his former type - a foot-stamping 
juvenile - when put under pressure in a really big match.

Two days later, Federer lost to Tim Henman in four sets, but there was no 
shame in that. Federer was - and is - still an emerging talent, while Henman 
was a seasoned player close to the upper limit of his ability. We may still 
find out in next Sunday's final just how wide the gap is between them now.

Certainly, Federer's form in Melbourne has been as impressive as those of us 
who tipped him to win could have hoped. He opened with a comfortable victory 
over the vet eran American Michael Chang and went through in straight sets 
again against Attila Savolt of Hungary. Yesterday, in fierce heat, he wore an 
ice vest under his shirt and coolly disposed of Schuettler in a competitive 
match, winning 7-6 (8-6) 7-6 (7-5) 6-4. 'Because I often get headaches from the 
heat, I have to do everything I can,' he said, explaining his unusual 
undergarment.

His next opponent is Tommy Haas, the highest seed left in the tournament after 
Henman. Yesterday Haas struggled with Todd Martin, eventually beating him in 
five sets, and the umpire, who spotted he had two sponsors' logos on his cap. 
One of them had to be inked out.
 