
Roger Federer received a standing ovation from the Rod Laver Arena after yet 
another straight-sets victory - this time against seventh seed Tommy Robredo - 
moved him into the semi-finals of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Federer, the world No1 and top seed, was occasionally threatened by Robredo, 
who has looked revitalised in this year's tournament. But whenever Federer was 
threatened he simply moved up to the gears. In the end, the 6-3, 7-6 (7-2), 7-5 
score was a fair reflection of his dominance.

"Conditions were very slow and it was windy so I had to adjust to that," said 
Federer. "Tommy is a tough baseliner so he plays it smart. I tried to change 
things up a bit but I struggled to find my rhythm. Overall, I played pretty 
well. The breaks of serve were due to the windy conditions. My attacking style 
worked out well and I volleyed really well. As long as I get through I'm happy."

Federer will next play Andy Roddick, who proved far too good for his fellow 
American and former flatmate Mardy Fish as he won through 6-2, 6-2, 6-2. World 
No42 Fish upset fourth seed Ivan Ljubicic in the first round but failed to deal 
with the power of Roddick - the sixth seed - who secured his third appearance 
in the Australian Open semi-finals in one hour and 27 minutes.

Roddick took the first set with two breaks and despite dropping serve at the 
beginning of the second doubled his lead with three breaks of his own. Two 
further service breaks in the third set saw Roddick home. He powered past his 
compatriot with a 92% first-serve success rate, while Fish struggled throughout 
and conceded 26 unforced errors compared to just two from the world No7.

"I played pretty flawless," said Roddick. "It's probably the best I've played 
against him. Mardy might have been a little bit nervous at the beginning as he 
made a few errors he wouldn't normally make, but that's about as well as I can 
play. I felt great going into the game physically and I feel like I'm hitting 
the ball well. The gap on Roger has probably been closing a little bit and I'm 
playing about as well as I can. So if I play Roger then I will look forward to 
it."

Fish added: "He puts so much pressure on you and I didn't feel like anything 
was working. Andy can go all the way and win the tournament."

Today's men's singles results:

(6) Andy Roddick (USA) bt Mardy Fish (USA) 6-2, 6-2, 6-2. (1) Roger Federer 
(Swi) bt (6) Tommy Robredo (Esp) 6-3, 7-6 (7-2), 7-5.
 