
Federer wins 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 6-2 Baghdatis wallops his forehand well beyond the 
baseline for 0-15... then topspins a forehand straight into the net for 0-30... 
unreturnable serve out wide for 15-30... magnificent Federer forehand curving 
out to the tramline for 15-40 and two championship points... and Baghdatis 
slams a backhand into the net. Federer cries out to salute his victory, but he 
knows he was pushed harder than even the Cypriot crowd expected early on in 
this game. Nonetheless, Roger Federer wins another final with some of the fine 
tennis we've come to expect from him.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, *5 - 2 What the devil's going on? This set had 
match over written all over it, then Baghdatis is on the good end of a 0-30 
scoreline! Federer gets back into things with an enormous forehand into the 
corner, then pings another one across court into the opposite corner. Normal 
service is resumed. Or is it?! Federer slings a backhand into orbit and 
Baghdatis has a break point... and Federer somewhat cruelly pushes him from one 
side of the baseline to another before delivering the killer blow.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 4 - 2* Baghdatis starts with an ace down the line 
but follows it up with a dreadfully mistimed backhand. Thankfully for him, 
Federer's backhand isn't infallible, and his forehand - that must have been 
metres long - certainly isn't. Federer remains Baghdatis who's in control with 
two superb drop shots, but Baghdatis stays vaguely in the fight with a second 
hold.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, *4 - 1 Baghdatis is exhausted and his returns, 
where he manages one, are struggling to spot the court, but Federer does 
himself out of an easy hold with two mistimed forehands and a cross court 
backhand that fails to escape the attention of the net. The hold comes 
eventually thanks to a wild, heavy-armed backhand from Baghdatis.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 3 - 1* Baghdatis has had a good oily massage on 
that left leg, and despite dropping the first point after a weak overhead 
backhand, he lets two long Federer forehands do the work for him to ease ahead. 
Ach! Agonising. Baghdatis watches his forehand drop into the corner expecting 
to be watching a winner, then Federer flights it back over off the backhand - 
and Baghdatis's volley slumps into the net. Superb forehand flies past Federer 
at a rate of knots to save the break point... and finally holds to rampant 
applause. He looks knackered.

While the trainer's on "I've somehow stumbled into work on Sunday morning - 
not necessarily sure how that happened but I'm glad now to be in the safe hands 
of a GU writer rather than have to suffer Mark Petchey on the BBC," says George 
Cooper, applying a liberal dose of butter. "Towards the end of the first set 
(when the tension should have been building as Federer was sent to deuce 
several times) we had to endure: 'They love their sport in Melbourne...[point 
played]...and you can see the Commonwealth Games live on the BBC later this 
year,' and 'Baghdatis likes to bounce the ball between his legs before he 
serves - Federer used to do this ...[point played]...but now thinks it isn't 
cool.'" Sounds painful. I still think Eurosport could give the Beeb a good run 
for their money in the verbal diarrhea stakes. "And you can't ever imagine 
Baghdatis changing. Even if he wins this. I mean, he's not going to win this, 
but..."

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, *3 - 0 Baghdatis isn't even chasing shots he 
would have not just chased by fetched earlier on in the match, and where before 
his leap onto a shot promised a winner they now promise at least one line judge 
some action, if not two. But he does find time to dink a lovely little slice 
drop shot over the net and pushes Federer into a corking rally.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 2 - 0* Uh-oh. With Federer 0-30 up and about to 
take three break points, Baghdatis drops the floor clutching his calf. He gets 
up again but he's not comfortable. Cramp? Federer's broken, anyway, and this, 
my friends, looks like the end.

"Sublime Federer seems to be giving spirited Baghdatis a reality check in this 
game," says Alan Agrao, "but Marcos should be proud of what he has achieved... 
he is simply marvellous! I think Raf Nadal has a reason to worry when he comes 
back, both in terms of game skills and popularity..."

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, *1 - 0 Baghdatis pinches the first point then 
plays almost the perfect rally on the second. Almost because, unfortunately, he 
shapes up for the winner then lummies it high and wide. Federer fluffs his 
lines to hand him the third, then cuts the Cypriots off mid-song with a 
two-handed winner to level. Oof! A 130mph ace for 40-30... but then a long 
forehand for deuce... another ace for the advantage, and an immaculate forehand 
behind Baghdatis to hold.

Federer leads 5-7, 7-5, 6-0 Baghdatis looks tired now, his approach to the net 
bearing the distinct hallmarks of a sprint for the bus hampered by Stella-legs. 
Federer has two set points... and takes the first with a lovely cross-court 
backhand return.

Those Bode Miller Borilla pasta adverts. Why?

Third set [7-5, 5-7] Baghdatis *0 - 5 Federer Clinical play from Federer now, 
the forehand that's failed him so often in this match dropping onto court a 
country mile from Baghdatis's brief, aborted scamper. The Cypriot whips a 
beautiful little forehand out to the tramline to prove he's not quite had his 
share of the shots, and then Federer double faults for deuce... Baghdatis takes 
advantage [with fist-pump] thanks to a long forehand from Federer... but once 
again Federer looms up at the net and his backhand volley levels things. One 
body shot and a mishit return later, Federer's 5-0 up.

Third set [7-5, 5-7] Baghdatis *0 - 4 Federer Oh dear. The blue-and-white 
striped crowd are getting quieter and quieter as Federer looks increasingly 
like his usual steamroller self: straight to 0-30 and Baghdatis looks a little 
gloomy. Just being in the final has doubled his career earnings though, and 
there's always a part in Jesus Christ Superstar if it all goes pear-shaped.

Third set [7-5, 5-7] Baghdatis *0 - 3 Federer Federer looked on course for a 
hold troubled only by a searing backhand pass from Baghdatis when he double 
faults and then sees another backhand down the line from the Cypriot nick the 
line. Again it's the big serves that get him out of trouble - but Baghdatis 
isn't happy with the line call and he's got cause to be miffed.

Third set [7-5, 5-7] Baghdatis *0 - 2 Federer Federer produces another of 
those long forehands that has blighted this match, but immediately pulls off a 
killer forehand across court to make up for it. This time it's Baghdatis 
getting sloppy on the forehand, going for a big shot and sending the ball into 
the stands. And there's a chance for the break early on in this third set when 
a backhand strays wide... oh and the forehand down the line swings wide too! 
"Come on" yells Federer, continuing that worrying morph into Tim Henman.

Third set [7-5, 5-7] Baghdatis 0 - 1* Federer Federer looks in menacing form 
now, he's got his eye in and strides to an easy hold.

Baghdatis won the first set 7-5, Federer wins the second 7-5 Baghdatis races 
to 40-0, but Federer gets his twopennyworth in with a cross court forehand 
volley and a well-placed smash and before you know it we're at deuce. Eek. A 
super return from Federer and Baghdatis can only sling it into the net. Oh! The 
umpire overrules to call Baghdatis's brilliant shot out and Federer breaks to 
take the set.

"I can't figure this out," says Sanjeev Sinha. "Whenever I turn down the 
volume on my TV Baghdatis wins a point. I will end up putting it on mute." You 
must have had it on full stereo surround sound in that last game.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 5 - 6* Federer reacts angrily to his forehand being 
called out, but I think he's cross with himself more than the line judge - he 
smashes the ball away in disugst. This is the point at which Baghdatis broke in 
the first set, and he looks set to do it again with a stinging forehand down 
the line that bounces beyond the reach of Federer's outstretched racket! Gah! 
He overdoes it with a whipped forehand that zings into the net and not into the 
far corner. And again! Federer recovers from 0-30 to 30-30 simply by pushing 
Baghdatis onto the forehand side. And it's 40-30 with an ace down the middle, 
but Baghdatis is convinced it was out and I have to say I agree. Deuce! Yet 
another Federer forehand fails to find the court! The Swiss has got the aces 
when he needs them though. A tiebreak beckons if Baghdatis can hold.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, *5 - 5 Baghdatis's backhand was nothing special but 
Federer could only put it into the net and shake his head. He's got to keep it 
together - putting a forehand into orbit isn't going to help though. And 
Baghdatis holds thanks to Federer's cross-court forehand flying well wide.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 4 - 5* Federer is certainly making life difficult for 
Baghdatis when he comes into the net but the 20-year-old will chase lost causes 
all day long. Doesn't help much here, mind, Federer holds without too much 
trouble.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, *4 - 4 Delightful backhand from Federer to take the first 
point off Baghdatis's serve, but the Cypriot takes the second at the net 
despite Federer's impressive fetch. A vicious serve out wide helps Baghdatis 
fend off the break, but Federer takes the score to 30-40 by forcing an error on 
the backhand... Baghdatis fires off another of those 1000mph serves out wide 
then rolls off a forehand winner. Vital hold.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 3 - 4* Baghdatis is casting concerned looks at his 
racket, but the quality of Federer's play in this game is more likely to blame. 
The shots he was fluffing mere moments ago are coming off for him now, and that 
mildly arrogant smile is back.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, *3 - 3 Not the best of starts, Baghdatis serving a double 
fault, but he sends another bullet down the middle of the court for the next 
and has Federer stretching hopelessly again on the third. He gets an iffy line 
call on what looked like an excellent serve out wide, but Federer puts his 
return off the second serve straight into the ballboy's lap, so no matter.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 2 - 3* Federer's working it at the net now, finding all 
the right shots and all the angles, but a double fault opens up a small window 
of opportunity for Baghdatis. Ooh, it's 30-30 as Baghdatis's return dips just 
onto the tramline and forces Federer into an overhit backhand... but Federer 
knows just as well how to force his opponent into a mistake.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, *2 - 2 Terrific play from Baghdatis, running himself all 
over court before slicing a cheeky little backhand into the back of the court 
to leave Federer flat-footed. Federer remains 1/2 favourite with the bookies 
though and he's certainly starting to force more errors out of Baghdatis the 
longer the rallies go on. He notches up two break back points... but Baghdatis 
summons another mighty serve to fend off the first. His backhand strays beyond 
the baseline, though and Federer is back on terms in this set.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 2 - 1* Baghdatis nicks the first point, then brazenly 
snatches the third with an inch-perfect backhand cross-court return. He tries 
it again for the next point but lightning, as it is wont to do, refuses to 
strike twice. Bloody hell! How Baghdatis got to that drop shot I'll never know 
but how Federer swung the forehand wide in return for break point is the bigger 
mystery. Lovely forehand winner to rescue things for the moment but he is 
looking almost beatable so far and offers Baghdatis another couple of break 
points before holding.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, *2 - 0 "Having predicted three football results yesterday 
I need Federer to win 3-1 to be 110zloty richer today," says Tomek Kowalski in 
Poland. "So it's all Roger from now on, no?" He's giving it his all, but 
Baghdatis is just working it this morning. His serve down the middle is so 
effective, and Federer's face tells you exactly what it feels like to be 5-7, 
0-2 down against an unseeded player. It doesn't look like a happy place.

Baghdatis leads 7-5, 1 - 0* That backhand down the line is so, so good from 
Baghdatis. Calling it textbooks stuff makes it sound too standard, it really is 
a massive winner for him. It's a deliciously well-timed forehand down the line 
that hands him a break point though... ah, Federer finds a decent forehand at 
last and hoiks himself up to deuce. Ooh, he tries a big second serve and hands 
Baghdatis another break point... but Fed smashes his way back to deuce. Lordy! 
We're back to break point with another dreadful forehand... and he's done it! 
Via a hefty net cord, but still!

Baghdatis wins the first set 7-5 Terrific serving from Baghdatis - an ace down 
the middle that lands bang on the T something for Federer to ponder there. And 
he claims to set points when Federer's attempted slice swirls into the net! And 
takes the first with an unreturnable serve! Goshly heck. We could be in for 
some ride.

Federer *5 - 6 Baghdatis Another great rally, only this one gets a poor finish 
- Baghdatis taking on a drop shot that no one should try, least of all the 
underdog in the final of the Australian Open. You have to love him though, he's 
keeping things interesting - Federer unable to come up with a pass just then 
and Baghdatis dinking a backhand volley across court and out of the world No1's 
reach. 30-30. Heck! Break point for Baghdatis with a scorching forehand down 
the line... Federer recovers with some menacing play at the net, and even 
treats us to a Timmy fist-pump while he's at it. ANOTHER forehand error though, 
and once more, Baghdatis has break point... and ANOTHER forehand error! He 
couldn't, he couldn't take the set. Could he?

Federer 5 - 5* Baghdatis Gorgeous shot! One of Baghdatis's backhand down the 
line specials to take Federer's backhand slice and shove it down his throat. 
Another ace from the Cypriot and a wide backhand from Federer, and Baghdatis 
holds before you can say "If one more person says he looks like a pirate..."

Federer *5 - 4 Baghdatis Wonderful rally! Both players bringing in every shot 
in their bag before Baghdatis tries to be a bit too cute with the slice drop 
shot and Federer spins one into the corner. Baghdatis is about to attempt 
probably the most important hold of his career. By the way, the emails have 
dried up. You've all gone back to bed with a cuppa and the Sunday papers, 
haven't you?

Federer 4 - 4* Baghdatis If Federer had plans to break again and serve for the 
set with less than half an hour on the clock, he soon had to put them on ice. 
Baghdatis rustles up two magnificent serves, then twice forces the error on the 
Federer forehand.

Federer *4 - 3 Baghdatis This tournament's been blighted by iffy line calls, 
and trust in the judges isn't helped when they keep making late calls. What's 
more important though, people, is that Federer's just buggered up a simple 
forehand at the the net. He soon puts things right with a dipping backhand that 
Baghdatis can't lift over the net... but a long forehand (again!) sees him held 
up at deuce. Ace. Ace. Hold.

Federer 3 - 3* Baghdatis Federer's got that look in his eye, the one that 
says, "I'll crush you, I'll effing crush you." But Baghdatis's serve is 
unswayed by such menace. I think he's actually serving harder than Federer so 
far. He's allowing himself to get a little overexcited in the rally though, 
walloping a forehand well beyond the baseline to allow Federer back to 30-30. 
Baghdatis manages his first ace - a beauty right down the middle - but a sloppy 
backhand finds the net and finds Cyrpus's hero pegged back at deuce. He 
struggles with the long rally, then double faults and is broken straight back.

Federer *2 - 3 Baghdatis He may be made to look average by the odd Baghdatis 
shot, but on serve, Federer looks in great form. Even mid-scamper he manages a 
beautiful cross-courter to leave Baghdatis stranded at the net. Och, the 
Cypriot's not going to lie down though! Pushes Federer wide out of court and 
then smashes home for 30-30. Federer nudges ahead with a possibly-slightly-long 
serve down the middle, but another dodgy line call takes things to deuce, so 
all's fair etc. Scorching ace down the middle = advantage Federer... and he 
sticks a simple forehand wide. This could end up being a long paragraph... what 
was I saying about Baghdatis not breaking? Another long Federer forehand gives 
him the break point - and another hands him the break! The man's a marvel, a 
modern marvel.

Federer 2 - 2* Baghdatis Lovely backhand down the line from Baghdatis, forcing 
Federer into slinging a forehand well wide. The next point goes Federer's way, 
mind, after Baghdatis whips a two-handed backhand into the net - but then - 
crikey! - Federer comes up with a pretty mean slice, only to see Baghdatis 
absolutely rifle it back across court on the backhand. Federer stretched but it 
was going away from him all the time. Great tennis.

Federer *2 - 1 Baghdatis "Do you have any predictions for the match ahead?" 
asks Paul Hawkins. "I hope someone's cooking you up a bacon sandwich 
accompanied by a mug of steaming hot tea." Well I can predict with some 
confidence that if I want a cup of tea and a bacon sandwich, I'll have to make 
it myself - it's just me and the security guards at Guardian Towers this 
morning. As for the match, I think Baghdatis's chances rest on him holding and 
sneaking the tiebreaks - I don't think he'll break Federer on the evidence so 
far - some deeeeelightful work on the forehand.

Federer 1 - 1* Baghdatis I'm sure in an ideal world Baghdatis would prefer not 
see his returns come back to him, but he's making more than a good fist of the 
ensuing rallies. First Federer's forehand goes long, then his backhand swings 
wide. His strokes almost look lazy at times, but then that's probably just the 
prerogative of the ludicrously talented. A huge roar as Baghdatis holds without 
too much trouble.

Federer *1 - 0 Baghdatis Nice cross-court forehand from Federer, followed by 
an ace out wide. I think he means to say "I mean business, kiddo, so don't show 
me up with your youthful enthusiasm, mkay?" An easy hold with 100% first serve.

"I can hear my neighbours screaming 'Hup Roger'," says Steve in Switzerland, 
"which is not the done thing on a Sunday morning in Switzerland."

They're knocking up "Good evening from Tokyo," says Simon. "Looking forward to 
your coverage of the final - hope you have a large pot of coffee nearby." I 
actually don't like coffee - I don't like to mess with my body with things like 
caffeine. I'm just going to hoover up a couple of lines of jazz salt.

Middle of the road Gah. Pre-match entertainment this morning comes courtesy of 
the runners up in Australian Idol, three men who really ought to know better 
than the backwards cap and sleeveless shirt look. And they appear to be miming 
over the soundtrack of a cat being run over by an articulated lorry. Ooh, 
they've stopped. With any luck we'll have some tennis in a minute.

Good lord With the players still not out on court, Eurosport's hired voices 
take one final opportunity to patronise the crowd within an inch of their 
existence. All the Cypriots in the stands are probably related to Baghdatis you 
know!

Good morning And how are we all today? I'm feeling pretty smug, having got up 
at 6am on a Sunday morning for the first and last time in my life. I'm also 
looking forward to a rather fine tennis match. I'm not sure Baghdatis's energy 
is quite enough to knock Federer off his stride, but it'll be an entertaining 
watch nonetheless.
 