
Roger Federer is the new Australian Open champion but it could be argued that 
Marat Safin did all the hard work for him by knocking out Andy Roddick, the 
former world No1, and Andre Agassi, the reigning champion, either of whom might 
have given the Swiss a sterner challenge in yesterday's final.

There was always the danger that the Russian would be too exhausted to offer 
Federer a sustained challenge, having battled his way through three 
five-setters in his previous four matches and in total spending eight hours 
longer on court than Federer over the fortnight. And so it proved, Safin losing 
7-6, 6-4, 6-2, his second Australian Open final defeat in three years.

Because Safin was largely drained of energy, the contest was effectively over 
after one set. Thereafter Federer, who was several notches below his best, 
became a little over-anxious in his search for outright winners and the tennis 
was markedly patchy, as finals often are. But few doubted that the best player 
had won the title - and not only the best but the most enjoyable to watch.

Federer, the reigning Wimbledon champion, has now won two of the last three 
grand slam titles, as well as the end-of-seasonTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup. He guaranteed his 
position as the new world No1 when he defeated Spain's Juan Carlos Ferrero here 
in the semi-final and looks virtually certain to hold on to the position until 
at least Wimbledon, assuming he remains fit.

The cream has truly risen to the top and, although the other leading players 
of Federer's generation - Roddick, Ferrero, Safin, Australia's Lleyton Hew itt 
and the two Argentinians Guillermo Coria and David Nalbandian - talk about the 
No1 position in terms of it being regularly shuffled around, Federer may 
dominate them all, just as Pete Sampras dominated his contemporaries.

Certainly Federer has the overwhelming skill and talent to do so. The 
unanswered question is whether he has the unbending will. "Mentally Pete was 
the strongest player on the tour," said Safin yesterday when asked to compare 
Sampras with the Swiss. "If Pete had a weakness, it was his backhand and really 
that only caused him problems on clay. Roger has everything but Pete was 
really, really tough."

Perhaps Federer will show the same resolve, although to be making comparisons 
with Sampras is premature, a difference of 12 grand slam titles to be precise. 
Unlike Sampras, though, he has the ability to win at Roland Garros and will not 
be filled with the horrors when the clay comes around.

It was sad to see Agassi finally lose to Safin, after a wonderful run of 26 
matches unbeaten at the Australian Open which encompassed three of his four 
titles here. He said he intends to return but many doubt it. The young guard 
are in control now. "There are a lot of young and very good players," said 
Safin. "We'll be famous in five years. It will be like Agassi, Sampras and 
McEnroe. It's the evolution of tennis."

Evolution, revolution: nobody can ever be sure what will happen but men's 
tennis is currently thriving, with the last week of this tournament throwing up 
rich excitement which hugely stimulated the television ratings, particularly in 
the evening and so-called "twilight" sessions. As a result of this next year's 
men's final has been moved from 2pm to 7.30pm Australian eastern daylight 
saving time, so will start at 8.30am in the United Kingdom.

Federer's win was achieved without a coach, the 22-year-old Swiss having 
parted company with Peter Lundgren last year. In the days of McEnroe few 
leading players had coaches, although Federer insisted he is "not trying to 
introduce something new. I'm still looking, like a single man."

Worryingly for his opponents Federer feels he still has scope for considerable 
improvement. He has the most natural of talents, so much so that sometimes he 
seems spoilt for choice, although generally his shot selection is excellent. 
"When I'm out there I feel like I'm living the game and I know exactly what 
spins and angles I need. And when it gets important, it feels like I can raise 
my game."

Safin knew his only chance was to win the opening set and he duly broke 
Federer's second service game for a 2-1 lead, only for Federer to break back 
immediately. Two more breaks, a comparative rarity at this level, followed and 
at 6-5 Safin, who won the US Open title in 2000, had to save two set points. A 
mistimed Federer backhand gave the Russian an immediate edge in the tie- break 
but it was short-lived, Federer taking it 7-3 and with it the initiative for 
the match.

"Don't give me a hard time, I'm trying my best," Safin told the crowd as they 
tried to raise him at the beginning of the third set. Two of his rackets had 
already bitten the dust but by now his exhaustion was terminal.

Safin, who missed most of last year through injury, was understandably 
disappointed while also being thoroughly pleased to be back in the big time, 
where he belongs. "Roger is a great player, the most complete on the tour. And 
he was fresh; I wasn't."
 