
Greetings Hello everybody. All set for another rollercoaster ride in the men's 
singles? Just smile and nod. Roger Federer looked out of sorts against Nikolay 
Davydenko and Nicolas Kiefer will be clinging to that with all the strength he 
can muster, but the fact is, even on a bad day, Federer hasn't been beaten. I'm 
not sure I'd have Kiefer down as the man to change that, but then there's a 
bloke called Marcos Baghdatis waiting in the final so anything could happen. 
Would anybody care to email me their predictions?

And here's what the audience thought "Though the pressure of being an 
overwhelming favourite wherever he goes is finally beginning to get to him, 
Federer in three sets today," Mystic Megs Alex Tesei.

"Federer to win this game in four sets," says Marika confidently, "then be 
taken to five sets by Baghdatis and win via the longest final set in the 
history of tennis!"

"Usually Roger moves up the gears during a big championship," explains 
Muhammed in west London, "so my prediction is for a Federer victory in four 
sets."

"A prediction," says A Douglas, although essay might have been nearer the 
mark. "Federer, great though he is, has very wristy shots on both wings. As he 
hits his late twenties, it will be a liability, when his timing goes down even 
a nearly imperceptible notch. In fact, I think that this liability is already 
beginning to manifest itself." But will it happen today? Well?

"Federer to walk it," reckons Gareth Wilson, "then walk out on yet another 
excruciatingly sycophantic post-game interview 'conducted' by Jim Courier. To 
think I used to respect that man..."

Ooh! And, ooh! The players are making their way through what appears to be the 
labyrinth from the film, and will soon be on court.

Federer *1 - 0 Kiefer Kiefer's bouncing on his toes in that 
honest-miss-I'm-really-up-for-this way, but even when he gets on the end of a 
Federer serve, he's left watching a little Federer backhand drop nicely inside 
the baseline. Crikey heck! Sod that, he's just stuck the most unbelievable 
return back across Federer for break point! He sticks it straight into the net, 
but at least engages the world No1 in a bit of deuce-advantage slap and tickle 
before losing the game.

"Federer to twist his ankle and Bagdatis to win on Sunday," says George 
Chishios, ducking under a passing pig. "And (sigh) what's really going to 
happen - Federer straight sets and Federer straight sets on Sunday too."

Federer 1 - 1* Kiefer Kiefer slides to 0-30 after a mistimed forehand but a 
tasty little kick serve helps him regain some ground. His forehand finds the 
net this time though and Federer finds himself with two break points... he 
can't take the first after another wide serve that he can't out back over the 
net... and the same goes for the second one too - how much will Kiefer rely on 
that wide serve today, eh?

"Living in the French part of Switzerland, I have to say Federer, or the Tennis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Police will charge over from the 
German part and clap me in irons," says Luke Williams. "Anyway, the Brit in me 
wants to see Baghdatis beat Fed in the final....followed by GB1 beating 
Switzerland into second place in the bobsleigh next month. Some hope!"

Federer *2 - 1 Kiefer Federer, as Mo Slater might say, looks like 'e's got the 
riiiight 'ump, thanks to a late line call in the last game. And it puts him off 
his stride, a thundering netcord sending the ball twirling up towards the 
umpire. His first serve percentage can't be anywhere near normal so far either, 
but Kiefer's struggling with the second ones too, so no matter.

Federer 3 - 1* Kiefer An almighty serve from Kiefer! This time it's down the 
middle and inches clear of Federer's frame. And he follows it with a delicious 
drop shot... oh poo. A double fault. Deuce. Another double fault! All is well 
again in the Kiefer camp thanks to two more absolutely tonking serves. 
Jawdropping rally with Kiefer on advantage! He chose the wrong shot running 
onto a Federer drop shot and slugged the resultant lob well into the stands. 
Which probably wasn't a good thing to do, because Federer rustled up a lovely 
forehand down the line to take the advantage for himself. Break point... and 
that's the break, via a questionable line call.

"My guess is that FedEx will deliver in three," says Marcos Baghdatis fan Alan 
Agrao. Instead of things like FedEx, I think tennis players should be given 
wrestling-style nicknames like Roger Bitchslap Bulldozer Federer. Well, 
probably something better than that. Any ideas?

Federer *4 - 1 Kiefer Lovely stuff from Kiefer, a deep forehand forcing the 
mistake from Federer. And he's found another of those superb, plum-straight 
returns for 30-30, too. Ach. Ace.

Federer 4 - 2* Kiefer Two aces in a row to open this game from Kiefer - that's 
four to Federer's nil now - and Federer's return off the third strays out. The 
love hold goes begging thanks to a deightful backhand that curves out and comes 
back in before dropping inside the baseline from Federer. Ouch. And that's 
another beautiful return for 40-30... FedEx/Bitchslap sticks a forehand wide 
for Kiefer to hold.

Federer *5 - 2 Kiefer Kiefer's not happy with another line call, but recovers 
himself enough to find a peachy whipped forehand that a scrambling Federer 
can't reach. Still a relatively untroubled hold for the world No1: his first 
serve percentage appears to be climbing.

Federer 5 - 3* Kiefer New balls! Kiefer forces Federer wide with a cross-court 
forehand to set himself up for a down-the-line winner, then lumps it into the 
net. His first serve percentage, meanwhile, appears to be heading very much in 
the opposite direction to Federer's - still no nickname suggestions by the way, 
distinct lack of imagination - which means hehas to make the rallies work for 
him. No such luck, Federer works him all over court then lets a delicious, 
classic Federer backhand fly. And again, Kiefer's drop shot stumbles into the 
net. He rescues two break points well, but he needs to be playing the points 
like this from the moment a game starts, not when he's backed up against the 
wall.

Federer wins first set 6-3 I think, though I couldn't be sure, that I've just 
seen Roger Federer,the Roger Federer, double fault. And good lord he's 
punishing Kiefer for it - following the next two serves in and smacking 
forehands deep into the corner of the court. A hefty net cord allows Federer's 
next forehand to drop just over the net, and that's the set.

Federer leads 6-3, 0 - 1* Before I was only wondering, but now I'm quite 
convinced that Kiefer could do with a different pair of shorts. They look like 
they've never been within three miles of a natural fibre and are clinging to 
him in what must be a most uncomfortable manner. And they're dripping with 
sweat. No wonder his first serve percentage hit an all-time low in this game. 
He survives as Federer puts a forehand and then a backhand volley into the net.

Federer leads 6-3, *1 - 1 Federer's definitely got his eye in now. He can't 
stop Kiefer getting on the end of his serves but he's making him wish he hadn't 
with some punishing groundstrokes. That seemed like a perfectly reasonable 
sentence until a double fault and a forehand into the middle of the net later. 
Still, Kiefer's forehand down the line strays wide, and then his backhand does 
the same, so I'm not made to look a total fool.

Federer leads 6-3, 1 - 2* "Are you going to post a picture of the shorts?!" 
wonders Jo Lenton. I can't find one at the moment, but I'll keep looking. 
Imagine you've leapt into a swimming pool in your favourite shellsuit, then 
you've got to wander around town in them. There you go. Easy hold for Kiefer.

Federer leads 6-3, *2 - 2 Brilliant backhand return from Kiefer, a mid-air 
wallop that leaves Federer stranded and the makers of The Matrix wanting to 
remake Wimbledon The Movie. His next two returns are agonisingly mistimed, but 
he makes a backhand down the line to take things to 30-30. Federer edges ahead 
with an ace that was probably out, actually, then smashes home Kiefer lob for 
the game.

Federer leads 6-3, 2 - 3* Kiefer looks set for an easy hold after some strong 
serving but allows Federer in on a wide one and pays the price with a cheeky 
cross-court forehand. That's all Federer manages though. "What about Kung-foo 
Kiefer and The Macho Man Roger F?" wonders James Stewart. "I know Randy Savage 
used macho man before but that always sounded too much like a redneck on viagra 
for me."

Federer leads 6-3, *3 - 3 Smashing stuff from Kiefer. Literally. But winning 
points like that only riles The Macho Man and he puts things right with a 
dipping forehand into the far corner.

"'Imagine you've leapt into a swimming pool in your favourite shellsuit'," 
quotes Alex Pickering. "Anything so your non-Liverpudlian readers can picture 
them?" All right. Imagine a Liverpudlian leaping into a swimming pool in 
his/her favourite shellsuit.

Federer leads 6-3, 3 - 4* Gah! Such, such a good rally, both players making 
the most of the angles, then Kiefer lummies a forehand towards New Zealand. 
He's helped out by another iffy line call on Federer's forehand, but then his 
own blistering forehand is wrongly called out. The umpire tells them to replay 
the point and Kiefer snatches it.

Federer leads 6-3, *4 - 4 What a return from Kiefer! Doublehanded backhand 
that swirls away from Federer. But he blunders the next two points and that 
break still looks a distant prospect.

"As someone said in their sign at Wimbledon, 'Federer is Betterer' - as he has 
shown this week by playing crap and still pulling through," says Robert Klein 
in snowy Geneva. "On the nickname I think it should be The Man Who Nose."

Federer leads 6-3, 4 - 5* Another dreadful line call on Kiefer's serve and it 
just rubs salt in the would when Federer sticks a terrific return in on the 
second attempt. The ball was in by over an inch! Where's hawkeye when you need 
it? Lovely rally on the fifth point, the climax of which is Kiefer stretching 
to a Federer pass and dinking it back over the net. "Balls" says Kiefer after 
sticking a forehand into the net instead of down the line. "Blast," he says in 
the wake of a long forehand that gives Federer break point. "Stick that in your 
pipe and f*$£ing smoke it," he says with a smash to bring things back to deuce. 
"Ja!"

Federer leads 6-3, *5 - 5 Federer drops the first point but gets down to a 
Kiefer pass to slice his way to the second. He's not finding too many aces but 
he's thumping Kiefer's returns all over court. Are we heading for a tiebreak?

Federer leads 6-3, 5 - 6* "Why is Tim Henman still on your tennis picture (top 
left)?" asks Graham MacFadyen, cheekily. "Surely it's about time you had a new, 
non-Henman block - or do you know something I don't about the future of men's 
tennis?" Yes. Tim's going to take a secret potion mixed by Pete Burns's lip 
surgeon and morph into a decent player in a complicated 48-hour process, before 
storming to every title on the tour for the next five years. Meanwhile, in the 
real world, Kiefer streaks to 40-15 but gets whipped all over court for 40-30 
to turn an easy hold into a slightly less easy hold. Ah, ace, lovely.

Federer won the first set 6-3, Kiefer takes the second 7-5 Blimey Charlie. 
Federer shapes up for a slice volley and sticks it into the net! Then double 
faults for 0-30! Kiefer couldn't really break here could he? All the other 
games I've done have been five-setters, so it wouldn't surprise me... but 
Kiefer floats a forehand into the net to allow Federer back in... woohoo! Set 
point for Kiefer... d'oh! He tries to just tease a drop shot over the net but 
has to watch it trickle into it instead. But then Federer's backhand sails wide 
and it's a set a piece!

"I don't even really cares who wins this, because I just want to see what the 
next President of Cyprus is going to do in the final," says David, who ensures 
he gets a name check with a huge dollop of praise atop his email.

Third set [6-3, 5-7] Federer 1 - 0* Kiefer Hoots man. Kiefer finds himself 
0-40 down before he even realises the third set has started, then musters a 
10th ace of the day and a decent forehand to scramble back to 30-40. But it all 
goes decidedly pear-shaped with a long backhand. early break.

"Another day, another hangover, and still no hope of redemption," mumbles 
Jascha Elliott. "Did you or anybody else saw the jaw-droppingly awful Hotel 
Babylon last night? I've watched some low quality trash TV in my time (I'm not 
proud of it, but I have) but that felt as painful as watching Noel Edmonds 
duetting with Tarby on a James Blunt medley. I'm just seeking validation before 
dismissing this out of hand - any thoughts?"

Third set [6-3, 5-7] Federer *2 - 0 Kiefer Easy hold for Federer, really nice, 
controlled tennis and inch-perfect precision. Oh by the way, the trailer for 
Hotel Babylon was enough to convince me it was a big pile of excrement.

Third set [6-3, 5-7] Federer 3 - 0* Kiefer That's got to be the worst backhand 
I've ever seen Roger Federer fling across the net, but he redeems himself with 
a beautiful forehand that zings past a despairing Kiefer. It's for another 
break point, as well. Double fault, double break... no way back?

Third set [6-3, 5-7] Federer *4 - 0 Kiefer I missed the first two points there 
grabbing a cuppa, but I did see Federer put in a devil of a servem and then 
another. 4-0 has gotta hurt.

Third set [6-3, 5-7] Federer 5 - 0* Kiefer Kiefer simply cannot find the right 
shots, the right time or the effing court at the moment, and he's been broken 
AGAIN. "Are these matches something of a dilemma for you?" asks Alex Pickering. 
"I mean, if it's a five-setter than you get to see some exciting tennis, but if 
it's a three set walkover then you can knock off early and go to the pub." Who 
says I'm not already in the pub using my poncy status enchancing Blackberry?

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0 Kiefer only went and nicked the first two points! 
He ended the third on his behind as Federer pushed the ball behind him... but a 
stinging return gives him a break point, for what it's worth at this stage. 
Survived in style by Federer, and he takes the set at about the same time 
Kiefer's forehand hits the net.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 0 - 1* An ace for starters, and then he wins a 
point you'd never have had down as his! Federer smashed but too weakly to avoid 
the return, and then his forehand simply went limp and hit the net. And what a 
fourth point: an energetic rally that had them both in at the net, Federer 
unable to get down to the drop shot in the end. But he sneaks an unbelievable 
slice backhand over the net, all of which was completely unexpected by Kiefer, 
to take the next point for 40-30. Kiefer holds though.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, *1 - 1 Kiefer's not giving up the ghost and 
hassles and harries Federer, coming into the net, to peg him back to 30-30... 
but Federer pulls a massive serve out of the bag and holds without more than a 
moment's worry.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 2 - 1* "Judging by the really white upper parts 
of his legs that are showing, it seems to me that those pants Kiefer wears have 
been washed at too high a temperature this week," proffers the 
superbly-monikered Huib Sturkenboom. "They look like those really tight 80's 
style football shorts. On Eurosport they mentioned Kiefer being named "whiney 
boy" in some German newspaper, how about that for a nickname?" He pulled off an 
exquisite forehand that Federer didn't suffer the indignity of chasing, but 
soon had a sixth double fault to moan about. Break point... rescued! Another 
break point... oh, it's all over. It must be.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, *3 - 1 It's all starting to look a little bit 
clinical: a scalpel clean forehand taking the first point, he pushes Kiefer 
into mistakes for a 40-0 lead, then finishes the German off with another arcing 
forehand.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 4 - 1* Oh dear, a Kiefer double fault suggests we 
could all be free for an early lunch, and what was meant to be a top-spun 
forehand down the line in fact gets to know the net. And that's the backhand of 
a man who knows his number's up and just wants to get it all over with - well 
wide. 0-40... and a peach of a forehand that whistles across court in front of 
Kiefer's wretched face.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, *5 - 1 Ruthless: an ace that pelts down the 
middle of the court from Federer. He comes into the net off the his next serve 
and pokes Kiefer's attempted pass bang into winner territory. Ace... ah, not 
quite perfect, Federer buggers up a forehand volley to concede one point... but 
fires off a brutal ace for 5-1.

Federer leads 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 5 - 2* Kiefer summons a 14th ace, but it's 
probably only prolonging the agony rather than signalling a fightback.Yep, he 
drops the next two points - about an inch past the baseline, as it happens. 
Good lord. Federer makes a couple of unlikely fetches and Kiefer somehow 
smashes his "winner" into the net. Two match points... first one saved with an 
ace... ooh and the second one is just about rescued when Federer's return 
doesn't quite make it in.

Federer wins 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 6-2 Hawkeye! Hawkeye! Hawkeye! Yet again the line 
call is more wrong than George Galloway in a leotard, and Federer misses out on 
what should have been a pretty neat forehand winner. And then Kiefer has cause 
to moan about another iffy shout - and one that hands Federer two match points 
too. Sterling effort from Kiefer to save the first... unreturnable serve, and 
Roger Federer is through to the final. Like it was ever really in doubt. Erm...

Thanks for all your emails, sorry I couldn't use them all. Hope you enjoyed 
the match and I'll see you tomorrow morning at about 11.30am for the women's 
final.
 