
World No1 Roger Federer was some way off his best but survived his 
quarter-final encounter with fifth seed Nikolay Davydenko to win in four sets 
and claim a place in the semi-final.

The match was expected to be an easy win for Federer, Davydenko having already 
faced some stiff tests in getting there. But he was made to play four sets - 
including two tiebreaks - before winning 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 7-6 (7-5).

Federer was broken five times by the Russian but managed to raise his game to 
claim the vital points - he won just five more points that his opponent and 
committed 52 unforced errors to Davydenko's 48.

The top seed will now face Nicolas Kiefer in the last four. Kiefer made the 
semi-finals after a brutal 6-4, 0-6, 6-4, 6-7 (1-7), 8-6 marathon victory over 
Sebastien Grosjean.

Grosjean started favourite, having beaten his opponent three out of the five 
times they had met, but it was Kiefer who managed to overcome some strong 
resistance from Grosjean as the 21st seed turned in a mixed performance before 
clinching victory after nearly five hours.

Kiefer started well, breaking Grosjean's serve in the sixth game. But the 
Frenchman bounced back in the second set and Kiefer could do little as Grosjean 
levelled the match.

The momentum switched again in the third set when Kiefer took an early lead 
with a break of Grosjean's opening service game and held out for the set.

Leading two sets to one, Kiefer started the fourth set in the best possible 
fashion with a strong break of his opponent's opening service game. But 
Grosjean quickly bounced back to break Kiefer's next two service games and take 
a 4-1 lead.

The match was looked to be heading towards a deciding fifth set until the 
German broke back in the seventh game. Grosjean responded with another break 
and looked to have the set wrapped up while serving for it, before Kiefer again 
broke him.

With the score locked on 6-6, it was the Frenchman whose performance lifted as 
he won it 7-1 to give him confidence for the fifth and final set.

The pair exchanged breaks before Grosjean had another break to lead 4-3 in the 
final set. But again he could not consolidate the lead and Kiefer managed a 
crucial break straight back.

In a sometimes tense struggle, both players lost their composure late in the 
match.

Kiefer was upset by a line call, while Grosjean was livid that the German had 
carelessly thrown his racquet onto his side of the court during the 12th game, 
but was credited with the point.

In the end it was Kiefer who managed to crank his performance up a notch and 
clinch the semi-final place with his second match point.
 