
Exit Roger Federer with his 10th grand slam title to the distant sound of 
Parisian accordions and a whiff of garlic. The outstanding player of his 
generation, and possibly of all time by the time he is done, duly won his third
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title, 
beating Chile's Fernando González 7-6, 6-4, 6-4, and now, as last year, will 
bend his mind and efforts to being fully prepared for the European spring and 
the French Open, the one major title to elude him.

Most agree that Pete Sampras's record of 14 grand slam victories will be 
passed with something to spare by Federer, provided he stays fit. But only five 
players have ever won all four majors and Federer's ability to join that elite 
quintet - Fred Perry, Don Budge, Rod Laver, Roy Emerson and Andre Agassi - is 
how history will judge him. And, should he win at Roland Garros in June, then 
the holy grail of tennis, the calendar grand slam, will be set before him in 
all its gleaming glory. Only Laver (twice) and Budge have achieved that.

"Last year was the first time when I felt that, if all went perfectly, I might 
be able to do it," said Federer. He won three but could not get past Rafael 
Nadal, who beat the Swiss in the final in Paris. Federer had always said he 
would not begin speaking about passing Sampras's record until he was more than 
half way there. It was, after all, only three years ago here that he won his 
second grand slam title, after opening his account at Wimbledon in 2003. But he 
now is. "It seems like I've come with such big steps in such a short period of 
time," said Federer, as if barely able to believe it himself.

These are glorious years for Federer, and everybody privileged to be able to 
watch him, for he has raised the modern game to new, undreamed of heights, 
imbuing tennis with athleticism, power, skill and - above all - grace. He is a 
true artist among the artisans. And on top of that he is a thoroughly nice guy 
and a wonderful ambassador of his sport.

Not that his opponents necessarily always see it that way. Poor Andy Roddick 
had so convinced himself before their semi-final that he had closed the gap on 
Federer that he was cut to the core to lose in straight sets and made to look a 
novice. González, to his credit, will be able to look back on his first grand 
slam final yesterday and remember he was within two points of the first set. As 
it was, Federer became the first player since Bjorn Borg in 1980 at Roland 
Garros to win a major title without losing a set. Not that this meant too much 
to him.

Such feats flow off Federer's racket like a bubbling underground spring 
feeding the river of history. He is, of course, playing for history these days, 
with all other tournaments being subsidiary to his grand slam ambitions. He has 
now played in seven consecutive finals, equalling the record of Australia's 
Jack Crawford in the 30s, while his total of 10 major titles places him on a 
par with Bill Tilden. Only Sampras, Emerson (12) and Borg and Laver (11) still 
head him. And drawing level with the last two, both heroes of Federer, would be 
something special for him, the more so if it were in Paris.

Unlike Sampras, who never reached the French Open final and whose best 
performance on the clay of Roland Garros was a semi-final in 1996, Federer has 
every chance. Last year he was second only to Nadal on this surface and he will 
be watching the young Spaniard extremely closely between now and the start of 
the French Open.

Nadal, world No2, has been displaying signs of feeling the pressure and has 
not reached a final since losing to Federer at Wimbledon last year. Here he 
lost to González in straight sets. If Nadal, whose run of matches unbeaten on 
clay reached 62 at Roland Garros when he defended his title, has not regained 
his form and brio by the time the French Open begins, then the world No1 will 
feel history is indeed nodding in his direction.

There was a chill in the air and a tricky wind for yesterday's final and 
Federer's forehand, his most potent weapon, was some way short of its best in 
the opening set, with several shots flying yards beyond the baseline.

González, the former wild man from Santiago whom the American coach Larry 
Stefanki has calmed and redirected, stuck to Federer like a limpet, and at 4-4 
punished a particularly loose service game to take the lead. At 5-4 and 40-15 
up it seemed the Chilean's patience would be rewarded but the champion snapped 
back, levelled and then won the tie-break with something approaching disdain. 
This was their 10th meeting and Federer had won the previous nine. Neither man 
forgot this statistic.

González, who will move into the top five today, needed treatment to his right 
shoulder before the second set, though it was tiredness rather than a serious 
injury - "Everything was tired," he admitted.

Not so Federer, who fell to the court with "relief" after match point, relief 
that was almost immediately transfigured into extreme happiness. So for the 
second year in succession he goes to the French as the holder of three grand 
slam titles. History beckons again.

Men's grand slam singles titles

 Aus Fr Wim US Total

Pete Sampras 2 0 7 5 14

Roy Emerson 6 2 2 2 12

Bjorn Borg 0 6 5 0 11

Rod Laver 3 2 4 2 11

Roger Federer 3 0 4 3 10

Bill Tilden 0 0 3 7 10

Andre Agassi 4 1 1 2 8

Jimmy Connors 1 0 2 5 8

Ivan Lendl 2 3 0 3 8

Fred Perry 1 1 3 3 8

Ken Rosewall 4 2 0 2 8

Men's grand slam titles without losing a set

Roger Federer 2007 Australian Open

Bjorn Borg 1980 French Open

Bjorn Borg 1978 French Open

Bjorn Borg 1976 Wimbledon

Ilie Nastase 1973 French Open (first two matches were best-of-three)

Ken Rosewall 1971 Australian Open (five matches)
 