
The statistics are stark for Marcos Baghdatis. Roger Federer, his opponent in 
tomorrow's Australian Open denouement, has played in six grand slam finals and 
won the lot. He is on a record 51-match winning streak on hard courts, while 
his number of career titles stands at 34. Baghdatis, with one previous final to 
his name, which he lost last year in Basle, can only shrug, smile his widest 
smile and keep dreaming the dream.

"I'm playing amazing tennis and I've just stopped thinking about my opponents 
and simply tried to be very aggressive," he said yesterday. "Of course I know 
that Roger is the best player in the world but I need to go out there and 
believe in myself and in my ability to adapt my game. I know I can create a lot 
of good things and it's important I don't suddenly try to change anything just 
because I am playing Roger."

The dynamic young Cypriot's run to the final is reminiscent of that achieved 
by the Brazilian Gustavo Kuerten at Roland Garros in 1997. He entered the 
French Open that year ranked 66th in the world and stunned the leading 
clay-court specialists with a series of phenomenal performances that ended in a 
samba accompanied triumph over Sergi Bruguera on the Bois de Boulogne.

Kuerten, like Baghdatis, was 20, ranked outside the top 50 and in a similar 
fashion won the hearts of the French, just as Baghdatis has so evidently struck 
a chord in this city. "I just like to have fun," he said, although this in no 
way implies a dilettante approach to the game. Baghdatis is deadly serious, as 
David Nalbandian, Ivan Ljubicic and Andy Roddick, all top-10 players and all 
beaten by Baghdatis over the last few days, will testify.

And it has not always been such fun for the boy who left Limassol at 13 to 
live and and train in Paris. "It was really tough for me when I became a 
professional because I didn't have any wild cards and I had to fight my way 
through all the qualifiers." But the former world junior No1 never lost his 
self-belief. "I was expecting one day to be up there and now I'm really happy 
because I have made a lot of sacrifices. And my family did. The way is long but 
my objectives are higher now. I know I have to keep my feet on the ground, work 
hard and I can go even better."

Nonetheless to beat Federer is the tallest of orders. The sole comfort 
Baghdatis will take into the match is that the Swiss has not been at his 
absolute best, although the last two sets of yesterday's semi-final against 
Germany's talented but mentally suspect Nicolas Kiefer were close to the 
sublime form he displayed for most of last year when he lost only four of his 
85 matches.

Federer won 6-3, 5-7, 6-0, 6-2 and said, ominously as far as Baghdatis is 
concerned: "Finally I got it right, not just for this match but I guess also 
for the rest of the year. Now I'm excited about the final." The Swiss had 
private words with Rod Laver here and, although he has played down the 
possibility of the calendar grand slam, it is obviously in his mind. Laver 
achieved it twice.

Federer will have a light hit today and then a few words with his Australian 
coach Tony Roche to iron out any minor glitches: "But I guess there's not much 
I can change now." He admitted to feeling nervous before playing Kiefer, this 
despite having won his previous six matches against the German who was playing 
in his first major semi-final. " I just had sort of a strange feeling. Not a 
negative one but just like a big excitement because I knew I'm so close to 
another slam title."

Federer had lost in the semi-finals here last year against Russia's Marat 
Safin, who went on to become champion, and did not care for that experience at 
all. "You work so hard and then to lose in the semis is a big disappointment. 
So maybe I was a little bit worried about the disappointment. I'd been waiting 
for the entire tournament to really get nervous and this was the moment."

Just a couple of weeks ago in Doha Federer beat Baghdatis 6-4, 6-3 in the 
quarter-finals of the Qatar Open. "I think we're all surprised he has got so 
far here because there are other very talented youngsters who I thought would 
make the break before him," said the world No1. "But he proved us all wrong. He 
has beaten quality players and he totally deserves to be in the final. Maybe 
he's changed something in his game, although I don't think so; time is just too 
short. But it definitely helps me that I've played him already this year, so I 
know what to expect."

In fact it will be their fourth meeting, Federer having beaten Baghdatis in 
the fourth round here last year and in the second round of the US Open in 2004. 
To date the Cypriot has managed only one set and that was in their first match.

Obviously Federer will be the overwhelming favourite to win his seventh major 
and second Australian Open title, a victory that would put him, at the age of 
24, half way towards Pete Sampras's record total. Baghdatis has hugely 
enlivened the tournament with his marvellous run and believes that one day he 
will become the world No1. He also believes he can beat Federer tomorrow.

Head to head

Roger Federer 

Switzerland

Age 24

Career prize money $20.4m

Born Basle

Seeded 1

Grand slam titles 6 (Wimbledon 2003, 2004, 2005; Australian Open 2004; US Open 
2004, 2005)

Marcos Baghdatis Cyprus

Age 20

Career prize money $0.4m

Born Limassol

Seeded no

Grand slam titles none

Federer leads 3-0

Qatar Open 2006 Stage QF Surface hard

Federer 6-4, 6-3 

Australian Open 2005 Stage 4th rd Surface hard

Federer 6-2, 6-2, 7-6

US Open 2004 Stage 2nd rd Surface hard Federer 6-2, 6-7, 6-3, 6-1
 