
First the good news for Andy Roddick. By reaching the semi-finals of the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> here he 
re-established himself as the US No1 and assured his return to the world's top 
five. The bad news was that he was pulverised, if that is not too kind a 
description, by Roger Federer, who won 6-4, 6-0, 6-2 in an hour and 23 minutes 
of something close to tennis perfection.

So the world No1 reached his 11th grand slam final out of the past 15 and is 
in a position, as lofty as they come, to win his third Australian Open title 
and 10th slam. "Everything worked," said Federer. "I'm shocked myself." Not 
half as shocked as the American, who at one point yelled: "Goddamn everything, 
it's all gone . . ." The final word was lost amid the crowd's applause of 
Federer.

Poor Roddick. Under the tutelage of Jimmy Connors he had seriously believed he 
was edging closer to the Swiss. Last night the gap was of Grand Canyon 
proportions. Despite losing 12 of their 13 previous slam and ATP matches, 
Roddick had beaten him in the Kooyong warm-up event and was clearly lifted by 
that small success. Little did he realise Federer had used that match, notably 
in approaching the net more than usual, to test the American's game. "I learned 
a lot," he said last night. Much more than many commentators here, who had 
suggested Roddick was about to break down Federer's door.

Federer was rapidly 2-0 up but conceded an immediate break-back, bringing a 
yell from Roddick, who believed the tide had turned. Less than 20 minutes later 
the water was rising around him. The first set was over in 33 minutes, the 
second in 22. Roddick's head dropped; at courtside Connors could only blink 
like an owl.

All Roddick's old failings returned. His backhand was limp and most efforts to 
get to the net saw him stranded. Such was his frustration at one stage that, 
trying to belt a ball out of the ground, he let his racket slip and saw it fly 
towards a photographer.
 