
So many questions, so little time... to cobble together a coherent preamble. 
Can Roger Federer reach his 2,045th grand slam final in a row? Is Novak 
Djokovic - yet to drop a set so far in this year's tournament - going to be 
able to hold his nerve better than he did during his last match against Federer 
(at the US Open last year), when he lost in straight sets after having set 
points in both the first two sets? More importantly, why doesn't Djokovic use
use Roger Federer's own serve <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5tkzsOQiNc> 
against him? And will Gary Naylor be the first person to send me an email?

What to expect Djokovic is playing some of the best tennis of his career right 
now, and Federer - top of the world rankings for 209 weeks now - is supposed to 
be "vulnerable". Federer was pushed all the way by Tipsarevic in the third 
round, while Djokovic has brushed aside everyone he's played -including fifth 
seed David Ferrer. Don't be fooled though - Rog raises his game as and when he 
needs to. Djokovic will need to be nothing short of perfect to even have a 
shot. After yesterday'sbrutal display of hitting 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/australianopen2008/story/0,,2246789,00.html> in 
the first semi-final, expect a slightly more technical match-up today - for all 
their huge serves, neither of these players boast the sheer athleticism of 
Tsonga or Nadal.

First set: Federer 0-1 Djokovic* First blood Djokovic, who serves hard and 
follows in before dispatching a tidy volley to the far right corner for 15-0. 
Federer comes straight back, driving Djokovic's second serve so close to the 
left-hand tramline that Djokovic mistakenly leaves it, before whisking another 
topspin forehand past him for 15-30. Djokovic finally gets his first serve 
going after that though, taking the next three points without too much trouble.

b>First set: Federer* 1-1 Djokovic Federer picks up the first unforced error 
of the game, dabbing his half-court drop shot into the net with Djokovic stuck 
well behind the baseline. No matter, he dominates every rally of the game on 
the way to holding to 15.

First set: Federer 1-2 Djokovic* Both of these two have such impressive first 
serves, and Djokovic needs his right now because Federer is attacking his 
second ruthlessly. Perhaps it's the knowledge of that fact that causes the Serb 
to double fault at 30-0, but despite letting his opponent in again with a 
backhand into the net to bring up 40-30, Djokovic pulls out another big serve 
when he needs it to hold the game.

First set: Federer* 2-2 Djokovic It's been an aggressive match so far - both 
players are attacking the ball early and looking to win points before they can 
get caught up in a rally. Such a strategy looks briefly like it might cost 
Federer here - as he belts a forehand into the tramlines before netting a 
backhand on the way to 15-40. But its all routine for the world No1 from there, 
as he mixes up unreturnable serves with more patient baseline play that twice 
sees Djokovic send looping topspin backhands just long.

First set: Federer 2-3 Djokovic* And Djokovic holds to love. Potentially an 
important game for him - he looked a bit frustrated at blowing those break 
points, but clearly it didn't get to him too much.

First set: Federer* 3-3 Djokovic By far the longest rally of the match to open 
the game, and it's Djokovic who takes it as Federer drives his backhand long. 
It's no secret that Djokovic needs to target that backhand - you could hardly 
call it bad, but in an otherwise impeccable arsenal, you have to find fault 
where you can. Federer comes roaring back, taking the next point with an 
emphatic smash, then holding to 15.

First set: Federer 4-3 Djokovic* I had to say it, didn't I - Federer flicks an 
delicious one-handed backhand past Djokovic as the latter attacks the net for 
0-15. To be fair Djokovic was asking for it - there wasn't nearly enough depth 
on his forehand to justify charging in the way he did, but still, what a shot. 
After dropping the next point for 0-30, Djokovic responds with consecutive 
unreturnable first seves, but then overhits a cross-court forehand to bring up 
30-40. Federer then changes things up beautifully on - you guessed it - his 
backhand, using a patient slice from the baseline until Djokovic sends a 
forehand into the tramlines.

First set: Federer* 5-3 Djokovic Federer's been playing most of his serves 
flat and down the line so far, but he opens this game with a vicious slice 
across Djokovic's face for an ace and 15-0. Djokovic is still holding his own 
though, and levels at 30-30 with a half-court forehand delivered with so much 
topspin it barely bounced. The game moves to deuce after a double fault from 
Federer, but Federer takes the game on his first advantage.

First set: Federer 5-4 Djokovic* Another glorious shot from Federer to open 
the game - Djokovic looked to have given himself room to attack the net with a 
deep forehand, but Federer somehow drove it back across his opponent with an 
impossibly-angled backhand. Djokovic could only clip it with his outstretched 
racket as he charged in, slipping over and appearing to bang his wrist in the 
process. Once again, though, Djokovic picks up some important points with his 
first serve and eventually holds to 30.

First set: Federer* 5-5 Djokovic A rare unforced error from Federer, who whips 
his forehand into the middle of the net for 15-30, but Djokovic can't tame his 
first serve on the next point, bouncing his racket in frustration after looping 
the ball long. Still, Djokovic brings up 30-40 - dominating a rally before 
forcing Federer into an awkward backhand behind the baseline, which doesn't 
quite clear the net. On the next point Federer repeats the trick with a far 
more routine forehand, and we're back level.

First set: Federer 5-6 Djokovic* It's always struck me with Djokovic that he's 
a very cerebral player - all that ball bouncing pre-serve smacks of Jonny 
Wilkinson-esque OCD, and my biggest concern for him is just that he begins to 
over-think when he finds himself in good positions. Certainly he does seem to 
tighten up towards the end of important sets sometimes, and he finds himself 
15-30 down again here on serve. An ace on the next point brings him back to the 
boil though, and successive Federer errors hand him the game.

First set: Federer* 5-7 Djokovic Well, we talked at the beginning about the 
set points Djokovic blew against Federer in the US Open final last year, but 
this time Djokovic makes no such slip - taking the set at the first 
opportunity. To be fair that owed much to Federer - who had overplayed a 
passing backhand with Djokovic at the net to bring up 30-40, and did the same 
again with his Djokovic at the baseline to give him the game. Well, well, well 
- we have a semi-final.

Second set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 1-0 Djokovic has his tail up and 
despite not sending in anything like his best serves, he holds to 15 after 
dominating the rallies. Interestingly he's been completely unafraid to work 
Federer's forehand thus far, and he's getting some change out of it - almost as 
though Federer doesn't expect anyone to play him that way.

Second set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 1-1 On one level that game was just 
the tonic for Federer - another ace and yet more unreturnable serves meaning he 
only dropped a single point, but what a shot it was on that point from 
Djokovic. Forced to react impossibly quickly to Federer's slice backhand, 
Djokovic barely reached the ball as it bounced barely inside his half of the 
court, and yet was able to dig out a perfect passing backhand down the line.

Second set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 2-1 Up 40-0, Djokovic almost pulls 
off a glorious through-the-legs lob after getting caught in no-mans-land in the 
middle of the court. Federer dismisses that attempt with a trademark smash, but 
Djokovic holds to 30 with another ace.

Second set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 3-1 He may not have the sheer muscle 
mass of a Nadal or a Tsonga, but it was perhaps unfair of me to say Djokovic 
lacked their athletcism earlier. He's so quick on his feet as he moves about 
the court, and it's something Federer is genuinely struggling to deal with. 
Knowing that Djokovic has dug out passing shots from impossible positions more 
than once in this game, Federer is playing the ball closer and closer to the 
baseline and twice he overplays such shots on the way to 30-40. He pulls it 
back with a glorious smash to end a long rally, but after netting the ball on 
deuce, he once again sees Djokovic pull out the impossible on the way to 
forcing the break. Having attacked the net, Federer looked to have put the ball 
out of reach with a dabbed volley that barely fell inside the court half-way up 
the service box, but Djokovic, running in from the baseline, summons up an 
incredible passing shot at full-stretch on his backhand.

Second set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 4-1 It's not often you get to say 
this, but Federer is in serious trouble here. I don't have the unforced errors 
statistics to hand, but Federer was at 18 a few seconds ago, and I've counted 
at least three more since that point. Despite one double-fault, Djokovic holds 
to 30.

Second set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 5-1 Federer can only stand and watch 
as Djokovic dismisses his first serve of the game with an almost arrogant 
cross-court backhand and after a passing forehand from Djokovic and yet another 
unforced error from Federer, it's 15-40. On break point Djokovic controls the 
pace, exchanging cross-court forehands with Federer's backhand, before suddenly 
upping the speed with a vicious half-court shot to which Federer has no answer. 
Unbelievably, this is threatening to turn into a rout.

Second set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 5-2 The hugely partisan crowd inside 
the Rod Laver Arena roars its approval as Djokovic nets a forehand to bring up 
15-40. Djokovic wrong-foots Federer - who just seems to naturally lean towards 
his backhand on the baseline - such is the preference of his opponents to 
making him play on it - with a two-handed passing backhand on the next point, 
before a successful challenge saves him on the next after it looked like he 
might have played the ball long. Another backhand to the baseline causes 
Federer to net and bring up deuce, but this time it's Djokovic who makes the 
error as he skews a shot into the tramlines, and Rog makes no mistake on the 
next point, slicing a glorious backhand past Djokovic as he rushes the net. 
Could that be a momentum turner?

Second set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 5-3 Maybe, just maybe Federer still 
has a shot in this set. Djokovic looks to lost his composure a touch, making a 
couple of unforced errors of his own as Federer takes the game to 30.

Second set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3 Both faces of Federer so far 
today summed up in the opening two points of this game. First he passes 
Djokovic with textbook topspin forehand, even though his opponent was well 
positioned on the baseline. Then, on the next point he drives a backhand into 
the net as he attempts to go cross-court from just inside the service box. 
Federer saves Djokovic's first set point at 40-30, but Djokovic, after 
receiving an official warning for taking too long between points, slams in an 
unreturnable serve to Federer's backhand, then an ace on the next point. You 
certainly can't accuse him of not taking his chances today.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 0-1 "I recall Marat Safin blowing 
Pete Sampras off the court in straight sets to win the US Open in 2000," chips 
in Gary Naylor, currently sans TV. "It was a bit painful to watch. Federer 
isn't getting that kind of treatment is he?" I've got to be honest here Gary 
and admit I never saw the game in question, but so far Djokovic has dominated 
this game withoutreally even looking at his own best, which is sad on a level, 
just because we so expect to see Federer playing better tennis than he has. 
There have been glimmers from the World No1, but never more than that. Still, 
he holds serve to 30 to open the set.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 1-1 Dearie me - Federer might be 
out of sorts, but you really can't afford to take your foot off the pedal like 
this if you're Novak Djokovic right now. Federer was just beginning to have 
some moments at the end of the last set, and now Djokovic hands him a 0-40 
advantage with some lazy ground strokes and two unforced errors. He claws it 
back though - two more aces and a couple of wild backhands from Federer helping 
out as Djokovic takes five points on the bounce to save the game.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 1-2 That's 24 unforced errors 
from Federer now, and to be honest it feels like a lot more. From 15-15 Federer 
volleys long and then finds the middle of the net to bring up 15-40. Once again 
leaning on his serve to dig him out of a hole, Federer brings the game to 
deuce, but then gives up the advantage after misjudging a floated Djokovic 
forehand that flew over him half-way up the court, and landed just in. He 
rescues the break point though, before each player wastes another advantage, 
then Federer finally holds at the second attempt after Djokovic can only barely 
clip a vicious flat serve down the middle with his frame.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 2-2 "Apparently nobody is 
emailing in and if I do I will get published," says Sam in Vauxhall, astutely 
picking up on my current predicament. "To contribute, then, Federer looks in 
trouble but he will probably win." Inspired, but for the record I'm not sure I 
agree. Djokovic is very much in position to win this, though I do suspect that 
if he doesn't do it this set, he won't do it at all. For now he holds to love.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 2-3 Well we haven't seen that in 
a while - Federer holds to love in double-quick time.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 3-3 Apologies - I missed the 
beginning of that game doing some retrospective tweaking after Marian Counihan 
pointed out that I still had 'second set' at the beginning of all my entries 
for this set. Djokovic is looking sloppy again here though, double faulting, 
sending a backhand long and then netting as he lets Federer back in from 40-0 
to reach deuce. An unreturnable serve, however, followed by a sliced backhand 
from Federer that sails comfortably long, gives him the game.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 3-4 Federer is still nowhere near 
his best, but he is beginning to dominate his service games. It looked like 
this one was going to love again, before a Djokovic forehand clipped the net 
cord and drops just over. Even though Djokovic claims another point with a 
smash after a long rally, Federer never looked in danger of letting it slip.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 4-4 Already this set looks like 
it could be going to what would be a fascinating tie-breaker. Both players are 
holding serve without any trouble at the moment. Federer's only point comes 
from a double fault.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 4-5 "A bit early to be talking 
about a changing of the guard perhaps, but could this be the year in which 
Federer and Nadal don't have it all their own way," muses Mike McDevitt. "None 
to soon, I say." Well, I'd say if Federer loses here it already is the year 
when they don't have it all their own way - even if they go on to divvy up all 
the rest of the grand slams. There's certainly no reason Djokovic can't begin 
to crash that group though, he's shown he's good enough before and today is 
just a confirmation, not a revelation. Whether or not anyone else is quite on 
that level - on a consistent basis - I'm not sure. Federer holds to 15.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 5-5 Mr McDevitt's just emailed me 
again to point out the similarities between Djokovic and a certain Ivan Lendl. 
"Hits the ball hard as (naughty word) and makes very few mistakes," he muses. I 
can see your point Mike, but I'm not sure Lendl was quite this light on his 
feet. Another routine service game for Djokovic goes to 15.

Third set: Djokovic leads Federer* 7-5, 6-3, 5-6 Djokovic suddenly looks like 
he's been just letting Federer have his way on service up to this point in the 
set - conserving his energy perhaps to make a push at the end. He tries to make 
that push here, suddenly adding some fire to his ground strokes that wasn't 
there a few seconds ago and bringing up 30-30. It only serves to wake Federer 
up though, and two vicious passing shots later, Djokovic will be serving to 
stay in the set.

Third set: Djokovic* leads Federer 7-5, 6-3, 6-6 Well Federer has certainly 
woken up. Rog absolutely dominates the first point, pinning Djokovic to the 
baseline, rushing the net and powering home a forehand to make it 0-15. On the 
next point Djokovic nets his backhand, but it's the serve that pulls him out 
again on the next to make it 15-30. Then it's Federer's turn to make the 
mistake, failing to clear the net as he gets just a little bit too casual as he 
exchanges forehands with Djokovic. On the next point Djokovic plays long again 
to give Federer set point at 30-40. 4,200 bounces of the ball later, though, 
Djokovic slams his serve in hard and wide and Federer can't return it. Djokovic 
saves another set point with a cross-court winner from just inside the 
baseline, brings up advantage with his 13th ace, and then finally the game with 
a dinked volley.

Third set tie-break Djokovic 0-1 Federer* An ace gives Federer the first point.

Third set tie-break Djokovic* 1-2 Federer Federer takes the first mini-break 
as Djokovic nets a backhand to make it 0-2. The Serb responds with an 
unreturnable serve down the centre.

Third set tie-break Djokovic 2-3 Federer* A huge rally on the first point 
which Federer wins with a perfect one-handed backhand punched right to the 
baseline. But Federer plays a forehand into the tramlines on the second point 
and Djokovic has mini-broken back.

Third set tie-break Djokovic* 4-3 Federer Federer plays a looping topspin 
forehand a good way long after a brief rally, to make it 3-3 at the changeover. 
Djokovic then goes down the middle again with his serve again to give himself 
the advantage.

Third set tie-break Djokovic 4-5 Federer* A 10th ace for Federer, followed by 
another belting serve that Djokovic could barely return, allowing Federer to 
kill the point with ease.

Third set tie-break Djokovic* 6-5 Federer Yet another unreturnable serve from 
Djokovic, then a sliced backhand from Federer that goes long, give Djokovic 
match point.

Djokovic beats Federer 7-5, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5) And Djokovic does it! It was 
another fierce serve from Federer, powered across Djokovic's face, but the Serb 
hasn't let many opportunities pass him by in this match, and he wasn't going 
let this one slide either. Lunging at full stretch he managed to just about get 
the ball back over, drew Federer into a rally and then waited for the world No1 
to drive the ball into the net for his 32nd unforced error of the match. 
Actually the official stats show Djokovic had just as many, but, crucially, he 
also had 50 winners to Federer's 38. Unbelievably, considering who he's just 
faced, Djokovic will enter the final of the 2008Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> having not dropped a single 
set. Thanks for all your emails - like London buses I waited all day for one, 
and then 72 came along at once, so sorry I couldn't use more. I'll see you all 
again on Sunday morning for the final.
 