
Of the four men's semi-finalists at this year's Australian Open, only Roger 
Federer has never been the world No1. If he beats Juan Carlos Ferrero tomorrow, 
a match that pits the Wimbledon champion against the French Open champion, then 
the Swiss, aka the Fed Express, will become the 23rd man to reach this pinnacle 
since the modern rankings began in 1973.

It was not something Federer wished to dwell on after beating Argentina's 
David Nalbandián 7-5, 6-4, 5-7, 6-3 in the fourth quarter-final in the Rod 
Laver Arena yesterday - Ferrero having previously defeated Morocco's Hicham 
Arazi 6-1, 7-6, 7-6. "Being No1 is secondary right now," he said. "I need to 
concentrate on trying to win my second grand slam."

The simple truth is that no matter what his ranking, Federer is the best 
player in the world. This has nothing to do with ranking points, nor matches 
and titles won - it is a subjective assessment based entirely on the fact that 
of all the leading players Federer is the one, way above all the rest, that 
tennis fans most want to watch.

This week, because he is still without a coach - having parted from Peter 
Lundgren last year - he has been practising with the juniors, who have their 
own tournament during the second week of every grand slam. Federer was a junior 
Wimbledon champion himself, and the youngsters here have been clambering to get 
a hit with him.

So many of them want to play tennis the Federer way. Perhaps none ever will, 
but the fact that he has brought style, elegance and touch to the modern game - 
and a one-handed backhand - has thrilled everybody who feared the template for 
the future was double-fisted baseline bashing.

There is room for all styles, but against the odds Federer has proved it is 
possible to beat the power hitters through a mixture of style and grace. This 
is not to say that the 22-year-old Swiss does not give the ball a most fearful 
clump, notably on the forehand, but it is the sheer variety that makes the 
aficionados purr.

Nalbandián is much less gifted but a wonderful fighter. His arrival in the 
Wimbledon final two years ago caught everybody on the hop, but it was no fluke. 
Many had thought he might win his first slam here; coming into the 
quarter-final he held a 5-1 lead over Federer, including a five-set victory 
here last year in the fourth round, and a further slam win at last year's US 
Open.

Crucially Federer downed the obdurate Argentinian for the first time at the 
end-of-seasonTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup in 
Houston. Federer won that tournament, in the process defeating Ferrero, Andy 
Roddick and Andre Agassi, the latter twice, including the final. It was an 
enormous week for the Swiss, and one that proved to him that his rightful place 
was at the very top.

Having now beaten Lleyton Hewitt and Nalbandián in successive rounds, Federer 
should be well and truly in the groove against baseliners. However, Ferrero, 
who reached the final of last year's US Open where he lost to Roddick, has a 
little more to his game than either of the other two, notably his ability to 
hit searing winners off either flank.

The Spaniard dealt efficiently enough with the gifted but temperamentally 
volatile Arazi, yet he has both thighs protectively strapped, and may lack the 
mobility needed to tackle Federer at his best. And Federer's self-belief is 
growing with every win, a confidence that liberates him to pursue the full 
range of his glorious stroke-play.

Against Nalbandián he knew he had to be slightly circumspect - "I took too 
many chances against him in the past and that's why I lost". But when the 
Argentinian cornered him in the first set at 5-5, forcing two break points, 
Federer responded with four aces, then ripped apart Nalbandián's service game.

It was never less than close, with Federer making more errors than in his 
previous match against Hewitt. "I couldn't find my rhythm," he complained, 
which had much to do with Nalbandián's cussed defence. The difference between 
Federer now and Federer a year ago is that he has learned to play his very best 
tennis when it most matters.

It is possible he may lose to Ferrero, who would then himself regain the No1 
spot. But if this should ha ppen, it would not prevent everybody believing that 
the best player in the world was still the man from Switzerland.
 