
Fernando Gonzalez is likely to receive confirmation this morning that Roger 
Federer deals with accurate cannons just as harshly as he does with loose ones 
- and the loose cannon that Gonzalez agrees he once was lost all his nine 
matches against the world number one between 2004 and 06.

It is important for the sport that the Chilean is not discouraged, though, 
because, in his boisterous surge to the men's final, he showed the sort of 
qualities that suggest, given time, he might develop into a player capable of 
discomfiting Federer. At present, there is only one player who is able to do 
this and even Rafael Nadal needs clay courts under his feet to do it with any 
consistency. Nadal was one of two men to beat Federer in 2006 and three of his 
four wins were on clay. Andy Murray was the other player to beat Federer last 
year and he, like Gonzalez, has what might be called interesting potential.

At 26, Gonzalez, a six-footer with quick feet and hands, is a late developer 
in terms of grand-slam success, which is not necessarily against him, although 
there have been few instances in recent times of players making much of 
themselves if they have not won a major by the time they are 25. What is a 
little different with Gonzalez is that he is such a destructive hitter and, 
with the punctilious American coach Larry Stefanki now in his corner, he is at 
last starting to use this power efficiently.

Stefanki proved just how good he is during successful partnerships with top 
players such as John McEnroe, Yevgeny Kafelnikov and Marcelo Rios and, although 
his spell with Tim Henman was conspicuously unproductive, he was the coach 
Murray targeted before ending up with Brad Gilbert. All the evidence is that 
Stefanki and Gonzalez used the short break after the 2006 season as well as 
anyone.

'Before I used to hit, hit, hit and sometimes I won the point and sometimes I 
lost it,' he says. 'Now I'm trying to find the right opportunity and stay a 
little bit calm, because my hitting can be a bit crazy sometimes.' Just how 
much more disciplined he now is was borne out by the fact that in his 
semi-final victory over Tommy Haas on Friday he struck 42 winners and limited 
his unforced errors to three, which was Federeresque in its parsimony.

Gonzalez was always a flair player whose game was irresistible when he hit one 
of his hot patches. The trouble was these invariably lasted no more than five 
or six games and opponents knew it was simply a case of waiting until the fire 
went out. Now they are likely to wait in vain. Nadal and Tommy Haas, Gonzalez's 
quarter-final and semi-final victims, mustered just 15 games between them as 
they were blown off court waiting for the Chilean to revert to the flaky type 
they used to know.

Before getting too carried away, though, Gonzalez's pursuit of Federer is by 
no means certain to see a swift narrowing of the gap between them. The fast 
courts at Melbourne Park have provided Gonzalez with the quick, even-bouncing 
conditions that particularly suit his game and he did not dominate all his 
opponents in the way he did Nadal and Haas. Juan Martin Del Potro, an 
18-year-old Argentine with a big serve, seemed to have Gonzalez's measure in 
the second round when he won a tiebreaker to open a two-sets-to-one lead. He 
then started cramping and had to pull out in the fifth.

The 9-0 margin that Federer held over Gonzalez before today's match is the 
sort of statistic that, however buoyed up the Chilean might have been, was not 
likely to have strayed far from his mind at any point in the contest. And while 
Gonzalez laboured under this one, there were plenty of figures to spur Federer 
on. These included the one victory he needed to move clear in fifth place in 
winning streaks by men in the Open era - he was unbeaten with 35 straight 
matches before today - and the chance to become the first player since Bjorn 
Borg at the 1980 French Open to win a grand slam without dropping a set.

But however compelling the statistical evidence, Federer's form was by far the 
more persuasive factor in making him the favourite to win today and claim his 
tenth grand-slam title. (This is just four fewer than the record, Pete 
Sampras's 14 - and Federer is still only 25.)

Federer eclipsed the stars of the future, as represented by Serbia's Novak 
Djokovic, and those of the present, Andy Roddick, on his way to the final. His 
game, rather than growing stale through the routine of winning consistently, 
seems to be developing ever deeper into the realms of excellence. Even if he 
stopped playing now he would deserve comparison with the very best and there is 
absolutely no sign that he wants to do anything other than keep going and keep 
improving.

Federer played so well through the first six rounds that not only those who 
watched him marvelled. After thrashing Roddick in the semi-finals, he said: 
'Everything worked - I'm shocked myself.'
 