
Once again, I must apologise for a long delay in writing. Thank you if you're 
still around to read this. My ulcer and my slowly-returning schedule decided to 
engage each other in not altogether positive ways. On the one hand, I have been 
able to get out and about a little and that initially cheered me. I took part in
Budleigh Salterton's literary festival <http://www.budlitfest.org.uk/>, ate 
crab sandwiches and loosened my overcoat recklessly on the nudist beach. I was 
also allowed to present some excellent and charming people onstage atthe 
Cheltenham literature festival 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/lit-fest-live>: James Rhodes 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/find-events/literature/l266-a-l-kennedy-james-rhodes>
,Mark Thomas 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/find-events/literature/l300-a-l-kennedy-mark-thomas>
 andRichard Wiseman 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/find-events/literature/l357-richard-wiseman-a-l-kennedy-the-paranormal-revealed>
: and I hada chance to praise the work of Mervyn Peake in public 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/find-events/literature/l333-mervyn-peake-a-l-kennedy-china-mi-ville-sebastian-peake>
. On the other hand, I spent more and more time lying down between excursions 
until gastric distress put paid to my gadding about entirely and my days now 
navigate between Zantac and Gaviscon. I am the person you never want to 
casually ask, "How are you?" I will tell you. At length.

There is, however, an aspect of this current self-inflicted woe which I have 
found intriguing. For reasons I can't pinpoint – exhaustion, drug interraction, 
stress – I am no longer really experiencing emotions. At its worst, this gave 
me the sensation of having died and being compelled to haunt myself, of 
floating three or four feet behind the action. I would hear sad news, I would 
learn bits of London were on fire, I would contemplate difficult tasks that 
were looming, if not in progress, and I would be mildly aware of breathing in 
and out – nothing more. If I remembered past events they would seem 
unconvincing, no longer having emotional colour attached. Drama with any kind 
of involving content irritated me and I slumped down into evenings spent 
watching American TV series that operate under initials: CSI, SVU, NCIS, OMG 
and so forth.

As it happened, the only writing required of me during August and September 
was factual, but I was aware that the usual background mumble of fiction ideas 
was completely stilled. The encouraging fragments I had set down in my notebook 
were perfectly legible, but they had no meaning. Likewise for the scribbles in 
my computer Prose file … Every time I tried to look inwards there was a blank – 
not uncomfortable, or scary, only impenetrable. The fact that I was unable to 
register this as a cause for concern simply underlined the problem. No 
emotions. And no fiction.

This is hardly surprising, of course. I have spent more than two decades 
talking to writers about the importance of emotion in our work. In the absence 
of feelings with which to identify, readers can remain unengaged. A shot may 
ring out in the required manner, a man may even walk in with a gun – if we 
aren't somehow induced to care about the proceedings, he might as well walk in 
with a hamster or a bag of nuts. Fictional characters whose interior lives 
don't hum and gurgle with this or that emotional tone can't be expected to 
compete with the genuine and complex human beings against whom – at a certain 
level – they are constantly being measured. We expect readers to temporarily 
oust loved ones, pleasant memories, delightful anticipations and present 
concerns for the sake of our inventions – an emotional reality in our work can 
make our demands seem much less unreasonable.

Part of what is frightening about setting out to write is the more or less 
acute awareness that somehow we must access or tinker with our own emotions in 
order to portray something workable for others. This doesn't mean, I sincerely 
hope, that we must weep along with Mrs Wiggins when we decide that her beloved 
guide dog must choke to death on a rat. But we do measure and remember and 
examine our feelings while we build our worlds, and people them. The whole 
process can give the impression it may expose us intimately. It needn't 
actually do any such thing. We're dealing with fiction here – unless the writer 
is a construct too postmodern to qualify for clothes and a mortgage, he or she 
will be out of place within it. Even if we include subtle blendings of 
autobiography and creation, effective writing will basically involve us in 
complex linguistic manipulations that we hope will provide the illusion of 
intimate exposure, or whatever other illusions we deem appropriate. We aren't 
really experiencing anything with the reader – we aren't there.

And our being harrowed or overjoyed whenever our characters have to would be a 
wearying distraction from all that multi-tasking. Readers – some of them 
reviewers and journalists – can sometimes assume that the writer has bled and 
sweated in the manner of his or her protagonists. This is gratifying in a way – 
it tends to mean that the piece has struck home to a degree. But writers mainly 
sweat and bleed in the manner of people trying to do something hideously 
difficult over and over until it's OK. Saying this in public can seem weirdly 
heartless, but it's true.

There are, naturally, times when I have cared for characters, but that care is 
primarily focused on portraying them in the way they deserve or, in 
collaborations, on defending them against odd direction, or poor performance.

I have no idea why my lack of emotion made creative writing impossible. 
Perhaps I lacked material from which to grow personalities and psychologies. 
Perhaps I believed I was no longer a safe pair of hands, given that I might not 
be able to give a toss about the quality of my work, or the well-being of my 
nascent people. Perhaps I was just very, very tired.

Embarrassingly, my emotions first re-emerged when I was told a disgustingly 
moving story about a compassionate horse and a child. (I know, I know…) Once 
I'd stopped weeping helplessly, I vaguely felt as if I vaguely felt. The 
situation is not yet quite as I would hope, but it wasn't too much of a shock – 
well it couldn't be, could it ? – that my first short story in a long while 
nudged itself forward quietly as soon as my interior began to show one or two 
lights. The feeling at that point? Gratitude. Onwards.
 