
Illness and Albert Costa combined to end Greg Rusedski's Australian Open 
campaign overnight, as the British No2 tumbled at the first hurdle in a 
straight sets defeat.

There were no such problems for Tim Henman, however, who came through against 
Frenchman Jean-Rene Lisnard in straight sets, 6-2, 6-4, 6-2.

Under intense pressure following revelations he tested positive for the banned 
steroid nandrolone, Rusedski was comprehensively outclassed 6-4, 6-3, 6-4 by 
the former French Open champion.

Afterwards, however, Rusedski revealed that he had been suffering from a fever 
and severe gastroenteritis in the build-up to the tournament, but denied the 
pressures of next month's ATP tribunal had undermined his performance.

"I had a heavy fever on Saturday and Sunday. I have only hit half an hour of 
tennis balls since Saturday. That is not the ideal preparation coming into a 
major," he reflected afterwards.

"That is what made it difficult today. A lot of players have been suffering 
with it.

"I wanted to at least go out there and give it a go. If you can get through a 
match somehow, then these things go away - it usually takes about four days to 
get rid of it.

"I have to give credit to Carlos. He played well. He came up with some good 
passing shots. I just went out there, tried to do my best, and that is all I 
could do."

Rusedski must now focus on the fight to clear his name at the ATP hearing in 
Montreal, which starts on February 9, and admitted that off-court events had 
affected his preparation.

"I think it is only human nature to think about it," he said. "I just hope the 
result comes that I desire. I am innocent in this situation. I hope that is 
seen."

Meanwhile Henman, seeded 11, made light work of Lisnard, dominating from the 
net and playing an effective chip and charge game.

Henman believes his more aggressive approach will help him prosper at the 
Australian Open, saying: "From my point of view, the tone I set early on was 
very positive, chip and charge and not giving him the rhythm he needs to play 
his game." "That tempo was to my advantage and I was able to maintain that for 
all three sets.

"Committing to that style of play, and being aggressive whether you are 
winning or losing the point, I knew that was the right way to play.

"I was very aggressive from the outset and set the tone and made sure I was 
playing the match under my terms.

"Early on I put him under a lot of pressure. Even in the first game I could 
have broken him. When you put a little doubt in your opponent's mind early on 
it's going to put extra pressure on.

"I've probably been guilty in years gone by of not doing that enough." 

Henman, a rugby fan, also enjoyed hearing a patriotic crowd singing 'Swing Low 
Sweet Chariot' and managed to stay focussed despite some of the distractions in 
the stands.

"It was a first for me at a tennis match," he said. "It was a great 
atmosphere, there was a lot of support for me - it was fairly Wimbledon-like."

In the second round he will face Radek Stepanek of the Czech Republic.
 