
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> will 
get another chance to manage the Socceroos in his hometown after Football 
Federation Australia confirmed a friendly with Greece in Melbourne. The 
Socceroos will play at Etihad Stadium on June 7, three days after they play the 
former European champions at ANZ Stadium in Sydney.

Postecoglou said he was expecting a fine contest. “From a football 
perspective, Greece will give us a great test over the two matches, and 
obviously there is some personal significance for me,” said Greek-born 
Postecoglou. “I am very proud of my heritage and it will be a proud moment to 
coach the Socceroos against the country of my birth in front of my family and 
friends in Melbourne, where my parents settled to give us a wonderful life.”

Friday Focus: Fifa election ripples to be felt in Australia | Scott McIntyre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/friday-focus-fifa-australia> 
The fixture is expected to sell out in no time given there are an estimated 
380,000 Melburnians with Greek heritage and Etihad Stadium’s capacity is 
53,000. Since his appointment in October 2013 the Socceroos have been 
infrequent visitors to the city.

By June, Melbourne will have played host to just one of 12 matches played on 
home soil during Postecoglou’s tenure. The fact had not passed the revered 
coach by. “I’m delighted that the game is going to be here. I’m a proud 
Victorian. Melbourne is my hometown and I’ve been in the job for two and a half 
years and I’ve only had one other game here,” he said.

Greece’s last visit to Melbourne, a match held before the Socceroos departed 
for the 2006 World Cup, drew 95,000 fans at the MCG. Victorian major events 
minister John Eren suggested availability was behind the decision to stage the 
game at a smaller venue in June. “These negotiations have taken place through 
VMEC and Football FederationAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>,” he said. “This is a great 
venue ... we want to make sure we have the best stadium that’s available at the 
time to have these events.”

Etihad Stadium is busier than the MCG in that fortnight and will sandwich the 
Socceroos between two AFL rounds, adding the marquee football fixture to the 
five scheduled AFL games in nine days.

With the next, and crucial, round of World Cup qualifying to begin in 
September 2016, Minister Eren couldn’t guarantee the Victorian capital would 
play host to one of those home matches. “We’re going to have the best events 
that we can possibly get and a return for our investment,” he said.

Postecoglou will be hoping the friendlies provide a good tune-up for the next 
phase of their World Cup qualifiers, which they are expected to make. Australia 
currently top their qualifying group with five wins and a loss, with only two 
first-phase home matches left in March – against Tajikistan in Adelaide, and 
Jordan in Sydney.



 