
A fifth juror has been dismissed from the trial of Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> theater shooter James Holmes.


The judge on Wednesday said the juror didn’t reveal all the facts when she 
said she recognized a witness who testified in May. Judge Carlos A Samour said 
he didn’t dismiss her earlier because he didn’t have all the information.

The juror told the judge on 6 May that she recognized a witness as the parent 
of a boy who attends the school where the juror works.

That leaves 19 jurors, including seven alternates. Four other jurors have been 
dismissed in the last week.

Lawyers for Holmes this week sought the dismissal of one juror because they 
said other jurors had seen her crying after her brother-in-law was shot in an 
armed robbery last week in Denver.

In further questioning, the juror said three other jurors were with her when 
her husband called and said her brother-in-law was in a “major accident.” She 
said that’s all she told them.

The judge dismissed the juror because of how her brother-in-law’s shooting 
might impact her and because he wasn’t sure if she was completely truthful 
either.

Three others were released last week over concerns they were exposed to media 
reports and may not have been truthful about it.


Samour found the three women violated his orders to avoid outside information 
on Holmes’ death penalty trial and not talk about the case with anyone.

The first woman told Samour her husband called her and told her, on 
speakerphone, that the district attorney had sent a tweet during testimony, 
which had been in the news.

The other two jurors, who sometimes socialized with the first juror on breaks, 
were dismissed because they likely overheard her.

The issue stalled testimony for a day last week, but Samour refused to let it 
derail the trial, which has been going on for two months.

Samour’s cuts came after he separately questioned each juror at length about 
what they had heard. He tried to ensure both sides were comfortable with the 
outcome.

He decided against getting rid of a fourth juror who said she had heard the 
first dismissed woman mention the word “mistrial” but didn’t know what it was 
about.
 