
The Australian Open, coming so early in the year, is supposed to favour 
players who have worked hard on their form and fitness during the winter break, 
thereby giving them an edge over those who have been rather less industrious. 
Andre Agassi, the four-times champion here, was the classic example.Serena 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> is the exception.

Williams won the title for a second time two years ago when she was patently 
underprepared, and now she is one victory away from doing it again. It is a 
moot point whose backside has been the most talked about during this tournament 
- that of Rafael Nadal, and the constant picking of his shorts, or the 
American's ample wobble.

Tomorrow's women's final will be a repeat of the 2005 semi-final when Maria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> served for the 
match twice and Williams staved off three match points. The American went on to 
win the seventh and last of her grand slam titles, and so badly did she 
struggle in the early rounds this time that it seemed impossible she would be 
in a position to add an eighth. But the Williams are a fighting family, with 
Venus overturning all logic and form to win her third Wimbledon title in 2005. 
The more the odds are stacked against them, the more determined is the response 
of the sisters.

Serena has bridled at the criticism she has received here. "You don't knock 
someone when they're down. I understand people have the right to write what 
they want. You don't just knock someone so hard when they're trying just to 
make it. I don't think anyone thought I would get this far, except for me and 
my mom," she said.

Hardly surprising. Last year Williams played only four tournaments, and this 
month she was knocked out early in the pre-Australian Open event in Hobart. 
That she has reached the final speaks volumes for her competitive spirit and 
determination, while once again underlining the general lack of intelligence 
and creative ability of the other leading players.

It is understandable that lesser opponents should have been intimidated by 
Williams' reputation but the response from those supposedly challenging for the 
title here, including Nadia Petrova, Jelena Jankovic and the American's 
semi-final opponent yesterday, Nicole Vaidisova, has been little short of 
abysmal.

Petrova had chances but melted away when the going became tough, and though 
Shahar Peer tried everything in the quarter-finals, and like Petrova served for 
the match, the Israeli also succumbed in the third set. Yesterday, for a set 
Vaidisova slammed a series of winners, and even managed a set point, but the 
17-year-old Czech's fault lines - the vulnerability of her serve and forehand - 
were there for all to see and widened horribly in the second set as Williams 
won 7-6, 6-4.

Even in her moment of triumph, television mischievously suggested one of 
Williams' entourage, a guest, had been attempting to dazzle Vaidisova by 
shining the sun in her eyes off the face of his watch. The Czech, who was 
wearing a visor, said she had not noticed anything untoward, and Williams 
responded by saying any such suggestions were "outrageous . . . as if anyone 
would do that on purpose".

Sharapova reached her first Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final with a scrappy 6-4, 
6-2 victory over Kim Clijsters, who is set to retire at the end of the year at 
the ripe old age of 24. There were no tears from the likeable Belgian and, 
unfortunately, not many memorable shots. Clijsters favours Sharapova to win the 
final, principally because she is thoroughly match-fit and hardened. "But what 
I love about Serena is the natural emotions she is showing. That's great and 
it's good to see her in the final."

The Australian Open organisers would doubtless agree, the women's tour people 
less so - Williams has played so few tournaments in the last 13 months that her 
success here rather makes a mockery of the circuit. Why play at all if you can 
get to a grand slam final with virtually no previous match-play? The Women's
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association argues that its 
circuit is richer in depth and ability than ever before. If so, then Williams 
should not have been able to get to the final with such ease. The fact that she 
has must be deeply embarrassing.

Head to head

Maria  Sharapova Russia

Age 19

Career prize money $8.47m

Born Nyagan, Siberia

Seeded 2

Grand slam titles 2 Wimbledon 2004; US Open 2006

Serena  Williams US

Age 25

Career prize money $16m

Born Saginaw, US

Seeded 81

Grand slam titles 7 Aus 2003, 2005; French 2002; Wimbledon 2002, 2003; US 
1999, 2002

Head-to-head 2-2 

Miami 2004 R16 Hard

Williams 6-4, 6-3

Wimbledon 2004 Final Grass

Sharapova 6-1, 6-4

Tour Champs 2004 Final Hard 

Sharapova 4-6, 6-2, 6-4

Australian Open 2005 Semi-final Hard

Williams 2-6, 7-5, 8-6
 