
Valtteri Filppula had two goals and an assist to lead the Tampa Bay Lightning 
to a 5-1 win over theAnaheim Ducks on Thursday in a meeting of NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> divisional leaders. Another divisional 
leader, theChicago Blackhawks, took sole possession of the Central lead with 
victory over thePhoenix Coyotes as the Colorado Avalanche slipped to second 
with a heavy defeat at theSt Louis Blues, while the San Jose Sharks closed in 
on the Pacific lead with an overtime win against theVancouver Canucks.

Tampa Bay goaltender Ben Bishop won his 13th game this season while Martin S 
Louis added a goal and two assists for the Lightning, who again won without 
star Steven Stamkos.The center is out indefinitely after breaking his right leg 
Monday and had surgery Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/12/steven-stamkos-tampa-bay-lightning-leg>
. Alex Killorn and Victor Hedman had the other Tampa Bay goals while Emerson 
Etem scored for the Ducks.

Chicago's Jonathan Toews and rookie Brandon Pirri scored in a four-round 
shootout to help the Blackhawks beat Phoenix 5-4 for their fourth straight win. 
Pirri tied the score 4-4 early in the third period when he connected on a 
midair deflection. Brandon Saad, Patrick Sharp and Marian Hossa also scored in 
regulation for the Blackhawks, who extended their point streak to eight games 
(7-0-1). Chicago fired a season-high 52 shots through overtime at Coyotes 
goalie Mike Smith.

Phoenix defenseman Michael Stone scored twice for the first time in his career 
as the Coyotes overcame an early two-goal deficit to earn a point. Shane Doan 
and Lauri Korpikoski also scored for Phoenix. At 13-4-3, the Coyotes are off to 
their best start since 1998-99.

St Louis' Alexander Steen scored his league-leading 15th and 16th goals of the 
season as the Blues slumping power play woke up with three goals which set up a 
7-3 win over Colorado. St Louis is off to the fastest start in franchise 
history with 12 wins in its first 17 games. Colorado lost consecutive games for 
the first time this season. Derek Roy, David Backes, Vladimir Tarasenko, Chris 
Stewart and Jay Bouwmeester also scored for the Blues, who have won their past 
five home meetings with the Avalanche. Steen has a point in 12 successive 
games; a career high. Nathan MacKinnon, Matt Duchene and Ryan O'Reilly scored 
for Colorado.

San Jose's Dan Boyle scored a power-play goal at 2:38 of overtime to give the 
Sharks a 2-1 victory over Vancouver. Henrik Sedin was in the penalty box when 
Boyle's shot from the slot stood after a video review. San Jose's Tomas Hertl 
had tied the game with 65 seconds left in regulation, preventing the Sharks 
suffering a sixth loss in seven games. Kevin Bieksa scored his first goal of 
the season for the Canucks who, in a scheduling quirk, were playing their last 
game of the season against the Sharks despite both being in the Pacific 
Division.

San Jose has won 10 of 11 against the Canucks dating to last season, including 
four straight in the first round of last season's playoffs.

The Los Angeles Kings' Tyler Toffoli deflected in the winning goal with 1:27 
left as the Kings stunned theNew York Islanders by scoring three times in the 
third period to take a 3-2 win. Milan Lucic scored on a breakaway 4:11 into 
overtime to lift theBoston Bruins to a 3-2 victory over the Columbus Blue 
Jackets. Tyler Seguin scored four goals and Jamie Benn had a career-high six 
points to lead theDallas Stars over the slumping Calgary Flames 7-3.
 