
This is turning out to be quite a match. If I was an Aussie I would say it was 
a ripper. All we need now is a finale like the one at Melbourne and then 
everyone can go home saying that this was the best Ashes series we've had in a 
decade.

 Michael Slater batted like a dream. He scored 66.8 per cent of Australia's 
runs and it felt like more. His twinkling toes must make him the perfect 
dancing partner, but he won't be Peter Such's first choice when the teams hit 
the disco tomorrow night. Slater slammed the spinners' off-breaks into the 
crowd time and time again in his electric innings of 123.

 Some England supporters might point to the fact that he was probably run out 
on 35, but the umpires - hampered by inconclusive footage from unhelpful camera 
angles on which the third umpire had to make his decision - had to use the 
information available to them. In addition, it's worth remembering that there 
were no England complaints when Tudor was similarly given the benefit of the 
doubt yesterday.

 Encouragingly, England did not mope about the decision, as they might have in 
the past. Their fielding was at times electric, especially from Ramprakash, who 
took another fantastic catch, Headley, and Crawley, stationed at short-leg.

 Dean Headley was inspired, making the old ball swing a bit Irish, as they say 
over here, and Stewart's decision to take him off when Australia were six down 
could be described likewise - and prove costly. That wiley old gingernut, Such, 
deserved his five scalps just for toiling away under the burning sun.

 The targets for the final day are clear and simple. England have to get 
another 183 on a wicket that is serving up spin on a plate. Australia, with an 
attack containing three spinners, and one of them is Shane Warne, have eight 
England wickets to take

 But England's most successful batsmen of the tour - Hussain and Ramprakash - 
are in, both are fighters and both are surely due a century. Crawley and Hick 
are good players of spin.

 Remember too that England have little to lose, Australia everything: the 
media here will simply crucify them if they fail. Even if they will still have 
the Ashes.
 