 Guards at a detention centre at Schiphol airport in Amsterdam were last night 
accused of negligence after at least 11 illegal immigrants burned to death in a 
fire at the complex. The inmates, who had been awaiting deportation, died after 
the fire spread through the building in the early hours of yesterday. At least 
15 other detainees were injured.
The building on the east side of Europe's fourth-largest airport is surrounded 
by a three-metre (10ft) fence and barbed wire. Set up in 2002, it is used to 
detain people who arrive by plane and have been refused entry to the 
Netherlands, including drug dealers and failed asylum seekers. "They were 
illegal aliens waiting to be extradited to their countries of origin," the 
Dutch immigration service said, adding: "We are still busy trying to confirm 
their identities."

The fire broke out shortly after midnight and raged until 3am. An unknown 
number of detainees managed to escape. Three were later recaptured.

One detainee said the inmates had tried to raise the alarm, but were ignored 
by guards who told them nothing was wrong. "First they said there was no 
problem, and they just kept us locked up," the unidentified detainee told the 
Dutch TV station NOS. "Our throats started hurting. We kicked, we screamed, we 
rang the bell of course. And then panic broke out."

About 350 people were being held in the complex. Some 43 were in the wing that 
caught fire.

The Netherlands, which has one of the harshest immigration policies in Europe, 
is in the process of deporting 26,000 failed asylum seekers. Human rights 
groups have criticised the policy, saying people have been deported to 
countries where they could face persecution or abuse.

The Council of Europe's secretary general, Terry Davis, said the blaze and 
several other fires that have killed immigrants in France "should serve as a 
warning of the hazardous situation affecting migrants". "We must never forget 
that the bottom line of our migration policies and procedures must be respect 
for human rights, human dignity and the physical and mental integrity of the 
persons involved," he told the Associated Press.

The cause of the fire has not been established, although press reports have 
claimed that an inmate could have started it. Hundreds of cocaine smugglers, 
mostly from the Caribbean and Curacao, are detained at the airport every year.

"It's terrible if you hear about a fire of such size, 11 people dead," said 
the Dutch prime minister, Jan Peter Balkenende, adding: "Our thoughts are with 
the families of the victims and the wounded."
 