
The first reprint of Adolf Hitler’s Mein Kampf in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> since the second world war has 
proved a surprise bestseller and is heading for its sixth print run, its 
publisher has said.

The Institute of Contemporary History of Munich (IfZ) said about 85,000 copies 
of the new annotated version of his antisemitic manifesto had been sold since 
its release last January.

Far from promoting far-right ideology, the reprint had enriched a debate on 
the renewed rise of authoritarian political views in contemporary western 
society, the institute added.

The IfZ had initially planned to print only 4,000 copies but increased 
production because of demand. The sixth print run will hit bookstores later in 
January.

The two-volume work has appeared on Der Spiegel magazine’s non-fiction 
bestseller list over much of the last year, and even topped it for two weeks in 
April.

‘Mein Kampf shows where ideologies can lead’: the case for republishing Hitler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/mein-kampf-book-adolf-hitler-copyright-expires>
The institute also organised a successful series of presentations and debates 
around Mein Kampf across Germany and elsewhere in Europe. This, it said, 
allowed it to measure the impact of the annotated edition.

“It turned out that the fear the publication would promote Hitler’s ideology 
or even make it socially acceptable and give neo-Nazis a new propaganda 
platform was totally unfounded,” Andreas Wirsching, the director of the IfZ, 
said.

“To the contrary, the debate about Hitler’s world view and his approach to 
propaganda offered a chance to look at the causes and consequences of 
totalitarian ideologies, at a time in which authoritarian political views and 
rightwing slogans are gaining ground.”

The institute said the data collected by regional bookstores about those who 
bought the book showed they tended to be customers interested in politics and 
history as well as educators, and not reactionaries or rightwing radicals.

Nevertheless, the IfZ said it would maintain a restrictive policy on 
international rights. For now, only English and French editions are planned 
despite interest from many countries.

The Guardian view on Mein Kampf: a good new edition of a very bad old book | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/the-guardian-view-on-mein-kampf-a-good-new-edition-of-a-very-bad-old-book>
The institute released the annotated version of Mein Kampf last January, 
shortly after the copyright of the manifesto expired.

Bavaria was handed the rights to the book in 1945 when the allies gave it 
control of the main Nazi publishing house after Germany’s defeat.

For 70 years, the state refused to allow the inflammatory tract to be 
republished out of respect for victims of the Nazis and to prevent incitement 
of hatred.

But Mein Kampf – which means “My Struggle” – fell into the public domain on 1 
January last year and the institute said it feared a version without critical 
commentary could hit the market.

Partly autobiographical, the tract outlines Hitler’s ideology that formed the 
basis for Nazism. He wrote it in 1924 while he was imprisoned in Bavaria for 
treason after the failed “Beer Hall Putsch”.

The book set out two ideas that he put into practice as Germany’s leader going 
into the second world war: annexing neighbouring countries to gainlebensraum, 
or “living space”, for Germans; and his hatred of Jews, which led to the 
Holocaust.

About 12.4m copies were published in Germany and from 1936 the Nazi state gave 
a copy to all newlyweds as a wedding gift.
 