
Think back to the last fairly rubbish chip you ate. It is probably not too 
hard. Mine was last Sunday at a burger van in Leeds. It was soggy and 
tasteless. I ate it anyway. Despite the chip being a national culinary 
tradition – last week sawThe Bay chippie in Aberdeen 
<http://www.thebayfishandchips.co.uk/> win takeaway of the year at the National 
Fish and Chip awards <http://www.fishandchipawards.com/>, while chipmongers go 
all out in February promoting both Fish and Chips Week and Chip Week – our 
expectations tend towards the extremely low. And they are almost invariably met.

So how do you perfect the chip? "It's hard to say," says Ashley Palmer-Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ashley-palmer-watts>, who worked for 
years at the Fat Duck before becoming head chef at Heston Blumenthal's newest 
restaurant, Dinner. "Heston started working on it around 1993 and it's still a 
work in progress. But the aim is to create a chip that is evenly cooked and 
fluffy." And is it really that hard? "I'm afraid so," he grins. "But here's 
what we've learned so far."

First, choose your potato. Not any potato. You need one with between 21 and 
23% dry matter. Whatever that is. "At this time of year, we use the agria," 
says Palmer-Watts. "But the consistency of a variety is very seasonal, so at 
other times of the year we might use the fontaine or the maris piper. You have 
to monitor them carefully. In August and September, all varieties tend to have 
too much sugar and not enough starch so we take chips off the menu then."

All Dinner's potatoes are pre-cut into Palmer-Watts's preferred 16mm diameter, 
square at the ends. They are then placed in salted water, brought slowly to the 
boil and left to simmer. "The salt is to make the outside crunchy," says 
Palmer-Watts. "But the real trick here is to keep on boiling the potatoes for 
about three minutes longer than you imagine is necessary. Every trainee chef at 
the Fat Duck has to be taught this. You want the potato to be visibly beginning 
to break up on the outside, so that when you come to fry it, the fat can work 
its way into the heart of the chip."

At this point, if you are Palmer-Watts, you will remove the chips from the 
water and place them in a blast chiller to remove excess moisture. Everyone 
else can bung theirs in the fridge for half an hour to an hour. But which? Half 
an hour or an hour? Palmer-Watts smiles and shrugs apologetically. "I told you 
it was complicated," he says. "It depends on the exact moisture content of the 
potato, the temperature of the fridge and how full it is."

Then comes the first fry – in a blend of 30% beef fat to 70% vegetable oil at 
a temperature of 130C. This should take between four to 15 minutes. Depending 
on what? "Depending on the potato," Palmer-Watts explains gently. "What we're 
trying to do is create a membrane around the outside of the chip with this 
first fry. Can you see it?" I can't, but I'm sure it's there so I say yes – I 
know when I'm out of my depth. He then takes the chips out of the fryer and 
puts them back in the blast chiller to remove further moisture.

For the final fry, the heat is turned up to between 180 and 190C. How do you 
know when they're done? "They will have a slightly glassy sheen on 
the outside," he says. "Can you see it?" I can. It's a chip that looks exactly 
like I'd always pictured a chip. And tastes even better. I was initially rather 
disappointed when Palmer-Watts said there were only about 12 chips in a portion 
as it felt a bit stingy. But by the time I had scoffed them, I felt stuffed. 
Here was a chip I could get used to. What sauce should you have, I ask. "Tomato 
ketchup," he insists. What? Some sort of heritage tomato triple reduction? "No. 
Heinz."

• This article was amended on 31 January 2013. Originally it included a 
reference to quantities of salt. This has been removed.
 