
The backlog of fitness-to-work assessments for benefits recipients could take 
as long as 18 months to clear, according to the company being brought in to 
deal with the problem.

Maximus Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Services UK was 
awarded a £500m three-year contract that starts in March, after Atos Healthcare 
ended its contract early following criticism about the number and speed of 
assessments it had carried out.

More than 600,000 appeals have been lodged against Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> judgments since the work capability 
assessments began, costing taxpayers £60m a year. In four out of 10 cases the 
original decisions are overturned.

Leslie Wolfe, president of Maximus, said it would aim to carry out assessments 
in a “timely manner”, but warned that improvements would not happen overnight. 
“It’ll take some time to hire the healthcare professionals. The expectation is 
that in 12 to 18 months, we should be able to catch up on the waiting times,” 
she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We’re hopeful that if we [conduct] the 
assessments in a timely manner, some of that anger and resentment will go away.”

Maximus is already used by the Department for Work and Pensions to carry out 
welfare schemes and has said it will take on a significant number of additional 
staff to deal with assessments.

The Commons work and pensions select committee found earlier this year that 
the assessment system, which is used to determine whether hundreds of thousands 
of benefit claimants with a disability or long-term illness are capable of 
working, was so flawed that it should be scrapped and completely redesigned.

The MPs on the committee said the ESA system was crude, simplistic and failed 
to help claimants return to the workforce. They described the work capability 
assessment (WCA) test as frequently inaccurate and a “stressful and 
anxiety-provoking experience” for many claimants.

The committee’s report, published in July, warned: “The flaws in the existing 
ESA system are so grave that simply ‘rebranding’ the WCA by taking on a new 
provider will not solve the problems: a fundamental redesign of the ESA 
end-to-end process is required.”

Minister for disabled people Mark Harper told MPs this week that Maximus could 
deliver. “We have confidence – both from the bid that they put together but 
also looking at the successful contracts they have operated in Australia, 
Canada and USA – that Maximus are able to deliver these assessments competently 
over the next three years,” he told the House of Commons.

An Atos spokeswoman said the French company was assessing more people than its 
contractual agreement stipulated and was reducing the backlog month-by-month. 
“The department are aware of the number of healthcare professionals we have 
delivering this service and how many people we can reasonably see each month. 
It is of primary importance that we give people the time they need during the 
assessment process,” she said.
 