
You love your job as a humanitarian: you mix with interesting people who share 
your mission, you get to travel, you feel like you’re making a difference.

But being in the field can be exhausting, and can soon take a toll on your 
health. Staying fit can often feel impossible. You can’t get outside to 
exercise because it’s either too hot, too smoggy, or too dangerous going for a 
run in a conflict zone. Besides, with your workload there’s not much time for 
sport.

I get you. I’ve been there. The longest walk I had during two years as an aid 
worker in Kabul was the 60 yards between my bedroom and office. And I used to 
look forward to it.


Secret aid worker: is humanitarian work a career for escapists?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/23/secret-aid-worker-is-humanitarian-work-a-career-for-escapists>
But during my second year there, I took up triathlon. This was despite being 
neither allowed to swim in open water, ride a bicycle on a road, nor run 
outside. I managed to complete three events that year. On top of that I was 
keeping a strict vegetarian diet.


Here’s a few tips for managing a healthy diet and keeping fit under somewhat 
less than desirable circumstances.

1. Situation-proof your exercise regime

We often find ourselves in environments where it’s hard to get outside, or 
where we find our movements suddenly restricted – with the all too familiar 
lockdown. So the first job is making sure you can work out at home.


When you are packing to head out into the field, pack a skipping rope and yoga 
mat in your bag alongside your gym kit, and find a few fun circuit routines 
online. If you don’t want to actually pack weights, get inventive with two tins 
of baked beans, or a couple of heavy, locally sourced yams.

2. Guard exercise time in the face of work and social demands

When you’re away from home, work can take over, and when you’re not working, 
you just want to relax. But your body needs to move. Exercise helps to remove 
toxins from our bodies and keep us limber. It also relieves stress, whereas 
working all day long compounds it. And we all know how common stress is among 
aid workers.

Exercise first thing in the morning, before the to do list has had a chance to 
multiply. If you’re not a morning person, the moment you wake up decide which 
hour you want to spend exercising and add it to your agenda as a meeting item.

3. Be creative with sourcing food

You’re probably eating out more than you would at home, or maybe you’re being 
catered for. You can’t control the ingredients that are being used, so you’ve 
no idea how much oil, butter, salt, or sugar has gone into your meals. If 
you’re cooking for yourself, then you might find that fresh produce options are 
limited (we had a text message cascade system in Kabul when the supermarket had 
avocados in stock). And supply chains for tinned and packaged ingredients are 
often dubious, reducing the nutritional content of what’s inside.


Cook in your accommodation wherever possible, and explore the options for 
local fresh produce. Just because you don’t know what it is exactly, doesn’t 
mean it’s not a delicious and nutritious foodstuff. Import key ingredients if 
you must, and then share among your friends. One friend would bring in 
delicious cheeses from her trips to France; I’d return the favour by bringing 
back something special from my breaks, too.

Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
4. Limit alcohol intake (despite the temptation)

Young professionals everywhere are exposed to the temptations of alcohol, but 
the high-stress working environments in international development take this to 
another level. It was certainly easier to source a bottle of Shiraz or Scotch 
than sesame oil in Kabul. Thursday night was party night, and there were always 
a few options for securing Friday’s hangover.


The only honest way to tackle this one is to dig deep and say no. You might 
think that a drink will relax you at the end of a long day, but it certainly 
doesn’t help you tackle the workload that’s waiting the following morning. 
Alternatively, it might help to limit drinking to certain days of the week, or 
up to a certain time of the night.

It’s also a good idea to have a non-alcoholic option that you can use as a 
replacement – sparkling water, ginger beer, or something equally dull. Women, 
watch out for the pregnancy “jokes”.

5. Pair up with a colleague

Self-motivation is hard, and you’re already motivating yourself at work all 
day long. A friend can help to spur you on and act as a healthy lifestyle 
counterweight: when you don’t feel motivated, they will. And vice versa.


Invite someone round for a healthy home-cooked meal. Sign up to an event 
together for a shared goal to work towards. And always – always – share the 
French cheese.


If you want to read more about how Laura swam, biked, and ran her way around 
triathlon courses whilst on break from Kabul, check out her profile at:
http://www.healthystartholidays.com/about-us/meet-the-team/ 
<http://www.healthystartholidays.com/about-us/meet-the-team/>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 