
As businesses seek ways to prosper in the global economy, more should look to 
build supply chains that are protean, those capable of rapid adaptation to 
changing market conditions.

Supply chains represent the lifeblood of most companies; parts or ingredients 
are sourced from suppliers, they are then manufactured or assembled in to 
products, and finally these goods must be delivered to customers.

There are several on-going developments feeding into the growth of protean 
supply chains. Here are five of the most important.

Demand-driven

In the past companies relied on forecasts based on historical sales to predict 
what to make and ship to customers. But past sales are horrible at predicting 
the future, especially in a volatile global economy.

Companies are switching to use so-called "demand signals" as the basis for 
production and replenishment planning. The most commonly used demand-signal is 
a product bar code. When a retail clerk scans a bar code at the cash register, 
that signal about a purchase can then be fed into special software that 
recalibrates manufacturing and replenishment requirements.

Personal-care products giant, Kimberly-Clarke, is one of many consumer goods 
manufacturers using special software to generate shipment forecasts based on 
point-of-sale data received from retailers. As a result Kimberly-Clarke has 
been able to reduce its overall finished-goods inventory while improving 
service to retailers.

Customer segmentation

All customers are not the same. Individual customers have unique demands and 
some generate more revenue or profits to the business than others.

Although a customer segmentation exercise can be costly and time-consuming, it 
does give a company the ability to match supply chain processes and service 
levels to discreet customers.

Smart companies segment their lines of business to align their production, 
inventory holdings and distribution to provide appropriate discrete levels of 
service at reasonable costs. One company that's donethis successfully is Dell 
<http://en.community.dell.com/dell-blogs/dell-shares/b/dell-shares/archive/2008/12/31/dell-announces-new-global-segmentation-around-key-customer-segments.aspx>
. When it entered the retail market, Dell readjusted its supply chain for its 
different business segments.

Centralise supply chain information

In order to respond swiftly to market events and be able to change operations 
at a moment's notice, a company has to have an end-to-end view of what's taking 
place in its supply chain at the item level. It has to know what parts 
suppliers have on hand, and the whereabouts of both parts and finished products 
in the pipeline.

That's why many companies have set up command centres or control towers to 
centralise information from their supply chain partners in one location. Not 
only do these towers provide enhanced visibility, many are equipped with 
software to help companies make rapid adjustments.

For example, in 2011 when the floods in Thailand affected the operations of 
many electronic suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/25/thailand-floods-hard-drive-shortage>
 in the country, instrument maker Agilent Technologies used simulation software 
in its control tower to model the impact of parts shortages and then find 
alternative sources for needed parts or redesign products using available parts 
on hand.

Supply chain analytics

To determine the right supply chain response to changing market conditions, 
companies are deploying special analytical software to gain operational 
insights that enable action.

Today's analytical software is no longer merely descriptive, detailing current 
performance of operations. It can also be prescriptive, offering solutions to 
problems, or predictive, anticipating future events and responses to those 
events. Because the weather influences consumer spending (people buy more 
coleslaw on hot days, for example), one leader in this area, Tesco, feeds 
meteorological forecasts into special software to anticipate future 
consumer-buying needs and then works with its suppliers to have those items on 
the store shelves.

The 'omnichannel' challenge

As more consumers shop online and expect home delivery, retailers find 
themselves having to support supply chains for both physical and virtual 
stores. When e-commerce first began, many retailers set up separate 
distribution centers, dedicated to either online orders or physical stores.

Lately, many retailers have sought to create a "common pool of inventory" such 
that no matter where the product is held, be it in a store or a warehouse, it 
can be used to fulfill online shopping requests. Picking online orders from 
stores has proven demanding as store employees must multi-task, switching back 
and forth from customer service to order picking. In addition, unlike 
distribution centers, most stores simply don't have the granular level of 
visibility as to what items are available on the shelf. One UK retailer, John 
Lewis, is taking an innovative approach to the omnichannel challenge by 
developing hybrid distribution centers designed to fill individual orders for 
both retail stores and online sales.

Along with advances in software, new manufacturing technology involving 3D 
printing and robots will make it even easier for companies to undertake rapid 
restructuring of their supply chains in the future. To win in the marketplace 
companies of tomorrow will have little choice but to create protean supply 
chains.

James Cooke is the editor of CSCMP's Supply Chain Quarterly 
<http://www.supplychainquarterly.com/> and the author of the new book: Protean 
supply chains: Ten dynamics of supply and demand alignment 
<http://eu.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1118759664.html>.

The supply chain hub is funded by Fairtrade Foundation. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find 
out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 