
In an ideal world, your university years would be a time for worry-free 
exploration and adventure, given solely to expanding your mind with new 
knowledge and experience.


In reality, student life can give your confidence a kicking – whether you’re 
up against seemingly impossible deadlines, stressing about how you’ll pay your 
rent or paralysed by existential angst about what you’re going to do with your 
life.

The usual rules apply for maintaining a base level of wellbeing: make sure 
that you get enough sleep, eat well, and get outside regularly (rather than 
festering in your room or the library). But there are lots of other ways to 
give yourself a confidence boost in times of crisis.

1. Take an academic approach to problems

When it comes to dealing with a crisis of confidence, try employing the same 
skills that you use for your studies, recommends Katie Finnimore, mentoring 
coordinator at the University of Essex.


How to stay positive and manage anxiety during exam season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/07/how-to-stay-positive-and-manage-anxiety-during-exam-season>
“Create a mind-map of your concerns,” she says. “This can help to clear your 
mind and identify where your lack of confidence is coming from. Get a big piece 
of paper and some felt tips and get it off your mind as you write. Don’t try to 
edit your thoughts; just get them onto the paper, however small or daft they 
might seem. This will help your subconscious to identify your true feelings.”

Anoushka Bonwick, projects and relationships officer at Student Minds 
<http://www.studentminds.org.uk/>, agrees. She says approaching challenges as a 
series of small steps can be helpful. “It’s really difficult to think of 
passing an exam,” she says. “That’s a very big thing to do and it can be 
intangible and daunting.


“Instead, break it down into a series of achievable goals: think ‘OK, I’ve got 
an exam, so that means I need to revise. What would a good day’s worth of 
revision look like?’ – and do that. This works for all kinds of issues.”

2. Create the social life you want

Don’t feel pressured to conform to the stereotype of spending all your free 
time staring into the bottom of a pint glass (regardless of what your 
housemates and friends are up to). If the party lifestyle isn’t your thing, try 
finding a new social landscape.

“There are a lot of students who aren’t into going out all the time and they 
are in much a bigger group than they might think,” says Bonwick. “Societies and 
clubs are a great way to meet new people and find things to do that aren’t just 
about drinking culture.

“You know yourself best. If you know you don’t enjoy clubbing, for example, 
ask yourself what you can do that will be fun and enjoyable.”

3. Get a mentor

When you’re feeling like you can’t manage, it’s helpful to remember that 
others have been in the same position – and survived. Many universities offer 
access to mentors, who focus on topics varying from emotional support to career 
development.

Therese Reinheimer-Jones, head of student engagement and enhancement at 
Kingston University, says: “Current students can play a vital part in welcoming 
new students and sharing their own experiences. This helps to reassure them 
that they are not alone and that many before them have felt exactly as they do 
at the start of this new chapter in their lives.”

Liz Guyar-Brown, senior employer and internships manager at the University of 
Essex, also highlights the benefits of the process: “We bring in alumni role 
models who come to talk to students about their career paths and the twists and 
turns within them. It’s really helpful for students to see what people have 
gone on to do and how they have coped with life outside of university.”

Eight things students should do when they make a mistake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/21/eight-things-to-do-when-you-make-a-mistake>
4. Make the most of university services

Your university will offer support in managing the nitty-gritty of day-to-day 
life, whether the issue is getting a new room or sorting out your council tax 
exemption. So if you find yourself swamped with life admin, try student 
services.

Anoushka Bonwick says: “People don’t always think about student services, but 
they offer guidance on all kinds of problems you might face at university, like 
money troubles and housing, and offer very practical solutions.”

Katie Finnimore adds: “If you’re worrying about the future, you can visit your 
careers centre for personalised and confidential information, whether you have 
no idea where to start or are preparing for the final stage of the interview 
process. You should also speak to your tutor or a lecturer you get on well with 
for ideas that are specific to your sector or course; they might have great 
contacts who can help.”

5. Share your problems

When you’re feeling overwhelmed, it’s easy to hide away. But the simple act of 
sharing your worries with peers can make a world of difference.

“Reach out to friends and fellow students, because they will be going through 
the same things,” says Bonwick. “The key to coping with the difficulties of 
university is to talk about them. You are surrounded by people who can relate 
to you and what you are going through, so don’t suffer in silence.”

“Above all, be kind to yourself,” says Finnimore. “Release some of the 
pressure you’ve put on yourself. We’re usually our own worst critics. 
Congratulate yourself for every action you take; success is built from many 
little achievements and your confidence will grow with each step.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 