
The Stars and Stripes are being hoisted all over the United States this week 
in preparation for Independence Day on July 4. But in hundreds of cities across 
the country a different version of the flag will be unveiled in an attack on 
the power that corporations wield over government.

The alternative flag replaces the stars with corporate logos, such as those of 
Nike, Warner Bros, McDonald's, Shell, Coca-Cola, IBM, ABC and Playboy.

"A blast of symbolic disobedience will force America to think hard about the 
meaning of its original revolution and its subservience to corporations today," 
is howAdbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adbusters>, the magazine 
that is coordinating the unveiling, describes it.

"And though we're aiming at the heartland, the question is global. What counts 
as 'independence'? And when will we win it back?"

Kalle Lasn, the editor of Adbusters, said: "We have had the biggest response 
to this that we have ever had for a single initiative. The flag is emerging as 
a symbol of what is wrong with America."

He said that 40,000 "culture- jammers" were part of a network organising the 
protest and 10,000 people were visiting the campaign's internet site every day.

The waving of the new flag is part of the post-Seattle, anti-globalisation 
movement that has been fuelled through the internet. Activists have been 
encouraged to download and print out the flag and to send in details of their 
plans for it.

Some aim to unfurl it over highway bridges during celebrations, and others 
will wave it in parades. One flag has been unveiled on a poster site off 
Broadway in New York. The new design will also be unveiled in cities around the 
world, including London.

The aim is to draw attention to the change in the relationship between 
corporations and government and to highlight the power that corporations now 
wield through political patronage and influence.

The organisers behind next week's protest say they hope that people will see 
the wider message behind the new design: "The spectacle of these flags snapping 
in the wind across the country is sure to raise sparks. But many may look and 
think, 'Dammit if that ain't the truth'."
 