 AIG's head office in New York 
It's been a humbling fortnight for top British businessmen on Capitol Hill. 
First BP's Tony Hayward wriggled his way through a seven-hour examination 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2010/jun/17/bp-oil-spill-tony-hayward-congress>
 on the Gulf oil spill. Then another tarnished export, the former AIG boss 
Martin Sullivan,delivered a cringe-inducing performance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/jun/30/us-lawmakers-amazed-at-aig-boss-ignorance>
 under fire over the insurance company's implosion.

Both men offered essentially the same message - critical decisions were taken 
at levels far below their watch. They didn't know, and couldn't have been 
expected to know, the details of everything that was happening in their global 
organisations. And when pressed on specifics, their memories proved to be 
faulty.

Hayward, already widely vilified over BP's Deepwater Horizon disaster, was 
always going to be a punchbag when he appeared before a Congressional committee 
two weeks ago. His blank-faced repetition of "I can't recall" and "I wasn't 
involved in that decision" proved provocative both for politicians and the US 
media. Congressmen accused him of "copping out", of willfull evasion and of 
"kicking the can down the road".

Today, flat home counties vowels were back on the airwaves as Martin Sullivan, 
a factory worker's son from Essex, faced a grilling by the USfinancial crisis 
inquiry commission <http://www.fcic.gov/> over AIG's spectacular failure which 
prompted a $180bn bail-out by US taxpayers. Sullivan, who was chief executive 
of AIG from 2005 until 2008, offered a frank admission that he simply didn't 
know what was happening at a largely London-based financial products division 
that wrote more than $1 trillion in credit default swaps over toxic derivatives.

"I never recognised that portfolio, and there were no issues raised in that 
correspondence that would have given me cause for concern," he told the panel, 
admitting he didn't know thatAIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> was 
obliged to pay out collateral on its swaps until months after Goldman Sachs 
began badgering for a $1.8bn payout in July 2007. "I was receiving reports but 
they didn't indicate there were any problems with the portfolio."

It's a dismal comedown for Sullivan, who was named by the Sunday Times 
<http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/article608387.ece> in 2006 as 
the most influential Brit calling the shots in US business circles. A lifelong 
Tottenham fan, he left school at 16 and spent 36 years rising through the ranks 
of AIG, winning an OBE in 2007.

One of the panel's commissioners, Byron Georgiou, asked Sullivan if it was 
correct that he was paid $107m between 2003 and 2008. The Englishman couldn't 
remember: "I have no knowledge or recollection whatsoever of that number."

Had Sullivan, or any of his colleagues, made any attempt to pay back any of 
his remuneration since AIG's ignominious bail-out?

"To the best of my knowledge, no sir," replied the former chief executive.
It's worth bearing in mind that any businessman who says anything remotely 
interesting in a public forum in the US runs the risk of a multi-million dollar 
class action lawsuit by irate shareholders. But this is hardly a shining 
example of on-the-ball corporate governance.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a Republican panel member, wondered whether Sullivan, 
with hindsight, could spot any flaws in the risk management of AIG in the 
run-up to its spectacular financial collapse. Sullivan replied that a 
"dialogue" about risk management had taken place within AIG's credit risk 
committee and that nothing was brought to his attention that indicated any 
wrongdoing.

Holtz-Eakin wasn't impressed: "In the end, you are the head. The fact that 
they're having a dialogue doesn't excuse your responsibility to ensure that the 
organisation as a whole wasn't at risk."

It's all a poor advertisement for British corporate management. Let's be 
thankful Fred "the shred" Goodwin was never summoned before Congress.
 