
The magic of the FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> may be a 
careworn concept, as faded as Paul Daniels and his on-stage shtick, but there 
were still moments to cherish for fans of unheralded sides up and down the 
country as the first round got underway in earnest.Fleetwood Town and Luton Town
 were the only two non-league clubs to pull off genuine, if minor, shocks but 
the result of the day perhaps came at Home Park whereStourbridge, of the 
Evo-Stik Southern Premier Division, were denied a win against nine-manPlymouth 
Argyle.

Despite falling behind in the fourth minute, the Glassboys – who arrived for 
the match to find that Stourbridge had been misspelled on their shirt badges – 
recovered to lead 2-1 shortly after half-time through goals from Aaron Drake 
and Ryan Rowe. The Plymouth player-manager, Carl Fletcher, equalised before a 
frantic final 10 minutes: a Sean Gebbis penalty, following Robbie Williams's 
red card, made it 3-2 to the visitors but Onismor Bhasera again pulled Plymouth 
level. There was still time for Conor Hourihane to become the second Plymouth 
player to be sent off, as Stourbridge claimed a replay against opponents who, 
despite being rooted to the bottom of League Two, are three divisions above 
them.

Fleetwood secured the biggest scalp, knocking out Wycombe Wanderers despite 
playing more than half the match with 10 men. Andy Mangan and Jamie Vardy 
scored the goals that ensured the Lancashire club, second in the Blue Square 
Bet Premier Division, beat a side 27 places above them in the league system.

Luton, relegated from the Football League in 2009, are five places below 
Fleetwood, but overcame League Two opposition in the shape ofNorthampton Town. 
The substitute Adam Watkins scored the only goal of the game in the 80th minute 
at Kenilworth Road to put the Hatters in the hat for the second round.

That was as far as the giant-killing went, though Maidenhead United celebrated 
140 years since they played a part in one of the first FA Cup fixtures by 
holding the League Two sideAldershot to a draw. The Conference side Bath City 
also earned a replay after holdingDagenham & Redbridge. Five other non-league 
teams progressed, with the most remarkable scoreline occurring at the Testwood 
Stadium, where Southern League Premier sideAFC Totton put eight goals past 
nine-manBradford Park Avenue of the Northern League.

League Two Swindon Town claimed a significant victory, winning 4-1 against 
Huddersfield, who were unbeaten in their previous 42 league games.
 