
The world is so weird, and the media often such unreliable guides to reality, 
that it's hard to tell what's true. Take yesterday's Sun. Which of the 
following is an April fool? A cigarette-addicted turtle finishes off fag butts 
its owner tosses into his garden (there's a great photo attinyurl.com 
<http://www.tinyurl.com/2xapqx> but doesn't the fag look as though it has been 
Photoshopped into the turtle's mouth?). French president

Nicolas Sarkozy is to have stretch surgery in a bid to make him taller. Man 
snaps randy frog romping in a garden pond with its own sex toy - a plastic 
duck. It could be any of them.

It was the Sarko story that was the Sun's April fool. As you might have 
guessed from the fact that the treatment was being developed by Israeli 
academic Professor Ura Schmuck, and that it would happen at the Poisson d'Avril 
centre in Geneva. Avril de Poisson also showed up as the byline in the 
Guardian's spoof suggesting that Gordon Brown has commissioned Sarko's wife 
Carla Bruni to work as a style adviser to us dowdy British. After last week's 
slurpathon of coverage for France's first lady, that seemed all too plausible.

If there are any new trends in April fools, it is that they have become hugely 
laborious, hi-tech collaborative efforts. For instance, the Mirror and the 
Telegraph reported that a new BBC1 nature doc will show footage of penguins 
flying. Both papers' websites had a trailer fronted by former Monty Python 
Terry Jones, seemingly on location in the Antarctic.

Elsewhere, the Express claimed Big Ben is going to have a digital face, while 
GMTV reported on a revolutionary sock-based weight-loss programme, called 
"Sotox" (check it out:tinyurl.com <http://www.tinyurl.com/yu7lnd>).

The tackiest April fool? Yesterday's launch of Ryanbare.com, offering "X-rated 
calendars, screen savers and saucy pics". It doesn't: it's just a tawdry portal 
to Ryanair's funless universe. Welcome to the glum world of the corporate April 
fool. Similarly, yesterday, full-page ads for BMW's new
"canine repellent alloy protection" (which stops dogs peeing 
on your wheels) turned out, if you rang 0800 777 129 for details, to 
be a hoax.

In the age of the web and Photoshop, the April fool is mushrooming. The 
Londonist site, for example, had the headline "Piggy-back plan to beat Heathrow 
congestion". The idea was that short-haul planes could be secured to long-haul 
jets using Nasa's space shuttle technology, and then detach themselves before 
gliding down to their destinations, saving CO2 in the process. The site even 
pictured an Air France plane hitching a ride on an
Air India jet. I know I'm convinced. Now where do I book tickets?
 