
Most celebrities brief their garden designer with the site for the swimming 
pool, the height of the security fence, the shade of off-white for the polished 
limestone terrace. Not DameAnita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick>. "I asked for my previous 
garden to look and feel like a 40-year-old woman - ripe and vital, in full, 
glorious bloom," she laughs. "By the time we moved here, nine years ago, my 
life had changed. The children had grown up and gone; my work was taking a 
different direction. This time I gave the designer four key words: spacious, 
reflective, celebratory, playful. And that's how the garden feels to me now."

Just a few miles north of Littlehampton, where Roddick famously founded The 
Body Shop in 1976 on a £4,000 bank loan, the tone is set by a chubby bronze 
figure, head thrown back and arms wide in welcome, at the far end of the drive. 
Without him, and the scarlet papier-mâché tulips that sprout from the neat box 
parterre, the tall, mock-Georgian mansion might appear imposing, almost 
overbearing. "I wanted a sense of delight, a dollop of colour and humour right 
from the start," she says. First step, with the help of Julian Treyer-Evans, 
who designed Roddick's previous two gardens, was to remove a huge leylandii 
hedge and open up the views of the surrounding countryside. And instead of 
digging a swimming pool, they had the existing one decked over to create a 
stage for music and dancing outside a barn used for family and business 
parties. "The great thing about this garden was that it was in such a mess," 
she says. "It meant we could make all the changes we wanted without feeling 
guilty."

When it came to planting, they had to consider the soil, which is solid chalk 
with a couple of inches of topsoil. Luckily, Roddick's favourite plants include 
box and yew, which thrive in such conditions and are perfect for creating the 
calm, green oasis she had in mind. "Green is my favourite colour in the garden, 
and by far the easiest on the eye," she declares. "The first time I visited a 
rainforest, I was amazed at all the countless different shades of green. It's 
very calming, the perfect antidote to my busy life - but never dull. I love all 
the different shades and shapes of the leaves, the fresh, new, bright green 
growth in spring, and the sharper definition of the hedges after pruning."

Green also creates a great backdrop for sculpture - from large pieces bought 
from the Sculpture Park at nearby Goodwood, such as the Janus Head by Peter 
Burke, to smaller, simpler works commissioned from local artists or spotted at 
degree shows. Emerging from the shade of a sycamore copse is The Host - a 
silent tribe fashioned from copper water tanks that remind Roddick of her trip 
to Nigeria in support of the Ogoni people. "There was a large group of them, 
silently waiting in welcome as I stepped off the plane," she says. The 
tepee-like forms of Diane Maclean's Encampment bring to mind Native American 
reservations, while Giles Penney's cavorting boy and anteater, and a farmer and 
cows looking over a hedge, are "purely about joy and humour".

"Almost all the sculptures are human figures. My only brief is that they 
should be celebratory, with their heads up to the sky." One of the most 
remarkable sculptures presides over the formal Italian garden. In a small, 
central pool, at the meeting point of four rills running between box-edged beds 
of silvery santolina, the Earth Man glints in the dappled light as water 
descends over the stainless-steel segments of his body. His creator, Jonathan 
Froud, works in a local shoe shop to supplement his income as an artist - 
proof, Roddick says, that you don't need the sanction of an expensive gallery 
to buy good art.

She's keen to point out that the strongest ideas are often the simplest - 
indicating a tree surrounded by boulders on which favourite buzzwords such as 
"passion", "humour" and "change" are engraved, and outlining a plan to copy an 
idea seen in Spain, where a dead tree has been wrapped in bright red cloth and 
placed in the landscape. "Ideas are more important than money," she says - a 
notion upheld by campaigning and publishing organisation Anita Roddick 
Publications, into which her considerable energies were largely channelled when 
she stepped down as co-chair of The Body Shop in 2002.

Though professing the garden is where she comes to relax, Roddick whizzes 
about on our whistlestop tour, stopping only to pull the odd weed from the 
artificial grass around the sculptures, trees and other spots that are hard to 
mow, and point out areas that have been, or are shortly to be, reworked. "I'm 
always editing the garden - weeding out the bits I don't want. The place is 
continually evolving, and I wouldn't have it any other way. I'm still full of 
ideas, and the garden is one of the places where I love to express them."
 