
I was halfway through Nightmare Movies, Kim Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kimnewman>'s perceptive and entertaining 
book about horror cinema since the 1960s, when I had my first anxiety attack. 
Spawn of the Slithis? Trail of the Screaming Forehead? All those horror movies, 
95% of which the author estimates he has actually watched! He and I are of the 
same generation, and started reviewing films around the same time, in the early 
1980s. So how come he's seen so many more than me?

Ideally, one would be able to explain the discrepancy by dismissing Newman as 
the sort ofotaku who never shifts from the sofa in front of his DVD player, but 
that just isn't true; all the signs are he leads a full and active social life, 
certainly fuller and more active than mine. In the interest of full disclosure, 
I should mention I'm thanked in the credits at the back of the book – but then 
so is everyone else Newman has ever talked to, just another indication that in 
between watching every horror movie ever made, he somehow finds time to go out 
and meet people.

Meanwhile, I'm left wondering how I can possibly write about horror films 
again when I've seen so few of them. And that's just one genre! Think of all 
those unseen films out there. Even if you were to exercise strict quality 
control and leave out straight-to-DVD titles starring Jeff Fahey, how could you 
possibly find the time to see all the new thrillers and rom-coms and action 
movies, let alone the classics and arthouse fare that sit glaring at you from 
your must-see pile, demanding to be watched.

There must be an official term for the anxiety this engenders, probably 
something along the lines ofKinosterblichkeitangst or Kinomangelschmerz. But if 
there isn't a specific word, there jolly well should be. After idly tweeting on 
the subject a few days ago, I was swamped by replies from people assuring me 
they too were suffering from the very same neurosis. I think we're all aware 
it's a trivial concern compared to, say, worrying about where your next sip of 
uncontaminated water is coming from, but it's clear this is a malaise 
increasingly common in the modern age.

Alvin Toffler was already writing about "information overload" in the late 
1960s. But the burden, if you can call it that, has been exacerbated by new 
media and technology that not only make films more accessible, but encourage 
film-makers to make more of them. When I started reviewing for the Sunday 
Correspondent in 1989, there were around three or four new releases per week; 
nowadays it's a rare Friday when the number dips below a dozen, and that's even 
before you factor in the DVDs.

It all used to be so simple in the pre-video, pre-multiplex, pre-download 
days, when the only movies on offer were the ones showing at your local Odeon 
or ABC or repertory cinema. Now the entire back catalogue is jumping up and 
down, vying for your attention. Unless you're Newman (who I sometimes suspect 
has equipped himself with an army of workhorse clones, like Michael Keaton in 
Multiplicity) or Bradley Cooper (whose enhanced brain activity in Limitless 
would presumably enable him to speed-watch 100 films per day), the rest of us 
need to redraw the battle lines. We're like demented twitchers, ticking off 
titles, but how many of these films do we actually need to see?

Caterina Fake, co-founder of Flickr, recently blogged about Fomo (Fear of 
Missing Out) <http://caterina.net/wp-archives/71> with regard to the grip 
social software exercises on its users, but I think what she wrote applies to 
culture, too: "To be always filled with craving and desire … is one of the 
Three Poisons of Buddhism." So maybe the solution is to develop a zen approach 
to cinema: the greatest action is not watching the film, but knowing the film 
is there. Or we could follow the example of RM Koske, who replied to my tweet 
with the rather lovely suggestion that all we need to do is adjust our attitude 
and greet the superabundance of movies, old and new, with the thought: "I'll 
never run out of wonderful things to see."
 