Who wrote In Praise of Folly?  Desiderius Erasmus  Jonathan Swift  Robert Armin 
 Philip Sidney Which author's April Fools' trick involved teaming up with David 
Bowie to publish a biography of an imaginary artist – whom everyone pretended 
they'd heard of?  Dave Eggers  Paul Theroux  William Boyd  Paul Auster Turkey's 
wise fool Nasreddin Hodja is traditionally illustrated in which posture?  
Asleep on the ground  Levitating above a magic carpet  Riding a donkey backwards
 Standing on one leg "I am a great eater of beef, and I believe that does harm 
to my wit," said which Shakespearean laughing-stock?  Sir Andrew Aguecheek  
Trinculo  Sir Toby Belch  Feste Who created the Guild of Fools and Joculators 
and College of Clowns?  Monty Python  William Shakespeare  PG Wodehouse  Terry 
Pratchett "Fools rush in where angels fear to tread." Phrase coined by?  Oscar 
Wilde  Alexander Pope  Jonathan Swift  Shakespeare Simon the Soldier, Tarás the 
Stout, and Iván the Fool all feature in a fairy tale of foolery by ...  Chekhov 
 Tolstoy  Pushkin  Hans Christian Andersen The Tales of the Wise Men of Gotham, 
a cycle of stories about foolishness first published in 1540, inspired the 
naming of the New York of Batman fame Gotham City (a city of fools). But where 
is the original Gotham?  Nottinghamshire  Essex  Dorset  Norfolk "A green 
hunting cap squeezed the top of the fleshy balloon of a head. The green 
earflaps, full of large ears and uncut hair and the fine bristles that grew in 
the ears themselves, stuck out on either side like turn signals indicating two 
directions at once." Who?  Pippin  The Good Soldier Svejk  Ignatius J Reilly  
Don Quixote "I left the room with silent dignity, but caught my foot in the 
mat." From the journal of which hapless diarist?  The Diary of a Nobody by 
George and Weedon Grossmith  The Rum Diary by Hunter S Thompson  The Secret 
Diary of Adrian Mole by Sue Townsend  Bridget Jones's Diary by Helen Fielding  
You got…  Hey, you're no fool! A great result.  Middling. I won't get out the 
dunce's cap – but you're no star pupil either.  Attempting this quiz when you 
know so little about literature is the height of folly.  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  