
Buried loot, 1840s

At the time in the 1840s when European visitors were denouncing American greed 
for a fast buck, one of the earliest newspapers April Fools, printed by the 
Boston Post, proved their point. It electrified the city by announcing that a 
cavern full of gold, jewels and other loot had been found by workmen digging 
out the roots of a felled tree on Boston Common. Everyone could go and have a 
peek at the presumed pirate hoard, or cache left by the dastardly British, on 
April 1. As an eyewitness recorded: "It was rainy, the Legislature was in 
session, and it was an animated scene that the Common presented, roofed with 
umbrellas, sheltering pilgrims on their way. A procession of grave legislators 
marched solemnly down under their green gingham with philosophers, 
archaeologists, numismatists, antiquarians of all qualities and the public."

Nothing awaited them except disappointment, the rain-soaked turf of the common 
and a small hole. And the Boston Post saying, "April Fool".

The spaghetti harvest, 1957

Cameraman Charles De Jaeger and producer David Wheeler "made their pitch to 
me," recalls the then Panorama editor Michael Peacock. "April 1 would be on a 
Monday that year, so this would be a rare opportunity to carry an April Fool. 
They outlined how the story of the spaghetti harvest would go. Charles, a 
freelance who'd worked for Panorama from the start, explained that he was going 
to be filming in Switzerland anyway. He knew a small village where the women 
would be happy to take part, and he was sure they could attach spaghetti to 
trees! So it wouldn't cost much to film.

"I couldn't say no. I gave Charles a budget of £100, and off he went. He did a 
splendid job of filming the harvest, but not enough credit has been given to 
David for the brilliant pastiche newsreel commentary he wrote for Richard 
Dimbleby." It was a masterly 350 words ("Many of you, I am sure, will have seen 
pictures of vast spaghetti plantations in the Po valley. For the Swiss, 
however, it tends to be more of a family affair . . ."), suited to the sonorous 
cadences of Dimbleby, who saw the script and fortunately agreed to join the 
prank.

The film ran for three minutes. Millions watched as yet another fascinating 
"window on the world" (Panorama's catchphrase) was opened for their 
information, education and entertainment. Then Dimbleby reappeared and gave 
them a whopper of a nudge. "Now we say goodnight," he signed off, "on this 
first day of April."

Most of the millions watching missed his clue. The spoof had scored an 
extraordinary bull's-eye. The BBC did its best to reassure critics - it would 
be a long time before April Fool's fell on a Monday again, said officials. They 
meanwhile took a playful line in following up the hoax. After a few days, 
anyone who rang up or wrote in about growing their own spaghetti was advised: 
place a sprig of spaghetti in a tin of tomato sauce and hope for the best.

The Spiggot rebellion, 1973

There are many curious names in England's West Country, from Piddle Trenthithe 
to Nempnett Thrubwell via Woolfardisworthy (which tricks visiting tourists 
because you pronounce it "Woolsery"). So viewers of the region's independent 
channel Westward TV in 1973 had few suspicions about Spiggot, a hamlet whose 
April Fool's rebellion against the recent introduction of decimal currency was 
given generous coverage. The programme's quaint rustics attracted many phone 
calls and letters of support. Spiggot and its doughty folk were, however, 
studio inventions, but their supporter in faraway Bradford, who said that if 
her city went decimal she would shop in Halifax, was genuine.

Leap of imagination, 1976

Patrick Moore was an ideal presenter to carry off an astronomical hoax. As 
weighty as Richard Dimbleby, with an added air of batty enthusiasm that only 
added to his credibility, he announced on TV on April Fool's Day 1976 that a 
"unique astronomical event" was going to occur at 9.47am. As the little planet 
Pluto passed behind Jupiter, he said, a "gravitational alignment" would reduce 
the Earth's gravity for a few moments. Anyone who jumped into the air at 9.47 
would experience a strange floating sensation.

They did too - or at least hundreds of them thought they did. The BBC was 
flooded with appreciative calls from people claiming to have floated, including 
a woman who said that she and 11 friends had been wafted from their chairs and 
orbited gently around the room.

San Serriffe, 1977

"The Financial Times was always doing special reports on little countries I'd 
never heard of," says former Guardian advertising rep Philip Davies. "I was 
thinking about April Fool's Day 1977 and I thought, why don't we just make a 
country up?" Special reports editor Stuart St Clair Legge suggested the title 
that was to become a legend: San Serriffe, part typographic pun, part credible 
name for a tropical isle.

It also had the special appropriateness for the Guardian of challenging 
spelling. During its long relationship with San Serriffe, starting with the 
original supplement itself, the paper has printed the name with carefree 
inconsistency, using every possible variation of "r"s and "f"s, and, on one 
occasion, two "e"s.

Picking up Legge's theme, staffer Geoffrey Taylor designed a shrunken 
semicolon-shaped version of New Zealand's twin islands and based everything on 
the rich vocabulary of print. Leading islanders, such as the dictator General 
Pica, and places like the capital, Bodoni, were named after fonts of type and 
their measurements: he even got away with a wilderness area on the north island 
called Wodj of Type.

The islands were positioned off the Canaries and with just over three days to 
go, the final shape of the major, seven-broadsheet-page supplement was drawn 
up. Then, in the late afternoon of March 27, two jumbo jets collided at 
Tenerife airport, causing the worst aviation disaster in the world, in which 
583 people died. The delicate web of April Fool fantasy suddenly seemed 
marginal. The editor, Peter Preston, teetered on the edge of pulling San 
Serriffe, but fortunately it was not abandoned. With a Herculean effort, the 
islands were relocated in the Indian Ocean, their history, flora and fauna 
completely revised.

So San Serriffe indelibly joined the map of the world. Next morning, the phone 
calls started early, the letters followed later. Thousands of readers were 
taken in; spin-offs soon included "I've been to San Serriffe" car stickers and 
a T-shirt from the islands, which sold a record 12,000 to readers.

Marathon man, 1981

Heroically lost or misdirected outposts are an April Fool stock-in-trade, like 
the wartime barrage balloon the Sunday Telegraph claimed to have discovered in 
Scotland. In 1981, the Daily Mail tracked a Japanese runner who had 
misunderstood the rules of the London Marathon, held on March 29, and thought 
he was supposed to run not for 26 miles but 26 days. The man's name, Kimo 
Nakajimi, had nice echoes of being knackered and gyms and readers were asked to 
look out for him on suburban roads or in the Home Counties. Sightings were 
included, along with an admission from a marathon organiser, Timothy Bryant, 
who confessed that his Japanese was dodgy and that Kimo might also have been 
confused because of "the very long races they have over there".

Chunnel trouble, 1990

If you're spoofing the building of a tunnel there's one enticing joke to play, 
and the News of the World went for it in 1990. The paper reported that the 
Channel tunnel project, at long last under way after centuries of discussion, 
had run into yet another glitch, and a really bad one. Costs had already 
spiralled and labour troubles had added to engineering challenges to slow 
things down. Now, guess what, surveyors had realised that the two halves being 
built simultaneously from Britain and France would miss one another by 14ft. 
The £10bn error - previously used as an April Fool on tunnels in the Alps, 
America and Japan - was blamed in proper tabloid style on French engineers who 
had insisted on using the metric system. The Brits had stuck loyally to miles 
and inches.

Other Chunnel spoofs over the long years of construction (1987-94) included a 
more original suggestion, in the Sunday Express, that work had stopped after 
the discovery of a gold seam at exactly halfway, which was being claimed by 
both Britain and France.

Motorway madness, 1991

It had the virtue of simplicity: in 1991, the Times revealed that the 
relatively new but already choked London orbital motorway the M25 was to follow 
an alternating one-way system. On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, all six 
lanes in both directions would be used clockwise. On Tuesdays and Thursdays 
everyone would go the other way. The idea was given credibility by the usual 
assortment of technical details, plus the fact that things would revert to 
normal at weekends. Hoax protesters were soon joined by real ones as readers 
rang or wrote in. One suspect commuter from Swanley in Kent complained: 
"Villagers use the motorway to make shopping trips to Orpington. On some days 
this will be a journey of two miles, and on others a journey of 117 miles. The 
scheme is lunatic." Congestion has since become so severe on the M25 that the 
apparently mad scheme may now seem like a bright idea.

Moscow underground, 1992

As the former Soviet Union thawed, its sense of humour warmed up. In 1992, the 
Moskovskaya Pravda newspaper guyed the country's increasingly passionate 
embrace of capitalism with news that the city was going to build a second 
underground system. The Moscow underground, built by Stalin to impress the rest 
of the world, is a genuine wonder, with marble floors, classical pillars and 
even chandeliers, but it does get crowded. The newspaper explained, however, 
that the new system was not intended to relieve the crush. It was ideologically 
necessary under capitalism to have at least two of everything, "to destroy 
monopolies in the interests of competition". Pravda is Russian for "truth", 
which this was not.

Millennium bug, 1999

How could anyone get away with a new invention-based company called Polo 
Flair? The Straits Times in Singapore did, in 1999, with a report that a nerdy 
local teenager had created a small, cheap computer program that guaranteed to 
kill off the Year 2000 computer bug that was causing great consternation at the 
time. All the big players in the online world were wrestling with the problem - 
the possibility that computer clocks would fail to understand the concept of a 
new millennium and would reset everything, plunging all computer-controlled 
systems into chaos. And now this Chinese lad had sorted out a solution in less 
than half an hour while doing his algebra homework. His family were supposed to 
be looking for financial partners and talking about annual takings of £40m, but 
the boy proved terminally elusive. It was, after all, April 1, as other news 
media and would-be investors gradually sussed.

Fishy story, 2000

Campaigning groups and ethical good causes have latched on, too. An 
imaginative example was the "tournament of sleeping fish" announced in the US. 
This was the brainchild of the campaigning group People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (Peta), a serious outfit that no one ever suspected of 
having an urge to play practical jokes. But in 2000 they did just that, showing 
an appealing sense of humour and getting precious publicity by sabotaging the 
annual fishing tournament in Lake Palestine, Texas. Organisers were told that 
the lake would be massively dosed with tranquillisers, which meant that nothing 
would bite. "The fish will be napping, not nibbling," said Peta, as wildlife 
rangers and chemists were dispatched by alarmed authorities. The Feds should 
have done their maths. To make the trick work, the 25,500-acre reservoir would 
have needed more sleeping tablets than could be carried by three large 
sea-going oil tankers.

Raise the Titanic, 2001

It was a sight too good to miss. So a blustery April Fool's Day in 2001 saw a 
crowd of several hundred gather in the wind and rain on Beachy Head to watch a 
full-size replica of the Titanic steam past. In spite of foot-and-mouth 
restrictions on much of the surrounding land, enthusiasts from up to 40 miles 
away managed to get to the grassy slopes above the famous lighthouse. They were 
responding to a bulletin on Southern FM radio. Alas, they had failed to note a 
string of giveaways, including the fact that the replica had been built by the 
"AFD Construction company". The DJ might as well have added that she was 
heading for San Serriffe. Nothing steamed past, but the hoodwinked ones left 
their mark. So many congregated on a small patch that a rack developed in the 
cliff and several days later, fortunately when no one was around, a chunk 
crashed into the sea.

Google's moon base, 2004

Google's deliberate mixture of spoofs with genuine announcements about new 
products on April Fool's Day is fascinating. The ethos seems to run through the 
entire firm; I was delighted to find an email on an April 1 internet thread 
from a Google employee saying that "of course" the milk in his office fridge 
that day had been dyed green. So one more handclap, please, for Google's spoof 
moon base, Copernicus, which advertised for staff in 2004 to survey the 
internet from an unparalleled vantage point and answer questions such as, "Does 
spam go on for ever?" The job also involved harvesting faint electromagnetic 
pulses in a way that could recreate the lost first appearance of Pink Floyd on 
BBC TV. There were plenty of clues, including a preference for employees 
"capable of surviving with limited access to such modern conveniences as soy 
low-fat lattes, The Sopranos and a steady supply of oxygen". But loads of 
people clicked the application button that triggered a reply saying, sorry, 
we're full, try again on April Fool's Day 2104.

· Extracted from The Guardian Book of April Fool's Day (Aurum Press/Guardian 
Books, £12.99). To order a copy for £10.99 call 0870 836 0749 or visit
www.guardianbooks.co.uk <http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk>
 