
There is a story told me by my old bowling partner Allan Jones about one of 
his first matches as a first-class umpire. It was towards the start of a game 
at Taunton, and an inexperienced Warwickshire seamer was bowling with an 
equally inexperienced wicketkeeper, standing in for injury while a substitute 
was en route from Birmingham.

According to Jones, a gentle away swinger, starting down the line of the 
stumps, had the batsman playing across the line and missing. It was plumb lbw. 
Except that neither bowler nor wicketkeeper appealed. Perhaps, thought Jonah, 
they were overawed. Certainly he would have raised his finger and back to the 
pavilion would have walked Viv Richards. He had but a dozen or so at the time, 
and his dismissal would have deprived the crowd and record books of five 
subsequent hours of batting mayhem in which The Master Blaster hit 42 fours and 
eight sixes in making 322 from 258 deliveries. Wednesday was the 26th 
anniversary of the innings regarded as one of the most destructive ever played 
in this country.

Of course, cricket, sport, and life in general is full of what‑ifs such as 
this. It is the Sliding Doors principle of a parallel alternative to events 
hinging on the outcome of a small, apparently insignificant factor. 
Warwickshire's misery would have been avoided if either the bowler or keeper 
had so much as squeaked.

To my mind, there was a Sliding Doors moment during the winter, the result of 
which may well have had a massive bearing on the destiny of the Ashes series. A 
couple of weeks ago, I had askedAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> about his first‑innings 
dismissal in Brisbane, where he cut the third ball of the series from Ben 
Hilfenhaus straight to Mike Hussey in the gully and how many had come looking 
for, and believed they had found, their "Harmison moment", after that bowler's 
opening delivery four years before which, it was said, set the tone for the 
series.

"Getting out like that was hard for me," he told me. "Harmison's was a 
bad ball to start the series but he ended up bowling OK in that match. We just 
played badly and were badly beaten. But people still look back at that ball 
which I don't think had a bearing on the outcome. So when I got out, I thought: 
'OK this is fine, this is not a precursor to what is coming any more than 
Harmison's ball was.' Deep down, though, I was fighting against it, and 
thinking: 'I know what they are going to write.' Test cricket can always ask 
some pretty serious questions of you and I realised that I was going to have to 
dig pretty deep in the second innings."

It was that second innings that interested me more. England were under the 
cosh, having suffered through a massive partnership between Hussey and Brad 
Haddin that gave Australia a first‑innings lead of 221. That evening of the 
third day, with backs very much against the wall, Strauss and Alastair Cook had 
10 overs to survive to the close. "It had been a tough period in the field 
leading up to that," he said, "and with the lead they had a tough time then for 
a captain to have to go out and bat again."

The first delivery, from Hilfenhaus again, may have been the deciding one of 
the campaign. It began just outside off stump and, having seen how the new ball 
had behaved during the Australian innings, Strauss opted to let it go not on 
line but length. It swung back in – as he knew it might – and, rather than go 
through to the keeper, struck him on the pad in front of the stumps. 
Australia's appeal was turned down by the brilliant umpire Aleem Dar and, on 
referral, was deemed by the technology to be clearing the stumps.

A lesser umpire than Dar and no technology and Strauss might have been a 
goner. "I actually did think that it was high – we had referred a couple during 
their innings that were going over – and Alastair Cook thought so, too. It was 
a bad leave, though." The pair survived to stumps, Strauss spent that night in 
sleepless pondering the enormity of the task ahead and over the final two days 
Australia managed only the single wicket of the captain, but not until he had 
made a century.

"I think it would have been hard for me to go out and bag a pair in that first 
Test, having said to myself I must go out and lead by example and show the guys 
it is different this time and there is nothing to fear. It would have been hard 
to come back from that. The game of cricket rests on such small margins."
 