
For some people it was impossible to believe that this day would come. Seven 
years after Chilcot started to take evidence, 12 years after theprevious 
inquiry into the Iraq war by Lord Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/jul/14/butler.iraq>, many anti-war 
protesters could be forgiven for being sceptical about what the report would 
say.

First impressions, announced over microphones and megaphones 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/chilcot-report-protesters-gather-in-westminster-as-sevenyear-iraq-inquiry-wait-comes-to-end-a3289276.html>
 while being read from mobile phones, were met with a militant response. There 
was a sense of vindication for those of us who opposed the war from the outset 
and has renewed our determination. Because for us this is not the end of the 
matter, it is a new phase in the movement.
Chilcot explainer: impact 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=Chilcot_impact>
The indictment of Blair and those around him is so severe that it must lead to 
further action. It is unacceptable that he faces no charges or sanction, yet as 
we know Chilcot was set up in such away that no legal outcome is possible.

For anti-war protesters this is only a partial victory and it is bittersweet. 
We have marched in our millions, only to be ignored. And let’s not forget this 
was not just Labour politicians (despite the biggest Labour rebellion in 
history led by MPs such as Jeremy Corbyn), but nearly the whole of the Tory 
party in the House of Commons. The refusal to recognise the strength of public 
opinion or the views of constituents, has, in my view, been a major factor in 
the disaffection with politicians that is so obviously a major factor in 
political life today.

Wednesday’s protest was representative of the different components of the 
anti-war and peace movements. There were former school students who joined 
strikes against the war. There were representatives of the Muslim community 
celebrating Eid. There wereVeterans for Peace 
<https://www.veteransforpeace.org/>, former soldiers who oppose war. There were 
trade unionists, peace activists, MPs, in much smaller numbers than at many of 
our protests but there symbolically to represent the millions who still feel 
the war was wrong and that they want those responsible to pay.

The demonstration outside the Chilcot report was for me and for many there an 
emotional one. Most of the military families were inside, but it was impossible 
not to remember the suffering of so many people as a result of the war. The 
estimated one million Iraqi dead, the millions of refugees, the victims of the 
sectarian killings and bombings, and of course the soldiers who have died or 
been injured and their families.

The world has been made a much more dangerous place, and the Middle East is in 
flames. The demonstrators who chanted: “Blair lied, thousands died”, or dressed 
up as judges arresting Blair, represent much wider forces in public opinion who 
must now be listened to.

Chilcot was devastating in his criticism, but the truth is that many of the 
points now being made were already being made in 2002 and 2003. This was not a 
catastrophe that was unforeseen. It was predicted by many, although probably 
none of us realised how bad the situation inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> would become. The truth also is that 
Chilcot would not have happened without a continuing anti-war movement. When 
people come together and stand in solidarity to demand truth and justice, as 
with the Hillsborough campaign, they can fight the establishment.

What needs to happen now? For us this does not draw a line under the whole 
affair, but opens up new campaigns. There has to be a legal outcome, and Blair 
should face charges. He should also be barred from public office.

This also sounds a warning about democracy in this country. In 2003 millions 
marched, blocked roads, occupied, walked out of school and took industrial 
action. All to stop the war before it started. The lack of accountability on 
the part of politicians and the wider establishment must end now.

This report will further deepen the political crisis in this country. Those on 
the wrong side of history need to acknowledge the profound error that they 
made, instead of cheerleading further interventions. There will be justice over 
Iraq, however long it takes. Part of that is acknowledging the disastrous 
nature of Britain’s military action in the past 15 years.
 