
Ariel Sharon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon>, the 
controversial self-styled "warrior" who dominated Israel's military and 
political landscape for decades, has died eight years after a massive stroke 
left him in a vegetative state.

The former army general and prime minister suffered multiple organ failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/02/ariel-sharon-critical-condition-doctor>
 over the new year. His sons were at his bedside at the Sheba Medical Centre, a 
long-term care facility near Tel Aviv, where Sharon has lain since May 2006.
 Shimon Peres (left) with Ariel Sharon in Egypt in 1975. Photograph: 
Keystone/Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
His son Gilad said: "He has gone. He went when he decided to go."

Shlomo Noy, of the medical centre, told reporters that Sharon had "struggled 
with surprising strength and determination" against multiple medical 
complications since his stroke. "Today he departed peacefully with his family 
by his side."

Television networks interrupted their scheduled coverage to break the news. 
But Sharon's death, at the age of 85 and after eight years in a coma, was less 
of a shock to Israel thanthe devastating stroke that felled him on 4 January 
2006 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/jan/05/israel1> at the height of 
his premiership.
 Ariel Sharon (right) shakes hands with the Palestinian prime minister Mahmoud 
Abbas, watched by the US president George W Bush following a summit meeting at 
the Royal Palace in Aqaba, 2003. Photograph: Hussein Malla/AFP/Getty Images 
Even so, for many Israelis he will be mourned as a giant figure who played a 
key role in shapingIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> both as a 
soldier and a statesman. His passing severs the last link to the iconic 
generation which fought in the 1948 war that followed the declaration of the 
state. His reputation as a fearless – and controversial - soldier was matched 
by his uncompromising ideology as a politician.

Among Palestinians and leftwing Israelis, he will be remembered as a powerful 
and reviled champion of Israel's colonial settlement project, and the political 
force behind the construction of the vast concrete and steel separation barrier 
that snakes through the West Bank. Many will not forgive him for failing to 
prevent the killing by Lebanese Christian forces of hundreds of Palestinians 
and Lebanese Shia in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut in 1982.
 Ehud Olmert, Sharon's successor. Photograph: David Furst/AFP/Getty Images 
His body is expected to lie at the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, to allow 
members of the public to pay their respects ahead of an official state 
ceremony, to which international figures will be invited. The former prime 
minister is expected to be buried at his ranch in the Negev desert, next to his 
wife's grave.

Using Sharon's nickname, the Israeli president, Shimon Peres, paid tribute to 
the former prime minister.

"My dear friend, Arik Sharon, lost his final battle today. Arik was a brave 
soldier and a daring leader who loved his nation and his nation loved him. He 
was one of Israel's great protectors and most important architects, who knew no 
fear and certainly never feared vision. He knew how to take difficult decisions 
and implement them. We all loved him and he will be greatly missed."

Danny Ayalon, former deputy foreign minister, said Sharon was a giant, both 
militarily and politically. "He could be very tough on the battlefield but very 
reasonable in the political sphere. That's what made him very special."

Barack Obama said: "On behalf of the American people, Michelle and I send our 
deepest condolences to the family of former Israeli prime minister Ariel Sharon 
and to the people of Israel on the loss of a leader who dedicated his life to 
the state of Israel."

David Cameron said: "Ariel Sharon is one of the most significant figures in 
Israeli history and as prime minister he took brave and controversial decisions 
in pursuit of peace, before he was so tragically incapacitated. Israel has 
today lost an important leader." Ed Miliband said: "Nobody can doubt the impact 
he had on Middle East politics."

Sharon suffered a first stroke on 18 December 2005 at the age of 77. The prime 
minister had long indulged his gargantuan appetite for rich food and cigars, 
despite doctors' repeated warnings that he needed to lose weight and take 
exercise. The prime minister was kept in hospital for 48 hours.

Seventeen days later Sharon had another, much bigger, stroke at his Negev 
ranch. Despite paramedics urging his immediate transfer to the nearest major 
hospital, one of Sharon's personal doctors insisted the prime minister should 
be kept at home until the physician could personally examine him.

However, following a further collapse while waiting for the doctor's arrival, 
an ambulance was called. Instead of being taken to the nearest hospital, the 
doctor directed the ambulance staff to drive to the Hadassah hospital on the 
outskirts of Jerusalem, a journey of around an hour.

Sharon underwent several long operations but never recovered consciousness. 
Four months after the stroke he was transferred to a long-term medical facility 
near Tel Aviv, where he remained – apart from one brief home visit in 2010 to 
assess whether he could be moved to his Negev ranch – until his death on 
Saturday.

There was a glimmer of hope last January when doctors said the former prime 
minister had exhibited "robust activity" in his brain during tests. Scans 
showed Sharon responding to pictures of his family and recordings of his son's 
voice. However, medical experts said the chances of him regaining consciousness 
were almost zero.

Sharon – known as "Arik" to his friends, "the Bulldozer" to his critics – was 
a giant figure, both literally and metaphorically, in Israel. He was accused of 
war crimes after between 800 and 2,000 Palestinians were butchered at the Sabra 
and Shatila refugee camps in 1982 in Lebanon by Phalangist Christians while 
Israeli forces stood by. Sharon was defence minister at the time.

But his reputation as a belligerent and uncompromising rightwinger was 
challenged in the period immediately preceding his stroke by his astonishing 
decision to withdraw Israeli forces and settlers from the Gaza Strip, and his 
determination to carry out the evacuation in the face of virulent opposition 
and accusations of betrayal.

Analysts were divided over whether the man who had been a driving force of the 
settlement enterprise then intended to initiate a much more complex withdrawal 
of settlers from the West Bank, or whether he had "sacrificed" Gaza in order to 
maintain Israel's hold on the West Bank and East Jerusalem.

Following his incapacitation, Ehud Olmert assumed the role of prime minister. 
Kadima, the party Sharon founded after breaking with the rightwing Likud 
shortly before his demise, won the largest number of seats, with Olmert at its 
helm, in the general election of March 2006.

Kadima, on the centre-right of the Israeli political spectrum, was predicted 
to reshape the electoral landscape. But the party has floundered in the 
vagaries of Israeli politics, with its multitude of parties and unstable 
proportional representation electoral system. In last January's election, the 
party won only two seats.

Olmert was seen as technocratic leader in contrast to the colourful, 
ideological, strongman image that Sharon enjoyed.

In a foreword to Sharon's autobiography, Warrior, the late Israeli journalist 
Uri Dan wrote: "Though much of the world knows him by the title of this 
autobiography, he is fundamentally a man of peace." Many assessments of 
Sharon's life and legacy will dispute that.
 