
The men involved in the original Scotland Yard inquiry into phone hacking will 
mount a robust defence of their investigation next week in the face of 
criticism from the prime minister and others that it was "clearly inadequate".

Former assistant commissioner Andy Hayman and his deputy Peter Clarke, who at 
the time of the phone-hacking inquiry in 2006 were the country's most senior 
anti-terrorism officers, will give evidence to the home affairs committee on 
Tuesday as pressure mounts on theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> over what the prime 
minister said was a scandal.

Both men are likely to put their phone-hacking inquiry into the context of the 
time they had available. They were running a series of high-profile 
anti-terrorist operations that year, including Operation Overt into the plot to 
blow up transatlantic airliners, which turned out to be one of the biggest 
terrorist plots to be thwarted by British police.

They are likely to face hard questioning from MPs – and accusations that they 
ignored evidence that identified phone-hacking victims such as Milly Dowler and 
the families of the 7 July bombings.

Shock and anger are reverberating through the Met after a week of revelations 
about alleged bribes being paid to officers and evidence that victims of phone 
hacking were not just celebrities but ordinary people who have suffered, 
including families of soldiers killed in Iraq and Afghanistan, and relatives of 
7 July victims.

"The idea that officers have been taking tens of thousands of pounds in bribes 
is shocking," said one source. "People here are reeling. No one quite knows 
where this is going to end."

Pressure has increased upon Scotland Yard with David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> talking of the "scandal" as 
he announced a beefed-up judicial public inquiry into hacking and alleged 
bribes to police officers.

The public inquiry is also likely to focus on why a decision was made in a few 
hours by assistant commissioner John Yates not to reopen the original 
investigation after the Guardian's revelations in 2009 that there could be 
thousands more victims.

Clarke, who had day-to-day control of the investigation, will describe the 
parameters he placed around it and the reason they followed the apparently 
limited evidence which led to the jailing of the former royal correspondent 
Clive Goodman and the private detective Glenn Mulcaire.

Clarke is understood to have prepared meticulously for the committee.

Hayman, who as assistant commissioner was not involved in the day-to-day 
running of the investigation but had overall responsibility, is aware he will 
face questioning about his alleged links to News International – in his 
retirement from the force he was employed as a columnist on the Times – and why 
as overall head of the investigation he did not make his officers go further 
into the evidence available from Mulcaire's notes.

He is understood to be confident about his evidence to the committee. "He 
knows he has nothing to hide," a source said.
 