
If Andy Murray can bring himself to watch tomorrow's Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> semi-final between his 
first-round conqueror Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and Rafael Nadal, he will wonder at 
what might have been. Tsonga's path to the semi-finals, the latest step of 
which was a 7-5, 6-0, 7-6 win over Mikhail Youzhny yesterday, was the one 
pre-ordained for the British No1.

Whether Murray would have made the most of a sympathetic draw the way Tsonga 
has, or beaten Youzhny with such brutal force, is a matter for conjecture. But 
while Murray licks his wounds, Tsonga is looking forward to an encounter with 
the world No2 and the possibility of playing a grand slam final in five days' 
time.

"I want to cry, I want to smile, I want everything. There's a lot of emotion," 
said Tsonga, who came into the tournament ranked 38th in the world but will 
leave much closer to the top 20. "I knew it would be a tough match but I'm 
playing better than last year and I'm very confident in my game."

The 22-year-old Frenchman has seized his opportunities over the past 10 days 
with much the same zeal with which he hits his whipping forehands. There were 
plenty of those against Youzhny and he should enjoy pitting it against Nadal's 
fabled left-handed version of the same shot.

"I have played him once before at the US Open," Tsonga said of his next 
opponent. "He is a different player but he has two arms and two legs like me. I 
will try to stay relaxed on court."

Nadal's 7-5, 6-3, 6-1 win over Finland's Jarkko Nieminen probably posed more 
questions than it answered about his form and fitness. He seldom wins matches 
easily, even when he is at his best, so it is not always easy to gauge his form 
but he had to save set-points in the first set against the Finn and was 
fortunate not to be pushed harder.

His knees are bandaged to prevent the discomfort caused by pounding the 
baseline and there is some suggestion that the foot problem he suffered at the 
end of last year might also be hindering him on hard-courts - though this is 
the first hard-court grand slam semi-final he has reached.

"I am playing and serving well at the important moments," he said.

Nadal has spent just nine hours and 40 minutes on court so far - a fact he 
thinks will work in his favour at the business end of the tournament. "I 
normally spend much longer on court in reaching the semi-finals," Nadal said. 
"I think the longest I have been on court [in a single match in this 
tournament] is about two and a half hours."
 