
“It’s like Frankie’s seven winners or Michael Dickinson’s first five in the 
Gold Cup,” Michael Tabor said here on Sunday after seeing his colours carried 
to victory by Found in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe. “Things like that aren’t 
supposed to happen but sometimes they do.”

Seventh Heaven and Found give Aidan O’Brien one-two in Yorkshire Oaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/seventh-heaven-found-aidan-obrien-one-two-yorkshire-oaks-horse-racing>
It was not Found’s presence in the winner’s enclosure that made this year’s 
Arc remarkable but the historic triumph which it spearheaded for Aidan O’Brien, 
her trainer, who also saddled Highland Reel and Order Of St George to finish 
second and third. It is believed to be the first time a trainer has sent out 
the first three home in the Arc’s 96-year history and even the youngest among 
the 40,000 racegoers here are unlikely to see it happen again.

Typically O’Brien deflected the acclaim towards the team at his County 
Tipperary stable afterwards but even by his standards a 1-2-3 in the Arc is an 
achievement to stand comparison with anything in his career. Several opponents, 
including Postponed, the strong favourite from Roger Varian’s yard in 
Newmarket, failed to produce their best form but in the end Team O’Brien was 
simply too good.

So, too, was Ryan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore> on 
Found, who was drawn wide in stall 12 but had settled into a perfect position 
against the inside rail with a mile to run. Found was seventh as the field 
turned for home with Vedevani, the pacemaker for Harzand, the Derby winner, 
still in front, but she was travelling strongly and, as soon as a gap appeared 
on Vedevani’s outside, Moore seized the chance to strike for home.

Found was quickly in a clear lead and, though she had finished second at Group 
One level in all five of her previous starts, there was never any chance that 
it would be surrendered. Highland Reel, the King George winner, was a length 
and three-quarters behind her at the line, while Order Of St George was another 
length and a half in front of Siljan’s Saga and Postponed. Harzand was ninth, 
while Makahiki, attempting to give Japan its first win in the Arc, was a bitter 
disappointment, finishing 14th of the 16 runners.

“She won a [Prix Marcel] Boussac at this time of year and also a Breeders’ Cup 
Turf,” Moore said. “She’s been frustrating sometimes but this has probably been 
the main aim all year. She was back to a mile and a half in an evenly run race 
and she showed what she’s capable of. At her best she’s a very hard filly to 
beat.

“It’s quite incredible [for O’Brien] to get all three horses there in top 
shape and beat the best around. It’s the hardest race to win in Europe every 
year. To have the first three home is unreal.”

O’Brien, who trains for John Magnier’s Coolmore Stud syndicate, was quick to 
point out that his three runners were all sired by Galileo, the Derby winner in 
2001. “It’s a privilege to be here and to be part of it,” he said. “I couldn’t 
dream that this would happen. We know how difficult the Arc is. She’s only run 
over a mile and a half four times and she was unlucky in the Arc last year. 
We’ve had our eye on this for a long time. When Ryan rode her as a 
two-year-old, he said she could win an Arc and he was right.”

Varian’s disappointment at Postponed’s failure to raise a significant 
challenge was palpable. “Andrea [Atzeni, his jockey] said he felt great going 
to post but after breaking well he was trapped three wide early on and couldn’t 
get in.

“It meant he met the big bend on the wrong lead and then he didn’t quicken up 
like he can. It’s disappointing as we went in hoping we would win, but the main 
thing is we still have a horse to go to war with.”

Found finished second in the Champion Stakes at Ascot and then went on to beat 
Golden Horn, the Derby and Arc winner, in the Breeders’ Cup Turf after her run 
in the Arc last year, so there is every chance that she has not yet finished 
for the season. A return to America for the Breeders’ Cup Turf in just under 
five weeks’ time seems likely and she is no better than 7-4, with BetFred, for 
a repeat win in the Turf at Santa Anita next month.

Wuheida, whose only previous start had been a maiden victory at Newmarket in 
August, ran away with the Group One Prix Marcel Boussac earlier on the card and 
is now favourite for both the One Thousand Guineas and Oaks next season with 
most bookmakers. “I’ve always thought of her as an Oaks filly,” Charlie 
Appleby, her trainer, said, “and the further she goes, the better she will be.”

Criquette Head-Maarek, who saddled Treve to win the Arc in 2013 and 2014, has 
endured a miserable season but has more to look forward to next year after the 
victory of National Defense in the Prix Jean-Luc Lagardere. The success was 
just Head-Maarek’s third winner in 2016, but the trainer hopes that National 
Defense “will be a Guineas horse”. She added: “We’ve had a terrible year, the 
horses were sick for a long time but they are coming back to themselves now.”

Newmarket trainer Sir Mark Prescott was celebrating after Marsha won the Prix 
de l’Abbaye in the hands of Luke Morris. The winning rider said: “The boss had 
freshened her up for this, we’ve always had high hopes for her and this is the 
icing on the cake.”

Brian Pothecary was representing the 10,000-strong members of the Elite Racing 
Club and said: “I’m very lucky to represent Elite here today, as one of three 
coachloads of owners who were selected by ballot to attend. I doubt whether she 
will run again this year and I very much hope she stays in training as a 
four-year-old.”

Michael Dods will take his time before committing Mecca’s Angel, who was 
favourite but finished third, to what would be the final start of her career in 
the British Champions Sprint on October 15.

He said: “She’s run a good race. I’m not using the ground as an excuse. I 
don’t think she likes to be crowded, and maybe that had something to do with it

“We’ll see how she comes home, we’ll give her the full week to get home and 
relax and then we’ll decide about Ascot. If she is in good form and has a good 
week the following week we’ll seriously think about Champions Day. I’d love to 
see her over six furlongs at some stage.”

In the final race of the day Limato was a comfortable winner of the Prix de la 
Foret for Lambourn handler Henry Candy but there is a difference of opinion in 
the victorious camp about the Breeders’ Cup target for the horse. Winning rider 
Harry Bentley said “He’s got an incredible turn of foot, but he does settle in 
his races, too. He really is a class act.”

Candy said: “The race worked out really, really well. The horse was really 
relaxed and Harry was able to take a pull. It was lovely to see the way he 
quickened up like that.”

Assessing plans, Candy added: “It [Breeders’ Cup] is a definite possibility. 
We’ll have to discuss it, but I’d rather run him in the Mile than the Sprint.”

Winning owner Paul Jacobs cautioned: “I’m not sure about the Mile, we’ll have 
to see. The Mile is a lot more valuable, but it’s a lot more competitive.”
 