
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> faces another damaging 
health scandal after its medical authorities confirmed four deaths in the past 
25 years were linked to an acne drug prescribed by doctors as a contraceptive.

Amid growing concern about third- and fourth-generation birth-control pills, a 
secret report by France's drug safety authority revealed 125 women had suffered 
"undesirable" and possibly life-threatening side-effects linked to Diane-35 or 
its generics.

Le Figaro newspaper, which obtained a copy of the confidential internal 
document, said 37 of the women had not fully recovered after taking the pills 
made by Bayer, the German pharmaceutical company. An estimated 4-5m boxes of 
Diane-35 are sold in France every year. The average age of the women affected 
is 25.

Dozens of lawsuits against third- and fourth-generation contraceptive pills – 
known in Britain as combined pills – have been launched in France by women who 
have suffered side-effects including blood clots and strokes. The French 
government has advised doctors to limit the prescription of some contraceptive 
pills, and will stop reimbursing patients the cost of those drugs from April.

Critics describe the move as folly, and accuse the government of blowing the 
problem out of proportion. In a statement on Sunday, the Agence Nationale de 
Sécurité du Médicament said Diane-35 had been authorised for sale in France 
since 1987, but only as a treatment for acne. It said it had looked into the 
side-effects of the drug and its generics and would publish its findings this 
week. It is also investigating doctors' prescription habits.

This month, as concern about the pills grew, Professor Dominique Maraninchi 
said: "Diane-35 is an acne treatment that also blocks ovulation. We have 
several inquiries going on that show that this non-authorised use is 
significant."

French medical authorities made headlines recently over Mediator, a diabetes 
drug widely prescribed by doctors as an appetite suppressant, which is believed 
to have killed at least 500 people. The head of the French pharmaceutical firm 
Servier, maker of Mediator, is under formal investigation for manslaughter, and 
the head of France's public health agency has resigned.

The row has highlighted the links between drug regulators and lobbying drug 
companies in France, which has one of the world's highest levels of consumption 
of prescription drugs.

Investigators are also looking into a second scandal over French-made faulty 
PIP silicone breast implants.

In 2003, Dr Eric Wooltorton, associate editor of the Canadian Medical 
Association Journal, warned about the risks of Diane-35, which is authorised 
for sale in 135 countries and sold in 116. He wrote the oral contraceptive with 
"anti-androgen properties" had been "heavily marketed" to young women and had 
seen its Canadian sales jump by 45% between 2000 and 2001.

"However, many physicians may be unaware of concerns about the drug's safety 
profile and the fact that it is not approved for use solely as an oral 
contraceptive."

He added that the UK Committee on the Safety of Medicines had issued a warning 
on the drugs risk of deep vein thrombosis in 2001.

"Diane-35 should be reserved for temporary use in women with serious acne and 
should not be used solely as an oral contraceptive. All women who use 
combination oral contraceptives are at risk of venous thromboembolism and 
should be informed of this rare but potentially serious adverse effect, 
particularly if they are taking Diane-35," Dr Wooltorton added.
 