
One in the mouth

Years ago, when I was understudying Ben Kingsley in an Athol Fugard play at the
Royal Court theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-court-theatre>, 
Samuel Beckett's extraordinary monologue Not I was presented as the second half 
of the bill.

"Final fifth" would perhaps be more accurate than "second half", since, in 
Billie Whitelaw's scorching delivery, Not I ran between 11 and 14 minutes, 
depending on the pace at which she scorched. The production was devised in such 
a way that all the audience could see, piercing the blackness, high in the air 
before them, was a mouth.

Out of this mouth spurted the garbled reminiscences of an old woman in a kind 
of desperate, last-ditch attempt to make some sense of her joyless life, while 
punctuating the verbal haemorrhage with moments of sudden, fierce negation: 
"What? Who? No! She!" (with "She!' coming out as "Sheeeee!" in an angry wail), 
before rushing breathlessly on. This happened four times. Soon after the fourth 
time the curtain fell on the still-spluttering mouth. Shocked silence. Wild 
applause.

The combination of Miss Whitelaw's intense performance and the relentless 
writing was devastating. I watched in awe from out front every night.

After several performances I noticed an element of design and character that 
I'd never seen before. Way over to the audience's left of the riveting white 
mouth was a dim agglomeration of long folds in a huge bolt of material, almost 
filling a vertical line from top to bottom of the stage. It was only just 
perceptible in a murky, positively grudging, blue light.

The material seemed at first to be the raised headboard of a baby's giant 
cradle, which suggested that the mouth might be that of a baby and an old woman 
simultaneously, a typically Beckettian blur of images, I thought sagely, adding 
an ever bleaker, almost gruesome dimension to the play.

Then, just before the end, the cradle moved. Its top inclined and the material 
at the middle moved upward ever so slightly. An interesting production value, 
done with wires, I assumed.

However, a closer inspection of the programme revealed that Not I had a second 
character called The Auditor. His name was Mel and we shared a dressing-room, 
but until the moment of the moving cradle I had thought he was some kind of 
prompter. We were seldom in the dressing-room anyway, so conversation had 
hardly skimmed the surface, you understand.

An understudy's lot is not a happy one. You have to work out the character's 
inner motivation and tuning from repeatedly watching the performance. Heaven 
help you if you have to go on.

This is supposed to be the actor's Big Chance, when he'll dazzle everybody by 
being just as good if not better than the principal performer who has had weeks 
of intimate discussion and rehearsal, followed by umpteen performances honing 
his delivery before the audience to produce all that acclaimed polish. (Dame 
Edith Evans is reputed to have said in the wings to one faltering, last-minute 
Hamlet: "Well, my boy, you had your chance — and you muffed it.")

After five weeks of the six-week run I really did feel I could go on in the 
Fugard play without too much disgrace, and began spending more time in the 
dressing room, where I learned that Mel's wife was expecting a baby at any 
moment during our last week. "I'll go on for you, if the baby comes and you 
can't make it," I said to Mel.

The days dwindled down to a monotonous few until the final Saturday. As I got 
off the tube at Sloane Square in time for the five o'clock matinee, I longed 
for this night to be different, monumental. More specifically, I longed for Ben 
Kingsley – an extremely decent man to whom I meant no personal harm whatsoever 
– to break an ankle.

There was a message for me at the stage door to call Mel in Colchester. "The 
baby's come, my wife's had a caesarean, I can't leave her, it's a girl, she's 
gorgeous, you're on." I was excited. "Don't worry, I know exactly when to raise 
my hands and lower my head. It's when she says 'What? Who? No! She!' for the 
fourth time." "And the run up to that," added Mel, "so that you can get ready, 
is when she mentions the lavatories and the wheatfields. I'll try and make the 
second show." "Well if you can't, I'll be happy to do that, too," I said, 
putting down the phone, tingling all over.

The Fugard play took forever, that day, with both of Ben Kingsley's ankles 
stronger than ever. At the interval I went down to the stage, now rearranged 
for Not I. At the back of the stage, centre, was a dais on which was an 
armchair with a head clamp, where Billie Whitelaw would sit.

The Auditor's place was on an alarmingly high diving board, parallel with the 
front of the stage, on to which I clambered nervously and stood up in Mel's 
carefully marked footprints, one foot slightly ahead of the other. I crouched 
down again and the stage manager draped the cradle-material over me. It weighed 
a ton.

I stood on the diving-board and practised gripping the folds of cloth from the 
inside and raising my hands and lowering my head. Simple, really. I was peering 
through an enormous hood which extended well past my face, while the material 
flowed down my body past the diving-board to the floor in a gigantic cloak. I 
struggled somewhat to keep upright against the heavy downward drag. It felt as 
though I were wearing the Victoria Falls.

Billie Whitelaw came on to the stage, covered completely in black 
body-stocking, a black skull cap, blackface make-up – and heavily accentuated 
white lips. "Good luck, Francis," she said. "Good luck, William," I replied, 
quickened by the moment into a misguided attempt at wit.

She climbed on to the dais and sat in the chair, into which she was then 
locked – her head clamped so that only the organs of speech would move, and an 
iron bar pinning her into position. I think her wrists were strapped down as 
well. Clearly, physical discomfort and Beckett went hand in hand.

A pin-spot from the middle of the stage floor lit her mouth. All other lights 
went out, leaving a darkness blacker and more terrifying than anything 
conceived by Edgar Allan Poe. The old woman's voice began its dreadful chatter. 
My Big Chance had arrived.

The next four seconds were truly thrilling. Here I was, making my debut at the 
famous Royal Court, in a new play bySamuel Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett>, standing in a design by the 
distinguished Jocelyn Herbert, and appearing opposite Billie Whitelaw's mouth.

In the fifth second something happened that I'd completely overlooked. A 
deafening whoosh burst the darkness right next to me, with a fierce rush of 
air, as the curtain rose.

Instinctively, I veered to the left and wanted to put out my upstage arm – 
which was in any case pinioned under the cloak – but there was nothing beside 
me in the darkness except more darkness. Nor was there anything sticking up 
from the diving-board under the cloak for me to cling to – an important detail 
overlooked, no doubt, by Jocelyn Herbert. Mel, in any case, would have had 
plenty of practice.

I wanted to faint. Far below me to my right, at the bottom of Mount Everest, I 
could hear sporadic coughing, throat-clearing, whispering and some nervous 
giggling as the audience was confronted by the mouth. I'm going to fall, I 
thought. I'm going to muff it. I'm going to roll off this bloody diving-board 
and crash down on top of the front row, killing myself and maiming several 
innocent throat-clearers. I hate heights. I hate the Royal Court. What will 
Dame Edith say? Please don't let me fall and ruin my debut and Billie 
Whitelaw's performance. Please God. Or please Godot, since this was Samuel 
Beckett territory.

I didn't fall. I gripped the folds of the cloak more tightly. I clenched and 
unclenched my toes. Gradually the blood returned to my head, which was already 
sweltering under the hood. I took long, slow breaths. I grew calm. As long as I 
froze in Mel's footsteps I'd be fine. Then, "What? Who? No! Sheeeee!"

My heart shimmied. Twin niagaras flowed from my armpits. I knew that on the 
fourth "Sheeeee!" l'd have to raise my hands and lower my head and I would 
topple over. It would be death with dishonour. "Actor starts and ends one-night 
career at the Court." I might just make Variety.

I tried to steady myself. By now, in the oppressive blackness, I was not 
altogether sure if I was actually upright or not. I could see no landmark 
against which to measure myself. I was hot. I was dangerously aloft. I was also 
adrift, alone in the enigma of space. Aloft and adrift and alone. Alone and 
adrift and aloft. Adrift and aloft … I was starting to lose my mind. I was 
rigid with fear. Rigidity helped to delay the decision to kneel down on the 
diving-board. I dared not move.

Squinting through the slit of the hood I tried to concentrate on the mouth. 
But the mouth, by an optical illusion, despite the head-clamp, had taken on the 
personality of the bouncing ball in those old singalong movie shorts. I seemed 
to be flying through the air, looping the loop, making me dizzier than ever.

I stared ahead into the blackness. I knew Agony. I could not see. I could not 
speak. I could not really move, though I did manage to flex my front knee with 
extreme caution. I could hear, but whatever I heard only made me more anxious. 
I had no accurate sense of dimension. I was certain of my existence only 
because I knew I felt agonised somewhere on a diving-board. I could as easily 
have been blinded and been buried in sand or stuffed in a dustbin.
 Samuel Beckett, leaving the Royal Court theatre, Sloane Square, London in 
1976. Photograph: Jane Bown for the Guardian 
My only choice was to try not to crumple. In short, I had become a genuine 
Beckett character. He could have written me. I was Existential. I fastened my 
imagination upon the glass of red wine and the ham roll that I knew were 
waiting for me in the dressing-room, if I could somehow survive the next 11-14 
minutes. Like Estragon, the tramp in Waiting for Godot, the image and the 
promise of succour kept me going.

It seemed like 14 hours. This is a long time to stare at an imaginary Still 
Life of Ham Roll on Plate with Red Wine in Glass. "What? Who? No! Sheeeee!" 
cried the mouth. "Ham roll! Ham roll!" I shouted in my head, trying to drown it 
out.

On the fourth "Sheeeee!" I raised the cloak in stiff, clammy hands and lowered 
my aching head under the leaden hood. I held my breath. I was so tense a karate 
chop could have snapped me in half. The curtain slid down. It was over. I had 
survived. Beckett would have approved. I was gallant.

Back in the dressing-room I gulped the wine and wolfed the roll and prayed for 
Mel to come. The second performance began. The Fugard play passed in a drone 
through the Tannoy. No sign of Mel. I began planning precautions for the final 
performance of Not I.

I would take a chair up on to the diving-board with me. At least I'd be able 
to hold the back of it, under the cloak, and feel whether it was fitting 
squarely on the diving-board or not. If not, well, we'd come down in a 
magnificent crash, cradle and all.

Just as the interval was ending, and I was beginning to trudge down to the 
stage, dragging a chair, definitely on the way to the guillotine in a French 
revolution movie, Godot arrived in the shape of Mel.

Thus ended my first and, so far, last appearance at the Royal Court. Nobody 
congratulated me on my performance. Mel would have, if he'd been watching out 
front. He, at least, would have known what to look for.
 