
A new national definition for what constitutes a free-range egg falls short of 
consumer expectations, advocacy groups have warned.

State and commonwealth ministers on Thursday agreed on a legal definition of 
free-range, meaning a standard on animal welfare will be put in place for the 
first time.

In order to be labelled free-range, products need to have a minimum standard 
stocking density of 10,000 chickens per hectare, or one chicken every square 
metre.

Animal rights groups had wanted a density of no more than 1,500 chickens per 
hectare, a limit supported by theAustralian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory>.

Why the egg industry is scrambling to set hens free
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/28/egg-industry-mcdonalds-free-range-hens-dunkin-donuts-general-mills-nestle>
“Allowing a stocking density of 10,000 hens per hectare is out of step with 
consumer expectations and accepted animal welfare standards. Consumers expect 
the ‘free-range’ label to signify high animal welfare standards with genuinely 
free ranging chickens – not an intensive farming operation,” the ACT’s consumer 
affairs minister, Shane Rattenbury, said.

“I wrote to all ministers prior to today’s meeting, asking them to agree to a 
national definition of free range that ensures enhanced animal welfare 
standards, and sets a maximum free range stocking density of 1,500 hens per 
hectare.”

The national standards also legislate that chickens have “meaningful and 
regular” access to an outdoor range, but do not specify the definitions of the 
terms.


“The definition of free-range as hens having ‘meaningful and regular access to 
the outdoors’ could allow producers to call their eggs free-range even if 
chickens stay inside a barn all day,” Tom Godfrey from consumer group, Choice, 
said. “A standard with integrity would require that most hens go outside on 
most ordinary days.”

Egg Farmers Australia said the issue of movement has sparked an “emotional 
debate” in the past.

“This is a commonsense resolution to what has been an unnecessarily 
complicated issue,” spokesman for the group, John Coward, said.

“Free-range hens are free. They are free from cages, free to move about inside 
the barn and importantly they are free to go outside if and when they choose 
to,” he said. “The decision by ministers to define free-range hens as having 
meaningful and regular access to an outdoor range where they are free to roam 
and forage brings common sense to an emotional debate.”

The federal small business minister, Kelly O’Dwyer, said the new standards 
created a “sensible” definition of free range.


“It means that the chook is able to get out of the barn, it’s able to scratch 
around in the pasture and it’s able to range, and being not impeded in that 
range is exactly what we mean by free-range eggs,” she told reporters. “At the 
moment there is a lot of confusion that forcing chooks out into the range on 
most days in all sorts of weather conditions wasn’t necessarily going to be in 
the best interests of the chooks.”

Free-range definition should not focus on hen numbers, says egg producer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/12/free-range-definition-should-not-focus-on-hen-numbers-says-egg-producer>
Agriculture groups welcomed the new standard.

“The new definition is fundamentally about doing the right thing by consumers 
to ensure they can make informed decisions about what eggs they wish to buy 
based on known factors,” the managing director of the Australian Egg 
Corporation Limited, James Kellaway, said.

Coward said the national standards gave both consumers and the egg sector 
certainty.

A number of egg producers had been found guilty of contravening competition 
laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/23/pirovic-egg-company-fined-300000-for-misleading-free-range-claims>
 by falsely labelling their products “free range”.
 