
After another quick start to the diminution of British interest – Elena 
Baltacha <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/elena-baltacha> lasted a tick over 
an hour against Sam Stosur in the first result of the 2012 French Open – 
attention switched later to the embarrassment of others, and Andy Roddick was a 
scowling loser at the end of day one.

He went out in four sets to the Wimbledon marathon man, Nicolas Mahut, who put 
13 aces past the American to the delight of Parisians crammed into Court 
Suzanne Lenglen on a warm and otherwise uneventful start to the tournament.

Consigned to the second interview room rather than the main stage, he was more 
combative than on court, taking on inquisitors who wanted to know if his injury 
woes or just natural decline were bringing the former slam winner to grief in 
the fading days of his fine career.

Pausing as he dragged his baseball cap down to shade his blazing eyes from the 
camera lights, he replied: "I'm fine. I lost a match to someone who played 
better than me. I'm not going to discuss injuries, no matter how many ways you 
ask the question. My [expectations] probably were not great. I moved 
horrendously and my first step on this stuff was just really bad."

Roddick will no doubt find the grass of Wimbledon more accommodating - he will 
wait for Queen's rather than mark time at Nottingham - but, after a run of 
ordinary form, his thoughts might turn increasingly towards about his budding 
career as a radio DJ rather than revisiting former glories.

Banana skins lurk across the draw in big tournaments and Tatsuma Ito could be 
one. He once was a skinhead but now sports a rich flop of black hair and a 
pretty mean defensive game from the back of the court. On Tuesday he hopes to 
give Andy Murray a fright with skills inspired by his boyhood hero, Andre 
Agassi, although the world No4 would have to be seriously off his game to 
tumble out against an opponent 64 places adrift of him in the rankings.

They have met twice – in doubles in Japan last year, and on the practice court 
– and Ito will know Murray's game better than vice-versa, given the Scot's 
profile. Ito's biggest win was also his most recent – over the 26th-ranked 
Radek Stepanek in Düsseldorf, after dispatching the rising American Ryan 
Harrison in the first round, so he is in form, and fit.

But how fit is Murray? He bridled at the weekend when pushed about suspicions 
that his back "niggle" was anything more than that, and he fairly made the 
point that most players are carrying some sort of physical inconvenience, from 
Rafael Nadal's knees to Novak Djokovic's back. Even the patron saint of 
perfection, Roger Federer, has complained recently of back trouble. It would be 
odd if they did not suffer for their art.

On Monday, Djokovic plays the Italian Potito Starace on Court Philippe 
Chatrier and Federer meets the German Tobias Kamki on Court Suzanne Lenglen, as 
the tournament hits another gear.

Baltacha pushed Stosur in the first set before lunch in front of a small crowd 
on Chatrier yesterday, clawing her way back to 5-4, then was reduced to the 
role of spectator as the Australian swept past her to love in the second.

"If I played really well, maybe she had a bit of an off-day, then potentially 
I would have had a chance," Baltacha said. "She went up a couple of levels and 
was just too good in the second set. I was absolutely ready to go. I didn't 
mind that I was scheduled first on."

Out on Court 7 yesterday, Switzerland's eternally second best player, 
Stanislas Wawrinka, seeded 18th, took five uneven sets to dismiss the Italian 
Flavio Cipolla, who didn't really recover form a collision with a line judge in 
the fourth set.

Laura Robson, gifted a place after the late withdrawal through injury of the 
Spaniard Silvia Soler-Espinosa, is first up on Court Six on Monday against her 
compatriot Anabel Medina Garrigues, and has her work cut out against the 29th 
seed. Heather Watson and Anne Keothavong play tomorrow, all of them hoping 
theirs is not a shopping holiday in Paris.
 