
Senegalese novelist and intellectual Boubacar Boris Diop 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boubacar_Boris_Diop> offers an incisive and 
complex critique of the French intervention in Mali in this interview first 
published inthe Senegalese newspaper Le Pays au Quotidien, 
<http://www.lesenegalais.net/index.php/actualites/items/mali-le-regard-de-boubacar-boris-diop.html>
 and translated into English byBhakti Shringarpure. 
<http://www.warscapes.com/about>

Souleymane Ndiaye: Can the situation in northern Mali be viewed as French 
neo-colonialism inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in action?

Boubacar Boris Diop: Yes and no. With Mali, France is certainly in its comfort 
zone and, with the exception of Nigeria, the countries involved on the ground 
are part of its former colonial empire. In the end, though, it should be viewed 
through the logic of global war. The model is really based on the US invasion 
of Iraq. In addition, the French interventions in Africa have always happened 
somewhat casually, almost without thinking, while this is one marked by 
councils of war at Elysée Palace and has been designed as a big media 
spectacle. French politicians arewatching the polls 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2013/0131/Mali-war-pulls-France-s-Hollande-out-of-polling-slump-video>
, and the ministers of defence and foreign affairs have never been this 
forthcoming.

SN: How do you explain this change in attitude?

BBD: A few days after the fighting started, all the French weeklies ran 
similar headlines:"Hollande, the War Chief." 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/international/2013/02/02/01003-20130202DIMFIG00387-la-viste-du-chef-de-guerre-hollande-au-mali.php>
 Northern Mali offered the perfect and rather easy opportunity for a president 
deemed dull and soft to re-create his image as a leader willing and able to 
preserve France's rank among the countries in the world. The contrast is 
striking given the less-than-heroic haste with which Pariswithdrew soldiers 
from Afghanistan 
<http://www.euronews.com/2012/06/09/hollande-confirms-early-withdrawal-after-taliban-kill-french-troops/>
 after the deadly Taliban attack.

SN: But it cannot just be Hollande's image behind this costly intervention?

BBD: That's true, but he couldn't pass up the opportunity. The stated purpose 
of this war is to help Mali recover its territorial integrity, but if Konna had 
not been captured by the Islamists, I expect nothing would have happened. It is 
with the fall of Konna that Paris, which never loses sight of theFrench hostages
 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20130201-france-mali-hostages-al-qaeda-threat-execution-human-shield>
 still held in the region and Areva's uranium deposits, grasped that its 
economic interests and regional standing were seriously at risk. Other actors 
are now involved. The war is being closely followed by countries like Algeria, 
Mauritania and Nigeria, not to mention other western powers and Qatar, the Gulf 
monarchy that is playing the same strange game here as it is in Syria. Also, 
since the attack in In Amenas [the gas field in Algeria], the Americans and 
English have been compelled to be more involved. And Japan, an important 
economic partner of Mali's, lost 10 of its citizens in the hostage crisis and 
made a contribution 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/mali/japan-give-120m-stabilise-sahel-region> of 
$120 million in support of Misma [International Mission in Support of Mali] at 
the donors' conference recently organised by the African Union in Addis Ababa.

SN: Do you agree with the ambassador of France to Senegal when he says that if 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> had not intervened, no one 
else would have done anything?

BBD: We can certainly grant him that, and it is, in fact, a stroke of genius 
on the part of Paris that France can be depicted as an enemy of the "villains". 
I use this word deliberately because international politics often reminds me of 
a Hollywood movie in which the whole plot depends on us being conditioned to be 
on the side of the good guys. When you learn that narco-terrorists occupy 
two-thirds of Mali, and that they destroy mosques and the tombs of saints, set 
fire to the Ahmed Baba Library and cut off people's hands, your first impulse 
is to approve of those trying to help innocents out of harm's way. And as we 
listen to the various positions being spouted now regarding Mali, there comes a 
realisation that we somehow have an inability to ponder the fact that this is 
France's "nth" intervention in Africa. The other night on 2STV, I saw that 
Senegalese philosopher Massaër Diallo had bluntly approved of military action, 
followed two days later by Senegalese diplomat and intellectual Cheikh Tidiane 
Gadio andEgyptian thinker Samir Amin 
<http://newsclick.in/international/mali-analysis-samir-amin>. Isn't it 
disturbing? And the thing is that these three scholars are always above 
suspicion when it comes to analysing the criminal excesses of France's colonial 
and neo-colonial ventures in Africa.

SN: Does this mean that you agree with them?

BBD: Oh, no! Definitely not. I understand, and do not doubt, their sincerity, 
but I do not share their views. The danger, in my humble opinion, is to analyse 
the war as an isolated event. Everyone connects it to the aggression against 
Libya, but not with as much emphasis as this merits. It is not enough to say 
that the aggression against Libya is still destabilising the Sahel and the rest 
of west Africa. This must be placed, along with the Arab Spring, at the heart 
of the debate on northern Mali. We can perhaps even go further and ask whether 
we should not have raised our voices whenFrench tanks toppled the palace gates 
of Laurent Gbagbo 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/fresh-clashes-erupt-in-ivory-coast-after-un-french-attacks-119588724/137817.html>
 in Ivory Coast. It was possible, without necessarily supporting Laurent 
Gbagbo, to understand pretty well that Paris had crossed a red line. But we 
have been brainwashed a bit too well when it comes to the injection of terms 
like "democracy" and invented concepts like "good governance" – who's ever 
heard of "good governance" in Belgium? We have lost all sense of nuance, 
especially the ability to situate specific political events within a global 
logic.

SN: In this case, what specific criticism could you formulate against France? 

BBD: Here, we need to look at the sequence of events. After Muammar Qaddafi 
was killed, under appalling circumstances, the French government believed the 
time had come to entrust the outsourcing of war against AQIM [al-Qaida in the 
Maghreb] and MUJAO [Movement for Unity and Jihad in west Africa] to the Tuareg 
rebellion. As Ibrahima Sene recently pointed out in his response to Samir Amin, 
Paris and Washington then decided to help the Tuareg in Libya return, heavily 
armed, toMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> – but, more 
interestingly, not to Niger, where they did not want to take any risk because 
of Areva. The Tuareg were delighted to finally realise their dream of 
independence through the new state of Azawad, an ally of the west.

Some French media were then asked to "sell" the project of the "blue men of 
the desert" who were willing and ready to go to war against Mali. Just take a 
look in the archives of France 24 and RFI to see how the MNLA [National 
Movement for the Liberation of Azawad], in particular, has been created from 
scratch by Nicholas Sarkozy's services. These strategists knew very well that 
this would lead to the collapse of the Malian government and the division of 
its territory. But this did not make them hesitate for a second. French 
politician Alain Juppé was allowed to minimise theTuareg's slaughter of about a 
hundred or so Malian soldiers and officers 
<http://www.genocidewatch.org/mali.html> on January 24, 2012, at Aguelhok, and 
suggest the possibility of a sovereign state of Azawad in the north. 
Ultimately, the MNLA, which could not live up to the expectations of its 
sponsors against the jihadists, has virtually scuttled, and this is also 
probably a first in the history of liberation movements. In this case, France 
clearly occupies the role of a pyromaniac firefighter. Everything suggests that 
the French will defeat the jihadists, but this victory will cost the Malians 
their government and their honour.

SN: What do you mean?

BBD: I just want to say that this is the end of independence for Mali for a 
long time, and for its relative territorial homogeneity. It would be naive to 
imagine that, after having worked so hard to liberate the north, France will 
hand over the keys of the country to Dioncounda Traore and to the Malians and 
be satisfied with effusive farewells. No, the world does not work that way. 
France has put itself in a good position in the race for the prodigious natural 
resources of the Sahara, and it would be hard to imagine that the French will 
just drop the Tuareg rebellion, which has always been their trump card. There 
is an episode in this war that has gone unnoticed, yet deserves some 
consideration: the capture of Kidal. We initially conceded that Kidal was 
"captured" by the MNLA, which no longer has any military presence, and a few 
days later, on January 29th, French troops entered the town alone, not allowing 
Malian forces to accompany them. Iyad Ag Ghali, head of Ansar Dine, discredited 
by his affiliation with AQIM and MUJAO, is already almost out of the game and 
his "moderate" rival, Alghabasse Ag Intalla, head of MIA (Islamic Movement of 
Azawd) is in the best position to find common ground with Paris. As a matter of 
fact, after this military debacle, the Tuareg separatists are going to have 
political control over the north, something they have never had before. It's a 
great paradox, but it is in the interest of the west that Mali has no hold over 
the northern part of it's country. Traoré is already being pressured to 
negotiate with the moderate Tuareg backed by Paris, and it is unlikely that we 
are going to see a president as weakened as Dioncounda trying to resist 
Hollande. Whether we like it or not, the Arab Spring is completely detaching 
north Africa from the rest of the continent, and in some respects, the "new 
border" is northern Mali. This is a clear and coherent strategy that the west 
is in the process of implementing.

SN: What did you think when you saw young Malians waving French flags?

BBD: Some say it has been fabricated. I don't agree. I think these pictures 
reveal the immense relief that the Malians feel. They are particularly 
disturbing images, and this is why should have the guts to confront them. The 
real question is not so much what we, as African intellectuals and politicians, 
should think of the French. More importantly, the question is how is it that 
our people are left in such a state of abandonment? The question that these 
images really raise for us is how is it that the French troops who occupied 
Mali for centuries as barbaric colonisers have come back 50 years later to be 
greeted as liberators? Does this not leave us seriously perplexed? What is 
Malian independence really worth? What is to be done with the heritage of 
Modibo Keita? The question ultimately for all of us, and probably even more 
strongly for former French colonies in sub-Saharan Africa, is that of national 
sovereignty. These historical reversals are hard to swallow, and we all have a 
responsibility. But sometimes I feel that our historians do not put their 
intimate knowledge of the past in the service of understanding the issues of 
the present. Many of them have their noses in their grindstone, while others 
repeat the same phrases for decades without taking into the account the many 
transformations that shape this history.

SN: What are other images that have struck you in this war?

BBD: One in particular is of Malian kids on the side of the road looking at 
the passing Toubab military. I always wonder what must go through the child's 
head that sees this. It is rare to see a population that is so astounded by 
what is happening at home, and yet not understanding at all that it is indeed 
their own war. Sometimes you have the feeling that they don't know what is 
right under their noses, and that it's crazy; is it even reality, or is it like 
something on TV?

SN: Despite everything, doesn't Operation Serval restore France's prestige in 
Africa?

BBD: Maybe, but that would surprise me. The outpouring of affection towards 
French soldiers is from the heart, but it is temporary. The real aims of the 
war will become clearer for Malians, and time will not be on the French's side. 
Benign foreign forces don't exist anywhere. The French media can delude 
themselves, but for them, I would say that the bride is still too beautiful! 
And then, you know, as Operation Serval is taking place, the Parisian press is 
simultaneously disclosing more and more precise evidence of the active French 
role in theattack of  
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/6/newsid_2472000/2472195.stm>
6 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/6/newsid_2472000/2472195.stm>
th April 1994 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/6/newsid_2472000/2472195.stm>
 in Kigali, Rwanda, where the plane carrying Rwandan president Juvenal 
Habyarimana was shot down by missiles as it was about to land to Kigali. This, 
as you know, triggered the genocide of Tutsis in Rwanda. The strong involvement 
of France in the last genocide of the 20th century is an indelible stain on its 
honor, and the momentary cheering in Gao and Timbuktu cannot deflect from this.

SN: What lessons can we learn from this conflict in Mali? 

BBD: Firstly, it must be extremely hard these days to be in the Malian 
military. Here is a national army fighting in its own country, and its 
soldiers' deaths do not even count, unlike that of theFrench helicopter pilot, 
Damien Boiteux 
<http://www.firstpost.com/topic/place/mali-french-special-forces-pilot-damien-boiteux-killed-in-mali-at-video-VoIM1q_-CfA-3099-1.html>
, who was shot on the first day of fighting. All these humiliations will show 
Mali that a certain democratic comedy, aimed at pleasing foreign backers, is 
meaningless. Mali is a case study, cited everywhere as an example. Very little 
is needed for the country to collapse. We already see the mechanisms of 
exclusion in the works, and these create more and more murderers: All Tuaregs 
and Arabs will come to be seen as accomplices of jihadists or of the Tuareg 
separatist movement. Already aware of this danger, intellectuals like Aminata 
Dramane Traoré of Mali have repeatedly sounded the alarm in recent months, but 
nobody wants to listen. Relations between the different communities in Mali 
have always been fragile, and the threat of racial hostilities has never been 
as grave. This is the time to overcome old grudges. Shortly after the carnage 
at Aguelhok, I had the opportunity to speak in a school in Bamako. There were 
young Tuareg in the audience, and they were clearly afraid of what might happen 
someday. Nothing, indeed, should happen to them. They do not have to pay for 
the crimes of a few ambitious politicians who are basically just lackeys of the 
French.

SN: It's being said that the slow reaction of Africans to the problem created 
an opening for France and even legitimised its actions. How can we prevent this 
from happening again?

BBD: Yes, the procrastination of the African states has been rightly 
criticised, but you have to understand that it is ultimately suicidal for them 
to engage in a complex war with their bare hands. Yet this is precisely the 
criticism we can dole out to our countries: A failure to have the means to 
defends ourselves, collectively or individually. And here we come back to what 
Cheikh Anta Diop has always said: "Security precedes development, and political 
integration comes before economic integration." During his life, Cheikh Anta 
Diop stressed the need for a strong continental army. Its creation is obviously 
not a simple matter, but seeing all west African soldiers once again become 
"Senegalese riflemen", one does feel ashamed, and we can say that on this issue 
that Cheikh Anta Diop was right. I think it is not too late to ponder his words.

Boubacar Boris Diop (born 1946 in Dakar) is an award-winning Senegalese 
novelist, journalist and screenwriter. Diop's career to date includes six 
novels in French and one in Wolof, screenplays and plays, several essays and an 
opera, Leena. His best known work, Murambi: The Book of Bones, is the fictional 
account of a notorious massacre during the Rwandan genocide of 1994. He is also 
the founder of Sol, an independent newspaper in Senegal
 