
The French National Assembly has approved a plan to outlaw abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> information websites that 
masquerade as neutral, official services with freephone helpline numbers but 
promote anti-abortion propaganda and pressure women not to terminate 
pregnancies.


The Socialist government’s proposal seeks to criminalise any websites that 
deliberately mislead, intimidate or “exert psychological or moral pressure” on 
a woman seeking information about terminating a pregnancy, with punishment of 
up to two years in prison and a €30,000 fine.

It will now need to pass through the French senate.

The issue has sparked a row in recent days, with a Catholic archbishop writing 
toFrançois Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>, the 
president, warning of a threat to freedom of expression. MPs debating the bill 
heckled each other and complained of vicious insults in committee hearings.


France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> legalised abortion more than 
40 years ago and already has a law that makes it a criminal offence to intimate 
or pressure a woman in order to stop her terminating a pregnancy. This law was 
initially aimed at anti-abortion protesters in the 1980s who tried to 
physically obstruct women from accessing clinics or advice centres, and was 
later extended to anyone exerting moral or psychological pressure on women.

The government now wants to extend the law further to include websites, 
claiming that the anti-abortion battle that used to take place outside clinics 
has now moved online.

A first attempt to pass the new law was blocked by the senate earlier this 
year.

On Thursday the Socialist women’s minister, Laurence Rossignol, told 
parliament that the government was not seeking to clamp down on anti-abortion 
opinion in general, but on sites that she said deliberately hid their true 
nature and tried to manipulate women with an “insidious” pressure.

“Everyone is free to affirm their hostility to abortion online or anywhere 
else, but on condition of doing it in all honesty, because freedom of 
expression can’t be confused with manipulating people,” she told MPs. “Thirty 
years ago, campaigners chained themselves to the gates of family planning 
clinics or operating tables to stop women accessing terminations. Today the 
next generation continues this battle online.”

She said anti-abortion groups “now act in a masked way, hidden behind 
platforms that appear neutral and objective and which copy and compete with 
official government information sites”, thus “deliberately seeking to trick 
women”.

She said these sites often had helplines run by “anti-choice activists with no 
training who want to make women feel guilty and discourage them from seeking an 
abortion.”

Rightwing opposition MPs firmly opposed the bill. Dominique Tian, a Republican 
MP, said there was a “very heavy atmosphere in parliament” and accused the 
government of “attacking freedom of expression”.

He said the government’s proposals were “dangerous for democracy and probably 
anti-constitutional”, and his party would do all it could to block them.

Last week Georges Pontier, the archbishop of Marseille and head of the French 
bishops’ conference, warned Hollande that the plans posed a threat to freedom 
of expression and “freedom of conscience”, and represented “a very serious 
attack on the principles of democracy”. Another bishop said the government was 
trying to act as “thought police”.

The issue of abortion also arose during the right’s primary race to chose its 
presidential candidate.François Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
, who on Sunday won the Republican party’s nomination and is now favourite to 
win the presidency next year, had said earlier this year that because of his 
personal Christian faith he could not “approve abortion”. During his nomination 
campaign, however, he stressed he would never make any changes to French 
abortion law.
 