
An avalanche in the French Alps has killed five members of the French Foreign 
Legion and injured six others.

They were part of a unit of 51 soldiers from the 2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment 
taking part in an all-day training exercise in an off-piste area near 
Valfréjus, close to the Italian border.

The regiment specialises in mountain warfare and all members have military 
skiing qualifications. French media reports said the unit was due to be sent on 
a military operation.


Jean-Claude Raffin, the mayor of Modane, the nearest town, said the 
legionnaires set out at 9am on an all-day skiing session, and the avalanche 
struck at 1.50pm as they approached the Petit Argentier peak. They were skiing 
at an altitude between 2,350m and 2,600m (7,700–8,500ft).


Four of the seriously injured were treated at the scene. Two others were 
reported to have suffered severe hypothermia and were flown by helicopter to 
hospital.


Helicopters and sniffer dogs were scouring the snow for other survivors. The 
nationalities of the victims have not been released.


France’s prime minister, Manuel Valls, tweeted: “Our country is in mourning 
after the death of five of our legionnaires in the Alps. Our thoughts go to the 
injured, to the families, to their brothers in arms.”

The tragedy came less than a week after two school pupils and a Ukrainian skier
were killed in an avalanche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/schoolchildren-caught-up-in-avalanche-in-french-alps>
 in the French Alps while skiing on a black run that had been closed because of 
the avalanche risk.

A total of 12 skiers have been killed by sudden snowslides in the Alps since 
the start of the year. The avalanche risk in the region has been high in recent 
days following heavy snowfall and strong winds. The combination has led to 
unstable snow formations high in the peaks that threaten to break off. The 
warning level is currently at three out of a possible five.


The defence minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, was heading to the scene of the 
tragedy. The local court has opened an investigation into the causes of the 
accident.

In February 2012, five members of the same legionnaire regiment were caught up 
in an avalanche in which one soldier died.
 