
A revolution you’re not supposed to notice starts on Sunday. The little i, 
orphan print child of the etherealIndy, sets out alone under a new owner, the 
Johnston Press, and with a new survival challenge: not to prop up an ailing 
national paper, but to give new focus and impetus to one of Britain’s biggest 
local paper groups, some 220 titles strong. Instead of 17 journalists refettling
Indy news and views into a buzzing format, there’ll be a 50-strong staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/mar/31/i-reveals-its-editorial-line-up-ahead-of-johnston-press-launch>
 producing this terse, successful tabloid. Same offices: theDaily Mail atrium. 
Same editor: Oly Duff. Very different mission.

It seemed pretty odd, a couple of months ago, to find Ashley Highfield, the JP 
CEO, spending almost £25m to take over thei. Highfield’s gritty role, year 
after year, has beengrinding down the mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/19/johnston-press-chief-local-newspaper-closures-blown-out-of-proportion>
 of Johnston’s accumulated debt. 2015 was that same old story: operating costs 
slashed another £13.6m, pension deficit chiselled from £67m to £27m, net debt 
down from £194.4m to £179.4m million, interest on servicing that debt cut from 
£29m to £19.1m – and pre-tax profits up 22.6% to £31.5m. A long, tough march. 
Where’s the sense in grappling with Evgeny Lebedev’sbereft national baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/evgeny-lebedev-newspaper-industry-in-denial-about-print-titles>
 as well?

'Newsprint: it ain't over yet' - debate on the future of newspapers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/mar/09/newsprint-it-aint-over-yet-debate-on-the-future-of-newspapers>
But there is, in fact, a reasonable case for a reasonable gamble. The i, with 
a circulation of around 270,000 copies a day, some 200,000 of them paid for at 
40p a time, provides a cash stream that flows continually. It gives Johnston a 
national salience so that ad agencies take notice. It is also a fit with other 
JP dailies – say theScotsman and the Yorkshire Post – so that one-stop ad 
buying packages have ABC1 appeal. Persuading big national advertisers to try 
local wares is one of the regional press’s eternal disappointments: but 
partnerships like this, with an added digital twist, give it that chance again.

Will it work? There are no easy bets here. If the eventual future is digital, 
then the printi is a detour along that path. But how long is “eventual”? The 
Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnstonpress> grew its 
digital audience by more than 40% to 22.6 million monthly users at the end of 
2015. Highfield, an ex-BBC digital chief, is catching up for lost time fast. 
Online ad revenues – at £30.6m – bounced upwards by 12.4%. Which is all fine 
and dandy – except that digital still accounts for only 20% of the cash the 
group needs to flow in. Print ads and print subscriptions remain its bread and 
quite a lot of its butter. Highfield may talk of pushing digital to 40% over 
the nextthree or four years, but he can’t presently do away with dead forests, 
pounding print rooms and vans carting his wares to newsagents. That magic word 
“transition” is a series of leaps in the dark, not an easy hop and skip. Which 
is where thei comes in.

Here’s a paper with a smart, young, upmarket audience. It is tolerably well 
established, seemingly at least, as a pocketIndy: but the smartness and youth 
of this audience doesn’t extend to making theIndependent connection. Some 90% 
of those surveyed didn’t twig that this was part of Lebedev’s mini-empire. And 
theJohnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> has tricks 
of its own it can bring to bear – a range of weekly titles in Ulster, for 
instance, that can help establish thei in Northern Ireland, an army of sales 
reps who can get just the right number of copies in just the right shops, an 
editorial resource that, 220 times over, can chip in to fill news gaps.

Johnston Press’s bet is about the potency of print on paper

Of course, there are also doubts and sorrows to reckon with. That’s part of 
taking a gamble. (You wouldn’t bet onTrinity Mirror’s New Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/28/new-day-editor-alison-phillips-we-threw-out-all-previous-thinking>
 making the grade on current performance.) Fifty journalists may find 
themselves terribly stretched when they have to originate so much of their own 
material – but load on too many extra staff and the mathematics of 
profitability begin to fail.

The Johnston Press hasn’t made much of a fist of the Scotsman in its old 
Edinburgh home: too emaciated, too bedraggled, too much a provincial rather 
than national product. Thei will have to develop views of its own, to tilt at 
windmills and tip over tables. It will need the force and conviction of true 
independence – and the ability to investigate and break stories of its own, the 
best advertisement any newspaper can have.

There is, moreover, a bit of a hiatus where digital linkage ought to be. The 
Independent, in its digital-only state, charges app cash to read Cockburn, 
Fisk, Dent and sundry stars of the bygone print edition. Thei, as part of its 
own independence now, has those stars under print contract. It can put their 
columns and articles on the printed page. But the newi website won’t carry 
those pieces. It will be a fast-moving résumé of the paper’s own-staff 
coverage. Finding Fisk means going back to his oldIndependent haunt.

That’s more confusion than transition. No normal progression – and no broad 
highway for development and change as the months tick by. But perhaps this 
merely delineates the basis of thei challenge more clearly. Is a relatively 
cheap, essentially intelligent quick read part of the next few years? Can it 
carry on hitting the spot? At root, Johnston Press’s bet is about the potency 
of print on paper, with 270,000 or so existing examples to buttress the case – 
which is, in turn, really a test case for print, for local talent, for national 
salience, and for what comes next.

• The good old days? Alex Brummer, once a brilliant Guardian man, now 
distinguished City Editor of theMail, came to the funeral of my old colleague 
and friend, Ian Wright – and remembered the distant, penny-crunched time in 
1979 whenGuardian managing editor Wright dispatched young Alex, plus wife and 
baby, to his first Washington posting. Yes, they had to go standby. And no, 
there wasn’t another budgetary way. Needs must when the pot runs dry.
 