
Mary Berry’s Absolute Favourites
8pm, BBC2


Sharp of jacket and never soggy of bottom, M-Bez proves she’s not just a cake 
machine with this exploration of some of her favourite recipes. Tonight, her 
inspiration comes from Guildford farmers’ market, where her haul includes 
sunblush tomatoes, olives and grilled artichokes, which all go into her salad 
tapas. There’s also asparagus soup, a sausage supper and a pavlova rich in red 
fruits.Hannah Verdier

Marvel’s Agents of SHIELD
8pm, Channel 4


It’s crisis point for the agents of SHIELD, as war is blurring lines between 
former friends and future foes. The Inhumans attack Agent Coulson and his team, 
with battle lines being redrawn and sacrifices being made. Jiaying absorbs a 
SHIELD agent’s life in order to heal her own wounds. While she’s intent on 
releasing the Terrigen crystals, Calvin has to stop the woman he loves 
succeeding in her mission.Ben Arnold

Kate Humble: Living With Nomads
9pm, BBC2


There are 143 unsettled Raute people left in Nepal – and they like it that 
way. But can the government convince them to renounce their lifestyle by 
flinging enough rupees at them? In the first of a new series exploring the 
nomadic way of life, Kate Humble joins the desperately poor, but fiercely proud 
and “regal” Raute (who, rather less romantically, initially see her as “a human 
ATM”). An honourable endeavour overall, that avoids cynicism and shallowness.
Ali Catterall

Big Brother: Timebomb – Live Eviction
9pm, Channel 5


It’s week four and Emma Willis hosts the eviction show, greeting one of the 
remaining 12 contestants with a montage of memories and meltdowns. This 16th 
series has showcased an eclectic bunch, from rapper Christian – voted most 
inconsiderate for stealing a pancake – to straight-talking actor Eileen and 
fiery Harriet. Their 15 minutes might be slightly extended in this series, too, 
with a time-themed spin that could see evictees allowed back into the game.
Hannah J Davies

The Graham Norton Show
10.35pm, BBC1


This week, Hollywood star Samuel L Jackson promotes action-adventure movie Big 
Game, which finds him starring as the US president, a man stranded in the 
Finnish wilderness after terrorists target Air Force One. Joining him will be 
actor and writer Stephen Merchant, and US standup Amy Schumer. Power trio Muse 
provide the music. Jonathan Wright

The Lions of Sabi Sand: Brothers in Blood
9pm, Discovery

Filmed over 16 years, this remarkable story of six notorious South African 
male lions (“to some extent, the ultimate lions,” says big cat expert Dr Amy 
Dickman), including Scar, Kinky Tail and Mr T, unfolds like some mythic opera. 
En route, giraffes are brought down (a high-risk but high-reward strategy), 
territory is staked out and power-hungry coalitions are formed. It’s thrilling 
stuff, yet be very warned: Mr T’s demise, at the hands of four rivals, is 
graphic, harrowing and almost unbearably poignant.Ali Catterall

Longmire
9pm, 5USA


When Longmire discovers the body of a long-missing millionaire, it awakens a 
convoluted case so cold it’s practically got freezer-burn. Speaking of 
freezers, Henry finds himself unable to handle Hector’s demise, using that very 
electrical appliance in an unexpected manner to jumpstart his own 
investigation. His search soon drags him on to a collision course with his 
scheming ex, Deena. All the while, Walt finds himself shoved unexpectedly into 
the spotlight, as the case surrounding that missing millionaire begins to 
defrost.Mark Jones

Today’s best live sport


French Open Tennis The latest action from Roland Garros in Paris. 11.30am, ITV4

Test Cricket: West Indies v Australia The third day’s play in Dominica. 
2.55pm, Sky Sports 3

Toulon Tournament Football: China v England All the action from the closing 
Group B contest at the Stade Léo Lagrange. 6pm, BT Sport 1

T20 Blast Cricket: Yorkshire Vikings v Lancashire Lightning The cricketing war 
of the roses at Headingley. 6pm, Sky Sports 2
 