
There is an ingeniousness to the way Frieze adopts its elaborate disguises. 
This year, perhaps the two most ardently discussed booths at the twin art fairs 
in Regent’s Park – Frieze, for contemporary work, and Frieze Masters, for 
antiquities, old masters and 20th century art – seem to have very little 
pretension to selling anything at all.

The stand that artist Mark Wallinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mark-wallinger> has curated for 
Hauser & Wirth at Frieze is a reimagining of Sigmund Freud’s study; Helly 
Nahmad’s stand in Frieze Masters is a theatrically intricate summoning-up of a 
Parisian collector’s apartment in 1968.

Nahmad, with co-conspirators including Sir Norman Rosenthal, the former 
exhibitions secretary of the Royal Academy of Arts in London, has fantasised in 
hectic detail the life of one Corrado N, who works at the Bourse de Paris by 
day, listens to Stockhausen and Berio by night, and fills his apartment with 
art – a Giacometti by the bed; Ernst and Schwitters and Dubuffet dotted around 
the walls, with a Morandi and a Fontana nodding to his Italian origins.

The kitchen sink is filled with washing up. A cheap newspaper on a chair tells 
us that there is a “scandale enorme au coeur de l’Angleterre” and every surface 
is stacked high with art magazines, every wall covered with postcards and 
photographs and political posters apparently ripped off the streets.

By the last we can date our visit to summer 1968, in the wake of the évenéments
.Brigitte Bardot <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brigitte-bardot> is on the 
telly. Everything is visible, nothing is tidied away – a shirt is crumpled on 
the bed; stamps steamed off envelopes sit on a ledge awaiting some unknown 
purpose. Our collector is an obsessive. He’s also invisible, ready to be 
invented in the mind of the viewer.

As a lowkey sales pitch, it’s rather smart – can’t you imagine just slipping 
out of your raincoat, throwing yourself into an armchair and lighting a 
Gauloise as you contemplate your Miros? Booths at art fairs are usually all 
about the artists – this one is a piece of high flattery to the idea of the 
collector.

At the other end of Regent’s Park, a real man is dozing in a chair, this time 
in the stand that Wallinger has curated, with great elan, for Hauser & Wirth.

The sleeper is a security guard – a kind of personage with which both fairs 
are liberally provided, hardly surprisingly given that there’s a £30m Rembrandt 
for sale at Masters.

Some of Frieze’s more expensively dressed visitors give little moues of 
disapproval, as if they too employ security officers, and dislike the idea of 
any fellow thus employed taking 40 winks on the job. It is in fact Christoph 
Büchel’s work, Sleeping Guard. For Wallinger, here, he is not just sleeping but 
dreaming. If Nahmad was delving into memory and fantasy, Wallinger plunges us 
into the unconscious. I begin to imagine that the artworks around me in the 
stand – which is painted in red and green, its floors stained dark and covered 
with oriental rugs – are extrusions of the guard’s dreamscape.

On a couch, a naked female figure, a bronze by Bourgeois, arches her back. 
There are clownish, bulbous chairs by Phyllida Barlow, made from timber, 
plaster, polyurethane foam and scrim.

Roman Signer’s Hocker mit Lampe, a red lightbulb on a wooden stool, burns 
reassuringly on. The stand is, as far as is possible for an array of intensely 
valuable art laid out at an art fair, homely. Or at least, the kind of offkey, 
disconcerting kind of homely we can experience in dreams.

There’s a hint of anxiety in the air, though, a touch of the post-apocalyptics 
about the place. At Green Tea Gallery they are handing out soup – made with 
vegetables grown inFukushima <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima>
. I pass.

Dan Gunn’s stand is a nuclear fallout shelter – at least as imagined by New 
York artist Michael Smith, as “Mike”, the naive, bumbling character he invented 
for his performances.

Mike’s Government Approved Home Fallout Shelter/Snackbar was first seen in 
Manhattan in 1983 – “a real backroom of the psyche”, the Village Voice noted at 
the time. It is a bar, rather pleasant as it goes, all cluttered up with the 
kind of basement lumber a suburban American might have accumulated in the early 
1980s – a copy of John F Kennedy’s memorial LP, a Star Wars 200-piece jigsaw.

Domestic in a quieter way are João Modé’s used dishcloths and handkerchiefs 
folded and stitched so that their stripes and edgings form abstracted geometric 
patterns, shown by A Gentil Carioca from Rio Janeiro.

It seems to me to be about the least showy art at either of the fairs, but 
oddly touching. (It was not, however, the least expensive – that was a Hogarth 
bookplate at Masters, which Andrew Edmunds sold as the fair opened for £350.)

Even if Jean Tinguely’s hilarious, humanoid machines made from springs and 
chains and hair and rubber tubing were deemed too precious to be plugged in at 
Masters (and thus made to whir and bounce) – leaving them rather sad and 
lifeless – I was mesmerised by Adam Linder’s dance piece with the gallery 
Silberkuppe, one of a number of performance works at Frieze this year.

He and a fellow dancer reacted to texts written on the spot by art writer 
Jonathan P Watts, sliding and gliding across their bare stand with the grace 
you might expect from (in Linder’s case) a man who used to dance with the Royal 
Ballet and Michael Clark.

Humanity – despite the throng – sometimes seems absent (or at least dozing) at 
Frieze. Here it was in all its breathing, sweating, blood-coursing glory.
 