
Once upon a time, Christopher Robin could just about get his chin on to the 
top rail of the wooden bridge, almost as broad as a road. Pooh could get his 
chin on the bottom rail, but it was more fun to lie down and watch the river 
slipping slowly away beneath him.

But that was all long ago, and the two friends would have been very surprised 
at the horde of visitors who descended upon that enchanted place yesterday to 
march across the restored bridge or to self-consciously chuck a twig or two 
into the sun-dappled stream in honour of the bear of very little brain who 
invented Poohsticks.

Christopher Milne, a bookseller, aged 59, who has borne the burden of his 
father’s literary imagination all his life, was there to cut a ribbon, his chin 
far above the top rail. So was Mrs Ivor Hill, whose father built the original 
bridge with the help of farm labourers, and who last saw Mr Milne 50 years ago 
in a school pageant.

Representatives of East Sussex County Council, who had provoked an outcry with 
its plan to replace the original wooden structure with a single-span utility 
version, pulled out the publicity stops with white tape across the bridge and a 
speech by Mrs Pat Drake, chairman of the council’s highways and transportation 
committee.

She said that contributions from Pooh’s world-wide fan club, his publishers, 
Methuen, and the National Westminster Bank, meant that the bridge had been 
restored by DLS Ltd. Mrs Drake said that there were plans afoot to sell 
splinters of wood taken from the bridge as souvenirs.

The bridge, which spans a tributary of the River Medway at Hartfield, East 
Sussex, was in danger of collapsing because its upright supports had almost 
rotted away. A. A. Milne wrote his Pooh books at nearby Cotchford Farm.

Mr Milne said that there were more houses in the area than during his 
childhood, but nothing else had changed. “I first found the bridge 20 years 
after it had been built when I came upon it with my nanny. How could we not 
fall in love with it? Then my parents came and how could they not fall in love 
with it?”

He said that Pooh Bear’s longevity stemmed from the stories being passed down 
from parents who had loved them, and because the stories were read aloud.

“If Pooh was here today, a hum would be working its way up to the surface, 
Rabbit would be making a list, Eeyore would be down by the water somewhere 
feeling left out and Tigger would have pushed you reporters out of the way.”

Mr Milne, who expunged the ghost of the boy Christopher Robin in a book of his 
boyhood five years ago, would have been happier had his father not used his 
name for his tales. “Were the stories written for you?” someone asked. “No,” 
said Mr Milne. “They were written for money.”
 