

After returning from a five-year active deployment as a field artillery 
officer in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2011, Bryan DeMotts struggled to find work. 
He confronted a stagnant job market, and even when he managed to get in front 
of a hiring manager, he felt stigmatized for having spent years in the 
military. “Everybody saw me as a soldier in spite of relevant work experience 
before I served,” DeMotts recalls.

Last year, after completing a business degree at North Carolina State 
University, he landed a job as a procurement consultant at IBM, where he 
advises IBM’s clients about what they should buy. He has noticed “a strong 
cultural shift throughout corporate America," he says, a change in attitude 
that included a growing appreciation of the benefits of military service.

DeMotts says his employer values the skills he developed as a field officer. 
“I’ve learned dependability, so if a meeting is set a month from now, I’ll be 
there,” he says. “I’ve learned how to thrive in high-pressure/stress situations 
— that’s when we do our best work — so I can juggle multiple deadlines and 
clients. This is a good home for me.”

What’s changed

Part of what’s driving the shift — and helping veterans find jobs and succeed 
in the workplace — is a raft of new programs by government agencies, 
universities, non-profits and employers.


Aside from transition programs such as Transition GPS 
<http://www.public.navy.mil/BUPERS-NPC/CAREER/TRANSITION/Pages/TAP.aspx> and USO
 <http://www.uso.org/>, the US Department of Labor and its Veterans’ Employment 
and Training Service have releasedtoolkits 
<http://www.americasheroesatwork.gov/forEmployers/HiringToolkit> to educate 
employers and managers on how to hire and retain veterans. Some university 
business administration programs are offering scholarships and programs for 
veterans, helping to steer them towards financial and supply chain roles.

And employers have increasingly launched their own programs to help veterans 
transition into the workforce. For example, retail giant Walmart has hired more 
than 42,000 veterans since 2013 through its “Veterans Welcome Home Commitment," 
which “guarantees a job offer to any honorably discharged veteran within his or 
her first 12 months off active duty." The company plans to hire 100,000 
veterans by 2018 and, through its corporate foundation, has also committed to 
awarding $40m in grants for veteran education and transition programs through 
2019.

Meanwhile, Disney reports hiring over 3,000 veterans since it launched its 
Heroes Work Here 
<http://heroesworkhere.disney.com/transitions/military-deployment-doesnt-stop-advancement-at-espn>
 initiative in 2012. AndLa Quinta Inns & Suites’ rigorous veteran program 
<http://lq.com/lq/data/files/G_20140612081841.PDF> (pdf) has won company 
endorsements from Military Spouse magazine and former president George W Bush 
for its work in supporting military non-profits, as well as hiring veterans and 
their spouses for quick advancement roles and easy segue into hotel ownership. 
The hotel chain expects to hire 430 military/spouses this year.

Help wanted


Still, more is needed. According to the United States Department of Veteran 
Affairs 
<http://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/Homepage_slideshow_3_31_14.pdf>, the 
US has nearly 22 million veterans, most of whom served in Vietnam and the Gulf 
war. The most recent data from theBureau of Labor Statistics 
<http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/vet.pdf> (pdf) cites 722,000 unemployed 
veterans in 2013, 60% of whom were age 45 or older.


To compound the challenge, more service members will return home when the US 
withdraws from Afghanistan. The US army expects approximately 87,000 soldiers 
to leave active service — and 57,000 to leave the reserve — this year, joining 
the roughly 144,000 soldiers who ended their service in 2013, according to 
Tatjana Christian, an army spokesperson at the Pentagon.

While not all of these service members will return to the US or seek civilian 
work, many will, says Lida Citroen, author ofYour Next Mission 
<http://www.lida360.com/>, a guide for veterans transitioning into civilian 
life. Historically, veterans have struggled finding jobs beyond defense 
contractors or small business ownership, she said. Today, the unemployment rate 
for male Gulf War II-era veterans (8.8%) remains higher than that of male 
non-veterans (7.5%).

Suitable roles

Anecdotally, Citroen says she’s been hearing that more and more large 
corporations are hiring veterans for IT, supply chain and financial roles.

It makes sense: Gabriel Ives — who served in the US marine corps for five 
years, leading 200 soldiers in combat during two deployments in Iraq, and now 
works in supplier risk management as a governance manager at GE Capital — sees 
himself, and veterans generally, as especially competent in financial settings 
that involve intense pressure and deadlines. “If nobody’s pulling a gun on me, 
I’m comfortable — that’s what I’m benchmarking against and nothing in business 
feels that impossibly challenging,” he explains.

When veterans land jobs where their experience with the fast, intense pace of 
military service is valuable to the company, the results can be gratifying. 
Among the strengths military veterans can bring to employers, he says, is the 
flexibility gained from switching roles and often countries every year while on 
active duty. “This makes veterans extremely adaptable to new tasks and 
challenges in ways civilians cannot be.”


Marilyn Eckelman, director of graduate management career strategies at Boston 
College's Carroll School of Management 
<http://www.bc.edu/content/bc/schools/csom/graduate/admissions/scholarships/military.html>
, says that students who were military officers tend to have a strong executive 
presence, strong presentation skills, and are adept at executing on goals while 
adapting to constant change.

The dos and don'ts of hiring veterans


Copious dos and don'ts exist to guide companies that hope to hire and retain 
veterans. Top of the list: do not ask about combat during an interview or on 
the job. “These are questions no one wants to be asked, let alone answer,” 
Citroen says. She advises that employers educate veterans about their rights – 
especially their right to privacy. “If a colleague asks a veteran, 'Did you 
ever shoot anyone?,' he or she might be inclined to answer out of respect,” she 
explains. “Help them know they don’t have to answer.”

Companies that fail to honor this rule may appear insensitive and clueless to 
veterans. DeMotts at IBM was appalled when, during business school, a hiring 
manager from a large and reputable corporation asked him about his experiences 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. “I’d specifically worked and studied to land this 
particular internship. I couldn’t believe a recruiter would ask about my 
deployment. I didn’t want to work for them after,” he said.

John Phillips, a former artillery officer and author of Boots to Loafers, 
Finding your True North <http://www.bootstoloafers.com/>, advocates having 
veterans handle the hiring and on boarding process for new veterans because few 
hiring managers can understand their experience or potential. For instance, 
Coca-Cola, where Phillips now works as a finance director, has established a 
military veteran’s business resource group, which Phillips founded. “There is 
not a better person to vet a vet than a vet,” he says.

DeMotts echoes this, noting that IBM linked him with veterans who guided him 
through the leadership structure, translating it into an army-like structure. 
“Without this I would’ve been lost,” he said. “I wasn’t used to having 
different managers with different functions. Once I understood and could 
translate the structure in my mind, I could effectively leverage my 
relationships with each individual manager.”

A tricky transition

One of the most challenging cultural differences between the military and the 
private sector is the divide between teamwork and personal accomplishment. 
Citroen says that, after years of team-based work, veterans tend to struggle 
with taking personal credit for their accomplishments and credentials. They 
often will not use “I” when describing successes and accomplishments, she says, 
because this feels disloyal to those who served alongside them.

Hiring managers can encourage the candidate to think of a time when they were 
part of an effort they are proud of, and then call out the individual role in 
that effort. “This will put the veteran at ease,” she said.

 Veterans can also be puzzled by workplace hierarchy. In the military, 
uniforms, stripes and decorations reveal one’s military achievements and rank, 
but in corporate America, especially in the seemingly casual atmosphere of many 
IT companies, the badges of authority can be more ambiguous.

 And whereas in the military, superiors promote for work done well, in 
corporate America managers may privilege personality over professional 
qualifications when deciding on hires or promotions, passing over the best 
candidate as a result. “This idea baffles many returning veterans when I talk 
about understanding corporate culture. It rocks their world,” Citroen says.

Then there are the different communication styles. Phillips initially found 
corporate language extremely evasive after serving in the first US occupation 
of Iraq. He recalls feeling initially confused by his manager’s expectations. 
“I’d ask, ‘What, precisely, do you want me to do?’ Managers felt insulted. Yet 
from a veterans’ perspective every mission has lives at stake,” Phillips says. 
“Everyone must feel clear on what their role is — so if a directive is muddy, 
you ask.”

To work around this, Citroen suggests that colleagues and managers understand 
that veterans, who are accustomed to solving time sensitive, life-and-death 
problems are now being asked to attend meetings that may not resolve issues or 
create action. “This can be extremely frustrating, if the expectations are not 
managed upfront.”

She adds that managers should understand that clarity and creativity work 
together, and advises that, when giving veterans a task to do, managers should 
first state the project requirements, then ask them to present multiple 
options, such as "the most fiscally conservative approach, the most liberal 
approach, and the one that you believe is in between the two.” This balance, 
she argues, bridges the structure of military work and the creativity of 
civilian corporate environments.”

Despite the growth in both services and attention to returning veterans 
seeking work however, Ives believes that upcoming waves of returnees have their 
work cut out. He worries many may disappear into the eves like veterans from 
the Vietnam War. “It’s tough out there,” he said. “We must help our veterans. 
They need all the support they can get.”

• A previous version of this article incorrectly stated that IBM procurement 
consultant Bryan DeMotts had re-enlisted in the military after struggling to 
find a job. In fact he didn't search for a civilian job until after he left the 
military in 2011.

D G McCullough is an independent writer, editor and owner of Hanging Rock Media
 <http://www.hangingrockmediapr.com/> in Cary, North Carolina.

The social impact hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/social-impact> is funded by 
AngloAmerican. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 