
Street, Somerset.
Mr Laurence Housman once thought he would not live beyond his lucky number of 
67. Aged 92 to-day, he has now completed with obvious relish a quarter of a 
century of what he has called “the unexpected years.”

In his self-allotted span, he had already made a well-earned reputation as a 
rebel against convention - not as a rebel who is always looking for trouble 
like the legendary Irishman, but as one more like his great hero Saint Francis 
of Assisi, whose rebellions grew out of his refusal to compromise. Housman 
began his artistic life as an illustrator and as an author - he was art critic 
for the “Manchester Guardian” for a time - by making “rather a cult of being 
much more interested in things of the past than of the present.” He credits a 
speech by Mrs Pankhurst - woman’s suffrage became one of his great causes - for 
discovering in himself “that most uncomfortable thing, a social conscience.” 
This undoubtedly helped him as an artist, if only to save him from remaining a 
Pre-Raphaelite rather out of touch with his own period. Housman once said he 
would far rather not have had a social conscience, but once Mrs Pankhurst 
discovered it for him, there were no half-measures.

So successful did he become at not compromising, particularly in subjects such 
as royalty and religion in which the conventions are strictest, that at one 
time he had 32 of his plays refused a licence - a rebel’s record of which he is 
obviously still very proud. He once urged that the troops on Armistice Day 
should parade without arms as an expression of the nation’s will to peace, and 
to-day the fact that Britain and the United States were the first to drop the 
atomic bomb lies heavily on that conscience of his.


Resemblance to Shaw
From a distance he still has a superficial resemblance to George Bernard Shaw, 
with the same jutting white beard and spare active figure. He says that when he 
is out for a walk now he keeps to the inside of the pavement in case he feels 
“giddy,” but as he pushes his glasses up to his forehead to read without them, 
as though not to have anything between himself and the book, the impression he 
gives is not that of giddiness but of gaiety. He reads part of “Brother Wolf” 
from “The Little Plays of St Francis,” and his voice seems to assume the 
character of Saint Francis, then that of the sinner. He lingers lovingly over 
the line, “The good that he did comforteth him.” But when you congratulate him 
he merely shrugs and says, “I have had a lot of experience of the theatre.” It 
never occurs to him that his performance is remarkable for a man of 92.

Since his sister’s death a few years ago - “she was a much better writer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clemence_Housman> than I ever was” - he has had 
the help of his friends, a pun he enjoys since he became a member of the 
Society of Friends. “For many years I was merely an attender, and I regarded 
myself as a guest and did not always say all I would have liked to say. But 
when they decided to have me, I said they would have to take the risk. One of 
the things that I try to do is to get people to be not afraid of laughter.”


Mysticism to satire
His conversation free-wheels from past to present and back again. He has no 
exaggerated idea of his position as a writer. He rates his sister better than 
himself and once said ofhis famous brother, A.E. Housman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jun/03/latelyunfashionableaehousma>
, “Like a bolt from the blue out came A Shropshire Lad and straight away as an 
author with any individuality worth mentioning, I was wiped out.” He thinks his 
best hope in the future is his “Little Plays of St Francis.” He says, “It was 
my fate to write about two famous characters in history. One was Saint Francis 
and the other was Queen Victoria, and unfortunately the less desirable person 
got the bigger public.” But the future, he seemed confident, would restore the 
balance in favour of Saint Francis.

He has always been versatile - “life is the most versatile thing under the 
sun” - and as an author he has ranged from mysticism in his verse to sharp 
political satire in his novels, so sharp in fact that at one time he thought a 
politician might sue him for libel - and like a true rebel, rather hoped he 
would. An admirer asks him if the modern world disappointed him - what will the 
social conscience think of the Angry Young Men? - and he replies:


“What do not disappoint me are the tremendous discoveries that science has 
made. We have a notion now of the age of this world and of the sun, planets, 
and other things only because science has begun to reveal it to us. Now we have 
got this fact to face that the whole of the Bible teaching and what the Bible 
has revealed to us of God only refers to this world of ours. It does not refer 
to those thousands of other worlds, possibly millions…”


He stops suddenly and looks gently at you. “Is that terrifying?” But life, at 
least in the latest scientific discoveries - and it obviously gives him as much 
pleasure at 92 as it did at 18, - is proving itself to be as versatile as ever.

 