
During the B.B.C. television programme "Panorama" last night Richard Dimbleby 
introduced an item showing "spaghetti" growing on trees, hanging from branches 
and being eaten.

Within minutes hundreds of viewers were on the telephone to the B.B.C. 
Spaghetti, they pointed out, did not grow on trees, and anyway April fool jokes 
traditionally end at midday.

Soon after the programme ended a B.B.C. spokesman said: "Yes, the last item 
was a piece of April tomfoolery. It was a 2 1/2 minute film shot in Switzerland 
showing a 'spaghetti harvest'. Richard Dimbleby gave an introduction."

One viewer said Mr Dimbleby introduced the item with "a completely dead-pan 
expression". He said the early crop was due to the early spring.

Not so Distressed. The West German Ministry for All-German Affairs has just 
produced a survey which is causing consternation in the Federal Republic. It 
takes the form of an analysis of the political views of a representative 
section of East German refugees who have "chosen freedom" by crossing the 
interzonal frontier and seeking new homes in the Federal Republic.

The first figures in the survey [are] the most striking. Only 28 per cent of 
those asked had left Eastern Germany for political reasons, and only 9 per cent 
claimed they had suffered personally from political persecution.

Over 30 per cent left their homes solely because of the greater economic 
possibilities and another 30 per cent for purely personal reasons, [like] 
difficulties in family life and dissatisfaction with jobs. These figures, 
coupled with the fact that most refugees make their way into West Berlin with 
comparative ease, do much to disarrange the conventional picture of the 
frightened, frantic East German who stakes his life in his hands in order to 
find intellectual and spiritual liberty.

Many other figures of the Ministry's survey are equally revealing. Thus 35 per 
cent regarded themselves politically as "Marxists" and another 26 per cent were 
"partially Marxist in outlook." Twelve per cent were Communists, and 35 per 
cent only were predominantly anti-Marxist.

Finally, 71 per cent were in favour of nationalisation of basic industries, 
and 42 per cent supported the programme of nationalisation undertaken by the 
East German regime. Only 14 per cent believed in the "free market economy" in 
the Federal Republic.

These figures are producing some earnest head-scratching in Bonn, with an eye 
on the prospects and problems which could arise out of reunification.
 