
For a brief moment Annie Lennox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> has been transported back to 
Aberdeen circa 1958. "We didn't have a bath, but we used to stand at the sink 
with that very hot boiler spurting out water," she says as her Blackberry purrs 
in the corner. "My mother would go to the Steamie (public wash house) and she'd 
scrub clothes and put them through the mangle and hang everything out."

"Everything is so different now," she reflects, adding that although she is a 
"contemporary woman" her memories are "almost Edwardian".

Lennox is 56 this year yet looks strangely timeless. The carrot-coloured 
cropped hair of her Eurythmics days has long been replaced by peroxide blonde. 
Her face is softer and she exudes a worldly wisdom, yet her piercing eyes 
reveal a childlike wonderment at everything around her.

"These autumn days are so uplifting," she announces in her velvety Scottish 
accent as I enter the private members' club in Portobello. Lennox has just 
released her first album in three years – a collection ofChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> carols and songs – an 
album she hopes is a fresh revisiting of the melodies of yesteryear.

It is also a few weeks since she won the Barclay's woman of the year award in 
recognition for her dedication to peace, poverty and in particular women's 
struggle against HIV and AIDS in Africa. In her thank-you speech she called 
herself a "feminist" and a "humanist". She told an audience of 420 women that 
feminism was desperately needed in developing countries.

"I asked them if they identified with being a feminist, but only half the room 
put their hands up – what's wrong? We need to redefine feminism. It's crazy," 
she shakes her head.

No one could accuse Lennox of being flippant. If anything, her conversation is 
as absorbing as her musical career has been. From the moment her rangy figure 
appeared in a tailored suit and sunglasses on Top of the Pops in 1983 she has 
bent the lines of gender and creatively challenged traditional notions of 
power. Despite the 80m plus records she has sold to date, she underplays her 
position in the lexicon of music and women's art.

"As a creative person, you just put something out into the consciousness of 
the society you live in," she explains. "You don't know the ramifications. At 
the time it was just something that happened and passed. It's only now when I 
meet people who saw that [performance] for the first time I have realised it's 
actually been a small seed of consciousness."

Time passing has been illuminating for Lennox. Her own teenage daughters 
recall the Spice Girls' Wannabe as their call to arms. But as the architect – 
alongside Dave Stewart – of the 80s anthem Sisters Are Doing It for Themselves 
she laments that strength of statement may have all but evaporated.

"That was a strange thing for me. My daughters met the Spice Girls [Lennox's 
former husband Uri Fruchtmann produced the girl group's film Spiceworld]. On 
the one hand it was such a treat for them, but on the other I could see how 
besotted they were – it was a weird mania," she says.

In almost the same breath Lennox tells me she's just been to see The Social 
Network – the film about Mark Zuckerberg, the American entrepreneur and founder 
of Facebook. "You must see it," she insists. "It's about guys that are 
super-bright. There is a ruthlessness coupled with young testosterone-fuelled, 
brilliant minds.

"Money is their goal. It's not about the pursuit of happiness. But it's about 
more than money too, it's about building an empire."

Lennox doesn't say it, but I suspect her mind's leap is a quiet assessment of 
the Spice Girl's "girl power" message which was manufactured and then taken 
global by Lennox's own manager and industry titan Simon Fuller – a savvy piece 
of marketing as opposed to a wholly heartfelt expression. And, although Lennox 
herself is worth around £35m, she professes that when she came to London from 
Aberdeen in 1971 to study in the Royal College of Music, money was the last 
thing on her mind.

"It was about creating the thing I had a passion for, but there was no 
guarantee. It was so risky," she says, remembering her "paltry grant" of £140 
per term and her various jobs to cover her rent. When she dropped out to 
concentrate on music full-time with Peet Coombes and Dave Stewart − they formed 
the pre-Eurythmics band, the Tourists − she paid her way by cleaning and 
cooking in a friend's house in Crouch End.

"We were all a bit renegade and there were people who came to that house and 
took a lot of drugs. A lot of speed was consumed − except me because I was 
never the drug taker," she laughs before adding, "neither was I purer than 
snow, but I was the person that made soup and went to bed while everyone else 
was up till six in the morning with their eyes like pinpoints.

"It was truly scuzzy and for me there were glimpses into that incredibly rough 
place where people get continuously out of their minds."

As a young musician, however, Lennox never lost sight of the creative goal. 
The trio signed on for a year to pursue that, she recalls. "We just thought 
we've just got to go for this. No more me being a waitress. It's got to be 
24/7."

The same instinct and passion is evident when Lennox talks about her latest 
album A Christmas Cornucopia – a collaboration with producer Mike Stevens. That 
she's recorded a Christmas album in the first place was not calculated she 
stresses. She only realised Elton, Cliff, Dylan et al have all recorded 
seasonal albums after she made hers.

"I'm a bit naive because, like most things, I get interested in what I'm doing 
because of the passion of the music. I wasn't thinking, 'Oh, it's that time in 
my career where I can get a Christmas album down,'" she laughs.

Recorded in a studio at the bottom of Steven's garden it is a project Lennox 
spent years thinking about, and after her contract with Sony BMG ended she was 
free not to make just "pop records that go in charts". The studio, she says, is 
"like a sandpit". "I can just be myself. Ideas come thick and fast and Mike's 
had to be ready to catch them – it's like ping pong."

As it happens, Universal got wind of it and loved it. Lennox, too, describes 
recording the album as a "wonderful experience ... reconnecting with the songs 
of my childhood, but from an adult perspective".

Lennox stresses that she has also reinterpreted the song's religious content. 
"Music is the language of the soul articulated," she says. "The inner world is 
very potent for me – I don't ascribe to any God or Jesus or Buddha – I just 
have a sense of it and revere it along with the natural world and human 
consciousness."

Lennox is also completely aware of the frailty of human life. Her humanitarian 
work, she admits, is connected in part to her heritage – her father was a 
shipbuilder and trade unionist – but is also a deep-seated way of healing her 
own wounds.

Her first child Daniel was stillborn, 22 years ago, but the wound she shares 
today is about being an only child from a working-class neighbourhood, going to 
a middle class school where a different dialect was spoken. "I always had that 
feeling of not belonging, and I think the root of it may be in the spoken word. 
I had to adjust and adapt, but I was always seeking approval and a place to 
belong," she says.

While Lennox works across several charities, including Amnesty International 
and Greenpeace, it is the cause of HIV and AIDS that "found me".

It was about women and children and South Africa, a place deep in Lennox's own 
consciousness. Meeting Nelson Mandela in 2003 had a profound impact on her. She 
had "felt wounded by aparteid". "It felt so freakish, so wrong. It was like a 
piece of grit in my shoe," she says, adding that the Eurythmics had refused to 
play there while the system operated.

But HIV is the country's post-Aparteid inheritance. "What did that mean for 
future generations? 1,000 people dying of AIDS related illnesses each day. So 
many women in a vulnerable place and not getting access to treatment," she says.

While Lennox was one of the first "celebrity" campaigners she acknowledges 
that charity and celebrity can sit uncomfortably together. She refuses to 
criticise Madonna, for example, for adopting two children from Malawi. That 
wouldn't be helpful. But she does present one caveat.

"It would be incredibly powerful if, while Madonna is adopting those children, 
that she could say something about the solution not lying in picking children 
up individually and taking them out of Africa. I'd like her to say that so much 
more.

"I can't go to Africa like some fucking white saint," she adds, "but I've 
tried to understand the dynamic and asked how I can be helpful."

"I see the burden women are carrying, and we can't sit back and think feminism 
is done. It's not. We need to keep doing it and that's what fuels my fire."

• Annie Lennox's A Christmas Cornucopia is available now on Universal
 