
March 1994: Jos Verstappen, Interlagos

A horrific four-car crash in Brazil involving Jos Verstappen, Eddie Irvine, 
Martin Brundle and Eric Bernard. The four cars were bunched together on the 
track when Verstappen collided with one and flew over the others. Verstappen 
became airborne and trundled into the safety wall.

F1 driver Jules Bianchi dies from injuries sustained in crash at Japanese 
Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
May 1994: Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger’s deaths, San Marino

The three-time world champion Ayrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> collided with the Tamburello 
wall on lap seven of the race at Imola, coming off the racing line on the 
corner at 190mph before striking the unprotected barrier. He died from skull 
fractures. The drivers had raised concerns over safety before the race after 
the wing of Ratzenberger’s car collided with a wall at the corner after 
Tamburello. He also died from skull fractures.

August 1998: Multiple pile-up, Belgium

In the wet at Spa David Coulthard lost control of his McLaren on the first lap 
causing a 14-car pile-up and the race was stopped. When the race restarted, 
four cars were so badly damaged they could not race.

July 1999: Michael Schumacher, Silverstone

At Stowe Corner the German’s rear brake failed, sending the Ferrari driver 
crashing head on into a tyre wall. He broke a leg and was out for 98 days but 
returned in Malaysia that year.

March 2001: Australia

The race in Melbourne was won by Schumacher but completely overshadowed by the 
death of Graham Beveridge, a track marshal. A wheel came off Jacques 
Villeneuve’s car, bounced through a gap in a safety fence and hit Beveridge in 
the head. In June 2013, at the Canadian Grand Prix, another marshal, Mark 
Robinson, was run over and killed by a truck recovering a stranded car.

July 2001: Luciano Burti, Hockenheim

Burti, driving a Prost, drove into the back of Schumacher, who had started the 
German Grand Prix at slow speed. Burti’s car flew into the air, hitting others 
as he landed on his wheels but the Brazilian was fit to take part when the race 
restarted.

May 2002: Nick Heidfeld, Austrian Grand Prix

Heidfeld’s Sauber suffered a rear suspension failure, causing the car to spin 
down the track and puncture a hole in the side of Takuma Sato’s Jordan. Fear 
mounted as the Japanese driver was stuck in his car for several minutes but he 
escaped with minor injuries.

Jules Bianchi: a popular F1 driver who was the ‘real deal’ behind the wheel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/18/jules-bianchi-f1-driver-death-marussia>
June 2007: Robert Kubica, Montreal

The Polish driver clipped another car, forcing his Sauber into the air and 
into the concrete wall at 186mph. The car rebounded across the track, lost 
three wheels and was smashed into smithereens. Kubica escaped with light 
concussion and a sprained ankle. A year later he won the race.

July 2009: Felipe Massa, Hungary

Massa was in qualifying when a suspension spring came off another car, bounced 
down the track and struck the Brazilian’s helmet. He lost consciousness and 
drove into a tyre wall. He needed a titanium plate inserted into his skull but 
he returned in 2010.

June 2010: Mark Webber, European Grand Prix

On the street circuit in Valencia, Webber, who was driving for Red Bull, hit 
the back of Heikki Kovalainen’s car, took off and flipped backwards 180 
degrees, landing head down before rolling back on to its wheels, coming to halt 
against a tyre wall. He escaped with minor injuries.

May 2011: Sergio Pérez, Monaco

The Mexican was in qualifying when he lost control of his Sauber and crashed 
into a barrier dividing the circuit from an escape road. Pérez suffered 
concussion and did not take part in the race. He returned later that season.

October 2014: Jules Bianchi, Japan

The 25-year-old French driver died from head injuries nine months after the 
accident at a wet Japanese Grand Prix, the first to pass away since the death 
of Senna 20 years previous. Bianchi’s car slid off track and collided with a 
crane picking up the car of Adrian Sutil, who had crashed in the same position 
a lap earlier.
 