
In 1933 Mr and Mrs Frank left Germany with their two daughters, Margot, aged 
7, and Anne, aged 4. They were Jews, and life under the Hitler regime appeared 
precarious. They settled in Amsterdam. All went well until the Germans invaded 
Holland and subjected its Jews to the frustrating disabilities prevalent in
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. They wore the yellow star 
to mark them as sub-human, their bicycles were forfeited, they were subjected 
to curfew and restricted shopping hours and forbidden to attend places of 
public entertainment or engage in sporting events. But - as Anne was to record 
later - “things were still bearable.”

They ceased to be so in July, 1942. The “call-up” of Jews for deportation to 
German concentration camps had begun. In anticipation of this Mr Frank had for 
some time been preparing and stocking a hiding place with the assistance of his 
Dutch business associates. On July 9, 1942, the Frank family moved in. They 
were joined by Mr and Mrs Van Daan and their 16-year-old son, Peter, and later 
by a Jewish dentist called Dussel. There they remained until August, 1944, when 
the Germans raided their premises and carried them off to Germany.

One survivor
Of the eight inhabitants of the “secret annexe” only Mr Frank survived 
incarceration in a German concentration camp. Anne, the youngest, died in 
Belsen two months before its surviving victims were liberated. It is to Anne 
that we owe a detailed account of day-to-day life in the “secret annexe” up to 
the eve of its discovery by the Germans. For Anne kept a diary; and that diary 
was found by Dutch friends among the debris kicked aside by the raiders.

In a preface to the English translation Miss Storm Jameson dwells on the 
personality of the young woman who at the age of thirteen began to write it. 
Miss Jameson finds “nothing self-conscious, no touch, not the slightest, of 
showing-off, acting a part, even before herself… in the marvellously gifted 
child forced to hide from an - alas - imaginable cruelty.” That is a matter of 
opinion. Other readers may find her a bundle of self-consciousness and 
self-dramatisation, a precocious and somewhat over-sexed child, thrown back 
upon the physical and mental symptoms of her own puberty in an unnatural 
atmosphere. But of her vitality, her unquenchable gaiety, her intelligence, her 
high courage, and her power to express herself on paper there can be no doubt 
whatever.

Food was precarious - at times scarce and unpalatable. Anne’s sharing of a 
minute bedroom with Dussel the dentist suggested that crabbed age and youth 
could not live at such close quarters with any comfort. Long stretches of time 
during which a lavatory plug could not be pulled for fear of noise precipitated 
complications which are described with uninhibited candour. Nights of terror 
with air raids were made more terrifying by the knowledge that to run into the 
street from a burning or falling building would involve dangers comparable with 
remaining inside it.

And yet - some semblance of normal domestic life went on. Muscles were 
exercised, lessons were done, clothes were adapted, birthdays celebrated, and 
presents exchanged. And though tempers were often frayed to breaking point by 
the clash of uncongenial personalities who could not get away from one another, 
Anne herself was able to work up a mildly gratifying love interest in the only 
young male within reach. She describes her efforts in this direction with 
commendable frankness. They were after all childishly innocent.

This life went on from day to day. In one respect the reading of it is perhaps 
more painful than was the living of it. As she wrote, Anne was buoyed up by 
hope of the future: some day she would get out, marry, have children, resume 
contact with nature, write, travel, and in her thoughts she plans for all these 
things. But we, as we read, know the end: Belsen. And the knowledge of what 
happened in Belsen shadows our response to Anne’s unquenchable joie de vivre 
from the first page to the last.

Danger and domesticity
There is something about this particular war book which strikes very hard on 
the imagination. It is, after all, only one of many chronicles of hardship, 
persecution, suffering, and human courage. It may be that this particular 
mixture of danger and domesticity has a peculiar poignancy; or perhaps the 
intensity of the close-up presented to us makes it seem so.

But there is more to it than that. We have begun to forget Belsen and the 
persecutions and pogroms that led up to it. Later persecutions have obscured 
those evil memories. It may be too, that we have derived much comfortable inner 
satisfaction from the post-war luxury of magnanimous forgiveness. Indeed many 
of those who repeat a certain familiar line of a familiar prayer would express 
themselves more accurately by saying: “Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive 
them that trespass against others.” It is a very easy kind of forgiveness. And 
it is particularly easy when those to be forgiven are as amiable and courteous 
as Germans habitually show themselves to be when defeated. If so, it may well 
be that this strange and moving diary of a gifted vital child, hunted from home 
to exile, from exile to hide-out, from hide-out to death, has come to us at an 
opportune moment: the moment when we are about to arm her hunters for the 
defence of Western civilisation.

This is an edited extract, click to read more 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/3/18/1426694993300/Review-of-The-Diary-of-An-001.jpg>
 