
There was a mixed reception from the City and advertising industry for Fru 
Hazlitt's appointment as ITV's managing director of commercial and online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/03/itv-fru-hazlitt-rupert-howell>. 
It's not personal – everyone likes her and wishes her well – but they just 
can't see what someone with no commercial TV experience can bring to a company 
whose core business is, well, commercial TV. But this is to miss the point. It 
is the fact that Hazlitt is an outsider to TV – and especially ITV – that makes 
her right for what its chairman, Archie Norman, has in mind.

When Norman arrived at ITV, he found a culturally sick company, with different 
divisions not just failing to work together but actively working against each 
other. If the production arm could sell a show to an outside customer – more 
than likely a competitor to ITV for ratings and possibly revenues – it would. 
It was justice for years of what most in-house producers regarded as 
high-handed mistreatment. The company may have called itself "One ITV" but it 
didn't feel like that on the inside. On the flip side, if there was a close 
call between an in-house programme idea and an indie idea, the temptation was 
to commission from outside – if only to punish production for past failings.

On the commercial front, Norman found a company that was stuck in its old 
ways: selling TV ads the way it always had, in the midst of a bitter recession, 
with no new revenue streams to speak of, and tied up in regulatory spaghetti 
from a bygone age. Furthermore, it was behind the game online and with few 
coherent ideas about how to catch up.

So, out with the old and in with the new. Change the board that had allowed 
the company to drift and the senior management with all their unhelpful company 
cultural baggage. Which is why at ITV's top table there is now no one with any 
deep historical roots in the company and a key trio – chairman, chief executive 
and commercial director – without any TV experience. It is an executive board 
utterly dominated by outsiders unencumbered by bad history. So far so good – 
cultural problem solved.

But will changing the company culture solve ITV's underlying issues as a 
"legacy" media business seeking a route to the growth demanded by unhappy 
investors? This is far from clear. Once ITV could have become a major player in 
the pay-TV market: first it was called On-Digital and then ITV Digital and it 
failed. Similarly, ITV could have been a major force in what was then the 
emerging online world –even search advertising (which has turned Google into a 
global behemoth) was within ITV's grasp. It was called Ask Jeeves 
<http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/technology/article6833033.ece>
and it failed too (not helped by Carlton, Granada and United News and Media 
starving itv.com of investment in favour of their own nascent online offerings 
in the years just before merger.) And ITV could have been big in the world of 
global content. But that was before the company's production capability – 
targeted as a source of post-merger efficiencies – disappeared to the 
independent sector in search of better rewards and, truth be told, more fun.

The sad fact is that in all these areas ITV, for a variety of reasons, has 
missed the boat. And, in business as in life, second chances are very rare 
indeed. ITV2 (or 3 or 4) may work as a modest pay-TV offering, Hazlitt may be 
able to help ITV make more of its content online and Kevin Lygo, the managing 
director of ITV Studios, may produce a global hit. But, in reality, the bulk of 
ITV's revenues are most likely to come from its legacy free-to-air TV 
advertising business. Not the worst of all possible outcomes – especially if 
the economy improves – but hardly the full-on "transformation" Norman and his 
new senior team hope for. And, without one of those, ITV's future as a 
standalone quoted company hardly seems assured.
 