
Whitbread is benefiting from Britain’s long hours work culture, analysts said 
after the Costa coffee and Premier Inns business reported a near 12% jump in 
profits.

The company’s shares have been under pressure recently on concerns about 
slowing sales growth at Costa and competition in the budget hotel market from 
the likes of AirBnB.

But a rise in full year underlying profits from £488m to £546m has helped lift 
the company 116p or 3% higher to £39.83. Steve Clayton, head of equity 
research, Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

Costa is busily slaking the nation’s never ending thirst for caffeine; think 
of it as an investment play on the UK’s long hours work culture. Premier Inn is 
a great product; a clean comfortable room, in a good location at a sensible 
price. With over 60,000 rooms in the estate, it is the clear market leader in 
the UK branded budget hotel sector. Costa is omnipresent on UK High Streets and 
highways, with a rapidly growing overseas presence too. Both businesses have 
ambitious growth plans over the next four years. The restaurants business plays 
a supporting role to the hotels, but struggles to inspire in its own right.

Alison Brittain, Whitbread’s recently appointed chief executive, said the new 
financial year had started well, albeit helped by the early Easter, and the 
company was confident of making further progress in the current year. She said 
the business faced challenges, but she identified three key strategies:

The world around us is shifting, with rising customer expectations, an 
evolving competitor landscape, rapid technological developments and changing 
cost structures...

I have identified three key strategic themes...grow and innovate in our core 
UK business, focus on our strengths to grow internationally, and build the 
capability and infrastructure to support long term growth.

Hotel and restaurant profits grew by 11.3% while Costa climbed 15.8%, with 
total sales growth of 15.9% but like for like growth up just 2.9%. Analysts at 
Canaccord said:

Today’s prelims were much as expected given the early March trading statement. 
The stage is now clear for new chief executive, Alison Brittain, to deliver her 
vision of how to achieve 2020 targets and beyond... Ultimately Brittain needs 
results to move the share price, but we think today represents a welcome fresh 
expresso shot of energy. We remain buyers in light of the 27% fall in the stock 
over the last 12 months, excellent underlying free cash flot and strong balance 
sheet which gives it significant optionality, a strength that Brittain appears 
to understand.

Deutsche Bank issued a buy note but said:

The strategic review highlights the structural growth opportunities for both 
Premier Inn and Costa, but also explicitly highlights challenges including the 
‘share any market disruptors might gain’ in the hotel market. Further,Whitbread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/whitbread> are strongly reiterating their 
view that they have no desire to split off any division. Trading numbers are 
satisfactory and in line with expectations from the 50 week update. We suspect 
the strategic review might lead to more questions than answers.

Overall the FTSE 100 has climbed 30.05 points to 6290.97 ahead of this week’s 
US Federal Reserve and Bank of Japan meetings, helped by positive results from 
a handful of other major businesses.

Standard Chartered is up 33.4p at 554p following its figures while BP is 10.8p 
better at 371.15 afterits update. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/bp-spending-cuts-profits-fall-80-percent-oil-prices>

 Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

Equity markets have seen a revival of bullishness this morning, maintaining 
their bounces from yesterday’s one-week lows. Risk appetite would appear to be 
on the up in contrast to the usual investor side-lining we see ahead of major 
risk events such as a Fed - and in this case Bank of Japan - update, hopes high 
of continued accommodative language from the former and more policy easing from 
the latter. UK sentiment is buoyed by an oil price holding up around recent 
highs and a surprise first quarter profit from behemothBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> while the US Dow Jones has surged 
back above 18,000 ahead of results from tech giant Apple tonight.

Before Apple reports, chip supplier Arm is down 13.5p at 916.5p on concerns of 
a slowdown in iPhone sales.

And mining shares are under pressure once more as metal prices eased, with 
Glencoredown 1.95p at 153.05p and Rio Tinto 20.5p lower at £22.17.
 