
Leading shares have started the shortened trading week in a downbeat mood 
after weak Chinese manufacturing data raised new concerns about the world’s 
second largest economy.

But insurers are bucking the trend. A new survey from the AA showed a small 
fall in car insurance rates after recent sharp rises, but the organisation 
believes the upward trend will soon resume.

So Admiral has accelerated 68p to £19.25 while Direct Line is up 6.7p at 
368.6p. Analyst Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital said:

According to the AA Insurance, the so-called Shop around rate for 
comprehensive motor cover reduced by 0.4% and by around 1% for non-comp cover, 
leaving rates up around 21% and around 15% over the year respectively (with the 
latter impacted by the increase in the insurance premium tax in the fourth 
quarter of 2015...for example comprehensive rates were up around 10% in the 
fourth quarter.

Although the first quarter of each year is often viewed as the most 
competitive, as companies attempt to build market share (to coincide with new 
car registrations), our analysis of the indices implies a fairly even spread of 
rate increases and reductions in the quarter. The key issue for the industry 
remains elevated levels of claims frequency and severity, which the rating 
environment is struggling to keep pace with. Sadly, whiplash claims remain a 
real problem for the industry despite repeated attempts by the government to 
address the issue.

A survey from Willis Towers Watson/confused.com painted a similar picture, and 
analysts at Peel Hunt said:

Quarterly rate trends were relatively flat during the first quarter 2016, as 
the Motor sector took a pause after strong rate increases in the second half of 
2015. Year on year, underlying rates (excluding insurance premium tax) were up 
an estimated 9.6%, in line with the annual trend in the fourth quarter of 2015. 
With signs that claims inflation is stabilising and having built up margin in 
the fourth quarter, it seems the industry has had its usual competitive start 
to the year. Willis Towers Watson indicates that underlying trends continue to 
point to further rate increases in 2016.

RSA Insurance is 15.3p better at 474.4p as Barclays moved from equal weight to 
overweight and raised its target price by 19% to 545p. It said:

RSA has set out its ambition to close the gap to the best in class players in 
each of its core markets, UK, Scandinavia and Canada by 2018. While we 
acknowledge that it is rare for a mid of the pack insurer to become a “best in 
class” insurer, we do believe RSA has set out a realistic plan to get there. 
RSA’s ambition is to have a combined ratio of 94% or lower in the UK and 
Canada, and 85% or below in Scandinavia. We believe there is significant upside 
even if the company is only partially successful, and we revise our price 
target of 545p is based on the company on getting half way to its targets. With 
19% upside to our revised price target of 545p, coupled with a 3% 2016 yield, 
we upgrade our rating to overweight.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 44.12 points to 6197.77, although off its 
worst levels after a weaker than expected UK manufacturing survey for April, 
making it even less likely that the Bank of England will make any imminent move 
to raise interest rates.

Among the fallers, mining shares have been hit once more by the worries about 
China, withAnglo American down 57.3p at 706.1p and Rio Tinto 94p lower at 
2206.5p.

Banks are also heading lower after poor results from Germany’s Commerzbank. So 
despitereasonable results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/03/hsbc-profits-fall-14-as-global-volatility-hits-bottom-line>
 fromHSBC, its shares have dropped 2.4p to 450.1p.

But BT is 3.8p better at 447p as UBS moved its recommendation from sell to 
neutral.

Among the mid-caps Just Eat has jumped 37p to 420.5p after reporting a 57% 
rise in first quarter orders and raising its guidance for full year profits 
from £98m-£100m to £102m-£104m.

But Aberdeen Asset Management has dropped 23.3p to 275.4p as its half year 
profits fell by 40% on weakness in emerging markets. Numis moved from add to 
hold, calling the figures “an all round bad set of results.” It said:

In the short term, the group remains very much exposed to the fortunes of 
emerging markets, where we for choice would now prefer to wait for a more 
attractive entry point. Long term, you need to believe the group can achieve 
growth in other areas and/or make further cost cutting motivated acquisitions 
and/or will be sold to justify purchasing here.
 