
Falling oil prices and a mixed bag of economic data combined to leave shares 
lower on the first day of the new week and new month.

Talk that Opec would not sanction production cuts at its meeting on Friday, a 
move which would do nothing to halt fears of oversupply amid weakening global 
demand, saw Brent crude slide nearly 2% to $64.49 a barrel by the time London 
markets closed. Oil was also hit by a stronger dollar.

So BP dropped 3.35p to 447.4p and Royal Dutch Shell B shares slipped 32p to 
1941.5p, whileWeir - which supplies pumping equipment to the oil industry - 
lost 68p to £19.56.

But British Airways owner International Airlines Group climbed 6.5p to 560.5p 
on hopes of cheaper fuel costs.

Mining shares were also under pressure, partly on the falling crude price and 
partly after Chinese data showed factory growth edging up to a six month high, 
but falling export demand.Anglo American fell 23p to £10.03 and BHP Billiton 
ended 20p lower at 1359.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 lost early gains to finish down 30.85 points at 6953.58, 
with investors also remaining cautious as Greece faced another crunch week in 
its attempts to reach an agreement with its creditors before the money runs 
out. Despite lots of jaw-jaw there has been no breakthrough as yet, and a €300m 
payment to the International Monetary Fund is due on Friday.

Elsewhere manufacturing data from the UK as shown by the purchasing managers 
index marginally missed expectations, while there was modest growth in the 
eurozone and a stronger than expected performance from US factories. The latter 
renewed suggestions that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates later 
this year.

Among the risers, equipment hire group Ashtead added 31p to £11.51, recovering 
some of last week’s losses in the wake of a downbeat statement from a US peer. 
In a positive note on the business, Bank of America Merrill Lynch said:

Comments from competitor United Rentals at a conference [last week] relating 
to May trading saw Ashtead’s share price react. However, we believe a slightly 
more cautious rate environment is already discounted in our forecasts and that
Ashtead <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> has a more 
aggressive growth strategy than United Rentals which should ensure that it 
continues its rapid expansion. The rental penetration story is likely to remain 
a key driver as the company adds to fleet, adds green field depots and executes 
M&A. Buy.

British Land built up a 10p gain to 872p after JP Morgan Cazenove raised its 
target price from 950p to 970p.


But Standard Chartered fell 17.5p to 1028.5p. New chief exect Bill Winters 
starts on June 10, and analysts believe he may cut the dividend or decided to 
raise between $5bn and $10bn to boost its capital ratios. It is also one of the 
banks looking at its links with scandal-hit FIFA.

Morrisons slipped 1.6p to 169.4p as the supermarket group faced the prospect 
of relegation from the FTSE 100 in this week’s reshuffle, possibly to be 
replaced byInmarsat, up 4p to 997p.

Among the mid-caps Imagination Technologies - at risk of falling out of the 
FTSE 250 - added 14.5p to 233.7p as analysts at Liberum suggested the chip 
designer could be a bid target.

Mears was steady at 429.5p as the social housing and care group announced the 
purchase of the care at home division of Care UK for a total of £11.3m. Peel 
Hunt said:

The key strategic attraction is the increased scale and capability as the 
sector slowly moves towards output based contracts. We note that Mears has an 
excellent long term record in transforming underperforming assets and see this 
as another potentially transformational move. We adjust our estimates to 
reflect the acquisition (6% 2016 earnings per share reduction) but would expect 
investors to welcome this development. Buy.

Lower down the market Real Good Food jumped 9% to 47.5p after a positive 
trading update following the recent sale of its Napier Brown sugar business.
 