
As investors waited for the outcome of the last US Federal Reserve meeting of 
the year,Centrica shares flared up.

The British Gas owner added 5.6p to 328.7p after unveiling the £420m sale of 
its Texas gas-fired power stations to Blackstone, with the proceeds destined to 
be handed back to investors via a continuation of its share buyback programme 
in 2014. Analyst Angelos Anastasiou at Whitman Howard said:
 Gas-fired generation has not been particularly profitable in recent times in 
Texas, whereas the continuation of the buy-back should be moderately earnings 
enhancing; so we see this as good news. 
Overall the FTSE 100 edged up 5.89 points to 6492.08, coming off its best 
levels as nervousness increased ahead of the Fed announcement later. Investors 
have been fretting that Ben Bernanke might signal a slowdown in the Fed's $85bn 
a month bond buying programme, although most believe it is more likely that 
this will be delayed until the new year.

Among the key economic indicators were better than expected UK unemployment 
levels and a positive German Ifo survey. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst 
at CMC Markets UK, said:
 UK unemployment fell back sharply in October to 7.4%, bringing it ever closer 
to the 7% staging post"identified by Bank of England governor Mark Carney as a 
benchmark to review UK monetary policy.

The main focus though remains very much on whether the Fed will be bold enough 
to start the long awaited tapering program later this evening as Ben Bernanke 
chairs his very last press conference as Fed Chairman. 
Supermarkets came under pressure again following Tuesday's news that the big 
four were losing market share to discounters.J Sainsbury was the biggest faller 
in the FTSE 100, 13.5p lower at 365.1p, whileTesco was down 5.45p at 319.05p and
Morrisons lost 3.5p to 253.2p. Deutsche Bank said:
 The Big 4 [Wal Mart-owned Asda is the fourth] have entered a period of 
structurally lower growth, due to a high level of consolidation and increased 
competition. We maintain our sell rating on Morrisons (target price 250p), our 
hold rating on Sainsbury's (target price 410p) and our buy rating on Tesco 
(target price 386p)

Still with retail, Marks & Spencer fell 10.8p to 441.5p, after downbeat 
comments from UBS and a price target cut from HSBC. There was also talk that 
its non-food sales were £30m below budget last week, while an increasing number 
of discounts are likely to hit margins.

Debenhams dropped 3.55p to 78.45p as UBS cut its profit forecast by 11% for 
2014 and 10% for 2015.

Elsewhere United Utilities was 17.5p lower at 650.5p after the shares went 
ex-dividend, whilePetrofac fell another 21p to £10.89 and Amec dipped 6p to 
£10.42 following Tuesday's warning from oil services specialist CGG.

But Rexam rose 9.2p to 497.3p after a positive note on the packaging sector 
from Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

Tullow Oil was steady at 836.5p despite disappointing results from its Paon-2A 
well at the Autruche field in the Ivory Coast. The well encountered water and 
will be plugged and abandoned. Tullow's exploration director Angus McCoss said:
 The well did not encounter oil at this location, reducing the upside volume 
potential associated with the Autruche field.

Oriel Securities kept its add recommendation on Tullow, saying:
 We see the announcement as slight negative for Tullow. At $8 a barrel of oil 
equivalent and 50% chance of success, this would imply a negative impact of 
about $344m net to Tullow (or about 3% on the current market capitalisation). 
However, as stated before, we don't believe markets currently assign too much 
value on future exploration success. Therefore we expect an impact 
significantly lower than 3%, likely in the 1% range (especially that the 
company was carried for half of its costs on this well).

Among the mid caps, iron ore miner Ferrexpo fell back after its two largest 
investors unveiled plans to sell some of their shares.

Ferrexpo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ferrexpo> ended 1.4p lower at 
182.6p as chief executive Kostyantin Zhevago and investment group BXR said they 
would trim their shareholdings to help meet new rules for the amount of a 
company's shares which available on the market.

Finally Vectura added 16.25p to 137.25p after it announced its partner Sandoz 
had received Danish approval for the sale of an inhaled lung drug, AirFluSal 
Forspiro, that analysts say could be a generic copy of GlaxoSmithKline's 
blockbuster drug Advair. Investec analyst Nicholas Keher said:
 We believe this is a generic of Seretide [Advair] and see it as a material 
value driver for Vectura. Un-risked, this now adds 22p to our target price. 
However, as previously highlighted, given time and assuming approvals are 
achieved globally for the portfolio, we think this stock could be worth 270p on 
a two year view. Buy.  