
As the market struggled for direction, shares in aero engine maker Rolls-Royce 
took flight.

They climbed 17p or 1.5% to £11.32 following an upgrade from Jefferies, which 
lifted its price target from £12.50 to £14.

The broker's analyst Sandy Morris said Rolls' TotalCare business - its civil 
aerospace maintenance and repair activities - was likely to do better than the 
market expected. He said:
 In the first half, we believe defence and, perhaps, marine contributed to a 
greater than normal cash outflow. The blame, however, appeared to be laid at 
the door of civil aerospace, specifically TotalCare. That saw the scale of 
engine losses significantly exaggerated, in our view. We believe the coming 
growth in TotalCare revenues - we estimate them at around £2bn in 2013 - was 
also neglected. Such revenues could broadly double in five years and treble in 
nine years, in our view. We believe TotalCare revenues to be highly profitable.

As time passes, we have deduced and discovered more about TotalCare to a point 
where we see it as an opportunity rather than as a risk or threat. TotalCare 
offers Rolls-Royce a different way of going to market, in our view. Some 
engines may be sold at losses initially, but perhaps the compensation is 
greater aftermarket revenues... In short, we believe higher engine deliveries 
combined with unit cost reductions will eventually see engine losses reduced 
and engines currently sold at or around breakeven become profitable. To 
extrapolate what we see today far into the future, in particular to ignore 
growth in revenues, simply fails to capture the dynamics of the TotalCare 
business model, in our view. We recognise that the second half of 2013 and 2014 
will face challenges as Trent XWB deliveries begin, but from 2015/16 we 
forecast good profits growth will go hand in hand with a material strengthening 
in cash flows. Our forecast stronger cash flows should be sustained and 
continue to grow for many years thereafter. 
Overall the FTSE 100 drifted higher, lower, then higher again to end the day 
14.09 points better at 6571.46. Uncertainty over the future shape of the German 
government in the wake of the weekend's elections combined with confusion about 
the US Federal Reserve's tapering of its bond buying programme to keep 
investors on their toes. Worries about the impasse over the US budget, with a 
possible government closure next week, added to the concerns. Brenda Kelly, 
senior market strategist at IG, said:
 The re-emergence of debt ceiling concerns, along with muddled central bank 
guidance, has helped to inspire caution rather than risk. Despite showing signs 
of sustained growth the German Business Climate Index fell short of 
expectations, and even an upbeat assessment on the UK economy from Bank of 
England rate setter David Miles could not wake investors from their reverie.

Meanwhile a survey in China suggesting a slowdown in profits among small and 
medium sized firms renewed fears about the country's economic outlook, hitting 
metal prices. A Reuters survey calculated that copper consumption in the 
country had fallen 2.7% in August compared to the previous month, and added to 
the downbeat mood.

So Anglo American dropped 28p to 1545.5p while among the mid-caps Ferrexpo was 
down 4.7p to 175.1p. With gold still under pressure,Randgold Resources lost 
128p to £44.93 and Mexican precious metals minerFresnillo fell 42p to 971p.

The day's biggest faller in the leading index was cruise ship operator Carnival
, down 134p at £22.58. The stricken Costa Concordia, which ran aground last 
year, may have beenrighted recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/costa-concordia-upright-parbuckling-operation>
 but Carnival was still leaking profits.

The company reported a 30% decline in third quarter earnings to $931m while 
net revenue yields, which combine the amount spent on board its cruise ships as 
well as the ticket price, fell 3.8%. Jefferies said:
 Initial guidance for 2014 implies a downgrade to consensus earnings of more 
than 25%. We feel it is too early to be confident about 2014 until signs of 
pricing improvement take hold. We have a hold recommendation with £22 price 
target. 
Elsewhere Amec dropped 17p to £10.91 after UBS reduced its recommendation from 
buy to neutral and its target price from £12 to £11.45. The bank said:
 We think the engineers face three major headwinds in the near to medium term: 
(1) customer slowdown on project decisions is having a knock-on effect on the 
pace of awards and the conversion to revenues, (2) demand both by region and 
end market is patchy, resulting in some slack in utilisation and having a drag 
on margins and (3) the competitive rivalry has increased in a fragmented 
industry.

Amec intends to return "surplus cash" to shareholders, which is defined as 
EBITA (excluding non-cash items) less working capital, interest, tax and other 
normal calls on cash. On this metric, we estimate around £80m to £100m a year 
on a normalised basis. This cash is likely to come back to shareholders in the 
form of a regular buyback or special dividend. However, we think this level of 
cash returns not sufficient to drive outperformance of the stock.

While we like the asset-light business model, we worry about the underlying 
slowdown in activity in Amec's end markets. Risks to our view include a large 
scale acquisition although we highlight that the larger the acquisition, the 
higher the integration risks.

But Aberdeen Asset Management added 4.7p to 393.2p despite reports it could be 
interested in buying Scottish Widows 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/world/aberdeen-in-race-for-scottish-widows-arm-29604185.html>
 fromLloyds Banking Group, up 0.3p to 74.21p.

GlaxoSmithKline recovered some ground after recent falls, adding 13.5p to 
£16.03. The European Commission gave a positive recommendation for its Revolade 
treatment in hepatitis C infection, while Panmure Gordon repeated its buy 
recommendation on the pharmaceutical group. Panmure's Savvas Neophytou said:
 The stock has depreciated some 12% since its peak in May, with the market 
overall selling off but also a number of stock specific events have contributed 
including increased risk to Advair, the situation in China and missed upgrading 
opportunity with MAGE-A3 trial data. We have outlined our views on these three 
factors at length previously, suffice to say we see risks well mitigated. Today 
we point to the option value from the company's pipeline, particularly the 
imminent data from cardiovascular product candidate darapladib which could 
trigger significant upgrades. Today's share price represents an excellent entry 
level into a stock that provides good dividend yield, security of earnings and 
growth.

The company has been through the majority of its patent expiries, big 
liability settlements and boasts a strong balance sheet and very little M&A 
risk. With shareholder returns remaining strong, we remain Buyers of the stock 
with a price target of £18.50 which is based on a 15 times multiple of our 2014 
earnings per share forecast.

Vodafone climbed 4p to 213.1p, with the sector helped by news that Spain's 
Telefonica planned to increase its stake in Telecom Italia. Meanwhile AT&T said 
it could be interested in buying European wireless assets.

Lower down the market Premier Foods, the company behind Mr Kipling and Hovis, 
dropped 4.25p to 143.25p after the surprise departure of its finance director.

The news comes as analysts expect a new fundraising from the company, with an 
equity issue of perhaps £250m or so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2013/sep/10/premier-foods-upgrade-possible-refinancing>
.

Mark Moran joined Premier in 2011 and helped its refinancing as it struggled 
with a huge debt mountain, but will now leave for personal reasons. The company 
said it asked him to stay on for three years to continue the turnaround but he 
felt unable to make that commitment. He will be replaced by Alastair Murray, 
who until recently was finance director of Dairy Crest.

Oxford Catalysts - which will change its name to its main brand name Velocys 
on Wednesday - jumped nearly 10% to 160p in the wake of positive news on 
Monday. Its technology to convert gas into liquid fuels was selected for a US 
plant being developed by Pinto Energy.

Finally technology group OMG rose 5% to 31.75p after announcing its Vicon 
motion capture division worked on the imminent FIFA 2014 game, including
capturing the movements of the world's most expensive footballer, Real Madrid's 
Gareth Bale <http://vicon.com/Press/Details/20>.
 