
Leading shares enjoyed their best daily performance for nearly two weeks as 
traders toasted Janet Yellen's latest update from Federal Reserve land.

The Fed chair announced an expected $10bn a month reduction in the central 
bank's bond buying programme on Wednesday, but also made dovish noises about 
interest rates and positive comments about the state of the US economy.

So the dollar slipped back as investors bet cheap US borrowing would not be 
ended in the immediate future, helping the pound to hit a six year high above 
$1.705.

The FTSE 100 finished 29.55 points higher at 6808.11, its biggest one day 
points increase since 6 June, despite continuing concerns about the situation 
in Iraq. It came off its best levels, however, after a negative start on Wall 
Street as investors cashed in some of their recent gains.

Rolls-Royce roared to the top of the leaderboard, adding 82p to £10.92 as the 
aero-engine maker unveiled a £1bn share buyback using the proceeds of recent 
disposals.

Equipment rental group Ashstead recovered after recent weakness in the wake of 
its recent results, adding 33.5p to 863.5p. Caroline de La Soujeole at Cantor 
Fitzgerald issued a buy note, saying:
 Ashtead's current valuation does not fairly reflect the company's financial 
and operational strength. We believe Ashtead has never been better positioned 
to benefit from a cyclical upturn at any time in its history.

BT bounced 7.5p to 392.5p after regulator Ofcom rejected a complaint from 
TalkTalk Telecom, down 1.9p at 321p, that the company was abusing its dominant 
position in broadband pricing.

But Vodafone fell 3.25p to 194.85p as Bank of America Merrill Lynch downgraded 
the mobile phone group from buy to neutral.

Shire slipped 47p to £37.38. The pharmaceuticals group has climbed sharply in 
recent dayson talk it could be a takeover target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2014/jun/18/shire-jumps-talk-of-allergan-bid>
.

Among the mid-caps, hedge fund group Man added 5.95p to 105.1p after agreeing 
to pay an initial $219m for US peer Numeric Holdings. Another payment of up to 
$275m will be made after five years. Numis repeated its sell recommendation, 
saying:
 This is considered to be a "fair and reasonable" valuation by Man's financial 
advisor. In other words, whilst we expect to upgrade our pretax profit 
forecasts by 16-22%, we do not anticipate this having a material change to our 
valuation (given the reduction in surplus capital). We do note that this will 
help diversify the group's earnings away from the structurally declining AHL 
business, which we regard as a positive step, albeit reduces the strength of 
the balance sheet.


Software group Micro Focus International rose 25.5p to 860p after reporting a 
better than expected 2.4% drop in profits to $147.8m. Investec analyst Julian 
Yates said:
 Headline sales and EBITDA were a touch ahead of our and consensus forecasts, 
with the anticipated uptick in second half licences coming through. An outlook 
of low single digit sales growth with sustainable high margins is positive as 
is the increased debt facility to 2.5 times. All combined, this keeps the Micro 
Focus model of 15-20% shareholder returns firmly intact. This outlook supports 
a higher valuation so we return to buy with a 950p target price (up from 850p). 
Finally Velocys, the gas-to-liquids technology business, added 9.5p to 217.5p 
following news that Ervington Investments, controlled by Chelsea-owner Roman 
Abramovich, had bought around 1.3m shares to take its stake to 9m or 7.71%.
 