
Leading shares have drifted lower as the Greek stand-off continues, and ahead 
of a revision of US growth figures.

But Associated British Foods, hit recently by concerns about its sugar 
business and the effect of a strong dollar on product buying at its Primark 
chain, has climbed to a two month high after a boost from Goldman Sachs.

The bank has moved its recommendation from sell straight to buy, saying the 
shares have underperformed the market by 17% so far this year, and this 
provides a good entry point.

The bank said it believed Primark’s launch in the US would be a success, and 
could add £720m to group earnings before interest and tax by 2020:

Our analysis of the US market suggests that Primark’s launch will be a 
success, particularly with the millennial consumer cohort (around 40% of US 
versus around 25% of UK/Western Europe), which is large and growing, has more 
value-oriented shopping habits, and prefers fast fashion.

We expect the [September] launch of the Primark store in Downtown Crossing, 
Boston, to provide a catalyst re-focusing investors on the Primark long-term 
growth story following near-term negative sentiment around sugar and dollar 
sourcing. We also expect any commentary at the interim managment statement 
(July 9) regarding strong performances at Primark, confidence in the US launch 
and stabilization in other businesses, to be taken positively.

The upgrade has lifted ABF shares by 87p or nearly 3% to £30.37.

But overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 30.40 points to 7010.52 as meetings 
between Greece and its creditors continue ahead of next week’s deadline for 
another repayment to the International Monetary Fund. Differing views about 
whether a deal will be reached this weekend, not to mention the IMF’s Christine 
Lagarde talking about a possible Greek exit from the eurozone, have put 
investors on edge once more.

There is also the matter of US GDP figures later, which will be studied for 
hints about the timing of the next rate rise from the Federal Reserve 
(September seems favourite at the moment.)

Among the fallers, equipment hire group Ashtead has declined another 12p to 
£11.49 after Thursday’s downbeat comments from US peer United Rentals.

But Weir, which supplies pumping equipment to the oil industry, continued its 
volatile week, this time up 54p to £20.20 as Credit Suisse raised its target 
price from £19.15 to £22.05.

Among the mid-caps Ophir Energy has added 6.2p to 133.4p after Barclays moved 
from equal weight to overweight with a target price lifted from 200p to 225p. 
The bank said:

After reviewing our valuation of Ophir’s Equatorial Guinea Block R FLNG 
project, we upgrade our rating on Ophir to overweight with an increased 225p 
price target (from 200p). Offering potential upside of around 75% versus the 
peer group average of around 40%, we also make Ophir our top pick for the 
industry.

We believe recent stock price weakness (down 25% in the last month, versus the 
peer group down 15%) combined with significant progress in Equatorial Guinea 
provides an attractive opportunity to revisit the Ophir investment case. In 
addition to seeing upside to the Block R development concept, we believe Ophir 
is well positioned to take advantage of declining industry costs and continues 
to have a very strong balance sheet with first half estimated net cash of 
around $600m.
 