
Retailers are in focus with a host of updates from the high street.

Morrisons is leading the FTSE 100 risers, up 12.1p to 309.3p, despite the 
supermarket group reporting a 10% drop in first half profits. It has missed out 
on two key growth areas, online and convenience stores, but is now belatedly 
tackling the problem. It has linked up with online grocerOcado, and also plans 
to open 200 M local stores by the end of 2014. It also plans to cut back on 
spending on opening new superstores. Darren Shirley at Shore Capital said:
 We reiterate sell; in the medium term though we see today's statement as more 
positive for the UK grocery sector as Morrison follows Tesco's lead in being 
more judicious with its capital, potentially leading to improving industry 
returns and cash flows.

Cantor Fitzgerald also issued a sell note, but there was some positive comment 
from Jefferies, which said:
 As expected Morrisons reported a mixed first half given the margin effort of 
reversing the fourth quarter trading pressures and the increasing revenue costs 
of growth initiatives. Still, undemanding valuation and a clear reduction in 
capex intensity from here onwards point to an improving outlook (admittedly 
partly reflected by the near 20% share price rebound of the past three months).

Meanwhile Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> dipped 1.1p to 
370p despite a 16.4% rise in third quarter sales, as investors took profits 
after a recent good run in the shares.

Elsewhere Home Retail was 5.3p higher at 169.2p as the Homebase and Argos 
business reported better than expected second quarter sales. Homebase's DIY 
sales benefited from the warm summer weather while Argos beat expectations with 
a 2.7% rise.

Next also moved higher, adding 10p to £52 following an 8.2% rise in first half 
profits, helped by a strong performance from its Directory business.

Overall the FTSE 100 has edged up 3.69 points to 6592.12, as Syria fears 
receded and there was even some optimism the US Federal Reserve may not turn 
off the money taps at next week's scheduled meeting. Matt Basi at CMC Markets 
UK said:
 Bluechip stocks have largely held their recent gains this morning, as the 
FTSE continues to flirt with 6600 ahead of speeches from Mario Draghi and Mark 
Carney later today. The key driver appears to be a belief in some quarters that 
the Fed will push back their asset purchase tapering to October or beyond in 
light of the worse than expected US employment data we've seen in the last 
couple of months. 
But oil and gas construction firm Kentz has slumped 58.1p to 491.4p as engineer
Amec, up 20p to £10.78, said it would not make an offer for the business. Amec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> had an approach worth 565p to 580p 
rejected last month.
 