
Leading shares hit a near three month low, on continuing worries about Greece, 
rising bond yields and talk of a US rate rise.

In a broad based sell-off the FTSE 100 fell 36.24 points to 6753.80, its 
lowest level since 13 March. European markets were also lower, with Germany’s 
Dax down 0.7% and France’s Cac falling 0.19%. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average was up around 25 points by the time London closed, as better 
than expected job openings figures added to Friday’s non-farm payroll numbers 
to ease concerns about weakness in the US economy. But gains were limited, 
since a strong economy inevitably suggests to investors a probable rise in 
interest rates this year.

Back with Greece, and the country presented yet another set of proposals to 
its creditors designed to break the deadlock and release much needed funds. But 
the early reactions were not promising, and talks continue to try and find a 
solution before the cash runs out.

Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at IG, said:

Each passing day sees equity markets suffer further losses, as investors 
struggle to find reasons to remain within the asset class. It looks as if the 
rout in developed equities is spreading to emerging markets, with concerns 
about slowing growth combining with a rising US dollar. And it wouldn’t be a 
complete day in global markets these days without some Greece news; officials 
at the European Commission have run their red pen over Athens’ latest homework 
and given it an F.

Both sides have merely taken to reiterating their positions and then digging 
in further. The damage being wrought to the eurozone economy with all this 
uncertainty is exemplified by eurozone indices like Germany’s Dax, where we 
daily witness the erosion of gains engendered by Mario Draghi’s QE programme. 
Confidence is being sapped, imperilling the fragile recovery in the region.

Among the UK fallers, Admiral dropped 19p to £14.36 after its Confused.com 
price comparison business was criticised by a Channel 4 Dispatches programme 
over the limited number of savings accounts it showed in search results.


Miners fell back after inflation figures pointed to weakness in the Chinese 
economy. Downgrades from Societe Generale sentAnglo American down 20.1p to 
985.4p andRio Tinto 37.5p lower at £27.81.

British Airways owner International Airline Group dipped 2p to 518.5p despite 
analysts at HSBC raising their recommendation from hold to buy.

Elsewhere OneSavings Bank added 5.25p to 320p but could fall back on 
Wednesday. After the market closed RBC Capital Markets announced an offering of 
up to 5.5m shares - worth around £17m - belonging to the specialist lender’s 
management and employees, who are taking advantage of the expiry of the 
post-flotation lock-up.

Meanwhile Pets At Home lost 7.2p to 273.8p as private equity group Kohlberg 
Kravis Roberts sold 21.6% of the company at 267p a share to raise £288m.

Cineworld closed 19p lower at 490p after the surprise departure of finance 
director Philip Bowcock “to pursue other interests.”

Poundland fell 6p to 294p as house broker Shore Capital cut its profit 
forecast for the current year for the second time in just over two months. 
Analyst Clive Black said:

Poundland is due to release its 2015 preliminary results (March year-end) on 
Thursday 18 June. Noting recent UK consumer market data and the strength of 
sterling versus the euro, we have reappraised our financial forecasts for the 
group on a cautionary basis; note – we have already lowered our 2016 estimates 
forPoundland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/poundland-discount-retail> 
on 30th March 2015, reflecting slower fourth quarter trading and precautionary 
comments on the potential for sterling strength to negatively impact EBITDA by 
£4m.

Since that time we have observed a number of factors which lead us to once 
again review our forecasts with a downward bent. These factors are:

• Sterling has remained firm against the euro through much of first quarter...

• Poundland faces tough comparatives in the first quarter, which we have 
factored into our previous forecast reductions. Since then secondary data has 
been subdued...Accordingly, we are concerned that Poundland’s first quarter 
trading momentum may have slipped back further, perhaps mid- single-digit sales 
growth rather than the double-digit momentum that investors have been used to 
since flotation and the 7.5% growth assumed in our previous forecasts.

As a consequence of our expectations we deem it appropriate to take down our 
2016 forecasts again, cutting our current pretax profit to £47.5m from £50.5m 
(our prior estimate for 2016 was £51.8m). This reduction is precautionary and 
may unwind if sterling weakens against the euro, so mitigating the currency 
impact on the Irish operation, and UK trading regains momentum faster than we 
are currently expecting.

Lower down the market Software Radio Technology dipped 1p to 28.5p as the 
maritime tracking specialist reported full year losses down from £6.1m to £0.4m 
but said revenues from its core business were disappointing, and warned its 
biggest opportunity - tracking vessels for national governments - meant the 
timing of future revenues were difficult to predict.

 