
After an upbeat start markets ended the week on an uncertain note.


 On the positive side, there were reasonable US jobs figures and the remaining 
optimism from Thursday’s hints of further action from the European Central Bank 
to stimulate the struggling eurozone economy.

There was also a smattering of takeover talk to keep traders interested.

ITV was in the spotlight after rumours of a potential takeover situation in 
Australia. Liberum analysts said:

Ten Network in Australia closed up 17% [overnight] on the back of bid 
speculation from pay-TV provider Foxtel and US ally Discovery Comms. The 
speculation has been a boost to the share price during the week. It is also 
reported that Fairfax Media has also discussed a deal with Ten’s executives in 
October.

This shows that M&A in the free-to-air sector is very much indeed active. For 
ITV, following Liberty Global’s purchase of 6.4% there is a chance for [Liberty 
to] acquire the company over the longer term or other interested parties to 
come forth. The rationale for a bid would be as follows 1) access to content 2) 
potential to leverageITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> brand (high 
quality programming). Any bid must also reflect the upside of retransmission 
which we estimate could add another 35p of value.

But despite an early rise, the broadcaster ended the day virtually unchanged, 
down 0.4p at 203.3p.

That reversal was typical of the market in general although, unlike its 
European counterparts, theFTSE 100 did not actually end up in negative 
territory. After hitting a high of 6608, it finished at 6567.24, up 16.09 
points on the day.

Investors were unsettled by reports of further Russian incursions into 
Ukraine, while banking shares moved lower on signs that loan growth continued 
to look weak at European banks, which could lead to a slowdown in their 
business.

But mining shares gained ground as metal prices moved higher as the dollar 
weakened, with Mexican gold and silver specialistFresnillo up 34.5p at 734p, 
BHP Billiton 48p better at £16.76 and Anglo American adding 35.5p to 1364.5p.

Chris Beauchamp, market analyst at IG said:

The FTSE 100 stands out alone among major indices this afternoon in holding on 
to some of its gains. A weaker dollar has led to a late-stage rally in 
commodities, which is providing a reason for a rally in mining stocks, which so 
far have taken little part in the parabolic rally. Chinese CPI, retail sales 
and industrial production next week should ensure that the raw materials sector 
stays in the spotlight.

 Reports from Ukraine led to a volatile afternoon in the DAX on Thursday and 
today indications that Russian troops are again on the move saw the index dive 
below 9300 once again.

Royal Mail rose 10.6p to 462.9p after Goldman Sachs issued a buy note with a 
575p price target.

But insurers came under pressure. RSA Insurance fell another 13.9p to 446.2p 
as analysts reacted to Thursday’s update by cutting their recommendations. UBS 
reduced its price target from 427p to 418p, while Canaccord Genuity moved from 
hold to sell. Canaccord said:

The third quarter management statement highlighted the myriad headwinds the 
company faces as it restructures in difficult markets. The £7.5bn top-line was 
modestly below our £7.55bn forecast, with the UK and emerging markets weak as 
re-underwriting continued, and Canada and Scandinavia broadly in-line. Weather 
losses were in-line with the first half as a percentage of premium, but large 
losses rose. The one bright spot was the commentary that ‘current year 
underwriting profit trends are broadly in-line with our expectations...for most 
business units’, but details were thin.

Management flagged it anticipated further writedowns on deferred tax assets 
and a reduction in discount rate at the full year.

Admiral was the biggest faller in the leading index, down 44p at £12.15 after 
the insurer saw third quarter turnover fall 3% as premiums declined in a 
competitive car insurance market.

Housebuilders lost ground after Bovis Homes, down 24p at 819.5p, said profits 
would rise strongly in 2014 but the housing market was returning to more normal 
levels. It said sales rates had fallen in the second half of the year compared 
to last year, when the government’s Help to Buy scheme boosted business.


Persimmon lost 27p to £14.10 and Bellway fell 40p to £16.74.

Among the mid-caps, gambling technology group Playtech fell sharply on 
Thursday on worries about a clampdown in Malaysia on online gaming. The company 
said it was monitoring the situation but still expected to meet the City’s 
earnings expectations for the year. Its shares recovered 13.5p to 648p, and 
Peel Hunt analyst Nick Batram said:

Thursday’s near 8% decline in the share price, in response to two-day-old news 
that Malaysia was blocking 172 online gaming websites ahead of new legislation 
(yet to be detailed), was an aggressive over-reaction in our view. As far as we 
are aware, none of the 172 blocked sites is operated by Playtech licensees – 
this is not to say that there won’t be some knock-on impact. The last time 
Playtech disclosed the amount of revenues from Malaysia (on admission to the 
Official List in July 2012), the country accounted for 8.4% of revenues; we 
believe it is now below this level.

[The reaction] highlights the volatility that goes with a business generating 
around two-thirds of revenues from ‘grey’ markets [but] in our opinion it was 
overdone. Playtech has a global footprint, recent significant licensee wins 
have all been in regulated markets, and the around €400m cash provides the 
group with further options. Therefore, for those that are comfortable with the 
risk profile, Playtech remains an attractive proposition.

Lower down the market Rose Petroleum added more than 4% to 2.95p after a 
positive assessment report on assets the company recently bought in the Cisco 
Dome field in eastern Utah in the US.

Finally Fever-Tree Drinks, the maker of premium tonic water, lemonade and 
ginger beer, bubbled up 23% on its market debut from its offer price of 134p to 
close at 165p.

 