
Glencore has been rumoured as a possible buyer for Kazakh miner Eurasian 
Natural Resources Corporation for some while.

Indeed the talk became so loud that in June the commodities trader issued a 
statement saying it was not considering a bid, ruling it out of any offer for 
at least six months under takeover panel rules.

But now analysts at Nomura have suggested Glencore could benefit from 
acquiring the 26% stake in ENRC currently held by rival firmKazakhmys. In 
return Kazakhmys would receive Glencore subsidiary Kazzinc, a producer of 
copper, precious metals and lead as well as zinc. Glencore is considering a 
flotation of Kazzinc's gold business, but Nomura believes this would not hamper 
a deal withKazakhmys <https://www.theguardian.com/business/kazakhmys>. Nomura's 
Patrick Jones said:
 Glencore is unlikely to pay large take-over premiums in the sector and 
Kazakhmys would prefer to have a Central Asian target to replace the stake in 
its portfolio. Additionally, Glencore aims to significantly expand its 
marketing in seaborne iron ore, a market dominated by the big three miners of 
BHP Billiton, Rio, and Vale. Meanwhile, ENRC possesses a growing Kazakh and 
Brazilian iron ore business.

Glencore and Kazakhmys can both create value through swapping Kazakhmys' ENRC 
stake for Glencore's Kazzinc (ex-Altyntau Gold). To give an effective premium 
for the ENRC stake, Glencore could allow Kazakhmys to realise the value of 
Kazakhmys' own goldstream by injecting Kazakhmys' de-rated gold and silver 
production into the proposed Altyntau IPO, which would come at no cost to 
Glencore.

Acquiring a stake in ENRC would give Glencore exposure to iron ore and a 
potential entry point to market ENRC's iron production, which we think could 
triple by 2016. This would represent a major step forward in Glencore's goal of 
becoming a major iron ore marketer.

Addition of Kazzinc could create a leaner, meaner Kazakhmys and offers a 
significant catalyst for turning more positive on the stock. 
ENRC added 8.5p to 649p, while Glencore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> rose 5.5p to 407.5p and 
Kazakhmys was unchanged at 874.5p.

Meanwhile Rio Tinto lost 21.5p to £31.38 after it made a $572m agreed offer 
for Canadian uranium group Hathor Exploration, topping a hostile bid from rival 
Cameco Corporation.

Hopes of a hefty increase in the Eurozone bailout fund helped push the market 
higher, with theFTSE 100 finishing 40.14 points higher at 5450.49 despite some 
dispute over whether EU members would agree to such a move. Angus Campbell, 
head of sales at Capital Spreads, said:
 The FTSE tentatively rallied today as investors remain convinced that this 
weekend will see France and Germany come together to boost the EFSF and save 
the European Union from destruction. Although there is still a great deal of 
uncertainty surrounding the actual deal, banking stocks were in demand as many 
people want to get ahead of the game in case they miss out on a possible surge 
higher. 
So the prospect of European banks being supported lifted Royal Bank of Scotland
 0.73p to 24.47p,Lloyds Banking Group 1.085p to 33.145p and Barclays 4.35p to 
179.45p.

Better than expected US housing figures helped lift building materials group 
Wolseley by 78p to £17.75 while a positive trading update from Diageo saw its 
shares climb 51p to £13.31.

SABMiller added 22p to £22.83 after it said first half beer volumes rose 3% 
although this was weaker than some had expected. The brewer - which has agreed 
to buy Australian rival Fosters for $10bn - also unveiled another deal. It is 
buying a 24% stake in Turkish brewer Anadolu Efes, a move which combines the 
two groups' Russian and Ukraine businesses to boost their market shares in the 
countries.

But GKN dropped 9.2p to 185.9p despite an upbeat trading statement, as 
investors worried about the global outlook for manufacturing. Analyst James 
Dawson at Charles Stanley said:
 At this stage this third quarter statement serves to underpin existing 
forecasts for 2011. However, the macroeconomic comments together with the 
softer divisional margins in some areas do suggest continued nervousness about 
the future prospects into 2012, especially in relation to the weaker European 
small car sales and margin drag at aerospace. We continue to believe that the 
risks to forecasts remain to the downside and therefore although a 2012 PE of 
6.8 times looks unchallenging we retain our reduce rating. 
Chip designer Arm lost 11p to 580.5p following Apple's disappointing results, 
even though it was a pretty stellar performance by the iPad company by most 
people's standards.

Among the mid-caps Ashtead, the industrial equipment rental group, added 9p to 
159.8p after better than expected results from US rival United Rentals. Seymour 
Pierce said:
 We re-iterate our strong buy stance on Ashtead in the light of the strong 
third quarter results from US peer United Rentals. United exceeded consensus 
pretax profit estimates by 17.5% due to increasingly strong rentals growth. 
Home Retail plunged 20.2p to 99.5p after a 70% slump in first half profits, 
with its Argos subsidiary making operating profits of just £3m in the period.

Balfour Beatty fell 9.4p to 248.3p after Investec began coverage with a sell 
recommendation. It said:
 Balfour Beatty is in a difficult position at present. Its core end markets 
are characterised by declining volumes and increasingly competitive tendering. 
The declining cash position revealed at the recent interims is another source 
of concern. With limited positive catalysts to improve sentiment and an 
increasingly high probability of earnings disappointments ahead, we initiate 
with a sell recommendation and 185p sum of the parts-based price target. 
Greggs gained 2.3p to 499.1p as the baker announced a trial to open franchised 
stores in Moto motorway service stations across the UK. The 12 month trial 
could lead to 30 stores being opened in what is a new market forGreggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/greggs>. Clive Black at Shore Capital 
repeated his buy recommendation on the business, saying:
 We see this as a sensible move that broadens the access of the Greggs' 
proposition, consistent with management's drive to open more stores in more 
diverse locations; Greggs has around 1500 outlets.

The proof of the pudding, or in this case the steak bake, will of course be in 
the eating and so we do not seek to get ahead of ourselves at this stage, it is 
just a trial. However, with its strong price points, appetizing range (that is 
gradually undergoing improvement sub-category by sub-category), this could be a 
strategic step that opens other opportunities for the Newcastle baker; it also 
has stores in Bury based Euro Garages and so other such tie-ups could clearly 
follow. The volume from such outlets should support the coverage of central 
overheads and bakery utilization, so supporting margins that are set with 
self-help to progressively build. 
Lower down the market struggling support services group Mouchel was steady at 
15.25p after it agreed to sell its rail business to Australia's Sinclair Knight 
Merz for £3.4m to help repay its borrowings. David Brockton at Espirito Santo 
said:
 This is positive news, but small and inevitably likely to be viewed as too 
little too late. This divestment, in addition to the recent receipt of an 
Islamic bond valued at around £2m (with around £18m still outstanding as an 
uncertified claim), provides small contribution to reducing Mouchel's £87.4m 
net debt (and meeting a £30m voluntary re-payment date), but does not 
materially alter the group's current predicament or its most recent covenant 
breach. 
But Cosalt, which supplies safety products and services to the marine and oil 
and gas industries, collapsed 57% to 0.695p, after it warned trading for the 
year would be significantly lower than previous expectations. It has begun a 
full review of its operations and future funding requirements, although it does 
not believe it is in breach of its banking covenants.
 