
Leading shares have bounced back after two days of decline, helped by positive 
growth figures from the five biggest members of the eurozone.

For once shrugging off worries about Greece’s finances, the FTSE 100 has added 
53.01 points to 6986.81 as Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain 
all reported GDP growth in the first three months of the year. But later come 
figures for Greece and the EU as a whole and, closer to home, the Bank of 
England inflation report. Meanwhile the unemployment rate fell to 5.5%, its 
lowest level since July 2008, and average earnings rose to a higher than 
expected 1.9% in the three months to March. Sterling hit a five month high 
after the data, on the basis an interest rate rise looks more likely.

Back with equities and the day’s biggest FTSE 100 riser so far is South 
African paper makerMondi - a sign of the global nature of the UK’s leading 
index - which has climbed 117p to £14.15 after the company said first quarter 
underlying operating profit had jumped 29%. It benefited from both sales growth 
and paper prices holding up. UBS said:

The strong performance reflected higher demand, lower input costs, and 
incrementally higher contributions from capital projects and acquisitions (and 
was despite the Richards Bay shutdown in the first quarter of 2015 (UBS 
estimated €15m impact) versus no shuts in the first quarter of 2014). On the 
back of this we lift our 2015 estimated earnings per share by 5% (to around 8% 
above consensus as of 12 April). We upgraded the share to buy on 24 April 
reflecting our view that there were forecast upside risks and this upgrade 
highlights the ongoing potential.

Also higher was Barratt Developments, 18p better at 563.5p after it reported 
strong demand and increased completitions, with the UK election apparently 
having little impact. RivalPersimmon has put on 38p to £17.86.

Travel business Tui is 20p better at £12.73 as it said profit growth over the 
next three years would be more than 10% annually as it benefited from the 
recent merger ofTui Travel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tuitravel> and 
German parent Tui AG. It also confirmed reports it would put hotel booking 
website LateRooms up for sale.

But Compass Group is down 41p at £11.22. The catering group said first half 
revenues grew 5.7%, but warned of a possible slowdown in north America from 8% 
growth to 6% in the second six months.

Admiral has fallen 20p to £14.55 as the insurer’s chief executive Henry 
Engelhardt said he was stepping down next year, to be replaced by co-founder 
David Stevens. Peel Hunt said:

Arguably, the international strategy has been led by Engelhardt, who has had 
ambitions of expanding into the US market. The key driver of profits for the 
group has come from the UK, andAdmiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> has built an undisputed UK 
motor insurance track record since 2004, while the international strategy has 
required significant investment. No news on whether this changes the group’s 
international strategy. The shares trade at 16 times 2015 PE versus the 
sector’s 14.7 times. We maintain our hold.
 