
Growing optimism that the Syrian crisis could be resolved without a US attack 
on the country helped push leading shares to their best level for a month last 
week.

But with Syria put to one side for the moment, investors moved on to worrying 
about next Wednesday's US Federal Reserve meeting. A feeling that the American 
central bank may signal a slowdown in its $85bn a month bond buying programme, 
a key support for global markets in recent months, took some of the shine off 
the week's gains.

So the FTSE 100 ended at 6583.80 on Friday, down 5.18 points on the day but up 
nearly 40 points on the week. David Madden, market analyst at IG, said:
 Traders find themselves under less pressure now the Syrian situation has 
cooled down. An immediate strike on Syria appears to be off the table since 
President Assad has agreed to hand over chemical weapons, and this has brought 
stability to the markets.

[Markets are] in two minds about whether to expect tapering by the US Federal 
Reserve. The longer Ben Bernanke avoids tapering, the more the market will 
demand it.

Mining shares were among the main fallers on Friday, as anticipation of the 
Fed turning off its money tap sent copper to a five week low while gold 
suffered its worst week for two months.

Anglo American fell 52p to 1568.5p, Vedanta Resources dropped 22p to £11.60 and
BHP Billiton dropped 38p to £18.85. Glencore Xstrata, boosted earlier in the 
week by higher than expected cost savings of $2bn from its merger, dipped 2.15p 
to 341.5p.

Technology companies were in the spotlight during the week, with Apple shares 
crumbling after a disappointing iPhone launch. Analysts said the new products 
were too expensive to appeal to consumers in emerging markets, raising the 
prospect ofApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> losing further 
ground to rival smartphone manufacturers. The company fell around 6%, wiping 
$30bn off its market value, following the launch.

But Imagination Technologies moved higher after its chip designs made it into 
the iPhone. It added 32.3p to 339.7p as Morgan Stanley put an overweight rating 
on company. The bank said Imagination's shares had been hit by a string of bad 
news in the past six months, but now things seemed to be looking up:
 Apple announced that the new iPhone5S would be compatible with OpenGL 3.0 and 
that the graphics performance would be much better – this points to Apple 
moving to Rogue which is the new generation GPU from Imagination.

Apple confirmed that the new iPhone 5C would run on A6 chip. We believe that 
some investors had been worried that the C version would have been designed 
with a single chip solution from a third party and thus without Imagination.

Broadcom announced it would buy the LTE chip business of Renesas. Renesas LTE 
chip includes an apps processor with an Imagination GPU. Broadcom has never 
used Imagination before. This provides some upside risk to earnings next year, 
should Broadcom ramp at Samsung and others. 
Meanwhile Imagination also announced a new licensing agreement with US 
semiconductor business MediaTek.

Rival chip designer Arm - another Apple supplier - slipped 14.5p to 972p on 
profit taking following gains earlier in the week.

Among the day's risers, IMI <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imi> was 
lifted 13p to £14.90 after analysts at Berenberg raised their target price on 
the industrial group from £13 to £14.20, following a reasonable half year 
performance from the business. But Berenberg kept its hold rating, saying:
 The stock is now up 37% year to date and valuation looks rich even on 2014 
estimates, but the ongoing share buyback and the sale of the merchandising 
business are likely provide support for the shares in the near term.


Elsewhere ITV was 3.8p better at 183.4p after Nomura raised its price target 
from 170p to 200p, saying:
 Continued UK macroeconomic improvement means we raise our ITV 2013 ad 
forecast to 1.5% (from 1%) and our 2014 forecast to 4% (from 2%).

But Morrisons fell 7.2p to 295.3p after a number of analysts turned negative 
following Thursday's news of a 10% drop in first half profits as the 
supermarket suffered the consequences of its tardy entry into the fast growing 
online and convenience store sectors. Citigroup moved from neutral to sell, 
saying:
 Management made a firm statement that they will seek to reduce cash capex and 
investigate returning surplus capital. There is merit to this aspiration. 
However like for like growth was negative in first half and is expected by 
management to remain negative through the balance of the year. Cash generated 
from operations looks likely to be down over the full year. To a considerable 
extent, we feel that the message on capital return was out of time with the 
moment. 
Mike Dennis at Cantor said:
 Morrison's growth prospects and ability to improve return on capital employed 
is limited by the loss of their budget orientated customers to the rapidly 
growing discount sector. In addition, we believe Tesco's underperformance in 
the UK restricts Morrison's future growth prospects. The recent rise in the 
share price seems, in our view, to be misplaced optimism around an improving UK 
economy and a change in financial strategy (reduced capex to £650m by 2016, 
sale of assets around £500m). This may provide capital for buy-backs but could 
add to costs at a time when Morrison's sales, gross and net margins are falling 
faster than their UK peers. In our view, the potential capital return in 
2014/15 could be partly offset by lower margins and profits. 
Among the mid-caps Pennon slid 27p to 699.5p yesterday after Credit Suisse cut 
its rating on the water and waste business from neutral to underperform. The 
bank's analysts said it could face pricing pressure in its energy from waste 
facilities, as supply increased and demand fell. In the water operations, 
regulatory pressures were increasing across the sector.

Oil and gas construction group Kentz closed 7p lower at 492p after a second 
bidder pulled out. Germany's M+W said on Friday it would not make an offer for 
Kentz, a day after engineerAmec decided not to follow up a rejected 565p to 
580p approach.Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> dipped 3p to 
£10.75 despite hopes it would return cash to shareholders, depending on future 
acquisition opportunities.

JD Wetherspoon added 17p to 752p as the pubs group reported a 6.3% rise in 
annual profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/13/jd-wetherspoon-profits-open-pubs>
 but said it expected lower like-for-like sales because of higher costs and 
taxation.

Property group Songbird Estates built up a 6.75p rise to 158p after a 6% rise 
in net asset value. But the property group admitted it faced a multi-million 
pound bill to deal with two setbacks. Its jointly owned Walkie Talkie 
skyscraper in the City of London has focussed the sun's rays so that they have 
melted car parts and bicycles, while the government said it would review its 
plans to develop Royal Dutch Shell's headquarters, despite a green light from 
local authorities.

Finally Fastjet, the African budget airline backed by easyJet founder Sir 
Stelios Haji-Ioannou, flew 53% higher to 7.175p despite the company saying it 
knew of no reason for the rise.
 