
As markets paused for breath after recent rises, Amec bucked the downward 
trend after an upbeat trading statement.

The engineering group said it was on course to meet expectations for full year 
profits, it had a strong pipeline of potential acquisitions, but it would 
consider returning cash to shareholders if it did not find the right purchase.

A strong performance from the North Sea and the Gulf of Mexico lifted its 
performance, just a couple of months after it revised down its revenue targets 
due to weakness in its mining division.

Analyst Gavin Jago at Shore Capital said:
 The target of 100p of earnings in 2014 has been reiterated again in 
this...statement, leaving the shares trading on a prospective 11.7 times PE 
ratio, which does not seem expensive, in our view. We maintain our hold 
recommendation on the shares.

Canaccord Genuity was less enthusiastic:
 We continue to believe that Amec's valuation is up with events. In our view 
the recent rally in the stock has been driven by the two announcements in UK 
nuclear: the renewal of the Nuclear Management Partners [consortium where Amec 
has 36%] contract on Sellafield, and the decision to go ahead with a £16bn new 
reactor at Hinkley Point. Amec has a leading position in UK nuclear engineering 
and has been able to generate margins well ahead of the group average, close to 
15%.

The full year results are due in February. There is the potential for 
announcements of acquisitions between now and year-end, and if not, a buyback. 
Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> added 17p to £11.84.

But overall the FTSE 100 finished 25.45 points lower at 6698.01, awaiting 
Wednesday's US Federal Reserve minutes and amid comments from various members 
of the US central bank which only served to muddy the waters about when it 
might start tapering its $85bn a month bond buying programme. On top of that, 
sentiment was dented by negative remarks about equities from US investment guru 
Carl Icahn. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said:
 A slightly more cautious approach has been the watchword today for European 
markets after last night's comments from billionaire investor Carl Icahn about 
his concerns about the sustainability of the current rally. As if to emphasis 
the concerns about a lacklustre global economic outlook the OECD downgraded its 
forecasts for global growth for 2013 and 2014.

Investors seem to care less about the fundamentals of the markets and the 
companies that they invest in, and more about the direction of policy of the 
central banks, and in particular the Federal Reserve. This exuberance does 
appear to be starting to be questioned now and that has to be a good thing, 
particularly given the gains we have seen so far this year when set against a 
backdrop of weak or negative GDP growth. 
Testing group Intertek was among the main fallers, down 79p to £31.02 after a 
disappointing update. The company said ten month revenues grew by 7.6%, but 
this had slowed to 5% in the four months between July and October. It said:
 The industry-wide headwinds experienced in the first half of the year have 
persisted into the second half. The weakness of the minerals market and 
challenging conditions in Europe have continued, alongside lower growth in the 
industrial inspection market following two years of exceptionally high growth. 
News of the $95m acquisition of North American certification business 
Architectural Testing did little to limit the damage.

Heading the other way was easyJet, up 89p to £13.45 after a 51% rise in pretax 
profits to £478m beat expectations and it revealed plans to return £175m to 
shareholders through a special dividend.

G4S rose 3.3p to 260.1p after it agreed to pay back around £24m to the UK 
government for overbilling on its electronic tagging contracts.

The outsourcing group, along with rival Serco, was alleged to have charged for 
prisoners who were not tagged or in extreme cases, were actually dead.

After an independent review by Linklaters, G4S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s> said it had wrongly billed for 
monitoring services in some cases "when equipment had not been fitted or after 
it had been removed."

The company has also apologised to the Ministry of Justice, but it said the 
review found there was no evidence of dishonesty or criminal conduct.

It has issued credit notes worth £24.1m, and has paid £2m for the external 
investigation.

Analyst Kean Marden at Jefferies said:
 In our view, this issue is nearing its endgame and, after the Bill Crothers 
report [the review of 29 G4S and Serco contracts] is published this side of 
Christmas, both companies will be permitted to bid for public sector contracts 
again.

According to Capita, the Cabinet Office is "distressed" by developments at 
Serco and G4S and wants them "back in the fold and bidding". Babcock and Mitie 
have also hinted at a warmer relationship towards the outsourcers as disputes 
are delaying reform and savings. We understand that high level government 
officials have directly intervened to move relations back to a more cordial 
footing. 
Among the mid-caps Enterprise Inns jumped 16p to 154p as investors warmed to 
the pubs group's latest update. Its full year like for like sales fell by 2.9%, 
hit by cold weather in the first half and the poor consumer environment.

But fourth quarter sales provided a positive sign, edging up 0.6%, while 
growth had continued in the first seven weeks of the new financial year.

Overall profits fell 11.7% to £121m, in line with expectations, while debt 
fell by £216m to £2.5bn.

Ted Tuppen, who founded Enterprise in 1991, announced plans to step down as 
chief executive next February and leave the group in May. He will be succeeded 
by chief operating officer Simon Townsend, who has been with Enterprise since 
1999.

Tuppen told Reuters that with better growth trends and falling debt, the 
business was well placed to improve under the new leadership.

Elsewhere Paddy Power dropped 8% to €57.5 after the bookmaker said full year 
operating profits would be around €11m lower than it expected three months ago. 
It blamed results going against it since July, including the Australian Spring 
Horse Racing Carnival and Champions League football.

Ladbrokes, which last week insisted it was on track to meet forecasts, was hit 
by the news, down 3.2p to 175p.

Elsewhere Thomas Cook climbed 7p to 147.5p following news it had sold the 
majority of its stake in the Airline Group - the majority owner of the UK's 
National Air Traffic Services - to the Universities Superannuation Scheme for 
£38m in cash.Tui Travel, up 1p to 388.2p, did the same, as did Deutsche 
Lufthansa and Virgin Atlantic.

Engineer Bodycote International dropped 29.5p to 618.5p as it reported a 3.6% 
rise in four month revenues, but this was driven by acquisitions. Without that, 
there was a decline of 1.3%.
 