
On yet another stomach-churning day for investors, it was perhaps inevitable 
that there was a FTSE 100 bid rumour amidst all the volatility.

As global recession fears gripped the markets, and Europe's debt woes 
continued, traders heard renewed talk of possible predatory interest in 
insurance groupAviva. The suggestion was that Zurich Financial Services could 
be interested, with a bid of up to 440p a share which would valueAviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> at £12.5bn. Cynics pointed 
out this story had done the rounds before, although there was a hefty volume of 
shares traded. Meanwhile BarCap raised its recommendation on the insurer from 
underweight to equalweight and its price target from 450p to 480p.

All this did little to help Aviva, however, which closed 5.3p lower at 301.8p, 
dragged down by its exposure to struggling equity markets.

Downbeat comments from the likes of World Bank president Robert Zoellick, who 
said the European economy was entering a dangerous period, did not help 
sentiment, while a surprise move by the Swiss National Bank to effectively 
devalue the franc against the euro also unsettled investors. Italy faced a 
confidence vote as it amended its austerity plans amid strikes on the streets, 
while analysts at RBS warned Greece could default in December. Wall Street fell 
back as it reopened after the Labor day holiday, with a stronger than expected 
services sector survey dampening hopes of further quantitative easing from the 
Federal Reserve.

But after two days of hefty declines the FTSE 100 bucked the falling trend in 
global markets to register a 54.26 point increase to 5156.84. Joshua Raymond, 
chief market strategist at City Index said:
 European stock indices suffered yet more losses on Tuesday in a very choppy 
trading session with investors unwilling to hold onto risk for too long as 
concern over the impact of the political discourse over the European sovereign 
debt crisis. The FTSE 100 did however outperform broader European trade with 
commodity stocks helping to keep the UK index from slipping into red territory. 
Whitbread led the risers, up 106p to £15.63 after a positive trading 
statement, with business boosted by its Costa Coffee division.

Betfair, 27p better at 655p, and equipment hire company Ashtead, which added 
21.2p to 133.2p, were also lifted by encouraging updates. ButKesa Electricals 
closed 6.3p lower at 95p andHalfords fell 11.6p to 280.5p after Citigroup 
reduced its recommendations on both retailers. The bank also cut its earnings 
estimates forMarks & Spencer, where it is joint broker, by 3% this year and 
around 5% after that to reflect a weaker consumer demand outlook. Marks slipped 
0.6p to 301.8p.

Dixons Retail dipped 0.41p to 10.59p as Nick Bubb at Arden cut his price 
target from 17p to 12p ahead of Wednesday's trading update, saying:
 We remain nervous, despite the strength of the Elkjop business [in 
Scandanavia] and the success of the Currys Megastores, as the balance sheet is 
fragile.

Banks, after an early rally, came under pressure again on worries about 
proposed changes to their business, US lawsuits and their exposure to sovereign 
debt.Barclays lost 3.4p to 150.75p while Royal Bank of Scotland dropped 0.61p 
to 21.17p despite reports Australia's Macquarie was considering a $6bn bid for 
the bank's aircraft leasing business.

Cairn Energy climbed 2.3p to 305.4p despite Credit Suisse restarting coverage 
following the sale of the bulk of its stake in its Indian business to Vedanta 
Resources with a neutral rating. The bank said:
 With Cairn's commitment to return a large proportion of the proceeds from the 
sale of its Cairn India stake, we think the nature of the investment 
proposition to the market is looking uncertain. In future it will likely be up 
to the wider industry to determine the availability of funding for the 
Greenland portfolio. If the vast majority of the $4.8bn is returned, then what 
remains is a speculative exploration vehicle that is only funded for four wells 
in Greenland in our opinion. We reinstate coverage with a neutral rating on the 
basis that maybe, just maybe, one of the upcoming wells in Greenland will 
discover oil. 
Scottish and Southern Energy rose 21p to £12.69 after Investec raised its 
target price from £12.14 to £12.79 "to incorporate a slightly more bullish 
outcome from the ratcheted-up capital expenditure programme."

Imagination Technologies slipped 0.5p to 325p despite news of a new licensing 
contract with Sony. Analyst Eoin Lambe at Liberum Capital repeated his sell 
advice to clients ahead of an expected trading update, saying:
 Sony is an existing Imagination licensee so this is not major news. 
Interestingly Sony only licensed Imagination's older intellectual property 
(Series 5 not 6), which comes with a lower licence fee. [This is the] first 
license announcement since the year end - we don't expect the licensing 
strength seen [last year] to continue in current environment.  