
After six days of rises, leading shares were hit by some poor trading updates, 
some profit taking and disappointing US retail sales.

The cumulative effect of all that was to knock 15.61 points off the FTSE 100 
to leave it at 6659.42, although it recovered from its lows following an 
opening gain on Wall Street.

Tate and Lyle took the wooden spoon. The sweetener specialist cut its estimate 
for the full year to below City expectations, sending its shares tumbling 
126.5p to 660p.

The company, which supplies sweeteners and other ingredients to food and drink 
makers, blamed weak sales in developed markets and a drop in sucralose prices.

Meanwhile Rolls-Royce dropped 165p to £10.45 after it said sharp cuts in 
defence spending in the US and Europe would mean no profit growth in 2014. The 
news draggedBAE Systems 13.7p lower to 425.8p.

Lloyds Banking Group lost 2.21p to 81.32p despite moving to a full year profit 
as the sector remained out of favour.

On the other side of the coin, Imperial Tobacco jumped 126p to £23.51 
following a well received update.

Shire edged up 1p to £31.42 after the pharmaceutical group said fourth quarter 
earnings rose 29% to a better than expected $510m. Full year income rose 23% to 
$1.86bn.

The figures were boosted by a strong performance from its rare disease drugs, 
while the group has also benefited from chief executive Flemming Ornskov's move 
to simplify the business and add on acquisitions.

But after early gains, Amec dipped 12p to £10.80 even though the company 
firmed up its $3bn bid for US rival Foster Wheeler, announced a bigger than 
expected dividend and a record order book. Its full year profits rose 3% rise 
to £343m.

Aberdeen Asset Management fell 19.4p to 408.2p after Jefferies moved from hold 
to underperform. Analyst Jason Streets said:
 We do not believe that the [deal to buy Scottish Widows] will achieve its 
stated aims nor will it compensate for the slowdown in the group's powerhouse 
[equities business]. Aberdeen's future prospects mean its earnings deserve, in 
our view, a lower multiple. The chief executive of Aberdeen sold a substantial 
number of shares just 16 days after announcing the deal to acquire Scottish 
Widows; we urge investors to follow his lead. We cut our target price to 350p 
and our rating to underperform. 
Royal Mail rose 2p to 598p and Asos added 282p to £65.62 after both companies 
were added to the MSCI Europe index, widely followed by tracker funds. Cantor 
Fitzgerald calculated tracker demand at 30m shares forRoyal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> and just over 2m for Asos.

Among the mid-caps, IP Group, which commercialises intellectual property 
developed in universities and other academic establishments, rose 9.5p to 
196.5p after strong demand for its 165p a share placing allowed it to lift the 
amount it planned to raise from £75m to £100m. At the same time IP announced 
one of its portfolio companies, software analytics businessActual Experience, 
had joined Aim. Actual soared to 245p compared to the 54.5p introduction price.

Film and television distribution group Entertainment One, which released films 
including American Hustle and 12 Years a Slave, added 7.5p to 334p after an 
upbeat trading statement. In a buy note Investec said:
 A good 10 month interim management statement showing very strong momentum in 
both Film and TV, with full year earnings expected ahead of previous management 
expectations.

But Ladbrokes lost 5.5p to 145.7p after analysts at Davy cut from neutral to 
underperform in the light of possible regulation of gaming machines in betting 
shops. They said:
 Regardless of the eventual regulatory outcome, our assessment of the 
valuations of William Hill and Ladbrokes has resulted in a rather surprising 
conclusion; we believe that the market is actually pricing in considerably more 
risk for William Hill than Ladbrokes at current levels. Indeed, it appears to 
us that Ladbrokes is actually trading at its fair value at present in the 
absence of regulatory change. This is in contrast to William Hill, which is 
trading at a 16% discount to our fair value on the same basis. That 
inconsistency does not make sense, particularly given Ladbrokes' higher 
exposure to machines and its higher operational gearing to falling machine 
revenue. Indeed, if the same level of risk was to be priced into Ladbrokes as 
we believe is currently being priced into William Hill, then our indicative 
valuation of Ladbrokes would be just 102p.
 