
Unlike other European markets, UK shares slipped back last week but have at 
least started the new trading session on a positive note.

Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said: 

While European and US markets managed to book their fourth successive week of 
gains they still remain in negative territory for the year, though the FTSE 100 
did slip back slightly last week, largely as a result of weak performances from 
the mining, oil and gas and banking sectors which all posed negative weeks, and 
weighed overall.

 This week looks set to get off to a positive start due to Asia markets 
following on from the positive end to last week, as we look ahead to another 
week of headline risk from data and central banks.

The Bank of Japan meets over the next two days, while the US Federal Reserve 
will unveil its latest interest rate decision on Wednesday, the same day as the 
UK budget. The day after comes the Bank of England announcement.

China’s central bank could also be in the spotlight. Weak retail sales and 
industrial production figures from the world’s second largest economy over the 
weekend prompted speculation the bank might be prepared to provide more 
stimulus to boost the flagging economy.

This thought has helped mining shares, with Glencore up 6.3p to 148p, Anglo 
American adding 19.6p to 535.2p and BHP Billiton 19.8p better at 835.6p.

So overall the FTSE 100 is currently 32.91 points higher at 6172.70.

ITV has climbed 3.5p to 237.9p following a report in the Sunday Times that 
Channel 4 could be privatised. That could helpITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> if it leads to the introduction of 
retransmission charges, said Liberum. In a buy note analyst Ian Whittaker said:

The Culture Secretary yesterday indicated he was in favour of privatising 
Channel 4. We see this as increasing the chances of the introduction of 
retransmission fees for the main public service broadcasting channels, which 
would be a boost to both ITV’s earnings and rating.

If ITV could charge £1 per month per pay-tv subscriber for ITV1, we estimate 
this would boost full year revenues (and adjusted pretax profit, as it would be 
100% margin enhancing) by £145m, or a 12% boost to our current 2017 estimated 
ITV forecasts (we currently do not assume any retransmission revenues for ITV1 
in forecasts). It should also – as it did for the US broadcasters – lead to a 
re-rating of the shares.

Morgan Stanley was also positive on the broadcaster:

ITV looks cheap against peers and the advertising outlook may be better than 
the April number suggests.

But Liberum’s Whittaker repeated his sell rating on Pearson, up 0.5p to 
872.5p, after comments from a US book business. He said:

Barnes and Noble Education, a major US college bookstore business reported 
third quarter numbers last week and indicated it was seeing a number of 
structural headwinds in the sales of textbooks and materials in the US higher 
education market: “As we look at sales for the quarter by merchandise category, 
our textbook sales declined 5.4% on a comparable basis, primarily due to the 
later Rush period and decreased enrollments in community colleges. Aggressive 
online marketplace pricing, digital direct courseware sales, OER (Open 
Education Resources) content, along with students’ reluctance to purchase 
textbooks, is providing some headwinds for course material sales. In order to 
combat these headwinds, we have successfully piloted our textbook 
price-matching program on multiple campuses this fall, and again during the 
Spring Rush.” This seems at odds with Pearson’s comments about 
“cyclical/policy” factors being the main reason for the problems it faces in 
its US higher education side, which we estimate is at least one-third of group 
profits.

Insurer Admiral has fallen 41p to £18.74 after a good recent run as HSBC moved 
from buy to hold, while the same bank reduced its rating on transport group
Stagecoach, down 13.6p to 259.8p, from hold to reduce.

Aviva is down 6.4p at 489p as RBC issued an underperform rating, although it 
raised its target price from 460p to 480p.
 