
Markets are staging an early rally after this week’s hefty falls amid panicky 
trading. But the mood is still cautious ahead of chair Janet Yellen testifying 
to Congress later, and there are some notable losers.

Hikma has dropped 234p or nearly 12% to £17.61 after the pharmaceutical group 
revised the terms of its offer for US generic drug group Roxane. It said it 
would pay $535m less than originally anticipated $2.65bn since the group’s 2015 
revenue would be lower than expected. It said Roxane’s revenues this year would 
also be affected. Analysts at Jefferies said:

The company stated they believe 2016 revenue will be negatively impacted and 
has reduced the revenue range for 2017 to $700-750m vs. $725-775m previously 
and JEFe $750m.

Since the publication of the Prospectus on January 22nd, Hikma received new 
information from BI with regard to the financial performance of Roxane in 2015, 
leading to a reassessment of the outlook for 2016 and 2017. Roxane’s unaudited 
revenue appears to have been lower than Hikma expected at the time of the 
prospectus’ publication.

Higher than expected rebates and increased cost of sales the cause: Rebates 
were primarily being paid to wholesalers, as the mix shifted from direct sales 
to retailers towards more indirect sales via wholesalers the level of rebates 
paid increased. This resulted in lower net selling prices than had been 
previously expected. Furthermore, Hikma believes the cost of sales is higher 
due to higher volumes and a change in mix which has led to a higher cost of raw 
materials.

Analysts at Stifel were still positive on the deal, saying:

We still believe the acquisition makes strong strategic sense for Hikma, and 
plan to adjust our forecasts for these changes in due course.

Chip designer Arm is also in the doldrums, down 37.5p to 902.5p as the Apple 
supplier reported a better than expected 14% rise in fourth quarter revenues to 
$407.9m but brokers pointed out that a $9m royalty catch-up payment inflated 
the figures. Liberum said:

Dollar revenue was 2% ahead of our forecast. However, there was a $9m royalty 
catch-up which boosted numbers. Excluding this catch up revenue was in-line. 
Opex was 5% ahead of our forecast. Including the royalty catch-up EBIT was 
in-line, but excluding it EBIT was 4% below our forecasts. Dividend per share 
has been increased by 25% but nothing further on cash returns which may 
disappoint some. Backlog was up quarter on quarter. Arm’s outlook statement is 
cautious.

The company has also been under pressure on signs of a slowdown in iPhone sales
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/apple-iphone-sales-slowdown-2007-drop-holiday>
.

Despite poor UK industrial production data, the FTSE 100 is currently up 51.03 
points at 5683.22. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker 
Interactive Investor, said:

 Major European markets are trying to rally once again, but with previous 
rebounds having lacked conviction, falling sharply after early gains, sentiment 
remains fragile. Any early movement in markets is, however, just a precursor to 
this afternoon’s main event, billed as possibly the most important debate of 
the year so far, as Janet Yellen makes her first official public statement 
since raising rates in December.

At the House Financial Services Committee today, Janet Yellen can expect a 
tough examination from lawmakers after the financial carnage that has ensued 
since the Fed hiked interest rates. Will she insist that the Fed is simply 
data-dependent, or might there be an acknowledgment that the world simply 
wasn’t ready for higher US interest rates? With both the Bank of Japan and 
European Central Bank still in aggressive easing mode, the Fed appears more 
isolated than ever in its efforts to normalise US monetary conditions.


Insurers are among the main gainers, with Prudential up 55p to £11.81 and 
Legal and General, which on Tuesday reassured investors about its bond exposure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/feb/09/ftse-edges-higher-after-rout-with-legal-and-general-leading-the-way>
, adding 7.5p to 209.9p.

Elsewhere Domino’s Pizza has jumped 68p to 924.5p after Credit Suisse moved 
from neutral to outperform with a target price raised from 770p to £11.
 