
Leading shares have started the week on a downbeat note, as the cocktail of 
concerns gripping markets over the past few days shows little sign of easing.

More disappointing Chinese data, with industrial production and retail sales 
both below expectations, renewed worries about the state of the global economy. 
Investors are also cautious ahead of the latest meetings from the US Federal 
Reserve, the Bank of Japan and Bank of England, both of whom are widely 
expected to stick to the status quo. But there is enough uncertainty to keep 
markets on their toes.

And on top of that there is the prospect of Brexit, with a number of polls 
putting the Leave campaign ahead. Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, 
said:

[EU referendum] polls show it’s now too close to call and markets are 
responding with some very twitchy activity. Sterling has shed more than 2% in 
two sessions to retrace its April lows, while implied one-month volatility for 
cable [pound/dollar] is at its highest since the depths of the financial crisis 
in 2008.

Stocks across Europe are in negative territory and it’s hard to see much 
upside until next Thursday’s referendum produces a result.

And with the weak Chinese data reviving growth fears, oil has moved lower and 
put more pressure on commodity companies. A surging yen as investors seek 
havens for their cash is also putting pressure on Japanese exporters.

So the FTSE 100, although off its worst levels, is still down 23.02 points at 
6092.74.

 Banks are among the fallers on Brexit and low interest rate worries, with 
Lloyds Banking Group 1.38p lower at 65.67p and Barclays down 3p at 166.4p. But 
Royal Bank of Scotlandhas bucked the trend, up 1.5p at 215.4p.


Sky has dropped 20p to 905.5p as Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> reduced its target price from 
£11.25 to £11 and Citigroup cut from £14 to £13.50.

Arm, the chip designer, has lost 23.5p to 942.5p on concerns about a slowdown 
in the smartphone market following weakness in Asia, and ahead of Apple’s 
annual developers conference in San Francisco. It was also hit by a sell note 
from Liberum, who said:

We believe Arm may see further royalty softness this year but that it has 
flexibility to use its licensing backlog to offset this. However, this 
flexibility is likely to diminish in 2017 if the backlog continues to decline.

We therefore view the acceleration in revenue growth that consensus models in 
2017 as unlikely.

The tailwind from higher royalty in smartphones eases in 2016 and new markets 
(networking) are unlikely to become material before 2018+. We are 8% below 
consensus earnings per share in 2017 rising to 22% by 2020.

But Inmarsat, which is due to be relegated from the FTSE 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/29/inmarsat-faces-relegation-from-ftse-100>
 at the end of this week, is currently the top riser in the leading index. Its 
shares have climbed 18p to 721.5p as it unveiled a partnership with broadband 
specialist SpeedCast to use the group’s Fleet Xpress service for its maritime 
business, rolling it out to 2,000 vessels. Inmarsat chief executive Rupert 
Pearce said:

This is a very important strategic alliance for Inmarsat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/immarsat>. [It] deepends our valuable 
partnership and ... also significantly strengthens Inmarsat’s position in the 
global maritime business.
 