
Leading shares have made a mixed start, with gold miners under pressure and 
Amec slipping back after a downgrade.

A survey in China suggesting a slowdown in profits among small and medium 
sized firms has renewed concerns about the country's economic outlook, hitting 
metal prices. A Reuters survey calculated that copper consumption in the 
country had fallen 2.7% in August compared to the previous month, and added to 
the downbeat mood.

So Anglo American has fallen 20.5p to £15.53, while among the mid-caps Ferrexpo
 is down 2.8p at 177p. With gold still under pressure,Randgold Resources is 
down 128p at £44.93 andFresnillo has fallen 15p to 998p.

Overall the FTSE 100 has recovered from an early dip, and is now up 7.33 
points at 6564.70. But with conflicting comments on tapering from Federal 
Reserve members - in the wake of last week's surprise decision by the US 
central bank to keep its $85bn a month bond buying programme unchanged - 
markets continue to lack direction. The uncertainty over the make-up of the 
next German government following the weekend election is also in investors' 
minds. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:
 Sentiment [continues to be] sapped given continued uncertainty regarding the 
outlook for the Fed's QE3 bond-purchasing stimulus programme, with conflicting 
comments from Fed members and the looming fiscal headwind (budget, debt 
ceiling).

Amec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amec> is down 10p to £10.98 after 
UBS reduced its recommendation from buy to neutral and its target price from 
£12 to £11.45. The bank said:
 We think the engineers face three major headwinds in the near to medium term: 
(1) customer slowdown on project decisions is having a knock-on effect on the 
pace of awards and the conversion to revenues, (2) demand both by region and 
end market is patchy, resulting in some slack in utilisation and having a drag 
on margins and (3) the competitive rivalry has increased in a fragmented 
industry.

Amec intends to return "surplus cash" to shareholders, which is defined as 
EBITA (excluding non-cash items) less working capital, interest, tax and other 
normal calls on cash. On this metric, we estimate around £80m to £100m a year 
on a normalised basis. This cash is likely to come back to shareholders in the 
form of a regular buyback or special dividend. However, we think this level of 
cash returns not sufficient to drive outperformance of the stock.

While we like the asset-light business model, we worry about the underlying 
slowdown in activity in Amec's end markets. Risks to our view include a large 
scale acquisition although we highlight that the larger the acquisition, the 
higher the integration risks.

Among the risers Rolls-Royce has climbed 16p to £11.31 following an upgrade 
from Jefferies, which lifted its price target from £12.50 to £14.

Aberdeen Asset Management has added 1.2p to 389.7p despite reports it could be 
interested in buying Scottish Widows 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/world/aberdeen-in-race-for-scottish-widows-arm-29604185.html>
 fromLloyds Banking Group, up 0.3p to 74.21p.
 