
Leading shares are on the slide again as volatility in China continues to 
undermine commodity companies.

But there are a couple of bright spots from businesses reporting positive 
trading updates. Insurer Admiral - the group behind confused.com - has added 
64p to £15.30 after it reported a better than expected 1% rise in first half 
profits to £186.1m. The improvement came as customer numbers increased and it 
released reserves set aside to cover the cost of future claims. Peel Hunt 
analyst Andreas van Embden said:

Admiral’s first half results were steady, with prior year reserve releases 
supporting a 1% increase in pretax profit. Given Admiral’s significant market 
position in the UK Motor market, growth is not a priority. Management continues 
to focus on supporting UK underwriting margins as it pushes through Motor rate 
increases in the first half of 2015 and protects future profitability. Reserve 
buffers remain high and will fund the dividend as the company awaits a gradual 
turn in the UK underwriting cycle.Admiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> trades at a 2016 estimated 
PE of around 15 times supported by a yield of around 6%.

Also on the rise was Hikma Pharmaceuticals, up 48p to £24.48, despite a fall 
in half year profits from $244m this time last year to $204m, as it confirmed 
full year revenue guidance for 6% growth. Jefferies said:

Hikma’s adjusted first half was solid driven by blow-out US margins; 
impressive given the tough base comp and foreign exchange headwinds, which had 
been well-flagged. Full year guidance was reiterated. In our recent upgrade, we 
had highlighted our view that the first half was irrelevant given strong 
upcoming growth prospects from 2016, and we expect the market to look beyond a 
second half weighted year to these future value drivers.

Stifel analysts said:

Hikma has announced results for the six months ended 30 June 2015 below our 
expectations primarily reflecting the impact of a strong US dollar. However, 
full year guidance remains unchanged. Ahead of the recently announced and 
transformational Roxane acquisition, we believe Hikma is well placed for 
sustained growth over the next few years. We reiterate our buy rating.

Overall though the FTSE 100 has fallen 72.02 points or more than 1% to 6454.27 
- its lowest level since early July - on continuing concern about China, even 
though the country’s stock market recovered from yet another fall by the time 
it closed.


So with commodity prices still under pressure, given fears of falling demand 
from China, mining companies were again the among the biggest losers in the 
index.

Glencore, which had slumped in recent weeks, was expected to recover somewhat 
following its results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/19/glencore-first-half-profits-tumble-amid-commodities-rout>
on the basis that the worst could be over. But this has failed to happen and 
its shares are down 9.4p at 166.70p.

Anglo American is also lower, down 18.4p at 723.5p, while BHP Billiton has 
lost 16.5p to £10.96.

With worries about the outlook for emerging markets, HSBC has fallen 12.4p to 
543.6p.

US inflation will also be in focus later, for any clues it gives as to when 
the Federal Reserve might raise interest rates. And investors will also be 
keeping an eye on the German parliament, which is expected to back the Greek 
bailout agreement although not without some opposition.
 