
Leading shares are on the slide again after a mini-revival on Thursday, 
despite support from the mining sector in the wake of the latest Chinese data.

The FTSE 100 is currently down 27.08 points at 6933.55, amid the uncertainty 
over the UK general election, the continuing discussions between Greece and its 
creditors to try and solve the country’s financial crisis and a strengthening 
euro as the receding prospect of US rate rises hits the dollar.

The UK manufacturing purchasing managers index came in at a much worse than 
expected 51.9 in April, its biggest one month fall since February 2013 and well 
below the expected 54.6.

European markets are closed for May Day, but Wall Street will open later, with 
investors looking at the latest ISM manufacturing data after this week’s weak 
GDP figures.

News that China had reported a manufacturing purchasing managers index of 50.1 
in April, unchanged from the previous month, helped support mining shares. With 
copper set to record its biggest weekly gain in more than two years,Anglo 
Americanhas added 40.5p to 1145.5p, Rio Tinto has risen 99.5p to 2984.5p and 
BHP Billiton is 42p better at £16.03.

Tony Cross, market analyst at Trustnet Direct, said:

Traders are struggling to find much enthusiasm for equities as the last 
session of the week gets underway. Many markets across Europe are closed to 
mark Labour Day so this could suppress volumes a little too, but it’s worth 
noting that the heavyweight mining stocks are at least managing to post some 
gains. That fractionally better than expected Chinese PMI reading has offered 
the sector another boost.

Lloyds Banking Group is up 2.53p to 79.91p after better than forecast results.

Motor insurers were boosted by positive comment from Barclays analysts, with 
Admiral up 39p at £15.97 and Esure 11.8p better at 230p. The bank said:

When we initiated on the UK motor insurers last year in our note “No pain, no 
gain”, our thesis was that we did not believe the market would turn until the 
insurers felt sufficient pain to force pricing higher. In our view they are now 
feeling the pain and pricing is therefore poised to inflect. We believe the UK 
motor market is the first property and casualty market to reach the trough of 
the pricing cycle, and the improving dynamics will become clear as the year 
progresses. Although we believe 2015 earnings could still need to come down, 
this will prove the catalyst for stronger pricing and the focus will quickly 
shift to improving 2016 earnings, and the stocks could re-rate - more pain, 
more gain.

We also believe the stocks are defensive, with little Solvency 2 [forthcoming 
regulatory regime] or interest rate exposure which is likely to be a focus for 
the wider insurance sector. We are double upgrading esure to overweight with 
31% upside to our revised price target of 285p. We are also upgradingAdmiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> to equal weight, with 2% 
downside to our price target of 1,523p. Esure is our favoured name within the 
subsector, as we believe it has been unfairly punished for disappointing since 
its IPO due to weak growth, but the market inflection could allow it to revisit 
its IPO aspirations.

Among the fallers investment groups are moving lower. Hargreaves Lansdown is 
down 23p at £12.07 as HSBC issued a reduce rating but moved its price target 
from 810p to 890p, whileAberdeen Asset Management has fallen 9.5p to 465.6p 
despite the same bank lifting its target from 510p to 530p.
 