
Leading shares fell back after five days of rises, following poor US economic 
news and a number of disappointing trading updates.

A surprise drop in US GDP 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/jan/30/us-economy-shrinks-fourth-quarter>
 helped push theFTSE 100 down 16.08 points to 6323.11 after earlier signs that 
a new five year peak was on the cards. Angus Campbell, head of market analysis 
at Capital Spreads, said:
 It's feels like it's been such a long time since we've seen a sell off in 
equities that it comes as rather a surprise, and we've almost forgotten what it 
looks like to see red across our screens. But today there's a clear cut reason 
for the decline as the first reading of fourth quarter US GDP showed the 
world's biggest economy has slipped back into contraction, just as the UK 
figure did last week.

This came as a bit of a bombshell for investors who hadn't been anywhere near 
expecting such a sharp move to the downside, but it indicates just how nervous 
businesses were throughout the fiscal cliff negotiations that went down to the 
wire. However, the decline was not as aggressive as it might have been in 
normal circumstances: investors know that the fiscal cliff debacle at the end 
of last year would have only led to a temporary freeze in production, so 
expectations are for the growth figure to bounce back in the first quarter of 
this year rather than this being the start of another structural decline for 
the US economy. Even if it is something more structural there's always the 
prospect of further central bank assistance and tonight sees the US Federal 
Reserve rate announcement that could have a very dovish tone to it following 
today's data. 
Defence companies were hit by a decline in US spending as shown by the GDP 
figures, withBAE Systems down 7.3p at 341p and Chemring closing 14.1p lower at 
275.8p.

On the whole, recent trading statements have shown companies performing 
reasonably well, so a spate of more negative updates also dented investor 
enthusiasm.

Antofagasta was a good example. It was the biggest faller in the leading 
index, 106p lower at £11.69 after it said production costs would rise in 2013 
and it would not increase output.

Polymetal - lifted in recent days by talk of a possible merger with Polyus 
Gold - lost 22p to £10.88 as it warned there was a chance it could miss its 
production target of 1.2m troy ounces of gold in 2013 due to delays at a 
Russian plant.

Platinum refiner Johnson Matthey dropped 102p to £23.06 as third quarter 
profits fell 19% to £84.3m, hit by lower sales of catalytic converters for car 
exhaust systems in Europe and weak demand in Japan.

Elsewhere the growing black market trade in cigarettes is hitting profits at 
Imperial Tobacco, the company admitted.

It said it expected first half operating profits to be down on the same period 
last year due to illicit trade in Europe, and increased investment in key 
markets. The company saw weakness in the EU - where the legal cigarette market 
is currently 7% lower - and in Russia, but better performances in emerging 
markets. Imperial closed 105p lower at £23.61.

Meanwhile Petrofac, the energy services group, was hit by a surprise warning 
from Italian peer Saipem.

Saipem, Europe's biggest oil services group which is controlled by ENI, said 
late on Tuesday that profits would be 6% lower than expected. Its new 
management blamed falling margins on new contracts and a tough business 
environment.

The news pushed Petrofac <https://www.theguardian.com/business/petrofac> down 
122p to £16.15. In the same sector,Amec lost 23p to £10.76, while Wood Group 
dropped 18p to 805.5p. Goldman Sachs said:
 In our view, there is some read-across [from the Saipem warning] to other 
offshore and onshore engineering and construction companies in the sector as 
the weaker outlook at least in part reflects a competitive bidding environment 
during a period of strong backlog build for many companies. 
Among the mid-caps, engineering group Renishaw ended down 100p at £18.60. The 
company said first half profits had risen 48% but second half revenue would be 
flat compared to the same period last year.

Heading the other way was Phoenix - the insurance group chaired by former FSA 
boss Howard Davies - after it announced a fundraising and the repayment of 
£450m of debt. It will raise £250m by issuing new shares at 500p each, and also 
plans a 27% increase in the final dividend. Phoenix rose 39p to 630p.

Elsewhere optimism about its new processors helped lift chip designer Arm.

The company's chief executive Warren East said the first of its new 
energy-efficient 64-bit processors were due to come to market next year and had 
already attracted strong interest, according toa report in the Wall Street 
Journal. 
<http://www.marketwatch.com/story/arm-says-new-64-bit-processors-on-track-for-2014-2013-01-29?reflink=MW_news_stmp>
 This pushed Arm up 4p to 873.5p despite Numis cutting its recommendation from 
buy to hold.

Meanwhile Imagination Technologies jumped 56.4p to 497.9p - a near 13% 
increase - after Morgan Stanley moved from equal weight to overweight and set a 
570p price target on the chip designer, up from 450p. The bank said:
 We believe two key potential catalysts are not fully priced in: 1) access to 
China via partner MediaTek presents a play on low-end emerging market 
smartphone growth; 2) potential design win in the Samsung Galaxy S4 could drive 
upside. 
Advertising giant WPP added 12.5p to 990p after Jefferies raised its 
recommendation from hold to buy and its target price from 800p to £11.50. The 
bank said:
 An analysis of WPP's largest clients and their 2013 ad budgets looks 
encouraging and with expectations low, we see upside risk. Additionally, we see 
cash returns rather than acquisitions increasingly the focus for 2013 following 
2012's transformational M&A. The shift to a lower risk, bolt-on strategy frees 
up cash for higher dividends and lowers integration risks. We see the 
risk-reward attractively balanced and upgrade to buy. 
Finally Vodafone finished 0.6p higher at 173.5p following reports that Indian 
authorities are close to an agreement with the mobile phone group over a tax 
dispute. Lawrence Sugarman of Liberum Capital said:
 It seems that the plan is to change tax legislation to remove penalties and 
interest from what they are trying to raise. This outcome would mean a payment 
of around £0.8bn. I currently include £2.5bn for all tax and spectrum fines etc 
in India and therefore this outcome would be positive from a valuation 
perspective. It also should be positive for sentiment because it would allow 
investors to focus on the Indian operations where the news around price 
increases has been encouraging. Separately Vodafone is seeking revisions of 
auction rules - basically they are objecting to the reserve price being too 
high and that some of the spectrum being auctioned is already being used by 
them.  