 An official report today found that known fuel leakage problems probably 
caused the most deadly air crash suffered by the British military since the 
Falklands war.
All 14 people on board an ageing Nimrod spy plane died after fuel leaked and 
caught fire during an operation overAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> in September last year.

The defence secretary, Des Browne, today apologised in the Commons for the 
mistakes made.

"The board of inquiry established the most probable cause of the fire and the 
subsequent loss of XV230 [the Nimrod plane involved] and in doing so identified 
failings for which the Ministry of Defence must take responsibility," he said.

"On behalf of the MoD, I would like to apologise to the House of Commons, and 
most of all to those who lost their lives and their families. I am sorry."

The head of the RAF's air command, Sir Clive Loader, has ordered a high-level 
inquiry to establish how widespread the ageing fleet's mechanical faults are. 
That inquiry, to be led by a QC, will have the power to call for a full public 
inquiry.

In an annex to the report, Loader admitted there had been failure in the 1980s 
to take action to remedy the problem of fuel tanks overflowing during mid-air 
refuelling.

He said there was "failure to recognise and take alerting action" when the 
problem was observed during air-to-air refuelling shortly before the crash.

Loader also said the age of the fleet had been a contributory factor.

"I accept the compelling evidence that there has been an increase in fuel 
leaks over the years," he said.

The board of inquiry report found that the fire was probably caused either by 
a faulty fuel coupling or jet fuel overflowing during mid-air refuelling.

It is unlikely certainty about the cause of the crash will be established, as 
some of the flight data was destroyed during the disaster, and investigators 
had only limited access to the crash site because of a lack of security in the 
area.

However, one of the two main theories is that fuel from a faulty coupling near 
the right-side wing leaked onto an exhaust pipe from the engine, which was 
heated to 400C.

Leaking fuel on the planes, which had been due to leave service a decade ago, 
was a known problem highlighted years earlier, the report confirmed.

The head of the RAF, Air Chief Marshall Sir Glenn Torpy, said the crew on 
board the plane had acted in an "exemplary" manner during the flight and in 
trying to tackle the blaze.

He said the new inquiry would examine why it was that faults near one of the 
fuel tanks were not deemed a more serious fire hazard.

He added the compensation claims of relatives would be dealt with 
"expeditiously", with interim payments if necessary.

The report made 33 recommendations, including the improved maintenance of 
ageing aircraft.

Torpy confirmed that air-to-air refueling was suspended with most Nimrod 
flights last year after three incidents.

Although restored, it has since been suspended again after another incident 
last month.

The investigation found that no firefighting equipment was installed in the 
fuselage close to where the fire is believed to have started, despite a 
recommendation in a 2004 report by the manufacturer, BAE Systems, that one be 
put there.

A maintenance report released by the defence technology company Qinetiq in 
March 2006 is understood to have highlighted the problems of fuel leaks on the 
MR2 versions of the Nimrod, particularly aircraft flying intensive operations 
in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Earlier this year Graham Knight, the father of Sergeant Ben Knight, one of the 
servicemen killed in the crash, released a series of leaked emails which he 
said came from senior RAF officers.

One, dated December 2005, said the plane involved, designated XV230, had 
"fuel-leak issues" which needed to be rectified, while another, from February 
last year, warned that the age of the airframe combined with the high tempo of 
operations was adding to the "leak headache".

The Nimrod MR1 - which is based on the design of Britain's first airliner, the 
De Havilland Comet - first entered service with the RAF in 1969 and was 
upgraded to the MR2 version in the late 1970s.

The existing fleet of 15 aircraft had originally been due to leave service 10 
years ago, but a series of lengthy delays to their replacement mean they will 
have to carry on to about 2011.

Critics have blamed cost-cutting by the Treasury and the Ministry of Defence 
for the hold-ups.
 