
Ahead of the Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>
, Alex Mittal, CEO and co-founder of FundersClub, spoke to us about connecting 
investors with startups online, what qualities make a good venture capitalist 
and why the internet will herald a new age of efficiency and transparency for 
the venture capital industry.

1) Can you tell us a little about FundersClub and your reasons for founding it?
FundersClub is the world's first online venture capital firm. We make it easy 
for top startups and accredited investors to connect.

My co-founder Boris Silver and I founded FundersClub because we wanted to 
solve problems we faced as entrepreneurs and angel investors ourselves. We 
recognised that for even the best founders, raising capital is far from 
delightful, and that for even sophisticated investors, investing in startups is 
fraught with difficulty. We also believe that startups are a positive force in 
the world and hope our activities spur more innovation and value creation in 
the world.

2) In what ways is the web disrupting the venture capital space?
The internet has heralded a new era of efficiency. This cuts across commerce, 
communication, social media and more. The same future awaits venture capital, 
an industry that, while having a few standout outperformers, is still not 
broadly regarded for its efficiency. The irony is not lost on me, considering 
venture capital has been responsible for enabling past disruptions in other 
industries; perhaps it's not so great at disrupting itself.

3) In your talk at SXSW 2014 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wNKITx6npHM>, 
you describe "venture capital as a positive force for the world". Can you 
elaborate?
The great thing about humanity is that when you look out across societies, 
innovators everywhere are always trying to push the boundary of possibility. 
Venture capital provides financing for ideas from those innovators that disrupt 
convention in a manner that fulfils people's pressing needs – a positive and 
noble pursuit that has given us everything from smartphones to electric cars. 
The challenge for venture capitalists is getting it right. It's very difficult 
to be a good venture capitalist.

4) What qualities make a good venture capitalist?
Venture capital is a challenging, humbling field. An unquenched curiosity and 
desire to learn about the world as well as conviction counterweighted with a 
healthy dose of humility are character traits I've observed in the best venture 
capitalists I've met in Silicon Valley and beyond.

5) How do you think the venture capital space will develop?
With increased efficiency and transparency in the venture capital industry, 
we'll see what we've seen develop in other industries, most notably increased 
accountability. It will become much harder to put oneself out as a fund having 
"proprietary dealflow" without substantiation, and without reporting 
returns/results, for example. As far as the impact of the internet and online 
venture capital, we'll also see the reduced impact of geographical boundaries 
much as we've seen in e-commerce and social media, and increased 
democratisation and access to the value and wealth creation that is possible 
through responsible venture capital.

6) What's next for FundersClub?
Big things. Stay tuned.

7) Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the Guardian's 
Activate London <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-london> 
Summit?
Listen, learn, but never stop questioning.

Quick questions

What time do you get up in the morning? Any o'clock if I'm travelling, which 
is quite often these days; otherwise 7.00am.

What's the first thing that you do when you get to the office? Review my 
schedule for the day.

How often do you check your email throughout the day? This is difficult, but I 
try to limit myself to three times. I'm still failing at this every day, 
unfortunately.

What do you do to relax? Take a long hike or walk.

What app can't you live without? Yelp. So many coffee/lunch/dinner meetings in 
strange new places these days, need to know the best place to meet.

What device can't you live without? My phone. Actually I recently blogged 
about living without it for 10 days and nights, so technically perhaps I can 
live deviceless.

What's your go-to source for news? Maybe a sign of the times, but I don't have 
a go-to source for news any more. I instead pull in from a number of friends, 
blogs, news outlets, social media sites and more.

Twitter, LinkedIn or Facebook? Secret.

What's one of your favourite startups that has raised funds through 
FundersClub? I can't choose between my children. That would be both impossible 
and cruel.

Alex Mittal is CEO and co-founder of FundersClub <https://fundersclub.com/>. 
He is speaking at this year'sGuardian Activate London Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/may/02/activate-london-2014-programme>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 