
The managing director of Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's production 
company Gallowgate, Ed Forsdick, has died.

It is understood he had a heart attack while on holiday. Forsdick worked on 
some of the biggest entertainment shows on UK commercial TV, includingChannel 
4's Big Breakfast <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/mar/30/broadcasting5> 
and ITV's Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway.

Ant and Dec said: "Ed was our managing director, our executive producer, our 
creative partner but above all our friend. He was so very unique, as anyone who 
has worked with him will confess.

"We are devastated. We will miss him enormously. Our thoughts are with Louise, 
their children and his family."

The Big Breakfast creator, Charlie Parsons, who worked with Forsdick on the 
hit breakfast series and on Parsons' groundbreaking reality show Survivor said: 
"I gave him his first job in television and it's a devastating loss to all – a 
loss to all his friends and to television."

Elaine Bedell, ITV's director of entertainment and comedy, who told the 
Guardian last month she was talking to Gallowgate about future programme ideas, 
added: "Ed has been responsible for some of the most iconic ITV entertainment 
hits of the last decade. His relationship with Ant and Dec was one of those 
great pieces of chemistry between a producer and on-screen talent that's hard 
to come by.

"He was a formidable presence in the gallery of his shows – dry, funny, 
chewing his pencil, pacing up and down, never missing a detail. We will miss 
him sorely."

The ITV controller of entertainment, John Kaye Cooper, said: "In recent years 
he has steadily grown Gallowgate into one of the leading entertainment indies, 
and I will really miss his passion for creating new shows, and his wicked, 
caustic sense of humour. It is a tragic loss to the entertainment industry."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 