
The Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> has 
commissioned a new web docu-series starring Game of Thrones actor Sophie Turner.

Turner, who plays Sansa Stark in the hit HBO series which airs on Sky in the 
UK, will host a 10-part series called #PowerShift which will look at the power 
of social media.

In the series, which has been commissioned out of AOL/HuffPo’s UK operation, 
Turner will share stories from around the world about how social media has been 
harnessed to effect change.

“I’m really excited to be involved with #PowerShift and presenting this new 
series for HuffPost,” said Turner, announcing the series at parent AOL’s 
presentation at the IAB Digital Upfronts in London on Tuesday.

“Social media has amplified the voice for my generation around the world and 
changed the way that we communicate. I am a huge advocate of social media and 
thrilled to be given the opportunity to delve deep into its influence and 
impact on society at large.”

The series, which is being made in partnership with WPP’s GroupM Entertainment 
and produced with Broad Bean Media, will be aired on all 15 global editions of 
the Huffington Post as well as being syndicated to partners on itsAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> On Network.

“Even though we’ve seen example after example around the world of social media 
deepening connections, improving lives and making the world better, we are 
still only beginning to understand its potential,” said the news and 
entertainment site’s founder Arianna Huffington. “So I’m delighted that, as 
part of our ‘What’s Working’ initiative to re-imagine journalism with an 
emphasis on solutions, #PowerShift is putting a spotlight on real people using 
social media to change the world.”

AOL has also invested heavily in original programming with more than 50 series 
commissioned to date – with shows from high-profile stars including James 
Franco, Boardwalk Empire’s Steve Buscemi and Sex and the City star Sarah 
Jessica Parker – which also appear within the AOL On Network.

“Social media has revolutionised the way that we communicate globally and is a 
key part of the HuffPost DNA,” said Hamish Nicklin, managing director of AOL 
UK. “#PowerShift will be a fascinating series, commissioned out of the UK, and 
highlights AOL’s commitment in creating premium video content that delights 
consumers and enables brands to connect with audiences across a fragmented 
digital ecosystem.”

AOL has previously commissioned two UK series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/16/tess-daly-richard-bacon-rochelle-humes-aol-web>
, one starring Richard Bacon and the other Tess Daly and The Saturdays singer 
Rochelle Humes.

 