
Chris Coleman hailed the courage of his Wales players after Gareth Bale’s 
brilliant free-kick enabled them to narrowly avoid embarrassment againstAndorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> on a pitch the manager said was 
“not up to the standard of a Uefa qualifier”.

Gareth Bale struck twice to spare Welsh blushes against opponents ranked 199th 
in the world and who were within nine minutes of claiming their first ever 
point in European Championship qualifying. But while Coleman was delighted with 
the attitude of his players, he was less than impressed with the 3G surface in 
Andorra la Vella, whichhad only been passed by Uefa last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/03/wales-andorra-euro-2016-qualifier-artificial-pitch>
 after previous inspections had showed that the ball ran too fast on it.

The pitch constantly threw up rubber crumbs from its base when the ball rolled 
along the surface and it was clear that the Welsh players were unhappy with the 
surface. “When we trained on it, my heart sunk,” Coleman said after his side 
began their Euro 2016 campaign with a nervous victory. “In my opinion the pitch 
is not up to the standard of a Uefa qualifier. But I don’t want to make a 
protest because I want other teams to come here. I didn’t want to say anything 
about the pitch before the game, but I can now and if you’re a passing team 
forget it.”

Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> fell behind to Ildefons 
Lima’s controversial fifth-minute penalty, awarded by the fifth official behind 
the goal rather than the referee even though there appeared little contact 
between Neil Taylor and Andorra’s Cristian Martínez. Lima sent Wayne Hennessey 
the wrong way but the wild celebrations lasted only until Ben Davies provided a 
cross from the left that allowed Bale to beat his marker and head firmly into 
the corner in the 22nd minute.

Andorra were not overawed and the burly striker Gabriel Riera provided a 
menacing focal point for crosses swung into the Welsh box. Wales came out with 
more intent at the start of the second half but Andorra escaped when Ramsey’s 
corner caused panic and Bale’s back header was cleared off the line. There was 
a moment of real concern at the other end when Ashley Williams hesitated and 
scuffed his clearance and Wales made the most of their good fortune after 81 
minutes. Bale was felled to win a free-kick which was saved by Ferran Pol, but 
the Real Madrid forward was given a second chance as Riera had encroached and 
this time curled his 25-yard effort into the corner for the winner.

“I think we showed a hell of a lot of courage,” said Coleman. “People thought 
it was a formality but I was worried before we kicked a ball. We watched them 
against Holland when they lost 2-0 and they drew with Finland and they made it 
difficult for us. But we stuck at it and I’m proud of my team.

“It wasn’t about the performance, we just needed to win the game. We’ve played 
a lot better than that and lost but you’ve got to take that pitch into 
consideration. We could not show our quality but we showed great courage and 
determination and stayed calm in certain situations when we could have lost our 
heads.”

Coleman praised Bale for stepping up when it mattered. “He couldn’t get into 
flow of it because the pitch wouldn’t let him. It was too sticky,” said the 
manager. “But not many players on the planet can score a goal like the second 
one. Time’s ticking, the pressure’s on and wallop, it’s 2-1.”

Aaron Ramsey came off in the closing stages with an ankle injury and faces a 
race to be fit for Arsenal’s Premier League game with Manchester City on 
Saturday. “He got a kick and there was a twist in his ankle,” Coleman said. “It 
was coming to the end of the game and it was pointless taking a risk with him. 
Hopefully he’ll be OK for Arsenal at the weekend but we’ll have to see what the 
next 24 to 48 hours hold.”

Andorra’s coach Koldo Álvarez dismissed Coleman’s criticism of the pitch but 
did not want to talk about the issue. “I’m no expert but we just played and 
defended well as a team,” he said.
 