
With fans massed on the banks of the Grand Canal, a drone flying overhead, and 
waterborne paparazzi swarming behind his taxi all the way from the island of 
Giudecca,George Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> 
arrived at sunset for his wedding reception in the kind of grand spectacle that 
only the very rich and very glamorous can ever hope to pull off.

Flanked by security officials and dozens of photographers surrounding him on 
all sides, the actor waved from his by-now familiar vessel, the Amore, as the 
procession for his nuptials with human rights lawyer Amal Alamuddin formed a 
flotilla of water taxis and motorboats on Venice's main thoroughfare.

Ahead of him came a stream of high-profile guests, among them fashion editor 
Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, U2 frontman 
Bono and supermodel Cindy Crawford, whose husband, entertainment entrepreneur 
Rande Gerber, is believed to be Clooney's best man. But it was only once the 
groom himself had disembarked at the "seven-star" Aman Canal Grande resort that 
the party could really get started.
 George Clooney smiles as he arrives at the Aman Hotel for his wedding dinner. 
Photograph: Alessandro Bianchi/Reuters 
In a heady swirl of celebrity sparkle and old-style Italian glamour, Hollywood 
A-listers such as Brad Pitt,Robert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> and Matt Damon were expected to 
attend the main event of the four-day nuptial celebrations: a no-expense-spared 
reception at the 450-year-old palazzo, where gaps in the back entrance's 
wrought iron gates had been covered and a shield had been constructed over the 
canal-side jetty to block the prying paparazzi.

And, in a plot twist that could have come straight from a Hollywood script, 
the happy couple – after weeks of keeping the world's media guessing over the 
dates and details of their marriage – played one more trick on the hundreds of 
journalists in town: instead of sealing the deal on Monday in a ceremony at 
Venice city hall, as expected, they got married then and there at the Aman.

"George Clooney and Amal Alamuddin were married today in a private ceremony in 
Venice,Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>," Clooney's 
representative Stan Rosenfield said.

The 53-year-old actor had been expected to officially wed his British-Lebanese 
fiancée, 36, in an understated civil ceremony on Monday afternoon, after the 
council issued an order banning pedestrian traffic on a section of pavement 
outside its offices, citing concerns for public safety and traffic build-up due 
to the "ceremony" and Clooney's marriage.
 Clooney's best man, Rande Gerber, and his wife Cindy Crawford, wave to the 
crowds. Photograph: Luigi Costantini/AP 
After Saturday night's surprise announcement, it was unclear whether whether 
there would in fact be an official ceremony at the historic council buildings 
on Monday or whether it would simply be a question of the marriage being 
registered. Walter Veltroni, a former centre-left mayor of Rome and old friend 
of Clooney, was due to officiate at the wedding.

Every step of the wedding celebrations have been shrouded in secrecy and 
everyone involved has been subject to a strict confidentiality agreement. Local 
reports suggested the select group of invitees would be serenaded into the 
night by a string orchestra and jazz trio, with US singer-songwriter Lana Del 
Rey reportedly scheduled to give a rendition of Nat King Cole's When I Fall in 
Love. A five-course dinner including lemon risotto with lobster was served in 
the main library after guests had finished their champagne and canapés in the 
garden, Agence France Presse reported.

But further details were scarce. Staff at the Aman were covered by the 
non-disclosure agreement, and Venetian newspaper Il Gazzetino reported on 
Saturday that employees who were not required at the party would be kept in a 
room without their mobile phones for the duration of the reception unless their 
help was needed.

The paper also claimed that Clooney and Alamuddin had wanted to make 
last-minute changes to some of the hotel's historic decor, ordering in even 
more antiques to blend in with the frescoes by 18th-century painter Giovanni 
Battista Tiepolo.

The couple spent Friday night celebrating with their respective friends and 
relatives, she emerging from the Grand Canal in a flowing red gown and he 
sailing in a dinner jacket and unbuttoned shirt aboard the Amore.
 George Clooney prepares to get in a boat as he leaves the restaurant Da Ivo 
on Saturday night. Photograph: Pierre Teyssot/AFP/Getty Images 
While she spent the evening with a small group of women, including her sister, 
Tala, and mother, Baria, inside the Aman, Clooney hit the town with six 
friends, Gerber included, and two bottles of the business partners' own 
Casamigos tequila.

Drinking shots on board the Amore, the group glided through the waterways of 
central Venice to sit down at a table at Da Ivo, a canalside restaurant between 
St Mark's Square and the Rialto bridge.

Staff said they had dined on plates of €70 truffle tagliolini, €30 courgette 
flowers with crab, and figs with prawns, also on the menu at €30. All of which 
was washed down with the tequila and a third of a magnum of 2010 Sassicaia, on 
which Clooney scrawled: "Grazia [sic]. Thank you. Another perfect night."

"They didn't drink much," said chef Luciano Gambardella. "They laughed, joked, 
chatted." Staff at the restaurant put red and white tablecloths over the 
windows to stop the paparazzi outside spoiling the evening, and were happy when 
the bachelor party left "a very generous" tip upon leaving shortly after 
midnight, said Gambardella.

"He's a wonderful person," he said, adding that Clooney had greeted all the 
staff in the restaurant. "What's nice about him is that when he talks to me, an 
ordinary person, he makes me feel like he's listening only to me and no one 
else."

Clooney and his guests have been staying at the Belmond Ciprani hotel, on 
tranquil Giudecca island. While journalists, photographers and tourists have 
expressed unabashed excitement over the elegant wedding, ordinary Venetians are 
taking the fuss in their stride. But some are happy that their city is basking 
in some positive publicity after a summer in which it was rocked by a 
corruption scandal involving the construction of the Moses dam and resignation 
of mayor Giorgio Orsoni.

"Let's make him ambassador … In fact, to be in keeping with the theme, let's 
make cavaliere [Knight] of La Serenissima [Venice]," wrote Sara d'Ascenzo in 
Corriere del Veneto. "Because George Clooney has returned Venice to the eyes of 
the world for an elite event which will be reported by tabloids and broadsheets 
from north to south, reflecting a rather different image of the city from that 
of the Moses bribesville."
 