
4.24pm GMT 

Afternoon summary

• George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has 
refused to rule out replacing the Bank of England's inflation target. Although 
he told the Treasury committee it had served Britain well, he would not rule 
out replacing it with a growth target and said that he was "glad" that Mark 
Carney, who has been chosen as the new governor of the Bank of England, was 
contributing to an international debate about the value of inflation targets.

We have an inflation-targeting regime which has served this country well and 
provided stability. There is a debate about the future of monetary policy, not 
in the UK exclusively but in many, many countries ... There is a debate going 
on. I'm glad the future Bank of England governor is part of that debate. Of 
course any decisions about the framework are decisions for the government, a 
government accountable to parliament.

• A poll has come out suggesting that 59% of voters believe benefits should 
rise in line with inflation, rather than below inflation, as the government is 
proposing. (See 2.55pm.)

• Ministers have agreed to pay more than £2m to the family of a prominent 
Libyan dissident abducted with the help of MI6 and secretly flown to Tripoli 
where he was tortured by the security police of the former dictator Muammar 
Gaddafi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/dec/13/libyan-dissident-mi6-aided-rendition>.

• David Cameron has said that he wants to discuss ways of getting "a better 
deal for Britain in Europe" at the EU summit staring in Brussels today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20716246>.

• Cameron has said that Maria Miller has given "excellent answers" to the 
questions raised about her expenses claims 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20711702>. Those questions have now 
triggered an inquiry by the parliamentary commissioner for standards. This is 
what Cameron said when he was asked about the matter when he arrived in 
Brussels.

Maria Miller does an absolutely excellent job as culture secretary and she has 
my full support. A newspaper has asked her a number of questions. So far as I 
can see, she has got excellent answers to all those questions. I am sure she 
will answer them and then get on with her job, which is what she should do.

• The TUC has said that raising the earnings threshold for auto enrolment into 
workplace pensions will exclude hundreds of thousands of workers. As the Press 
Association report, the TUC said over 400,000, mainly female employees, could 
miss out after the government confirmed that the threshold will increase from 
£8,105 to £9,440 from next April. The TUC general secretary, Brendan Barber, 
said:

Today's decision to raise the earnings trigger is disastrous for millions of 
low-paid staff who are not saving enough for their retirement. Everyone agrees 
that more people need to save for their retirement if we're to address our 
growing pensioner poverty crisis. It is very worrying therefore that millions 
of low-paid staff, particularly women working part-time, will no longer be 
auto-enrolled into workplace pensions.

• Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's first minster, has told the Scottish parliament 
that it was realistic to assume an independent Scotland would remain a member 
of the EU <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-20709124>.

• Labour has launched a new internet campaign, with its own website, 
thepriceoftoryfailure.com, <http://www.thepriceoftoryfailure.com/> to highlight 
the impact of the government's policies on working families.

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated at 4.29pm GMT

3.56pm GMT 

The Treasury hearing is over - and I'm afraid it did not live up to my advance 
billing. (See 9.07am.) In the commentsjimmyyadders 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/20024235> was right. John 
Mann did manage a food-related question, but there was no repeat of the cold 
pasty farce.

I'll post a summary in a moment.

3.49pm GMT 

Q: Will having an infrastructure minister appointing to you make a big 
difference?

Osborne says he is generally sceptical of changes to the Whitehall machinery.

But Paul Deighton, the man who delivered the Olympic Games, is joining the 
government as an infrastructure minister. Osborne says he thinks that will make 
a difference.

3.47pm GMT 

Q: You said you wanted to save money using spending cuts and tax rises in a 
proportion of 80:20. Yet the IFS said you are hitting 85:15. Does this mean 
there is scope for tax increases?

Osborne says 80:20 was never a hard and fast rule.

Q: Why did you reject new council tax bands?

Osborne says he has yet to see any plan that would not involve a revaluation.

A mansion tax would require a new system.

Q: Is a council tax revaluation overdue?

Osborne says governments in the past have attempted general revaluations "and 
have usually come to regret it".

Updated at 3.57pm GMT

3.43pm GMT 

The Conservative David Ruffley goes next.

Q: Do you anticipate announcing further changes to welfare?

Osborne says he now has a spending envelope for 2015-16. He now needs to 
divide that up between departments. He needs to save around £10bn.

Beyond that, there will be further decisions to take. They could involve 
spending cuts or tax increases.

Q: You were reportedly looking at cutting housing benefits for under-25s and 
restricting child-related benefits to families with two children. Have you 
dropped those two ideas between now and 2017-18?

Osborne says there is a real question about housing benefit provision for the 
under-25. Why should people on housing benefit get accommodation when those who 
don't qualify have to live with their parents? And working families have to 
weigh up the costs of having extra children. But people on benefits don't.

Q: Have you gone off those ideas?

Osborne says they are worthy of consideration. Anyone standing at the next 
election will have to explain how welfare can be made affordable.

Q: So they could be in the spending review?

Osborne says he raised them at the Conservative party conference. The spending 
review will assume savings coming from departments, not from welfare cuts or 
tax increases.

Updated at 3.57pm GMT

3.36pm GMT 

Labour's John Mann goes next.

He starts by saying that Osborne has compromised on all the issues he raised 
last time he questioned Osborne at the committee, such as the pasty tax and the 
caravan tax.

Q: Do you agree with the Bank of England official who said people were worse 
off under this government? 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2247308/Two-years-pain-families-says-Bank-England-boss-Spencer-Dale.html>

Osborne says that the recession has affected everyone.

Referring to his "very talented" predecessor, he says Alistair Darling would 
not have been able to stop world energy prices going up.

Q: The OBR says that the structural deficit is going to be larger than it was 
originally thought?

Osborne says the OBR has changed its view on the impact of the financial 
crisis on this British economy. They changed their view last year.

Q: How much has the structural debt increased under your measures?

Osborne says the structural deficit has gone down by 3%.

Osborne says he has not gone around trumpeting the fact that he has done much 
better on employment than the OBR forecast.

Q: Under your definition of structural deficit, are you saying there has no 
increase?

Osborne says it has fallen by 3%. And the overall deficit has fallen by 25%.

Q: You are not saying the debt to GDP ratio has fallen?

It has gone up, he says. 

Q: You are the first chancellor since Neville Chamberlain to have seen food 
banks set up. So what would your festive message be to people queuing up for 
food?

Osborne says he would say that unemployment is going down. It's a hard road, 
but it is leading to a better future.

3.26pm GMT 

Love turns to the 1% cap on benefit increases.

Q: Do you accept the Resolution Foundation claim that 60% of those affected 
will be in work?

Osborne says tax credits go to people in work. One is actually called the 
working tax credit.

But the richest are affected too, he says.

Q: You said in the autumn statement speech that those in work had had their 
pay rises curbed and that this justified the welfare cap. That implied that the 
welfare cap was aimed at those out of work.

Osborne says it would not be possible to tackle the deficit without tackling 
the £200bn welfare budget.

Q: The IFS says a one-earner family with two children will lose £534 by 2015. 
Do you accept that?

Osborne says he thinks this figure does not include the income tax threshold 
or universal credit.

Q: The IFS were just talking about the autumn statement. Do you accept those 
figures?

Osborne says he thinks it is odd to look at universal credit without 
considering the full impact of universal credit.

As a result of the autumn statement, the average working family will be £125 
better off, he says.

3.19pm GMT 

Labour's Andy Love goes next.

Q: Would it matter if Britain lost its AAA rating?

It would not be a good thing, Osborne says. But the agencies have warned about 
the possibility of the AAA rating being lost. Credit rating status is only one 
test. The key measures is how much it costs to borrow money.

He says at the meeting of EU finance ministers he attended everyone had their 
economic problems.

The GDP numbers are not as good as hoped. But the OBR says the deterioration 
in the GDP forecasts has been caused by the situation in the eurozone.

Q: Aren't the credit rating agencies bound to take into account falling growth?

Osborne says the key test is what happens when you try to sell gilts.

There was no reaction in the markets to the revised growth forecasts because 
they saw the government was taking steps to control the deficit.

Q: Will a downgrade make borrowing more expensive?

Osborne says he won't speculate on a downgrade. But the UK has been "something 
of a safe haven", he says.

Q: Will a downgrade affect the government's credibility?

Osborne says he is not going to speculate. The government is currently 
borrowing money at the lowest rate ever.

Updated at 3.37pm GMT

3.13pm GMT 

Osborne says RBS has shrunk already.

If you were to break it up further, that would be a very complex operation.

There are not a lot of buyers for bank branches.

Breaking up the banks sounds like a good idea. But it is not practical.

If the government thought breaking up RBS was practical, it would have done 
it, says Osborne. But it has not done it.

3.09pm GMT 

Labour's George Mudie goes next.

He reads out some debt figures. In 2013-14, the national debt will be 
£1,272bn, he says.

Q: After two and a half years, we still have another five years of austerity 
to go. You accept that you have missed your debt target?

Yes, says Osborne. He was open about that in his speech.

Q: You are also missing your deficit target. But you can get away with it 
because it rolls forward every five years. What's the point of having a rolling 
deficit target, but not a rolling debt target? If you borrowed money from a 
bank, and then said you will pay the money back in five years, how long would 
you stay in business?

Osborne says that is not a hypothetical questions. If a bank thinks your 
business is viable, it will give you more time to pay back a loan.

Q: You are spending more than £200bn to fund austerity.

Osborne says he is getting the structural deficit down.

Q: You announced the business bank in the autumn statement. Vince Cable said 
it would be a bank where you borrow through the internet. Yet in all our 
discussions, we've said we want face-to-face banking back. Will you consider 
using some of the RBS branches as regional business banks? You could even sell 
them when they are profitable.

Osborne says Mudie is right to say that the loss of face-to-face banking was a 
problem. The banks are trying to recreate that.

The business bank is not supposed to be a rival to high street banks. And that 
would not be allowed anyway.

It is supposed to help firms that cannot get normal bank lending.

Trying to return the bank system to health and to get lending going again has 
been the hardest economic problem he has faced, he says.

2.57pm GMT 

Osborne says his debt target was put in place to assure people the government 
was determined to deal with the deficit.

With a coalition government in power for the first time in the modern era, it 
was important to show it could take tough decisions, Osborne says.

2.55pm GMT 

Turning away from the Treasury committee for a moment, I see that Ipsos MORI 
has published some research showing that 59% of people think benefits should 
rise in line with inflation. 
<http://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3093/Ipsos-MORI-Autumn-Statement-Poll.aspx>

Some 51% also think that low earners are being asked to do too much to help 
Britain recover from the recession.

2.50pm GMT 

Pat McFadden is still asking questions.

Q: Do you accept the Resolution Foundation analysis that says 60% of the 
people affected by the cap on benefit increases are people in work.

Osborne says he accepts it will affect people in work. But the Resolution 
Foundation did not take account of the tax threshold increase. At one point 
Gordon Brown froze the family element of tax credit, he says.

Q: Do you accept that families are facing a "double whammy" of stagnant wages 
and benefit cuts?

Osborne says the government inherited an economy that was badly damaged by the 
recession. He lists measures he has taken.

Q: Do you accept Resolution Foundation figures showing that, even after you 
make allowance for the tax threshold, those in the bottom decile are losing 
£152?

Osborne says he thinks the figures involve "a selective calculation". 

Curbing the benefit increases is a fair way to save money, he says.

If Labour opposes it, it will have to say what it would do instead. Would it 
impose deep cuts in health or education? Labour even opposes taking child 
benefit away from the wealthiest families. He says he cannot have a debate if 
his opponents won't suggest alternatives.

Q: The IFS said that a one-earner family with two children would lose £3,000 
from all your measures. Do you accept that?

Osborne says "chart after chart after chart" in the IFS presentation last week 
 <http://www.ifs.org.uk/projects/401>showed that the richest were paying most. 

2.41pm GMT 

Labour's Pat McFadden goes next.

Q: How much extra borrowing is in your plans compared to after the election?

Osborne says he does not have the number. He will write to the committee.

Q: Does £212bn sound right?

Osborne says he does not have the number.

Q: If someone had told you in 2010 that you would have to borrow that much 
more, what would you have thought?

Osborne says that if someone had told him that the UK was going to maintain 
low interest rates while countries like Spain and Portugal struggled, he would 
have been satisfied.

According to the IFS, under Alistair Darling's plans the government would have 
had to borrow another £200bn, on top of the government's plans.

Labour's George Mudie invites James Bowler, the Treasury's director of 
strategy and planning, who is sitting with Osborne, to answer.

Bowler says he does not have the figure to hand either.

Updated at 3.30pm GMT

2.36pm GMT 

Q: Only six financial instutions have taken advantage of "funding for 
lending". Are you happy about that?

Osborne says many more than six have participated, several dozen. It has had 
"a very strong take up". It is having an impact on the real economy, adding to 
GDP, he says.

2.35pm GMT 

Andrea Leadsom, a Conservative, is asking the questions now. She asks about 
zombie companies and "bad forebearance".

Osborne says it is sometimes difficult to tell the difference between a zombie 
company and a company that is just going through a bad period.

But more work needs to be done on this area, he says.

Q: Do you believe in the concept of "creative destruction", where you let 
companies go to the wall so you get better capital allocation?

Osborne says he has always thought that was a bad phrase.

And he would not agree with those calling for a "short, sharp shock" to the 
economy. That is not what the economy need, he says.

2.30pm GMT 

John Thurso, the Lib Dem MP, is asking the questions now.

Q: Will the automatic stablisers continue to function as they have in the past?

Osborne says one of the key decisions in the autumn statement was "not to 
chase the debt target". If he had decided to do that, there would have been 
further cuts.

So one of his key judgments was to let the automatic stabilisers operate, he 
says.

2.26pm GMT 
 George Osborne Photograph: Democracy Live 
Osborne says Britain is now back in the top 10 of the best places do do 
business.

2.20pm GMT 

Brooks Newmark, a Conservative, is asking the questions now.

Q: You were thinking "out of the box" when you hired Carney? Isn't it time for 
the Treasury to think "out of the box" on inflation targeting?

Osborne says there has been plenty of creative thinking on monetary policy in 
the UK in recent years.

He won't give a running commenting on Treasury thinking, he says.

But if you want to change the regime, you need to make a strong case for it, 
he says.

Q: But you must have an opinion on replacing the inflation target with a GDP 
target?

Osborne says he does not think it is sensible for him to openly speculate 
about the macro-economic framework.

• Osborne does not rule out replacing the Bank of England's inflation target.

Updated at 2.26pm GMT

2.16pm GMT 

Osborne says it would be a good thing for academia to lead the debate on the 
value of having an inflation target, and for governments to follow.

2.15pm GMT 

Tyrie turns to Mark Carney, the Canadian who has been chosen as the next 
governor of the Bank of England.

Carney has recently said he would consider getting rid of inflation targeting, 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b6ab7eea-43cb-11e2-844c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2EpoxM74q>
 Tyrie says.

Q: Have you discussed this with him?

Osborne says Carney can speak for himself when he gives evidence to the 
committee.

But he says he thinks it is a good thing that the next governor is leading 
international debate.

The inflation target has served Britain well, he says. But there is a debate 
going on.

Of course, any decisions on this are for government.

Q: Are you dissatisfied with the inflation target?

Osborne says the inflation target has served Britain well.

He does not think chancellors should speculate about different monetary 
regimes.

He has no plans to change the regime, he says.

Q: If you were to change it, would he seek cross-party support?

Osborne says his party was wrong to oppose independence of the Bank of England.

He would like cross-party agreement for everything he does, he says.

2.09pm GMT 

Osborne says that British politicians should acknowledge when Brussels gets 
something right. Last night, it got something right, he says.

Tyrie says the deal does not amount to a full banking union.

Osborne says it could make swifter progress towards a banking union. But it is 
going in the right direction.

2.06pm GMT 

Q: What is the impact of the banking deal agreed overnight for Britain?

Osborne says it has been a good deal for Britain. A double majority will be 
required for decision, requiring a majority of countries in the euro and a 
majority of countries out of it.

And there is a "non-discrimination" clause protecting financial centres 
outside the eurozone, he says.

2.02pm GMT 

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative committee chairman, opens the hearing.

Q: To what extent is the eurzone crisis to blame for Britain's growth problems?

George Osborne says the eurozone crisis has had a huge effect.

According to the Office for Budget Responsibility, if trade to eurozone 
countries had grown as much as trade to non-eurozone countriese, GDP would have 
grown by 1%, he says.

1.58pm GMT 

George Osborne at the Treasury committee

George Osborne, the chancellor, is about to start giving evidence to the 
Commons Treasury committee about the autumn statement.

When it starts you can watch the hearing here, at Democracy Live.

1.45pm GMT 

Lunchtime summary

• Ed Davey, the energy secretary, has given permission for the resumption of 
fracking 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/dec/13/fracking-shale-gas-green-light>
. Commentators, readers and Guardian journalists are debating the merits of this
on a Guardian environment live blog. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2012/dec/13/fracking-shale-gas-uk-davey>

• John Lyon, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, has launched an 
investigation into allegations that Maria Miler, the culture secretary, broke 
parliamentary expenses rules in relation to her second home 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/dec/13/maria-miller-parliamentary-investigation-expenses>
. She insists that her claims were "wholly proper and above board". (See 
12.43pm.)

• George Osborne, the chancellor, has said that Britain's interests have been 
protected in a deal agreed overnight to allow the European Central Bank to 
supervise eurozone banks.

Britain’s vital interests were protected and we protected the single market so 
that businesses can go on selling their goods and services to the rest of 
Europe. I think it’s a bit of a model of the way Britain’s relationship with 
Europe is going to work in the future, which is that the eurozone are going to 
do more integration but Britain is going to protect its interests and it’s not 
going to give any more rights and powers to Brussels.

Osborne will be giving evidence to the Commons Treasury committee at 2pm about 
the autumn statement. The hearing was meant to take place at 10am, but it was 
put back because Osborne's return from Brussels was delayed. I will be covering 
the hearing live.

• Esther McVey, a welfare minister, has announced that reforms that are 
expected to see more than 300,000 losing all or some of their disability 
benefits have been delayed for up to two years. (See 12.25pm.)

• Nick Clegg has told MPs that a mid-term review of the coalition's 
performance due to be published by the government soon would show that it had 
achieved more than people might realised 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20709389>.

I think it's right that at this half way point we judge ourselves against our 
own benchmarks. In some areas we'll be able to show that we have over-achieved 
and in other areas where we have not achieved as much as we would have liked 
... On the whole I hope it will actually surprise on the upside, we have 
achieved a great, great deal of the coalition deal, in terms of implementing it.

• Britain has slipped two places down Europe's league table of living 
standards falling to sixth after being overtaken by Austria and Germany, the 
European Union's statistical body said 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/dec/13/uk-falling-living-standards-eu>.

• MPs have voted to add three lay members to the Commons standards committee. 
As the Press Association reports, Peter Jinman, Walter Rader and Sharon Darcy 
will take up seats on the committee on standards in January and will undertake 
training in the culture and practices of parliament. The appointment of three 
lay committee members, none of whom has ever been an MP, was agreed as part of 
reforms to the Commons following the expenses scandals in the last parliament. 
Each of the members will be paid £300 per day as and when the committee sits, 
which is on ad-hoc basis when there is an issue to consider. Lay members do not 
have full voting rights - but the committee on standards has on only one 
occasion been divided and in that case later produced a unanimously agreed 
report. Lay members do have the power to have dissent recorded if necessary.

• The Department for Education has published new league tables showing the 
number of schools failing to reach expected targets in maths and English has 
fallen by around 60% 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/dec/13/fall-primary-schools-targets>.

• The Home Office has published a draft antisocial behaviour bill that will 
give victims more say in how offenders are published 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/media-centre/news/antisocial-behaviour-victims>.

• Sally Bercow, the Speaker's wife, has refused to pay Lord McAlpine £50,000 
for an alleged libel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/dec/13/sally-bercow-lord-mcalpine>. He is 
suing her, and she has instructed solicitors to contest the claim.

• David Cameron has visited the Airbus Broughton plant to welcome a deal for 
new aircraft orders that will protect 1,500 British jobs at Airbus and another 
7,500 in its supply chain 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/jobs-protected-in-airbus-deal/>.

Updated at 3.26pm GMT

12.43pm GMT 
 Mari Miller. Photograph: David Jones/PA 
Maria Miller, the culture secretary, has been responding to the news that 
there will be an investigation into her parliamentary expenses.

A spokesman for the minister said her expenses had been audited.

Mrs Miller's expenses have been audited twice and found to be wholly proper 
and above board. Any suggestion to the contrary is simply untrue. She would 
fully co-operate with any inquiry.

And Miller has been defending herself in an interview with the Evening 
Standard. 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/maria-miller-i-didnt-use-leveson-to-threaten-editor-investigating-my-expenses-8412745.html?origin=internalSearch>
 Here's an extract.

We turned to her expenses. At issue are claims totalling £90,718 between 2005 
and 2009 for a property in Wimbledon where her parents also lived — an 
arrangement that some say broke parliamentary rules.

“Those expenses have been audited twice independently so I think everything’s 
in order,” said Mrs Miller.

Who were these independent auditors? One, she said, was Sir Thomas Legg, the 
former civil servant who ordered 389 MPs to repay sums wrongly claimed in 2009.

Did Sir Thomas know her parents lived there? Mrs Miller was unclear. “I 
obviously spoke to the Fees Office about my claims and they were happy that 
everything was in order,” she said.

And who was the second “independent auditor”? The Culture Secretary replied 
that it was the Conservative Party which “audited all Conservative MPs’ 
expenses”. Her definition of independent may raise some eyebrows as the Tory 
panel was headed by the then Chief Whip and David Cameron’s chief of staff.

I suggested that some members of the public might simply think it doesn’t 
smell right that Mrs Miller, who treats the Wimbledon property as her family 
home, listed it as a second home for expenses purposes, and a rented house in 
Basingstoke as her main home.

“MPs live in two places and that’s what the rules reflected,” she responded. 
“And as I said, my expenses have been looked at in detail twice by two separate 
organisations and have been found to be entirely in order.”

12.25pm GMT 
 Esther McVey, the welfare minister. Photograph: Dave M. Benett/Getty Images 
There's a story in the Daily Mail saying that the government's plans to 
replace disability living allowance (DLA) with a new benefit, the personal 
independence payment (PIP) will end "unchecked welfare for life" for 330,000 
claimants. (See 10.59am.) Tough stuff.

Esther McVey, the welfare minister, gave a statement about this in the 
Commons. But it turns out that real story involves the crackdown on "unchecked 
welfare for life" (as the Mail puts it) being delayed for up to two years.

New claimants will start claiming PIP instead of DLA from April 2013 and the 
Department for Work and Pensions will start moving existing claimants on to the 
new benefit from October 2013.

But now existing claimants will only be transferred to PIP from October 2013 
if there is a change in their circumstances, or if their claim period comes to 
an end. Most existing claimants will not be transferred to the new benefit 
until 2015.

McVey told MPs this was adopting a "significantly slower reassessment 
timetable" to ensure that it got it right.

At that point more than 300,000 claimaints will lose out. This is what she 
told MPs.

By reforming the system, ensuring it is fit for the 21st century, we can use 
the money we spend on disabled people more efficiently and effectively to help 
those most in need ... By October 2015 we will have reassessed 560,000 
claimants. Of those, 160,000 will get a reduced award and 170,000 will get no 
award. However, 230,000 will get the same or more support.

11.50am GMT 

John Lyon, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, has decided that he 
will launch a formal investigation into Maria Miller's expenses, the BBC is 
reporting.
Ross Hawkins (@rosschawkins) 
Parly standards commissioner opens inquiry into Maria Miller expenses. 
Complaint accepted for inquiry says spokeswoman
 <https://twitter.com/rosschawkins/status/279190742696615937> December 13, 2012
 <https://twitter.com/rosschawkins/status/279190742696615937> 
11.41am GMT 

The Home Office has released figures showing that the number of suspects 
terrorists arrested by police rose by more than 60% in the year to June. As the 
Press Association reports, a total of 228 people were held on suspicion of 
terrorism-related offences over a 12-month period ending in June, compared with 
140 during the previous period.

11.31am GMT 

For the record, here are today's YouGov GB polling figures. 
<http://yougov.co.uk/news/2012/12/13/update-labour-lead-13/>

Labour: 44% (up 1 point since Wednesday)

Conservatives: 31% (no change)

Lib Dems: 12% (up 2)

Ukip: 9% (no change)

Labour lead: 13 points (up 1)

Government approval: -33 (down 2)

11.10am GMT 

According to the Office for National Statistics, living standards in the UK 
have fallen in relation to other countries. The Press Association has filed 
this.

The standard of living in the UK has fallen two places to the sixth highest in 
Europe after higher prices squeezed households.

Britain's living standards fell below Germany and Austria in 2011, according 
to new figures recorded by the Office for National Statistics and Eurostat. The 
UK was already behind Luxembourg, Norway and Switzerland.

The measure - actual individual consumption - takes in all goods and services 
that a household consumes, including benefits in kind such as health and 
education.

The drop came as prices in the UK rose to 3% above the EU average in 2011, 
from 2% in 2010, as inflation in Britain rose to a peak of 5% in September of 
that year.

At the end of 2011, Bank of England governor Sir Mervyn King said households 
were suffering from the biggest squeeze on living standards since the 1930s.

Updated at 11.29am GMT

10.59am GMT 

You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/all> And all the politics stories filed 
yesterday, including some in today's paper, arehere. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/dec/12/all>

As for the rest of the papers, here's the PoliticsHome list of top 10 must 
reads, <http://www.politicshome.com/uk/todays_must_reads.html>here's the 
ConservativeHome roundup of today's political stories 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/frontpage/2012/12/newslinks-for-thursday-13th-december-2012.html>
and here'sthe New Statesman list of top 10 comment articles. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/staggers/2012/12/morning-call-pick-papers-11>

And here are some stories and articles I found particularly interesting.

• James Chapman in the Daily Mail says 330,000 people are expected to lose 
money as a result of a review of disability welfare payments. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2247290/Disability-handouts-cut-stopped-330-000-claimants-Government-aims-end-welfare-life.html>

The Government is to reduce or stop disability allowance for hundreds of 
thousands of claimants in a bid to end unchecked ‘welfare for life’.

The clampdown comes as new figures suggest that seven in ten of those claiming 
the benefit go through the system without proper checks.

Ministers intend to reassess an initial 560,000 claimants, and expect that 
330,000 – nearly 60 per cent – will get no award or a reduced sum after the 
checks.

There are currently 3.2 million adults claiming disability living allowance 
(DLA), costing Britain £13.2 billion a year – equivalent to the entire budget 
for the Department for Transport.

• Tim Ross in the Daily Telegraph says that government figures suggest 2 
million people could be worse off under universal credit if they decide to work 
extra hours. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9741033/Universal-Credit-2-million-will-be-better-off-refusing-work.html>

When he launched the reforms last year, Mr Cameron promised that Universal 
Credit would mean “it always pays to work”. “Never again will work be the wrong 
financial choice,” he said. “The more you work, the better off you will be.”

However, the DWP’s new impact assessment for the reforms, warned this would 
not always be the case.

“There is a risk of decreased work incentives for second earners in couples 
(primarily women),” the report said ...

The DWP found that 1.8 million main earners in a family will be worse off if 
they take on extra hours under the reforms than they would be now. Another 
300,000 secondary earners will also be penalised for taking on extra work under 
the scheme.

This means up to 2.1 million people would be better off refusing the offer of 
extra work under the Universal Credit, 600,000 more than would be better off if 
they agreed to take on more hours.

• James Chapman in the Daily Mail says Lady Warsi, the Foreign Office minister 
and minister for faith, has told fellow ministers that the gay marriage 
legislation could have “unintended consequences”. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2247266/Gay-marriage-law-Baroness-Warsi-claims-equality-string-unintended-consequences.html>

In a letter leaked to the Daily Mail, Baroness Warsi suggests schools could be 
required to teach about same-sex unions, while individual priests and churches 
who refuse to conduct them risk being sued.

Her intervention will embolden more than 100 Tory MPs who are threatening to 
vote against the legislation in the New Year.

Writing to Culture Secretary Maria Miller, who unveiled the planned 
legislation on Tuesday, Lady Warsi raises a series of questions about the 
change in the law.

She demands ‘clarity’ on how the new law will properly ‘protect religious 
freedom’ and asks: ‘What legal support will be afforded to churches and other 
places of worship if they’re challenged individually or as an organisation?’

• The Independent says that Eric Schmidt, the Google chairman, has said he is 
very proud of his company’s tax avoidance scheme. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/google-boss-im-very-proud-of-our-tax-avoidance-scheme-8411974.html>

In an interview in New York Eric Schmidt, Google’s Chairman, confirmed the 
company had no intention of paying more to the UK exchequer. Documents filed 
last month show that Google generated around £2.5 billion in UK sales last year 
but paid just £6m in corporation tax.

The Californian based search giant has also been revealed to have sheltered 
nearly $10bn of its revenues in Bermuda allowing it to avoid some $2bn in 
worldwide income taxes in 2011.

But Mr Schmidt said such schemes were legitimate and the company paid taxes 
“in the legally prescribed ways”.

“I am very proud of the structure that we set up. We did it based on the 
incentives that the governments offered us to operate,” he said.

The Silicon Valley boss went on to suggest that Google would not turn down the 
opportunity to draw on the big savings allowed under the law in the countries 
it operates in: “It’s called capitalism. We are proudly capitalistic. I’m not 
confused about this.”

• The Daily Telegraph says Craig Oliver, David Cameron’s communications chief, 
warned the paper that Maria Miller was “looking at Leveson” when it started 
asking questions about her expenses. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/leveson-inquiry/9741171/How-No-10-warned-off-the-Telegraph.html>

Craig Oliver indicated that the article may be poorly timed as “she [Maria 
Miller] is looking at Leveson at the moment.”

The Daily Telegraph today discloses that Mrs Miller is facing new questions 
over her expense claims after it emerged that she rented a home from a major 
Conservative donor and property developer in a private deal that has not been 
declared to Whitehall officials.

The property was declared as her “main home” to the parliamentary authorities, 
an arrangement which allowed her to claim the costs from the taxpayer for 
another property that she owned.

• Sue Cameron in the Daily Telegraph wonders whether the civil service is 
being politicised. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9740045/Sir-Jeremys-Civil-Service-just-isnt-working.html>

Is Whitehall moving inexorably to an American-style system with party 
politicians appointing their favourites to top Civil Service posts and senior 
jobs being auctioned off to the highest bidder?

This is the question some insiders are asking following the foul-up – a real 
corker – over the appointment of a new permanent secretary to the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change (DECC). In short, David Kennedy, the man put forward 
for the job by the independent and impartial Civil Service Commission, was 
vetoed by the Prime Minister – even though Ed Davey, the Energy Secretary, was 
happy with him.

The move comes as Francis Maude, the Cabinet Office minister, stands ready to 
overturn part of the Civil Service Act so that ministers can have more say over 
Whitehall appointments. The Act, which enshrines the appointment of impartial 
civil servants on merit, was only put on the statute book in 2010 and was 
passed with all-party support – including Mr Maude’s. At the time he asked for 
assurances that the Act would confirm that “protection for civil servants 
against ministerial political interference in recruitment, dismissal or 
promotion lies with the Civil Service Commission”. Now he wants ministers not 
just to have the right of veto but to pick candidates from a shortlist.

• Steve Richards in the Independent says David Cameron’s EU renegotiation will 
be be very different from Harold Wilson’s. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/tantric-sex-similes-dont-usually-turn-me-on-but-im-still-excited-about-the-pms-europe-speech-8411739.html>

As far as I can tell, only one observer from that era argues that the 
negotiations brought about substantial change to the UK’s membership. He is the 
former Political Editor of the BBC, John Cole, who, in his memoir, suggested 
that Callaghan had achieved significant concessions. But even Callaghan is more 
modest in his own memoir. On the whole, most contemporary commentators and 
participants regarded the changes as fairly cosmetic.

There is one very big difference between now and then. For reasons of 
conviction and party management, Cameron needs to conduct a genuine, historic 
renegotiation of substance. Wilson’s renegotiation was simply in order to 
provide cover for him and a few other senior figures to switch from opposition 
to membership to support in a referendum. The rest of the Labour Party had 
decided already whether they wanted to be in or out. The media and his party 
broadly recognised its limited relevance to the extent that he was not asked 
much about what form it would take. When questions were posed by the usually 
persistent Sir Robin Day on the BBC, Wilson tended to light his pipe noisily, 
suggest that it would be unwise to declare a position in advance, refer 
fleetingly to the unfair price of cod and move on.

Cameron is in an altogether different position in relation to negotiations, 
though not the offer of a referendum that he is reluctant to make but will do 
so, like Wilson, to keep his party together in the short term and reduce the 
threat from Ukip. For Cameron, the negotiation is of immense significance. He 
believes, as do William Hague and George Osborne, that the EU “tries to do too 
much”, but that Britain’s membership should continue. Crucially, this is the 
view of a significant number of his Eurosceptic MPs, including his former Press 
Secretary, George Eustice, who has proved an important unifying intermediary at 
times for Cameron over Europe. Eustice and others like him in the parliamentary 
party would contemplate withdrawal if the negotiation does not bring about 
major change.

Updated at 11.14am GMT

10.20am GMT 

This morning the Cabinet Office has published the succession to the crown 
bill, that will stop men taking precedence over women in the line to the throne.

It will ensure that if the Duchess of Cambridge has a baby girl, she will not 
be overtaken in the line to the throne by any younger brothers.

In the political and constitutional affairs committee hearing, the Labour MP 
asked Paul Flynn why the changed did not come into force immediately (ie, to 
stop Prince Edward leapfrogging Princess Anne). Good question. Chloe Smith, the 
Cabinet Office minister who is giving evidence alongside Clegg, replied by 
arguing that changes of this kind required plenty of advance warning.

Updated at 8.17am GMT

9.56am GMT 

The Treasury did not know when the Osborne hearing would now take place, but 
Twitter tells me that it's now 2pm.

9.52am GMT 

According to the Treasury, the Treasury committee hearing with George Osborne 
will go ahead later today, but they don't know when.

Osborne was apparently up until 4am in Brussels taking part in the banking 
regulation negotiations. (See 9.30am.) He is currently still on his way back to 
London.

9.49am GMT 

George Osborne's Treasury committee hearing has been delayed.
Ed Conway (@EdConwaySky) 
George Osborne has been held up in Brussels so his 10am appearance at the 
Treasury Select Committee has been postponed. Sorry to disappoint!
 <https://twitter.com/EdConwaySky/status/279159901916381185> December 13, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/EdConwaySky/status/279159901916381185> 
9.35am GMT 

Back in the Commons political and constitutional reform committee, Nick Clegg 
has just given a new slant on the Lib Dems' decision not to support the 
proposed parliamentary boundary changes. Clegg said he was not blocking the 
proposals; he was just delaying their implementation for a parliament. The 
coalition agreement proposed the policy, but did not say when it should take 
place, he said.

He is being questioned by the Tory MP Eleanor Laing, who opened the 
questioning by accusing him of lying when he told the committee earlier this 
year that there was no link between the Tories supporting Lords reform and the 
Lib Dems supporting the boundary changes. Clegg rejected that, saying there was 
no formal link. But, of course, he accepted that the Tories refusal to back 
Lords reform led to the Lib Dems deciding not to back the boundary changes.

9.30am GMT 

Eurozone finance minister have agreed to give the European Central Bank new 
powers to supervise eurozone banks.There are full details on our business live 
blog. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/dec/13/eurozone-crisis-live-breakthrough-deal-banking-union>

On the Today programme Greg Clark, a Treasury minister, was asked to give the 
government's response. He said Britain's interests were protected.

There is an explicit clause that has been inserted into the regulation with 
legal effect, effectively representing Britain's position, which essentially 
says no action, proposal or policy of the European Central Bank should directly 
or indirectly discriminate against any member state or group of member states 
in any currency, in effect. So that is a very strong legal protection.

And then over and above that the arrangements for the voting in the European 
Banking Voting Authority makes sure that there are two different groups and you 
need to have a majority in your ins and your outs.

I've taken the quote from PoliticsHome. <http://www.politicshome.com>

Updated at 9.33am GMT

9.20am GMT 

My colleague Nicholas Watt is tweeting from the political and constitutional 
affairs committee hearing with Nick Clegg. Here are his first two tweets.
Nicholas Watt (@nicholaswatt) 
Nick Clegg: PM and I to publish mid term review early in 2013. 'Candid 
assessment' of achievements + plans for 2nd half of parl
 <https://twitter.com/nicholaswatt/status/279152663982137344> December 13, 2012
 <https://twitter.com/nicholaswatt/status/279152663982137344> Nicholas Watt 
(@nicholaswatt) 
Nick Clegg: I spent some time Weds with @david_cameron 
<https://twitter.com/david_cameron> discussing mid term review. Will have audit 
of achievements + under achievements
 <https://twitter.com/nicholaswatt/status/279153068061388802> December 13, 2012
 <https://twitter.com/nicholaswatt/status/279153068061388802> 
9.12am GMT 
 Ed Davey. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
Ed Davey, the energy secretary, has announced that fracking will be able to 
resume in the UK, subject to controls "to mitigate the risks of seismic 
activity".

He has issued this statement.

Shale gas represents a promising new potential energy resource for the UK. It 
could contribute significantly to our energy security, reducing our reliance on 
imported gas, as we move to a low-carbon economy.

My decision is based on the evidence. It comes after detailed study of the 
latest scientific research available and advice from leading experts in the 
field.

We are still in the very early stages of shale gas exploration in the UK and 
it is likely to develop slowly. It is essential that its development should not 
come at the expense of local communities or the environment. Fracking must be 
safe and the public must be confident that it is safe.

We are strengthening the stringent regime already in place with new controls 
around seismic risks. And as the industry develops we will remain vigilant to 
all emerging evidence to ensure fracking is safe and the local environment is 
protected.

The new Office of Unconventional Gas and Oil, led by DECC, will be able to 
focus regulatory effort where necessary to meet the needs of future production.

Emissions of methane – which is a potent greenhouse gas - are already subject 
to control, but I am today commissioning a study of the possible impacts of 
shale gas development on greenhouse gas emissions and climate change.

The full details of the announcement are in the Department for Energy's press 
notice. <http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/news/pn12_164/pn12_164.aspx>

Updated at 9.23am GMT

9.07am GMT 

There are some parliamentary occasions that we cover in detail here, not 
necessarily because they are going to be riveting, but out of a Reithian sense 
of public duty (eg, David Cameron at the liaison committee). And then there are 
other events where we turn on the live feed with relish, because we know it’s 
going to be fun. George Osborne giving evidence to the Commons Treasury 
committee about the budget or the autumn statement comes into this category. 
The hearings tend to be quite long, and involve quite a lot of details, but 
with John Mann and other Labour MPs doing their best to make Osborne look daft, 
there are normally some moments of good parliamentary theatre too.Last time we 
had the famous exchange about when Osborne went last went to Greggs, and 
whether its okay to eat a pasty cold. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2012/mar/27/cash-access-osborne-budget-politics-live#block-23>
At the time I thought Mann was just engaging in rather empty grandstanding, but 
he managed to get Osborne branded as a modern-day Marie Antoinette in a tabloid 
splash 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/4223620/LET-THEM-EAT-COLD-PASTY.html>
 and he contributed to establishing the pasty tax as one of the coalition’s 
worst policy disasters, and so he was clearly onto something. Today we’ve got 
the chance to go through it all again, because Osborne is back before Mann and 
his colleagues, taking questions about the autumn statement.

That should be the highlight for the day. Here’s the full agenda.

9am: Nick Clegg gives evidence to the Commons political and constitutional 
reform committee.

9.30am: The Home Office publishes a draft antisocial behaviour bill.

9.30am: The Department for Education publishes primary school league tables 
for England.

9.45am: Philip Rutnam, permanent secretary at the Department for Transport, 
gives evidence to the Commons public accounts committee about the west coast 
mainline franchise.

10am: George Osborne gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about 
the autumn statement.

10.30am: Former ministers Lord Heseltine, Charles Clarke and Lord Reid give 
evidence to the Commons political and constitutional committee about the 
effectiveness of ministerial reshuffles.

We've also just within the last few minutes had an announcement from Ed Davey, 
the energy secretary, about the resumption of fracking. 
<http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/news/pn12_164/pn12_164.aspx>

As usual, I'll also be covering all the breaking political news as well as 
looking at the papers and bringing you the best politics from the web. I'll 
post a lunchtime summary at around 1pm, and another in the afternoon.

If you want to follow me on Twitter, I'm at @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>

Updated at 9.22am GMT
 