
Even for battle-hardened observers of the British economy, the landscape 
portrayed by last week's autumn statement was shocking. Now there isofficial 
acknowledgment 
<http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/economic-and-fiscal-outlook-november-2011/>
 that a country burdened by bank assets five times its GDP and chronically poor 
productivity is being dragged into the deepest and longest economic setback in 
modern times – with awesome implications.

Thus the continuing weakness in tax receipts that forces another £30bn of 
spending cuts if the government is to meet its self-imposed targets for budget 
balance, but two years later than planned. Thus the promise of decade-long 
austerity. Thus median incomes in real terms will be lower in 2015 than in 
2002, the longest period of falling real incomes ever recorded. Thus more than 
700,000 job losses in the public sector.

It could scarcely represent a bleaker picture. In the 1930s, Britain had an 
empire to fall back on as a protected market to help support recovery; in the 
1970s, North Sea oil was to come to our rescue; in the 1990s, the great credit 
boom seemed to solve the economic question. Nothing like that is going to 
happen now. Britain has to answer the riddle about how to make its living in 
the world with no soft options – with a grossly unbalanced and underperforming 
economy.

It is hardly a surprise that the talk is of a lost decade and a lost 
generation, but still there are some who try to comfort themselves with the 
hope that, while Britain is going to be a drearier and more austere country 
than it was, we will muddle through with the rules of the game more or less 
unchanged.

The postwar settlement will hold, if in a more flyblown and tattered shape. 
Organised labour will continue to decline. British companies will carry on as 
they have, along with explosive growth of pay at the top. The City of London, 
albeit subject to more regulation, will continue as it has. England will remain 
the fiefdom of the Conservative party. Britain, the argument goes, remains such 
a great power with such distinctive resources that it can afford not to make 
common cause with other European countries. The EU will either split up or go 
its own way; Britain can at last live its euro-sceptic vocation.

It is an assessment supported neither by history nor by any honest assessment 
of our plight. For example, the last time Britain endured such an extended 
period of depression and falling living standards – the 1870s and 1880s – saw 
the mushrooming of the co-operative movement and the emergence of the Labour 
party as the more moderate expressions of anger that wanted to challenge the 
very basis of capitalism. Be sure that British civil society will not accept 
its grim fate as if nothing is happening. There will be organised and angry 
responses – and rightly. We are about to experience economic, social and 
political tectonic plates on the move.

What is going to make the years ahead doubly fraught is that the ideologies 
that used to provide the basis for our democratic discourse have been as 
torched as the economy. This is a first-order crisis to which socialism, 
certainly as conceived and practised over the past 100 years, is no plausible 
answer.

But equally, nobody can dare argue that the solution is to press ahead with 
yet more of the free-market capitalism that has laid Britain and the west so 
low. The simple-minded nostrums that have poured from the great American neocon 
thinktanks have been tried and found wanting. An ideological vacuum coincides 
with the most testing economic times for decades.

We need vision and visionaries – but what we have is journeymen espousing 
bankrupt world views. Perhaps the most dispiriting aspect of George Osborne's 
autumn statement was its lack of an organising or inspirational idea about what 
he wants the economy to be. Enveloped by the collapse of anything he has 
believed in, all he could do was reach for the grim economics of the corner 
shop with incantations about the menace of public debt. But governments are not 
corner shops. Osborne is operating within a framework that permits no vision 
for how the British economy can be re-energised and reimagined.

Any prospectus for the future must have as its alpha and omega the answers to 
two coherent and related questions. The first is how risk is to be managed and 
shared – whether risk for companies and entrepreneurs that the business models 
on which their finances rest might collapse as a consequence of lack of demand, 
new technologies or new competition; or the risk for ordinary men and women of 
unemployment, ill health and financial hardship. The second is how opportunity 
is to be generated and capitalised on – whether to build new industries, how to 
ensure genuine social mobility. The paradox of capitalism is that unless it is 
buttressed by collective and social institutions that share and distribute risk 
fairly, provide a social contract for its people and generate opportunity, it 
degenerates into what we are living through – business leaders preoccupied with 
their own remuneration, consumers frightened to spend, sectors such as banking 
bloated by vast, hidden subsidies and a poverty of innovation and investment.

What is needed now is for these truths to be understood and then addressed. 
This is a crisis of bad capitalism, a capitalism distorted by the ideological 
prattle that claims it is moral and efficient that all risk be borne 
individually. This is a world in which the rich get richer, the poor get poorer 
and everyone else can go hang.

But everyone else will not just go hang. They will ask ever harder questions 
about how reward and risk are distributed in our society. What are the 2,800 
bankers in London estimated to be earning more than £1m a year doing to deserve 
such rewards? As the pension age is extended to 67, the education system 
Balkanised, unemployment institutionalised and workplace rights removed, what 
is the quid pro quo, the social deal? Are we happy to see the postwar social 
settlement whittled away with no coherent replacement? Why does the British 
private sector provide so few jobs, so little growth and so little innovation, 
but so much reward for those at the top? Is the sole purpose of government only 
to reduce its debt?

The only way forward is a good capitalism that solves these hard questions, 
commits to investment and innovation and builds new institutions that share the 
risks of entrepreneurship and of life, led by an enterprising government with a 
bigger conception of its role than debt reduction. Nor can Britain allow itself 
to become disconnected from the continent to which we are bound by geography 
and history.

The autumn statement exposed the raw truth of our national predicament and 
with it the promise of inevitable discontent and anger. It is a watershed 
moment. With sufficiently visionary leadership, it could mark a turning point; 
without it, decline could turn to rout.
 