
A Bavarian brewer has caused outrage in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> by producing a batch of “border 
fence” beer that appears to use Nazi symbols to criticise the large number of 
refugees arriving in the country.

Röhrl Brewery removed the variety from sale this week and apologised for “hurt 
feelings”, but denied having any sympathy with the far right.

Frank Sillner, the chief executive of the brewery in Straubing, said he had 
intended the special issue of 2,000 crates to be a commentary on the migration 
crisis and a reminder of Bavarian values.

The brown label on the 500ml bottles uses Gothic letters for the name 
“grenzzaun halbe” or “border fence half”, which appears to echodemands from 
local conservative politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/bavaria-threatens-legal-merkels-germany-open-door-refugee-policy>
 to seal Germany’s frontiers.

It also says “the homeland needs beer”, while the back of the label features 
the words “protect”, “defend” and “preserve” alongside virtues such as 
“diligence”, “loyalty” and “discipline”.

University groups urged people to boycott the brewery, while social media 
users described the variety as a “Nazi beer”.

They pointed to the retail price per bottle of €0.88 – a number used in 
neo-Nazi circles for the illegal “Heil Hitler” greeting, because the letter H 
is the eighth in the alphabet.

The company has insisted that this and the batch’s use-by date of 9 November, 
the day that marks the 1938 anti-Jewish attack known as Kristallnacht, are a 
coincidence.

Sillner told national news agency DPA that the idea for the beer came during 
talks about Germany’s refugee policy a few months ago.

Bavaria was the main gateway for the more than 1 million refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/germany-on-course-to-accept-one-million-refugees-in-2015>
 who came to the country last year.

“We have nothing, absolutely nothing, to do with rightwing extremism,” Sillner 
was quoted as telling DPA.

He said the beer’s price changes once sales tax is added and that the expiry 
date is “calculated by a computer”.

“When the refugee influx surged, we wanted to point to all of Bavaria’s good 
and positive traditions, to urge that we please do not forget, despite all 
willingness to help, what makes our Bavaria beautiful and good,” he told public 
broadcaster BR.
 