
Your home may be your castle but the law demands that you also take the right 
steps and behave responsibly when dealing with trespassers and other unwanted 
intrusions on to your property.

Trespass is defined as the unauthorised interference with the possession of 
your home and garden. The law says you have the right to decide what is left on 
your property, as well as the right to keep people out.

Most people protect their homes and gardens by building a fence, for which you 
won't normally need planning permission unless it is more than two metres high.

Signs that read "Trespassers will be prosecuted" are meaningless as you cannot 
be prosecuted for trespass - it is a civil wrong, not a criminal offence. It's 
therefore more accurate to have a sign that reads: "Keep out - private 
property. You are trespassing."

Reasonable force

If someone trespasses on your property despite due warning the practical 
remedy is to ask them to leave. If they don't you are entitled to use no more 
than reasonable force to eject the trespasser.

The right to use reasonable force has evolved through case law and there is no 
single answer as to what is reasonable - it will always depend on the 
prevailing circumstances.

However, you are not entitled to assault or harm a trespasser in any way. In 
the infamous Tony Martin case, for example, it was obviously unreasonable for 
him to shoot dead a teenager who had entered his remote farmhouse with the 
intention of committing theft.

In another case, a man who found a trespasser up a low ladder leaned against 
his house shook and overturned the ladder throwing the intruder to the ground. 
Although the trespasser was not injured, the judge said even this amount of 
force was unreasonable.

Contrary to what most people think, homeowners actually owe a duty of care to 
trespassers to ensure they do not come to any harm, which means if there is a 
hazard on your property you might reasonably be expected to offer some 
protection. And you mustn't lay traps to put off trespassers or you could be 
liable for a claim for compensation.

For adult trespassers, in most cases the duty of care will be met if you put 
up a fence and display a notice warning of the danger. But children might not 
be able to read and understand the notice, so if you know they trespass on your 
land you shouldn't, for example, leave sharp tools or toxic weed killer lying 
around. If the children play with these things and hurt themselves you might 
have to pay compensation for their injuries.

As above so below

Trespass does not only occur when people enter your land without permission - 
it can also arise when somebody places something on your land, such as when a 
car is left in your driveway. And if creepers or other plants are growing on 
the face of your wall, from roots in your neighbour's property, this is also 
technically a trespass.

You could take action if this creeper is likely to cause damage to the wall of 
your property, and you are entitled to cut it off. Someone dumping rubbish 
against your house wall is also trespass, as is throwing stones or rocks into 
your garden.

Trespass is not just confined to interference with your home and garden, but 
also extends to the airspace above and the soil below. So, for example, it 
would be a trespass to tunnel beneath your garden, and if someone put up an 
advertising sign that projects over your property, it would also be an 
actionable trespass.

If your neighbour's tree has branches that overhang into your garden then the 
law allows you to cut them off, but you must not go beyond the boundary line 
and you must give the cut branches back to your neighbour.

Be careful about firing up the chainsaw though, as the tree may be subject to 
a preservation order leaving you liable to the local authority for causing 
damage to a protected tree.

The forbidden fruit

Although it's OK to cut down an overhanging branch, it is not OK to pick fruit 
from it without your neighbour's permission. By law, the fruit belongs to your 
neighbour, as does any fruit that falls onto your land from your neighbour's 
tree.

If a tree affects the amount of light you receive but its branches do not 
overhang your property, you probably cannot make the tree owner do anything 
about it - there is no general right to light. That is unless there is a 
prescriptive right to light acquired through uninterrupted use for 20 years, or 
because you have applied to acquire the right to light through your local 
authority.

However, if your neighbour has a massive leylandii hedge that blocks your 
light and drains your garden soil of moisture rendering your garden unfit for 
growing plants, you may well be able to take advantage of the new High Hedges 
Law 2005 <http://www.communities.gov.uk/index.asp?id=1127822>. Under this 
legislation local authorities have the power to enter your neighbour's property 
to cut down hedges that cause a nuisance.

To do this, however, you will need to show that your neighbour's hedge is 
comprised of two or more evergreens that are more than two metres high without 
significant gaps between the trees or shrubs forming the hedge.

Your complaint should be made to your local authority only after you have 
tried to resolve the matter amicably with your neighbour - your local authority 
may also charge a fee for investigating the matter on your behalf. For more 
details on the legislation visit the Hedgeline website 
<http://freespace.virgin.net/clare.h/>.
 