
It's amazingly easy to disembowel a grand piano. With little more than a flick 
of his wrists, the blocks are removed from either end of the keyboard and the 
entire intestinal mechanism - keys and the hammers they are attached to - comes 
neatly away.

I'm watching this happen on stage at London's Barbican Hall. In front of me is 
Ulrich Gerhartz, a wiry man in a trim blue apron in whose lap a keyboard now 
heavily rests. Around us are three pianos with their lids gaping open, each one 
a £100,000 Steinway concert grand model D.

In an all but invisible way, Gerhartz is probably the single most important 
figure in the entire piano world, at least to pianists and to concert halls. 
He's just back from Melbourne, where he set up two concert grands in a new 
venue. Stored in his mobile phone, he has the numbers of just about every top 
piano player on the planet. "And their agents," he adds. When Alfred Brendel 
went on his farewell tour last year, he took Gerhartz with him. When Lang Lang 
lands in London in April and needs his Steinway set up to extract his trademark 
maximum-impact sound, who's he going to call? You guessed it. And in the last 
few weeks at the Barbican, this discreet figure in artisan fatigues has worked 
withMitsuko Uchida <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mitsuko-uchida>, Evgeny 
Kissin, Imogen Cooper, Murray Perahia and Maria João Pires.

But back to the innards. With one hand, Gerhartz has isolated a particular 
hammer. With the other, he is brushing a clear liquid on to its green felt 
coating. "There was one note here, an F sharp, that wasn't bright enough," he 
says. "So I used a mixture of collodium and ether to bring the note out. You 
apply it right on the nose of the hammer and it stretches the felt, so it makes 
it slightly harder and gives it a bit more tension." This gives the note more 
attack and brightness - but the process is not yet finished. From his array of 
little instruments balanced on the strip of wood above the keyboard, Gerhartz 
chooses a small screwdriver-shaped device, attached to what looks like a 
hypodermic dart, and starts pricking the felt of the F sharp hammer nose once, 
twice, several times.

To call this man a piano-tuner would be to sell him a tad short. Gerhartz, 
Steinway's director of concert and artist services, is a master piano-tuner, 
maybe even a maestro. And tuning is not nearly as simple as it sounds. US 
orchestras specifically request a pitch of 440Hz for an A, while European ones 
generally go for 441. There is one horror story (from before Gerhartz's time, 
he quickly says). The Russian pianist Mikhail Rudy once requested a last-minute 
change of Steinway for a Prom. The Proms schedule is so tight that the windows 
for technicians are tiny. Somehow, no one noticed that the new piano was 
pitched at 440 while the orchestra, for some reason, played at 444. They 
noticed in the concert though. "It was awful," says Gerhartz. "Everybody could 
hear it. It made the newspapers."

Preparing a concert grand for performance is quite a task. Every note has to 
pull its weight, every hammer, every string, every key. This is why, when 
Gerhartz gets under the bonnet of a piano, he might not come up for air for an 
hour and a half. There is regulating, voicing and balancing between bass and 
treble to do. His fingers trickle neurotically up and down the keyboard playing 
chromatic scales. Anyone else would be doing this to hone technique. But 
Gerhartz is hunting for bum notes. When he finds something, he takes a stick of 
chalk - which has its own smart golden holder - and deftly marks the wood above 
the offending key.

Unsurprisingly, Gerhartz, who trained at Steinway's Hamburg factory, comes 
across as highly meticulous and methodical. I watch as he picks up, for the 
umpteen-thousandth time in his 20-year career, a short stick and begins to take 
measurements from inside the piano. "It's a blow gauge," he says, of this 
instrument designed to read the distance between hammer and string. "The hammer 
has a certain distance to accelerate before it hits. That has a big impact on 
the depth of touch - how far you push the key down in order to get the hammer 
to the string."

Depth of touch is all-important. Some pianists like the piano to be set up so 
that all they have to do is tickle the key and a note sounds. Others opt for 
resistance. Do preferences divide up on gender lines? "You could say a female 
pianist would like a lighter piano, although not all of them," says Gerhartz. 
"The keyboard I prepared for Mitsuko would probably be slightly too light for 
Imogen, so Imogen would find it hard to control."

The lightest touch of them all, although obviously before Gerhartz's time, was 
Vladimir Horowitz. Gerhartz is sometimes asked to set up a piano just as the 
Kiev-born maestro preferred it - in the delusional belief that it'll make 
someone sound like him. "Horowitz made an amazing sound with a very, very 
light, shallow keyboard with a very, very, very bright tone. He could control 
it and he created his colours with it. But if you gave a piano like that to
Alfred Brendel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel>, it would be 
unplayable for him. Unthinkable!"

And then each piano has its own personality, which gradually emerges in the 
first year or two of its performing life. It is Gerhartz's job to steer a 
pianist in the direction of the right instrument. The piano before him is an 
099 (naming pianos is not one of Steinway's fortes). This, he says, "has always 
been a very strident concerto piano", while its younger stablemate, the 826, 
has "a tone with a lot of depth and brightness - but not brittle metallic 
brightness".

Steinway has an unchallenged monopoly in the concert hall. Unlike violins, 
however, Steinways have a brief lifespan, akin to that of a sports star. "To 
project sound well, with a nice musical tone, you need the pianos to be young," 
says Gerhartz. At Bridgewater Hall, in Manchester, the youngest is one year 
old, while the oldest is 12. Now confined to an orchestral role, the latter 
will soon be put out to grass. "It's like a high-performance athlete who eats 
the right thing, trains every day, is totally focused on performing," says 
Gerhartz. "As soon as their training regime goes and they have a normal life, 
they change." They get fat? "I didn't want to put it like that."

Gerhartz is ever the diplomat. But if anything in the highly strung world of 
solo performance tries his patience, it's younger pianists: "The problem is 
they don't learn how to work with a technician. A lot of them grow up in such a 
bubble of how wonderful they are and they just think, 'A piano-tuner is trade 
and I'm too good for them.' But it's all about the partnership. Pianists who 
don't talk to me won't get any service because I don't know what they want."

And talk to him all the leading ones do. His next set of conversations will be 
with Joanna MacGregor, Richard Goode, Nelson Goerner, Wayne Marshall and Barry 
Douglas - all of whom are performing this week at Bridgewater Hall's 2009 piano 
festival.

As he prepares all these pianos in all these empty concert halls, do 
Gerhartz's fingers never succumb to wanderlust? Do they not ache to explore a 
prelude, strike up a sonata? He looks sheepish at the very idea. "Not really, 
no. That's not my job. I come very much from the craft side. I can play a bit, 
yes. But I'm not a pianist by any means." And with that he gets back under the 
bonnet, looking for bum notes.

• Bridgewater Hall's Piano 2009 festival runs from Thursday to Sunday. 
Steinway pianos will be available to play in the foyer. Gerhartz appears on 
stage in conversation on Saturday at 6pm.
 