
With so many three-year-olds of untold potential peering over stable doors at 
Aidan O'Brien's yard, a spring-time card at Leopardstown can seem not so much 
like a set of Classic trials as a series of Ballydoyle trials.

Yet even a master of the art can have a bad day at the races, and yesterday 
O'Brien saw his runners beaten in trials for both the 1,000 and 2,000 Guineas, 
before insult was added to injury asAlberto Giacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti>, an 8-1 chance for the 
Derby, finished only third behind Balestrini, his stable-mate and supposed 
pacemaker.

A rush of money early last week, at least some of which apparently came from 
the wallet of the colt's owner John Magnier himself, had forced Alberto 
Giacometti down from 20-1 to singe-figure odds for the Derby. The cash was 
still coming before the Ballysax Stakes yesterday, too, the race that O'Brien 
has used to introduce the last two Derby winners, Galileo and High Chaparral.

After opening at 4-5 in the ring, Alberto Giacometti was down to 4-6 by the 
off, with Alamshar, a 5-4 chance, the only apparent danger in the five-runner 
field. Balestrini, by contrast, was the unconsidered 33-1 chance that two 
modest performances in maidens last October fully entitled him to be. But as 
Tom Queally and Balestrini set off at high speed, both Mick Kinane, on Alberto 
Giacometti, and Johnny Murtagh, on Alamshar, seemed happy to let him go.

Queally swiftly built up a significant lead, and as they turned into the short 
Leopardstown straight, it was clear that Alberto Giacometti would have to be 
the equal of Nijinsky - or at the very least, Galileo - to stand any chance of 
catching him.

Both Murtagh and Kinane were soon hard at work, but Alberto Giacometti found 
precisely nothing, and it was left to Alamshar to set off after the leader. 
Murtagh had closed to within half a length at the line, but Balestrini held on, 
with his much-touted stablemate another five lengths further away.

Alamshar would surely have won yesterday had Murtagh concentrated more on what 
was happening at the front of the field and less on tracking Alberto 
Giacometti. A handsome colt with a fluid action, he was cut from 14-1 to 10-1 
for the Derby by both Coral and Hill's, and may well prove to be among the best 
of his generation. Balestrini is 40-1 from 50-1 for the Classic with Hill's, 
while Alberto Giacometti is generally back out to the 20-1 mark that he 
occupied seven days ago. "Balestrini had been working really well and he's one 
of those horses that I said would probably leave their late season form at two 
behind," O'Brien said. "We had the option of this race or the maiden and he'd 
be a possibility for the Derrinstown Stud Derby Trial now. The main two didn't 
follow the pacemaker early on and then at the furlong marker Alberto Giacometti 
got tired on his first run back. We'll just have to see now if the improvement 
comes in Alberto Giacometti."

O'Brien's Brian Boru, the Derby favourite, pleased connections in a 10-furlong 
workout after racing. Kinane, who rode the colt, said: "He's in good shape and 
moved well - we did enough ahead of the Derrinstown Derby Trial."

O'Brien found little encouragement in either of the Guineas trials on 
yesterday's card, both of which fell to Dermot Weld. First up was Dimitrova, 
who made all under Pat Smullen to win the 1,000 Guineas Trial, before Refuse To 
Bend, a leading candidate for both the 2,000 Guineas and the Derby, gave away 
7lb to seven opponents in the 2,000 Guineas Trial.

Refuse To Bend, a son of Sadler's Wells, grabbed the lead from his pacemaker 
in the straight and quickly went two lengths clear. Although he then seemed to 
tire, and had just half a length to spare over Good Day Too at the line, he was 
immediately cut to 6-1 (from 8-1) for the 2,000 Guineas by Coral.
 