
Adam Gilchrist completed only his second Test as captain of Australia seeking 
to justify the declaration that was intended to advance his side closer to a 
5-0 whitewash but instead left England lauding Mark Butcher's role in a 
remarkable victory.

England's 315 for victory was the second-highest run chase total they have 
reached in their history but from the way that Gilchrist continually had to 
field references to his "generous" declaration it was possible mistakenly to 
presume that, in the absence of Steve Waugh, Australia had handed England 
victory.

"The plan was to have a bowl at them last night and to have the chance of a 
second new ball," Gilchrist said. "The rain on the fourth day became a factor 
in the declaration but we felt we were in a good position. We didn't know that 
someone was going to play the innings of his life."

Even before Butcher's assault, an innings strewn with flashing cover drives 
off front and back foot, Gilchrist said that England's No3 had proved himself 
an opponent to respect.

"It has to be one of the great Ashes Test knocks, I suppose," he said, "given 
that he wasn't even meant to be in the side at the start of the series. He has 
looked England's most solid player. He has impressed us as much as any of their 
guys."

Butcher's innings revived bad memories for Gilchrist of the double-century by 
India's VS Laxman in Calcutta that ended Australia's run of 16 successive Test 
victories. Gilchrist has only ever known an Australia side so dominant that 
their cricket has remained forever attack conscious. Defensive fields, even as 
England's authority blossomed in easing conditions after lunch, were never 
considered.

"Maybe we suffered for our attacking instincts," he said. "Our bowlers always 
look to take wickets and maintain the pressure by doing just that. Maybe this 
is something we can look at. But this was something special. I have never known 
so many of our guys congratulate someone for making a hundred."

Nasser Hussain described England's victory as "one good day of cricket". He 
added: "We have stopped the rot. Obviously for a large part of the game we were 
outplayed but if you don't dream, you don't believe.

"Butch was magnificent. In the first half-hour the ball was going all over the 
place and I thought 'here we go again'. The Headingley wicket produces great 
cricket whether the game lasts two days or five days and the crowd were so 
noisy that we almost ran each other out twice because we couldn't hear each 
other call. I love playing here.

"Butch has made a lot of good 20s and 30s throughout his Test career and me 
and Duncan Fletcher have scratched our heads about why he has got out when well 
set. Today he took his batting to another level. It proves what he is capable 
of."
 