
Layers upon layers, plots within plots. Thursday at Glastonbury used to be 
simply pitch up, neck 12 hallucinogenic Scrumpys, a quick squelch around 
Shangri La and then smoke yourself wizard in the Stone Circle. In 2013, though, 
it's become a frantic hunt for secret thrills. Those vaguely in the know – or 
alerted by the massive Beady Eye backdrop on the Other Stage – get an early 
night in preparation for the 11am Friday rush to theweekend's first major 
"secret" gig <https://twitter.com/liamgallagher/status/349883186978893825> in 
the hope they don't just play Beady Eye songs. Those really in the know descend 
on the 2000-capacity William's Green tent at 10pm amid whispers of an 
appearance by Alt-J. Those REALLY in the know blag invite-only tickets to the 
hospitality stage for an anannounced Stornoway acoustic set. And those not in 
the know at all just pick a random stage and hope, beyond hope,that Daft Punk 
will be playing <https://twitter.com/DaftPunkNews/status/350287497395306497> in 
their tent.

Six By Seven 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/5e2e050f-7280-464e-b251-0a1272c43300>'s 
surprise sets in the Glade – now renamed the Spirit Of '71 stage – have always 
been a brain-bending joy, and tonight at 9pm the reformed motorik pop noiseniks 
blast through their entire new album Love And Peace And Sympathy with nary a 
thought for the "fan favourite" and still inspire people to smear mud on their 
faces in tribalist mania and do a dance that can only be called Extreme 
Pinching.

Then, for the ardent scavenger of the secret set, it's a race past the 
gigantic flame-spewing spider spinning webs of acrobats in Arcadia (one too 
many Scrumpys?) to the Hospitality stage for 20 minutes being charmed out of 
your Hunters by a stripped-downStornoway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stornoway>. Mingling mariachi horns with 
slapped crate drums they breeze through a heady Zorbing, lost sci-fi party tune 
When You Touch Down From Outer Space and anti-new build shanty We Are The 
Battery Human. Mildly drizzly, but quite wonderful.

A dash over to William's Green proves that word is out about Alt-J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j>. The crowd spills a hundred feet out 
of the tent, grooving glacially to the geometric warps of Tessellate, the 
spidery subtleties of Matilda and Breezeblocks' blip-funk poundings. They 
declare themselves Glastonbury virgins but seductively pop Thursday's cherry.

Then it's a squelch through Shangri La where sinners queue to blag their way 
into the enormous Heaven club, comprising a celestial strip bar and a palatial 
lounge. Applicants are offered two ways in – convince the angels in the 
entrance booths of your spiritual purity with a story of your fundamental 
Mandela-ness or offer them something from your person in return for a 
wristband. Except, as a lesson in the impossibility of rich men gaining 
entrance, those wristbands are fake.

Finally, to the Rabbit Hole, which buzzes with word of the ultimate secret 
set. Michael Eavis, joining the in-house karaoke band for a rousing romp 
through Suspicious Minds. Which has got to be better than the final secret set 
we're subjected to, at 6am in the Park camping field, when what sounds like an 
Ian Brown acoustic session in the tent next to ours starts up to a largely 
unconscious audience, which swiftly turns nasty. If only we'd camped over in 
Michael Meads field, at least we'd have got an impromptu acoustic set from Dog 
Is Dead instead…
 