
Hi Arthur. Can you tell us what you'll be doing at the festival?

Mainly hanging out with friends and walking up to the top of the hill to see 
who I bump in to. I'm MCing for three and a half hours tomorrow, and then 
Saturday lunchtime I'm doing a half an hour spot in the Cabaret tent – and who 
knows what other things along the way.

How many Glastonburys is this for you?
I didn't really start going 'til I was in my mid-40s, so I've only done about 
10 or 15. You lose track.
Plans for the rest of today?
My favourite thing is to walk up to the top of the hill and look over it all. 
One year, I was up there having a smoke with some nice young chap who turned 
out to be Dizzee Rascal. You never know who you're going to meet. Part of me 
feels oppressed by the number of people here, so I have a slight instinct to 
head to the perimeter and watch over. And often you can hear the bands better 
up there.


Anything about the festival you're not keen on?
If there's any drumming that goes on in the Cabaret tent at 10am, that is most 
oppressive. I think they may have fired the drummers this year following 
complaints from everyone who sleeps here. You don't want to be waking up to the 
sound of bloody drummers.

How much to you tailor your set for a festival crowd?

A bit. I'm more loose-limbed and experimental, shall we say. Last year I was 
on at exactly the same time as the Rolling Stones, so there were only 20 people 
in my audience, and they were only there because they were too out of it to 
stand up. And I declared myself the messiah, which I wouldn't do at a normal 
gig. Then, after a while, it got quite tiring being the messiah, so I nominated 
one of the audience to be the messiah. His only policies in the world were: 
"Everyone should drink more and come to Glastonbury." Which I felt, for a 
messiah, lacked a bit of vision.

Is it better to come to Glastonbury as a performer or a punter?

I've never been as a punter. It's certainly nice as a performer; I get my own 
caravan. I think as a performer you don't feel the pressure to see everything.

If you could be a member of any band, who would it be?
Who was it did "Ruby, Ruby, Ruby, Ruby"? Kaiser Chiefs. I met [frontman] Ricky 
Wilson once. Turns out he's a Radio 4 man, so he and I hit it off.

Do you enjoy festival crowds generally?

Yeah, I do like the festival; people are on a kind of holiday mode. It's like 
a lacuna – you don't have any interest in the news or anything. It's just like 
a very intense version of the Edinburgh festival, which is the mother of all 
festivals.


Are you playing at Edinburgh this year?
I'm doing the same show I did last year, reprising Arthur Smith sings Leonard 
Cohen at the Pleasance 
<https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/arthur-smith-sings-leonard-cohen-vol-2>. And 
I'll be doing my late-night alternative tour of the Royal Mile, which starts at 
2am on the last Saturday, probably. It involved me leading a lot of people and 
making up a lot of stories, and it has, in the past, involved me getting 
arrested, for breach of the peace and possession of a megaphone. But not this 
time – I don't drink any more.


Any message for people following the festival from home?

In many ways, you've made the right decision not to come. But I'm glad I'm 
here.
 