
It's been a dismal few months for GlaxoSmithKline, so Britain's biggest drugs 
company enjoyed a welcome shot in the arm when a regulatory advisory committee 
in Washingtongave a thumbs-up to Benlysta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/17/glaxosmithkline-lupus-drug-benlysta-approval-fda>
, a potentially groundbreaking treatment for the autoimmune disease lupus.

Benlysta could be the first new medicinal approach in half a century for 
lupus, a debilitating illness suffered by 50,000 people in Britain. Symptoms 
can be anything from chronic fatigue and muscle pain to kidney failure and 
physical deterioration that leaves some people using wheelchairs.

Benlysta did not originally come from GSK's labs. The British company bought a 
half share in the drug four years ago from US biotech firm Human Genome 
Sciences, which came up with the treatment. Still, GSK has shared the cost of 
developing it, and one analyst said it could be the London-based firm's first 
"bona fide" new molecular entity in living memory to command blockbuster sales. 
If Benlysta is successful, it could rake in £1.2bn annually.

But, as ever in the drugs industry, things are not quite as cut and dried as 
they might be. There's a debate in the medical community about how much more 
effective Benlysta might be than existing drugs. It seems to have benefited 30% 
of patients in trials, but among US sufferers it had less impact on African 
Americans – who are more susceptible to lupus. But patients are enthusiastic – 
many suffer unpleasant side effects from steroids prescribed to control the 
illness and some spoke on behalf of Benlysta to last week's FDA committee. It 
could be a contentious issue next year for the National Institute for Clinical 
Excellence, which vets drugs for the NHS.

Still, if Benlysta gets approval from the US food and drug administration next 
month, it'll be a positive end for a bad year at GSK. The company has taken a 
roasting over its diabetes drug Avandia, which had to be withdrawn because of 
health concerns. And it wasobliged to pay £61m last month to settle litigation 
with a whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/27/glaxosmithkline-whistleblower-wins-61m>
who exposed a series of quality and contamination problems at a factory in 
Puerto Rico. A new drug in doctors' hands will be just the tonic.
 