
Great full-backs generally come in pairs, and it has been a long time since 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> were able to field a 
partnership worth boasting about. Last night, however, Glen Johnson and Ashley 
Cole gave a pretty good impression of just such a thing, albeit in the most 
helpful of circumstances.

Johnson had a hand in England's first four goals, his display representing a 
marked improvement over the slapdash way he began Saturday's match in Almaty, 
when he was repeatedly caught dawdling in possession. Last night he was sharp 
and eager, matching the efforts of Cole on the opposite flank.

It is five years since Sven-Goran Eriksson gave the 19-year-old Johnson his 
debut, having been impressed by his early form with West Ham. Since then, like 
so many young England players, his form has been affected by the pressures 
imposed by early fame and wealth. Having failed under the scrutiny that came 
with being Roman Abramovich's first big signing at Stamford Bridge, he has used 
his time at Portsmouth to rediscover the zest and enterprise that made him such 
an exciting prospect.

Perhaps nothing has been as impressive as the way he knuckled down against 
Kazakhstan, eradicating his early carelessness and playing a full part in 
England's recovery from an opening half-hour in which they demonstrated all the 
collective technical and tactical gormlessness that Fabio Capello is striving 
to eradicate, generally with greater success than his predecessors. Last night 
it was Johnson who shaped the openings that enabled England to cruise into 
their summer break without a care in the world.

Even had the Wembley car parks not been overflowing as a consequence of the 
tube strike,Andorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> could have 
been excused for finding a parking space for their team bus in front of goal. 
When England took the lead, 212 seconds into the match, it was with their 
fourth opportunity.

Andorra strung five men across their penalty area at the kick-off, with a line 
of four midfielders almost within whispering range, but from the opening 
minutes the Group Six leaders pierced their defence at will. Johnson took 
possession on the right, glanced up to assess the situation and stroked in a 
lovely diagonal cross that found the head of the unattended Wayne Rooney. And 
then, having scored, the home side could not resist the temptation to turn the 
occasion into an exhibition.

It was not much of one for a while. Showboating flicks failed to find their 
mark. Crossfield passes flew straight into touch. Strikers stumbled into each 
other. And Peter Crouch proved yet again, when presented with a clear chance 
from a David Beckham free-kick in the 10th minute that for a man of 6ft 7in he 
is an astonishingly poor header of the ball.

If ever there was a night for Crouch to mount an attempt to loosen Emile 
Heskey's renewed grip on the England No9 shirt, this was it. The Portsmouth 
striker has a more varied repertoire of deft touches than his Aston Villa 
rival, and his international scoring record is vastly superior, but Heskey is 
the one who brings others into the game.

Instead it was Johnson who seized the occasion. In the 29th minute he slid a 
clever ball through to Theo Walcott, running down the inside-left channel, and 
the Arsenal forward's astute and accurate cut-back found Frank Lampard with the 
time and space to drill his shot home from the edge of the area. Ten minutes 
later Johnson again claimed the ball on the right and picked out Rooney, this 
time with a lower diagonal ball that invited a brusque scoring shot.

His opposite number was not making as significant a contribution but it was 
equally interesting to see the signs of Cole's revival. Long hampered by 
nagging ankle injury since his move to Chelsea three years ago, he appears at 
last to have recovered the fitness and form that made him, during his Arsenal 
years, arguably the most impressive left-back in the world. Returning to the 
scene of the recent FA Cup final, where he played a leading role in Chelsea's 
victory over Everton, he provided a marvellous moment when, soon after England 
had taken the lead, he took on Josep Ayala, Andorra's right-back, with a shimmy 
and dart and feint that brought Francisco Gento to mind. Perhaps it was just 
the all-white strip that created the illusion but Cole was clearly enjoying 
himself.

Of course, neither he nor Johnson was being called upon to do any defending, 
making it easier for them to express their ability with the creative arts. This 
was a night on which the 57,897 England fans who had made it to Wembley (there 
appeared to be no Andorrans present) were able to relish the sight of 90 
minutes of uninterrupted England possession, as well as the half-time 
presentation of the members of the 1966 squad who had belatedly received their
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> winners' 
medals at 10 Downing Street earlier in the day.

The sight of George Eastham, Jimmy Greaves, Peter Bonetti, Ian Callaghan, 
Jimmy Armfield, John Connelly, Norman Hunter and the rest of Alf Ramsey's 
reserves would have been better served by a full house but they would be the 
last to complain.

The great Greaves, however, can hardly have been impressed by the profligacy 
of his successors – Rooney and Jermain Defoe excepted – in the matter of 
converting total dominance into goals.
 