
Glenn Hoddle is ready to return to football management with Tottenham, if 
approached by the club in the wake ofthe sacking of André Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/andre-villas-boas-tottenham-sack-tim-sherwood>
.

Tim Sherwood has been placed in interim charge of Spurs, while Hoddle, Fabio 
Capello and the Southampton manager Mauricio Pochettino have emerged as 
contenders for the position.

Hoddle, the former England manager, was in charge at Spurs between 2001 and 
2003 but has not been in club management since Wolves in 2006.

A story on a website co-founded by Hoddle suggested he is awaiting a call from 
White Hart Lane and read: "Zapsportz.com understands that Hoddle will certainly 
help if the club makes an approach."

The former Tottenham owner Sir Alan Sugar, the ex-Spurs striker Gary Lineker 
and Hoddle's former Spurs team-mate Ossie Ardiles are all backing the 
56-year-old's appointment.

"For me, the man for the job is Glenn Hoddle," Ardiles, the Spurs manager from 
1993 to 1994, told TalkSport. "I think he is a wonderful manager and he is a 
lot more mature, so I think he will be a wonderful choice. He knows everything 
about the Premier League and Spurs especially."

Villas-Boas was sacked after Sunday's 5-0 loss at home to Liverpool, with 
Sherwood placed in temporary charge. Despite the Reds reverse and the earlier 
6-0 defeat at Manchester City, Ardiles has confidence in the Spurs squad.

The former Argentina midfielder added: "I believe whoever is the manager will 
have a wonderful, wonderful squad. They have one of the best squads in the 
Premier League in fact. Unfortunately, things have not gone right this season, 
but in terms of the quality of our players it is absolutely second to none. It 
is a wonderful job at the end of the day. It is a big squad and a superb squad."

Sherwood, who is already on the coaching staff at White Hart Lane, is to take 
charge of Spurs in an interim role, beginning with Wednesday night's Capital 
One Cup quarter-final at home against West Ham. Sherwood's interim role could 
be extended for a longer period depending on the club's search for a permanent 
successor.

The Hammers won 3-0 in the Premier League at White Hart Lane in early October 
and face a Tottenham side without captain Michael Dawson and midfielders 
Paulinho and Sandro. Paulinho misses the first of three matches for his 
dismissal against Liverpool, Dawson is banned for one match and Sandro is 
expected to be out for around a week with a calf injury.

Danny Rose (toe), Christian Eriksen (ankle), Vlad Chiriches (knee) and Younès 
Kaboul (thigh) could all return, but defender Jan Vertonghen (ankle) is out.
 