
Everyone now recognises the need to reform the international economic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> regime. But the idea should 
not simply be to fix a system that is obviously broken: we need to exchange it 
for a better model. That is because thecurrent financial architecture has failed
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketturmoil> in some very important 
ways.

Most importantly, the international financial system has failed to meet two 
obvious requirements: of preventing instability and crises, and of transferring 
resources from richer to poorer economies. Not only have we experienced much 
greater volatility and propensity to financial meltdown across emerging markets 
and now even industrial countries, but even the periods of economic expansion 
have been based on the global poor subsidising the rich.

These global failures are so immense that they constitute enough reason to 
abandon this system. But there are other associated failures in terms of what 
the regime has implied within national economies: it has encouraged 
pro-cyclicality; it has rendered national financial systems opaque and 
impossible to regulate; it has encouraged bubbles and speculative fervour 
rather than real productive investment for future growth; it has allowed for 
the proliferation of parallel transactions through tax havens and looser 
domestic controls; it has reduced the crucial developmental role of directed 
credit.

So we clearly need a new system, even if the goals remain the same as that of 
the originalBretton Woods <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system>: 
to ensure currency stabilisation through international monetary cooperation; to 
encourage the expansion of international trade in a stable way; and to promote 
development by facilitating productive investment.

To achieve this in the current context, four elements are crucial. First, the 
belief that self-regulation supported with external risk assessment by rating 
agencies is an adequate way to run a financial system has been blown sky-high. 
There is no alternative, therefore, to systematic state regulation of finance.

Second, since private players will inevitably attempt to circumvent 
regulation, the core of the financial system – banking – must be protected, and 
this is only possible through social ownership. Therefore, some degree of the 
socialisation of banking (and not just socialisation of the risks inherent in 
finance) is also inevitable. In developing countries it is also important 
because it enables public control over the direction of credit, without which 
no country has industrialised.

Third, to cope with the adverse real economy effects of the current crisis, 
fiscal stimulation is essential in both developed and developing countries. 
Enhanced public expenditure is required to prevent economic activity and 
employment from falling, to manage the effects of climate change and promote 
greener technologies, and to advance the development project in the south.

Fourth, we need an international economic framework that supports this, which 
in turns means that capital flows must be controlled and regulated so that they 
do not destabilise any of these strategies.

It may be argued that such an international system based on state regulation 
will reduce the possibility of developing countries to access much-needed 
capital for their own economic expansion. But this perception is wrong, because 
in fact the current liberalised system didnot provide for a net transfer of 
resources to the developing world. In the past six years, there has been a net 
flow of financial resources from every developing region to the north, 
primarily the US, even as global income disparities have increased. And within 
countries, the idea that deregulated finance could put more resources in the 
hands of the poor (as in sub-prime lending) has proved to be unsustainable.

So greater state involvement in economic activity is now both necessary and 
desirable. The time for arguing about whether to have it or not is over. 
Instead, we should be thinking of how to make such involvement more democratic 
and accountable, within our countries and internationally.
 