
Form may famously be temporary, but add a touch of extra quality and it counts 
for plenty. The confidence Gloucester took into the final of theAnglo-Welsh Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglo-welsh-cup> on the back of 10 
successive wins was apparent from the start, and while the Cherry and Whites 
were not perfect – it took an hour for the much vaunted back division to 
produce a move really worthy of the occasion – they were much too good for a 
brave but ultimately outclassed Newcastle side.

Whether qualification for the Heineken Cup means more than the ending of the 
club's reputation for choking in finals will no doubt have been a subject for 
pleasant debate in many a pub in the West Country city after this match . The 
celebrations on the pitch were certainly heartfelt, and the fly-half Nicky 
Robinson, who will be playing for Wasps next season, acknowledged the primary 
emotion was relief.

"It's a massive win, because the club deserves silverware and the supporters 
do too," he said. "We knew we were kind of favourites, but after the way they 
played in the semi-final, we also knew thatNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> would put up a tough, 
tough fight. The squad really performed today."

It took Gloucester less than seven minutes to go ahead, and the ease with 
which the try came must have made the Falcons' coaching staff twitch. The
Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> pack pulled in 
the defence with a drive down the blind side before the ball was spun to the 
open side for the left wing Tom Voyce to step inside Luke Fielden and the 
full-back Alex Tait, and score.

Nicky Robinson converted from the touchline, but the Falcons were not about to 
panic. Their problem was not so much retaining possession as winning good 
quality ball in the first place, and after Robinson had stretched Gloucester's 
lead with a penalty from in front of the posts, Jimmy Gopperth's decision to 
take on a 50‑yard attempt was possibly the result of an early sense of 
desperation.

Newcastle's aggressive tackling was making the game increasingly scrappy, 
though, and Gloucester's frustration saw them give away a far more kickable 
penalty. Once again Gopperth pulled it wide, but the New Zealander excelled 
defensively soon afterwards with a last‑man tackle on Charlie Sharples after 
the Gloucester wing was sent clear by Robinson's fine pass.

Whatever the coach, Bryan Redpath, said at half-time had no immediate impact. 
Gloucester produced a series of sloppy errors in the first few minutes of the 
second half to cough up possession until Robinson brought a little order to 
proceedings by kicking a penalty for offside. Shortly before the hour, however, 
Gloucester produced a really incisive move. It was finished by Eliota 
Fuimaono-Sapolu but the interplay and sharp handling, twice involving Robinson, 
was an indication of Gloucester's capabilities.

Finally Newcastle heads went down, and with 15 minutes left Voyce and Freddie 
Burns released Sharples on the right to remove any lingering doubt. Luke Eves 
went over from close range to break the Falcons' duck, but Gloucester had the 
final word with a driving maul that ended with Darren Dawidiuk scoring.

The Newcastle captain, James Hudson, had no complaints. "The scoreline is a 
completely fair reflection of the game," he said. "They played really well, 
they stretched us, we defended well for a while but made some fundamental 
errors to gift them field position too often. We've enjoyed the competition, 
but the performance hurts a little bit."

Newcastle Tait; Fielden (Catterick, 61), Tu'ipulotu, Fitzpatrick (Bobo, 53), 
Eves; Gopperth, Young (Charlton, 63); Golding (Shiells, 64), Thompson (Vickers, 
46), Brookes (Hall, 68); Hudson (capt), Van der Heijden (Wilson, 63); Swinson 
(Levi, 71), Wilson, Hogg.

Try Eves. Con Gopperth.

Gloucester Morgan (Burns, 61); Sharples, Molenaar (Trinder, 56), 
Fuimaono-Sapolu Taylor, 74), Voyce; Robinson, Pasqualin; Wood (Thomas, 78), 
Azam (Dawadiuk, 78), Harden (Knight, 71); Hamilton (James, 64), Brown; Qera, 
Hazell (Cox, 41), Narraway (capt).

Tries Voyce, Fuimaono-Sapolu, Sharples, Dawidiuk. Cons Robinson 4. Pens 
Robinson 2.

Referee Dave Pearson. Attendance 6,848.
 