
Gloucester moved to the top of Pool Three in the LV Cup with a 30-16 
bonus‑point victory overLeeds Carnegie at Headingley.

On New Year's Day Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> had given Leeds their only 
domestic win of the season so far but there seemed little chance of a repeat 
yesterday as tries from Lesley Vainikolo and Tom Voyce and a conversion and 
penalty from Freddie Burns gave the visitors a 15-9 lead, Ceiron Thomas having 
kicked three penalties for the hosts.

Burns extended Gloucester's lead with another penalty and despite a fine try 
for Leeds from Scott Mathie, Nick Wood and Tim Molenaar crossed to give the 
West Country side the extra point. A win over London Irish next weekend will 
put them into the semi-finals of the Anglo-Welsh competition for the third year 
running. Leeds have been eliminated.

Towards the end of the match, Vainikolo had to go off with a shoulder injury. 
The Gloucester forwards coach, Carl Hogg, said that the England winger could 
face a lengthy lay-off. "I think Lesley has dislocated his shoulder," he said, 
"but we will wait for a medical update at the start of the week. I wouldn't 
like to speculate until we have that."

Worcester wrapped up top spot in the Championship when they came from behind 
with four minutes left to beat theCornish Pirates 33-30 at Penzance.

Richard Hill's side took the lead against the only team to have beaten them 
this season but they were then made to look pedestrian as the Pirates scored 
three well-crafted tries before half‑time. Down 25-7 at the interval, 
Worcester's head coach clearly had plenty to say and, in a thoroughly pragmatic 
19 minutes,Worcester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> 
scored three tries, Andy Goode just getting their noses ahead when the video 
referee confirmed the conversion that made the score 26-25.

The Pirates came back with a try by Rob Cook but the full‑back missed the 
conversion and two penalties that would have wrapped up the game before Pat 
Sanderson got his second try, converted by Goode, to confirm Worcester's No1 
seeding in the play-offs.
 