
The Daily Mail greeted Andreas Whittam Smith's decision to step down as the 
president of the British Board of Film Classification earlier this month as the 
exit of the X-rated censor. His four-and-a-half-year stint as Britain's chief 
film classifier certainly saw the board gain a more permissive reputation.

That liberal record was quickly established by his early decisions to give a 
much delayed video release to some 1970s classics, including The Exorcist and 
The Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Even the notorious Driller Killer was given a 
video release 20 years late, after the deletion of scenes showing a drill 
actually boring through flesh. And although it was nothing really to do with 
the BBFC, the decision taken by Stanley Kubrick's family after his death to 
lift the director's ban on A Clockwork Orange added to the idea that there was 
a new liberalism afoot. One cultural commentator even claimed that, in his 
pinstripe suit and Garrick Club tie, Whittam Smith had presided over the 
"biggest ever liberalisation of cinematic content".

But just how deserved is that reputation? It certainly seems to ignore the 
circumstances in which Whittam Smith and his director, Robin Duval, were first 
appointed; not to mention their less than heroic role in the battle over R18 
videos, the outcome of which was the legalisation of explicit consensual adult 
sex on video.

It is true that the new team appointed by the then home secretary, Jack Straw, 
in the winter of 1997, has been more open than its predecessors. The BBFC's 
policy of holding "roadshows" up and down the country was expanded to get the 
fullest picture possible of public attitudes.

The result, in 2000, was a marked shift in the principles underlying the 
approach to film censorship in Britain: "The public has told the BBFC that the 
board's guidelines should be more relaxed in the 18 category, but the board 
should be tougher on violence, drugs and bad language at the lower 
classification levels," concluded Whittam Smith.

On the one hand this has meant, for example, that an English-language film, 
Patrice Chéreau's Intimacy, was passed last year with the same kind of content 
as such foreign-language arthouse films as Ai No Corrida, Romance and The 
Idiots were in the past. On the other hand, it now means that drug-taking 
scenes such as in Trainspotting would now be cut and that Sam Peckinpah's 1971 
Straw Dogs remains locked firmly in the censor's cupboard.

Whittam Smith and Duval justified this particular decision by saying that they 
shared the view of the previous BBFC director, James Ferman, that the brutal 
rape scene in Straw Dogs condoned the male rape myth that "women really like 
it". Hence also the decision to cut a hardcore 10-second shot from a rape scene 
in the forthcoming Baise-Moi (right), on the basis that sequences that 
"eroticise sexual assault" should be barred.

So far, so fine. But Whittam Smith seemed more concerned to ensure that these 
old 1970s censorship warhorses finally saw the light of day than to address the 
thornier issue of contemporary censorship. His reign also saw the customary 
saucy diversions: he allowed himself to get embroiled in silly rows such as 
whether Ralph Fiennes's bottom in Neil Jordan's The End of the Affair meant the 
film should be given a 15 or 18 certificate.

But the significant exception to this generally honourable record was his role 
in that battle over R18 videos. Part of the problem was the circumstances in 
which Whittam Smith was appointed. Straw had refused to confirm the acting BBFC 
president, Lord Birkett, after the home secretary discovered that he had 
sanctioned the creation of the R18 category for videos for sale only through 
licensed sex shops. Straw had asked Birkett: "Do you really mean you are going 
to allow oral sex?" Straw appointed Whittam Smith for the sole purpose of 
reversing this decision.

The new BBFC president obliged by reversing the official verdict on these R18 
videos, which included titles such as Horny Catbabe and Nympho Nurse Nancy. 
When the decision was rejected by the indepen dent video appeals committee, 
which included such child-welfare experts as Fay Weldon, Nina Bawden and Claire 
Rayner, Whittam Smith launched a high court battle. But the judge failed to 
oblige, saying the risk of the videos causing devastating harm to more than a 
minority of children was insignificant. Straw was furious. He disbanded the 
video appeals committee and vowed to change the law to keep this flow of 
"hardcore filth" out of Britain. There is no sign of that legislation, and the 
episode left Whittam Smith looking less than independent.

What of the future? Well, the BBFC has already made clear that it would like 
to move away from a system of mandatory ratings to something more advisory, 
especially with the PG-12 category. The BBFC is already giving more advisory 
information. For example, The Lord of the Rings was given a PG certificate with 
the advice that the battle violence and fantasy horror could disturb children 
under the age of eight. Expect a lot more of that American-style consumer 
advice in the years to come. Not a bad legacy for the son of an Anglican canon.

 The Whittam Smith legacy


 Passed for video 

The Exorcist (1974) 

The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (1974) 

Driller Killer (1979) 

Christiane F (1981) 

 Still banned 

Sam Peckinpah's Straw Dogs (1971) 

Lucio Fulci's Nightmare Concert (1990) 

The Story of O (1975 - on video) 

Baise-Moi (2001 - on video) 

Alan Travis is the author of Bound and Gagged, a secret history of obscenity 
in Britain (Profile Books, £7.99).
 