
In 2008, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) became 
the latest body to try to persuade us to live the green lifestyle. Its 
Framework for Pro-Environmental Behaviours dealt with lifestyle and behaviour 
issues in the context of climate change.

Like many other organisations that have tried to promote pro-environmental 
behaviour, DEFRA's approach in the Framework focuses on ways of persuading 
individuals to adopt a greener lifestyle and make green their brand of choice. 
In taking this approach, they have reproduced the limited but familiar 
vocabulary of the ABC – a language in which A stands for attitude, B for 
behaviour and C for individual choice. Is this any way to go if the job is to 
promote social transformation on the scale and at the rate required in response 
to climate change?

The ABC approach begins with A for Attitude. But to concentrate on moments 
when attitude makes a difference is to lose sight of the bigger picture. In 
societies characterised by car use, people drive around not because they want 
to, or because they have no care for the environment, but because participation 
in such a society brings with it an unavoidable burden of mobility. In 
emphasising choice, desire and attitude, ABC obscures the questions that 
matter, which are about how social obligations and conventions evolve and with 
what environmental cost.

The system then moves on to B for Behaviour. Here, the familiar idea that 
attitudes motivate individual behaviour makes life simple. Instil new values 
and new behaviours will follow. In reality, behaviour change programmes often 
run into problems. Values don't always translate into action. In any case, many 
environmentally significant practises are routinised and ingrained. In heating 
and lighting their homes and in washing and showering as they do, people 
reproduce expectations that are not theirs alone. In addition, such ways of 
behaving are often shaped and sustained by the homes in which we live.

Finally, the C stands for Choice. The ABC is not just a theory of change. It 
is intended to promote action. It defines citizens as consumers and governments 
as 'enablers' whose role is to induce people to make pro-environmental 
decisions for themselves. In placing responsibility so squarely on the 
individual, this approach deflects attention from the many institutions that 
shape options and opportunities, and which makes some courses of action more 
likely than others. Thus we no longer take it for granted that our children 
will go to the nearest school. We expect them to go to the 'right' school, 
according to an elaborate set of social criteria. This often creates demand for 
mobility. Likewise, building codes perpetuate the idea that 22°C is the 'right' 
temperature for a building.

Cycling is another example. Governments want to encourage bike use. But 
cycling involves equipment such as bikes, clothing and suitable roads, as well 
as shared experience and competence. None of this has anything to do with 
individual attitudes. The ABC approach is often apparent in government 
initiatives, but it is also seen in the logic of the Transition Towns movement. 
Despite its rhetoric about towns, the focus is still on persuading individuals 
to change their approach.

Can we go beyond ABC? Disciplines for which social change is core business, 
including sociology, history, anthropology and geography, are brimming with 
many more useful ideas from other parts of the alphabet, including systems, 
transitions, routines, practices and dynamic processes. What would it mean to 
go beyond the ABC and to exploit concepts starting with letters like S, T, R, P 
and D?

We don't have to look far to find examples. The idea of transition management 
has its origins in studies of science, technology and innovation, and in 
evolutionary economics, history and complexity science. All of these have 
important and relevant things to say about how social arrangements hang 
together and how they fall apart. In adopting transition management as part of 
their National Environmental Policy Plan, Dutch policymakers have created space 
for thinking about how environmentally problematic ways of life are reproduced 
and evolve.

Another example is public health, where the concept of an obesogenic or 
fat-generating environment is used to highlight the role of infrastructures, 
cultures and institutions. So why not something similar for climate change? 
Sydney Water has taken just such an approach – thinking of water not as a 
'resource' but as the input for human activities, from bathing to gardening. 
Maintaining a green lawn and keeping clean are very different social practices. 
The institutions that affect these practices are also different: maybe Boots 
for the bathroom, but B&Q for the garden. We need to know more about how 
social, policy and business interests interact in cases such as this. There are 
also examples closer to home. One is the congestion charge for people driving 
into central London on weekdays – a measure that changed habits directly and 
that was again not related to individual attitudes.

The future challenge is to focus on ways of developing environments that 
favour sustainable ways of life. As well as opening up more opportunities for 
intervention, such a strategy would break through the conceptual log jam of the 
ABC, and allow climate change policy to benefit from a much wider range of 
social science than it does at present.

Professor Elizabeth Shove, ESRC climate change leadership fellow, Lancaster 
University.

This article originally features in the ESRC magazine Britain in 2010.
 