
A volcanic ash cloud shut down airspace over Britain for six days; an oil-rig 
explosion knocked £20bn off the value of the UK's largest company, and the 
eurozone finished the year on the brink of collapse. Whatever other ups and 
downs 2010 has offered corporate Britain, disasters have loomed large.

But while Tony Hayward no doubt believes this year has been one to forget, 
others are having a very good recession. There has been an almost complete 
overhaul at the top at the UK's biggest banks, and significant changes at 
retailers, too. Meanwhile, some features of the corporate landscape have 
disappeared, including well-known brands, and others have made unexpected 
comebacks.

Still making a packet

Any chief executive worth his or her salt has been adopting the mantra of the 
chancellor, George Osborne, and insisting to staff that we all share the burden 
in these straitened times.

For some, that is a hard argument to make. Bart Becht, chief executive of 
Reckitt Benckiser <https://www.theguardian.com/business/reckittbenckiser>, for 
instance, took home £90m last year, it was revealed in April. To be fair, most 
of it came in shares awarded more than 10 years ago, but it was still a 
reminder that some have bigger nest eggs to tide them over in tough times.

Becht's pay package was the standout corporate excess story of the year. 
However, it was not a freakish occurrence. Analysis from Incomes Data Services, 
out in October, revealed that the pay of FTSE 100 directors went up by 55% in 
the year to June. A lot of that came from share options – but even after 
stripping that out, FTSE 100 board salaries rose 3.6%. "It is as though the 
recession never happened," said Steve Tatton, director of IDS.

Others toasting 2010 include Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, who took home £3.5m from 
Royal Mail when he left to join ITV in April; Mark Byford, who is due to leave 
the BBC with a payoff of as much as two years' salary after being made 
redundant in October; Marc Bolland, lured from Morrisons to Marks & Spencer 
with the promise of £15m; and Mike Geoghegan, who leaves HSBC with a package 
worth £17m in cash and shares. Tough times, indeed.

Headhunters busy

Many of the UK's biggest companies have seen a change at the top in 2010. 
Geoghegan's departure grabbed the attention: with his finance director, Douglas 
Flint, being elevated above him in the pecking order and prompting an unseemly 
media dispute over who said what and when, and who threatened or did not 
threaten to resign.

HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> failed to shed much 
light on the exact turn of events but regardless, Geoghegan has gone, former 
chairman Stephen Green has joined the government, the finance director is now 
the chairman and former investment banking head Stuart Gulliver becomes the 
bank's chief executive at the start of 2011.

It was a busy year for all top financial services headhunters. Lloyds 
surprised everyone by plucking António Horta-Osório from Santander to replace 
the longstanding boss Eric Daniels, and Barclays appointedBob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-diamond>, the already 
well-remunerated Barclays Capital chief executive, as its new boss.

In the retail world, Sir Stuart Rose left M&S and gave way to Bolland. But 
perhaps more significantly, Tesco said farewell toSir Terry Leahy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/terry-leahy> and hello to Philip Clarke. 
When Leahy took over in 1997, Tesco was worth £4bn. It is worth more than £31bn 
today. No pressure there, then.

Floats that sank


The FTSE 100 ended 2009 at 5411, and had risen to 5971 yesterday. But it has 
not all been plain sailing on the markets. Despite surging equities, a few 
flotations fell distinctly flat in 2010.

Betfair and Ocado were both firms that flopped after they floated: Betfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/betfair> is down below £10 after 
launching at £13 and rising above £16 after trading began, while Ocado has lost 
about 10% of its flotation price of 180p.

Neither, though, were quite as spectacular as the performance of Promethean 
World – a maker of interactive whiteboard technology which says its purpose is 
"lighting the flame of learning". The company floated at £2, and was down to 
almost 50p in December, a scarcely believable 75% drop in value.

Disappearing acts


"How will the Santander rebrand affect you?" a personal finance magazine asked 
in January as the Spanish bank began removing the Bradford & Bingley, Alliance 
& Leicester and Abbey brands from our high streets. "Not very much" was the 
likely answer, though some may shed a tear at the loss of B&B's bowler-hatted 
insignia.

Another famous name disappearing from UK corporate life – but maybe not for 
long – was Pontin's. The holiday company went into administration in November, 
and at the time of writing is still seeking a buyer.

Construction and support services were also in upheaval: Connaught 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/connaught> sank into administration in 
September, followed by Rok in November.

And it was a farewell of a different sort in January as chocolate maker 
Cadbury's ownership fell into the hands of the US food group Kraft: a move that 
meant waving goodbye to some British corporate tax revenue too, as it emerged 
in December that the company was relocating some of its key functions to 
Switzerland.

Comebacks


For some, 2010 was a year of renewal, and of re-emergence after long 
hibernation – includingArchie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>. After a political career of 
limited success and a series of small deals since he stepped down as chairman 
of Asda in 2000, Norman took on the chairman's job at ITV on 1 January. He set 
about trying to revive the ailing broadcaster, bringing in Adam Crozier as 
chief executive.

Another great comeback of 2010 was the revival of General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors>. The maker of Buicks and 
Cadillacs and owner of Vauxhall went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2009, but 
came storming back on to the market in November of 2010. It even declared a 
profit, for the first time in three years, in May.

Prosecutors at the Serious Fraud Office were toasting a very different sort of 
comeback: the return to Britain of former Polly Peck chief executiveAsil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>. Nadir said in August that he 
was coming back to get a fair trial. Polly Peck folded in 1990 and Nadir was 
charged with theft and false accounting but fled to Turkish-occupied northern 
Cyprus rather than go to court; he will complete his full comeback in October 
2011, assuming prosecutors can get near the 20-year-old paperwork involved.

Corporate crises


2010 has, above all, been a year of disasters, natural and otherwise. Snow has 
disrupted businesses across retail, aviation and sectors further afield not 
once but twice.

Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> said in February it would 
recall almost half a million hybrid cars worldwide, including 8,500 of its 
Prius model in the UK, following a string of safety scares.

In April, an explosion on BP's Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico 
killed 11 workers, with the Macondo well blowout going on to become the biggest 
accidental marine oil spill in history (see box below).

In June, the insurance group Prudential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> was in the spotlight after 
dropping its takeover approach to AIG, having incurred £450m in costs.

In November, a Rolls-Royce engine blew up on a Qantas A380 and Qantas 
subsequently grounded its entire fleet of A380s and threatened to sueRolls-Royce
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup>, while Singapore 
Airlines recalled three of its superjumbos. As investigations continue, the 
engineering company has issued a profits warning.

It was a disastrous year for EMI and Guy Hands. Not only did the music group 
reveal a £1.75bn loss in February, but Hands was then humbled in a New York 
court as he tried to blame his advisers, Citigroup, for him overpaying forEMI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/emi>.

But perhaps the most unexpected crisis of the year was one which happened 
earlier, and which encouraged many to brush up their Icelandic pronunciation. 
Those in the airline industry are still likely to remember how to say 
Eyjafjallajökull.

The volcano's explosion in April and subsequent ash cloud caused flights to be 
grounded across Britain as well as elsewhere in northern Europe, leading to 
significant losses for the airline industry. "Perhaps this is nature's way of 
telling us all to slow down a little," said a contributor to the BBC's website.

With mergers and acquisitions activity starting to grow, however, the eurozone 
crisis unresolved and a host of new chief executives eager to make their mark, 
slowing down looks likely to be the last thing to happen in 2011.

BP's hard year

BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> entered 2010 in a state of 
enormous optimism. Tony Hayward was showing himself to be an astute chief 
executive, who was concentrating on the core business, and eschewing the grand 
gestures enjoyed by his predecessor John Browne.

The commercial environment was looking encouraging. The oil price had bounced 
back from $40 ber barrel lows and demand was beginning to recover nicely allong 
with global economic growth.

the company was beginning to benefit from internal cost-cutting and a wide 
range of exploration and production opportunities – not least in the Gulf of 
Mexico, where it had already established a dominant position.

But an explosion on 20 April changed everything for Hayward, BP and the wider 
oil industry. The blowout on board the Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 workers 
and caused the worst oil spill in American history.

The ensuing environmental damage to the southern coast of the US created a 
political firestorm that embroiled Barack Obama, eventually cost Hayward his 
job and torched the reputation of his company.

Unfortunate comments by the BP boss at the height of the crisis, such as "I 
want my life back", are likely to live in the public mind for decades to come – 
longer perhaps than the company itself as an independent force.

While BP had begun the year looking for potential takeover targets, it ended 
2010 the butt of stock market rumours that it could soon be on the end of a bid 
from its arch-rival Shell.

Over the past 12 months, BP's share price has fallen from a high of 658p to a 
low of 296p and now stands at about 469p under the new leadership ofBob Dudley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-dudley>, its first American boss.

And with $20bn (£13bn) put aside to deal with future liabilities from the Gulf 
spill, the oil company has been looking to sell off at least an equal value of 
assets. There has been speculation that Riverstone Holdings, the New York-based 
private equity house that Lord Browne, BP's former chief executive, is involved 
with, is among the potential bidders for its liquefied natural gas assets in 
Canada.

The future of BP as an operator in the Gulf has been up for question and the 
company has been forced to drop out of an exploration race in places such as 
Greenland. But Dudley will be hoping the company can rebuild its reputation and 
financial momentum during 2011.

• This article was amended on 31 December 2010. The Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> flotation price was given as 165p. 
This should have been 180p.
 