
Everybody's favourite Wall Street bank, Goldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs>, has suffered a sharp sense 
of humour failure about a worker in its graphics department leading tourists on 
credit crunch-themed walks around Manhattan's financial district.

For a Guardian story on financial crisis tourism 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/may/28/wall-street-guided-tours> back 
in May, I reported on a tour led by Tom Comerford, who offered visitors an 
anecdote-heavy wander around Wall Street hotspots such as AIG's building, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Deutsche Bank and Standard & Poor's.

Comerford was working in Goldman's document production division by evening, 
while running tours for a firm calledThe Wall Street Experience  
<http://www.thewallstreetexperience.com/aboutus.html>during the daytime. But 
he's since quit the bank after being told to choose between Goldman and his 
tours.

Comerford tells me that after The Guardian's coverage of his tours, he was 
summoned by Goldman's compliance department. The bank initially demanded 
whether he was using confidential material - zeroing in on an CDO document that 
he brandished to tourists as an example of a real, life toxic asset.

"They thought I was taking documents from the office which, to me, is 
ridiculous - I could go to jail for that," says Comerford, who says the 
document in question was actually aDeutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> derivatives that had long 
been in the public domain.

Although he was able to satisfy Goldman that he wasn't stealing anything, 
Comerford was then told to choose between his job at the bank or his tour 
guiding activities - an ultimatum that he feels was "very unfair". After ten 
years, he quit his job.

"I looked at it as an acting gig - and I'd done acting gigs before while 
working at Goldman, without any problem. But they were very concerned at the 
tone of it," says Comerford. "They thought that if anybody could possibly, in 
any way, shape or form, interpret the tour negatively, I couldn't do it."

It's worth pointing out that Comerford's tour wasn't particularly harsh or 
judgemental on Wall Street - it was a whistlestop guide to how, and where, the 
credit crunch began. The Wall Street Experience is run by Andrew Luan, a former 
Deutsche Bank trader who has a relatively sympathetic view towards the 
"entrepreneurial" stories of successful financial institutions.

Goldman's chief spokesman, Lucas van Praag, points out that Comerford didn't 
work directly for the bank, but was employed through a contractor. 
Nevertheless, the bank confirms that it told him to choose between tour guiding 
or working at Goldman.

"He was told that given the nature of the tours he was giving, we'd like him 
not to do it," says Van Praag. "Being very deprecating about the industry while 
claiming to be an employee of one of the organisations within it seemed to be 
inconsistent."

Goldman apparently took exception to Comerford's description, which I 
reported, of subprime mortgage securities as "crap". Van Praag said: "Here he 
is, advertising himself as a Goldman employee and talking about producing 
subprime mortgage securities as 'crap'."

Strangely enough, though, we've heard similar sentiments expressed before at 
Goldman - by a young banker named Fabrice Tourre, who described his own CDOs as 
"monstrosities" and compared them to creations of Frankenstein. Tourre, who is 
at the centre of Goldman's recently settled brush with regulators for fraud, 
remains employed by the bank on fully paid leave.
 