
Adam Scott says he harbours fears for the health of world No1 and friend Jason 
Day as well as everyone involved with theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>.

Scott would not be playing in Rio regardless of the Zika virus causing havoc 
for Rio organisers but the Australian golf star hopes those involved are taking 
the warnings and risks seriously.

Jack Newton tells critics to lay off Adam Scott over Olympic golf snub
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/jack-newton-tells-critics-to-lay-off-adam-scott-over-olympic-golf-snub>
The Queenslander pulled his name from Olympic consideration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/20/australian-golfer-adam-scott-says-no-to-rio-olympics-selection>
 mainly for scheduling reasons, preferring to prioritise time with his young 
family around the last two major championships and FedEx Cup playoffs.

But he also has serious concerns about the mosquito-borne Zika virus and the 
implications it could have for world health in general.

“I have not used it as an excuse although it would be very convenient to do 
so. It is only part of my concerns,” Scott said.

“I will say when the World Health Organisation has serious concerns over the 
impact that hundreds of thousands of people flooding into Rio is going to have 
I think we should listen.

“Clearly traditional Olympic athletes are in a very awkward situation. They’ve 
trained so hard for this and it is everything that they’ve dreamed of and for a 
health epidemic to get in the way, I understand why they are still trying to go.

“But it has to be treated seriously and I just don’t think it is. It hasn’t 
really got major traction yet and I am amazed by that.”

Scott referenced a recent opinion of Canadian public health expert Amir 
Attaran who was quoted in the Harvard Public Health Review suggesting a global 
epidemic could stem from the Games.

With the virus spread via mosquitoes or sexual contact, the potential for it 
to hit all corners of the globe is high.

Already major league baseball in the USA has cancelled a series of games due 
to be played in Puerto Rico over Zika concerns.

Attaran added further thoughts to the CBC website, calling for the Games to be 
stopped and likening it to playing in a nuclear zone.

“The problem is we’re essentially faced with a situation of games versus 
health,” Attaran said. “And to me, it’s very clear that you don’t play games so 
as to wreck the health of the world, which is very possibly the outcome.

“I characterise it as potentially catastrophic, extremely negligent, 
ill-considered and inconsistent with the scientific evidence. It’s a bit like 
saying: ’We’re holding the Games in Fukushima. Protect yourself. Wear a lead 
suit. It will all be fine.”

Marc Leishman has declined participation solely on Zika fears, with his wife 
still recovering from a near fatal bout of toxic shock syndrome.
 