
Approximately 130 orders prohibiting begging, dogs, busking, sleeping, street 
art and even carrying a golf bag in public spaces have been introduced over the 
past 18 months.

Freedom of information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/freedomofinformation> requests show 79 
councils in England and Wales have brought in public spaces protection orders 
(PSPOs) under the Antisocial Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act since it came 
into force in autumn 2014.

A report published on Monday by the libertarian Manifesto Club  
<http://www.manifestoclub.com/>claims many are poorly drafted, based on 
insufficient public consultation and target inoffensive activities.


Among the more unusual PSPOs, which attract £100 on-the-spot fines, is one 
drafted byNorth East Derbyshire council 
<http://www.ne-derbyshire.gov.uk/about-north-east-derbyshire/news-homepage/bulletins/news-archive/mickley-pspo/>
 which prohibits “playing golf, or being in possession of golf equipment, on 
the open, park areas” in Mickley.

In Hillingdon, there is a ban on feeding pigeons and playing with remote 
controlled cars that cause a nuisance in the borough’s parks.

The report <http://www.manifestoclub.com/>, compiled by Josie Appleton, the 
Manifesto Club’s director, records 12 prohibitions on loitering or congregating 
in groups, 10 bans on shouting or making noise, nine on swearing, six relating 
to begging, three outlawing face covering, three on rough sleeping and two on 
aggressive charity collection.

A PSPO in Kettering in effect imposes a curfew on “unsupervised juveniles” 
under the age of 18 in the town centre after 11pm. “Before the legislation came 
in,” the report states, “the Manifesto Club warned that the powers would be 
used to target groups such as buskers and the homeless.

“At the time, the Home Office told us they didn’t think this would happen. Yet 
now there are six councils restricting begging, three councils banning sleeping 
in public, and five councils restricting music or street art.

“The Home Office does not collect data on PSPOs, so this FOI survey is the 
first indication of how powers have been used. The results confirm our concern 
that these orders would be used to target groups who were seen as ‘messy’ in 
public spaces, such as the homeless, young people or buskers.”


In some places, PSPOs appear to be targeting genuine problems. The Local 
Government Association has dismissed complaints about PSPOs in the past, 
saying: “[They] can be used to address anti-social activities in public spaces 
which are having a detrimental effect on the quality of life of local people. 
Antisocial behaviour offences, such as aggressive begging, public drinking or 
the sale of legal highs, are far from ‘bizarre’.


“For victims and communities affected, they are serious issues and councils 
are keen to protect them from offenders who can make the lives of those they 
target a misery.”
 