
According to oft-cited statistics, climate scientists are 95%-99% certain of 
climate change 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/what-95-certainty-warming-means-scientists%20> 
– about as certain as they are of the link between smoking and lung cancer. 
Nonetheless, an estimated 58% of US Republican congressmen claim to be 
unconvinced of it. This group, the so-called “climate denier caucus 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/06/26/2202141/anti-science-climate-denier-caucus-113th-congress-edition/>
,” is a big part of the reason that meaningful climate activist legislation 
keeps getting shot down. And according to a recent report, some of America’s 
most popular companies are helping to fund the effort.

Forecast the Facts <http://forecastthefacts.org/> and Sum of Us 
<http://sumofus.org/>, two sustainability oriented NGOs, recently released “
#DisruptDenial <http://forecastthefacts.org/disruptdenial/>,” a report 
outlining the corporate contributions to the 160 members of the climate denier 
caucus in Congress. According to them, these legislators have received $641m in 
campaign contributions from US companies, including $98m in 2014.

It isn’t hard to see why some corporations might want to support climate 
change denial. Companies involved in gas and oil, like Chevron – which 
contributed $1,262,463 – or ConocoPhillips – which contributed $754,251 – could 
have much to gain by delaying climate action. Others, like Goldman Sachs – 
which contributed $1,757,104 – might be concerned about the market effects of 
climate regulation.

Other contributing companies, however, are actively pursuing sustainability 
agendas. For example, General Electric (GE) – which donated $1,756,457 – 
announced plans last year toreduce the energy intensity of its operations by 
50% by 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/environmentally-friendly-sustainable-business-profitable>
. Similarly, Google, whose efforts to fight climate change have included a $1bn 
contribution to developing renewable electricity, contributed $699,195 to 
congressional climate deniers, including US senator James Inhofe, a Republican 
from Oklahoma, and US representative Darrell Issa, a Republican from California.

For some companies, these contributions may be working directly against their 
core business. Two major contributors, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway – 
which gave $1,189,612 to climate deniers in Congress – and Norfolk Southern 
Railway – which gave $1,032,610 – could both profit from stricter climate 
regulation. Rail, after all, produces the least emissions per freight mile of 
any form of surface transportation, and policies that push lower emissions 
would also, likely, improve their business. Both companies declined requests to 
be interviewed for this story.

Duplicity?

One criticism of the Disrupt Denial report lies in its methodology, which 
combines direct corporate contributions with contributions from individual 
corporate employees. However, Brant Olson, campaign director at Forecast the 
Facts, argues that individual contributions, while not under the direct control 
of corporations, may also not be completely independent. “The statistics show 
that, in the majority of cases, the individual gifts of a company’s employees 
are aligned with the overall political agenda of a firm – and with its overall 
giving,” he explains. “This may be, in part, because the majority of the 
individual contributions by employees of a company come from top executives.”

Another problem, Olson emphasizes, is that a large amount of corporate giving 
is not transparent. “These donations represent only the tip of the iceberg. 
Corporations and their employees also contribute through political 
organizations like the Chamber of Commerce and the American Legislative 
Exchange Council (Alec), which are not required to disclose their contributors.”

And, again, involvement with lobbying organizations can create some strange 
political bedfellows. Google, for example, contributed to Alec because of what 
chairman Eric Schmidt referred to as political campaigns “unrelated” to 
climate. However, under increasing pressure from consumers and its own 
employees, the company withdrew its support.Speaking on the Diane Rehm show 
Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/23/google-to-cut-ties-with-rightwing-lobby-group-over-climate-change-lies>
, he said: “I think the consensus within the company was that that was some 
sort of mistake and so we’re trying to not do that in the future.”

Schultz said Google’s involvement with Alec went against its guiding 
principles. “Everyone understands climate change is occurring and the people 
who oppose it are really hurting our children and our grandchildren and making 
the world a much worse place,” he explained on the show.

Another criticism from companies cited in the report is that Disrupt Denial 
lumps together corporate contributions with contributions from corporate 
political action committees (PACs), which pool contributions from large groups 
of donors. AGeneral Electric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalelectric> spokesperson, in 
particular, was quick to note that the GE PAC’s “non-partisan, voluntary 
contributions were made by individual employees on issues they care about in 
their communities, including healthcare, transportation, energy, finance and 
climate policy”.

Olson argues that the distinction between corporations and their PACs is far 
thinner than GE suggests. “Corporate treasuries are legally prohibited from 
making political contributions, and PACs are the vehicle that they use,” he 
explains. “Technically speaking, these PACs represent voluntary gifts from a 
company’s employees. In practice, they are the political arm of a corporation.”

Many fingers, many pies

A better argument might be the one proffered by a Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> spokesman, who pointed out the 
difficulty that his company faces in balancing its various interests. “We 
engage on a wide variety of public policy issues and we work with advocacy 
groups across the political spectrum,” he explained. “We’re never going to 
agree 100% with every organization on every issue.”

In other words, because of its interest in corporate tax policy or trade 
policy or other other issues, Google – as well as the many other companies that 
echoed this sentiment – are forced to align with legislators who are fighting 
climate activism.

Olson acknowledges the problem: “It’s understandable, but it shows the 
dysfunction of our political system. You have companies with strong, explicit 
policy commitments to fighting climate change who are forced to give millions 
to opponents of that agenda.”

Gretchen Goldman, a lead analyst at the Union of Concerned Scientists, offers 
a radical solution: disengagement from politics. Some companies, she notes, 
have chosen to completely decouple themselves from campaign contributions. Of 
course, by denying themselves political influence, companies that disengage 
also place themselves at a competitive disadvantage.


Another, less radical possibility lies in decoupling campaign support from 
specific policies. “Companies can publicly state that, while they support a 
group financially, they disagree with its stance on climate change,” Goldman 
explains. “This can undermine the legitimacy and power of these groups that 
fail to accept climate science. For example, when we analyzed public 
disclosures from companies, we found that, while the US Chamber of Commerce 
does not accept climate science, not a single company on its board reported 
agreeing with that position.”

Olson echoed this, noting that there’s a precedent for making this sort of 
linkage. “Last year, Intel responded to shareholder pressure by committing to 
review its political giving to make sure that it aligned with its corporate 
policies,” he said.

From the consumer end, Goldman points out, there are even more options. She 
suggests that consumers look at “all the actions that companies are taking” to 
determine if a company’s behaviors are acceptable. And if they aren’t, she 
suggests, direct consumer and shareholder action can have a significant impact 
on a company’s policies and political contributions. “Time and time again, 
shareholders and customers have signaled that climate denial is not okay,” she 
says. “They’ve pushed companies to pull out of Alec, the Heartland Institute 
and other groups that spread misinformation about climate science.”

Editor’s note: This story was updated on September 22 to reflect an 
announcement made by Google after the story’s original publication.

• A previous version of this story mistakenly stated that Senator James Inhofe 
is from California. In fact, he is from Oklahoma.

The finance <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/finance> hub is 
funded by EY. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 