
This book is set in the Congo where Imara is the black mamba’s spirit child. 
It is said that to look into her eyes is to see your death. She survived the 
bite of a black mamba, which usually has fatal consequences, and this proved to 
black mamba, the leader of the Mamba rebel tribe, that she is the devil’s child 
and converses with the sprits.

 Bobo is a ranger’s son; he, like his father, loves gorillas, so when he 
encounters Imara looking after a baby gorilla called Kitwana, he feels it is 
his duty to protect the animal from the rest of the Mamba tribe. Only Bobo sees 
that Imara is good at heart despite having the reputation of the devil itself.

 This novel is not the sort of genre that I would usually choose because I am 
not a huge fan of the often sad subject matter of Michael Morpurgo books or the 
animal-based stories of Lauren St John, and they are both listed in the blurb – 
but I am extremely glad that I persisted with this book because I grew to love 
it as the novel went on. I read it as it was shortlisted for the North East 
Book Awards.

The bond between Imara and Kitwana was so strong; it made you love the baby 
gorilla as much as she does. This book also addresses real issues facing 
gorillas and people of the Congo, such as mining in terrible conditions for 
valuable materials that are in constant demand for electronic devices. It shows 
just how these problems affect everyone involved in one way or another. A real 
eye opener.


At the book awards presentation Gill Lewis was thought-provoking and 
encouraging to all of the young readers in the room. She even donned a gorilla 
suit when explaining in her address the various greeting sounds a gorilla makes 
to avoid confrontation! Her in-depth research makes this book very real. I have 
a new perspective on man’s relationship with gorillas after reading this 
informative, engaging book.


 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/331327/>  