
Proposals to allow local authorities in England to privatise child protection 
services have been abandoned.

The Department for Education said on Friday that profit-making organisations 
would be barred from carrying out core child safeguarding duties, although 
councils would still be able to bring in charities and not-for-profit firms if 
they wished.

The decision follows criticism from experts – including social work academics, 
professionals and charities – that opening up child protection to the market 
would distort decision-making and dilute local accountability over sensitive 
matters such as taking a child into care.

The department revealed that of 1,300 responses to its consultation, held in 
April and May, just 2% agreed with the proposals. Over half said they objected 
to the introduction of the profit motive. A further 72,000 people signed online 
petitions objecting to the plans.

Ministers had argued that allowing the outsourcing of child protection would 
enable more innovative approaches and improve services for youngsters at risk, 
but the strength of opposition forced them into a swift climbdown.

In its response to the consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/321863/Extension_regs_consultation_response200614_for_web.pdf>
, the department said: "The majority of responses raised concerns with the 
proposals. By far the most common reason given for this was an objection to the 
possibility of privatisation or profit-making in children's services.

"The government recognises the scale of concern in relation to the potential 
inclusion of a profit-making motive in the proposed range of additional 
delegable functions – in particular child protection."

The response added: "The government is happy to respond directly to the 
primary concern raised in the consultation and is making an amendment to the 
draft regulations which would prevent profit-making bodies from carrying out 
the additional delegable functions on behalf of local authorities."

Kathy Evans, chief executive of Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> England, which represents more 
than 100 children's charities, welcomed the climbdown: "We welcome the fact 
that government has recognised the breadth and strength of feeling about the 
risks of allowing profit-making in child protection. What the huge support for 
our campaign confirmed is the widespread agreement that children's best 
interests, rather than cuts of profits, must be the driving force in daily 
practice with children."

Ray Jones, professor of social work at Kingston University, who organised a 
letter condemning the move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/16/child-protection-privatised> 
signed by 37 leading social work academics, also applauded the U-turn. "Local 
authorities can still contract out these responsibilities to not-for-profit 
organisations, but there is no route in here for the likes of G4S, Serco, 
Virgin Healthcare and Atos."

The DfE said draft regulations laid before parliament next week would still 
enable them to encourage innovation by delegating children's social care 
functions to mutuals, social enterprises and charities. They would allow social 
workers to establish specialist not-for-profit practices that focused on 
specialist areas such as female genital mutilation. If the Commons and Lords 
approve the regulations, they will could come into effect in the autumn.

The DfE emphasised that the sole intention of the consultation was to improve 
safeguarding services: "The proposals were concerned with improving the quality 
of children's services rather than savings, 'privatisation' or profit-making."

The children's minister, Edward Timpson, said: "We want to offer local 
authorities the freedom to deliver services differently in order to achieve 
better outcomes for vulnerable children – to make the adequate good and the 
good outstanding. If we are going to achieve the very best for our most 
vulnerable children, we must harness the expertise, passion and drive of all 
those who want to serve children's needs."

Many respondents to the consultation argued that there was little evidence 
that outsourcing would improve services, that there was a lack of child 
protection expertise in the private sector, and that there was huge potential 
for conflicts of interest. The government rejected these arguments.

Currently, only local authority child protection departments taken into 
special measures as a result of a child protection failure can delegate core 
functions to outside providers, a move that the secretary of state has to 
approve.

Although ministers have argued that there was a demand from local authorities 
to clarify the regulations to enable them to outsource child protection 
voluntarily, only two – Kingston, in south-west London, and Staffordshire – 
have sought to go down this route.

The charity Action for Children, which supported the proposals, said it 
welcomed the announcement. Kate Mulley, director of public policy, said: "The 
freedom to outsource children's services will allow local authorities to 
innovate and improve support provided to families."
 