
The row over smacking children was reopened today as the government announced 
a review of the law less than three years since MPs rejected an outright ban.

Beverley Hughes, the children's minister, said that parents and professionals 
would be consulted this summer over how present rules were working.

Restrictions were toughened in 2004 to prevent anyone claiming they had 
administered a "reasonable punishment" if it left visible bruising.

But moves to outlaw any "hitting" of youngsters were rejected. 

Last month Britain's four child commissioners called for a total ban, 
insisting that there was "no room for compromise" on the issue.

But the most recent poll found parents believed smacking was an acceptable way 
to discipline children.

More than two thirds of parents surveyed said they did use it as a punishment 
and between 80% and 90% of both parents and adults without families were 
against a complete ban.

In a written statement, Ms Hughes said the review of Section 58 of the Children
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> Act 2004 - which contains the 
controversial "reasonable punishment" test - would begin immediately.

The process, promised by her predecessor, Margaret Hodge, during the passage 
of the bill, would involve a "parental income survey" this summer as well as 
consultation with professionals working with young people, she said.

A report would be published in the autumn but there were "no current plans to 
change the legislation", she added.

Campaign body 11 Million - headed by Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, the children's 
commissioner for England - called for Section 58 to be repealed.

Rob Williams, its chief executive, said: "We recognise that parenting is 
sometimes a difficult job and there is a need for help in finding positive and 
effective forms of discipline that lead to long-term improvements in a child's 
behaviour.

"However, children and young people in England should have the same right to 
protection under the law on common assault as that afforded to adults. There is 
no good reason why children are the only people in the UK who can still be hit."
 