
Ten years is a long time in the literary game: it can easily take someone 
until then to finish writing a decent novel – although that's less and less 
likely to wash with contemporary publishers. But a decade is also more than 
enough time for a writer's fortunes to change dramatically.

Take Hilary Mantel. In 2003 she was a highly respected novelist and critic, 
the author of such enthusiastically reviewed novels asEight Months on Ghazzah 
Street, The Giant, O'Brien and A Place of Greater Safety, the epic fictional 
portrayal of the French revolution published a decade previously that had 
probably been her most widely read novel. In the spring of 2003 her 
extraordinary memoir,Giving Up the Ghost, came out. But Beyond Black, her 
macabre novel of psychic shenanigans in the home counties, was still two years 
away; and we would have to wait several more beforeWolf Hall and Bring Up the 
Bodies would scoop two Man Booker prizes and transport Mantel to the highest 
echelons of writerly fame. Ten years ago she was the very emblem of the 
seriously talented and audacious female writer who was somehow rarely mentioned 
in the same breath as the holy trinity of Amis, Barnes and McEwan. Now, she 
cannot express amildly contentious view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/08/duchess-of-cambridge-hilary-mantel> 
in a literary journal without waking to find an outraged press pack camped on 
her front lawn.

Both scenarios are mad, and flipsides of the same issue. The pigheaded 
undervaluing of certain writers and the overnight obsession with others suggest 
problems with scale and perspective; problems that are perhaps related to 
Jonathan Franzen's analysis of the trappings that come with mega-successful 
authorship. The money, the hype, the limo to theVogue shoot, he wrote, might 
once have been the perks; these days they're supposed to be the prize itself. 
Such baubles are, he regretfully maintained, "the consolation for no longer 
mattering to the culture". In the interests of accuracy, I should point out 
that Franzen has softened his pessimism a little in subsequent interviews, and 
one might also retort that the work obviouslydoes matter; people are surely 
readingThe Corrections and Wolf Hall and Freedom and Bring Up the Bodies, not 
simply waiting for Franzen to appear onLetterman or Mantel on Loose Women. But 
he has a point. When, these days, a writer becomes well known, when they are 
successful, when they are said to have "broken through", what does that 
actually mean?

In 1983, when Granta <http://www.granta.com/> magazine published its first 
ever list of the Best of Young British Novelists, it meant something slightly 
different. That's not to say that the waters were crystal clear, nor that the 
literary arena was immune to the very idea of celebrity or to the lure of 
Franzen's consolation prizes. And no enterprise of this nature ever takes place 
in a vacuum. Work by the first 20 BOYBN created the seventh issue ofGranta. Its 
inaugural issue had been entitled "New American Writing", its second "The 
Portage to San Christobal of AH", the title of a novella by the French-born, 
Austrian-descended polyglot George Steiner which appeared alongside pieces 
about Don DeLillo and William Styron and an interview with John Barth. The 
issue after that had been called "The End of the English Novel". You get the 
picture.

Such determined iconoclasm was perhaps unsurprising, given that Granta had 
been founded by an American,Bill Buford 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Buford>, and one with a nose for an 
attention-grabbing editorial statement to boot. Now, in the midst of these 
celebrations of writing from elsewhere, he launched a sort of home talent show, 
adapting an original initiative from the British Book Marketing Council (allow 
me a brief and probably deeply unfair diversion: have four words ever so 
readily summoned up the image of a committee meeting with green cups and 
saucers and a plate of Peek Freans?). Buford's boldest innovation was to insist 
that his bright young things be, well, young, imposing an age limit of 40 on 
candidates.

Then he slapped the work of, among others, Martin Amis (with an extract, of 
course, fromMoney, the era-defining novel that would appear the following 
year), Graham Swift, Kazuo Ishiguro, Pat Barker, Ian McEwan, Rose Tremain and 
Salman Rushdie between vibrant covers that depicted two fountain pens clashing 
against an exploding Union flag. He must have known that this kind of thing 
would be dynamite; the book was calledBest of Young British Novelists 1 
<http://www.granta.com/Archive/7>.

Buford's confidence was not misplaced. Every decade since 1983, Granta has 
produced its 20-strong list of 20- and 30-somethings (although there's no lower 
age limit, I don't believe a teenager has ever been included). In the mid-90s, 
the brand was clearly thought to be so successful that it diversified, and 
there have now been two instalments of Best of Young American Novelists. 
<http://www.granta.com/Archive/97> And since the beginning of this decade, 
there have been two more additions to the stable: 2010'sBest of Young 
Spanish-language Novelists  <http://www.granta.com/Archive/113>and last autumn's
Best of Young Brazilian Novelists <http://www.granta.com/Archive/121>. In one 
sense, the Spanish-language issue is the most barrier-breaking list to date; 
bringing together writers from nine countries, its editors argued in their 
introduction that "the literary homeland, as this collection shows, is the 
language itself". No wonder they bent the rules to allow themselves 22 writers; 
they also lowered the age-limit to 35, meaning that all the shortlisted writers 
had been born since 1975, the year that Franco's death wrought seismic changes 
in the Spanish-speaking world.

But back to the Brits and, as the sharper among you will have realised, to 
this year, when the once-a-decade alarm clock is primed to ring again. On 15 
April,Granta will announce its fourth list 
<http://www.granta.com/New-Writing/Best-of-Young-British-Novelists-4> of future 
fictioneers. The judges – the magazine's publisher, editor and deputy editor, 
Sigrid Rausing, John Freeman and Ellah Allfrey respectively, novelists Romesh 
Gunesekera and AL Kennedy and literary journalists Gaby Wood and Stuart Kelly – 
will have done their work. (This is not quite true of Kelly, who is doing 
double duty this year on the Man Booker prize jury. He deserves a gong and a 
lifetime's supply of coffee.)

No sooner have they put their reading specs to one side and allowed themselves 
a celebratory amontillado, however, than another task begins; that of soaking 
up the flak. It may come in the form of straightforward disagreement or be of 
the more politely framed "I beg to differ" variety; it may focus on an 
outrageous inclusion who has no business even putting pen to paper or on an 
absent writer who immediately conjures a heart-rending image of genius 
unrewarded. It may take issue with the whole enterprise. But flak there will be 
– because there is no list compiled in the whole of contemporary culture that 
doesn't provoke dissent. And that, in part, is the whole point.

Ten years ago I was on the panel, alongside the chair, Ian Jack, then the 
editor ofGranta, the aforementioned Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>, the Observer's literary 
editor, Robert McCrum, and Nicholas Clee, then the editor ofThe Bookseller. A 
very quick word about Mantel, whom I remember – no surprise here – as an 
exceptionally astute reader and the keeper of more detailed and more 
illuminating notes than the rest of us put together (no offence, everyone 
else). But aside from that, an obvious question arises. Why wasn'tshe a BOYBN?

As is so often the case, it's a matter of the stars aligning. In 1983 Mantel 
had yet to publish a novel; in 1993, when she had published five, she had just 
passed 40. Judging that second BOYBN list wasAS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt>, one of this country's greatest 
novelists; her date of birth meant that she wasn't eligible for even the first 
list. In 2003, one of those just outside the cut-off date was Ali Smith; there 
can be little doubt that she would have been included had she been born a while 
later. I cite these examples not to denigrate either the lists or those on them 
but simply to underline the fact that they are inevitably snapshots, vivid but 
partial pictures of a constantly evolving culture.

I cannot pretend, even for the sake of drama, that the creation of that third 
list was a fraught affair; the general sensibilities and tastes of the panel 
were too much in accord for trouble, and there were no particularly 
confrontational or maniacally idiosyncratic temperaments to accommodate. There 
were, of course, disagreements, and there were also a couple of crises in the 
form of much-admired writers who turned out, for one reason or another, to be 
ineligible. But the key to harmony is more than anything else a question of 
numbers: life is made far easier when you are choosing 20 "winners" rather than 
one.

I suspect most of the BOYBN panels have had a roughly similar experience: the 
first five, 10, even dozen places fill themselves pretty quickly with writers 
whose talents would make their omission merely bizarre, sometimes because of 
the sureness and quality of their early writing, sometimes because they have, 
by a comparatively young age, built up an impressive body of work – and 
sometimes both. But then come the writers who make the endeavour come alive; 
those in whom one can discern a flash of brilliance and originality that compel 
you to take a punt. The development and durability of a literary career is an 
unknowable thing; hence we are keener than mustard to try to divine it.

In 2003 much was made of the fact that we had included two writers whose first 
novels had yet to be published; Monica Ali and Adam Thirlwell. In both cases, 
typescripts had arrived late on in the proceedings, unaccompanied by anything 
much in the way of extraneous information. I recall losing myself inBrick Lane 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552771153>
, becoming utterly absorbed in the tragicomedy of Nazneen and Chanu, feeling 
that I had rarely read a first novel so assured and fresh. Thirlwell'sPolitics 
was a different affair: it was explicit, sure, sexually and sexily, but it also 
seemed to have its roots in Europe, not Britain.

There was much discussion about both – but the fact that neither novel had 
been published was not a factor. When the list came out, this unavailability 
was held, by some, to be a weakness, almost a deception, even though it was 
very short-lived;Brick Lane and Politics were not in the early stages of 
gestation, and both were published soon afterwards. So the injury was not to 
the reader; was it, therefore, to the critics and journalists, who were somehow 
shut out, the evidence necessary to grant or withhold approval denied them?

Whether or not BOYBN 4 includes any as-yet-unpublished writers, the critical 
landscape has changed vastly in the past three decades. For a start, what 
Buford seized upon as a firecracker in 1983 is now a more commonplace feature 
of book promotion. Lists are ubiquitous, and perhaps none more so than those 
that promise newness or, even better, youth: theNew Yorker's 20 American 
writers under 40 <http://www.newyorker.com/fiction/20-under-40/writers-q-and-a>
, the annual announcement of Waterstones's11 best debut writers 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/pages/waterstones-eleven/2272/>, the 
less codified lists produced by all newspapers and magazines at frequent 
intervals. Their popularity might derive from a residual desire to believe in 
an authoritative critical consensus (although this seems less plausible by the 
day) or from a more pragmatic need to discover new work or from the 
understandable, if somewhat self-defeating, impulse to have something to rail 
against. But their co-dependent relationship with the publishing and 
bookselling industries mean that they are unlikely to disappear any time soon.

Meanwhile, the way we read is changing – with the probable consequence that 
the way writers write will change too. Overstating this is unwise; the fact 
that Jennifer Egan releases a story asa series of tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/30/jennifer-egan-ebook-novel>, for 
example, doesn't mean that Karl Ove Knausgaard doesn't write a series ofsix 
autobiographical novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/09/karl-ove-knausgaard-memoir-family>
 that run to thousands of pages. Just because a self-published author hits the 
jackpot doesn't mean that another writer won't collaborate with an editor to 
work painstakingly through numerous versions of a book. But it does mean that 
things are freeing up: that the idea of what constitutes a "literary" novel is 
changing, that genre writing is becoming less marginalised (look, for example, 
at the success enjoyed by the graphic form in this year'sCosta Book Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/02/costa-awards-graphic-novel-biography>
), that the career trajectory of a novelist is even less predictable than it 
ever was, if such a thing is possible.

Against that backdrop, one should embrace the Best of Young British Novelists 
and other entertainments of its ilk with a sense of adventure and discovery, 
rather than as the latest reiteration of a tired orthodoxy. Let's face it: a 
list is a silly thing. It is designed, as Adam Thirlwell wrote in a piece for
Grantaahead of its Spanish-language special, to self-destruct; as an entity in 
itself, it can't last much longer than the present moment. "And so," he added, 
"although every novelist wants to be included on a list – sure you do, sure you 
do – the unread novelist also knows that the deeper history of the novel takes 
place in the future: where you float free of lists entirely, and enter the 
stratosphere."

Granta's fourth Best of Young British Novelists list will be announced on 15 
April, followed on 16 April by publication ofGranta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/granta> 123 (£12.99), featuring work from 
all 20 writers.
 