
The film-maker Alfonso Cuarón, riding high after winning this year's best 
director Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/alfonso-cuaron-wins-best-director-oscar>
, has launched into political activism in his Mexican homeland by throwing down 
the gauntlet to the president.

The London-based director of Gravity published a full-page advertisement in 
Mexican newspapers on Monday addressed to PresidentEnrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enrique-pena-nieto> and demanding answers to 
10 questions about the country's controversial energy reform.

Cuarón explains his advertisement as a response to an interview the president 
gave two months ago dismissing the director's earlier low-key public 
expressions of opposition to the reforms as the result of ignorance about its 
benefits for the nation.

"I am not informed because the government you head has not shared with me – 
with us Mexicans in general – the indispensable things we need to understand 
it," Cuarón writes, before listing his questions. "I await your response, 
alongside many Mexicans," he finishes.

The constitutional reform, approved by the national legislature last year with 
little substantial debate, though much drama – including a deputy stripping at 
the podium – foresees a dramatic opening up of Mexico's state-owned energy 
sector to private-sector participation. The government's legislative proposals 
to define what this will mean in practice are already overdue.

Cuarón's questions include a demand for outlining when exactly the 
government's promises of falling energy prices will be reflected in household 
bills, as well as details of measures to protect the environment from the 
potential impacts of a production boom rooted in concessions negotiated by 
powerful multinational companies.

"In a country, like ours, where the rule of law is so weak (and often absent), 
how can the phenomenon of large-scale corruption be avoided?" he asks in 
another of the questions.

Peña Nieto responded to Cuarón's letter with three tweets on Monday afternoon 
that welcomed the questions he said "will help understanding of the reform's 
reaches and benefits". Eschewing the personal nature of the director's 
challenge, the president added that the government would answer them all once 
it had presented the secondary energy legislation.

While Mexican cultural names regularly feature within lists of public figures 
endorsing political, social and environmental causes, it is rare for individual 
personalities to launch such direct challenges.

Cuarón's paid advertisement, accompanied by a website www.diezpreguntas.com 
<http://diezpreguntas.com/> where the letter is translated into English, 
German, French and Italian and a Twitter account, produced an immediate impact 
within Mexico.

The twitter hashtag #Cuarón was soon a national trending topic, while the 
letter was reported prominently on mainstream news websites.

"Cuarón is difficult to dismiss because he is obviously independent, 
successful, and obviously acting with no hint of social resentment and only 
concern about what is happening inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>," Sergio Aguayo, an analyst, said on 
MVS Radio. "It boils down to asking who will benefit and who suffer from such 
an important reform."
 