
What are the perfect ingredients for a great victory? At the weekend we saw 
three examples of delirious elation – from Sir Alex Ferguson,Luiz Felipe Scolari
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luiz-felipe-scolari> and Ronnie 
O'Sullivan – after scrapping performances that suggested courage and resilience 
are the virtues that appeal to them most.

In the span of their long careers United's last-gasp winner at the Reebok, 
Chelsea's gritty comeback against Stoke City and O'Sullivan's fourth Masters 
title pale compared to their more significant achievements. Ferguson already 
has more medals than the Vatican dishes out in a good year, Scolari has won the 
World Cup and O'Sullivan has bagged three world titles and hit nine 
maximumbreaks.

But still Ferguson unveiled his trademark blissful shuffle at the whistle 
(part Bobby Ball whenever he had got the better of Tommy Cannon, part Terry 
Scott when he finally got his hands on his "bruvver's" Curly Wurly), Scolari 
gave his players 'tache rash by affectionately nuzzling all of them after Frank 
Lampard's goal and O'Sullivan punched the air like a lottery winner onspeed.

Call it a relish for battle if you like or the joy of vindication, because 
what really makes these men tick is holding their nerve when there is a whiff 
of cordite in the air. They seem to get more pleasure from their indomitability 
when escaping disappointment than from slickly winning when they have hit peak 
performance.

This is the same for fans – the majority of whom, me included, feel more 
ecstatic coming from 1–0 down to win 2–1 than after a host of comfortable 3–0 
victories. We have a masochistic streak that needs to court despair before the 
ultimate satisfaction can be felt. Look at how many V-signs are flicked towards 
opposition fans when your team rallies from behind to win and the goal has 
thrust their taunts straight back down their throats.

It may be rare but when it does happen there's no feeling like it, which is 
why I've never understood those who ritually exit the ground after 85 minutes 
when their team is only a goal down. I stormed out in anger once when Leeds 
were losing 2–0 toWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> during the opening game of the 
1976-77 season but the cheers as I was heading down the steps when we scored 
our first made me scarper back to my place with a chastened look in time for 
the late equaliser. I learned my lesson that day and now stay to the bitter end 
sometimes long after all hope has expired.

The galvanising effect it can have on a team cannot be underestimated. Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> fans of my acquaintance still 
point to their 1987 League Cup semi-final against Spurs when twice, once in the 
second leg and then again in the replay, they came back from behind to win 2-1, 
as the pivotal moments of their team's renaissance under George Graham. That 
night at Anfield two years later, which kicked off two decades of people 
wagging their index fingers at Steve McMahon while gleefully mouthing "one 
minute", was the culmination of a venture that had begun at White HartLane.

There was no happy ending in terms of the series but England's win in the 
Melbourne Ashes Test in 1982 is another stunning example of snatching victory 
when all seemed lost. When Geoff Miller perceptively ran behind Chris Tavaré to 
scoop the catch that the Kent blocker had spooned up and took the wicket of 
Jeff Thomson to win the Test by three runs, I sprang out of bed whooping. 
Edgbaston 2005 and the dismissal of Michael Kasprowicz was similarly stunning 
but it was the partnership between Ashley Giles and Matthew Hoggard, which won 
the fourth Test at Trent Bridge, that had most in common with the qualities 
that recently transported Ferguson, Scolari and O'Sullivan to such heights of 
jubilation.

First Hoggard cover drove Brett Lee, the only decent shot he played all 
series, and then Giles clipped Shane Warne off his legs to hit the winning runs 
and provoke scenes of ecstasy on the dressing-room balcony. Those famous 
pictures of a screamingAndrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> upper-cutting the air 
capture the heady essence of fight-back fever. On the balance of the Test 
England deserved to win anyway but when you add relief to the sense of merit 
the exhilaration infinitely multiplies.

The cliché that bottle is sport's most valuable commodity elicits groans when 
spouted in post-match interviews but those moments when players deliver 
salvation through spirit and tenacity have few equals as the Chelsea and
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
managers and O'Sullivan with his new cue have surely testified with their 
celebrations.
 