
Australia’s ambassador to the United States, Joe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, should be recalled to 
answer questions about his role in the Bell Group saga, the Greens justice 
spokesman has said.

Nick McKim made the call on Tuesday, as his party gathered support for a 
Senate inquiry into the alleged deal between the federal and West Australian 
governments which would have cost the tax office $300m had it not won a high 
court case disputing the constitutionality of a WA law to implement the deal.

The inquiry is now likely, as Labor and the Greens have attracted crossbench 
support from Derryn Hinch and Rodney Culleton for the move.

McKim told ABC radio that rather than a quick-fire inquiry it could take weeks 
to deal with the issue because the attorney general, George Brandis, had thrown 
so many of his federal and WA Liberal colleagues “under the bus”in his 
explanation to the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/george-brandis-joe-hockey-collapsed-bell-group-western-australia>
 on Monday.

Timeline: how a tangled WA court case led to Brandis-Gleeson stoush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/25/timeline-tangled-western-australia-court-case-brandis-gleeson-stoush>
On Monday Brandis said he did not believe there was a deal with the Western 
Australian government for the commonwealth not to run a particular 
constitutional argument to defeat the WA law.

Brandis said he had no personal knowledge of discussions between the former 
federal treasurer Hockey and the WA treasurer, Mike Nahan, in 2015 and that 
correspondence between them did not prove there was an agreement. McKim said 
Brandis’s 30-minute statement was “instructive for what it did not contain”.

McKim said it “didn’t address the allegation [Brandis] effectively told [then 
solicitor general] Justin Gleeson to run dead in the high court” and when that 
point was put to Brandis in question time, he did not answer.

At a doorstop on Monday, Brandis was asked if he had “effectively told Gleeson 
to run dead”, and he replied: “That is not the truth and he did not.”

McKim said Brandis should prove this by waiving legal privilege over advice 
and instructions between Brandis and the solicitor general over the Bell 
litigation.

“If [Brandis] ordered the solicitor general not to use the strongest argument, 
that would be an extraordinary abrogation of his responsibilities as attorney 
general.”

The Greens democracy spokesman said that the fact Nahan had told the Western 
Australian parliament there was a deal demonstrated the need for an inquiry. 
McKim said the Senate could call Nahan, WA attorney general Michael Mischin, 
assistant federal treasurer Kelly O’Dwyer, federal social services minister and 
former WA treasurer Christian Porter and federal finance minister, Mathias 
Cormann.

He said there was a “very strong argument” to call Hockey back from Washington 
to answer questions.

Did George Brandis mislead parliament over solicitor general changes? | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/did-george-brandis-mislead-parliament-over-solicitor-general-changes>
“These are very serious allegations, and he should be called back, and George 
Brandis <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis> threw him 
under a bus yesterday so he may well want to come back and answer these 
questions.”

A spokeswoman for Hockey told Guardian Australia he would not be making any 
comment.

The Senate could not compel Porter and O’Dwyer to appear because they are in 
the lower house, but McKim said Labor and the Greens’ joint motion would compel 
Brandis and Cormann to appear.

He said he hoped the motion would pass.

On Tuesday Nick Xenophon told Guardian Australia he opposed the inquiry and a 
spokesman for Pauline Hanson said One Nation also opposed it.

But a spokeswoman for senator Rodney Culleton said he supported the inquiry, 
meaning One Nation will split on the question.

Senator Derryn Hinch told Guardian Australia there were still “lots of 
questions [that] need answering” and he would support the inquiry.

On Monday Labor’s leader in the Senate, Penny Wong, told Lateline that since 
Brandis had said there was no deal, while Nahan said there was, “both sets of 
statements … cannot be true”.

Wong argued Brandis and Nahan were also at odds about the role of O’Dwyer and 
Porter in discussions between the federal and state government.

She argued that Brandis and the prime minister had not answered the question 
about whether the solicitor general was instructed not to use the particular 
constitutional argument that won the case for the ATO.

Asked about the fact that Gleeson did eventually run the argument, Wong 
replied: “The fact that George Brandis was dissuaded from what was a 
dishonourable path by an honourable man does not absolve Senator Brandis of 
responsibility.”
 