
Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> was, I think, my first 
obsession. It struck me around the age of twelve. In this sense I suppose it 
taught me what obsession is and resonated within all the other obsessions that 
have governed, enriched and distorted my life since then.

Golf simply catches you and you are thereafter in some way betrothed. I know 
of nothing else outside of life's elementals of work, love, sex, family that is 
like it. It will find your addiction gene even more rapidly than vodka or 
roulette wheels. I sometimes think that those taking their first timorous 
swings on a practice ground should be warned that once the initial barrier is 
passed there is no way back.

 My father had this obsession, as do I. One day, he told me, he played 72 
holes on a nine-hole course and was so exhausted afterwards that he couldn't 
raise himself out of the bath. Perhaps he enjoyed his obsession more richly 
than have I, for at his best he was a better player than I am (so far), and I 
think he had a better character for it.

 We spoke about golf together from the time it first gripped me until the time 
of his death. Our last conversations were about golf.

 Golf had by my mid-teenage years assumed an imperial presence in my life. I 
read instruction books and golf magazines. I kept my sand wedge under the desk 
in the starter's office at the club where I worked and, whenever I could, I hit 
shots from the bunker beside the ninth green.

 During afternoons in the school year, when the weather was good, I hit 
hundreds of nine-iron shots on a football field near our home. I had a yearning 
to see the thrilling high-arcing shape of golf shots everywhere - out of 
classroom windows, along highways, from the tops of buildings.

 One afternoon I was waiting for a train after a round at a lakeside public 
course called Waveland. The Chicago Cubs baseball park, Wrigley Field, was 
adjacent to the station. There was no one around. I took out a four wood, teed 
up a ball between the wooden slats of the platform and hit it cleanly over the 
hoardings and apartment building rooftops and into the baseball park.

 At night in my bed in those years I played heroic rounds in my mind before 
going to sleep. I talked about golf incessantly. It felt sometimes like 
something I could not quite contain, like something from which I needed some 
relief.

 I have never again played as much golf as I did in those years, but I only 
rarely played with my father. He had his playing companions and I had mine. We 
talked quite a lot about golf, however, and I was always interested in learning 
about his rounds.

 Just after I graduated from high school and a few weeks before I fell in love 
for the first time, my father offered me a round of golf as a graduation 
present. I think it was the first round we would play together during that 
summer in which golf was to recede from its place of importance in my life.

 I was playing well, for me. I wanted him to see what I could do - 
particularly at the venue he had chosen, for it was heavy with symbolism.

We were to play all 27 holes at the Butterfield Country Club, the course on 
which he had probably played his most enjoyable and best golf and towards which 
he had felt compelled to turn his back upon my arrival in his life.

 It was a still, sunny June day. We had lockers assigned to us and had lunch 
in the men's locker room. Members and employees came over to greet him. I saw 
his name engraved on plaques as the winner of various competitions. I don't 
remember much about the round, except a few singular sunlit images and the fact 
that I played solidly and avoided falling apart at any point. I had a 39 on, I 
think, the second nine we played and an 80 or 81 over the eighteen. This was 
two shots or so better than my father. I also had the better score over the 
entire 27 holes. I had beaten him. This had never happened before. After I 
added up the scorecard I turned to him and said, 'I won.'

 'It's about time, ' he said.

 Indeed it was. He was 63 and I was 18. Yet this made it no easier for him 
entirely to accept.

 Not long after that round at Butterfield it all faded away, for then came my 
girlfriend Ruth Farrell, protest marches, cross-country hitchhiking, 
literature, wine, music and rhapsodic talk through the night, and golf for a 
time became a small, nearly forgotten thing in my life.

Many years later, when I was established as a writer, a friend from Esquire 
magazine rang to ask what golf story I might like to write. I told him that I 
would like to play a round withArnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>. He said that sounded fine 
and so I wrote a letter stating my case to 'Arnold Palmer, Latrobe, 
Pennsylvania', but it couldn't be arranged at that time and I wrote about other 
things.

 However, 15 months later and just before New Year, 1993, I got word from 
Pennsylvania that if I still wanted to play golf with Mr Palmer I was to be at 
the 1st tee of the Bay Hill Club in Orlando, Florida at 12.20pm on 12 January.

 I arrived three days early with a bad back and nearly nauseous with nerves. 
There had been a time when Palmer was the second person in golf for me after my 
father. I followed him around during his practice rounds when he came to 
Chicago for the Western Open and watched his progress on the tour, perpetually, 
it seemed, on the edge of my seat. The idea then of actually playing golf with 
him was the sort of idle notion boys entertain themselves with before going to 
sleep. Like punching out the local thug. Or being marooned somewhere with 
Brigitte Bardot.

Now I was at Bay Hill and it was about to happen. His name and face were 
everywhere there because he is the club's owner. Palmer winning the Masters. 
Palmer and Jack Nicklaus. Palmer and a few Presidents.

 The morning of the round I went out early and played five holes very badly. 
'Please not today,' I whispered after each ballooned, blocked and topped shot. 
I ran back to my room to change my shirt and then walked over to the practice 
range. I got a few degrees of coordination back and then heard the starter 
announce through a loudspeaker, 'First group of the shoot-out to the tee please 
- Mr Palmer, Mr Damron, Mr Mitchell, Mr Dorman and Mr O'Grady.'

Arnold Palmer came down the steps from the pro shop, put on a straw hat and 
walked over to the 1st tee. So did players coming off the 9th and 18th greens, 
everyone from the practice putting green, several from the driving range and 
swimming pool, caddies, waiters, club attendants, assistant pros and a number 
of people in the middle of their lunches. I did not turn around to see how many 
there were, but from the way the skin was crawling on my back it felt like a 
multitude.

 All four of my playing partners hit good, long drives into the heart of the 
fairway. Palmer's ball took off from the face of his large, metal-headed driver 
as if out of the mouth of a cannon and sailed into the atmosphere out of the 
range of my sight.

I heard applause and a few whoops. I was last. My chest felt like it was in 
flames. Golf bags, tee markers and the trees up the fairway all looked out of 
proportion and shimmering, as if in a malign dream. I bent over to tee the ball 
up, looked along the ground and there, just a few feet away, was Arnold Palmer. 
I could see his white Nike shoes, his sharply creased trousers, the powerful 
veined forearms and blacksmith's hands, the fingers round and surprisingly 
short, like chipolatas. How had I come to be in this position? My hands were 
shaking so badly that the ball clattered on the tee like teeth in a cold wind. 
Above me, as if from the clouds, I heard him speak. 'Take it easy,' he said 
very softly. 'We 're just here for an afternoon of golf. Enjoy yourself.'

 I stood up, looked, I suppose, imploringly at the ball, and tried to stay 
intact as I took my swing. The ball came off the clubface a little to the 
inside of centre, climbed over a tree that guarded the slight dogleg and 
settled down on the left side of the fairway, 17 yards behind Arnold Palmer's. 
Never had I struck a golf shot invested with such turmoil.

I watched his back as he strode down the fairway. Winner of seven major titles 
over six years. At 63 the fourth highest money-earner in all of sport. Possibly 
the most widely admired and trusted man in America. He would play that day in a 
way that reminded me of the games I had played with fellow caddies as a 
teenager - free and easy, laughing a lot, going full-out for everything, a 
little angry at himself sometimes but also visibly loving the feeling of the 
ball being struck by the club.

He still flailed at it with a violent, corkscrewing lunge. His drives carried 
275 yards and I don't recall him missing a fairway with any of them. On a par 
three where I was using a three iron I noticed that he had hit a six.

 By the time we came to the 16th, a par five, we were three over as a team and 
out of the hunt. Arnold hit a two-iron second over the water into some thick 
grass on the front fringe of the green. When he half-fluffed the chip he winced 
as though someone had prodded him in the ribs and then said to the sky: 'If I 
knew how to play that shot I'd have won four more US Opens.' It occurred to me 
that I would be unlikely to hear that again on a golf course.

 Just two holes left then. I could already feel the round slipping away like a 
passing dream and I longed to hold on to it. I had played with a moderate 
solidity and was eight over through 16, but then cracked up on the next, a long 
par three on which I hit two balls into the water and finished with a six. They 
were really hideous shots. I got a little round of applause from Arnold on the 
next, however, when I hit a four wood out of the rough and over water which 
landed next to the pin and stopped on the fringe of the green. He hit an eight 
iron for his second and finished one over for the day. I got a par for an 83.

 We headed for the clubhouse. Scott Hoch sped by on his own in a buggy. Arnold 
stopped to talk for a while with two teenagers and then went inside. We sat at 
a round table in the men's locker room and had three rounds of beers. I was so 
elated I felt I could have drunk vats of it. Andy Bean came in wearing long 
white socks and pressed Bermuda shorts. He was carrying two framed photographs 
he wanted Arnold to sign for some friends. Arnold smiled, said, 'Sure,' and as 
he wrote his name said to Bean: 'You're not playing golf in shorts are you?' 
Bean is a large, relaxed and amiable man who won 11 times on the US Tour and 
played twice in the Ryder Cup, but in this moment he looked like a truant 
caught on his way out of a sweet shop.

 'Well ... ahhh ... just, you know, trying to get some sun on the legs ... 
very white the legs, after the winter ...' he said, and then drifted away. 
Arnold waved and wished him well.

 We talked about a lot of things through the late afternoon - Hogan, Snead, 
his victory in the US Amateur and his rivalry with Jack Nicklaus - 'still as 
fierce as ever'.

 He was intelligent, unrestrained and interesting about these and other 
matters, but the subject that seemed to stir him most was his father. Years 
after his father's death and decades after he himself had become heroic to so 
many people, he was still clearly awed by him, a tough, compact steelworker and 
club pro from western Pennsylvania with a foreshortened foot.

 'My father was one of the strongest men I ever met,' he said. 'He could do 10 
pull-ups with either arm and go practically all day if he used both. He was a 
severe disciplinarian and a great man for manners, but above all he had respect 
for other people. He told me that if I wanted to go to sleep with a clear 
conscience I should treat everyone I came across as if I myself were that 
person. It's a simple enough principle, but maybe it could be forgotten if you 
were tired or had a bad round. But he'd driven very deeply into me the idea 
that everyone has their story and that you must take them as they come and care 
about them. Anything else is undeserving of respect.

 'Because of the way he raised me I don't think there was much chance of me 
going off the rails or acting like a big shot, but if I had, I know he would 
have been there to make me see sense.

 'He was tough. For a long time I didn't think he believed I could play golf. 
I had won the US Amateur, several pro tournaments and two Masters before he 
even congratulated me. It was after the US Open at Cherry Hills and he said, 
"Nice going, boy." I thought the world had come to an end.'

 We went out onto the grass to have some pictures taken for the article I was 
to write. The photographer placed us nose to nose, as if to suggest two boxers 
promoting a fight. We had to hold this pose for a long time.

'This would be a lot easier if you were a pretty girl,' said Arnold as he 
looked into my eyes.

He wrote a note to my father, then small and enfeebled in his bed in Chicago. 
His wife called him then on his mobile phone and he told me he had to go. I 
watched him walk into the gathering darkness, hands in his pockets, checking 
the condition of his trees, whistling lightly, I thought, as he rounded a 
corner, a driven, successful yet unpretentious man. That was it then, my most 
memorable day on a golf course.

I went back to London and sent my father the note. He was about to become 88 
years old. He'd had a triple-bypass operation 10 years earlier and finally 
retired from dentistry. The surgery invigorated him so much that in his first 
year of retirement he played up to three rounds of golf per week.

Then, the following year, he began, it seemed, slowly to evaporate. His hands 
and face became skeletal. Sometimes he looked both haunted and bewildered, as 
though he feared something bad might be coming to him but could not understand 
why this should be. He walked a few times per week to the school playing fields 
to hit nine irons from the same spot I had used as a teenager, but he ceased 
going to the golf course. I tried several times to get him to come with me when 
I visited him, but he wouldn't shift. 'If I swung a golf club now I'd fall 
over,' he said.

 Finally, when he was 86, I persuaded him to come out as a spectator for a 
round I was to play with three friends of his.

He stayed sitting in his buggy with his eyes shaded by the brim of his hat 
until the 12th hole, a par three, when he asked if he could hit a shot. He 
hadn't struck a golf ball for at least three years. The emaciation had now 
advanced so far that his flesh seemed like a fine layer of gauze over his 
bones. He looked terribly frail as he stood alone on the tee lining up the 
shot. I yearned for him to at least get the ball airborne. He took no practice 
swing. The club came back with a familiar little hitch near the top of the 
backswing, then the right knee kicked in and the right elbow stayed tight to 
the ribs as he accelerated smoothly and classically, the head down and behind 
the ball as he hit into and through the shot - all those elements of controlled 
abandon he had instructed me in decades before. It was as though there was an 
inner ghost moving the derelict frame. He hit it thin, but it ran up to the 
edge of the green.

· This is an edited extract from Timothy O'Grady's 'On Golf', published by 
Yellow Jersey Press (£10, 144pp).
 