
The greatest repository of ancient Greek art – the National Archaeological 
Museum of Athens <http://www.namuseum.gr/wellcome-en.html> – has become the 
latest victim of the economic crisis engulfing Greece, with visitors getting 
only a peek at its renowned collections.

As the long-awaited tourist season begins, the debt-choked country's top 
attraction is in the news for all the wrong reasons: closed exhibition halls, 
neglect and exasperated holidaymakers.

"This is our first time to Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> 
and of course we're disappointed," said Shareen Young, from Orange Country, 
California, who on Friday found herself locked out of the venerable institution 
because of a staff shortage. "I had really wanted to see the golden Mask of 
Agamemnon and other treasures of Troy."

Barbara Vimercati, an Italian tourist, was also left standing outside the 
museum's monumental bronze doors. "It says it's open until 4pm but it's not, 
and there isn't even a note explaining why," she said, making do with a glimpse 
of cellophane-wrapped statues in an adjacent corridor. "It's unbelievable. We 
don't understand."

Most Greeks, including the museum's keepers, are similarly at a loss. "We have 
11,000 exhibits, five permanent collections and galleries over more than 8,000 
square metres of space," said Alexandra Christopoulou, a museum representative. 
"The season begins in April. I really don't know why it has taken so long for 
the culture ministry to send extra personnel."

With just 30 guards to supervise displays that require at least 130 on a daily 
basis, only eight of the museum's 64 exhibition halls were open to the public 
last Sunday, according to the Kathimerini newspaper. Visitors have reportedly 
almost come to blows with staff when they discover that their €7 (£6.25) ticket 
gives them access to only a fraction of the displays.

"The culture ministry is in absolute chaos because of the IMF-dictated 
cutbacks," said one archaeologist. "The glory of Greece is suffering."

It has since been announced that 114 more guards are to be taken on.

But Yannis Mavrikopoulos, head of the union representing guards on 
archaeological sites, said the appointments would not solve the problem. "There 
are 350 museums and sites in Greece and just 1,700 people to guard them," he 
said. "For all of them to open we need approximately 5,000 staff.

"We understand that the economic crisis is biting and the government is 
limited by the IMF but the National Archaeological Museum is the worst example 
of all and we had to leak it to the press to get the government to move at all."

Some Greeks are asking whether they deserve to be the custodians of such 
riches.

"In any 'normal' country [the museum] would be an object of wealth, pride and 
dignity," wrote Kathimerini's arts editor, Nikos Vatopoulos. "Somehow ... we 
have rendered the ark of the world's highest civilisation, of which we are 
heirs, into the reason for our contemporary culture to be reviled."
 