
The Greens will appeal a decision by the Australian Electoral Commission not 
to recount the 1.3m Senate votes inWestern Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>.

The Greens senator Scott Ludlam and Australian Sports party candidate Wayne 
Dropulich requested the recount after initial results saw Ludlam dumped in 
favour of the Palmer United party candidate Zhenya Wang.

But the commission announced on Thursday that the recount had been declined 
because it "did not identify any specific issues which would have warranted the 
conduct of a recount".

"Mr Dropulich and Senator Ludlam have the option of appealing the decision to 
the AEC electoral commissioner under section 278 (2) of the Commonwealth 
Electoral Act 1918 before the declaration of the poll."

The formal declaration of the poll for the WA Senate election has been 
rescheduled for 11.30am on Friday.

After the decision, Ludlam said he would appeal to the electoral commissioner 
as the result showed a difference between the respective parties at last count 
of just 14 votes.

"There have been Senate vote recounts both in this state and other 
jurisdictions when the margin has been far greater, and in more than one 
occasion those recounts have led to a different result," Ludlam said.

"In such a marginal decision, with such important consequences for two Senate 
seats, only a recount can ensure that the votes receive the scrutiny needed to 
exclude human error.

"As none of the elected senators will be required to take their seats in the 
Senate before 1 July 2014, there is time to ensure the result is correct."

As the 2014 Senate result now stands, the Coalition has 33 senators, Labor, 
26, Greens, 9, Palmer United party, 3, with five independents or microparties 
for a total of 76.

A total of 39 votes are required to pass legislation.

A recount continues in the lower house seat of Fairfax, between the Palmer 
United party leader, Clive Palmer, and the Liberal candidate, Ted O'Brien.
 