
Greek taxi drivers protesting against the liberalisation of their profession – 
an IMF-dictated reform enacted in exchange for the debt-stricken country 
receiving emergency aid – caused chaos on Monday as they blocked access to 
ports, archaeological sites and Athens international airport.

On the first day of a 48-hour strike, described as "the beginning of a 
battle", cabbies took over roads, toll-booths and entries to the ports of 
Piraeus and Patras in a mass display of defiance against government plans to 
deregulate their trade.

Thousands of holidaymakers visiting Greece were caught up in the mayhem. Many 
missed connecting flights after some 2,000 taxi drivers took over the road 
leading to the capital's airport. Protesters also blocked gates to cruise ship 
docks preventing some 15,000 visitors from boarding coaches to see prime sites. 
In northernGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, holidaymakers 
were also held up as drivers blocked main roads.

"It's been very trying in the baking heat," said Mimi Skillett, a British 
tourist, after missing a plane connection from Athens to Skiathos.

Drivers, who vowed to take to the streets on Tuesday, have been spurred into 
action by a government decision to open up their business by making it easier, 
and cheaper, to buy taxi licences. The socialist administration implemented the 
reform as part of efforts to liberalise over 150 "closed shop" professions 
blamed for stunting competition and Greece's economic growth. With the country 
mired in recession, the 23,000-strong sector says its earnings have dropped 
precipitously.

"If you had got a €200,000 [£175,000] loan to buy a car and a taxi licence 
according of the laws of this country … and suddenly you are told that tomorrow 
you will have nothing, you tell me what you would do?" Konstantinos Dimos, 
general secretary of the Athens taxi drivers' association told state-run 
television.

Under the new rules, drivers will be able to obtain licences for €3,000 
compared with the €80,000 demanded previously. With some 15,000 cab owners in 
Athens alone, unions say there is no need for more drivers.

Prime Minister George Papandreou's government moved ahead with the 
controversial legislation – lawyers, architects, pharmacists and public 
notaries will also see their fields opening up – after Athens came under 
renewed pressure to expedite reforms in return for a second rescue package of 
loans. The new bailout is expected to be as much, if not exceed, the €110bn 
financial aid package Greece received last May.

Similar action by truckers last year resulted in the government allowing for a 
respite before the new legislation took effect. Despite appeals from Greece's 
culture minister Pavlos Geroulanos, who described the strike as a "huge wound 
for tourism" – the nation's biggest foreign currency earner – the drivers vowed 
to continue their action in future.

"This is another blow to the image of our country [after the riots sparked by 
fresh austerity measures in Athens last month]," said the Association of Greek 
Tourist Enterprises. "Blocking access to ports and airports creates problems 
for tourism, one of the main pillars of development and hope that will enable 
our country to get out of this crisis."
 