
West Australia’s Greg Chalmers has won the Australian PGA Championship 
following a dramatic seven-hole playoff against world No.3Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott>.

Scott had four opportunities to win the Joe Kirkwood Cup with birdie putts 
during the playoff but failed to make any.

When he then missed a four-foot putt for par on the seventh playoff hole, it 
allowed Chalmers to seal the win with a near tap-in.

“Just phenomenal, I’m worn out,” the 41-year-old left-hander told the Seven 
network.

“I was all over the place ... really excited and thrilled.”

The playoff, the longest in history for a tier-one tournament in Australia, 
started as a three-way playoff after Scott, Chalmers and South Australia’s Wade 
Ormsby finished level on 11-under at the end of Sunday’s fourth round.

“I didn’t hit it close enough today to the hole,” Scott said.

“It wasn’t like I missed 10-footers today all day long.

“When you hit it outside 25 feet, there is almost the same chance you are 
going to three putt as two putt on tour. You have to hit it closer.”

Chalmers won his first Australian PGA Championship in 2011, also following a 
three-way playoff.

Ormsby forced his way into the playoff with a long putt on the 18th hole to 
complete a one-under 71 fourth round.

The 34-year-old from South Australia had the chance to putt for the title on 
the second playoff hole but missed his 1.5 metre attempt to the left.

On the third playoff hole, Ormsby’s brave bid for a second professional win 
faded as he went wide on his approach and his rivals both made birdie.

“It was nice to get into the playoff there,” Ormsby said.

“I didn’t think I was going to get in and I got myself in it but, yeah, a 
little bit disappointed.”

Chalmers’s putting in the end proved the difference after he’d nailed eight 
birdies during his fourth round to post a tournament-low eight-under 64 to 
surge to the top of the leaderboard.

Scott, meanwhile, probably should have won the event comfortably but regularly 
failed to sink birdie putts and was made to pay for his profligacy.
 