
If there is a symbol of the adoring relationship that Greeks have with lamb, 
it is on the spits that most people in mainland Greece eat as a speciality on 
Easter Sunday. Greeks eat beef or pork at least once per week; lamb, however, 
is not an everyday thing but a treat, something more than just meat.

The film My Big Fat Greek Wedding may be a never-ending fountain of 
stereotypes, but it does get it exactly right when it comes to how Greeks view 
lamb. When Aunt Voula finds out that the groom Ian is a vegetarian, she says: 
"What do you mean, you don't eat meat? That's OK, that's OK, I make lamb."

If lamb is a beyond-meat Greek treat, lamb chops, called paidakia, are a 
delicacy. Paidakia are marinated with oregano, lemon juice, herbs, thyme and 
pepper and then grilled at a high temperature until they are well done (no pink 
meat allowed), usually over a charcoal fire. They are generally accompanied by
patates tiganites (the Greek version of French fries), a combo that's as 
irresistible as it is cholesterol-raising.

Lamb chops are not to be found everywhere. Traditionally, there are certain 
areas near Athens – such as Kalyvia , Varibóbi or Stamata (all 15-20 miles from 
the capital) that specialise in lamb chops, but going there is an excursion. 
Luckily, in central Athens there are three good places for paidakia.

Karavitis

Located in the popular neighbourhood of Pagrati, near the emblematic statue of 
American President Harry S Truman that was erected in the 1960s and has come to 
define the area, Karavitis is the stuff of legend, bearing the trademark of the 
Athenian old-fashioned tavern: enormous wine barrels on the walls. In summer, 
diners – from politicians in suits (the Conservative party headquarters used to 
be right around the corner) to working-class families – sit in the whitewashed 
garden. An old man who is extremely out of tune sings and plays the guitar to 
old Greek classics, sometimes in a corner and sometimes while going from table 
to table. As with many places in Greece, the tree trunks are whitewashed to 
fend off insects, and there are enormous potted plants, creating an image of a 
picturesque and surreal Garden of Earthly Delights.

The service at Karavitis is speedy and organised and the food is typical Greek 
taverna fare:saganaki (fried cheese), wild boiled greens and Greek salad, all 
well-executed. The high point is the meat and the speciality is, of course, the 
paidakia, which is ordered by the kilo (luckily you can always order just half 
a kilo). Served piping hot, the lamb chops are extremely succulent and have an 
extra strong charcoal flavour. Locals also swear by thebiftekia, grilled ground 
beef patties filled with cheese. The cheese is a sort of 80s touch and the 
biftekia are slightly on the heavy side. Karavitis's bread is a mix of 
sourdough and classic white bread and the house wine is also very decent for 
the price.
• Pafsaniou 4 (at Arktinou), Pagrati, +30 210 721 5155, open Monday to 
Saturday from 8pm-1am and Sundays from 1-4pm and 8pm-1am

Doureios Ippos

Doureios Ippos (meaning Trojan horse) in Exarchia also deserves a mention. 
This family-run place has an atmospheric terrace where students and 
intellectuals have heated political arguments about the future of capitalism 
under a pergola covered in vines. Most of the food is served on hard plastic 
dishes and the house wine is nothing to write home about, but the meat is 
grilled to perfection on an old-fashioned grill spit. From sausages to chicken 
thighs, the meat is juicy and flavourful, including the awesome lamb chops.
• Koletti 21, Exarchia, +30 210 383 2006, open Monday to Saturday from 
7.30pm-2am, closed Sunday

To Steki tou Ilia
 To Steki tou Ilia reataurant, Athens Photograph: Manteau Stam 
Our absolute favourite paidakia place in downtown Athens, near where the 
Thiseio and Petralona districts meet, is To Steki tou Ilia. Unlike touristy 
Plaka, and despite its proximity to sites such as the Temple of Hephaestus, 
Thiseio has maintained its residential character and is still one of the 
prettiest neighbourhoods in Athens, thanks to its neoclassical buildings and 
pedestrianised streets. To Steki tou Ilia is located on one such street, right 
next to one of Athens' best art galleries, theBernier Eliades 
<http://www.bernier-eliades.gr/>, although a new restaurant extension recently 
opened a bit further down the road to accommodate the locals' ever-present 
hunger for paidakia. Harried waiters bring platters full of thinly cut lamb 
chops to the tables lining the cobblestone street outside. What sets these 
chops apart is that they are extremely thin but full of fat and flavour. The 
taste is heavy and smoky, but at the same time the texture is juicy and sloppy. 
In addition to the lamb chops and the other usual suspects, the venue also 
servessykotaria, fried lamb liver, a rare delicacy in Athens. 
• Eptachalkou 5, Thiseio, +30 210 345 8052, open Monday to Friday from 
8pm-midnight, Saturday from noon-4pm and 8pm-midnight, Sunday noon-4pm. Second 
branch at Thessalonikis 7, Thiseio, +30 210 342 2407, open Tuesday to Friday 
8pm-midnight, Saturday noon-4pm and 8pm-midnight, Sunday noon-4pm, closed Monday

A final tip: Greeks eat paidakia with their hands. You can always try using a 
knife and fork but it will be a waste of both your time and of good meat. Plus, 
there is something delightfully primeval about picking up a well-done, 
charcoal-flavoured lamb chop and sinking your teeth into it. Perhaps that's 
part of what makes eating one such a treat.
 