
The middle-aged woman was getting a swift and brutal lesson in fiscal prudence 
and the second-hand book trade. Tremendously respectably dressed and shocked to 
the core, she came into Chatterton's bookshop and demanded: "do you buy books?"

"All the time," said Jo, cautiously. 
 "Well, I've got a whole boot-load of books, at least 100, very good books, 
hardbacks, and I've just been offered £25 for them. For the whole lot!"
 "Ah," said Jo, even more cautiously, "what sort of books?" 
 "Very good books," the woman repeated. "Romances mostly, and some John 
Grishams, and lots of Maeve Binchy. Most of them are book-club books, but there 
are some first editions."
 "I think you were offered a very good price," Jo said, "I'm afraid I couldn't 
offer you as much."
 "But that's ridiculous!" the woman protested. "You don't sell books for 25 
pence each! They're worth far more than that - there's a whole boot full of 
them."

It was clear from the glare in the would-be seller's eye that she'd done a 
rough calculation that she had a minimum of £100 in her boot, and given that 
they were mostly hardbacks, probably several times that.

At first glance, you could see her point. The very cheapest books in any of 
the Blaenavon shops are in sale boxes by the doors, for around £1. The cheapest 
in Chatterton's are paperback bodice rippers, for around £2. They're there like 
chocolates by the supermarket checkout, to delay and seduce and encourage 
further spending. Women - almost entirely - are comforted to find them there, 
tend to pick one off the shelf, and then often wander around the shop and end 
up buying something else as well.

But if she loaded the books into the car herself, however, she should have 
spotted one of the problems: books weigh a ton, and take up a staggering amount 
of space. Her boot-load would take up yards of strong expensive shelves, and 
would probably take months, if not years, to sell.

If it takes two years for the 25p book to sell for £2, with the risk of 
getting so dog-eared in the process that it's barely fit for the bargain box, 
it will have failed miserably to pay the rent.

Book-club books, often handsomely printed in good quality bindings, are 
another mystery. Customers are deeply suspicious of them. People take them off 
the shelves and peer at them like own-brand baked beans, suspicious that they 
may not in fact do precisely what it says on the tin. Some vital ingredient may 
have been omitted or substituted, the beans, say, or the baked, or the 
whodunnit.

Jo said again that the £25 offered further down the street was a very good 
price, and the woman should jump at it. Instead she left, in incredulous 
disgust, and crossed the road to the next shop, now occupied by James Hanna's 
bookshop.

A revised booktown map has already had to be printed. One bookseller says they 
need one with a moveable velcro patch to show the current whereabouts of James 
Hanna, the American who has spent every day of the last six months making 
Blaenavon happen. A cookery book shop is opening in the former Koffee Korner, 
where Hanna originally set up his shop and office. He has now moved up the hill 
to Cobwebz, the former shop of Louise the fortune teller, which closed due to 
unforeseen circumstances. However, a new tenant is coming soon to take over 
that shop, so Hanna's stock will soon be on the move again.

A burly man came in, incredulously plucked the Doctor Who annual out of the 
window - £10, but it's being saved for a special auction night of the town's 
best books - and demanded to know if they bought books.

"Er ... yes?" 
 "Because I've got books, really good books, John Grishams and all." 

Chatterton's specialises in poetry, drama and the Romantic movement: the 
bodice-rippers just about qualify. John Grisham does not.

"Everyone who comes in to sell books always has John Grishams," Jo Wyborn 
said. "They always tell me they've got John Grishams. They always tell me 
they've got John Grishams as if this is some fantastically exciting and 
wonderful piece of news. I really don't understand what it is about John 
Grisham."
 