
Author: The son of an Italian immigrant, Emile Zola (1840-1902) grew up in 
Aix-en-Provence, moving to Paris as an 18-year-old. Zola turned to freelance 
journalism, but was fired from publishers Hachette after putting out his first 
novel, La Confession de Claude (1865). Thérèse Raquin (1867) was his first 
success, establishing the principles of literary naturalism, the socially 
engaged, highly wrought examination of quotidian existence. He immediately 
commenced the massive Rougon-Macquart series - "I want to portray, at the 
outset of a century of liberty and truth, a family that cannot restrain itself" 
- which, among its 20 instalments, comprises such masterworks as L'Assommoir 
(1877) Nana (1880), La Terre (1887) and La Bête Humaine (1890). Alongside these 
Zola found time to write highly researched novels like Germinal (1885), in 
which he applied "scientific" principles of observation to the treatment of 
industrial unrest, and to defend the unjustly imprisoned soldier Alfred Dreyfus 
with the open letter, J'Accuse, in 1898. Zola died in 1902 from carbon monoxide 
poisoning; rumours persist that enemies from the Dreyfus affair had his chimney 
blocked.

Story: La Terre details the harsh experiences of extended peasant families 
eking out a breadline existence in central France, near Chartres, in the period 
before the Franco-Prussian war and the Communard uprising. The novel was 
swiftly banned in Britain, largely because of an opening scene that describes 
in detail a bull impregnating a cow. Zola models his central narrative motif on 
King Lear: peasant patriarch Fouan divides his land between his three children, 
Fanny, Buteau and Jésus-Christ. The division of property sparks vicious 
squabbling among the siblings and their associated families; Fouan is forced to 
move from one to the other to find shelter. Buteau also has designs on his 
wife's sister, Françoise, and in a gruesome scene rapes her and (accidentally) 
fatally wounds her. The Buteaus then murder Fouan, who witnessed the attack, 
but manage to avoid detection and hold on to the property that they crave.

The film-makers Andrew Kötting (b1962) began making short films in the early 
1980s, finally making his feature-film debut with Gallivant (1997), an 
idiosyncratic documentary about travelling around the British coastline with 
his grandmother and daughter. Kötting's co-writer, comedian Sean Lock, had 
previously collaborated with Kötting on a short film, Smart Alek (1993).

How book and film compare: Kötting essentially uses La Terre as a starting 
point for his own concerns - rural squalor, organic decay, and copious amounts 
of post-production trickery. The narrative, sketchy as it is, focuses on the 
Françoise character (here renamed Fran) and her difficulties with 
brother-in-law Buto. This Filthy Earth significantly alters her story, however 
- Fran has a tentative romantic connection with a foreign farm labourer, Lek, 
but does not end up dead as in Zola's original.

Inspirations and influences: Kötting emerged from the same experimental world 
that also produced Patrick Keiller, whose films London (1994) and Robinson in 
Space (1997) were clear influences on Gallivant. But Kötting's also draws on 
literary sources; This Filthy Earth was inspired by John Berger's story 
collection about French peasant farmers, Pig Earth (1979).
 