
Imagine sharing your hot water supply with neighbours linked to a huge ring 
main as part of a local district heating system – and all fuelled by biomass 
boilers.

Biomass – or, according to one definition, "organic matter that was living 
recently" which could be anything from "wood to sewage sludge, animal slurries 
and crops grown for energy purposes" – is still only just taking off in the UK. 
However, over the past 15 years, such systems have been widely adopted in 
Austria, Germany, Denmark and elsewhere. In fact, Austria takes a staggering 
40% of its heating from renewable energy sources – by contrast, the UK has been 
slow to pick up the biomass baton and takes less than 1%.

This is where the Carbon Trust comes in as a pump primer for new ideas and 
private sector firms looking to adopt new technologies needed to take the place 
of the UK's now dwindling gas and oil reserves. Founded in 2001, the Carbon 
Trust is an independent company set up and funded by the government in response 
to the threat from climate change. Its remit is to speed up the move to a low 
carbon economy by working with private companies and public sector 
organisations to reduce carbon emissions now and develop commercial low-carbon 
technologies for the future.

One of its key private/public sector initiatives is the biomass heat 
accelerator programme, which aims to increase use of biomass energy. It works 
with biomass heating equipment suppliers to cut costs and reduce risks in the 
fuel supply chain and promotes awareness and understanding of the new 
technology among companies and institutions. Biomass is much further down the 
line than other technologies like wave power but many businesses still need to 
be made aware of its huge potential for reducing heating bills, a key part of 
the programme's work.

"Quite often we're working with private companies to develop the technologies, 
help them work better or work at all," says the Carbon Trust's technology 
acceleration manager, Keiran Allen. "But we also support companies starting to 
use the technology [see panel below] – energy-efficient products providing more 
efficient lighting, boilers, refrigeration, insulation etc."

In January when the Carbon Trust launched its handbook, Biomass Heating: A 
Practical Guide for Potential Users, its director of innovations, Mark 
Williamson, stressed that "renewable heating will need to play a key role in 
meeting the UK's renewable energy targets, and biomass offers the greatest 
potential to contribute to this."

In its UK Renewable Energy Strategy white paper, published this July, the 
government spells out a big role for biomass in helping meet a renewable energy 
target of up to 14% of the UK's heating needs by 2020. In fact, using biomass 
makes remarkable sense – carbon is first taken out of the atmosphere by plants 
during growth and then put back through burning. Net carbon emissions are 
minimal. "Biomass technology in its early stages," says Allen. "There are very 
few people in the UK doing this. It is an early adopters' technology market."

Since its launch, the Carbon Trust has advised 75% of the FTSE 100 companies 
and tens of thousands of other business and public sector organisations. It has 
helped clients save 23m tonnes of carbon emissions and made direct cost savings 
of £1.4bn, supporting a wide range of new, innovative, low-carbon technologies 
alongside biomass. Customers big and small range from Hilton, Morrison's and 
the Royal Mail through to many small businesses, hospitals and local 
authorities.

But to innovate or adopt these technologies requires information, expertise, 
research capacity and, more often than not, funding. "If you have an energy 
spend of more than £50,000 annually, companies and institutions can qualify for 
a free Carbon Trust survey which identifies ways of saving energy and money," 
says Allen. "If a company wants to take it to the next level, it can co-fund a 
project with the Carbon Trust, funding more advice and surveys on site, 
specifying solutions in more detail and working out costs of design work and 
implementing the project."

At implementation stage, the Carbon Trust offers interest-free loans up to 
£400,000. Recipients have to be small to medium-sized businesses (SMEs) and 
loans are paid back over the time during which new energy savings accrued by 
the company will have offset the cost of the loan. As Allen says: "As an 
unsecured, interest-free loan in the current economic climate, it's a real no 
brainer for businesses that have high energy spend."

Switching over

Making fuel while the sun shines

Acres and acres of 4 metre-high miscanthus (elephant) grass sway in the wind 
and stretch away into the distance. It's harvest time, but at a different time 
of year to food crops, meaning expensive machinery normally lying redundant for 
many months can be used to process the crop. It is a product that guarantees a 
fast-growing, almost never-ending supply of renewable, almost carbon-neutral 
fuel to supply a biomass boiler that can heat glass houses as far as the eye 
can see …

But no, this is still a dream for Lincolnshire nurseryman Robert Bell. This 
sort of sustainable, low-carbon solution to the UK's energy problems is not yet 
feasible, but in a few years it may well become reality for private and public 
sector organisations across the UK.

Bell, who heads up a 50-year-old family-owned nursery supplying bedding and 
potting plants to garden centres and supermarkets, is secure in the knowledge 
that he has already cheated the fuel crisis. In 2006, at least a year before 
fuel prices rocketed, he took the brave but vital step of switching over from 
heating oil to sustainable biomass fuels as his primary heating source. The 
nursery is now one of only three or four horticultural businesses nationwide 
using biomass.

Several years ago, Bell Bros Nurseries, based near Boston, had a huge problem. 
Business was becoming increasingly tough due to sharply increasing fuel costs. 
It was using 250,000 litres of gas oil to heat 8 acres of glass houses at a 
constant 21C during winter and early spring; it had to find a cheaper 
alternative.

"We were very concerned about all the oil we were using," says Bell. The 
problem was they were ahead of their time and sustainable fuels had not yet 
risen up the UK's political agenda. "We had no one to talk to in the UK when we 
started. Our concern was getting the right equipment to get sustainable fuels 
for the future."

Research started back in 2003 with a walk round a farm producing miscanthus 
grass. The key question worrying Bell was: could any existing kit heat his 
glass houses cheaply enough to keep his business viable?

Bell teamed up with the consultancy Rural Energy Ltd, which in turn called in 
the Carbon Trust to help in offering advice and monitoring the project. He 
began researching in Europe, including trips to Austria, the European leader in 
biomass energy use. There he found his answer. Austrian businesses and 
consumers had been successfully using the sort of equipment he needed for 
several years – they were thinking "biomass" at least a decade earlier than 
most countries.

In October 2007, the nursery took the plunge and installed a 2-megawatt 
biomass boiler. "It can burn both wet and dry fuel and can use almost anything 
available," says Rural Energy's Richard Harvey: hedge trimmings from the local 
council, off-cuts from the timber factories on Boston docks, material from 
conifer woodlands, which is then all converted into woodchip and fed 
automatically into the boiler.

The result has been an annual 40% saving on previous heating costs and a 
2,500-tonne cut in carbon emissions each year. The nursery now only uses 
heating oil as a back-up system – with annual use radically reduced 
to10,000-20,000 litres.

The installation was part-funded by a government grant of 17.5% of the capital 
cost. The Carbon Trust also helped the nursery benefit from the government's 
enhanced capital allowance tax scheme. "We got 100% tax relief on equipment," 
says Bell. "You have to qualify by registering your boiler and the equipment." 
He says the biomass scheme will pay for itself within five years of its launch.

How would he advise others aiming to switch to biomass? "People going forward 
will be in a much better position than we were. The Carbon Trust will play a 
big part in the process for anyone looking for administration, funding and 
information. Government documentation is clearer and then there's its white 
paper, The UK Renewable Energy Strategy – we're on page 158! We did a lot of 
research into fuel and energy costs. The key thing for us was studying the form 
– ensuring it's viable."

Last call to enter

Innovation Awards 2009

Here's your final chance to enter the Carbon Trust Innovation awards, a 
national competition promoting the work of pioneering developers and early 
users of the latest in energy-saving, low-carbon technologies.

If you have an innovative idea that has made significant cost, carbon and 
energy savings, you can win yourself and your company or organisation 
invaluable recognition, new business and some £50,000 worth of national press 
coverage and publicity.

The awards come in six categories, with four seeking out innovative developers 
of low-carbon technologies from the transport, energy, building and industry 
sectors. They include not only the more high-profile options such as wind, 
tidal and wave power but also less obvious, yet still important technologies 
that help save energy and money in buildings, transport and industry, where 
many ingenious solutions are often left unsung.

The other two categories recognise the equally brave pioneers among private 
and public sector institutions which are first to adopt new low-carbon 
technologies. They have to show they have gone beyond conventional practice, 
prove they have substantially cut their carbon emissions, and demonstrate that 
their project model can be replicated by other organisations.

A key ingredient in many award-winning entries is use of existing resources in 
new ways. One of the winners in 2007 – Professor Graeme Maidment and a team 
from London South Bank University – used rising underground water to develop a 
new cooling system at London's Victoria underground station. "Sometimes the 
best answer to a problem is right in front of you – or underneath us in this 
case!" says Maidment.

He speaks for many winners when he adds: "Winning an innovation award was 
recognition of the innovative work we are carrying out, it raised our profile 
with our stakeholders, consumers and competitors, and it led to many 
opportunities for our business, as well as reduced carbon emissions."

There are vast numbers of stories out there, according to the Carbon Trust's 
technology director, Garry Staunton. "We'd like to see a steady stream coming 
through, see [the ideas] work, and celebrate that at every opportunity."

So enter your applications now. Entries close on 9 October and winners will be 
notified at a special awards dinner in London on 25 November.

For more details and an entry form, please visit: carbontrust.co.uk/awards 
<http://www.carbontrust.co.uk/awards>
 