
In brital contrast to the euphoria of 12 months ago the international season 
has ended grumpily. The one exception has been provided by old Captain Grumpy 
himself. Mike Atherton has departed the scene with dignity, the minimum of 
fanfare and a terse press statement telling us how much he had enjoyed the past 
15 years after all. We can only bid him farewell with thanks. He has given 
heart and soul to the English cause throughout a trying decade at considerable 
personal sacrifice.

But while Atherton leaves at his own volition and with justified plaudits 
being tossed his way, Alec Stewart and Darren Gough now occupy the hinterland, 
both grumpy and both unsure of what their future holds. Stewart is 'very 
disappointed' by the selectors' decision not to allow him to go to New Zealand 
having made himself unavailable for the Indian tour. He notes that previous 
English stalwarts have missed tours without penalty - sometimes to appear in 
Christmas pantomimes - and he can point to 12 consecutive winters away from 
home. He has a case, but the selectors' determination to shun him in New 
Zealand is understandable. Where better to blood his potential replacement?

Gough is equally grumpy not only with the English hierarchy but also the 
'mole' who keeps saying that Gough would be happy to leave Yorkshire - the 
cricket team rather than the county (he already lives in Buckinghamshire). On 
BBC's Test Match Special both Gough and Stewart talked openly of their 
disappointment and grabbed the opportunity to promote the idea of 12-month 
contracts for England players. They pointed out that this is the system 
employed by the Australians and South Africans, while hinting that it was only 
a matter of time before the laggardly English followed suit. Gough suggested 
that he would have gone to India if he had been in possession of a 12-month 
contract.

Meanwhile there is also grumpiness around the counties, some of whom are 
denied their England players for the climax of the season for the second year 
in succession. Moreover the announcement of the touring parties inevitably 
produce gripes and hard-luck stories in the shires. In fact I have few quibbles 
with the tour party for India. As the Aussies can tell us - after their 2-1 
defeat there - India is one of the toughest tours, which explains why the 
selectors are grumpy that they cannot send their best side. The inclusion of 
Jamie Foster and Richard Dawson is bold, even though the alternatives were 
scarce. David Graveney was bound to state that Foster and Warren Hegg would 
begin the tour on an equal footing - he could hardly say anything else - but I 
anticipate that Foster will be given first go behind the stumps. Dawson may 
have to wait his turn, but he will not be so ostracised as Jason Brown in Sri 
Lanka last winter.

Meanwhile Usman Afzaal is likely to spend a lot of time in the nets and 
ferrying drinks. My inclination would have been to take another bowler instead. 
The balance of the Test team is likely to mirror that used in Pakistan and Sri 
Lanka even though this is complicated by Stewart's absence - namely five 
specialist batsmen, White as an all-rounder, the wicketkeeper, two spinners and 
two pacemen. Which leaves Afzaal, whose technique against spinners is suspect, 
out on a limb.

There is a whiff of horse-trading about the party that is destined for 
Zimbabwe, assuming that the tour actually takes place. Justifiably the 
selectors are experimenting before they name their one-day squad for India and 
New Zealand, in which Gough, incidentally, hopes to be included. The choice of 
spinners surprised me, to say the least. David Graveney has finally, after much 
badgering, acknowledged the recent success of Gloucestershire in one-day 
cricket by including Jeremy Snape, while Nasser Hussain would be better placed 
than most to appreciate the talents of his county colleague, Paul Grayson, who 
went to Kenya in an emergency 11 months ago when he made his one-day debut.

Both are stalwart journeymen; Snape is 28 (and currently in plaster); Grayson 
is 30. I know with my Somerset connections that this may seem a parochial 
point, but I'm amazed that the 23-year-old Ian Blackwell, after a sparkling 
second half of the summer was not preferred to one of them - and then not 
included in the Academy. In the long term he has more to offer.

That Academy squad contains gifted young batsmen and bowlers who have already 
had coaches and captains tearing their hair out. Alex Tudor, a prince after the 
Trent Bridge Test has been sent back to school; Durham's Steve Harmison has to 
overcome the reputation of giving way to homesickness once he leaves the 
North-East; Steve Kirby may be regarded as mouthy even in Adelaide, while Simon 
Jones is fast, but wild and needs a decent run-up. And the two spinners, Graeme 
Swann and Chris Schofield, wayward talents both, have so far flattered to 
deceive. If Rod Marsh can manufacture three or four substantial Test bowlers 
from that lot he will have earned his corn.
 