
You can already access the Guardian in ways that were unimaginable two decades 
ago: on your desktop or laptop computer, a tablet, e-reader or smartphone.

But today, ending months of speculation and rumour, this newspaper announces a 
groundbreaking development in the modern history of the media: a pair of 
web-connected "augmented reality" spectacles that will beam its journalism 
directly into the wearer's visual field, enabling users to see the world 
through the Guardian's eyes at all times.

The motion-sensitive spectacles, known as Guardian Goggles, incorporate 
translucent screens in the lenses, overlaying the wearer's view of their 
surroundings with a real-time stream of specially curated opinions from the 
paper's reporters, critics and commentators. For example, simply by looking at 
the outside of a restaurant or cinema and pointing, the user can call up 
relevant Guardian reviews of the food or current films.

"For some time, our users have been telling us they want an even more 
immersive Guardian experience, without the hassle of having to reach for their 
phones, or switch on their iPads, and Guardian Goggles are the answer," a 
spokesperson said.

"Now, when you're out shopping, you needn't have memorised our recent features 
on ethically sourced foods. Just call up the 'Mini-Monbiot' app, and the 
products you're looking at will be rated in front of your eyes."

Related software can detect the destinations featured in holiday brochures, 
warning wearers before they book trips to countries with problematic human 
rights records.

The spectacles also feature optional built-in anti-bigotry technology, which 
prevents exposure to non-Guardian opinions by blacking out columns by Melanie 
Phillips or Richard Littlejohn, among other writers, as soon as the user 
attempts to look at them.

Media analysts predicted that the Goggles could have a tectonic effect on the 
media landscape. "This is the easily biggest development in news technology 
since newspapers opened 'virtual bureaus' in Second Life in 2006, transforming 
journalism forever," said Paul McMullan, the former tabloid journalist who is 
now Professor of Disruptive Thinkovation at City University in London. "I 
frankly wouldn't be surprised if this were an even bigger success than Google+."

Another Goggles app, currently in development, will allow readers with strong 
feelings about postings on the Guardian's Comment Is Free site simply to yell 
their objections out loud, for example in the street, or on a bus. A 
voice-recognition system will then add their opinions to the relevant web page 
within 30 seconds.

An algorithm designed to detect frequently recurring viewpoints -- for 
example, that the Guardian should not be wasting valuable internet space by 
running blog posts about fashion or celebrities -- will enable those to be 
added to the site even faster.

A still more ambitious project could see the G2 columnist and psychotherapist 
Pamela Stephenson Connolly delivering sex-related advice in real time.

A limited-edition designer model, evoking the shape of the letter "g" from the 
Guardian's masthead, has been specially created by a collective of avant-garde 
designers working in association with Christopher Biggins.

Already the glasses, a limited number of which have been given to prominent 
public figures for testing, have attracted a number of high-profile fans, 
including at least one cabinet minister. Meanwhile, a spokesman for St James's 
Palace said both the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge were enjoying using the 
product, despite Prince William's grandfather, the Duke of Edinburgh, 
suggesting that they "looked like they'd been put together by an Algerian."

Guardian Goggles' impressive battery life enables them to be used for up to 
three hours at a time. To facilitate easy recharging for even longer periods of 
use, the paper plans to place unobtrusive charging stations on street corners 
in parts of London, Brighton and Bristol, where users may plug in their glasses 
without even needing to remove them.

It is not yet understood how glasses-based immersive journalism will be 
handled by the emerging new regulatory framework for the UK media. But Hugh 
Grant said he would issue an authoritative ruling on the question within the 
next two weeks.

Google Glass, a wearable-technology project blatantly inspired by Guardian 
Goggles, but with added features enabling the user to make creepy surreptitious 
video recordings in coffee shops, is expected to go on sale to consumers in 
2014.
 