
It is fair to say the appointment of Mick Newell as a selector in place of 
Ashley Giles, who resigned his post, brought with it the same misgivings that 
arose when Giles himself was appointed and after that, Angus Fraser. Was it 
appropriate,I queried back then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/aug/19/ashley-giles-england-selector-ashes-warwickshire>
, that a director of cricket for a county, or head coach or whatever the title 
happens to be, should be helping make binding decisions on who should represent 
England beyond an advisory capacity.

This in no way questioned the integrity of Giles or Fraser, which was 
unimpeachable, but rather the possibilities that such a vested interest 
created. For example, it would be possible, even subconsciously, to promote 
their own players, a natural thing to do given that a coach would know his 
players better than others. Or they could be reticent because of accusations of 
favouritism.

And also, unlikely but still a concern, would be the prospect of stalling 
selections to the betterment of their own teams; or attempting to attract 
players to their counties by suggesting that potential international futures 
might be served there; or players might even think this without being told, a 
bit like the old days where it was a common, and not entirely misplaced, belief 
that there was an advantage in playing for a London side. Again, I stress that 
there is no suggestion that these things have occurred, but merely that the 
possibility exists.

But then if we were to exclude those such as Giles, Fraser and now Newell, 
and, furthermore, others in areas of equally vested interest – for example, 
those who work in the media who have connections to management companies, 
something else I have always viewed as inappropriate – then it becomes very 
difficult to find anyone with the knowledge of the game, the time (Geoff 
Miller, the retired national selector, says that he drove upwards of 60,000 
miles a year in that role) and the resource to do the job properly. So in that 
regard, boththe appointments of Fraser and Newell, characters as solid as 
Giles, is good news.

There was, however, one more thing which did not quite stack up for me. Fraser 
is director of cricket at Middlesex and Newell atNottinghamshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nottinghamshire>, both Division One teams, 
so how was one half of the selection panel (in fact three quarters if you count 
the new head coach, who will see precious little live cricket beyond that of 
the England team) going to be able to watch players in the second division. But 
then I bumped into Gus in the Edgbaston press box on Sunday and saw the process 
in a slightly different light. He was sitting, wearing both his metaphorical 
titfers, and swapping them, like Tommy Cooper in his hat sketch.

It is generally hard to tell if he a happy fellow because his demeanour is 
always that of someone trudging home from the pub having been given his P45. 
Here, though, he was particularly grumpy, watching his Middlesex side tamely 
submit in their first innings. He was, he said, only there for that day. He 
always attends the opening day of aMiddlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> match, but then only as an 
observer, and then leaves it up to the coaches in any case.

The following day he was off to Chelmsford to watch a Division Two match in 
which he hoped, in particular, to see Tymal Mills. I am presuming that much the 
same kind of scheduling is there for Newell. It is a balancing act, but just to 
show that things are getting covered, the national selector James Whitaker 
arrived in Birmingham for the third day of the match, with an opportunity to 
see Sam Robson with pretty much unlimited scope to bat as long as he could.

I think that selection is in good hands. The process is about using judgment 
and experience, of course, which all on the panel possess. It is also about 
credibility and communication, so selectors will talk to the coaches, other 
players (I can remember how Tony Greig, as new England captain, canvassed 
opinion on a middle-order batsman when first he took over, from which came the 
selection of David Steele), umpires and many in the media.

But it is also prescriptive: the England coach and captain will have a 
strategy in mind to which they will fit players, and, if needs be, it is the 
job of the selectors to find such players. Thus, say, the infamous selection of 
Darren Pattinson against South Africa in 2008 came after a request to identify 
the best current available swing bowler, which, acting on that brief, they did.

Gus also showed me a small sample of some of the kind of information and data 
he receives on a daily basis, footage, in this instance, of just about every 
delivery that is bowled in the county championship. So he talked 
enthusiastically about the pace currently being generated by a rejuvenated Liam 
Plunkett, and was able to show me a spell he sent down recently against 
Middlesex. And then, shaking his head, and with the three seaxes in place now 
rather than the crown and three lions, the eight wickets that Middlesex had 
lost before lunch. Just to bring me up to date. You'd think the world had 
fallen in.
 