
On 27 January 1984, music show The Tube visited the Haçienda. As part of the 
evening,Madonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> was filmed 
lip-syncing Holiday with a couple of dancers. The clip still exists and you can 
see her rocking the definitive early-to-mid-80s B-boy look: big hair tied up at 
the back, layered sports wear and synchronised dance moves.

Although displaying considerable hauteur, Madonna wasn't a big star then: her 
first UK hit, Holiday, was just moving up the charts when the clip was filmed. 
Yet it made sense to showcase this product of the New York electro scene in one 
of the UK's most unique and innovative clubs. For the Haçienda was conceived 
specifically, as New Order manager Rob Gretton later said, as a "New York-type 
club".

Launched in May 1982, the Haçienda was beautifully designed by Ben Kelly, with 
themed bars and branded colours and typeface. This former yacht warehouse was 
conceived as a meeting place for Manchester's scattered post-punk tribes: as 
Rob Gretton later remembered, there was "nowhere else to go". There was also 
the idea to give something back to the city that had spawned and nurtured Joy 
Division and New Order.

The Haçienda wasn't the disaster that it has been portrayed. The club had 
strong musical roots in the then current avant garde/black electro crossover. As
Tony Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tonywilson> later said: "It was 
very much conceived as a space. We had just been to America, New Order and 
ACR's first tours, clubs like Danceteria and Hurrah, and these clubs were 
discos and venues; venues and discotheques. Groovy spaces."

This was the period when New York DJs regularly worked with British post-punk 
groups. François Kervokian, for instance, who played at the Paradise Garage, 
did a brilliant remix of Yazoo's Situation while Arthur Baker and Jellybean 
Benitez, both of whom played at the Warehouse and had done mixes of Afrika 
Bambaataa's Planet Rock, reworked New Order's follow-up to Blue Monday, 
Confusion. Benitez was also the producer of Madonna's Holiday.

During its first two years, the Haçienda showcased gigs by artists as diverse 
as Orange Juice, J Walter Negro, the Psychedelic Furs, the Gun Club, the 
Smiths, Grandmaster Flash and Curtis Mayfield. In the DJ box, Mike Pickering 
and Hewan Clarke played the latest electro and rap 12-inches. The problem was 
not the club's musical policy, but the fact that it was open every night – 
a guaranteed way of losing money.

The club started to break even in 1986 with the success of Mike Pickering and 
Martin Prendergast's Nude night – one of the UK's first adopters of the 
emergent Chicago house sound. This was soon amplified by another popular night, 
Zumbar, Paul Cons's mix of fashion show and cabaret entertainment, with a disco 
and house soundtrack.

Things exploded in July 1988 with the creation of Hot – conceived by Paul Cons 
and Mike Pickering as a "New York-styled balearic" night. Coinciding with the 
introduction of ecstasy as a popular youth cult drug, and the rise of acid 
house, this sparked a sequence of delirious nights, later known as the second 
Summer of Love. As Mike Pickering later said: "It was the best scene I've ever 
been involved in, there were people from all walks of life, all getting on and 
it was so creative when it first started."

The delirium continued through 1989, but in July there was a severe reality 
check when 16-year-old Clare Leighton collapsed at the club and later died as a 
result of taking ecstasy. Combined with the Madchester hype – concentrated on a 
number of indie bands with dance inflections – the Haçienda's days were 
numbered, as the club came under scrutiny from police, licensing authorities 
and gangsters alike.

The next two years saw the club constantly under threat from the police, from 
the licensing authorities and the increasingly violent activities of the gangs. 
The Haçienda closed for the first time in January 1991, reopening four months 
later. However even under this duress, the club hosted another successful and 
innovative night with the introduction of Paul Cons and Lucy Scher's Flesh – 
"an outrageous queer event" that had huge influence on gay clubbing in the UK. 
(It also had the side effect of temporarily putting off most of the gangsters.)

The Haçienda eventually closed in June 1997, having failed to stem the gang 
violence. After lying empty for a few years, it was demolished in 2002 – the 
fixtures and the fittings having already been auctioned off for charity. The 
site had been redeveloped and is now a multistorey block called the Hacienda 
Apartments.

Although the physical building has gone, the Haçienda remains legendary not 
only for the breadth and depth of its musical policy and its status as a youth 
culture catalyst, but also for its pioneering vision of the club as a brand. 
After the Haçienda came Cream, Ministry of Sound, and the deluge.
 