
Tommy Haas narrowly avoided the curse of the top seeds at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> today, coming from 
matchpoint down to defeat Roger Federer 8-6 in a thrilling final set.

Haas, seeded seven and the highest ranking player left in the men's draw, won 
through 7-6, 4-6, 3-6, 6-4, 8-6 in three hours 35 minutes to earn a 
quarter-final place against former world number one Marcelo Rios.

Sublime tennis from both players saw them split the first four sets on the Rod 
Laver Arena centre court.

With the roof closed to protect the court from rain, the ball moved faster 
through the air and with no wind to divert it a succession of winners flew from 
both players' rackets.

Nothing could separate the pair in the first 12 games of the decider but, with 
11th seed Federer serving for a 7-6 lead his nerve cracked. A game earlier the 
Swiss player had held a match point but lost it allowing Haas to level at 6-6.

That missed match point rattled Federer. Two unforced errors gave Haas a 
love-30 lead and he ripped a forehand return down the line for three break 
points.

The first was saved but he converted the second when Federer mishit a backhand 
off his racket frame. Moving with new vigour, Haas served out, clinching the 
victory with a backhand volley.

He will now play Rios, who won through to his first grand slam quarter-final 
in nearly three years with a 7-5, 6-1, 6-4 win over Nicolas Lapentti.

Rios strolled to victory over the 23rd seed in less than two hours to continue 
his best run at a major since he made the last eight at the 1999 French Open.

But the temperamental Chilean was far from happy with his performance, saying 
he was still a long way off his best form.

"I used to play much better. Everytime I compare myself with the Rios before, 
I think I was much better then," he said.

"When I was younger, I felt a lot better and I was able to recover quicker but 
nowadays I'm not that good at recovering."

He has produced some amazing trick shots over the past week, including shots 
behind his back, but the 26-year-old said he will need more than that if he 
wants to progress.

"This is not my best tennis. I have been playing pretty good, but I'm not 
consistent," he said. "I play one good match then I play 10 really bad."

Wayne Ferreira won another marathon affair, beating Spain's Albert Costa 4-6, 
6-4, 6-4, 6-7, 9-7.

Ferreira, 59th in the world, has come through the section of the draw 
defending champion Andre Agassi withdrew from before the start with a wrist 
injury.
 