
I should never have said yes. But the flight had been delayed due to 
mechanical failure, which always adds an edge to proceedings, and then matters 
became more fraught when, dying for a cigarette on arrival, I was directed into 
Further Immigration. And then, on the cusp of finding myself in Deep 
Immigration, the customs official informed me that in the past I had just got 
lucky; I so nearly replied: 'And everyone knows terrorists only need to get 
lucky once.'

Fortunately I was saved by an instance of what might be termed a reverse 
esprit de l'escalier . However, despite having been spared 20 years inside for 
making a joke about the War on Terror, I was still sufficiently frazzled when a 
chauffeur approached and asked: 'Are you William Buckley the writer?' Stupidly 
I replied: 'Yes.'

Within minutes of the two-and-a-half-hour drive it became apparent that the 
driver had mistaken me for the septuagenarian William F. Buckley. And once 
someone has made a mistake as to your identity it is hard to correct it without 
embarrassment (an acquaintance of mine has called me Ian for nearly a decade). 
I threw a few rogue opinions into the conversation, but this merely convinced 
the driver that the venerable political pundit might have regained his youth - 
and picked up an English accent along the way - but at the cost of losing his 
marbles. As we arrived in Augusta, he asked me to sign the placard with my and 
my namesake's name upon it for 'Donald Maybe and Martha Quimby and everyone at 
Appliance Land'. This I did, inserting a comma between Donald and Maybe because 
I'd like to think there is someone called Maybe Quimby out there, and signing 
off with an 'all the best'.

None of which is strictly relevant, but it did get me thinking about the 
elderly, specificallyArnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>, who, like an aged relative 
invited for Christmas who stays for years, was once again claiming to be saying 
farewell. Golf is a sentimental sport and it doesn't get more gushing than 
Arnie at Augusta.

Or so I thought until, after his round on Thursday, I saw Arnie on the lawn in 
front of the clubhouse drinking a beer and chatting with friends. There was a 
grace and humility to the man, qualities entirely absent from the preening 
bumptiousness with which most modern sports stars carry on. Uniquely, he was 
neither surrounded by yes men nor appeared to have any need for them. 'Please 
stay for another year, Arnie,' I wanted to say, except it would have 
embarrassed both of us. Nor was I alone. Palmer's consecutive rounds of 84 gave 
more people more pleasure than anything lower scored by anyone younger.

One of the weaknesses of sport is its ephemerality. It's here, it's gone. 
Youth must have its day. Moments such as a 41-year-old Cyril Washbrook 
returning to bat for England or a 48-year-old Dick Saunders winning the 
National on Grittar are as rare as they are memorable.But people wane rather 
than wax with the passing of the years.

Yet in golf the ancient greats can carry on and provide glimpses of how they 
were in their pomp. The middle-aged can compete; at Augusta the average age of 
the winner is 32.9 and Jack Nicklaus won there in 1986 at the age of 46. There 
is less emphasis on youth.

Watching Palmer brought to mind something Robert Hughes wrote last week when 
comparing Lucian Freud's new exhibition with the Brit Art mob's effort: 'His 
work is supremely tough, ruthless even. But it has none of the facile emotional 
posturing that appeals to the kind of institutional ad man's taste, the bratty 
cynicism and quick-fix sensationalism that pervades the Saatchi collection.' 
The sight of Palmer playing golf came as a welcome relief after spending the 
early part of the week submerged in coverage of another famous sportsman, which 
was characterised by 'facile emotional posturing', 'bratty cynicism' and 
'quick-fix sensationalism'.

The nadir was the claim by one columnist that David Beckham was 'arguably the 
most happily married sportsman in the world'. What a magnificent use of 
'arguably'. As if anyone has ever debated the subject. As if anyone can 
truthfully claim to pronounce on the happiness or not of the marriage of 
Latvia's number-three ping-pong player. As if anyone cares.

Yet without Palmer we might never have reached the state we have reached with 
Beckham. It was Palmer and Mark McCormack, the late founder of IMG, who 
initiated the branding of sports stars. It is Beckham who has profited and lost 
from such branding. Had he escaped from the public eye to Augusta for some 
carefully stage-managed photographs with Less Posh he wouldn't have known 
whether to thank Arnie or damn him.

You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank as 
you like, we can take it, tosport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:sport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>, or mail the Observer direct at 
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 