
Author: Mickey Spillane (b1918) - real name Frank - grew up in Brooklyn, and 
started writing for the comic-book market in the 1930s. His best-known early 
strip featured private detective Mike Danger, but after a stint in the US air 
force during the war, he reworked the character as Mike Hammer in a full-length 
novel, I, the Jury (1947), supposedly written in just six days. In paperback 
the book was a huge success, and Spillane wrote six more in three years: Kiss 
Me, Deadly (1952) was the last of these.

In the same year, Spillane became a Jehovah's Witness, and stopped writing 
novels; he returned to Hammer in 1962 with The Girl Hunters, and started 
another series. He took another break, for 16 years, in 1973 when he began a 
long-running series of self-parodic beer commercials in the US.

The rise of the graphic novel in the 1990s, with its interest in noir 
aesthetics, saw a revival of interest in Spillane's work, and he co-edited the 
short story collection Murder Is My Business (1994) with comic-book writer Max 
Allan Collins.

The story: Mike Hammer picks up a woman hitchhiker, Berga Torn, a refugee from 
a nearby psychiatric hospital. Shortly afterwards, his car is run off the road 
and his passenger is tortured and killed. Hammer tracks the killer and finds 
that Torn was about to testify against the mafia. He traces a link with a mafia 
boss called Carl Evello; Torn's flatmate, Lily Carver, also appears to be a 
target of Evello's gang.

Hammer eventually realises that Torn possessed information about a package of 
narcotics that eventually turn up in a locker at a sports club. He rescues his 
secretary/lover Velda, who has been kidnapped, and kills Carver - who turns out 
to have betrayed Torn to the mob.

The film-makers: After a decade as assistant director to the likes of Charlie 
Chaplin and Robert Rossen, Robert Aldrich (1918-1983) earned a reputation as a 
radical Hollywood figure with early films such as the film industry assault The 
Big Knife (1955). In later decades he would alternate politically difficult 
material, such as the revisionist western Ulzana's Raid (1972), with 
crowd-pleasers such as The Dirty Dozen (1967). ForKiss Me Deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kiss-me-deadly>, Aldrich hired AI Bezzerides 
(best known for his 1938 trucker novel, The Long Haul) to write the script, and 
cast perennial tough guy Ralph Meeker in the iconic Hammer role.

How book and film compare: Spillane is on record as "hating" the adaptation of 
his novel. Bezzerides was none too complimentary about his source, describing 
Spillane's book as "lousy". The most radical change made was the nature of the 
box in the locker: in the spirit of the mid-1950s cold war era, Bezzerides made 
it a nuclear weapon, which detonates as the finale after Hammer kills Carver. 
Thus, instead of Spillane's original patriotic crusade against mafia "slime", 
in the film Hammer is a compromised bully who is in way over his head. The 
ending was only fully restored in 1997, after the shots of Hammer and Velda 
escaping the explosion had disappeared from all then-available prints.

Inspirations and influences: At once a key entry in the film noir cycle and an 
opportunist exploiter of McCarthy-era political paranoia, Kiss Me Deadly is 
first and foremost a classic what's-in-the-box thriller - and as such is 
referenced in such varied postmodern pop-culture recyclers as Repo Man (1984) 
and Pulp Fiction (1994).
 