
Defending champion Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> was knocked out of the 
third round by Daniela Hantuchova 6-1, 7-6 (7-5). Hantuchova raced through the 
first set in 31 minutes. Williams saved three match points to force the second 
set into a tiebreak but the Slovakian regained her composure to take the match. 
Williams, who had staged a series of miraculous comebacks to win last year's 
Australian Open, threatened another when she led 4-3 in the tiebreak but 
Hantuchova held her nerve to clinch it 7-5.

"I just made a lot of errors today," Williams said afterwards. "I just 
couldn't find my shots at all. Everything I was trying just wasn't working. It 
was just one of those days."

"I always believed in myself," said Hantuchova, whose reputation as something 
of a choker was not in evidence on court today. "I guess the way to get there 
is to keep working hard and fight all the way."

Lindsay Davenport overcame a determined Maria Kirilenko in three sets to 
advance to the last 16 at Melbourne Park.

Despite committing 42 unforced errors for the match, twice that of her 
opponent, the world No1 exploited Kirilenko's weak second serve to progress 
6-4, 4-6, 6-2.

"It was really an up-and-down performance by me," said Davenport, who took the 
first set after an early break but was pegged back in the second.

"I felt like I was making a lot of errors but I felt like I was doing well to 
control the points in the first set.

"Then in the second set I really just kind of fell apart with making way too 
many errors. She was doing a good job of keeping a lot of balls in.

"I do feel like the third set I really was able to turn it around and play 
really well. I started playing aggressive, but with better margins and a little 
bit more contained. I'm happy I ended the match on a positive note."

Davenport will now meet another Russian, 14th seed Svetlana Kuznetsova, who 
beat Italian Mara Santangelo in straight sets.

In fact, it was a good day for the Russians, as Maria Sharapova, Nadia Petrova 
and Elena Vesnina all progressed.

Sharapova was barely tested as she beat Croatian Jelena Kostanic, breaking in 
the second game and never looking back on her way to a 6-0, 6-1 win. Despite 
the lopsided scoreline, the fourth seed insisted it was still a tough match.

"I wouldn't say that was really easy, mentally it was pretty tough when you 
know you've got a very patient opponent and you know that it's really hot out 
there," she said.

"I mean, you've got to be really tough, and the score doesn't really explain 
the match."

Sharapova will face a tougher test in the last 16, where she will meet Serena 
Williams's conquerer Hantuchova.

Petrova, meanwhile, cruised past Maria Elena Camerin, who only managed one 
winner in the entire match as she went down 6-1, 6-2.

Vesnina took on Ukrainian Olga Savchuk, with neither woman ever having played 
in a Grand Slam before - let alone competed for a place in the round of 16.

The pair, both ranked outside the top 100, committed over 100 unforced errors 
between them as Vesnina came from a set down to win 5-7, 6-2, 6-4.

Things were slightly easier for Justine Henin-Hardenne, who thrashed Virginie 
Razzano 6-4, 6-1 to set up a meeting with Virginia Ruano Pascual, who defeated 
Laura Granville with similar ease 6-3, 6-3.
 