
Resounding cheers echoed around Headingley at 1.45pm yesterday. The Aussie 
speedster Brett Lee had just been smacked for 16 runs in an over and England 
had avoided the follow-on. For the first time in the series their batsmen had 
compelled the Aussies to propel a second new ball. This is not the usual 
trigger for outlandish celebration, but such has been Australia's dominance in 
this series and so desperate are English supporters for something to shout 
about that they roared as if a famous Test victory had been sealed.

There was more raucous applause to follow throughout the next hour of bizarre 
Test cricket. Alec Stewart has obviously taken his demotion to number seven 
seriously. This is the Adam Gilchrist position and he duly sought to emulate 
the audacity of the acting Australian captain. In fact for 20 minutes he was 
even more flamboyant than his opposite number.

Put simply, he started slogging and how the Yorkshire crowd enjoyed it. 
Stewart backed away to leg before cover-driving Glenn McGrath for six into the 
Western Stand. If there had been a roof on this new edifice it would have been 
raised (but they are tough up here - roofs are for southerners). Next he backed 
away to swat Lee to the midwicket boundary. No one bats like this in one-day 
cricket nowadays, let alone a Test match.

It was surreal, heady stuff as England raced to 300 for nine before normality 
- and sanity - was restored. As the clouds rumbled in England were offered the 
opportunity to leave the field for bad light. Stewart was not so adrenaline 
fuelled that he turned down that offer. No doubt if he had tried to stay on 
last man Alan Mullally would have intervened. It was dark and Lee was bowling 
very fast and frequently short. When play eventually resumed, Mullaly soon 
became McGrath's seventh victim and England were all out for 309.

So we have good news for treasurers around the country. This game is now 
likely to proceed into the final day. Meanwhile, yesterday's punters were 
treated to some freakish, enthralling cricket during which the English players 
refused to kow-tow to their mighty opponents. This cheered up just about 
everyone (though I'm not sure what G Boycott, W Rhodes and countless other grim 
Yorkshiremen would have made of it all). But for all the frenetic excitement of 
this dotty half-hour it has not changed the balance of the match. The stark 
facts tell us that. Barring more substantial rain interruptions, Australia will 
probably win some time tomorrow.

At the start of play, England's follow-on target of 248 did not seem too 
daunting. Within 45 minutes, it looked formidable. For England endured another 
nightmarish start to the day courtesy of McGrath and their own masochistic 
instincts. In the third over, McGrath, who had already bowled a few lifters, 
produced a scuttler for Nasser Hussain, who was lbw. He left scowling not at 
umpire David Shepherd, but at a pitch he clearly regarded as treacherous. His 
47 had been an encouraging, courageous innings.

In the next over, Mark Butcher had a moment of madness, which reflected how 
England are still liable to self-destruct when squeezed by Australians. A firm 
push back down the pitch was parried by the bowler, Jason Gillespie, before 
dribbling towards Lee at mid off. For reasons known only to Butcher, he set off 
for a single while Lee gathered the ball and threw down the stumps from only 
four or five yards. Butcher walked while the third umpire was consulted.

Next Usman Afzaal hinted at better things to come with two driven boundaries, 
but soon he flirted outside his off stump to present McGrath with another 
wicket. Unless he scores significant runs in the second innings the unfortunate 
Afzaal is likely to be replaced by the fit-again Michael Vaughan at the Oval 
and is only an outsider to tour India.

Now Mark Ramprakash and Stewart steadied the innings stoutly. Shane Warne, who 
was supposed to be a greater threat on this dry surface than in previous Tests, 
was innocuous and if Ramprakash came down the wicket to him, he kept watching 
the ball. Together they took the score to 232 for five at lunch - 16 runs away 
from the follow-on target, though not, given the pace of the modern Test match, 
safety.

In the first over after the break they knocked off those 16 runs in Lee's 
over, where he consistently over-pitched, an error he did not commit when 
confronted with the English tail later on. But the extra bounce provided by the 
new ball accounted for Ramprakash. He attempted to slash a short, fast delivery 
to the off-side boundary but could only edge it to Gilchrist. Ramprakash's shot 
selection at Trent Bridge was roundly criticised - with justification. Here the 
shot was legitimate if not properly executed and after this innings it is 
churlish to criticise Ramprakash for being too positive.

Alex Tudor soon edged a snorter from McGrath, which was the spark for the 
madcap half hour. Andrew Caddick experienced an interesting over from Lee. He 
was hit just below the elbow by a bouncer; after a lengthy delay he was 
immediately bowled by a no-ball. Then he was hit by another bouncer before 
cracking a cover drive to the boundary. Meanwhile Stewart cover-drove McGrath 
in orthodox fashion to post his half century. In highly unorthodox fashion he 
followed that with his six.

Now Caddick sensed a bouncer from Lee almost every ball and he was rarely 
wrong. Retreating to the leg side he was adjudged by umpire Venkat to have 
gloved the ball; in fact it flicked the top of his arm guard. Darren Gough 
could not restrain himself either - surprise, surprise - and after thumping two 
boundaries, skied to cover seeking a third but donating McGrath his 349th Test 
wicket instead.

Then bad light and drizzle allowed everyone a chance to calm down. It had been 
frenzied stuff, though not Test cricket as we know it - except that the 
Australians were still in command.
 