
Roll up, roll up: it's the "big price drop" – and not just at Tesco. Worried 
retailers across the high street are decking the aisles with discounts and it's 
not even December yet. This year'sChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> trading period is shaping 
up to be as tough as anything seen during the recession, as a year in which 
living costs have raced ahead of pay rises draws to a close.

Consumer confidence is at rock bottom and three profit warnings from listed 
retailers are already in – albeit from Game, Blacks Leisure and French 
Connection, companies that were already vulnerable to a downturn in consumer 
confidence. Topshop tycoon Sir Philip Green has plans to cull up to 260 stores, 
amid predictions of a cut-price Christmas as clothing chains crank up the 
discounting to shift unsold coats and boots languishing in stockrooms after the 
mild autumn.

The real meaning of Christmas, of course, is not finding an iPad 2 or Dr Dre 
headphones – two of this year's must-have gifts – under the tree. It's about 
Jesus, aDownton Abbey Christmas special and munching mince pies. For many 
retailers, however, it is life and death, as during December monthly retail 
sales nearly double to a figure approaching £39bn. A bad Christmas flushes a 
year's toil down the drain; the growing phenomenon of "pop-up" shops is 
testament to how thankless the other 11 months of the year are in modern 
retailing.

Christmas is so important to retailers that it has acquired its own lexicon. 
It's the "golden quarter" because of the significance to profits, while in the 
US last Friday was "Black Friday", representing the approximate point in the 
year at which American retailers' finances move out of the red and into the 
black. Tomorrow is Cyber Monday; not time to upgrade your internet security, 
but one of the biggest online shopping days of the year.

But with UK unemployment at a 17-year high and disposable incomes squeezed by 
inflation, this year was never going to be a record-setter. The supermarkets 
say customers are worried about the cost of Christmas and expect families will 
dip into their savings to pay for the celebrations.

The imperative to save money where possible was hammered home by an incident 
during Black Friday's sales, whenan American woman used pepper spray to keep 
hold of a discounted Xbox games console 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/25/black-friday-sales-pepper-spray-stampede>
. Such desperate measures are not required in the UK, where visitor numbers at 
shopping centres and stores are well below last year's levels and – based on 
Game's experience – interest in videogame consoles is muted at best.

Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb may be right when he says "nobody pays 
full price any more": stealth discounts are already being deployed in the mass 
market as Marks & Spencer, Debenhams and BHS slug it out for their share of a 
diminished pie. Some analysts predict shoppers will spend £200m less this year.

Should we care if the high street goes to hell in a handcart? After three 
years of financial crisis we know the deal. It's payback time for the spending 
sprees of the boom years that helped get us into this mess.

The answer is yes. The high street underpins the UK's economic health: retail 
sales make up a fifth of GDP, pumping £18bn into government coffers, and there 
is no time to rebalance the economy away from consumer spending before 
Christmas.

Then there are the near 3 million shopworkers gritting their teeth as Now 
That's what I Call Xmas plays on in-store PA systems. One in 10 jobs are in the 
retail industry, which is the largest private sector employer in the UK. The 
downturn is already taking its toll: in September there were 23,000 fewer jobs, 
a contraction that disproportionately hits the women and young people who make 
up the high street's army of part-time workers.

Last year the blast of Arctic weather ruined Christmas for retailers, we were 
told. This year, it has been too warm. Come on, Britain, your high street needs 
you. Whatever the weather.

Hank takes the biscuit

Shameless behaviour and self-serving rhetoric have never been in short supply 
during the credit crisis, with Goldman Sachs boss Lloyd Blankfein's insistence 
that he was doing "God's work" just one of the more memorable examples.

But Hank Greenberg, the former chief executive of bailed-out insurance group 
AIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig>, has out-chutzpahed them all. 
He's suing the American taxpayer for $25bn (£16bn).

Greenberg wasn't at the helm when AIG was rescued; but he is the man who built 
it up from a humble insurer to a monster in the shady world of derivatives, 
issuing $2tn of credit default swaps. These allowed banks to insure themselves 
against all kinds of nasty eventualities, many of which suddenly looked very 
likely to happen all at once after the Lehman Brothers collapse.

Greenberg had been ousted three years earlier; but he now claims, via Starr 
International, a company he controls, that in the $180bn taxpayer-backed rescue 
of the company, shareholders, (including, of course, himself), got a raw deal.

Short orders at Thomas Cook

It looks like some short-sellers are having a terrific year, profiting 
handsomely on the back of the growing woes of some much-loved British brands. To
Thomas Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> can be added 
the names of Carpetright, Mothercare, Next, Dixons and Ocado.

At first glance this might seem one of the ugliest sides of the capitalist 
world. But that wouldn't be entirely fair: it is the short-sellers who first 
spotted the warning signs in Thomas Cook's accounts over the last few years. 
They took the time to probe a little deeper into the traditional share-price 
valuation metrics and had the courage of their convictions. The steady 
deterioration in the quality of the balance sheet was not something that passed 
them by.

If there is anyone in the sorry saga of Thomas Cook's debt-driven unravelling 
who truly does not come out well, it is former boss Manny Fontenla-Novoa, who 
left abruptly in August. It is hard to believe that only three years ago he 
received a maximum one-off £5m bonus for his "exceptional performance and 
personal effort… exceeding all expectations" in extracting cost savings from 
the 2007 merger with MyTravel.

It has subsequently emerged that the merged business in the UK has been 
allowed to deteriorate into a very sorry state. It is likely to require some 
very radical changes – including job losses, probably – before it can be 
restored to health.

If there is anything to lament about the short-sellers of Thomas Cook, is it 
that their critical – and accurate – perspective did not arrive soon enough.
 