
Tim Henman had a bad day in Melbourne, with a heavy 6-4 6-2 6-2 defeat to 
Nicolay Davydenko, a Russian who hadn't taken a set off the British number one 
in two previous meetings. Davydenko played a very solid game, making few errors 
and finding the corners and angles with great regularity. But he must have 
thought Christmas had come late, so many gifts did he receive from the 
out-of-sorts Henman.

'Elena Baltacha said she got her arse kicked yesterday, and unfortunately I 
fall into the same bracket,' said Henman, whose defeat ends British involvement 
in an Australian Open. But the question is: who kicked arse - Davydenko, or 
Henman himself?

Henman's consistency over a professional career now in its thirteenth year is 
often underappreciated by a home public fixated on Wimbledon. But he does seem 
to have an unusually high number of underachieving days, especially Down Under. 
He had a nightmare against Jonas Björkman in the fourth round three years ago, 
he lost to an eminently beatable Chris Woodruff at the same stage in 2000, he 
was out of touch in losing to Marc Rosset in straight sets in 1999, and his 
first-round, five-set defeat to Jérome Golmard in 1998 started the talk about 
whether David Felgate was the right coach for him.

With his semi-finals at the French and US Opens last year, the Australian Open 
is now the major at which Henman has achieved least well - his best is three 
fourth-round appearances - despite it having a surface that ought to suit his 
game.

'I'm not going to deny this was definitely a bad day at the office,' he said, 
speaking calmly and eloquently despite admitting to being 'gutted'. 'But when 
you come into these types of tournaments and you're in the last 32 or 16, it's 
going to be highlighted if you're a bit short. I want to do better than the 
fourth round, I don't think that's good enough, but it hasn't happened for me 
this time. It's not going to deter me from coming back for a few more years to 
try and improve on that.'

The fact that Andre Agassi is still a factor three months short of his 
thirty-fifth birthday will encourage Henman not to worry unduly about being 30. 
But as in 2002, he has failed to exploit a draw that seemed made for him to 
reach at least the quarter-finals.

The dropped serve in the opening game could be put down to a sleepy start, but 
the first alarm bells rang in the eighth game after Henman had worked his way 
to 15-40 on Davydenko's serve. He had four break points in total to level at 
4-4, but made errors on all four, and when the Russian held for 5-3, the first 
hints of another Henman failure were visible.

The opening game of the second set should have been a turning point. Brought 
back from 40-15, Henman looked a sitting duck at the net after a defensive 
volley, but as Davydenko belted a backhand down the middle of the court, Henman 
stuck his racket out behind his back and saw the ball bounce off his strings 
for a winner. When he then saved a break point and held for 1-0, the tide was 
ripe for turning.

Yet it continued to flood Henman. Davydenko held for 1-1, and Henman then 
double-faulted to go a break down. A further break for 4-1 and Davydenko was 
cruising to a two-sets lead.

Henman found a semblance of form in the third set and began to pressure the 
Russian. But he dropped serve again in the seventh game and Davydenko finished 
the job in two hours and six minutes.

Apart from Henman and Carlos Moya, all the major names in both men's and 
women's singles have made it to the fourth round, though with no obvious 
favourites.

Lleyton Hewitt dropped a set for the second match running in beating Juan 
Ignacio Chela, which leaves Andy Roddick looking the likeliest to reach the 
final from the bottom half of the draw. His split from Brad Gilbert and new 
working partnership with Dean Goldfine seems to have energised him, and he was 
untroubled in his 6-2 6-2 7-5 win over Jürgen Melzer.

Among the women, the most in-form player looks to be Australia's tenth seed 
Alicia Molik, who seems able to handle the pressure and her opponents. But her 
draw gets tough from now on, starting tomorrow with Venus Williams, a 6-3 6-0 
winner yesterday over Anna Smashnova.
 