
Harlequins' director of rugby, Conor O'Shea, hailed the impact of his side's 
stand-in players after they eased to a 38-13 victory in the LV Cup tie withWasps
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> in Abu Dhabi today.

The match was the first domestic fixture to be staged overseas and was played 
in perfect conditions on a specially erected 5,000-seat stadium in the 
luxurious grounds of the Emirates Palace Hotel.

Karl Dickson crossed twice for the victors, with further efforts by George 
Lowe, Ceri Jones and Sam Smith ensuring a bonus-point win that takes them to 
the summit of Pool Four with only one round of games remaining.

The win, which stretched Quins' unbeaten run in all competitions to eight 
games, was achieved despite the absence of a host of leading names. With Danny 
Care and Nick Easter on England duty, and Mike Brown, Joe Marler, Chris 
Robshaw, Ugo Monye and George Robson with the Saxons, it was a largely 
second-string side which swept aside their Premiership rivals. O'Shea was 
delighted with the performance.

"On a day like today, when the conditions are like they are, you can get a few 
tries, which we did," he said. "We're really happy with the performance. Seven 
guys away between England and England Saxons, another 14 injured, I thought the 
guys did really well tonight."

After falling behind to an early Wasps penalty, Quins hit the front on seven 
minutes thanks to a superbly taken try by Dickson. Lowe added a second on 19 
minutes before a Nick Evans penalty and a further try from Jones just before 
the break established a 24-8 half-time lead that Quins never looked in danger 
of relinquishing. "We were clinical in the first half," O'Shea said. "I'm just 
really proud of the way the guys are going about their business at the moment."

Wasps replied with tries from Tom Varndell, above, and Joe Launchbury and a 
Mark Atkinson penalty, but were never really in the contest after a damaging 
opening half. "I'm angry and frustrated," Wasps' coach, Tony Hanks, said. 
"We've fallen back into the pattern we had at the beginning of the season – 
performing one week and not the next. We've got to keep working at it."
 