
Harzand, the Derby winner at Epsom three weeks ago, emerged victorious from a 
sustained duel with Idaho here on Saturday to add the Irish Derby to his record 
by half a length and confirm his status as the season’s leading middle-distance 
three-year-old colt.

Dermot Weld, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/globetrotting-pioneer-dermot-weld-fulfils-derby-dream>
 Harzand’s trainer, had suggested earlier this week that winning the Derby had 
“left a mark” on his colt, a son of the brilliant Sea The Stars. Harzand did 
not shrink from the battle, however, as Aidan O’Brien’s Idaho, who finished 
two-and-three-quarter lengths behind him at Epsom, drew alongside a furlong 
from home under Ryan Moore.

The two colts fought all the way to the line, and it was only in the final 
half-furlong that Harzand and Pat Smullen found more to edge out Idaho, with 
Stellar Mass back in third for Jim Bolger’s stable and Ed Dunlop’s Red Verdon, 
sixth home at Epsom, next across the line. Harzand was the fifth Derby winner 
owned by the Aga Khan to line up in the Irish equivalent three weeks later and 
the fifth to succeed, at odds of 4-6.

“It was a great performance by horse and rider,” Weld said. “I thought today’s 
race was an even better race than Epsom.

“The exciting thing about this race was the battle. Both of those horses 
quickened and picked up brilliantly and both jockeys tried to save that little 
bit more for the final challenge.

Harzand wins Derby after Dermot Weld makes late call to run the colt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/harzand-wins-derby-after-late-call-epsom-classic>
“I thought for a few strides that Idaho was going to beat us, but just in the 
last week, Harzand’s coat had begun to sheen and his blood picture came right. 
I didn’t do much work with him but I knew he had physically improved and Epsom 
had sharpened him. It was brilliant to watch those two great jockeys riding a 
finish on two very high-class colts.

“Pat has been a brilliant rider for many, many years. He won [the Irish Derby] 
on Grey Swallow here for me, and so many races all around Ireland and right 
across the world. He won the Matriarch for me one day [in California] and 
totally outrode the top riders in America.”

Smullen, winning the race for the second time, felt that Harzand had committed 
everything to the struggle in the closing stages.

“He’s such a great horse, he’s got such courage and determination,” Smullen 
said. “Ryan came with one good, determined run. I needed this horse to dig deep 
for me and he did. The pressure was on and we pulled it off.”

Sinndar, in the same famous green-and-red colours, completed the same Derby 
double in 2000 and went on to take the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe in the autumn. 
Harzand was cut to 8-1 from 10-1 for the Arc by Paddy Power, in a market headed 
by Postponed, the Coronation Cup winner, at 5-1. Idaho is a 20-1 chance to win 
at Chantilly on 3 October with the same firm.

Earlier on the card, Medicine Jack denied Aidan O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/22/aidan-o-brien-irish-derby-us-army-ranger-out-of-race>
 his 13th victory in the Group Two Railway Stakes with a half-length success 
from Peace Envoy, the 7-4 joint-favourite.

“He did what we thought he could do,” Ger Lyons, Medicine Jack’s trainer, 
said. “That’s not being cocky, we like him, but you never know when you’ve 
Ballydoyle to deal with.”

Antiquarium came from a long way off the pace to win the first running of the 
Northumberland Plate on Newcastle’s new Tapeta all-weather surface, and may now 
be trained for November’s Melbourne Cup over the same two-mile trip.

Seamour, the 13-2 favourite, surged to the front in the home straight and 
grabbed what seemed to be a decisive lead, but Antiquarium emerged in 
Godolphin’s blue colours to run him down under James McDonald and win by a 
length and a quarter.

McDonald, who was born in New Zealand, is the retained jockey for John O’Shea, 
Godolphin’s principal trainer in Australia.

“Maybe there’s a good one in mind for him in early November,” McDonald said, 
referring to the Melbourne Cup. “I’m sure he will [travel to Flemington], he 
showed a really good turn of foot, which we like Down Under. He has a turn of 
foot like a miler and plenty of pace.”
 