
HBOS abandoned its ambition to take over its rival Abbey National yesterday, 
as Spain's Banco Santander Central Hispano stepped up its efforts to convince 
investors to back its proposed £8.5bn offer.

James Crosby, chief executive of the combined Halifax and Bank of Scotland 
group, insisted he was not embarrassed at pulling out after six weeks of public 
deliberation over whether to mount a counter offer for Abbey. "We all worked 
very hard at this. We've done the right thing for our business. It was 
completely the right thing [to consider a potential offer]."

He relayed his decision not to spoil Abbey's agreed takeover by Santander in a 
call to Luqman Arnold, the Abbey chief executive, late on Tuesday, before 
announcing it to a stunned City yesterday.

Mr Crosby insisted the price HBOS would have to pay for Abbey, rather than the 
prospect of a potential Competition Commission investigation, had motivated the 
decision.

Abbey's shares, which had been supported by hopes of a full-scale auction, 
dropped 37.5p to 572.5p, falling below the 579p at which the Santander offer 
values each Abbey share for the first time since the Spanish bid was announced 
in late July.

HBOS shares rose 23.5p to 738p on apparent relief that it was not going to 
enter a costly takeover battle for Abbey.

Banking analysts said Santander's bid looked more certain now, particularly as 
Europe's competition commissioner yesterday gave his approval to the deal, two 
days earlier than scheduled.

Norrie Morrison, banks analyst at Fox-Pitt Kelton, saw the lack of a counter 
bid for Abbey as "unmitigatedly bad news for the sector". He said there was now 
little scope for consolidation among UK banks and that Santander could increase 
competition among the banks, potentially reducing their profitability.

Mr Crosby, who has positioned HBOS as a competitor to the major banks, 
promised Santander a "HBOS welcome".

Juan Inciarte, Santander's general manager, said: "We have a bit more wind in 
the sails." He was one of a number of the Spanish bank's executives, including 
chairman Emilio Botín and his daughter Ana Patrica, at a City presentation to 
win over sceptics.

The Spanish bank tried to reduce the possibility of any counter bidder being 
lured in by setting October 14 for the Abbey shareholder meeting to ratify the 
deal. Under City takeover rules a counter offer must be made 10 days before the 
shareholder meeting, suggesting rival offers must be tabled in the next 
fortnight.

The Spanish bank is applying for a listing of its shares on the London stock 
market to convince Abbey investors to keep the Santander shares they will 
receive if the deal is completed. The listing, how ever, will not be ready by 
the time the deal is due to be completed in November.

The Abbey takeover is structured as one Santander share - listed in euros on 
the Madrid stock exchange - plus 31p in cash for each Abbey share. Some City 
investors remain to be convinced about the offer and are expected to sell their 
Santander shares, even though the Spanish bank plans to pay its dividend 
quarterly in sterling.

Santander, which admitted yesterday it would cut 3,000 Abbey jobs, raised its 
synergy benefits from the deal to €670m (£458m) by 2007 - €220m from increased 
revenue, up from the original €110m, and €450m in cost cuts.

Its lengthy offer document will be posted to Abbey's 1.7 million shareholders 
tomorrow. Details of a potential £1.2m share option gain by outgoing Abbey 
chief operating officer Stephen Hester may be contained in the document.

Standard Life Investments backed the HBOS decision, saying it was a "statement 
of confidence in [HBOS's] own business prospects".

Abbey National share price in pence

February 26 2004 Abbey posts losses of £686m for 2003 

April 30 Reports suggest Abbey National has received an informal takeover bid 
from Spain's Banco Santander Central Hispano

July 23 Abbey National confirms it has received a takeover bid from BSCH. 
Shares in Abbey surge 16%

July 26 Abbey agrees to a takeover bid from BSCH for £8.3bn, subject to 
approval by its 1.7 million shareholders and the emergence of no other bidders

August 1 Halifax and Bank of Scotland (HBOS) banking group is rumoured to be 
mulling a £9bn counter-bid for Abbey

August 2 HBOS says it is at the preliminary stages of reviewing its position 
on Abbey and that "something or nothing may come of it"

August 23 BSCH tells Abbey union representatives that about 3,000 jobs will be 
lost if it completes the offer, saving it £300m

August 29 BSCH decides to speed up its takeover bid to head off moves from 
rival bidders. It now hopes to complete by November

September 15 HBOS announces it has scrapped plans to bid for Abbey, clearing 
the way for BSCH
 