
Architect Mike Davies doesn't just dress in red - he drives a red Jaguar with 
red leather seats, writes in red ink with a red pen and studies the stars from 
his roof through 22 red telescopes. "Colour is a vehicle to exploring life," 
says Davies, a founding partner of Richard Rogers Partnership. "The range 
inherent in a colour is so incredible." In his spare time he paints "symphonies 
in red", and he still adheres to an idealism of art that many left behind at 
college.

He had been doodling the Millennium Dome in red - a sketch similar to the one 
with which he started the £758m project in 1996. It was, he says, "a simple, 
honest, elegant and minimalist answer to a very big, simple problem".

With the day of judgment on his brainchild fast approaching, is he feeling the 
pressure? Not at all: "Having a deadline that can't be moved is fantastic. 
There is a palpable atmosphere that we are on a ship in the middle of the 
Atlantic and none of us can jump off. Everyone is committed to making it a 
success."

If this upbeat attitude sounds improbable, Ove Arup & Partners director Chris 
Wise, who has worked with Davies for more than 11 years, says it rings true to 
his character. "He is a real enthusiast and a dreamer," says Wise. "Maybe 
that's what enables him to do difficult projects like the dome. He'll take the 
bad and the good and do the best he can in situations which someone else would 
run away from."

This charm and enthusiasm overwhelms one's initial response to the garish 
attire. Wise says he was horrified when he first set eyes on him, but after a 
couple of hours it was apparent that Davies had the strength of character to 
carry it off.

Despite sometimes vitriolic media scrutiny, Davies says he has no qualms about 
the cost of the dome, and few about its design. "We are only the cover - which 
is £42m, or 7% of the total project cost."

He did not set out to create a great monument, but rather a natural public 
gathering place. "The dome should not be over-read. In fact, it is not an 
architecture project at all. It is a lightweight, loose-fit, friendly cover. It 
is the lightest large-scale structure on the planet. And it's festive. It is no 
accident it does this," he says, showing how the dome's yellow masts resemble 
outstretched arms in his doodle.

If Davies weathers controversy well, it maybe because he is no stranger to it. 
His other current project - the £8bn Heathrow Terminal Five for BAA, four times 
bigger than the dome and perhaps even more controversial - has been mired in a 
public inquiry since 1995. Davies expects to be the terminal's project director 
after the dome opens. Although the project has been dogged by delays, changes 
in the brief and cost-cutting drives, he is optimistic about its future: 
"Further expansion is inevitable - it just has to be done responsibly."

Has he ever hankered after his own practice? "No, because I'm a team player. 
We are an amazing problem-solving team. I have worked with seven of the guys 
for 27 years, so there is a certain commonality of feel to us that has been 
useful. The shorthand between us is very good. We have a lot of skill and 
experience from having done odd projects like Pompidou, Lloyd's, Channel 4, the 
dome. Compared with run-of-the-mill buildings, you learn so much."

He says the concept of a signature architect is an anachronism. "The days of 
Norman [Foster] have gone, the days of Richard have gone," he says. "The days 
of multidisciplinary top-end practices are here." As Davies is a man who has 
never lost the ideals of flower power, you tend to believe this non-egotistical 
stance.

Born in Wales, Davies lived in Egypt and Cyprus as a child and travelled with 
his geographer father to 18 countries before his 18th birthday. "It gave me a 
wonderful architectural education," he says. "I got to stand inside the Great 
Pyramid of Giza when I was 11 - although it was standing beside the Skylon at 
the 1951 Festival of Britain when I was nine that made me want to be an 
architect." He studied at theArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> Association with two of 
the other Richard Rogers founders, Marco Goldschmied and John Young. In those 
days, Davies wore electric purple. He went on to do an MA at UCLA and stayed in 
California to co-found a multidisciplinary practice, Chrysalis, which did 52 
projects in three years, including the Pepsi Cola pavilion at the Osaka Expo in 
1970. He joined Renzo Piano and Rogers shortly after the practice won the 
contract for the Pompidou Centre in 1971. It was while working on it that he 
switched from wearing purple to red: "I used to get my bottom pinched on the 
Paris metro. It was the code colour for the Parisian gay community," he 
explains, "so I thought it was time to change. I thought, what's another 
wonderfully rich, cheerful colour to explore?"

Sartorial idiosyncrasies aside, what distinguishes Davies from his partners? 
Rogers is the public, and increasingly political, face of the practice; 
Goldschmied is seen as the business brain; Young is credited with the design 
strength. What is Davies's forte?

"I enjoy all aspects of the process," he says, "but I particularly enjoy 
starting the concept design, because I think it's the most difficult and 
interesting thing to do. We have this 95% adage. Getting the concept right at 
the beginning is 80% of the battle. During the course of the design 
development, construction and evolution of the client's brief, you can regain 
another 15%. You never get the last five. That's why we continuously tune if we 
can."

In architectural circles, Davies is known as a technological evangelist with a 
keen interest in research and development, particularly in glass technology. He 
pioneered the concept of intelligent building skins in the 80s as part of a 
research project with Pilkington.

He is also credited with developing the practice's urban design and 
masterplanning expertise - he was in charge of the Royal Docks and Greenwich 
Peninsula masterplans. He says masterplanning inspires him: "If you can create 
a vision that enough people will subscribe to and support that it becomes the 
way forward, that is a powerful weapon."

The practice's policy of keeping staff numbers down is critical to its design 
approach. "We try to stay this size so that we can all remember and communicate 
with each other and all fit into one room. We have a directors' design meeting 
on a Monday that is an open meeting. Anybody can come in. If the office junior 
wants to come in and say, 'It's a load of bullshit', they can. There is no 
status to it. Whoever carries the intellectual argument wins the day."

This egalitarianism has been noted by Wise. "He is not a snob. He will chat to 
anyone about anything. Maybe that's why he's into climbing. Whoever you are 
climbing with, all that matters is getting from the bottom to the top." When 
Davies is not climbing at Harrison Rock in Tonbridge, he is sailing his yacht 
out of Poole harbour. "You need to get out on the ocean to maintain your 
equilibrium," he says. "You can't keep this up 365 days a year."

So the pressure does get to him? "As a practice, we are very aware that for 
the first three years it was called Richard Rogers's Millennium Dome. We know 
that, even though we are a small part of it, if it doesn't take off, it will be 
'Richard Rogers's dome failure', " he concedes.

Whatever happens, Davies will face the music, celebrating new year's eve 1999 
with Tony Blair and assembled dignitaries in the dome. Might the dawn of a new 
century precipitate another colour switch? "You never can tell. I know the next 
colour I would investigate would be yellow - but it might take a while to make 
the change and I might be dead before it happens. But I think it's very 
interesting, yellow. Very interesting."
 