
Peter Mandelson's insistence last week that he will never again be a minister 
- and rumours that he may become a European commissioner - raises the question 
of which grace and favour postings are worth taking these days. The usual 
consensus is that governor of Hong Kong was the best of the government 
reward-baubles. With that gone, it's a choice between irrelevance in the 
sunshine (governor of the Bahamas) or bureaucracy in the rain (EC 
commissioner). Then comes a long list of jobs - chairman of the Arts Council 
and so on - which play on rich men's guilt about having done so well and 
recompense them with free tickets.

But there remains one title available to those once known without irony as the 
great and the good which is important, influential and potentially fun. 
President of the British Board of Film Classification - the role from which
Andreas Whittam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith> 
resigned this week - is a position which can affect the development of both an 
art form and a society. Within 24 hours of the desk becoming empty, a trial 
screening by the BBFC of Baise-Moi (Rape Me), the most sexually-explicit 
mainstream film ever made, reminded us of the complexity of the decisions 
involved.

Appointed by Jack Straw, Whittam Smith was one of New Labour's great 
inspirations. He was a Tory by instinct but one who had run a newspaper (the 
Independent) which was the first in Britain to ignore the royal family 
completely and to print the c-word without protective asterisks. The job of 
censor involves arbitrating between conservative and libertarian instincts, and 
Whittam Smith was unusually equipped to judge both. In his dark pin-stripe and 
Garrick Club tie, he presided, with his chairman Robin Duval, over the biggest 
ever liberalisation of cinematic content.

Though this attracted criticism, the strategy was based on sound principles. 
The first was that explicit sexuality was now less generally shocking - and 
less likely to disrupt society through imitation - than graphic violence. The 
second was that the internet meant that any banned visual material was rapidly 
distributed without control and so it was preferable to have a controlled 
official release. But the most vital organising belief was that cinema is 
different from television. The images and language of TV have to be regulated 
because children or non-consenting adults can access them by accident. 
Classification of films allows grown-ups to decide what they want to see and so 
has more leeway.

Baise-Moi (which I saw during its art-house American release) is a porn film 
but with a feminist spin (women taking revenge on men) though that fails to 
redeem it. I'd give it a 95 certificate on the basis that most people have lost 
their sight by then, and I couldn't honestly advise anyone to watch it. The 
only grounds for releasing it are libertarian.

Baise-Moi, though, is a once-in-a-decade dilemma. The biggest problem of film 
censorship is not the reels featuring really operatic depravity, where the 
decision is simply between 18 or no certificate, but the borderline cases in 
which a minor infringement prevents a piece from reaching an audience which 
might enjoy and benefit from it.

There have been three recent examples - Shakespeare In Love, The End Of The 
Affair and the Australian moon-landing movie The Dish - where expletives in the 
script or a single sexual encounter lifted them closer to the dirty-mac 
category than they deserved. Anecdotal evidence suggests that many parents 
actually helped their teenagers to sneak in to these movies. I personally 
confess to showing a DVD of The Dish (cert 12) to a space-mad nine-year-old, 
coughing strategically during the riper Australian dialogue which earned the 
too-stringent certificate.

In addressing these skirmishes on the borderline, the next president of the 
BBFC should follow the American example and allow more plea-bargaining with 
producers and directors: lose that shot and we'll drop the age. 
Edge-of-certificate films could be sent out in clean and dirty versions with 
different certificates; the more shockable grown-ups could see the sanitised 
reels and complain less about the overall product.

When David Blunkett casts the stand-in for Whittam Smith, the precedent set by 
the outgoing candidate means that attention will inevitably fall on former 
media bosses now freelancing: Michael Grade, Peter Stoth-ard, Max Hastings and 
James Boyle, former overlords of Channel 4, the Times, the London Evening 
Standard and Radio 4 respectively. On the grounds of equality - and because the 
most sensitive censorship decisions frequently involve violence against women - 
the CVs of media divas including Mo Mowlam, Liz Forgan, Sue MacGregor and (an 
inevitable contender on such occasions) Margaret Jay are likely to be summoned 
to Whitehall.

But the enlightened reign of Whittam Smith indicates that it's a liberal Tory 
with a maverick streak who is best positioned to keep a balance between the 
sensationalist ambitions of directors, the sleazy greed of producers and the 
reflex shockability of the rightwing press. Another such conservative eccentric 
happens to be available in Max Hastings, who has the added advantage of being 
an obsessive movie-goer.

Sequels rarely work, but the best chance of a continuation of our most 
intelligent period of film censorship would be for Hastings to be offered the 
chance of being Godfather II to Whittam Smith's Godfather I.
 