
The offices of Mirage, the production company Anthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> owns with the producer 
Sydney Pollack, are in a former chapel in north London. The walls are decorated 
with huge prints of Kristin Scott Thomas and Juliet Stevenson, Jude Law and 
Nicole Kidman - images shot on the sets of Minghella's films.

But in a previous life the building was the studio of photographer Gered 
Mankowitz, whose pictures of the Rolling Stones and Jimi Hendrix have become 
some of the most iconic rock images of the 1960s.

Minghella is a writer and director with a giant passion for music, and the 
ghosts that haunt this building clearly thrill him. "The last person Mankowitz 
photographed here was Leonard Cohen," he says, "which is especially meaningful 
for me. Without Cohen, I don't think I'd have started writing."

It was Leonard Cohen's lyrics that first awoke a passion for words in a 
teenage Minghella. Ever since, he admits, music has remained a major influence 
on all his work. "Every other serious writer I know works in silence. But I 
can't. When I write, I lock myself in a room and put on very, very loud music. 
If the music's right, I can work for 18 hours straight. I only stop to change 
the CD."

Minghella sees himself more as a writer than a director - a writer who directs 
is how he describes it. But even before he starts working on a script he has to 
work out what the film sounds like.

"My idea of a great day is one spent making lists of music," he says. "I love 
having reasons to buy more albums, to accumulate more CDs, and spend hours 
poring over obscure tracks. On Cold Mountain there were 400 pieces of music at 
one point that I had assembled from various libraries and musicologists. The 
same was true for The Talented Mr Ripley. In a way that film only started to 
exist for me when I found out that it could be about music - about jazz and 
classical and their relationship."

Truly Madly Deeply, the first film Minghella made, didn't have a story until 
he found the right music. "All I had was the idea of two people meeting once a 
week to play classical music. Then I found what they were playing - a 
collection of Bach's sonatas - and the story came from there. Everything grew 
out of the music."

For Minghella's latest film, Breaking and Entering, PJ Harvey was his muse. "I 
listened to nothing else for months," he says. "I'm not entirely sure why - 
it's not the music the characters in the story would listen to. But hearing a 
woman's voice, especially one as raw as Polly Harvey's, was crucial to the 
writing process."

As you might expect from someone who draws so much creative fuel from music, 
Minghella gets deeply involved in the process of scoring his films. On every 
project he works with the composer Gabriel Yared, often in collaboration with 
other artists in a plethora of styles and from different backgrounds.

On The English Patient, Yared worked with Hungarian folk singer Marta 
Sebestyen. Jazz artist Guy Barker sung on the Ripley score, and for Minghella's 
last film, Cold Mountain, Yared collaborated with Alison Krauss, T-Bone Burnett 
and Jack White of the White Stripes.

"Gabriel is very generous with me," Minghella says. "He lets me invade his 
process in a way I'm sure no other composer would dream of. I suggest artists 
and he's versatile enough to create a score around what I give him."

Minghella and Yared start sketching out ideas for their scores very early in 
the production process of the film - sometimes at the same time Minghella is 
writing the first drafts of the script. "On Cold Mountain, Gabriel wrote some 
of the principal themes in my writing room - he was working on one side of the 
room writing the music and I was on the other writing the script. It's a very 
co-dependent relationship. It feels like we're making the movie together. In 
the same way that I'll write 10 or 20 drafts of the script, I expect Gabriel to 
keep changing and redrafting the score."

The way Minghella and Yared work, the score is built up in tandem with the 
script, evolving and growing as the words firm up on the page. But this working 
method isn't typical. Most films are written and shot before much attention is 
paid to the score. Then a composer comes in to write a soundtrack to accompany 
the scenes. It's a process Minghella is critical of.

"The music is an integral part of the look and feel of the film. It's not 
something you can throw on afterwards. But that's the way the industry often 
tries to do it. Directors will get almost to the end of the process of making 
the movie and then a composer is asked to come in, under enormous time 
pressure, and decorate the film. Often directors are bewildered by the sounds 
that subsequently appear over their scenes. It's like adding a new character 
into the story at the last minute."

Minghella says the score can also become the punching bag of the film - the 
place where the producer, the studio and the director squabble about how they 
want the movie to play. "It's the one thing that you can keep changing very 
late on in the process, so if someone's unhappy with the way a movie has turned 
out, they start messing with the score. The music becomes a battleground rather 
than what it should be, which is one of the elements that is present and 
organic in the process of creating a film."

On a critical level at least, Minghella's method works. Yared won an Oscar for 
the first score he did with Minghella, The English Patient, and has received 
nominations for every one since then.

"None of this is foolproof," says Minghella. "None of it's fixed. But if you 
give the music the time and space it deserves, you get startling results. 
That's obvious to me."

As part of the events Abbey Road is putting on this month, Minghella and Yared 
will be giving a masterclass on their way of working, accompanied by a live 
instrumental ensemble to illustrate the way they build up ideas for a score. 
Minghella has worked many times at the studio, but says he still thrives off 
its atmosphere.

"Like every other music fan in the world, I'm in awe of that building and its 
history. It's very hard to become casual about the studio, and I've never been 
there without getting a buzz. It's a fantastic church of music and it will 
never lose that magic for me."

The idea of the film festival receives his backing too. "It will remind people 
of the unsung role of the recording studio in the movies. That's an 
often-overlooked part of film-making, but certainly a crucial one. Perhaps it 
will remind audiences when they go to see a film that they're also listening to 
it and the extent to which the listening affects the seeing."
 