
Headingley will not stage an Ashes Test in 2013 or 2015 because Yorkshire 
cannot afford to bid to be a host venue. The county has announced a pre-tax 
loss of £2m for 2010, a year that the chairman, Colin Graves, described as a 
"financial disaster". He said it would costYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> up to £2m just to bid to be an 
Ashes venue and believes that given their losses, that simply represents too 
great a risk.

The news came just before an England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board meeting, at which the issue 
of the bidding process for Test matches was discussed at length. Sources at the 
ECB suggest that the current system, in which counties enter a blind auction to 
compete for major Tests, will be scrapped. Instead matches will be bundled into 
different packages, each with a fixed price. Ashes fixtures and matches against 
India will be in the top bracket of packages.

County cricket's finances are in a parlous state and the new method of 
allocating Tests is designed to add a little stability and predictability to 
the bidding process, allowing counties to budget more accurately for the costs 
of staging Tests.

Two Ashes series will be held in England within two years because the next 
contest in Australia has been brought forward to 2013-14 to avoid a clash with 
the 2015 Cricket World Cup in the same country, so the Ashes series scheduled 
for 2017 in England has been brought forward by two years to avoid a lengthy 
gap.

Graves was emphatic that under the current system Yorkshire simply cannot 
afford to gamble on losing a bid. "We don't have to put our hat in the ring 
because basically there's no point taking the risk of trying to get an Ashes 
Test match," he said. "For the next seven years, we are not going to put this 
business at risk. We did it last year and it backfired on us in a big way. 
Nobody anticipated it being a big risk, but it was."

The risk was the neutral Test between Pakistan and Australia held at 
Headingley last July. The county chose to host that match instead of a Test 
between England and Bangladesh, a decision that backfired badly when Pakistan 
won in a little over three days.

Despite a huge publicity campaign, the Yorkshire public stayed away. 
Headingley was barely a quarter full on each of the first three days. Graves 
estimates that the Test cost the county £1m. The ramifications of the poor 
turn-out are also being felt in Bradford, where the city council underwrote the 
match with £50,000 of public money, which has now been lost.

There was sympathy at the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> for the 
situation at Yorkshire, but the board was quick to point out that it faced a 
legal imperative to open up the bidding process to new grounds and that the 
refurbishment work that the bidding process has prompted at several of the 
older venues would eventually benefit fans across the country.

There will be no Test cricket at all at Headingley in 2012, but the club do 
have a staging agreement with the ECB between 2013 and 2019 which will see the 
smaller Test nations such as New Zealand play at the ground.

Across the Pennines, Lancashire's bid to stage an Ashes Test in 2013 is 
hanging in the balance. It depends on the outcome of a judicial review 
concerning the Tesco-funded redevelopment of Old Trafford. That will be held on 
28 February, but there is also a chance that the case could go to appeal.

Such a delay would preclude the possibility of Old Trafford staging an Ashes 
Test in 2013 because of the ensuing delay to construction work. The upshot is 
that, for the first time since 1890, an Ashes series could take place in 
England without a Test at one of the Roses county venues. Chester-le-Street 
will host an Ashes Test for the first time.
 