
A fit and healthy teenage rugby player died 12 hours after taking treatment 
for acne, a coroner said today.

Recording a narrative verdict, Mary Hassell said Shaun Jones, 14, died "as a 
result of complications of medical treatment".

Shaun, who was described by his mother as "vain" about his appearance, saw his 
doctor about spots on his back and shoulders after learning his friends had 
been given medication to deal with similar problems.

The 6ft schoolboy, of Rhydyfelin, near Pontypridd in South Wales, who had 
previously used Clearasil to treat the spots, was diagnosed with mild acne and 
given a prescription, Cardiff coroner's court heard.

When he went to his local pharmacy with his mother Clare, he was told the drug 
was out of stock. Shaun and his mother were informed that the pharmacist had 
spoken to the doctor, and he could be given different tablets which were the 
same as the other medication.

Mrs Jones noticed there was no safety leaflet included in the box, but thought 
nothing of it at the time.

Shaun took the medication with a glass of water just before going to bed at 
10.30pm on 20 October last year. Little more than an hour later, he complained 
to his parents of shortness of breath and tightness in his chest.

Mrs Jones initially contacted an out-of-hours GP service but was told no 
doctor was available. When Shaun's condition deteriorated, he was taken to the 
Royal Glamorgan hospital, Llantrisant, by ambulance in the early hours of the 
next morning.

Despite treatment there, and at the University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 
where he was transferred, Shaun died at 10.40am the following day.

Doctors at the University Hospital of Wales believe an "idiosyncratic 
reaction" to the acne medication could have caused his death.

Hassell said she would write a report to the lord chancellor's office 
underlining the importance that "doctors prescribe drugs and doctors make 
amendments and patients receive drugs with the correct information attached".
 