
In a parliamentary career that will have spanned 36 years when he draws it to 
a close in May, Stephen Dorrell has always been on the patrician left of the 
Tory party. “I was a wet,” he says gleefully of his early days as an MP, when 
Margaret Thatcher’s premiership was in its infancy.

He arrived at Westminster in 1979 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/person/1442/stephen-dorrell> as the 
youngest member of the Commons, aged 27. Always a polite, cerebral figure, 
Dorrell is one of those politicians who rebelled enough to be noticed, but not 
so regularly as to impede his career.

Under Thatcher, he spoke out early against changes to immigration rules that 
he thought threatened civil rights and opposed Geoffrey Howe’s policy of 
keeping interest rates high to squeeze out inflation. “I didn’t agree with all 
the analysis of the group around Thatcher,” he says. The then prime minister, 
though infuriated by the young Dorrell at times, was impressed by his clarity 
of thought and shunted him into the whip’s office, where he had to toe the line.

He became a junior health minister in 1990 and under John Major was seen as 
deft enough to speak for the government on crises as grave as Black Wednesday.

“I’ve always quite enjoyed dealing with journalists – I characterise a 
television interview as being like a batsman at a crease,” he said at the time. 
“I try to avoid being out and try to score runs when you get an opportunity.”

Major saw Dorrell as a possible successor, promoting him to the cabinet, first 
as heritage secretary and then as health secretary when he was just 43.

Now, having stepped down after four years as chairman of the health select 
committee last June, he is less worried about occupation of the crease, and 
more willing to play his shots.

He supports David Cameron and does not think he has swung the party to the 
right. “It is very hard to argue that a party led byDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> now, and Margaret Thatcher 
then, has moved to the right,” he says. But talking to theObserver, he speaks 
his mind on what he regards as serious errors made by the Cameron government on 
health, the issue that is likely to be front and centre of the general election 
campaign.

Asked if he regards the Health and Social Care Act of 2012, driven through the 
Commons by Andrew Lansley in the face of furious opposition from the health 
sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/20/nhs-reform-health-bill-passes-vote>
, as the biggest mistake of this parliament he is in no doubt at all. “Yes I do 
agree with that. The reason I agree with it is partly for the political 
fallout, but the thing I care most about is the lost opportunity in the health 
and care system.”

In a dig at Lansley, he says politicians these days don’t think through their 
ideas and head off instead in search of headlines. In Thatcher’s day he 
believes there was more intellectual and policy rigour. “Politicians have 
always been interested in headlines, of course they have. But they have become 
more willing to settle for a story than a policy,” he said.

Dorrell voted for the Lansley bill – which abolished primary care trusts and 
strategic health authorities and transferred£80bn of healthcare funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jul/06/stephen-dorrell-ringfencing-nhs-budget>
 to clinical commissioning groups – because it introduced “some worthwhile 
changes” such as health and wellbeing boards. But he says the massive 
institutional reorganisation was largely unnecessary and meant the government 
overlooked the far more urgent challenge of improving the NHS so that fewer 
people have to go into hospital, and that those who do are discharged as soon 
as possible.

“I certainly think that it would have been far better done by a very 
minimalist change in the law to achieve the necessary changes rather than 
trying to redraw the management structure, which isn’t the problem anyway,” he 
says. “There is no such thing as a perfect management structure, but the irony 
is that every time you change the management structure, the managers focus on 
changing management. What they don’t do is focus on changing healthcare.”

What they should have done, he argues, is integrate health and social care, 
and end a situation in which people “go to A&E because it is the only place the 
lights are on”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/may/08/integrating-health-social-care-ease-pressure-nhs>
Currently, information about an elderly person is held by the social care 
system, the social housing system, the pharmacist, the community nurse, the GP 
– “all of them separate systems; none of them related to each other. How can 
you deliver care when you are running this massive multiplicity of 
uncommunicative bureaucracies?

“Not only do they not exchange information or use information with each other. 
They also have separate budgets. The example is the handrail which stops 
admission to the fracture clinic. Prevention is not merely cheaper. It is 
better.”

Asked why his own party failed to see the obvious, he says: “You will have to 
ask them that.” The result is that the crisis remains to be addressed. Did 
Lansley simply miss the point? “Yes that is my view,” says Dorrell.

He insists that he told the powers that be at the time that they were on the 
wrong road. “I remember very well writing it down, expressing my view and being 
told ‘we have thought about your view, we respect it, but we disagree with it.’ 
”

As he counts the days until he leaves parliament, he despairs of much of the 
political debate on health, saying the main parties pretend to have differences 
that do not exist. It is impossible, he admitted, to “depoliticise” health 
policy completely but “that doesn’t mean that the parties have to invent 
disagreements where there aren’t any.

“That is where the health debate is so depressing. If there were [such 
differences] how come we invented trusts and the amendment they [Labour] had 
was foundation trusts? We had health authorities and they had PCTs. We have now 
got CCGs. These are angels-on-a pinhead territory.” He says the Tories would 
benefit from developing a “common agenda” with the other parties on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and care, even “drawing on quite a 
lot of what Labour says”.

Having failed to persuade a Conservative-led government to change direction 
from his seat in parliament, he will now try to do so from outside, working as 
a senior adviser on health at management consultants KPMG, a private sector 
adviser to ministers. “The theme I will be developing is the case that I have 
made as chair of the select committee: that health and care is a sector which 
needs to change.”
 