
Healthcare experts today responded with scepticism and anxiety to government 
plans for the most radical overhaul of the NHS inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> for nearly 60 years.

The 10-year programme to reshape healthcare in the capital, under which a 
network of 150 "polyclinics" would take over much of the work of existing local 
hospitals, also provoked exasperation from patients' groups.

A spokeswoman for the Patients' Association said patients were already 
"confused and exhausted" by the many recent NHS reforms.

"We don't need to change the structures of the NHS every couple of years, or 
months," she said. "We should develop the services we already have rather than 
undergo another massive spend to the detriment of hospitals already providing a 
service.

"Can ministers please take on board what all these reforms are like for the 
patients? The public are so confused with so many massive changes."

Under the plan, published today, polyclinics equipped with x-ray and 
ultrasound machines would provide up to 50% of the outpatient treatment that is 
currently carried out in hospitals.

The British Medical Association (BMA) warned that the polyclinic model would 
create super-sized surgeries in which patients would be unlikely to see the 
same doctor every time.

Dr Tiz North, chairman of the BMA's London regional council, said: "The 
concept of care closer to patients' homes may sound appealing, but polyclinics 
have the potential to destabilise and fragment existing hospital and GP 
services.

Nick Bosanquet, a consultant director of the thinktank Reform and professor of 
health policy at Imperial College London, said there was "a complete lack of 
any sound evidence base for the polyclinic concept".

Prof Bosanquet said the plan, which the newly appointed health minister Sir 
Ara Dazi devised, would lead to "complete gridlock in the capital's health 
services".

The plan was extremely vague both in terms of cost and where the services 
would be located, he added.

"It is right in diagnosing serious problems in London's health services, but 
it is completely wrong in its policy approach," he said. "The whole thing is 
slipping towards disaster."

The professor said there was no precedent for polyclinics in the UK, adding 
that they had been discredited in Soviet Russia.

He agreed with Sir Ara's assessment that there were urgent problems with the 
quality of care in some outer London hospitals, but he said these difficulties 
could be more simply addressed through merging or twinning NHS trusts. Access 
to GP services could be improved by opening more walk-in centres offering 
services in the evening and at weekends.

Prof Bosanquet added that London GPs and hospitals were already pursuing 
reforms to improve the quality and efficiency of their services, and he warned 
that Sir Ara's approach would undermine promising local initiatives.

The Conservative's health spokesman, Andrew Lansley, said: "There are places 
where family doctor services are weak and a polyclinic could deliver better 
community access to services. But there are other areas of London where GPs are 
much stronger and there is no case for shutting down hundreds of local GPs' 
surgeries.

"Nor is there any sense in shipping out services from local district general 
hospitals if they are viable, successful and accessible."

Under Sir Ara's plan, hospitals would take on different roles. Local ones 
would do the bulk of routine work, while acute hospitals would undertake 
complex and specialist work. Three trauma units would take seriously injured 
patients.

The campaign group London Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Emergency said the report left nine major acute hospitals facing closure or 
downgrading.

The proposals would see accident and emergency, maternity and critical care 
"centralised on a narrow range of favoured sites", it said.

Geoff Martin, the group's head of campaigns, said: "This review of services by 
NHS London is a package of cash-led cuts to local services dressed up as a 
rational planning process.

"We have no objection to developing services, but not at the expense of local 
accident and emergency and maternity units. If these plans are bundled through, 
Londoners can expect long journeys through the capital's busy streets in a 
blue-light ambulance in order to access emergency care.

"The public know that it's those extra minutes in transit that threaten lives, 
and that's why they oppose these cuts."
 