
This autumn, Blizzard Entertainment took one of the most powerful decks from 
its collectible card game Hearthstone and obliterated it. This was not the 
first time the company had decided to significantly alter, or “nerf”, an aspect 
of its hugely successful title, but it was the most high profile, and caused a 
storm of controversy within the Hearthstone community. Many thought it was the 
nerf to end all nerfs.

But it wasn’t. 

It turns out that while nerfing cards is often considered a failure of design 
among the makers of physical collectible card games, it may be a feature of 
Hearthstone. “I’m very confident there will be more nerfs in Hearthstone’s 
future,” admits production director Jason Chayes during an interview with the 
Guardian at the recent Blizzcon event. “Actually, I’m 100% sure of that.”

It’s a bold statement. In an increasingly competitive scene, where Hearthstone 
players must build their own combinations of cards to do turn-based battle 
against other participants, it is vital that no possible formation becomes 
dominant. In collectible card games, nerfing generally occurs when players have 
found an exploit that gives them an unfair edge over competitors that makes the 
whole experience less fun for everyone.

This was definitely the case this year for Blizzard, with a deck known as Grim 
Patron Warrior. This popular selection included the Grim Patron, a card capable 
of replicating itself if it survived damage, and the Warsong Commander, which 
allowed some cards to strike immediately when summoned. The result of combining 
these cards was an instant army of immensely destructive capabilities, often 
wiping out an opponent’s force in one turn. Although widely used among pro 
players, it was inarguably over-powered especially as when combined with 
another card, the Frothing Berserker, it could offer a one turn kill. As 
complaints grew, Blizzard finally decided to act, reducing the power of the 
Warsong Commander card in a patch in October.

While many agreed that the game was more balanced as a result, nerfing always 
prompts a backlash from the community. Players are a passionate and, at times, 
volatile bunch – when a developer tinkers with a game to remove an advantage 
they’ve enjoyed, factions within the user base can respond with outright 
hostility. There have even been instances where players have responded to 
developers nerfing their game withthreats on social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/jul/29/twitter-culture-gamer-rage>
.

So Chayes’ admission that nerfing is an integral part of Hearthstone could be 
read as tossing a hand grenade at the game’s 30-million-plus community. But, as 
Chayes tells it, Hearthstone is a different beast to most games. His argument 
is that, as Blizzard is committed to adding ever more cards to the game’s 
already sizeable catalogue, further nerfing is inevitable because player skill 
levels quickly surpass those of the developers. There will always be exploits 
the team didn’t catch – and that millions of dedicated fans will quickly work 
together to uncover.

“This is the way it works: we do a lot of testing internally to the point 
where we feel like the game’s in a pretty good place [before an expansion],” 
says Chayes. “Then, wouldn’t you know, we ship the expansion or we ship the 
adventure, and the community has a lot more experience and lot more people 
trying things than we do and discovers new things that we’d never even thought 
of. Then it makes sense to come in and make a change.”

Chayes points out, however, that the Hearthstone team is very careful about 
when to do it, and which cards they nerf, as they don’t want to appear heavy 
handed. “[When we nerf Hearthstone we’re] taking creations, like a new deck 
type, that came out of the community and making it no longer viable,” he says. 
“One of our goals is to make sure that our players know that we’re valuing 
their investment in the game, whether that be time investment or monetary 
investment through purchasing cards.”

“We don’t want to nerf cards anymore than we absolutely have to.”

As Chayes tells it, the decision to tweak Warsong Commander wasn’t taken 
lightly and came as much from the community. “The biggest problem with Grim 
Patron, which ultimately led to the change [for Warsong Commander] is that we 
received a lot of feedback from players – which we agreed with – that it wasn’t 
very fun to play against and, specifically, to lose against,” he says.

According to Chayes, the reports of player dissatisfaction presented a wider 
problem for Hearthstone because it meant the game was falling into a 
degenerative state. Warsong Commander was ultimately limiting the places where 
Hearthstone could go, so the team made the decision to nerf it in order to 
revitalise Hearthstone’s metagame – the strategic element that involves 
attempting to understand and anticipate an opponent’s deck.

“Nerfs are something we take very seriously,” Chayes continues. “In the last 
year we’ve been very deliberate and very tentative about nerfing things more 
than we had to. The reason for this is that we want the community to push the 
metagame forward rather than us coming in with a heavy hand and changing cards. 
The reality is, there will always be a ‘most powerful deck’ in Hearthstone. As 
soon as you nerf one deck another one will emerge.”

Chayes won’t be drawn on what cards may be nerfed in the future because 
although he does say cryptically there are “one ore two” the team is looking 
at. But then, a lot of the time, he argues that the game’s player-base does a 
good job of ensuring that this action is unnecessary. “Right after an expansion 
comes out and a ton of cards are introduced, it blows up the meta, and decks 
and combos start emerging that no one imagined,” he says. “That by itself 
starts to address these issues; we might see a dominant deck start to get 
marginalised by the player-base’s new combinations. Then the tinkerers come out 
and start to refine those decks to point where they start to dominate.”

`Chayes is adamant that player concerns – and by extension the in-game 
experience – are a key consideration before such a decision is taken. 
“Ultimately our main goal is thinking about what’s right for the game,” he 
says. “While feedback is very important, we have to ensure that Hearthstone can 
be a game ten years from now. We have to move towards a place where the game is 
in a healthy state for many years to come.”

So it seems Hearthstone’s future is inescapably intertwined with Blizzard’s 
practise of occasionally nerfing its game. While controversy rages within the 
CCG sector – and within the Hearthstone community itself – about the practise, 
it has become a part of development and user-testing. In a lot of ways this 
symbolises modern game development, where constant downloadable updates and 
patches ensure that a game is never really released in a complete state 
anymore. Nerfing is here to stay.

 * Hearthstone: how a game developer turned 30m people into card geeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/hearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin> 