
On Monday, Activision announced a deal to acquire the smartphone and online 
gaming specialist King for $5.9bn, instigating one of the largest takeover bids 
in recent gaming history. The move was greeted with surprise by analysts who 
pointed to King’s heavy reliance on a single title, Candy Crush Saga, which 
appears to be stagnating, as well as the company’s declining revenues – a point 
underlined on Thursday when King announced its third-quarter earnings, down to 
$180m, compared with $216m a year ago.


Many compelling reasons for the bid were also put forward. Activision has very 
little presence in mobile or casual gaming, while King has a user base of 500 
million; most of Activision’s titles are aimed at the “core” gaming audience, 
while King brings a more diverse global audience; and King has Candy Crush Saga 
(which, at its peak, was generating a million dollars a day), as well as other 
reasonably successful titles.

But one interesting element has been largely overlooked so far: King’s 
foothold in the “skill-based gaming” sector, where players pay a fee to compete 
in online tournaments for cash prizes. Its dedicated site, Royalgames.com, 
offers multiplayer tournaments using a range of casual brands, including 
puzzle, “match three” and pool titles. King is in competition with sites such 
as Skillz and MGTplay, which specialise in cash play tournaments.

The advantage of the sector is that it gives players the chance to win money 
while completely circumnavigating strict online gambling laws in the US. It’s 
still a comparatively limited business (Skillz, a leading company in the 
sector, raised $13m in funding last year and claimed to be running 50,000 prize 
competition a day), but insiders wonder if the growing popularity of eSports is 
creating a new generation of gamers who are comfortable with the idea of 
playing competitively for money.


So is there a chance Activision is eyeing up a skill-based gaming future for 
Hearthstone, its major mobile brand?Speaking to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/04/bobby-kotick-king-deal-activision-blizzard>
 this week, Kotick said it was a possibility. “When you think about the future, 
certainly games of skill for prize play or cash play is an opportunity and one 
that we’ll seriously consider.” Hearthstone is doing fine right now, earning 
$20m a month, but adding an extra incentive to committed players may well be on 
way to ensure revenues remain consistent when more casual users start to drift 
away.

The free-to-play gaming specialist Nicholas Lovell is unconvinced. “Broadly, 
senior executives and investors are frequently super excited about cash 
prizes,” he says. “They reason that if people will enjoy playing the game just 
for the fun, or the kudos, or the satisfaction, then they would obviously enjoy 
it much more if there was cash at stake. Of course executives and investors 
think like this: it is their job to risk money on ventures that they hope will 
make them money.

“But for many players, this is not why they play games. They play for 
escapism, to relax, or to have something to talk about with their friends. 
Adding a financial incentive to this increases the enjoyment forsome players, 
but it massively decreases it for others by increasing the intensity, and the 
risk, and the potential for loss.”

The developer and analyst Oscar Clark acknowledges these issues while 
recognising the potential. “Hearthstone is an idea game to have a skill 
component as long as that aspect is kept separate,” he says. “It would need to 
be a proposition for the elite player – an extra option, not an essential. Not 
everygame can pull that off.

“I would start with virtual item stakes as an entry point to skill gaming; 
with ticketed tournament entry and real money prize competitions as the end 
goal. The original Magic: The Gathering has a mechanism where both players put 
up one card as a bounty for competitive play. Having a tier of play where the 
player can risk a random card – of a certain level of rarity – could be a way 
to introduce players to the concept; using the ‘doubler’ method from Backgammon 
would allow players to push their opponent to up the stakes or concede the 
game.”

It’s all theoretical at the moment, but the fact that Kotick would not rule 
out cash prizes in relation to Hearthstone is interesting. Activision is 
already investing heavily in the idea of competitive gaming: in October, the 
company announced the formation of its own dedicated eSports division to 
explore the pro-gaming potential of big brands such as Call of Duty and 
Destiny. The sector makes about $200m a year, but it’s possible that Activision 
has an eye on the 226 million people (according to research firm Newzoo) who 
watch eSports, but perhaps don’t participate.

If this is the plan, Hearthstone – which has more similarities with poker than 
it does with the big moba and FPS titles that dominate pro-gaming – may well be 
the place to experiment. According to Koitck, however, it won’t be for some 
time. “Right now the focus is on keeping the network thriving as it is and 
growing as it is. But I think that in time you’ll see the opportunity to change 
the commercial opportunities that come from those audiences.”
 