
Hearthstone: how a game developer turned 30m people into card geeks, part one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/hearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin>

Every Hearthstone match starts in the same way. 

Players select a hero class from the nine alternatives, each with their own 
specific abilities. Next, they build a deck of 30 cards to act as their hero’s 
army, most with attack and defence stats as well as special modifiers – they 
may be able to add health to fellow minions when played onto the table, or 
“buff” or augment other cards in order to create powerful combination attacks. 
Every card also has a mana value, which effectively represents the cost of 
playing it.

Participants take it in turns to place their cards on the table, then choose 
to attack either their opponent’s minion cards or their hero. Players start 
with one mana crystal each, initially restricting them to less powerful cards, 
but with each turn, the mana count rises opening up more devastating options. 
When one hero’s defence count hits zero, the match is over. This is how over 30 
million players spend many hours every week.

But why is it so compelling?

The beauty of the game is its mix of charm, intuitive design and reasonable 
depth. It’s easy to get into, with a straightforward turn-based mechanic and 
clear rules, but the combination of minion, spell and weapon cards, means that 
players can produce complex and multifaceted strategies that shift and mutate 
depending on the next card drawn from their pack.

“The interesting thing about Hearthstone is that it actually does much less 
than Magic and other CCGs,” says game designer Will Luton, who is also a 
tournament Magic player. “Magic is such a complex game that even the smallest 
tournament organiser has to employ judges, who are graded through incredibly 
rigorous training and testing procedures by Wizard of the Coast’s tournament 
governing body the DCI. Even top pros are seen to call judges and ask questions 
on card interactions or specific timings of events and in some cases there is 
no answer and cards need to be amended or rulings made in Gatherer, Magic’s 
card database.”

Hearthstone is much more simple, removing elements that upset the pace and 
fluidity, like the ability to ‘respond’ – to play off turn in response to 
another player’s card or effect. “It was certainly more complex when we 
started,” says Hearthstone lead designer, Eric Dodds. “With the taunt mechanic, 
which lets a Minion protect the hero from any incoming attacks, we originally 
thought the player should have to select which attacker to step in front of. 
But we tried it and we didn’t like the break in flow between turns. So we 
simplified the mechanic. We made a number of changes like that over time.”

Luton agrees that this has made the game much more accessible, but it also 
retains enough of what makes paper CCGs so successful. Tactics that will work 
in more complex games, work here: the underlying structures and demands are the 
same.

“All CCG games can be abstracted out and considered as a constant exchange of 
value,” he says. “A good player can come in to Hearthstone and apply long 
tested theories, such as tempo vs card advantage or beatdown theory, very 
effectively. For example, they’ll know that polymorphing a creature and then 
hitting it with a Fireball is expending two cards to remove one minion and so 
is a poor value exchange, whilst a new player probably won’t make that 
consideration. But over time, and with enough exposure to theory, players start 
to consider every play they make from a value perspective.”

Matt Burke, an experienced Hearthstone player and YouTuber agrees that while 
the game is super intuitive, it retains just enough complexity to allow player 
invention. With the large number of cards available – many of them 
interoperable – the community is able to construct its own strategies and 
combinations. As with chess, different tactics go in and out of fashion as the 
player-base evolves. At the same time, the game shares similarities with poker 
– something the design team played a lot of, and borrowed elements from – 
including a “mulligan” sequence at the start where participants are able to 
reject cards. Although players build custom decks, they don’t know which cards 
will be dealt into their hand during play so they have to work with what 
they’re given. And chance sometimes throws up some blockbusting opportunities.

“Whenever anyone plays Hearthstone there are always some really cool card 
combos you hope you can pull off,” says Burke. “If you get really lucky, it is 
such a great feeling. For example, using the coin to get an Alarm-o-Bot out on 
turn two and the next turn it summons Ysera, a legendary dragon card, or having 
two Knife Jugglers out before flooding the board with Onyxia and her whelps, 
and watching the Jugglers go to town throwing their daggers, clearing the board 
and eventually winning me the game. These are one of a kind moments; it’s so 
exciting when it happens!”

The world is the board

The intrinsic appeal of the gameplay is also augmented by the attractive 
aesthetics and by a very clever user interface. The team decided that, although 
this is a digital game, they wanted it have have the tactile feel of playing 
with physical cards across an actual table. When you select a card it makes the 
same swishing noise you get when drawing a real card from a pack; when you 
place it, there’s the satisfying impact sound, like plastic on a wooden table 
top. “A big part of the charm that we’re striving for – and this is reflected 
through out the game’s user interface – is this notion of physicality,” says 
production director, Jason Chayes. “The cards themselves feel like they have 
weight, that they’re lovingly crafted out of these exotic materials by artisans 
in the Hearthstone works in Azeroth. We wanted to make sure there was a feeling 
of imaginative persistence in the game.”

On top of this, the setting of the game also mimics a physical space. “We 
experimented with a lot of different conceits for where you are in Hearthstone, 
and why you are playing,” says Chayes. “It wasn’t until about halfway through 
development where we had this notion that you’re inside a tavern playing on a 
little miniature board. We thought, this is a great way to play, it works with 
all our values, it has a lot of charm.”

A key problem though, was maintaining the sense of having another person 
sitting opposite you at the table. Hearthstone is an online title so the 
opponent could be anywhere in the world – and there’s no camera or onscreen 
avatar, so you can’t see them. To add a social element then, Blizzard provided 
a small selection of phrases that players can select and send to their 
opponent. It’s just stuff like greetings and friendly compliments, but it’s as 
close as th eteam was willing to get to interaction.

“Part of the notion of accessibility was to make it a very safe environment,” 
says Chayes. “We wanted to ensure that you could come in and have fun and not 
have to worry about negative comments and vitriol. Because of that we had to 
make sure that the interaction with other players was within a confined 
environments. But at the same time we didn’t want to lose that sense of sitting 
across a table in the real world – we knew that interaction was very important. 
You need to be able to say, ‘hey great game’, or even have the ability to 
evolve that into a friendship after the match . We knew if we shut that off 
completely you may as well be playing an AI.”

The team also introduced elements to make the board more interactive, more 
digital. During each match, players are able to interact with the scenic 
elements around the board, perhaps loading a miniature catapult or stroking the 
wings of a dragon. Eric Dodds says the idea was inspired by the movie Jumanji 
about a board game that comes to life. Chayes insists it was about more than 
simple aesthetics. “The idea for these ‘clickables’ came quite earlier,” he 
says. “While playing physical card games, a lot of players like to shuffle the 
cards in their hand when it’s not their turn, slide them around – almost like a 
bit of a distraction. We wanted something similar, something to keep you busy 
while your opponent was playing. So once we’d made the decision to focus on the 
physicality of this board and this little virtual environment, we introduced 
the notion of clickable scenic elements to address that need.”

Depth vs balance

Throughout 2012, Team Five began an escalating series of beta tests. The 
prototype first went to Blizzard’s QA team before being shared with other 
development teams within the company. August 2013 saw a limited closed beta, 
followed by an open beta in January 2014.

“Through each of these phases we were getting a lot of ideas about how to push 
the game in new directions,” says Chayes whose team has continued to tweak the 
balance of play after the official launch. “You can see this if you look 
through the history of the cards we’ve adjusted over time. Unleash the Hounds 
and Starving Buzzard come to mind - these are cards that we’ve come back to a 
few times just to perfect the balance.

“There’s a lot of interest in building very fast-paced rush decks - these 
particular cards end up supporting that approach very effectively so we want to 
make sure that we don’t eliminate rush as a strategy, it’s a very important 
part of the game. But that said, it’s also important that no particular deck 
type dramatically overwhelms the meta of the game. There have been others - 
warlock has a few cards we’ve come back to – but overall we’ve felt pretty 
happy with the balance, we’ve done smaller incremental changes over time, 
rather than wholesale change to the way any particular class works.”

Approaching the April 2014 launch of the game, there were still doubts within 
Blizzard about its marketability. As Chayes explains, “We had tons of 
experiences as we were designing the game where we were saying to people, ‘hey 
you should check out Hearthstone’, we were really excited to show it to people. 
But the feedback, even internally, was ‘oh that’s not really my type of game’. 
That was a big challenge to us. How do we introduce this game from a genre that 
players have existing biases around? We just wanted people to pick it up and 
give it a shot.”

To facilitate that the company made a crucial decision: Hearthstone would be 
free-to-play. It costs nothing to download the game, and new card packs can be 
bought with in-game currency earned through winning matches – but players can 
also buy packs if they don’t want to wait. It’s a complex, controversial model, 
and some players persist in calling Hearthstone a ‘pay to win’ game simply 
because of the time it takes to accrue a deck with a lot of powerful 
“legendary” minion cards if you’re not prepared to spend money.

But what it’s meant is that a wider audience has come onboard – people who 
would never have paid for a fantasy-themed strategy game. “You can essentially 
collect every card in the game without spending a penny, which is what I’m 
trying to do,” says actor Greg Austin, who runs a a gaming YouTube channel 
where he regularly plays Hearthstone. “Sure, it’s going to take a long time, 
but as a gamer, I prefer to earn what is given to me, and when I manage to open 
up that awesome legendary card I’ve been yearning for, it feels that much 
sweeter than if I had paid for it. Also, I don’t feel punished for not having 
paid to get every single card in the game yet, as the element of chance 
features very strongly – but fairly – in Hearthstone. That leads to some 
downright epic game-changing moments.”

After launch, as the player base swelled, something else was happening. 
Hearthstone was becoming a spectator sport. YouTube streams sprang up 
specialising in showing off cool decks and winning tactics, and very quickly, 
games were being streamed over Twitch gaining huge viewer figures.

Hearthstone goes professional

Then, of course, the game was adopted into the growing eSports phenomenon 
where pro-gamers compete in global tournaments. This year’s world 
championships, set to be held as part of the massive Blizzcon festival this 
autumn, will boast a $250,000 prize pot and an online audience of millions. The 
neat thing about Hearthstone is that there’s a sense of engagement between 
viewer and participant – unlike other pro strategy titles like Starcraft II, 
which move at a hundred mouse clicks a minute, it’s slow enough that you can 
see what the player is thinking about when they’re toying with their cards. 
Watching decent players isn’t just a visual spectacle, it’s a viable learning 
experience.

Chayes says the team is surprised at the size of Hearthstone’s eSports 
presence, but always felt the game had pro-gaming potential – and spectator 
appeal. “Before we ever released it to the public, we held an internal 
tournament and had one of our designers, Ben Brode, shoutcast the final. We 
were able to fill up our studio theatre – people were getting all rowdy, 
yelling at the screen, throwing things at each other, it was awesome. We saw 
that happening and we thought, wow, this is more than just a match being fought 
between two opponents.

“After the closed beta it was really fun to watch the rise of the Hearthstone 
community, to see personalities start to develop with different styles, 
interacting with their audiences in different ways. At this stage we’re just 
trying to catch up, throwing in new features for the game to help enable that.”

Since the launch, just over a year ago, there has been a series of expansions, 
including Goblins and Gnomes and Blackrock Mountain, adding new cards and 
gameplay items. In June, Blizzard launched a new game mode, Tavern Brawl, which 
opens up limited timed competitions with unique rules. But the development team 
is aware it has to ensure the game remains approachable as it matures.

“It’s an ongoing topic about how to not overwhelm players,” says Chayes. 
“There are a lot of ways we ensure that: looking at the packs, we haven’t 
introduced any new key words at this point - it’s still taunt – we have the 
freeze mechanic, divine shield, all these ways to interact with your minions, 
but we really want to be careful about bringing new ones out. It’s the same 
thing with new classes, we get a lot of requested for things like monks and 
death knights. Right now, we feel like there’s a lot to digest with the classes 
we have. We feel like there’s a lot of design space to explore with all the 
various abilities and mechanics we’ve already introduced.”

Whatever happens, the same small team of designers, pooled together seven 
years ago to play about with a weird game prototype, is still looking after 
Hearthstone. They’re still sort of baffled about what’s happened.

“It’s crazy to think it’s only been a year,” says Dodds. “A number of people 
weren’t sure it would work – they would say, ‘well, collectible card games are 
a great idea, but they’re not for me’. We had some very passionate supporters 
within Blizzard but we also had people who said ‘I’m glad we’re doing it, but I 
don’t think it’s a game I’m excited about playing’.

“When we announced it a couple of years ago people were asking if we knew what 
we were doing! But we’re very passionate CCG players, we always felt like it 
was an amazing game type - it actually felt strange that there weren’t more 
people playing. So we just said to ourselves, hey, let’s see if we can make a 
game for everyone.”
 