
Former world No1 Justine Henin-Hardenne's successful run continued after a 
cleverly constructed three-set victory against highly-fancied RussianMaria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova>.

The ferocious competitor outwitted her big-hitting opponent 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 in 
two hours and 26 minutes to advance to her second Australian Open final.

Absent from last year's tournament because of injury, Henin-Hardenne has the 
opportunity to regain the grand slam crown she won in 2004 and extend her 
winning streak at Melbourne Park to 14 consecutive matches.

The semi-final was played under a closed roof on Rod Laver Arena after 
tournament officials enforced the extreme heat policy at 1pm Melbourne time.

With the changed conditions favouring Sharapova - the world No4 already having 
expressed a passionate hatred for playing in the wind - she got off to a flyer, 
holding her service games with little resistance.

Sharapova made the most of her forehand for winners, while Henin-Hardenne 
called on her masterful top-spinning and slice backhand. The women were locked 
in probing rallies, playing short chip shots at the net and exploiting the full 
angles of the court.

The two broke each other in the seventh and eight games before the squeaky 
Russian secured the first set after 50 minutes, when she converted set point 
against Henin-Hardenne's inconsistent service game.

The best timer of the ball in women's tennis, Henin-Hardenne lifted a gear in 
the second set and began to push the ball around. Her placement on serve and on 
her ground strokes was, as it has been throughout the tournament, incredible. 
Sharapova was left scampering for cheeky drop shots or caught mid-court with 
backhand passing shots.

It was a tight affair in the decisive third set, but Henin-Hardenne cemented 
her fifth grand slam final appearance in the sixth game, when a blinding 
backhand and an error from Sharapova gave her a 4-2 lead.

Serving for the match, Henin-Hardenne dropped serve when her final approach 
shot narrowly clipped the top of the net.

She exerted immediate pressure on her opponent's serve, and Henin-Hardenne 
brought up two match points with a blistering backhand down the line.

The Belgian will play Amelie Mauresmo in the final. Mauresmo came through a 
semi-final against Kim Clijsters after Clijsters was forced to retire thanks to 
an ankle injury. Mauresmo was leading 5-7, 6-2, 3-2 at the time.
 