
Tim Henman overcome a worrying and all-too-familiar lapse in concentration to 
book his place in the second round of the Australian Open today.

Henman cruised through the opening two sets of his first-round clash with 
Cyril Saulnier in under an hour, losing just three games in the process in 
Melbourne.

The large British contingent in the Margaret Court Arena sat back in 
anticipation of an easy victory, but seasoned Henman watchers knew better and 
it was with an air of inevitability that the Frenchman was allowed back into 
the match.

Henman saved two break points in the sixth game of the third set but could not 
repeat the trick a few games later, Saulnier producing some superb passing 
shots to take the set 6-4.

Losing that set at least had the desired effect of sparking Henman, and the 
match itself, into life. The seventh seed broke serve in the opening game of 
the fourth set, Saulnier crucially serving a double fault and smashing the 
errant ball out of court in frustration.

A sublime backhand lob then helped Henman to another break as he raced into a 
3-0 lead, only for Saulnier, fuming at a debatable line call, to produce two 
brilliant winners of his own to reduce his arrears.

The next two games also went against the serve, making it four in a row, until 
Saulnier held serve to close within one game at 4-3.

This time however there was to be no way back for the Frenchman, Henman 
holding serve and then breaking his opponent for the fourth time in the set to 
seal a 6-1, 6-2, 4-6, 6-3 victory.

Asked what had changed after dominating the first two sets, Henman said: "I 
would like to think he was the one that made the difference.

"I played two sets of pretty much flawless tennis and I wanted to try to 
maintain that level. I think I did but if anything I wanted to be more 
aggressive.

"I thought there was some really good tennis. A lot of points were finishing 
on winner and if I was him I would be really disappointed to lose the second 
set 6-2 because he was playing well."

Henman will face Romania's Victor Hanescu in the second round, a player who 
lost to Britain's Ian Flanagan, world ranked 866th at the time, in the second 
round at Queen's last year.
 