
He came. He saw. He choked. With the bottom half of the men's singles draw in 
the 90thAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> all 
but reduced to the status of a minor European indoor event in late autumn, Tim 
Henman, the No6 seed, walked into the Rod Laver arena yesterday morning with 
the odds of his reaching a first grand-slam final next Sunday so heavily 
stacked in his favour that it appeared the first six days had been schemed by 
some benevolent benefactor hell bent on presenting Henman with the easiest 
passage possible.

Such was the relative paucity of the opposition remaining, that even those who 
refused to believe Henman would ever get within sniffing distance of a slam 
final on any surface other than grass began to wonder if the world was about to 
be stood on its head and that history - Henman's history - was to be declared 
bunk.

In 19 previous grand-slam tournaments in Melbourne, Paris and New York, he had 
never managed to carry his racket any further than the last 16. At Wimbledon, 
where 75% of men are overcome by the vapours the moment they set foot on grass, 
Henman is a prince. Not a king, mark you, but a prince, with three semi-finals 
and two quarter-finals in the past six years. But on the hard courts of the 
Australian and US Opens, as well as the clay of Roland Garros, the British No1 
has been barred from entry to the second week by a door marked "possible 
champions only - no chokers".

But this was going to be different. To be sure, he was not underestimating 
Jonas Bjorkman, ranked No64 in the world, but not even Henman could screw up 
this opportunity of a lifetime. He did. This fourth-round match was not even 
close, Bjorkman winning 6-2, 7-6, 6-4. "You just can't take anything for 
granted," said Henman afterwards. The trouble was you could. That he would lose.

It is no good blaming Henman. He simply does not have what it takes, the 
mental alchemy, to covert his natural talent to championship gold. The problem 
is that from time to time - as at Wimbledon against Goran Ivanisevic last year, 
and again in this position where the draw opened up to the point of sagging - 
those who watch him throughout the year are apt to suffer from collective 
amnesia, or are left in denial of his perfectly clear and obvious inability to 
cope with pressure.

Whatever plan Henman and his coach, Larry Stefanki, had concocted was rendered 
obsolete by Henman's loss of nerve. Bjorkman, who had expected an opening salvo 
of some intensity, could barely believe his luck. "His strategy was a little 
different than I was expecting," said the 29-year-old Swede, which was a polite 
way of expressing the all too obvious incoherent and vacillating nature of 
Henman's first hour on court. It was 2001 revisited, a replay of the same round 
last year, when he had frozen against Pat Rafter.

But that had been partly excusable. Having entered the brand new Stefanki 
world, and having won the preparatory tournament in Adelaide, Henman had 
convinced himself that the leopard had changed its spots. But yesterday, the 
pressure having increased sharply, all the bad old habits returned. His first 
serve disintegrated, and he found himself in two-man's land and a schizophrenic 
nightmare.

Against Rusedski, Henman dominated the net exchanges and served solidly 
throughout. Against Bjorkman he started with a double fault, and duly dropped 
his first three service games. It was the worst of beginnings, and thereafter 
his game rarely rose above the satisfactory. Even when he broke Bjorkman for a 
5-3 lead in the second set, Henman immediately dropped his own with leaden 
predictability.

The only weakness in Bjorkman's game was that he was inclined to ease off the 
pedal when in front. At 4-1 up in the tie-break he looked home and dry in the 
second set, only to leave Henman with a set point at 6-5. This Bjorkman saved 
with brilliance at the net, and then, with athleticism and nerve, punished 
Henman for not putting away a smash at 6-6. Effectively this was Henman's last 
stand; he saved five match points at 5-4 in the third, but this belated 
defiance only delayed the inevitable.

There were those prepared, in all seriousness, to suggest that his third-round 
victory over Greg Rusedski had drained Henman of inspiration. In truth, this 
was just the latest in a litany of vapid performances, although the particular 
circumstances, namely the state of the draw, made such an uninspirational and 
ineffectual display doubly galling.

"By winning eight matches in a row before this one, I think I've shown that 
I'm certainly improving," said Henman, a statement that drifted away into the 
ether like a small rain cloud in the desert. As much as Henman may work on his 
game, the major flaw in his psychological make-up, namely his chronic 
vulnerability under pressure, shows no sign of changing. Wimbledon remains his 
one hope of a grand-slam title, no other, and that hope is constantly dwindling 
in the face of the passing years and the emergence of fresh talent.

British No1 he is, and British No1 he will stay for as long as he likes within 
reasonable parameters. But Henman has always yearned for so much more than 
that, believing himself capable of a place in the world's top five and of 
winning grand slams. If only reality did not keep impinging on his dreams.

Bjorkman next plays his fellow Swede Thomas Johansson, who defeated Romania's 
Adrian Voinea, and in the other quarter-final in the bottom half Jiri Novak of 
the Czech Republic is up against Austria's surprise package Stefan Koubek. But 
the remaining big guns are in the top half of the draw, with Pete Sampras 
playing Marat Safin today, a repeat of the 2000 US Open final which Safin won 
in straight sets.
 