
Greg Rusedski, trying to keep the tightest of grips on his emotions as the 
disappointment and frustration flooded his mind and body, had no doubts about 
the significance of yesterday's 6-4, 6-3, 1-6, 6-3 defeat by Tim Henman here in 
the third round of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

"I felt like this was my tournament," he said afterwards. "I've beaten 
everybody left in the bottom half of the draw. But I just didn't do it."

Henman did, and now has the best possible chance to reach his first grand slam 
final, having eased open the door on three occasions at Wimbledon only to have 
it firmly shut in his face by Pete Sampras in the 1998 and 1999 semi-finals and 
by Goran Ivanisevic in last year's.

He is, after all, at No6 the highest seed left standing after an 
incident-packed first week and should really fear nobody in the next three 
rounds before the final a week tomorrow. But there remains an awfully long way 
to go, and to date he has never progressed beyond the last 16 of any grand slam 
other than Wimbledon in 19 attempts.

"For me to start looking at the final is a million miles away," Henman said. 
"I've got a difficult match against Jonas Bjorkman [tomorrow], someone I've a 
losing record against. I'm going to have to play well to beat him."

Most of all, Henman has to guard against beating himself. Having established a 
two-set lead over Rusedski with his very best tennis - notably some 
high-quality returns and stunning volleying - he let his compatriot come back 
from the dead and then came close to choking as he served for the match at 5-3 
in the fourth set.

"Same old Henman," muttered a Dutch journalist. There are few who do not 
admire the British No1's natural ability but all are aware of his frailty under 
pressure. Larry Stefanki, his American coach, has been working hard to cure him 
of this weakness, principally by building on his strengths.

It is obvious that Henman is one of the best volleyers in the game, and 
equally obvious that to capitalise on this he needs to get his first service in 
far more regularly. So Stefanki has encouraged Henman to go for placement 
rather than flat-out speed, the consequence being that his first-serve 
percentage has increased significantly and thus he has increased his volleying 
opportunities.

In itself this all-British third-round encounter was the little big match. The 
Australians, having lost all their male players, made some effort to build it 
up as the Battle of Britain, but not very convincingly. The rest of the tennis 
world either ignored it or sat back with a sardonic smile and asked whether the 
Englishman would lose to the Canadian, which is how they continue to regard the 
Montreal-born Rusedski.

The evening was fine and the roof open. With Rusedski serving at 4-5, a silver 
gull from the nearby Yarra river circled the court. A sublime lob and a rocket 
of a forehand reduced Rusedski to 0-30 while the gull distracted the 15,000 
fans.

Had there been a crossbow handy, and notwithstanding the Rime of the Ancient 
Mariner, Rusedski might have been tempted to take a pot. The crowd eventually 
roared the bird away but the British No2's concentration had been shattered and 
he lost the opening set. A quick break in the second swung the match further 
Henman's way, but when he came to serve for a two-set lead his suspect nerves 
almost did for him. At 3-5, Rusedski had two break points and will forever 
believe that the second should have been his.

Henman hit a strangely tentative volley which appeared to drop beyond the 
baseline. Perhaps it clipped it, but Rusedski thought differently and, as the 
Australians say, spat the dummy. He was still seething at the start of the 
third set when Henman had four break points. The match might have been all but 
over; instead Rusedski converted the fires of rage and frustration into flames 
of inspiration and raced through the third.

The Australian crowd, for the most part politely quiet in the face of a very 
British affair, began to warm to the possibility of a five-setter. But Henman 
cut such ideas short, changing his tactics slightly by not rushing the net on 
every occasion and offering less of a target. Rusedski faltered and Henman 
reapplied his grip, only to falter again when serving for the match. Rusedski 
had three break points, but a high backhand volley saw Henman home.

"I didn't get one call in my favour," said Rusedski, which was true, but 
Henman played superlative tennis in the opening two sets. Whether he can 
continue to do so is the big question. Rusedski believes Jiri Novak (the No26 
seed) and Thomas Johansson (No16) may be the main threats. "But if you look at 
the section you think, Jeez, that looks great. I mean, I would be happy if I 
were in Tim's place."

Had Rusedski won, which he never looked like doing, he might well have gone on 
to his second grand slam final, having lost to Pat Rafter in the US Open in 
1997. The case for Henman is less convincing, principally because of his acute 
vulnerability under pressure.

It is, of course, possible that all is about to change. Patrice Hagelauer, the 
LawnTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association's performance 
director, certainly thinks so. Asked whether Henman could win the title he 
replied: "Why not? I am confident when I see him playing. There is no reason 
why he can't go to the end of the tournament. If I don't believe it, who will?"
 