
Cue the Eiffel Tower, the Champs Elysées, a small glass of vin rouge and the 
pungent whiff of Gauloises outside a bustling pavement café. Images of Paris 
need to come flooding back into Tim Henman's mind tomorrow as he takes on 
Argentina's Guillermo Canas in the third round of the Australian Open.

It was in the French capital last autumn that he won his first major 
tournament, the Paris Indoor Open, playing the sort of super-confident, relaxed 
tennis that has so often eluded him in the slams.

This was not the style of tennis he played yesterday, save for the occasional 
cameo, as he defeated Radek Stepanek of the Czech Republic 6-2, 4-6, 6-3, 6-0 
to reach the last 32 of the season's opening major. Melbourne has rarely bought 
out the best in him, the Rebound Ace courts being a touch too slow for his 
liking and the capricious wind rarely blowing him any good.

If Henman is finally to succeed here - and success would mean reaching his 
first slam quarter-final outside Wimbledon - then he must summon up all those 
memories of Paris when he posted successive wins over four of the world's top 
20 players, including Roger Federer and Andy Roddick.

"If he can win in Paris then he can win here," said Federer yesterday after 
his own 6-2, 6-3, 6-4 victory over Jeff Morrison of the US. "He's dangerous for 
anybody." Henman could meet the reigning Wimbledon champion in the 
quarter-finals, but such leaps of faith in the draw have been made previously 
in this city only for the British No1 to fall flat on his face.

Should he beat Canas, then a second Argentinian may loom out of the sun, 
namely David Nalbandian, whom many are tipping for the title and who crushed 
the German qualifier Florian Mayer 6-1, 6-0, 6-3 yesterday.

Henman and Canas have met only four times but Canas holds a 3-1 advantage, 
including a straight-sets win in the first round of the 1999 US Open which must 
rank as one of Henman's worst grand slam displays. It was in the Louis 
Armstrong Stadium, and if Satchmo had been there he would have played the last 
post.

Twice in his career Canas has suffered severe wrist injuries, including last 
year, but he has top-20 pedigree and is an obdurate and resilient competitor, 
as was highlighted by his 6-1, 4-6, 2-6, 7-6, 6-4 second-round win yesterday 
over his compatriot Agustin Calleri.

"He's given me trouble in the past and he's a class opponent, but in some 
respects he will be an easier opponent than Stepanek because it's very clear in 
my mind the way that I've got to play," said Henman. He will have to play well, 
for a start, and then get to the net at every opportunity and cut the length of 
rallies to a minimum.

Despite good support from the crowd, his performance against Stepanek was not 
totally convincing, with too many errors on the forehand creeping back into his 
play.

He is in an exceptionally tough section of the draw which, as well as 
Nalbandian and Federer, also includes Lleyton Hewitt, the former world No1, 
Wimbledon and US Open champion, who led Australia to their Davis Cup triumph 
here in the Rod Laver Arena last year.

On that occasion Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis were cheered on by the 
Fanatics, the official Davis Cup supporters' group, and yesterday they were in 
full voice again having been supplied with tickets by Hewitt's coach Roger 
Rasheed. And they needed to be after Hewitt lost the opening set against 
Slovakia's immensely talented yet totally unpredictable Karol Kucera. Hewitt 
now plays the 17-year-old Spaniard Rafael Nadal.

With the exception of Pat Rafter's all-too-brief comeback - he and Joshua 
Eagle lost 6-2, 7-5 in the first-round doubles to South Africa's Jeff Coetzee 
and Chris Haggard - it was a good day for the Australians. Philippoussis won 
4-6, 6-3, 6-4, 6-2 against the unorthodox Fabrice Santoro of France - a player 
he described as " the kind of guy who can hit any shot because he's got two 
hands on both sides". Fortunately Santoro played with only one racket.

The other Australian winner was the 19-year-old Todd Reid, who defeated the 
vastly experienced Armenian Sargis Sargsian over five gruelling sets during 
which Reid, who now plays Federer, cramped and threw up most of the water he 
had imbibed. Television replays were not for the squeamish.
 