
At the height of their rivalry there was little to separate the careers of Tim 
Henman and Greg Rusedski in terms of titles won and, outside Wimbledon, their 
respective success on the annual grand slam circuit. Now they are much more 
sharply divided.

Henman, at 30, and precisely one year younger than Rusedski, remains a 
contender at the highest level, as he proved last year by reaching the 
semi-finals at Roland Garros and Flushing Meadows. Rusedski may not be slipping 
exactly quietly into his tennis dotage, but slipping he undoubtedly is.

On the fourth day of the Australian Open Henman, seeded No7 and not due to 
meet any of the heavy hitters until next week, moved untroubled into the last 
32 with a 7-5, 6-1, 6-4 victory over Romania's Victor Hanescu. In comparison 
Rusedski, unseeded, was rushed to defeat by Andy Roddick, the world No2, whom 
Henman could meet in the quarter-finals.

It is now 7 years since Rusedski reached the final of the US Open, having also 
made it to the Wimbledon quarter-finals in 1997. Since then, in 26 attempts, he 
has never managed to get beyond the fourth round of a slam, and since the 
beginning of 2003, a time of great turmoil embracing operations and a failed 
drugs test, he has played in eight slams and not progressed past the second 
round.

"Sometimes you have the sort of days when nothing much is working, and that 
happened against Andy. I didn't serve well enough - my speed and accuracy were 
just not good enough," said Rusedski, who lost 6-0, 3-6, 6-2, 6-3 in little 
over 90 minutes. He knew he had not played well, or rather had not been allowed 
to play well, and it was no time to prevaricate.

The crumb of comfort he clung to was this: of the three matches he has lost 
this year, two have been against Roddick and the world No1 Roger Federer. The 
third was against Sweden's Joachim Johansson, the world No11 and one of the 
hottest players on the circuit.

Rusedski has always been an optimist, and is currently looking for a coach who 
will help him get what remains of his fading best - which in his mind, more 
than anything, means one more journey into the last week of a slam, and 
preferably at Wimbledon. Perhaps this journey - call it a pilgrimage if you 
wish - will happen, although the chances are it will not.

Three or four years ago Rusedski said that he believed his career might be 
over when he was 30, such were the increasing stresses and strains of a sport 
that generally favours the young. To his credit, he has fought on beyond this 
limit and when his serve is in the groove, one of the top five services of the 
past decade, he can still rattle a few cages. But increasingly, and inevitably, 
his capacity to compete is waning.

Had Henman ever possessed Rusedski's quality of serve, or had Rusedski been 
armed with Henman's greater variety of shot, then Britain might have had a 
player to rival Fred Perry. Patently Rusedski will never win a slam title now, 
though he prizes that stupendous fortnight in New York when he reached the US 
Open final.

Henman knows he should have at least equalled Rusedski's achievement, notably 
in 2001 when he allowed Goran Ivanisevic to escape in a Wimbledon semi-final he 
had all but won. It irks Henman that despite his greater overall success in the 
four slams, it is Rusedski's name in the history books as the last British 
player to reach a grand slam final. And how badly he wants to at least equal 
that, and preferably go one better.

Tomorrow Henman will strive for a place in the last 16 against the Russian 
Nikolai Davydenko, a 23-year-old of considerable ability though often 
unfathomable intent. Davydenko has yet to get past the third round of a slam, 
and if he did it this time Henman would be mortified.

"I'd like to think he doesn't serve as well as Hanescu so I can perhaps be a 
little bit more aggressive," said Henman, who remains steadfast in the belief 
that he has finally learned to relax, to sweep away self-inflicted pressure 
from the front of his mind and to concentrate on imposing, wherever possible, 
his multiple skills on less gifted opponents.

Ultimately this may not be enough to win him a slam, or even get him into a 
final, but he is convinced that it optimises whatever chances he has. "I can 
still do better. There are still times when I'm not as relaxed as I could be, 
but I'd like to think I can do it for longer periods."

There were no major surprises on day four, although all Australia held its 
breath in the second-set tie-break between Lleyton Hewitt, the No3 seed, and 
James Blake when it seemed the American might open up a two sets lead. Hewitt 
won 4-6, 7-6, 6-0, 6-3, and great was the relief in the Rod Laver Arena.
 