
Frailties which have consistently prevented Tim Henman from challenging for 
the sport's biggest prizes resurfaced to undo his Australian Open challenge at 
the fourth round stage, as the British number one slumped to a straight sets 
defeat to Sweden's Jonas Bjorkman.

It was a miserable end. Henman had flattered to deceive with his impressive 
start to the year, winning the title in Adelaide and moving to the last sixteen 
of the first Grand Slam with his highly impressive victory over compatriot Greg 
Rusedski.

But the verve and confidence of that performance was absent from the start 
against Bjorkman who won 6-2 7-6 (8-6) 6-4. Henman appeared inhibited against 
the 29 year old Swede to whom he had lost four of their previous six matches.

By starting the match with a double fault the sixth seed set a tone which 
reverberated for the duration of the first set. With no game plan apparent the 
Henman serve was broken three times and Bjorkman seized control.

"I think I was probably a bit nervous to begin with," admitted Henman. "There 
was definitely a little bit of tension in my serve and that's something that I 
have been working on to try and avoid because I think I have learned to serve 
much better when I'm looser.

"If you make the start that I did, then you've got to make damn sure that you 
win the second set," added Henman.

He came desperately close to levelling the match and should have made the most 
of the service break that gave him a 5-3 lead. But at crunch time he was again 
found wanting. Bjorkman broke back and the set headed towards a thrilling 
tie-break.

Henman surged back from 5-2 down, winning four points in a row. At set point 
Henman appeared to have it on his racquet strings until Bjorkman found an 
inspirational flicked forehand cross court winner, picked up off his own 
service line.

More outrageously on the next point the Swede made a winning overhead return 
from deep behind his baseline off a Henman smash. When that happens you know 
the force is with you, but the damning fact from the Briton's point of view is 
that he should have sealed the set in regulation play, as a potential champion 
would surely have done.

Bjorkman's game is based around his scintillating returns and throughout he 
relished the fare being offered by the world number 8 who believes his serve 
has become more potent by going for placement rather than power. Too frequently 
Henman placed the ball into his opponent's hitting zone, particularly on the 
backhand side.

But the Swede is notorious for one weakness, a failure to control his nerves 
when the finishing line is in sight. Again Henman's luck was out, because 
Bjorkman's arm held firm as he fended off two break points to open a 4-3 lead 
in the third set.

Similar attributes were almost shown by the loser as he served to stay in the 
championship. Henman bravely fended off four match points, but when another 
unforced error heralded the fifth the game was up and Bjorkman powered a 
forehand winner to seal a victory that takes him through to the last eight here 
for the second time.

For Henman away from Wimbledon such progress remains elusive. He continues to 
tell us he's improving but we should only believe it when the results book 
agrees. As the highest remaining seed and with the draw wide open he'll rarely 
have a better chance of a major title than he did here.

He foundered at the hands of a player ranked 64 in the world. OK, Bjorkman 
played to the standard of player ranked much higher, but if Henman was truly a 
potential champion he would never have allowedhis opponent to play so far above 
himself.

Iain Carter is BBC Radio's tennis correspondent
 