
I am all for using the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> as an 
ideological battleground for the whole country: there is nothing like enough 
boring stuff on it to justify its public service remit, so the very least it 
can do is stage these arguments. However, I am tired of identity politics 
(race, sex, parenting, it's all we ever talk about ... well, me. It's all I 
ever talk about) and would like to move on to Blue Peter versus The Weakest 
Link.

Blue Peter was last year brought forward 20 minutes, to 4.35pm, to make room 
for The Weakest Link's switch from BBC2. I don't think, technically, it matters 
that much, since 12-year-olds are too busy bullying each other on the internet, 
and those aged six to 10 finish school soon after three, so are well into their 
fig roll and busy TV schedule by 4pm. But it's a statement of intent, isn't it? 
The channel values the earlier programme less highly, viewers get a whiff of 
this by cultural osmosis, everybody stops watching. The worst figures since the 
switch show a 50% drop year-on-year, and you don't get disasters like that, 
normally, without employing Richard and Judy.

But does it matter? What values did Blue Peter promulgate, and do we care if 
they're sacrificed toAnne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson>?

Like most children's programming, Blue Peter is tirelessly uncontroversial and 
jolly, environmental in thought and deed, inclusive, nice and charitable. There 
are elements of this that I find unbearable - like, when did civic spirit 
collide with this smiling neutrality? But that aside, the USP of Blue Peter 
(besides badges) is home craft.

Having looked at the website, I can confidently report that the stuff is 
exactly as sort-of-pointless-and-a-little-bit-crap-looking as when you were 
little. There's a jelly volcano and a monster made of socks. Who needs these 
things? That's the point, you don't need it, but then, you don't need monsters 
made of anything, particularly. You do it because it's something to do.

Telly is so passive, and so castrating. Whatever you want to do or make, 
there's always someone there who's already done it, so much better. It's a 
licence to disengage - for only 140 quid! Normally when you retreat into dumb 
staring, that's one of the things that gets cited in your divorce.

It seemed to me that in the Biddy Baxter era this was recognised as a downside 
of the programme, of all programmes, and they countered it with an active call 
to involve yourself, physically, mentally, in any fashion. It bordered on 
hectoring, really, especially poxing Why Don't You?, with its injunctions to 
find something more interesting to do than watch the telly.

I am very divided about crafts: beads and teeny-box fashioning and straw dolls 
I take as a sign of a very low IQ. Knitting, on the other hand, has a 
counter-cultural, third-wave feminist agenda. I think you can live quite 
happily without doing any of this, as an adult. But I think the experience of 
doing it as a child does equip you with some sense of the inherent worth of 
activity, regardless of how shonky the end result is. And that experience is 
invaluable: humanity's drive to reduce physical effort has been catastrophic, 
in micro and macrocosm. And now we're all so powerfully aware that we've got to 
reverse that impulse, but there's an austerity and joylessness to it. A Blue 
Peter superstructure reminds us how much delight there is in the fruitless 
expense of energy.

Anne Robinson, by quick contrast: she derides and mocks; privileges the 
accruing of money, in pathetic units, above all other activities; rejects 
actual knowledge in favour of a simulacrum, factettes, collected randomly; made 
John Noakes cry. Which of these value systems do you want to see at a 
six-year-old's prime time?

Now, I wonder if they'll send me a badge ...

mszoewilliams@yahoo.co.uk <mailto:mszoewilliams@yahoo.co.uk>
 