
 The author:  Umberto Eco (b1932) wrote a thesis on Thomas Aquinas before 
being appointed professor of semiotics at Bologna University in 1961. His study 
of communication methodology, A Theory of Semiotics (1976), established him as 
a leading academic, as did Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language (1984), The 
Limits of Interpretation (1991) and Kant and the Platypus (1997). Eco also 
maintained a parallel journalistic and literary career, and The Name of the 
Rose (1980) was his first novel, building on his academic interest in medieval 
aesthetics. Its huge success prompted a second, Foucault's Pendulum (1988), 
and, though a year later Eco stated "it doesn't make much sense" to write a 
third, he has since published two more, The Island of the Day Before (1995) and 
Baudolino (2002).

 The story:  In reconstructing the impassioned theoretical debate of a 
14th-century Italian monastery and combining it with the more orthodox concerns 
of a conventional detective story, Eco set a much-imitated template for 
literary-historical thriller. His narrator is Adso of Melk, a novice monk 
accompanying William of Baskerville, a Franciscan emissary of the Holy Roman 
Emperor (referencing Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes tales). Baskerville's task 
is to debate theology with the papal inquisitor, but his visit is disrupted by 
a string of unexplained deaths, centred around the abbey's closely guarded 
library. Baskerville penetrates the library's secrets and solves the crime - 
the murders are committed to keep hidden the "lost" second volume of 
Aristotle's Poetics , by a monk convinced its subject, laughter, is heretical.

 The film-makers: Jean-Jacques Annaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jean-jacques-annaud> (b1943) emerged as part 
of the post-nouvelle vague generation of French film-makers that also included 
Jean-Jacques Beineix and Luc Besson. Annaud won the best foreign film Oscar for 
his debut, the Algerian war satire Black and White in Colour (1976), before 
establishing a reputation for rigorously anthropological film-making with Quest 
for Fire (1981). After persuading Eco to reassign him the rights from Italian 
TV combine RAI, Annaud cast Sean Connery, who was just emerging from a 
three-year career hiatus after the disaster of Never Say Never Again (1983).

 How book and film compare:  Inevitably, Annaud's film guts the story of its 
prolonged theological disputations, concentrating on the whodunnit aspects of 
the narrative and elevating the Bernardo Gui character into Baskerville's evil 
adversary. The major plot departure was a "happy" ending, with Adso 
encountering the young peasant girl he believed burned. Annaud compensated for 
this pruning with an obsessive attention to historical authenticity, from 
specially-woven monks' habits to having all fillings and crowns removed from 
his actors' mouths.

 Inspirations and influences:  The 1980s saw the development of an 
intellectually and aesthetic "arthouse" cinema, in direct response to perceived 
lowering of standards in commercial Hollywood, and The Name of the Rose was a 
key entry in the genre - released the same year as Betty Blue , Down by Law and 
The Sacrifice . Probably the presiding influence on this film, however, was 
Pier Paolo Pasolini, whose artfully arranged compositions Annaud clearly 
imitated, as well as employing Pasolini's former cameraman, Tonino Delli Colli, 
and art director, Dante Ferretti.
 