
If Heston Blumenthal had intended the design of his new restaurant to be a 
physical metaphor for the risks he is taking, he couldn't have done a better 
job. He knows full well that Dinner byHeston Blumenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hestonblumenthal>, at the Mandarin 
Oriental Hotel in London's Knightsbridge, is a big gamble: it's his first 
serious restaurant since he quietly opened the now three-Michelin starred Fat 
Duck at Bray in the mid-90s; it has a complex culinary agenda built around the 
modernisation of historic British food; there is the commitment of millions of 
pounds from his backers. His whole brand is going to be hugely exposed, and 
literally so. The kitchen is a vast glass-walled box right in the heart of the 
dining room. At Dinner there will be nowhere to hide.

So it matters who the £75-a-head diners will see inside that glass box. "I've 
made sure to tell people I'm not the one who's going to be here," Blumenthal 
says, during a visit to the fast-advancing site. "I'll be around, but basically 
I'm in Bray." Instead of his shining pate and fast-forward-to-the future 
glasses, they'll get a soft-cheeked Dorset-born thirtysomething chap called
Ashley Palmer-Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ashley-palmer-watts>. "I'm utterly 
confident of putting Ash out under my name," Blumenthal says. "It was always 
going to be Ash. I simply wouldn't have done this if it wasn't for him." 
Palmer-Watts returns the compliment. "The one person I would not want to let 
down is Heston," he says.

To describe theirs simply as the relationship of mentor and protege is, 
however, to misunderstand the culture of the Fat Duck. They both accept the 
titles – "I sound like a proud dad, when I talk about him like this," 
Blumenthal says at one point. "It's great to have Heston at my shoulder," 
Palmer-Watts replies – but it goes much further than that. "You will thrive 
around Heston if you want to absorb, challenge and discuss," Palmer-Watts says. 
And if that makes Blumenthal's team sound like a priesthood, it may not be 
accidental. "We've evolved our own path to designing things," his most trusted 
lieutenant says, dryly.

It was not always this way. When Palmer-Watts joined the Fat Duck 10 years 
ago, the set-up was chaotic. There were no more than five cooks – today 45 work 
the various kitchens – and Blumenthal was still in his "complicated phase". He 
could get supremely angry during service and start smashing plates; his small 
brigade once put on crash helmets when they saw the storm coming. Not that 
Palmer-Watts knew any of this. "I went to the Fat Duck with a friend when I was 
21," he says. "It was just so different. He was doing this chicken dish which 
cost £75 to make. He was selling it for £60. The whole thing was being 
marinated in truffle jus, Madeira and port. I just thought, 'I have to work 
here.'"

Palmer-Watts grew up in Dorset, and caught the cooking bug in his teens 
courtesy of a local restaurant that became something of a refuge when his 
parents split up. With the owners, Geoff and Linda Chapman (who went on to run 
Lumiere in Cheltenham), he travelled the world and ate well. From there he took 
stages – short unpaid periods of kitchen work experience – at everywhere from 
Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons to Gordon Ramsay's Aubergine, which even offered 
him a job. But it was the Fat Duck he wanted, so he went to work on a friend's 
watercress farm, while he waited for a vacancy. "That impressed me," Blumenthal 
says. "I didn't have a job to give him at the time so he just waited. I told 
him to call me every day." Why? Was he testing him? "No, I was just too busy. I 
needed him to keep reminding me."

So what kind of employee was he? "Very quiet, which was odd. The mixture of my 
then less-than-calm demeanour and the hours I had to work meant that I was used 
to people around me who were slightly strange because they were the only ones 
who would work for me. And then here was this polite lad who had caught the 
food bug." It came down to some very simple virtues. "He was never late; he 
wanted to talk about food. Ash was interested."

In the early days the Fat Duck culture revolved around hard kitchen services 
and equally hard stints in the gym each afternoon. They never got enough sleep. 
"I remember telling him in the gym one day that he had a great future if he 
stayed with me." He meant it. By the time Palmer-Watts was 25 he had been 
appointed Blumenthal's head chef. "He's extremely encouraging," Palmer-Watts 
says. "He will push me. He's worked out that by making me uncomfortable, I will 
produce my best work. It's about applying pressure."

As the business expanded, so did the job of keeping track of what was going on 
in Blumenthal's domed head. "I'm a bloody nightmare to work for. Right now with 
all the TV work and the restaurants and other contracts we've got 600 dishes in 
development. And I'm anal about everything. Take a lemon tart. It will be about 
the thickness of the pastry, the setting temperature of the filling within half 
a degree. There's an awful lot of pressure." Palmer-Watts clearly thrived on 
it. "A dish doesn't go on the menu unless it's right," he says. "It's got to 
have more to offer than just be a plate of food. It's got to be a multi-sensory 
thing." Or, as Blumenthal says, "Over the years Ash has developed my traits, 
that obsessive compulsive attention to detail."

That, they both say, lies at the heart of the new venture. Blumenthal has said 
many times that if he was going to do a second major restaurant, it had to be 
distinct. Two years ago, Palmer-Watts stepped down as head chef – or, as 
Blumenthal tells it, was dragged out of the kitchen – to work on other projects 
including the makeover for Little Chef. "That was all about jeopardy. It showed 
him there is another world out there." Palmer-Watts is less enthusiastic: "It 
was absolutely horrendous." By comparison the new restaurant – despite its 100 
staff, and 100-plus seats – looks like the proverbial walk in the park.

Blumenthal has become intrigued by Britain's culinary history and, with food 
historians from Hampton Court and elsewhere, has been developing dishes that 
have a British rather than French root. This is what defines the new menu. 
Palmer-Watts starts a slide show on his iPad: descriptions of dishes from the 
18th century, in flowing serif fonts, followed by their makeovers: a turkey 
sausage recipe that has become a turkey boudin enclosing nuggets of bone 
marrow, alongside braised cockscombs and girolles; a beef royale, that will 
demand the braising of short rib for 72 hours, to be served with a smoked 
anchovy and onion fluid jelly; a ragu of pig's ear from 1750, with onions 
cooked in smoked duck fat.

So whose dishes are these? "Ours," Palmer-Watts says. Blumenthal concurs. "The 
whole process has been very much us. Ash is a very good foil for me. I'm like 
the kid at Christmas who wants the upside down mountain with the flashing 
lights and the plane flying round the top. And Ash is the one who says no, 
Billy, they don't actually make those." Does Blumenthal ever fear losing him? 
"I don't even think about it. Why the hell would he go anywhere else?"

Which makes Blumenthal Enterprises sound a little like John Grisham's The Firm
: people only join, but nobody leaves. Then again, being shown round the as yet 
undressed restaurant, with its solid but modern panels in leather and wood to 
play up the English theme, its views over Hyde Park, the shiny kitchen, 
complete with a rotisserie with a polished cog mechanism, custom-built by a 
Swiss watch company, it is hard to imagine why anybody would say no. "I have 
tried to put the fear of God into Ash," Blumenthal says. "I want to make him 
shit scared, but also very excited." It seems to have worked. "You think about 
doing other things," Palmer-Watts says. "But I like playing at this level. I 
like the way we think and what we do."

Though, of course, it isn't "we"; it really will be Palmer-Watts. He slips off 
to the kitchen, which has only been handed over by the contractors while we are 
there. He turns on the induction hobs and, for the first time, plates up a dish 
– tranches of marinated mackerel, a smear of anchovy sauce, pickled vegetables 
– so that we can photograph it. Afterwards Blumenthal and Palmer-Watts, mentor 
and protege, head chef and collaborator, friends, stand over the plate and pull 
it apart with their hands. They nod. They do not say much to each other about 
it. They really don't need to. They are a long way beyond that. OFM

Dinner by Heston Blumenthal 
<http://www.mandarinoriental.com/london/dining/heston_blumenthal/> opens at the 
Mandarin Oriental Hotel, Knightsbridge on 31 January
 