
Lleyton Hewitt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lleyton-hewitt> today staged 
a brilliant fightback to keep his dreams of Australian Open glory alive.

Hewitt looked down and out when Spain's Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> raced through the third set 6-1 
for a two sets to one lead in their fourth-round clash in Melbourne.

The Australian third seed then received treatment on court for a hip injury 
and looked destined to again miss out on a quarter-final berth at his home 
grand slam.

But the 23-year-old refused to buckle and, roared on by a capacity 16,000 
crowd on Rod Laver Arena, took the fourth set in a tie-break to force a decider.

That visibly deflated Nadal, the 18-year-old clearly not relishing being 
dragged into only his third five-set grand slam match. In contrast Hewitt was 
into his 23rd and experience paid off as he raced into a 3-0 lead with two 
breaks of serve.

It was Nadal's turn to receive treatment now on his left thigh but it was 
merely delaying the inevitable, Hewitt clinching a remarkable 7-5, 3-6, 1-6, 
7-6, 6-2 victory in three hours 53 minutes.

"I was hurting a little bit but told myself to hang in there and wait for my 
opportunities," said Hewitt. "I strained my hip flexor in Sydney last week but 
I will be fine."

Hewitt will face either Guillermo Coria or David Nalbandian in the last eight, 
the Argentinians set to do battle in the second evening match.

Earlier in the day, Andy Roddick had cruised into the quarter-finals with a 
straight-sets win over Germany's Philipp Kohlschreiber.

Roddick overpowered the 21-year-old world No102 - the lowest-ranked player 
left in the draw - racing to a 6-3, 7-6, 6-1 victory on Vodafone Arena.

The second seed will face Nikolay Davydenko in the last eight, Davydenko 
carrying on where he left off against seventh seed Tim Henman with a 
surprisingly easy victory over Guillermo Canas.

Davydenko, playing in the fourth round of a grand slam for the first time in 
his career, won 6-3, 6-4, 6-3 against the 12th seed.

Roddick had faced left-handed players in the previous three rounds and 
admitted he had trouble adjusting to a right-hander.

"I don't think I hit the ball as cleanly as I did in the first three matches," 
said the 22-year-old. "I think I actually had a little trouble getting used to 
a serve coming from a righty in the first couple of sets, as weird as that 
sounds. It took me a little while to get on it.

"The good thing is I don't feel like I had my best day and we're sitting here 
talking about a three-set win. I didn't have my range early on. Luckily I was 
able to bear down and win points when I had to.

"I'm not too concerned. I've been feeling really good throughout the event and 
I'm really happy to be through."

Meanwhile in the evening match, David Nalbandian defeated fellow Argentinian 
Guillermo Coria, in the fourth round of the Australian Open. The former 
Wimbledon finalist won 5-7, 7-5, 6-3, 6-0 in a match that didn't start until 
10.45pm and finished after 2.00am. He will play Hewitt in the quarter finals.
 