
Australian Day celebrations turned sour in Melbourne today when Lleyton Hewitt 
and Mark Philippoussis both crashed out at the fourth-round stage of the 
Australian Open.

Hewitt went down 4-6, 6-3, 6-0, 6-4 to the Swiss No2 seed Roger Federer, while 
Philippoussis lost in straight sets to the Moroccan outsider Hicham Arazi, 6-2, 
6-2, 6-4. Rarely have the words of the national anthem, Advance Australia Fair, 
seemed less appropriate.

Hewitt went into the game with the psychological edge over Federer, having won 
eight of their last 10 matches including an epic Davis Cup clash last year when 
Hewitt came from two sets down.

And when the local favourite broke Federer in the first game of the match on 
the way to taking the first set 6-4, a packed house settled back to enjoy the 
show.

Federer, though, was having none of it and proceded to blow Hewitt off the 
court with a series of stinging ground strokes and some muscular serve and 
volley. He won the second set 6-3, the third to love, and wasted only one match 
point in the fourth set before completing a famous win.

"I am very happy to have taken my revenge on him," said Federer, who moves 
into the quarter-finals, where he will meet the Argentine David Nalbandian. "It 
hurt me big time that match in the Davis Cup so I am glad I got him."

"Every time we play we have had great matches. I always feel these matches can 
go either way and the third set was quick but I still felt it was a real 
battle."

Applause was muted, but the stuffing had already been knocked out of the 
locals by the shock defeat of Philippoussis. The No10 seed had never gone 
beyond the fourth round at Melbourne Park and was out of sorts from the off, 
making 38 unforced errors and failing to convert any of his 10 break-point 
opportunities. Arazi, by contrast, broke the famous Philippousis serve five 
times.

Arazi and his compatriot Younes El Aynaoui, who made such a stir here last 
year with his victory over Hewitt and epic clash with Andy Roddick, are the 
only Moroccans in the open era to have reached the quarter-finals at a Grand 
Slam.

Last year El Aynaoui went down 21-19 in the fifth set to Roddick and now Arazi 
will face Spanish third seed Juan Carlo Ferrero.

"They'll be going crazy on Al-Jazeera right now," said John McEnroe when 
interviewing Arazi on court after the match. It proved to be the toughest test 
Arazi had faced all night. "It's pretty tough to understand him," he smiled. 
"My English is not so good and he's speaking pretty fast...like the American 
accent."

Arazi, who won both his singles rubbers in Morocco's Davis Cup victory over 
Great Britain, apologised for disappointing the Australian crowd, but reminded 
them Hewitt's clash with Federer was still to come.

"You have still got tonight," he said. "I was very happy with the way I played 
today. The key was the returns. I was in a good day today. I have played him 
many times. It is always a good match. Today, unfortunately, he didn't play his 
best tennis."

Philippoussis, who lost to Arazi in five sets at Melbourne Park in 1998, was 
in no mood to disagree. "Nothing much I could do," he shrugged. "He was hitting 
the ball really clean today. Just have to take my hat off to him."

No Moroccan has ever reached a Grand Slam semi-final and for Arazi to do so he 
will need to overcome Ferrero, who progressed after beating plucky Romanian 
Andre Pavel 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2.

Also through is Nalbandian, who took three sets to achieve what Tim Henman 
failed to do in five and beat compatriot Guillermo Canas.

Nalbandian, the eighth seed, has been in sparking form all year and reached 
the quarter-finals with another straight-sets demolition job to set up a clash 
with Federer.

 Canas had been through successive five-set marathons, and less than two days 
after his near-five hour epic with Henman, could not match Nalbandian and went 
down 6-4, 6-2, 6-1.

Nalbandian, the 2002 Wimbledon runner-up, has not dropped a set in four 
matches and a backhand winner off Canas' serve sealed the win in one hour 44 
minutes - three hours nine minutes shorter than his last match.

Canas had staged a remarkable comeback to beat Henman, winning 9-7 in the 
fifth set, but looked jaded today, unsurprising given his workload after 
missing eight months last year following wrist surgery.

"He was tired from the last match, but I played really good," said Nalbandian 
afterwards.

"I feel great, I played a great match."
 