
It has taken Lleyton Hewitt almost eight hours to win his past two matches in 
the Australian Open and, although he joked about going for a 10km run today 
before his semi-final against Andy Roddick tomorrow, it will be remarkable if 
the man they variously call "Rusty" and the "Rock" has much more than vapour 
left in his tank when he squares up to the American.

Roddick has hardly needed to break sweat to get this far, having reached the 
last four after his opponent Nikolay Davydenko, who beat Tim Henman in the 
third round, retired at 6-3, 7-5, 4-1 down when experiencing prolonged 
breathing difficulties in the high heat. "Not quite as dramatic as it normally 
is," agreed Roddick, who two years ago defeated Morocco's Younes El Aynaoui 
21-19 in the fifth set of their marathon quarter-final.

Any drama this year has been at the city's blackjack tables where the 
American, prior to last night, was up £2,300. He has also had the satisfaction 
of seeing Hewitt taken to five sets by Spain's brilliant teenager Rafael Nadal 
in the fourth round and then again by David Nalbandián of Argentina last night, 
the Australian winning 6-3, 6-2, 1-6, 3-6, 10-8 just before midnight.

Roddick will lose his No2 spot in the world to the Australian if he is beaten. 
The two have met five times, with Hewitt holding a 4-1 advantage. The last time 
they played was in the semi-finals of theTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup last November, when 
Roddick was humiliated in front of his home crowd and later parted company with 
his coach Brad Gilbert.

"Obviously that's in the back of my mind and I'm sure it's going to be in the 
back of his as well," said Hewitt. "It's not easy playing Andy in America. He 
loves the hype of playing in his home country, so I'll be trying to emulate a 
very similar situation. But I'm sure he's going to learn a lot from that match 
and he's going to come out and want revenge."

Roddick would dearly love to turn the tables and this time it is unlikely he 
will be trying to force the issue at the net as he attempted in Houston.

Despite the physical battering Hewitt has incurred this week he can never be 
underestimated. He has a remarkable capacity for recovery and a heart so huge 
that at any moment you might expect it to burst free of his chest. Nevertheless 
he entered the Open with a right hip flexor injury and, against Nalbandián, at 
the end of the fourth set, had treatment on his left thigh.

Advance Australia Fair had been sung throughout the land on Australia Day, 
although by 11.30pm here there seemed a good chance, in tennis terms, that the 
country would finish on its knees, raging with bitter frustration. Never let 
anyone kid you it is the poms who whinge; Aussies are worse losers by far.

Alicia Molik had gone down 9-7 in the third set of her quarter-final against 
Lindsay Davenport, the world No1, and it appeared Hewitt was going the same 
way. On this day last year Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis had lost in the fourth 
round, giving rise to suggestions that the event be moved to avoid Australia 
Day. "Thank Christ I came away with a win tonight," said Hewitt.

There was a good deal of ill feeling between Hewitt and Nalbandián, who had 
previously criticised the Australian's behaviour on court, especially his 
stentorian cries of "Come on" when an opponent has missed a shot. The two 
brushed shoulders at a change-over and exchanged words and after the match 
Nalbandián reiterated his earlier criticisms in Spanish.

Hewitt, in his early days, upset Spain's Alex Corretja, the former French Open 
champion, with his on-court outbursts, which were considered disrespectful. 
Over the years he has toned things down but he was noticeably vociferous during 
the Open's first week and his combative attitude splits Australian opinion.

Hewitt has to be admired for his fighting spirit. There is a good deal of 
hypocrisy here from a sporting public that has turned a blind eye to the way 
its cricket team sledges opponents. Hewitt is not guilty of that. It is 29 
years since an Australian won the men's title here and Hewitt, who has never 
before got beyond the fourth round, is two wins away. A few more "Come ons" 
will surely hurt nobody.

Davenport will play Nathalie Dechy in the semi-finals, the Frenchwoman also 
coming through in three sets against Patty Schnyder. She had never before 
reached the last eight of a grand slam championship.
 