
Highland Reel, the winner of the King George at Ascot in July, gave Aidan 
O’Brien his first winner at this year’s Breeders’ Cup meeting on Saturday under 
an outstanding front-running ride by Seamie Heffernan.

With Ryan Moore, O’Brien’s No1 rider, aboard Found (the Prix de l’Arc de 
Triomphe winner), Heffernan had an excellent opportunity to record his first 
success at the Breeders’ Cup and he seized the initiative from the early stages 
of this mile-and-a-half contest.

Highland Reel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/ryan-moore-highland-reel-ascot-king-george-frankel-fair-eva-horse-racing>
 was in front within a few strides, and led Ectot as the field turned away from 
the stands with a circuit to run while Found raced much further back with only 
a couple of opponents behind her. Heffernan then kicked even further clear down 
the back stretch, and was six lengths to the good going into the final turn.

Heffernan still had a healthy lead at the top of the straight, and though his 
opponents were now well aware that they had handed a multiple Group One winner 
a soft lead, it was too late to do anything about it. Flintshire, America’s 
best middle-distance turf horse, closed the gap in the straight under Javier 
Castellano, but he was still one-and-three-quarter lengths adrift of the winner 
at the line.

Highland Reel can land Breeders’ Cup Turf for dominant Aidan O’Brien yard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/highland-reel-breeders-cup-turf-aidan-obrien-horse-racing>
Found, who will now retire to the paddocks, ran on into third place without 
ever looking entirely at ease on the quick ground, while Ulysses was fourth for
Sir Michael Stoute <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sir-michael-stoute>.

“We knew that he gets a mile-and-a-half well, that he handles fast ground and 
doesn’t mind dictating,” O’Brien said. “So it was straightforward really, but 
Seamus executed it brilliantly. He controlled the race perfectly. He kicked at 
the right time, and really the race was over from a long way out.

“He has two options now, in the Japan Cup and a race in Hong Kong. I don’t 
know if he’ll be able to take in two or take in one, but we’ll see how he is. 
But he’s an incredibly versatile horse that loves travelling.”

Earlier on the card, Stoute, already the most successful British trainer in 
Breeders’ Cup history, added a seventh victory to his record as Queen’s Trust 
andFrankie Dettori <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frankie-dettori> edged 
ahead of the favourite Lady Eli on the line to win the Breeders’ Cup Filly & 
Mare Turf.

Dettori was at his outstanding best to snatch victory from Lady Eli and Irad 
Ortiz, having broken from a wide berth in stall 11 which forced him to sit well 
off the pace. Queen’s Trust had not enjoyed much luck in running in several 
previous races this season, but there was no danger that she would be blocked 
here as Dettori pulled her to the middle of the track at the top of the stretch 
and set out to run down the leader, Avenge.

Lady Eli was nearly three lengths in front of Queen’s Trust as Dettori 
launched his challenge, and Ortiz’s mount only got to Avenge well inside the 
final furlong. Queen’s Trust was finishing even faster than the favourite, 
however, and Dettori’s perfectly timed pursuit ensured she had her head in 
front when it really mattered.

“When we got to the backstretch, basically I tried to find a spot where I 
could get into a challenging position,” Dettori said.

“I was very fortunate mid-turn because I got behind the favourite, and then 
she got a jump on me and my first thought was, well, I’ll be a good third.

“Then she started to motor and it’s funny, it’s a short straight but those 
last hundred yards make a big difference. She got into top gear, and we flashed 
past the line and I was pretty much sure we’d won.”

Stoute has now won the Filly & Mare Turf three times, to go with four 
victories in the Turf, a record that stretches back to Pilsudski’s victory in 
the latter race in 1996.

But European hopes were dashed in the Mile when Henry Candy’s Limato faded 
from a furlong out behind Bill Mott’s runner Tourist, with last year’s Mile 
winner Tepin in second place. Midnight Storm completed a 1-2-3 for US-trained 
horses.

The Turf Sprint also went the way of the Americans, with O’Brien’s Washington 
DC out of the frame behind Obviously, a veteran eight-year-old who has lined up 
for the Mile three times in the past. Home Of The Brave, from Hugo Palmer’s 
stable in Newmarket, was also unplaced, along with Undrafted, who took the 
Diamond Jubilee Stakes at Royal Ascot for his American trainer Wesley Ward in 
June 2015.

The feature event of the meeting produced another exceptional finish as 
Arrogate, the second-favourite, got up to beat the market leader California 
Chrome after a protracted duel down the straight.

California Chrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/27/california-chrome-dubai-world-cup-american-meydan-global-appeal-horse-racing>
 made the running and looked to be going easily as he turned for home, but Mike 
Smith had Arrogate a couple of lengths behind and the three-year-old showed 
tremendous courage to eat into California Chrome’s lead before passing him a 
few strides before the line.

The winner carried the pink, green and white colours of Prince Khalid Abdullah 
so familiar to European fans thanks to the exploits of horses like Dancing 
Brave and Frankel, and gave Bob Baffert his third consecutive success in the 
Classic.
 