
The star names in Aidan O’Brien’s team for the second day of the Breeders’ Cup 
meeting at Santa Anita seem sure to play a central role in many punters’ 
betting plans on Saturday, and Found, the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe winner, is 
likely to be the most important name of all as she makes what may well be the 
final start of her career in the Turf.

Ryan Moore a step ahead on Highland Reel in Ascot’s King George
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/ryan-moore-highland-reel-ascot-king-george-frankel-fair-eva-horse-racing>
And on the face of it Found looks as bankable as they come. She is the 
top-rated performer in the field, beat the Derby winner Golden Horn to land the 
same contest 12 months ago, and her overall profile is that of a horse who 
delivers her best form, at the highest level, over and over again. “Tough and 
highly durable” is Timeform’s assessment of Found, which is, if anything, doing 
her a disservice. Her last seven starts have all been at Group One level and 
Found has finished first or second in all seven.

She is far from an odds-on chance in the betting, however, and there are some 
good reasons why. Flintshire, who started his career with André Fabre but is 
now the best middle-distance turf horse in the States, should be a very tough 
opponent even if he does need to bounce back from a disappointing run – on 
good-to-soft ground - last time out. Found’s stable companion Highland Reel, 
the King George winner, was also less than two lengths behind her in the Arc, 
while it is also hard to overlook the fact that, for all her consistency, only 
one of those seven Group One runs this year actually resulted in a victory.

Perhaps the most significant concern, though, is the likely speed of the turf 
track here on Saturday. The turf was relaid in the summer and, while it is 
always quick in California, there is a consensus that this year, it could be 
faster than ever. Found does have some form on fast ground and it was 
good-to-firm when she took the Arc but turf as firm as it is likely to be this 
weekend is an unknown.

The good news from O’Brien’s point of view, however, is that Highland Reel 
(10.22pm)is both high-class and versatile and perhaps a horse, too, whose form 
has not received quite the credit it deserves. He took two Group Ones outside 
Europe as a three-year-old, winning both at Arlington Park in Chicago and Sha 
Tin in Hong Kong, and the ground was very quick for his run at Arlington in 
particular. A well-run 12 furlongs on firm ground could be just what he needs, 
Seamie Heffernan has proved time and again that he is an excellent No2 jockey 
and Highland Reel makes plenty of appeal at around 7-2 (and quite possibly a 
bigger price on the US Tote).

O’Brien was noticeably keen this week to stress how much he is looking forward 
to seeingWashington DC (9.05pm) in the Turf Sprint and the red-hot pace should 
set the race up for Ryan Moore to deliver a late challenge. His Falmouth Stakes 
winner Alice Springs, however, may struggle to cope withLimato (11.40pm) in the 
Mile, as Henry Candy’s gelding seems tailor-made for the challenge.

Sir Michael Stoute seemed a little cool on the chance of Ulysses in the Turf 
earlier this week but perked up considerably when discussingQueen’s Trust 
(7.43pm) in the Filly & Mare Turf and she could be another British-trained 
winner if she can get a little more luck than in several of her recent starts.

For American fans, meanwhile, the highlight of the week will be California 
Chrome’s attempt to add the Breeders’ Cup Classic to a career record which 
already includes the Kentucky Derby, Preakness Stakes and the Dubai World Cup 
in seven Grade One wins.

Arrogate, a wide-margin winner in a track record time last time out, is a new 
challenge for Art Sherman’s outstanding five-year-old but California Chrome
(12.35am) has continued to improve as he has matured and he should deliver the 
victory that many in the huge Santa Anita crowd will be desperate to see.

Haveyougoneaway (11.01pm) has a live chance in the Filly & Mare Sprint for Tom 
Morley, whose late uncle David was a multiple Group One winner in Britain.Union 
Strike (7.05pm) and Drefong (8.21pm) are the picks at the prices in the 
Juvenile Fillies’ and Sprint respectively, while the front-runningSyndergaard 
(9.43pm) may just have enough to win a very tight renewal of the Juvenile.

Selections:

7.05 Union Strike

7.43 Queen’s Trust

8.21 Drefong

9.05 Washington DC

9.43 Syndergaard

10.22 Highland Reel (nap)

11.01 Haveyougoneaway

11.40 Limato

12.35 California Chrome
 