
There was an enormously distasteful story in the press some time ago. A devout 
elderly Muslim woman had died, and her body, when removed from the morgue for 
burial, was found covered with slabs of bacon. I was shocked on two levels: 
that there are people living among us who would do such a thing; and that such 
people have access to places even those of us who are not religious invest with 
sacredness. What saddened me most was that her family would never be able to 
divorce their memories of her from that awful, indescribably insulting image. 
In trying to make a point, someone had entirely altered the course of their 
grief.

"Grief" is a powerful little word. Like "love", it accepts everything. Like 
"Europe" or "America", it describes a place where anything might happen. In the 
land of "grief" people tear out their hair, stay in their beds, starve 
themselves, put their faith in saints and psychics, give up on love. All is 
forgiven, on the understanding that eventually they will return.

That Muslim family were hijacked on their journey. Nothing so malicious has 
touched me, but I think of them often, for my own grief has been forced down an 
unexpected path.

My little sister Lucy Grealy died in New York on December 18 2002, at the age 
of 39. She had accidentally taken an overdose of heroin. Her life had been 
hard, but she had also experienced more joy than many. As a child, she was 
diagnosed with a cancer in the bone of her jaw. Treating it was physically 
agonising and hugely disfiguring. As an adult, she wrote about her life, to 
enormous literary acclaim, in a book called Autobiography Of A Face. Even when 
she was alive, I found it difficult to read. Her descriptions of my father, who 
died in 1979, were unbearably true. Finding him on those pages, singing or 
talking to our dogs, was like dreaming. A phrase about looking out the window 
above the kitchen sink of our childhood home in Spring Valley, New York, was 
like chancing upon a yellowing photograph of a place I had once loved. When she 
wrote about my mother, I felt I was standing outside the door, listening to 
conversations I had already heard.

There was also irritation, for much of the book was careless. It was the first 
time I had experienced reading about my family and parts of my own life, and I 
realised how easy it was for Lucy simply to select her vantage point. I 
learned, too, how easily readers would accept it as the only true vantage 
point. But I was happy for Lucy. The book's success was a first-class ticket to 
a world she loved, in which doing what she thought she wanted - writing - 
earned money.

Well before the publication of Autobiography Of A Face, Lucy had become 
friends with another writer,Ann Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett>. Ann was hugely patient with 
Lucy, who could be infuriatingly disorganised and irresponsible. She was able, 
it seemed, to accept Lucy's constant need of approbation and affection, even 
when Lucy herself ignored, and even scorned, those needs in others. Ann was a 
good friend. Lucy's life became harder, with endless reconstructive surgeries, 
frustration at her inability to recreate the crystalline beauty of 
Autobiography, and a loneliness she attributed to being "ugly". Ann supported 
her throughout, with company, money, food and love.

Ann was a far better "sister" to Lucy than I could ever have been, but we 
never met while Lucy was alive. I had moved to London while they were still at 
college together. There had always been thousands of miles between us, and she 
was simply one of the many friends Lucy made so easily. When a review copy of 
Ann's book, Taft, arrived by courier at my house in London, Lucy, staying with 
me, didn't bother to open it. I wasn't surprised by the way she tossed it 
dismissively on to a chair, for she rarely showed interest, at least to me, in 
other people's achievements. I felt sorry for Ann then, because I knew how much 
she had done for my sister.

As Lucy's life became more and more confused, I called Ann in exasperation. I 
had no idea that heroin had become so huge in my sister's life. I knew she was 
unreachably sad. Oddly, while Lucy and I had spent hundreds of hours discussing 
the failings of our confused childhood, we skated quickly over the thin ice 
that might expose us to a truth - that Lucy's illness had affected us all. She 
often had great - and comforting - insight into my mother's lifelong 
depression, but the understanding between us was that my mother brought the 
worst of it upon herself. We made such a harsh judgment of our mother's 
desperation that Lucy might have felt - in front of me, at least - that she had 
forfeited the right to her own. Ann, unwittingly, colluded. "Lucy's so much 
like her mother," I said over the phone. "Don't tell her that," Ann replied.

At the funeral in New York, Ann read a beautiful piece she had written. 
Afterwards, I was consoled by my new, transatlantic email friendship with Ann. 
Six weeks later, she wanted an article about Lucy to appear in the New Yorker 
but in the end settled on New York magazine instead. Ann emailed a document for 
my signature, a family permission to use Lucy's letters. I was surprised that 
it did not mention the New York magazine article, but referred to 
HarperCollins, her publisher. I wish now that I had sent it to Lucy's agent in 
New York. But I was grieving, and innocent of the implications.

That was my mistake. 

At about the same time, my sister Sarah - Lucy's nonidentical twin - and I 
were trying to sort through Lucy's papers in Connecticut, where she had stayed 
towards the end of her life. A family painting had disappeared from her room, 
along with many other belongings, and Sarah and I were sad about this. Friends 
of hers, not including Ann, had already been there. Sarah and I sorted through 
our own feelings at the time, confused as they were, and tried to convince 
ourselves that friends Lucy had loved were just as "entitled" to have her 
things as we were. I still believe that, even now. Lucy had loved that 
painting, however, and I was disturbed that someone would feel more entitled to 
such a connection with her past. I believed my nephews should have had it.

While I was staying with Sarah, HarperCollins wanted to reissue Autobiography 
Of A Face with an afterword by Ann. We had read the afterword, and it was 
beautiful, but Sarah had asked, "Where are we in this story?" We are 
everywhere, I told her, like the paper it is printed on, though no one knows 
this but us. HarperCollins seemed very keen to issue it quickly, and we agreed. 
We thought, how could we not? We were in no state of mind to imagine the 
implications.

I noticed that the reading Ann gave at Lucy's funeral and the piece in New 
York magazine shared similar phrases. The magazine had used a photograph of 
Lucy on the cover, and for a week Sarah, working in Manhattan, had to walk past 
a huge wall of these covers by the newsagent in the lobby of her building. She 
rushed past each day not looking, forcing herself to believe that having her 
dead twin's face staring out at her was a good thing, because people had loved 
her. I felt so sorry for Sarah then.

Then Ann began to write what was to become Truth & Beauty, about her 
friendship with my sister. At first I believed that this was as it should be. 
Ann is an artist, how else could she express her grief? This was the defence I 
used to friends in New York. They had been surprised by some of the personal 
detail in the New York magazine article; they asked, "But why is she doing 
this?"

Later, Ann was in England for the Oxford Literary Festival. I heard a Woman's 
Hour interview that she did - as winner of the Orange Prize for Bel Canto - 
with Martha Kearney. They discussed Truth & Beauty, then in progress. Ann 
appeared to believe that after the success of Bel Canto, critics would judge 
her less harshly for a work of nonfiction.

Around that time, Publishers Weekly in the US noted Ann's forthcoming work of 
nonfiction about Lucy, referring to her as the "heavily disfigured writer who 
killed herself". I was alarmed. Had HarperCollins released such a coarse and 
incorrect press release? But my concerns were brushed aside. Apparently it was 
a misunderstanding. Then I was alerted to reading guides published for the 
posthumous reissue of Autobiography Of A Face, with Ann's afterword. One of the 
questions for discussion concerned my mother's parenting skills. I cried almost 
incessantly with frustration. It was put down to the work of an inexperienced 
intern.

Three months before Lucy died, my mother's depression took on the symptoms of 
dementia. I felt I had lost her. She had not been well for years - a huge 
source of sadness to me. Despite the efforts of my sister Sarah and I to help 
her, she was becoming more frail, more sad, more alone. Our conversations 
became surreal. Each one sent me deeper into despair. I was grieving for her. I 
tried to come to terms with the fact that she would never, after all, have the 
capacity for happiness. When Lucy died, I was already suffocating with loss.

On the morning of the funeral, my mother sat in her wheelchair crying, as she 
often did, terrified by her own constant fears. Sarah and I hugged her, trying, 
as we have both done all our lives, to protect her from her overwhelming 
despair. We have never told her that Lucy is dead.

In the spring of 2003, Ann was working, writing and living in what she 
described to me as "the Lucy factory". I thought this was offensive, but didn't 
say. She mentioned film rights. I was living in frightening and unfamiliar 
territory. For whom was this suffocating grief I felt? For my mother? For Lucy? 
The sadness that Lucy's many other friends wrote about addressed only a tiny 
fraction of the tragedy my family had experienced. I envied the precision of 
their grief. How easy to focus on just one chapter of the intertwined lives of 
my father, dead at 57 from pancreatitis; my eldest brother, a schizophrenic, 
dead following a car accident in Nevada; my little sister, dead; my mother, 
subject to the idle scrutiny of book clubs across America, invited by those 
reading guides to judge her worth as a parent.

I'd had a framed photograph of Lucy for many years, which I loved. The only 
word I can think of to describe it is honest. I had loved it while she was 
alive, for the texture of her skin, for the closeness of her teeth, for a 
quality of nearness that made me feel if I looked at it long enough, she would 
blink. Now I looked at it and thought, who is this person? A public person, 
with a "legacy", with "work", by which we felt obliged to do the right thing. 
But what was the right thing? My husband said he could gauge my mood by whether 
he found the photograph hanging on the wall or hidden behind the chest of 
drawers in the spare room.

I was incapacitated with confusion. I felt, without being able to express it, 
that it was somehow indecent to risk laying my family bare for the sake of 
Ann's personal expression of grief. I was afraid that with the publication of 
her book, there might be more inexperienced interns, another set of unsavoury 
reading guides, another reason for people to ask, "But where was Lucy's mother?"

I wished that Ann would not publish the book. I admired and had defended her 
need to write as an artist, but I hoped she would finish it off, for herself, 
and put it under the bed. I'd have preferred her to work with a smaller 
publisher, one with less of a publicity machine than HarperCollins. That she'd 
ask for no publicity. I wanted her to wait until my mother was dead.

She felt it was her right, even her obligation, to write the book, and that it 
had to be HarperCollins because that was her publisher.

One evening before that conversation, when Ann was in London, we had walked 
arm in arm after dinner towards Notting Hill Gate. I told her I believed that 
Lucy, dead and thus completely free of the worldly obstacles of vanity and 
rivalry, would want us to console each other. I knew that Lucy, stripped down 
to the essence of sister and daughter, would want us to be happy together. Ann 
disagreed - she felt that Lucy would still be jealous of our developing 
friendship. It was almost as if she was excited by the idea.

Ann and I have not been in touch for some time. She offered a sum in exchange 
for permission to use Lucy's letters to her in Truth & Beauty. Sarah and my 
brother Nicholas felt it was fair, a contribution towards the burden of my 
mother's care - she was living in sheltered accommodation paid for by Sarah and 
me. I told them to do what they felt was right.

My sister Lucy was a uniquely gifted writer. Ann, not so gifted, is lucky to 
be able to hitch her wagon to my sister's star. I wish Lucy's work had been 
left to stand on its own.

There is a memory, one of thousands, that I would like to keep of Lucy. She is 
walking with my mother and me in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, near where my 
mother lived for many years. It is a warm and humid early evening, and I am 
taking photographs of them in a graveyard, trying to be arty. Lucy is wearing 
shorts, my mother a white linen shirt. One picture is of Lucy's back and my 
mother's face. Another is of my mother's back and Lucy's face. The one picture 
that I can't focus on quickly enough is when they both turn to look at me, 
laughing, their foreheads nearly touching.

Why is that memory so elusive? Because it is so precious? Because it is mine 
alone, one that I don't have to share with the hundreds of thousands of total 
strangers who think they understand Lucy through Ann Patchett's personal 
vantage point?

Truth & Beauty has enhanced Ann's reputation as a writer, though many have 
questioned the speed with which she published it, and the validity of exposing 
Lucy's frailties, not apparent in Autobiography Of A Face. I'm sorry I stood by 
as this happened.

My sister Sarah and I have been travelling too long in the land of grief, and 
we would like to come home, to prop our pictures on the mantelpiece and to get 
on with our lives. But there is the book: what can we do with a grief thief?
 