
Timidity is a deadly sin in sport and so though Saturday's Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> women's final will be 
remembered for yet another Jennifer Capriati comeback, it was clearly a match 
that Martina Hingis threw away. She led 5-1 in the first set and 4-0 in the 
second, then let slip four match points before losing 4-6, 7-6, 6-2.

"I was passive, hoping she would make mistakes on those match points," said a 
remarkably candid and pleasingly mature Hingis, who added: "I just wasn't up to 
it, mentally or physically."

The sheer drama of the encounter, with both women barely able to put one foot 
in front of another in the final set, so intense was the heat, masked the 
generally poor quality of the tennis. Capriati arrived in Melbourne with hip 
problems and needed heavy strapping on the upper parts of both thighs 
throughout the fortnight, although she took the tape off when 3-0 down in the 
second set, mainly because it was so hot.

Afterwards she made light of the injuries but she was never at her best, 
particularly compared with last year's final when she pounded Hingis to defeat 
in two short sets. But then last year the 25-year-old American was in the 
region of a stone lighter, moving much more quickly, and hitting the ball 
harder. Her three-set semi-final against Belgium's Kim Clijsters had clearly 
taken a toll, with Capriati looking nothing like the world No1 for the majority 
of the match.

But she is a fighter, and despite losing the first set 6-1 she had the courage 
to go for her shots in moments of high anxiety, as she had in last year's 
French Open final against Clijsters when Capriati won 12-10 in the third set. 
This was her third grand-slam final, and her third win. For Hingis it was her 
12th major final, and her seventh defeat, including three successive losses in 
the Australian Open final.

On this occasion everything appeared to have conspired in the Swiss woman's 
favour. Two of the game's big hitters, Lindsay Davenport and Serena Williams, 
missed the tournament because of injury, and Venus Williams was beaten in the 
quarter-finals by Seles. Add Capriati's injury problems and it seemed Hingis 
was poised to win her first major title since here in 1999.

This latest defeat will be a body blow. The very fact that Hingis was totally 
unable to take the initiative on the match points or, more importantly, hold 
her serve when 4-0 up in the second set, was testimony to the mental scarring 
that Capriati, the Williams sisters and Davenport have inflicted on her over 
the past three years.

"It was a big step from last year when I lost to Jennifer in straight sets," 
argued Hingis, as much with herself as those listening. But it was a hollow 
argument.

It is possible that last year's right ankle-ligament operation had left Hingis 
short of match competition, although she won the warm-up event in Sydney, and 
that her women's doubles title, won on Friday with Anna Kournikova, took the 
edge off her physically. But if Hingis found it impossible to add to her five 
grand-slam titles (three Australian, one French and one Wimbledon) when the 
odds were so heavily in her favour, it is hard to make out a case for her ever 
doing so.

Hingis retains the capacity to cut down lesser opposition by the sheer 
brilliance of her positional play and variety of shots, and in this respect she 
is far more interesting to watch than the Williams sisters or Capriati. But 
power undoes her, either through sheer velocity or because, as against 
Capriati, she is run to a standstill.

Her one hope is that she stays fitter than her main rivals, and that her 
desire is greater. "I'm a competitor, so I don't want to give anything up," she 
replied when asked about the doubles.

But she will perhaps look back with most frustration to her inability to close 
out the match from the point when Capriati blew up and looked in danger of 
complete collapse at 3-0 down in the second set. The American demanded that the 
umpire remove a line judge over a call that went against her and raged at her 
father Stefano in the crowd.

"There were a few moments when I got really agitated," she admitted. "It was 
tough and you have nobody else to take it out on except the ones you love."

The resurrection and restoration of Capriati's career is well documented and 
she relished her third slam victory. "I'm not looking for a place in history. 
I'm just looking for titles." So is Hingis, increasingly forlornly.
 