
There is no doubt that that the majority of tennis fans at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> would dearly love to see 
Kim Clijsters, who intends to turn her back on the sport and start a family at 
the end of this year, win the title for the first and possibly last time this 
Saturday, although at 23-year-old she is clearly young enough to make a 
comeback of the sort Martina Hingis made last year. Hingis is also a firm 
favourite here, having played in six consecutive finals between 1997 and 2002 
and winning the first three.

Tomorrow loyalties will be tested when the two meet in the quarter-finals, 
Hingis having beaten China's Li Na 6-4,3-6,6-0 yesterday, with Clijsters, who 
lost the final against fellow Belgian Justine Henin-Hardenne three years ago, 
defeating Daniela Hantuchova of Slovakia 6-1,7-5.

Hingis and Clijsters are also good friends. "Of course we try to beat each 
other, we know that's what we are here for, but we always joke around in the 
locker room afterwards," said Clijsters. "Martina comes up with some 
unbelievable shots that you don't expect. With some players you get used to 
their routine; you know when they are going to play down the line or 
cross-court. With her you always have to be ready to go the other way. It's 
very challenging."

As yet Hingis, who returned here last year after a three-year absence, has 
been no further than the last eight of a slam in her second coming, and most 
doubt that she can add to her previous five slam titles. What has remained 
constant is her love affair with this tournament. "It never ended. When I 
retired I was here as a commentator so I was never really away. It is been the 
place where I have felt the most comfortable. No matter what, I always feel 
this cannot be my last appearance. That's what has kept me alive."

She has yet to beat Clijsters since her return. "Kim is an attacking player 
and I'm more of a counter puncher. I know I will have to be 100 per cent ready 
from the start; otherwise it will be a walkover. That's the key."

Tomorrow's other quarter-final will be an all-Russian affair between Maria 
Sharapova and playing the fast rising Anna Chakvetadze. " I think my chances 
are pretty good," said Sharapova, who this week re-claimed the No 1 ranking 
from Henin who is absent from the tournament, having recently split up from her 
husband.
 