
Martina Hingis and Jennifer Capriati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jennifer-capriati> are to meet again in the 
final of the Australian Open. For Hingis it will be her sixth consecutive 
Melbourne final, and for Capriati a chance to retain her women's singles crown. 
But to predict a winner from the pair will be more tricky, after they both had 
to overcome difficulties in winning their semi-finals today.

Hingis beat Monica Seles, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 as she struggled to see off an 
opponent who not only has a great history at Melbourne Park, but was in great 
form too. "I had to do something, Monica was playing so well - just hitting 
winners," said Hingis who won her last major in Australia in 1999. "I was just 
trying to make her move whenever I could."

Seles started the match much the stronger, the 28-year-old breaking Hingis in 
the first game of the match. Hingis broke back in the sixth, but a selection of 
powerful shots from Seles pulled off another break in the ninth to clinch the 
set.

Hingis was often left grunting and screeching as she summoned up the power to 
match Seles for power. But Seles couldn't maintain her early standards, and 
Hingis quickly seized control.

Coming in to the net frequently and using her volley to keep Seles on the back 
foot, Hingis out-thought her opponent and raced through to claim the second set 
in double time. The Swiss third seed went 5-1 up in the third set too, but 
failed to serve out and had to cope with a mini-revival from Seles, before 
holding out 6-4.

When asked whether she had the ability to overcome Capriati on Sunday, Hingis 
said: "I believe in it now again. I've played some great matches to get here 
and am looking forward to playing the final."

The current champion also had her difficulties in shaking off Belgian teenager 
Kim Clijsters, 7-5, 3-6, 6-1. Both women played out a titanic French Open final 
at Roland Garros last year, with Capriati only prevailing 12-10 in the third 
set. But today she made more effective use of her extra power when it mattered.

The American lost four consecutive service games in the first set, but broke 
back each time before winning out 7-5. An error-strewn second set was gifted to 
Henin, but Capriati recovered in the third set and after holding one break 
point, raised her game and drove past Henin with ease.

"I think it was important to get that first game [in the third set] and not to 
get broken," Capriati said. "I regrouped and said to myself, 'This is it. I'm 
going to give it all I've got.'"

Looking forward to the final, Capriati said: "For the first time, going up 
against her, it's like I'm the one favored to win. I know how she feels being 
in that position, because I was in that position last year. I know she wants it 
bad, but I want it bad too."
 