
Third seed Martina Hingis raced into the semi-finals of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> with a clinical 6-2 6-3 
defeat of unseeded Italian Adriana Serra Zanetti.

Hingis outclassed Serra Zanetti and finished off their quarter-final on 
Melbourne Park's Rod Laver Arena in 73 minutes.

Hingis, who has not won a grand slam title since her third successive 
Australian Open victory in 1999, has dropped just 14 games as she brushed aside 
her first five opponents and has been in dazzling form on her way to the last 
four.

But a much harder test awaits there, where she will play either second seed 
and hot favouriteVenus Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams> or former world number one 
Monica Seles, who meet later on Tuesday.

"It's definitely an interesting match up, they both are playing pretty well," 
Hingis told reporters.

"Venus definitely has the game, everybody put her as the favourite at the 
beginning of the tournament.

"Monica has nothing to lose, but it depends on how Venus is going to play," 
she said.

Hingis will be vying for her sixth straight finals appearance in Melbourne 
after losing to Jennifer Capriati last year and Lindsay Davenport in 2000. She 
said she felt even better than she did at the same stage last year.

"All of us have improved," Hingis said. "If you stay still you're going to 
drop out of there. I think I've reached some stage that I haven't been before."

In a remarkably tough stretch of matches in Melbourne last year, Hingis beat 
Serena Williams in the quarter-finals and then Venus in the semifinals before 
she was beaten 6-4 6-3 by Capriati in the final.

Hingis said she is also happy with her fitness as she works her way back from 
ankle surgery last October.

She won a warm-up event in Sydney - her first title in a year - before coming 
to Melbourne.

"Sometimes it's nice that you have time to regroup and then go 100 percent 
behind everything," she said of her injury layoff.

"This is what players like me wait for, big occasions of a grand slam, 
semifinals and hopefully the final," she said.

Serra Zanetti was playing her first grand slam quarter-final. She reached the 
fourth round in the 1995 French Open.

She had few answers to Hingis's pinpoint groundstrokes and struggled to hold 
serve against a barrage of sharp returns.

In taking five games off Hingis, the tiny Serra Zanetti at least gave the 
Swiss her toughest workout of the tournament.

"She had some great points, those down the lines and the little angles she 
plays," Hingis said.

"She definitely made me run, she made me earn the semi-final spot," she said. 

The match was played with centre court's retractable roof closed after morning 
rain.

Hingis, who has become used to playing bigger power hitters like the Williams 
sisters and Capriati, said it was nice to play someone smaller than her for 
once.

Baseliner Serra Zanetti stands just 1.6 m (5 ft 3 in) to Hingis's 1.7 m (5 ft 
7 in).

Hingis and Serra Zanetti had never before played on the professional tour. 
Serra Zanetti, a talented player but one who has played only fitfully at grand 
slams since 1994, remembered playing Hingis as juniors when she was 14 and 
Hingis 10.

"She was already a very good player and she beat me," Serra Zanetti said of 
their match 11 years ago.
 