
Martina Hingis, at the beginning of her comeback a year ago, was adamant she 
wanted success even more and even faster - "I'm not doing it for money. It's 
just because I love the game. No one's pushing me. It's me who's in charge." 
But the 26-year-old, winner of five grand slam titles before she was 19, is 
getting no nearer to replicating those youthful glory days.

Yesterday was déjà vu. She lost to Kim Clijsters over three sets in the 
quarter-finals here 12 months ago and the same happened again, although this 
time Hingis, three timesAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> champion from 1997-9, took 
the first set but lost 3-6, 6-4, 6-3 . "I came out stronger and I had my 
chances," said Hingis. "I felt like I was winning the match and I had all the 
things in my hands. But she's a great fighter."

Hingis left the circuit in 2002 with 40 singles titles to her name. Injury was 
the underlying cause for the Swiss player's departure, although it was the 
unremitting rise of the power game that seemingly deposited her prematurely 
into the history books at 22. It was an awfully young age to quit but 
superficially at least she appeared content to step off the treadmill and enjoy 
her considerable riches.

She rode her horses and dabbled in television punditry. However, the more 
Hingis watched, the more the desire for renewed competition grew, and late in 
2005 she announced she was coming back. Since then she has reached three slam 
quarter-finals in five attempts and won a couple more singles titles. And 
everybody still loves to watch her, for her game is a nostalgic reminder that 
tennis used to be about deftness of touch.

Hingis's anticipation is second to none, while her net play, when she can get 
there, is almost a lost art among her peers. But all today's youngsters hit the 
ball harder than she does. "You can't change it," she said. "The game moves 
on." She might believe she is a better, more rounded player now, but she also 
knows the lack of fear she had as a teenager has gone forever. "I would have 
mentally broken other players earlier. I kind of had Kim, but let her get back 
in. I was too tentative."

Justine Henin-Hardenne, world No1, plans to return to the circuit next month. 
Three weeks after withdrawing from the Australian Open for "personal family 
reasons" the Belgian announced yesterday that she was splitting from her 
husband, Pierre-Yves, and would return at the Open Gaz de France. The 
24-year-old married in 2002.
 