


The rate of HIV infections in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men has 
doubled in the past five years, while the national rate has stabilised, the 
latest Australian data has found.

The proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders diagnosed with HIV 
was double that of non-Indigenous men, surveillance data collated by the Kirby 
Institute at the University of NSW and published on Monday found.

'I'm too young to die': the disease of disadvantage forcing Indigenous 
children to have open-heart surgery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/26/im-too-young-to-die-the-disease-of-disadvantage-forcing-indigenous-children-to-have-open-heart-surgery>
Rates also doubled among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders aged over 35 
in the past five years, with 10 diagnoses per 100,000 Indigenous people in 2015.

Associate Prof James Ward, who is head of Aboriginal health at the South 
Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, said the rise in HIV in 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders last year was due to several underlying 
risk factors which made that population more susceptible.

“We’ve got a particularly young population where much more live in remote and 
regional areas where access to HIV testing and treatment services is not as 
readily accessible as in the city,” Ward said.

“We have very high rates of other sexually transmissible infections which 
makes it much easier for HIV to be transmitted in the background of other STIs. 
And we have a higher proportion of our diagnoses occurring among those who 
inject drugs.”

While he said it was not clear whether the higher rates were down to more 
cases or increased testing, he pointed out that rates of diagnosis had 
stabilised in the non-Indigenous population.

Some targeted prevention campaigns working in the non-Indigenous population 
had not been considered and rolled out as effectively among Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander communities, he added.

A higher proportion of HIV cases in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
population were among heterosexuals and people who inject drugs, than the 
non-Indigenous population, the data found.

President of Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations, Dr Bridget Haire, 
said the commonwealth had actually divested funding away from the Anwernekenhe 
National HIV Alliance which aims to improve the lives and protect the rights of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people affected by HIV.

“This is not helpful at time when infections are rising,” she said. 


Rates of chlamydia, gonorrhoea and infectious syphilis infection were 3, 10 
and 6 times greater respectively than in the non-Indigenous population in 2015, 
the report found, with even greater disparities in remote and very remote areas.


However the introduction of the cervical cancer vaccine and vaccine programs 
had seen a a 91% reduction in genital warts in young Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander females aged less than 21 year.

Scientists testing HIV cure report 'remarkable' progress after patient 
breakthrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/02/scientists-testing-cure-for-hiv-report-progress>
The data also revealed that one in 20 young Australians aged from 15 to 29 had 
chlamydia last year, but most of them were undiagnosed.


While approximately 50,845 young people were tested and diagnosed by their GP, 
prevalence data for the disease suggests 260,000 young people aged between 15 
and 29 were carrying the infection last year, Associate Prof Rebecca Guy, the 
program head of Kirby’s surveillance, evaluation and research program, said.

Chlamydia is usually easily cured with a single dose of antibiotics, but 80% 
of cases show no symptoms. Untreated, chlamydia can have serious complications, 
especially for women, as it can cause infertility. It is a notifiable disease, 
which means new diagnoses have to be reported by doctors to health departments.

“Chlamydia is the most commonly reported sexually transmitted infection in 
Australia,” Guy said.

“About three quarters of notifications are among young people aged 15 to 29. 
In this age group there’s been a steady increase in notifications over the past 
10 years. But encouragingly, there has been a decline in notifications among 
15-19 year olds, a 19% decrease in the past five years.”

However, testing and therefore treatment is much higher among women, she said, 
calling for more to be done to encourage young men to be tested for the disease 
in order to prevent spreading it to their sexual partners.

The data was released at the Australasian Sexual Health Conference 2016 in 
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide>.
 