
We always suspected this particular Senate was going to be a wild ride. Sadly 
we didn’t know the half of it.


On Tuesday Family First senator Bob Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-day> careered in the direction of the 
high court. Now he’s been joined by One Nation senator Rod Culleton.

It’s worth taking the time to understand the particulars of the Day saga, so 
let’s start there.


Day, a construction multimillionaire as well as a crossbench senator, owned a 
building inAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide>. He 
wanted to use the building in Kent Town as his Senate office.

In 2014 Day sold the Kent Town building to a business associate, by his own 
account to “avoid any conflict of interest”. By that Day presumably meant 
falling foul of section 44 of the constitution which forbids parliamentarians 
from having “any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any agreement with 
the public service of the commonwealth”.

Day in the life: a timeline of Bob Day's Senate saga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/day-in-the-life-a-timeline-of-bob-days-senate-saga>
But although the building was sold, Day apparently retained liability for the 
mortgage, so the transfer was not a clean break. More of that shortly.

Here’s the first thing we can say.

It is clear there have been concerns in the government about the Kent Town 
electorate office leasing arrangements since the get-go, from the time Day 
first entered parliament in July 2014.

How do we know this?

We know because the newly elected Abbott government allowed the Family First 
senator to remain in situ only if various conditions were met, including ending 
his personal connection to the building.

The other conditions imposed on Day at the time were: he had to pay for the 
refit of the new office, and the government would pay no rent until the Labor 
man Don Farrell (who lost his seat in that election) vacated his electorate 
office in the Adelaide CBD.

Fairfax further revealed on Wednesday that bureaucrats in the finance 
departmentrecommended clearly against Day 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/government-approved-bob-days-office-deal-despite-departmental-advice-not-to-20161102-gsg8rf.html>
 situating himself in Kent Town, but the then special minister of state, 
Michael Ronaldson, ultimately ticked the arrangement.

Politicians are certainly not obliged to follow the advice of their 
bureaucrats, although in this instance it would have been prudent to do so. 
This isn’t a hindsight judgment – the potential pitfalls were pretty clear at 
the time.

The why of Ronaldson’s conditional approval of Day’s preferred office 
arrangements is reasonably obvious if we consider the contemporary political 
context.

The new Abbott government, looking at a fractious Senate (everyone remembers 
the band of crossbenchersTony Abbott dubbed “feral” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/17/tony-abbott-tells-party-room-its-time-to-look-on-the-bright-side-of-life>
, right?) would have doubtless been at pains not to irritate any reliable 
supporters in the red place, and Day was certainly that.

Now we need to roll forward to 1 December 2015. By then, a new special 
minister of state had taken possession of Day’s office arrangements – Mal 
Brough – and a lease was signed covering the Adelaide office.

As Day puts it in a statement he released on Wednesday: “The government is in 
possession of a legal opinion which says from the day the department of finance 
signed a lease with Fullarton Investments Pty Ltd – the owner of the building 
in which I had my Senate office, a company I am neither a director nor 
shareholder of –was the day I became ineligible to be a senator.

“That day was 1 December 2015.”

Government challenges election of One Nation senator Rod Culleton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/challenge-election-one-nation-senator-rod-culleton>
Government people familiar with the case say Day provided a guarantee on the 
mortgage for the building through his company B&B Day Pty Ltd, so there was a 
financial exposure, which arguably triggers the constitutional issue. As Day 
characterises it: “Because Fullarton Investments owes me money, the 
department’s legal opinion says I have an indirect interest in the lease.”

Despite the lease being signed with the commonwealth last December, no rent 
was paid on the building.

After months passed, Day went looking for the payments. On 4 August, he 
approached Scott Ryan, who is the current special minister of state. This 
contact happened a month after the election, and immediately after Day was 
returned to the Senate after the marathon count.

Day’s inquiry to Ryan about the rent (which apparently included an assurance 
to the minister that there was no constitutional problem, just in case anyone 
was wondering) then triggered a process where Ryan sought advice about 
precisely what was going on with the building in Adelaide, and whether there 
was any constitutional problem with the arrangement.

The next relevant date is 7 October.

On that day, Ryan told the Family First senator he intended to terminate the 
lease on the building and seek external legal advice about whether Day had an 
indirect interest in the lease, which could fall foul of section 44.

The legal advice came back to the government last Thursday, and it was 
conveyed to the Senate president, Stephen Parry, on Friday.

While the correspondence and the legal advice was flying around behind the 
scenes about whether the Family First senator was validly elected, Day was also 
facing significant problems with his construction empire.The building business 
was put into liquidation on 17 October. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/family-first-senator-bob-day-quits-after-business-collapses>

Bizarrely, rather than just accepting the sum of the parts and moving on from 
politics to deal with the practical consequences of his various compounding 
imbroglios,Day remained in public view, prevaricating about whether to stay or 
whether to go. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/labor-presses-coalition-to-rule-out-accepting-bob-day-vote-on-abcc-bill>

The reason cited for Day’s prevarication was he wanted to be present for 
critical votes coming up in the parliament. Maybe that was the reason, maybe it 
wasn’t. Whatever it was about, it has complicated the political appearances for 
the government.

While the available evidence suggests Ryan has made a priority of getting 
clarity on Day’s arrangements post election, and working through the sequence 
required to clean up the mess,Labor, naturally, has pounced, and reasonably so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/what-did-you-know-and-when-labor-wants-government-answers-on-bob-day-fiasco>
.

It is more than reasonable to ask who knew what when, and why it took such a 
long period of time to follow the trails of smoke diligently back to the fire.

The Day problem was hidden in plain sight.

It’s obvious the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has relied heavily on 
Day’s vote, both in this parliament and the last one. That’s a matter of 
record. So it is reasonable to ask why the government continued to rely on 
Day’s parliamentary vote when the government was, in fact, fully aware there 
were serious legal questions about whether he was eligible to sit in the Senate.

And then there is Culleton. The One Nation senator has faced persistent 
questions about his eligibility since he arrived in Canberra.

The solicitor-general, Justin Gleeson, said two weeks ago (in the middle of 
the high-octane slugfest between himself and the attorney general, George 
Brandis) that he had provided advice on an urgent legal matter about the 
composition of the Senate, which Brandis confirmed on Wednesday was about 
Culleton.

Brandis said he received Gleeson’s opinion late on Friday, 28 October, and 
forwarded it to Culleton.

This problem relates to proceedings in the high court against Culleton by 
Bruce Bell. Bell is alleging Culleton was incapable of being chosen as a 
senator because at the time of the last election he had been convicted 
convicted of an offence punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for one year 
or longer.

So now, Senate willing, Culleton will be joining Day in the high court. Far 
from the Senate being a sleepy hollow, it is all happening.

Regardless of how the current case studies end, it’s clear the government 
needs to look at new measures to ensure that would-be politicians are forced to 
comply with their constitutional requirements, as Australian Electoral 
Commission veteranMichael Maley has already suggested to a current 
parliamentary inquiry. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/tighten-up-political-system-to-stem-birther-controversies-aec-veteran-says>

That’s just a basic integrity measure.

To give voters some confidence, it is also incumbent on the government to come 
clean about everything it has known about either matter.

And that means everything.

Anything less than full disclosure, and concrete steps to ensure greater 
integrity in the process in the future, will be marked down as a failure by the 
Turnbull government – and this is a government which is already chalking up too 
many failures in the minds of the voting public.
 