
The children's commissioner Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> is to launch a campaign to 
encourage children to be more like the characters in Arthur Ransome's Swallows 
and Amazons series. After some initial confusion when people thought he had set 
himself the Herculean task of turning the nation's youth into one giant 
middle-class Edwardian family, he clarified his aim. He wants to teach kids to 
enjoy the great outdoors and take more physical risks, like the all-camping, 
all-sailing Walker and Blackett children.

A laudable goal. But as today's only semi-literate generation are unlikely to 
have heard of Swallows and Amazons (unless it's the name of some failed Pop 
Idol group candidate), Al's schooner of good intentions risks being holed below 
the waterline on the rocks of ignorance. So to prevent such unnecessary 
founder-ing, here are a few pointers on how to live the Ransomian life, for all 
those blubbery offspring tipped unwillingly off the sofa and into the fresh air.

1. Names are very important. You must be known for the duration as something 
like John, Susan, Roger, Nancy or Peggy. Nobody called Kevin, Chantelle or 
Kayleigh-Chavberry ever had a healthful adventure.

2. Do not, however, call yourself Titty. Some accommodations with the modern 
age must be made and this is one of them. You don't want to overstimulate all 
the paedophiles who will be gathering at the shoreline to watch you clamber 
round your coracle in lissom fashion and shorts.

3. Boat names are even more important. They should be along the lines of 
"Swallows", "Amazons" and "Scarab" - not "Crack Whore", "iPod" or "The Olde 
Happy Slap".

4. When you set up camp, cook a tasty supper of sausages, bread and molasses, 
ideally in billy cans. Do not send out for pizza.

5. Don't forget to bring a dictionary with you, so you can find out what 
molasses and billy cans are.

6. When fishing, use maggots, not Turkey Twizzlers, for bait. A single chicken 
nugget can pollute a body of water the size of Lake Michigan and render it 
uninhabitable for 17 aquatic generations.

7. The original Swallows and Amazons did their sailing in the Lake District 
and along the Norfolk Broads. Alas, in either of these places nowadays, anyone 
trying to have fun which doesn't centre around peeling off an HRT patch or 
eating overpriced offal in a gastropub is shot on sight, lest they disturb the 
natural habitat of the Greater Crested Retiree. You will have to do your best 
to get yourself afloat at the nearest lido, reservoir or chemical spill.

8. Remember, you are supposed to be exploring the great unknown, inviting 
adventures and rites of passage, forging bonds, experiencing moments of moral 
illumination, and generally presaging adult hopes and fears. Fitting a satnav 
system to your dinghy will substantially reduce these opportunities. Draw some 
crude pencil maps instead.
 