
Derek Holland gave up four hits in eight stellar innings, and Nelson Cruz and 
Mitch Moreland each hit a home run as theTexas Rangers blanked the Oakland 
Athletics 4-0 Sunday to make Ron Washington the most successful manager in 
Rangers history.

Adrian Beltre had two hits and drove in a run for the Rangers, who have won 
six of seven to move within 2 1-2 games of the American League West-leading 
Athletics. Nate Freiman had two hits for the A's, who have lost four of five.

Felix Doubront pitched seven shutout innings to continue his run of strong 
starts and Jacoby Ellsbury drove in two runs to lift theBoston Red Sox over the 
Arizona Diamondbacks 4-0 in interleague play. It was Boston's seventh win in 
nine games, completing a 5-2 homestand. The AL East leaders play 16 of the next 
19 away from Fenway Park, beginning Monday night in Houston.

Doubront (8-5) allowed five singles, struck out five, didn't walk a batter and 
allowed just one runner to reach second base in holding an opponent to three 
runs or fewer for the 15th straight start. It's the most by a Red Sox 
left-hander since at least 1920.

In an another interleague game, Ian Kennedy won his San Diego Padres debut, 
his first victory in more than two months, and Everth Cabrera, facing a 50-game 
suspension in baseball's latest drug scandal, had two hits and two RBIS as the 
Padres beat theNew York Yankees 6-3. Kennedy (8-4), acquired from Arizona on 
Wednesday, hadn't won since June 1 at the Cubs. He allowed two runs and four 
hits in 5 2-3 innings, struck out six and walked four. Huston Street pitched 
the ninth for his 21st save in 22 chances.

In the AL, Torii Hunter hit an RBI single in the 12th inning as the Detroit 
Tigersedged the Chicago White Sox 3-2 to extend Chicago's losing streak to 10 
games. At Baltimore, seldom-used Henry Blanco hit a two-run homer in the 
seventh inning off Chen Wei-yin as theSeattle Mariners beat the Baltimore 
Orioles 3-2 behind left-hander Joe Saunders. The Toronto Blue Jays edged the 
Los Angeles Angels 6-5 and the Minnesota Twins were 3-2 winners over the 
Houston Astros.

In the NL, Chris Johnson drove in a pair of runs and Alex Wood pitched six 
strong innings to lead theAtlanta Braves to their 10th straight victory, 4-1 
over the slumpingPhiladelphia Phillies. Wood (2-2) allowed one run on two hits 
in his fourth major league start. The unorthodox 22-year-old rookie 
left-hander, who configures his body in an unusual way during his delivery, 
struck out three and walked two.

AJ Burnett allowed eight hits and Russell Martin provided some rare run 
support for the right-hander with a three-run homer as thePittsburgh Pirates 
downed theColorado Rockies 5-1. Burnett (5-7) struck out nine and walked one in 
his first complete game of the season and 23rd of his 15-year career. He threw 
110 pitches, 83 for strikes.

The Los Angeles Dodgers shut the Chicago Cubs out 1-0, the St Louis Cardinals 
trounced theCincinnati Reds 15-2 and the Milwaukee Brewers downed the 
Washington Nationals 8-5.

In other interleague games, the Tampa Bay Rays beat the San Francisco Giants 
4-3, theCleveland Indians blanked the Florida Marlins 2-0 and the Kansas City 
Royals defeated the New York Mets 6-2.
 