
Forgive, once again, my lack of blog filing. I have been navigating the joys 
and wonders provided by English property law – losing a home, trying to buy 
another, firing a bad solicitor, retaining another solicitor to deal with the 
bad one, finding out how many items the removers who got me from Scotland broke 
during their progress (most of them) overseeing the new removers taking me out 
of storage in London (they were wonderfully careful) and their merry, and 
ultimately futile, attempts to haul my old sofas up my new stairs. I was also 
as delighted as you can imagine to be technically homeless for three months and 
end up borrowing other kind people's premises while trying to keep body and 
typing together.

It's been a bumpy time and yet also a wonderful one. I now know I have friends 
who will support me in all manner of circumstances and that if I ask for help I 
will get it. I'm very bad at asking for help and it's a habit I hope I will 
retain when necessary. I also hope I will remember that when I was at my most 
vulnerable, still slightly ill, behind with work, in need of cash and with no 
address, I was held, encouraged and looked after until life slowly evened out 
and many of the bad things went away.

Of course, I wasn't that vulnerable. I'm a relatively articulate middle-class 
person with a passable accent and some funds behind me. Had I been genuinely 
destitute and really homeless I would have been lost in every sense, because I 
live in a country which now punishes the weak for their weakness. I am lucky in 
an unlucky time.

Last week I travelled to the capital of another country – Berlin – to take 
part in a discussion about the place of writers and artists in the wider world 
and the role they can have in binding us together, helping us to understand 
each other, to see that our individual suffering is not greater than anyone 
else's, only closer to us and that any suffering is neither a good nor a safe 
thing for any of us. That's the kind of stuff they talk about in Berlin. I know 
because I've been there before. It seems they talk about it all the time.

Germany is a country with cause to remember what happens when a population is 
force-fed a national media diet of fraudulent journalism, threat-mongering 
hatred and debased gossip. Nazism not only took great care to produce a toxic 
and dehumanising culture, it sought out and destroyed work that sustained, that 
inspired, that made private and subversive joys, that gave officially 
unacceptable lives value and dignity.

Before the wholesale destruction of living, breathing human beings comes the 
destruction of what they create, the rehearsal of murders in effigy.

Whenever the UK's national obsession with the second world war rears up around 
a sports fixture, or an EU wrangle, or a tabloid spat over beach towels, I 
despair that all we seem to remember about that war is that we won. It's simply 
become the ultimate away match. We don't recall why we won – that a whole 
nation united in the face of horrible pain and hardships and was supported by 
its government so it could do so. The short-termism, self-interest and 
prejudices of our betters crumbled, as did the class divides, and our press 
eventually had to admit we were all worthwhile.

Would such a thing as the new bedroom tax  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/25/bedroom-tax-protest>have 
been possible to introduce in the Britain of 1945, or 1949? In 1979? I don't 
think so.

As it happens, I have a bedroom over-capacity. My new study could technically 
be used to house at least two people. I won't be taxed on it, because I don't 
claim benefits. Basically, because I can afford to pay the tax, I don't have to.

If I had the courage of my convictions I probably should be using the room to 
house at least two people. In fact, it's where I work – where I'm working now - 
and where I store my books, for the first time in my life, all in shelves where 
I can see them. From here I can see the spine ofThe Wind In The Willows 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780141321134/the-wind-in-the-willows>
 – the same volume I read in bed when I was a child. It has been my friend for 
more than 40 years, there for me, a kind light. Here is the volume ofRaymond 
Carver <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/raymond-carver> I threw 
across the room when I was a student because it was so amazing, so tender with 
broken people. Here isAlasdair Gray 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/alasdair-gray> and his 
mind-blowing Lanark, which taught me the courage inherent in thinking and 
creating when I had no courage of my own. Here is my library.

Here are all my reasons for being inhumanity-averse. Here are all my reasons 
to take the next step and the next, even when I am tired, or lonely. Here are 
all the pathways back and forth to be with love, to express love. Here are some 
of the things that get me through. They are cheap and simple and unelectronic, 
some of them are very old, or scruffy. They are all threads of life within my 
life. If they were burned, or lost, or confiscated, or had to be sold they 
would stay with me indelibly, contagiously – the fire from so many words from 
so many other minds and lives. Here are gifts which are the opposite of death 
and silence. They're not as weak and small as you might think. Onwards.
 