
Mark Butcher's honesty in owning up to not taking a catch cleanly off Steve 
Waugh yesterday was praised as a noble example of sportsmanship by the 
Australian side.

Waugh was on 56 when he edged a ball from Andrew Caddick. Butcher took the 
catch low to his left at second slip but told the batsmen he suspected the ball 
had hit the ground. Several England fielders appealed for the dismissal and the 
decision was referred to the third umpire, but while Darrell Hair was scanning 
the inconclusive television replays Butcher told Waugh he had failed to 
complete the catch.

"As soon as the ball went in my hand I was not sure if it had carried or not," 
Butcher said. "Other fielders around me appealed and as a result it was 
referred to the third umpire. Steve Waugh asked me if I had caught it and I 
said I was not sure. Then the third umpire decision came back and it was given 
not out. I've since seen a replay and I was right to have doubts. Steve Waugh 
thanked me for my honesty."

Watching at the non-striker's end was Justin Langer, who was involved in a 
similar incident during the second Test in Adelaide when he claimed a catch off 
Michael Vaughan in the gully. The television replays were unclear then too and 
Vaughan was given not out on 19, which he converted into 177.

"It was good to see sportsmanship here and that is the way the game should be 
played by professional cricketers," Langer said. "The umpire asked if they were 
appealing and Nasser said yes, so he referred it to the third umpire. Butcher 
then said he didn't think it carried and Steve gave him a pat on the back. It 
was a good example to set."

It was the kind of break Waugh needed, with doubts over his future mounting 
after a mediocre year with the bat, but in making an unbeaten 62 he produced 
aggressive strokeplay to match that of the century-makers Matthew Hayden and 
Langer.

"Steve Waugh has got to a point where he wants to enjoy his cricket," Hayden 
said. "He really enjoyed the partnership between myself and Justin and his 
spirits were excellent right up to the time he had to go out to bat."

If Waugh prolonged his career yesterday, a hand injury may have ended Alec 
Stewart's last Ashes tour. The wicketkeeper was ruled out at the MCG after 
being diagnosed with synovitis in his right hand, a condition similar to 
arthritis, and has less than a week to recover in time for the final Test in 
Sydney.

His absence forced England to select a four-man attack which, despite Hayden's 
103 and Langer's first hundred since January, maintained its discipline for the 
majority of the day.

"England bowled well in the first session and Andy Caddick was swinging it 
back in for the first time this summer," Hayden said. "It was as good as 
England have bowled through this series."

Graham Dilley, England's assistant coach, agreed: "My impression was that we 
bowled with discipline and after that little spell after lunch when they scored 
a lot of runs we came back at them. A score of 356 for three looks like another 
normal day in Australia but I think there are things that we can take out of 
that performance."
 