
Back in 1976, when Taxi Driver first opened, I trotted off to see it with 
no idea what I was in for. Imagine that. I'd never heard of Martin Scorsese or 
Robert de Niro, and I hadn't read the reviews. It was my date's choice of 
movie; I was more of a Night of the Living Dead kind of girl. So I sat in 
the front row of the Leicester Square theatre, feeling slightly underwhelmed by 
the absence of zombies, until near the end. And then, suddenly, everything 
turned yellow, Bernard Herrmann's music was drilling into my skull, blood was 
dripping off De Niro's finger and I had to lean forward to stop myself fainting.

Incredibly, my date didn't notice anything amiss and I was too embarrassed to 
tell him what had happened. It's true the scene in Theatre of Blood in which 
Robert Morley is force-fed with his own poodles had put me off chicken supreme 
for life, but I had always been able to sit through films such as Death Line or 
The Devils without flinching. I assumed my nerves had simply been caught 
unawares by an unexpected explosion of splatter in a non-genre movie – until, 
not long afterwards, the exact same thing happened during a vampire film at the 
Holloway Odeon.

In Grave of the Vampire (screenplay by David Chase, no less), the vampire 
rapes a girl, who gives birth to a vampire baby, which refuses to drink milk, 
so the mother has a lightbulb moment, picks up a knife and … What actually 
happened was considerably less gruesome than I'd feared, but too late, because 
it was head-between-knees again. But now I was starting to feel a little 
anxious. How could I call myself a horror fan if I didn't have the stomach for 
horror movies? Would I henceforth have to keep muttering the tagline of The 
Last House on the Left? "To avoid fainting, keep repeating: 'It's only a movie 
… It's only a movie … '"

Not long afterwards, I had to walk out of Blue Sunshine when the first 
psychopath shoved a screaming girl into an open fireplace, because I was afraid 
I might vomit. Even more dramatically, I ended up spending most of Francesco 
Rosi's gangster movie Lucky Luciano slumped on the floor of the ladies' toilet 
because I'd suddenly became convinced my head was going to fall off.

Oddly enough, the film that restored equilibrium to my world was probably the 
most gruesome of them all – David Cronenberg's Shivers. The opening credits had 
barely finished before one of the characters had strangled his mistress, sliced 
open her torso and poured acid into the wound, at which my nervous system 
sighed, "aw, so what?" and allowed me to settle back to enjoy the show. As 
Alexander DeLarge might have said, I was cured all right.

But if the days of horror making me feel queasy are over, and I can sit 
through the Saw movies or The Human Centipede without my pulse missing a beat, 
it just means the tipping points have shifted. I used to laugh in the face of 
sentimentality, but now I have only to look at the opening credits of Tokyo 
Story or My Neighbour Totoro and I'm welling up; A Serbian Film is a piece of 
cake next to Hachiko: A Dog's Story, which reduces me to quivering jelly.

Unlike many of my peers, I can negotiate the whip-pans of Husbands and Wives 
or Breaking the Waves without feeling seasick, yet the strain of trying to make 
sense out of cack-handed chase scenes such as the ones in Quantum of Solace 
leaves me with a headache. Even more extreme was my response to the boring 
British film Among Giants, when the dreary predictability of the relationship 
between Rachel Griffiths and Pete Postlethwaite triggered a full-blown panic 
attack, obliging me to rush out in mid-screening to do a series of breathing 
exercises in Soho Square.

But alas, the most violent physical reaction I experience in the cinema these 
days has less to do with what's on screen; it's the sweaty-palmed, homicidal 
fury brought on by spectators who insist on chattering or texting during the 
film. Where's Travis Bickle when you really need him?
 