
Hospital doctors and nurses should be given greater control of their budgets, 
the health minister, Lord Darzi, urged as he backed away from proposals for 
closing district general hospitals.

Launching a progress report on his plans to restructure the health service, 
the minister promised to scrap more performance targets and improve the 
"wellbeing" ofNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff.

The transfer of budgetary powers to clinicians has been widely welcomed as a 
means of handing power over to frontline medical staff.

For Darzi, the surgeon turned politician, it is key to delivering quality 
patient care and "innovation" in the way the health service is delivered.

In an interview with the Guardian, the minister said: "We are making the case 
that clinicians should start running their own budgets. We want more of them to 
do it in the acute [hospital] sector.

"We are talking about what brings clinicians to work, about quality of care. 
It's going to make a difference."

The move to devolve budgetary control to doctors and nurses in hospitals is 
aimed at improving efficiency within the NHS. It is already happening in some 
local trusts.

Darzi said it would allow clinicians to manage their budgets in ways that 
would "promote entrepreneurship and innovative delivery" of services aimed at 
the needs of the patient.

Asked whether it would result in fewer NHS managers, he said the complexity of 
the NHS would still require their skills.

Both the NHS Confederation and the British Medical Association welcomed the 
emphasis. "It looks like they want to ensure that trusts are giving real power 
to clinicians," said Jonathan Fielden, head of the BMA's consultants committee. 
"The evidence is that this will drive up the quality of care. You can improve 
data and that's beneficial. It puts clinicians and their fundamental drive for 
quality in charge of budgets."

Asked whether NHS restructuring would lead to the closure of district general 
hospitals in London – a plan condemned in motions passed at the BMA conference 
in Liverpool this week – Darzi dismissed the suggestion as "complete nonsense".

"Outside London there has been no statement about hospital [closures]. There's 
a piece of work we did in London [in 2007] in which we said we needed to make 
healthcare more differentiated.

"If we are to make the changes of the next decade and deal with lifestyle 
diseases, we need to have more care delivered in a primary care setting."

Hospital closures, however, were "nothing to do with me", he said. Where new 
ones were built and outmoded ones shut down was a "local issue", he insisted.

Earlier this month, the new health secretary, Andy Burnham, said that he would 
not shrink from difficult decisions even if it meant closing hospitals or wards 
before an election. "We can't step away from system reforms because of those 
fears," he said.

Nigel Edwards, director of policy at the NHS Confederation, said the 
government had never adopted an "explicit policy" on shaping the hospital 
system, but added: "I strongly suspect they wish they had never talked about 
it."

On improving the health of NHS workers as a means of setting an example to the 
rest of the population, Darzi said: "We are committed to changes for life as an 
employer of 1.2 million people.

"We want to be leading with our staff and we want to be ambassadors, making a 
commitment this year on [their] health and wellbeing."

On scrapping performance targets, the minister said that the 13-week waiting 
time for outpatients and 26-week target for inpatients would no longer be 
collected in order to free up time for patient care.
 