
This Friday, if you're in work, you may find yourself surrounded by children 
telling you what to do. You, in turn, might be asked to "demonstrate your 
commitment to listening to and recognising the talents of young people across 
England". Or, at least, that's the theory.

Professor Sir Al Aynsley-Green, the children's commissioner for England, leads 
an organisation called11 Million <http://www.11million.org.uk/> (as in the 
number of children and young people in the English population). Aynsley-Green 
has designated FridayTakeover Day 
<https://www.childrenscommissioner.org/adult/takeoverday/takeoverday.cfm?id=2007>
, "to celebrate the importance of children and young people in our society". 
And here, of course, is the first flaw.

Namely, that a large number of adults see no cause for celebration at all in 
the existence of children and young people, important or otherwise - and 
especially not when they insist on being seen, heard and consulted.

On Takeover Day, nonetheless, adults are requested to work with the under-18s 
and bring them into organisations, institutions and offices, to include them in 
the working day, share a challenge and/or to ask them to come up with a 
strategy that allows them to "change one thing in one day".

The example given of the latter is to "ask the children and young people to 
decide on the best time in the week for a staff gathering to take place and to 
construct an agenda". Now, if I was 10 or 12 or 14 and reasonably bright, 
wouldn't I find that just a touch patronising?

It's work experience 
<http://www.work-experience.org/cms/ShowPage/Home_page/p!eLacegf> on a 
countrywide scale; adults allegedly handing over the reins of power. And what 
do many teenagers know of work experience? Mindless clerical work; all 
experience out in the field cancelled out by health and safety; sandwiches in 
the grownups' canteen and sayonara.

Does Aynsley-Green, whose own powers as a children's commissioner are 
shamefully limited, really believe that children and young people are so easily 
conned into believing that a couple of hours wearing the mayoral robes is an 
introduction to the way that adults think? Or, for that matter, that one day it 
will shift some adult's perception about the "problem" of youth?

Takeover Day is depressing in the narrowness of its imagination; its aims, 
strictures and goals. It also reveals the hypocrisy that pervades so many adult 
initiatives to "deepen democracy"; engage the disenfranchised and encourage 
children and young people to believe they really, really are participating.

A number of councils, companies and organisations have signed up. Some 
children will, no doubt, have fun; and possibly some adults too - but wouldn't 
the whole exercise have been far more effective if England's politicians, city 
moguls, councillors, entrepreneurs and other professionals had been encouraged 
to step out of the environment of paid work to shadow a child or a teenager?

I haven't a clue how individuals could render themselves less visible and 
effectively weave themselves into a child or young person's world for several 
days - but it would surely make the terms of engagement between grownup and 
child less employment focused and adult-orientated.

The 11 Million Takeover Day is part of the celebrations of the 18th birthday 
of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC 
<http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/uncrc/>). The convention consists of 54 
articles (including, for instance, the right to survival; the right to develop 
to the fullest and the right to freedom of expression, "to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers").

The articles are useful benchmarks of how far short of their goals the 
developed (one in four UK children in poverty) and developing world (150 
million children malnourished; 120 million primary school children not in 
school; 600 children infected with HIV daily) are falling.

In the UK, children and young people are, on the whole, infinitely better off 
than in the developing world. But the hypocrisy of the government in ratifying 
the UNCRC while blatantly ignoring a number of its articles implies that the 
18th birthday should also be a time to review how to exert more pressure for 
compliance.

Take for instance, the article concerning the right to freedom of association. 
Well, not if there are two or more of you teenagers hanging around an English 
street corner. Or Article 40, the right, "having infringed penal law to be 
treated in a manner consistent with promotion of a child's sense of dignity and 
worth". Would that be "dignity and worth" as witnessed in the use of 
segregation, restraint and violence on mentally vulnerablelocked-up 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6224958.stm> children?

And best not mention the fact that although the British don't really listen 
until a law is passed (for example no smoking; no drink driving; seat belts), 
the sprit of the convention is ignored by the government's refusal to pass 
legislation to stop smacking.

So, to me, Takeover Day feels like a gimmick and a photo opportunity; a sham 
calling card of progress. It may change the lives of a few, old and young, but 
it will take principles and the genuine exercise of political will if our 
children - our present and future citizens - really are seen to matter.
 