
Beethoven's 9th Symphony is one of the greatest works of art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/may/24/beethovens-ninth-always-comes-first>
. It is vast, complicated and instantly recognised by people around the world. 
It's Europe's unofficial anthem, heralds the close of the year in Japan, and 
memorably celebrated the fall of the Berlin Wall. But what do most people 
actuallyknow about it?

Sure, it was written by Beethoven, it has four movements and features a huge 
chorus and soloists singing in German. But what is the meaning of B9? When and 
how did Beethoven compose it? Why has it earned a special place in so many 
cultures? The reason we wanted to makean app about Beethoven's 9th Symphony 
<http://www.touchpress.com/titles/beethovens9thsymphonyiphone/> was to explore 
all of this in depth and hopefully to create something entertaining at the same 
time.

To proceed we needed several things. A crack team of app designers and 
engineers are a given, but we also needed a musical partner – an organisation 
rooted in the world of popular music, able to help negotiate the complex rights 
around musical performances. We knew we wanted to compare multiple alternative 
performances of the symphony, and the record companyDeutsche Grammophon 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/gb/> was superbly placed to provide the very 
best of these. Their team also helped us to interview an array of interesting 
people to talk about Beethoven and his work in the insights section of the app.

Then we needed an author who could explain and comment on the work. We invited 
the acclaimed teacher, composer and broadcaster David Owen Norris, who did a 
great job of writing not only an integrated book but also a synchronised 
blow-by-blow commentary that you can read as the symphony plays. David has a 
wry sense of humour that shines through his intelligent text.

The B9 app is enormously complicated with numerous moving parts. Probably the 
most challenging aspect was perfectly synchronising the four legendary 
performances. This sounds simple until you realise that each one is a different 
duration, and the four conductors unpredictably speed up and slow down in each 
section.

In the app you can seamlessly and note-perfectly switch between performances, 
anywhere in the symphony. To achieve this we needed to write some cunning 
software and to painstakingly map the exact timing of every note in each 
performance. A time-consuming task, but the end result is enormously satisfying.
 Beethoven's 9th Symphony app screen Photograph: Touch Press 

We also devised a visual map of the key changes throughout the work. We tried 
very (very) hard with some amazing permutations, but none of them worked and 
that particular piece of design never made it into the shipping app. Instead we 
simply indicate the current key as a changing strip of colours along the top of 
the scrolling score.

When the app was almost ready, the marketing department suddenly suggested 
that we should give it away for free. This rather flew in the face of its 
six-figure budget. But with Apple's encouragement, we agreed to experiment with 
the first Touch Pressfreemium app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/beethovens-9th-symphony-for/id599986207?mt=8>. 
You get two minutes of the symphony with all four performances free of charge, 
so you can try out all of the features before we ask you to part with £9.99 as 
an in-app-purchase to complete the work.

Into the bargain you also receive David Owen Norris' book, his expert analysis 
and video interviews with a wonderful cast of characters ranging from the rock 
journalist Paul Morley to the great maestro Leonard Bernstein, speaking from 
beyond the grave.

The app has now been downloaded an astonishing 680,000 times. For any piece of 
classical music to be downloaded that many times is remarkable. Of course, not 
everyone went on to unlock the full symphony – but plenty have. There is no 
doubt we have reached a wider and different audience than if we had charged our 
standard £9.99 up-front.

Will apps like Beethoven's 9th Symphony bring a new audience to classical 
music? I certainly hope so. We've heard from many teachers who use the app to 
enliven their music classes, and we receive numerous emails from users who feel 
that this way of experiencing classical music is nothing short of revolutionary.

We're often asked: why only iOS? These are challenging apps and we are 
determined to offer an exceptional experience to our audience. These premium 
apps demand a lot of memory, graphics processing and audio capability. The iPad 
is really the only platform available today where we have sufficient oomph in a 
stable operating system environment, combined with a high-quality delivery 
channel in the iTunes App Store. Right now Android is a fragmented environment 
in terms of both hardware and software, although watch this space as the tablet 
universe is evolving fast.

Max Whitby is co-founder and CEO of Touch Press <http://www.touchpress.com/> – 
follow Max on Twitter@touchpress <https://twitter.com/touchpress>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 