
Pursue 'targeted serendipity'

Pick each new book at random, and you'll end up with plenty of duds. But if 
you stick religiously to the same authors or genres, or rely on Amazon's 
recommendation engine, which makes suggestions based on past purchases, you'll 
never expand your horizons. Choose a middle path: use a recommendation site 
such asWhichbook <http://www.openingthebook.com/whichbook/>, which filters 
books based on numerous sliding scales – "funny/serious", "optimistic/bleak", 
"no sex/lots of sex" – without knowing which specific titles you've previously 
read.

Stick to print

Quite apart from the romanticism in the smell and feel of "real" books, 
there's some persuasive psychological research to suggest that we grasp their 
content of paper books better and faster than ebooks'. This could be because we 
subconsciously use physical cues to store information: whether something's on 
the left or right page; how many pages are under your right thumb, still to be 
read, etc.

In one British study, children who read only on screens were three times less 
likely to say they greatly enjoyed reading. It's also been argued that the blue 
light emitted by tablets may seriously interfere with sleep and health.

Read first, talk later

The web offers countless opportunities to join a worldwide, 24-hour book 
group, such asReadmill <http://www.readmill.com>, an e-reader platform that 
lets readers have conversations in the margins. But there's much to be said for 
more limited devices – paper books, say, or basic Amazon Kindles – that make it 
harder for your attention to wander.

As the new media thinker Clay Shirky, no Luddite, puts it: "Tell me later who 
else liked it. Show them to me, introduce them to me, whatever –not right now. 
Right now I'm reading." Make reading and discussing two distinct activities.

Keep it literary 

Last year, a controversial but well-designed study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/oct/08/literary-fiction-improves-empathy-study>
 at the New School for Social Research in New York, found that reading literary 
fiction (Don DeLillo, Alice Munro) enhanced the capacity for empathy, and that 
the same didn't apply to popular fiction or non-fiction. One hunch is that 
literary fiction leaves more to the reader's imagination, forcing you to work 
harder to enter the emotional worlds of others. "What great writers do is to 
turn you into the writer," explained one researcher. "In literary fiction, the 
incompleteness of the characters turns your mind to trying to understand the 
minds of others."

Split your time: have a few books on the go

While you're best advised not to try to read 20 books at once, there are 
definitely advantages to choosing three or four at once. Have a mix of fiction 
and non-fiction on the go, each suited to different moods and contexts. Even 
bad books can help – by sending you back to the good ones. "When you're not 
feeling the book in front of you, pick up something else," writes one blogger, 
Leigh Kramer, an advocate of the multi-book approach. "This will either make 
you want to go back to your original choice or press forward with one of your 
other options."
 