
Dozens of previously unknown sketches by the artist and sculptor Alberto 
Giacometti <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti> have come to 
light, including impromptu drawings of Christine Keeler, the showgirl whose 
1960s affair with Conservative minister John Profumo shook the British 
establishment.

Nine months ago, one of Giacometti's sculptures sold for £65m. Now the Swiss 
artist's family has allowed his biographer, the distinguished art historian 
Michael Peppiatt, access to the collection for a major new book and a loan 
exhibition. The unseen images reveal Giacometti at his most intimate and 
unselfconscious.

Giacometti seems to have taken his inspiration for the Keeler sketch from a 
1963 French newspaper report. A series of nude female figures sketched across a 
page fromFrance-Soir is thought to represent her. The collection also contains 
sculptures, paintings and drawings not seen since they left his dilapidated 
studio in Paris. Another find is an art book owned by Giacometti which he used 
to produce a striking drawing of Van Gogh's self-portrait.

Another previously unknown sketch appears across a torn-out page of L'Express, 
a 1964 edition with a report on Lee Harvey Oswald, President John Kennedy's 
assassin. Giacometti scribbled over Oswald's photograph, giving him a beard and 
scrawling across the page the repeated wordcontinuare ("to go on") and the 
phrase "the busts were made quickly, and a painting this evening, the drawings 
soon". The words seem to convey Giacometti's constant urge to push himself into 
yet more work. The artist, who died in 1966, obsessively scrutinised his work 
for hints of failure, always destroying works that did not match his vision. 
Peppiatt said that the newspaper sketches showed that drawing was fundamental 
for Giacometti. "Drawing was a form of instinctive thinking for him. He was 
never without a pencil in his hand or a fag in his mouth," he explained.

Peppiatt, an art critic for the Observer during the 1960s, recalled his 
excitement at being given access to the images, taken from a collection owned 
by the widow of Giacometti's nephew, Silvio Berthoud: "There is something very 
intimate about these works. I was allowed to choose from 300 drawings. I was 
deeply moved. I felt that Giacometti was almost there with me … as if his 
drawings were dropping from his hands. He had scribbled over the inside covers 
of books, doodled on bits of paper in cafes." Some of the unknown images are in 
Peppiatt's forthcoming book,In Giacometti's Studio, and a loan exhibition he 
has curated at the Eykyn Maclean gallery in New York.

Through newly published letters, Peppiatt offers new insight into Giacometti, 
the man and his art. He has delved into the artist's relationships, notably his 
doomed affair with Isabel Rawsthorne, a raucous, bohemian painter and model.

Peppiatt said: "Isabel was a terrifying animal, a man-eater. She was having 
affairs with both sexes and drinking everybody under the table. He was 
ambivalent towards women. What he liked were prostitutes. Giacometti was both 
attracted and repelled by Isabel." Feelings of despair emerge from their 
letters, Peppiatt said. In one, Giacometti wrote: "I didn't think your stay was 
a washout, Isabel, otherwise I wouldn't have felt so upset when you left. My 
throat was tight. I was sobbing inside."

Peppiatt also casts light on the artist's friendship with Samuel Beckett. 
Describing Giacometti's skeletal figures as a visual embodiment of the Irish 
writer's pared down prose, he said: "They had the same nocturnal habits. They'd 
bump into one another in Montparnasse around midnight, go to the same brothels 
together and walk home together." He tried to imagine their conversations as 
they strolled the deserted streets. "I researched and researched, following 
every line of inquiry, until I came to the truth," he recalled. These 
20th-century geniuses would walk in "deep, utter, total silence", he said.
 