
Lewis Hamilton’s idol has always been Ayrton Senna – but not when it comes to 
negotiating contracts. The Formula One world champion has just completed a
three-year deal with Mercedes worth £100m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/20/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-deal-formula-one-monaco>
, making him not only the best-paid British sportsman in the world but also the 
highest remunerated driver in F1 history.

Senna once concluded negotiations by tossing a coin: he called wrong and lost 
$1.5m. “Ayrton and I started to headbutt on the numbers,” says theMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> chairman and chief executive, Ron 
Dennis. “There was no way he wasn’t going to drive the car and there was no way 
we weren’t going to contract him to us – but we couldn’t agree about the money.

“We were arguing over half a million dollars and I came up with the idea of us 
flicking a coin to decide. It was the only way to break the log jam. So the 
coin was thrown into the air, spinning. It landed and went off like a rocket. 
You could hear it rattling under the curtains. I pulled them back and I had 
won. At the time neither of us twigged that we’d tossed a coin over a 
three-year contract – so the net result was for $1.5m.”

Hamilton ended four months of intense talks by re-signing for the team with 
whom hewon his second world championship last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
 and that is no surprise to his close friend of 10 years Marc Hynes, who deals 
with drivers’ contracts at the other end of the paddock, at Manor.

“What Lewis has done is very impressive,” he says. “Dealing with a big company 
he’s shown how smart he is. He never stops working to improve his brand, 
working tirelessly for his team and his sport off the track. Then he gets in 
his car and destroys everyone.”

No two contracts are the same. They vary from team to team and driver to 
driver but most of the basics are the same. A deal is normally between one and 
three years and once a basic agreement has been made a contract will be drawn 
up. This will then be scrutinised by lawyers on both sides and usually go back 
and forth two or three times.

“You start with the key points and these are the ones you end up arguing over, 
money and the length of the deal. The payment schedule is very important. The 
driver will normally get a business-class flight and an economy flight for his 
trainer, and a hotel room for the driver and the trainer. But at the front of 
the grid the driver will go first-class and his trainer business-class. And he 
will want another hotel room for his manager. The other big issues are passes, 
sponsorship, image rights and promotional days.”

Otmar Szafnauer deals with drivers’ contracts at Force India, where he is the 
chief operations officer. He says: “Usually what we negotiate most about is 
money. That’s the big one. The basic salary and then the bonus structure. Some 
drivers will want money for every point, others for podiums, extra money for 
wins and extra money for a world championship. Even with a pay driver [ie one 
financed by a sponsor] the sponsor will pay the team and then the team will pay 
the driver, so you still have to make a deal.”

The main points of a typical deal for an F1 driver

Duration One to three years. The smaller teams tend to sign one-year deals, 
conditional on sponsorship income. It is rare for a driver to have a contract 
for more than three years because so much can change in that time.

Options Teams like to include an option to continue if they notify the driver 
by a certain date. This is more likely at the lower end of the grid.

Sponsorship Some teams sell packages of sponsorship rights, brought to the 
team by the driver. Logo placement is for negotiation as is paddock access, 
paddock club and driver appearance days. There may some obligation for the team 
to provide live action demos if the deal is a big one.

Promotional activities The more successful the driver the more valuable the 
days, because they aren’t too keen to do many sponsor days. Thirty days is a 
common starting point, with some teams wanting limitless days.

Expenses Driver and trainer expenses are normal in smaller teams. Bigger teams 
may ask the driver to pay expenses as their taste may be more elaborate and 
expensive. Drivers fly long haul business class in smaller teams, and first for 
more established drivers with bigger teams.

Passes Normally a driver is given a paddock pass for his trainer and his 
manager. Further paddock passes can be added as part of a sponsorship or 
commercial rights package.

Personal sponsorship spaces Pay drivers will often negotiate personal 
sponsorship spaces on their helmets, caps, or race suits. As well as adding 
revenue this allows drivers to maintain long-standing relationships while teams 
can cut back on salary demands.

Prize money/bonuses Probably an area where there are differences between 
team-mates. Normally a price per point plus podium bonus, win bonus, 
championship bonus.

Driver identity The driver grants the team and their sponsors the right to use 
the name, fame, image and reputation (in any manner depicting the driver in his 
racewear or trackwear). More established drivers will try to carve out some 
rights here to use for their own merchandise or personal sponsors but these are 
usually pretty tightly controlled and owned by the teams in a racing context.

Trophies Do they become the property of the driver or the team?

Hazardous activities There is normally a list of sports that drivers cannot 
participate in eg snowboarding, rock climbing, parachuting, motor cross etc.

Waivers and indemnities The driver shall execute such forms of standard waiver 
or indemnity as may be required by any tyre or engine supplier, team sponsor, 
racing promoter, organiser or track owner.
 