
Years ago, before our children were born and after two years of searching, my 
husband Tim and I found a dilapidated flint cottage up a lane on the edge of a 
semi-rural village in Hampshire. Its hideous ‘60s back half extension with no 
foundations was capped by a flat roof in dire need of repair … and the garden 
was the size of a handkerchief. But it overlooked fields and was near a 
footpath that led to semi-ancient beech woods and the South Downs Way. Its 
advantages meant we were in a beautiful location, and its disadvantages meant 
we could afford to buy it.

Our dream of having a bit of the adjoining field at the back of the house to 
extend the garden soon materialised in 1990 when we were offered the 
opportunity to buy a part of it. We begged and scraped together the cash and 
became proud owners of a third of an acre of bare, flinty subsoil that had been 
degraded by intensive farming and regular exposure to the elements. Our first 
job was to secure and build the soil, so we planted it up as a wildflower 
meadow bordered by a hedgerow made up of 23 native species, all grown from 
native Hampshire seed stock. The soil was poor and wounded like a scab. Nature 
quickly covered it with wildflowers, initially mainly ribwort, used as an 
ancient herbal remedy to heal infection and staunch cuts. Very appropriate.
 Maddy and Tim extended their garden by buying part of an adjoining field, but 
the soil was poor and 'wounded like a scab'. Photograph: Maddy Harland 
We were amateur conservationists at that time and our focus was biodiversity. 
Then along came permaculture in the form of a Channel 4 documentary calledIn 
Grave Danger of Falling Food 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CjWaP0iQmWw&feature=kp>. Tim was smitten. Why 
couldn’t we have our conservation project and eat it too? I wasn’t so sure. I 
wanted to read about it and test permaculture out. But Tim had what I would 
describe as a brainstorm – he could see that conservation alone was not enough 
and his enthusiasm was relentless. He went on a forest garden course with 
Patrick Whitefield (a permaculture teacher and author) and the late Robert Hart 
(the pioneer of temperate forest gardens), and was soon working out a 
permaculture design for the whole site.


Permaculture uses nature’s principles as its guide and the principle of 
"stacking" – using every niche and level to create different layers of plants – 
is most useful when designing a forest garden. In a natural woodland, for 
instance, the top storey might be oak, beech or ash, with a shrub layer of 
hazel or holly, and an underlayer of bramble and other ground cover. We swapped 
this for walnut, apples, plums, cherries and hazel, on top of currants, 
gooseberries, goji berries, perennial kale and Himalayan rhubarb, on top of 
Nepalese raspberry, mint, wild strawberries ... to name just a few of our many 
choices.

We initially planted more than 60 fruit and nut trees, all carefully spaced so 
that when they matured there would be enough room and light for them all. At 
first, the site was so exposed that we used spoilt straw bales as individual 
windbreaks to protect the trees and then, as the straw rotted, used it to mulch 
the trees.
 Initially, Maddy and Tim planted more than 60 fruit and nut trees to bring 
life to their garden. Photograph: Maddy Harland 
Over the years a few trees have not survived and some have not been productive 
or tasty enough to warrant keeping. We are on chalk downland and so the soil is 
very alkaline. Quince doesn't thrive. We have too much rainfall for outdoor 
peaches and almonds, and they get peach leaf curl. Apricots and green gages 
also struggle.


But this has given us the opportunity to indulge in our passion for planting 
unusual fruiting trees. There is so much that loves chalk downland so we work 
with species that thrive here and it also attracts all the native insects, 
birds and reptiles. We have added Chinese dogwood, Nanking and pygmy cherry, 
mulberry (Illinois Everbearing), saskatoon and our much loved Nepalese pepper.


I also have a little tree nursery where I am raising more trees in the hope 
that Tim will let me squeeze a few more into his design. Waiting to be planted 
next winter are two Szechuan peppers, an unusual raspberry and a juneberry. 
Last winter we planted a special apple – a Red Love from a Swiss nursery – 
which has a bark, blossom, fruit and flesh that is red, and is high in 
antioxidants. Other existing favourites include a Bardsey Island apple (a 
delicious and rare variety that thrives on chalk), Laxton’s Fortune (a 
quintessential apple in Tim’s book), Merton Pride pear (as juicy as a tropical 
fruit), and Oullins Golden Gage (sweet as honey).
 The Merton Pride pear tree – one of Maddy and Tim's exisiting favourites. 
Photograph: Maddy Harland 
We have also added further edibles into the hedgerow to grow out as standards 
above the hedgerow, such as cherry plum, damson, wild service, tayberry and 
Oregon grape. We have created a no-dig raised bed garden as well to grow annual 
veg for favourites such as broad beans, broccoli, spinach, cut-and-come-again 
salads and garlic (a fantastic money-saving crop).

We renovated a greenhouse that had been clobbered by the big storm in 1987 and 
added a Heath Robinson-style rainwater harvesting system to it. Here we also 
incorporate the idea of stacking with plants growing at different levels to 
make the very most of the light. Against the back wall is an "own root" peach 
tree that provides us with juicy red peaches every summer. Underneath, we have 
a variety of tomatoes, cucumbers, sweet and chilli peppers, basil, coriander, 
tarragon, parsley, thyme and hanging strawberries from the roof frame. I use 
the ancient idea of an "Ollas", a terracotta flower pot sunk into the soil and 
filled with water. The roots of the plants wrap themselves around the pot and 
draw the water from it. It is useful if you are going away for a weekend and 
don’t have someone to come in and water.
 The 'Ollas' allows the roots of the plants to wrap themselves around the pot 
and draw the water from it. Photograph: Maddy Harland 
Time has always curbed our ambitions in the garden. We have always aimed for 
self-reliance, not self-sufficiency because when we started the garden we also 
had two baby girls to look after. They were, bless them, to grow up quite 
feral. They rarely wore shoes and became adept foragers from a young age. There 
also came the opportunity to start a small publishing company – publishing 
books on permaculture – andPermaculture magazine <http://www.permaculture.co.uk>
. With two kids, a business and later, in 1995, the opportunity to recycle 55 
acres of a nearby redundant naval base into the sustainability centre, we were 
a little busy.

Our passion however was always permaculture, and in our case this was about 
eco-renovating our house to be as energy-efficient and happy a family home as 
possible, and creating our own little Eden of a semi-wild, biodiverse, 100% 
organic edible landscape.

Time has passed. The wildflower meadow has become a habitat for common 
lizards, slow worms and countless butterflies and other insects. We cut it in 
the autumn with an Austrian scythe – hard but satisfying work. Buzzards soar 
over us, and bats and martins forage in the evening light. Where once there was 
no wildlife at all there is now birdsong, buzzing insects, a paint palette of 
flowers and, of course, delicious food everywhere.
 The view of Maddy and Tim's house and raised beds from the garden. 
Photograph: Maddy Harland 
Our children have grown up. They once told us they thought we loved our garden 
more than we loved them. Not true! But the reality is – besides a period of 
teenage rebellion when they wanted PlayStations, high-street brands and fast 
food like their friends (none of which we could afford) – they have both grown 
up to love fresh, homegrown food and have become accomplished cooks. The time 
we spent outside together playing in the meadow and planting seedlings, picking 
apples, beans, plums, strawberries and sprouting broccoli, has formed them into 
healthy, independent young women with a love of nature, wilderness and 
adventure.

When we started we were the village hippy eccentrics. “What will they do 
next?” thought many of our neighbours. Then when the Brownies asked to do their 
green badge in our garden we knew things were changing. Within a few years we 
were filmed for the BBC2 programmeAlan Titchmarsh’s Garden Secrets 
<http://www.permaculture.co.uk/videos/wild-permaculture-forest-gardening>, 
which told the story of great formal gardens across Britain. Our wild edible 
paradise was the last garden in the series, and was billed as the future; 
sustainable (requiring few inputs), biodiverse and edible. We certainly offer 
sanctuary to flowers, bees, butterflies, birds and reptiles and a small 
collection of unusual edibles and we hope, in time, to another generation of 
our little family.

Maddy Harland is the editor of Permaculture <http://www.permaculture.co.uk>. 
Follow her on Twitter@PermacultureMag <https://twitter.com/PermacultureMag>.

Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month's Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

 