
Gift-giving is a strangely sweet tradition when you think about it. One person 
holds out an offering to the other, something they thought beautiful or unique 
or useful, and they hope that this token will be able to convey the words which 
are sometimes so difficult to say: I love you or I’m proud of you or I’m sorry.

Christmas, of course, is the granddaddy of all gift-giving celebrations. 
Nothing else even comes close. This year, each household in the UK is expected 
to spend £596 ($900) on gifts, resulting inpredicted 
<http://business-reporter.co.uk/2015/10/16/christmas-spending-forecast-to-drop-796-per-household/>
 Christmas spending of £42bn ($63.5bn). (In other news, 12% of respondents to 
that survey admitted that they’ll be ringing in 2016 with a nasty financial 
hangover.)

That says a lot more than I love you, doesn’t it?

If you’re looking for a holiday that holds less waste, debt and stress, there 
are many ways to shift the gift-centric nature of modern Christmas celebrations 
without eliminating the tradition of exchanging presents altogether. Did you 
really think I was going to tell you to do that? I’m no Scrooge. I mean, 
without gifts,Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
morning would find us all staring blankly at each other as we sip coffee and 
wonder: “What now?”

Because I’ve never been good in extremes, I’ve found over the years that the 
best way to shift the spotlight away from gifts isn’t to declare an outright 
ban, but to just ...moderate them a little instead. 

For families, organizing a Secret Santa gift exchange is a fantastic way to 
decrease the number of gifts on your to-buy list, as well as ensuring that the 
gifts you do buy are of good quality. The way I look at it, you can either 
spend December in a frenzy trying to cross eight people off your list and spend 
$20-$30 on each gift (and sometimes, admit it, find yourself looking at 
something in a packed store on 23 December and thinking: “To hell with it. 
This’ll do” ), or you can avoid the shopping frenzy and just have one person to 
buy for. With just one person you can ditch the mall and spend your time and 
money to find a gift which will be well made, useful and justperfect for the 
intended recipient.

Also, don’t discount gifts that aren’t things. We often assume that because a 
tangible object lasts longer than a once-and-done experience, it will bring 
happiness to our recipient for longer too. Not so. Research has shown that the 
way we quickly adapt to new possessions means thatnew experiences 
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3043858/world-changing-ideas/the-science-of-why-you-should-spend-your-money-on-experiences-not-thing>
 make better gifts. So consider ski passes, concert tickets, spa days (please, 
Santa: spa days!) or art gallery memberships for those you love this year.

As for the little ones, I like to remember just how many people will be buying 
gifts for my daughter when I’m tempted to go overboard. Grandparents, aunts, 
uncles and cousins – it will be enough. Repeat that as many times as you need 
to until the panic passes:it will be enough. A nice rule to follow if you need 
some guidelines to assist in your gift-giving restraint is to buy each child 
just four things: something they want, something they need, something to wear 
and something to read. Simple, useful and more than enough to keep any kid 
happy.

Now, let’s talk wrapping. Your thoughtfully chosen gifts look even better when 
they’re brightly festooned with colourful paper and bright ribbons and bows, 
but consider that American wrapping paper sales total $2.9bn annually, and the 
the UK uses 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/dont-increase-your-christmas-waste-line> 
enough paper to stretch to the moon.


Gorgeous gifts don’t have to create this sort of waste.

Eco-friendly wrapping options don’t stop at secondhand wrapping paper and 
mismatched ribbons; this is a chance to get crafty and creative. In past years 
I’ve used newspapers (the comics section for kids) with a bright red fabric 
ribbon, or brown paper grocery bags decorated with stamps. This year I’ve saved 
the paper roll from my daughter’s easel, and I think friends and family will 
love getting gifts wrapped up in her bright paintings.

When you’re brainstorming wrapping alternatives, don’t ignore all the 
non-paper options either; with a little forethought the wrapping can even 
become part of the gift. A cute tea towel, a reusable bag, a soft scarf or even 
a fabric gift bag like the ones my mother-in-law sewed one year – think outside 
the box for beautiful, creative and eco-friendly wrapping options.

Finally, and this last point belongs not so much in the eco-friendly zone as 
it does in the decent-human-being one: remember others. There are many for whom 
the number of gifts bought and received, or whether to use burlap or hemp wrap, 
is the very least of their worries. Socks are some of the least donated and 
most needed items at homeless shelters; each Christmas thousands face going 
hungry instead of tucking into a feast; and this year, more than ever, there 
are thousands of families experiencing their first winter in a strange new 
country. Donate your time, your money or a turkey dinner to those who need it 
the most.


That, more than anything, is a tradition worth preserving.
 