
There has been no shortage of good stories on the Chatsworth estate. The 
fictional council house development in Greater Manchester that forms the 
backdrop toShameless, one of Britain's longest-running drama series, is packed 
with dodgy incident. Such as the end of series one when charming Steve, played 
by James McAvoy, hands Fiona, played byAnne-Marie Duff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff>, the keys to her own house 
– but only after blowing it up.

Or the sombre scenes in the second series when Steve has to slip off to 
Amsterdam to avoid the law. Or perhaps the moment in the third series when 
lovable layabout Frank, played by David Threlfall, and Veronica, played by
Maxine Peake <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maxine-peake>, dig up a stash 
of fake gold. Oh, and a dead body.

Yet one story rarely told about the nefarious and intertwined characters that 
have peopled Paul Abbott's fictional Manchester for seven years is the one of 
just how theShameless casting team have managed to pick out so many acting 
stars of the future. As Duff is hailed this month for her "electrifying" West 
End performance as thescandalously adulterous Alma Rattenbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/apr/03/cause-celebre-rocket-to-moon> in 
Terence Rattigan'sCause Célèbre, Peake's career is also in top gear. The 
recommissioning of the successful BBC1 seriesSilk, in which the actress plays 
an ambitious barrister, followed on the heels of her stage appearance inanother 
Rattigan play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/27/deep-blue-sea-review>, The Deep 
Blue Sea, at the West Yorkshire Playhouse.

Peake plays the worldly wise Alice Aisgill in a subtle new adaptation of John 
Braine'sRoom at the Top. Transmission last week was postponed at the last 
minute due to a contractual problem over the rights which the BBC is urgently 
trying to unravel. But with a film about the 1996 IRA Manchester bombing due to 
be shot over the summer and TV roles inThe Devil's Whore, The Street and Little 
Dorrit already on her CV, Peake's decision to leave the role of Veronica in 
2007 after 27 episodes ofShameless has been vindicated. Her only fear is that 
she will not find a path back to comic roles. "When I started out I got pushed 
into comedy and was always desperate to play these parts. Now I'm going, 
'Please can I do a comedy?' I don't know how much more I've got in me," Peake 
said recently.

The actress moved to Salford in 2009, after 13 years in London, and claims she 
has no strong desire to work in America. "I don't have massive ambitions to be 
anywhere other than in this country doing good work, but I'd be lying if I said 
I wasn't intrigued. It'd be nice to go and earn a bit of money," she explained.

Duff's on-screen boyfriend and real-life husband, McAvoy, has, of course, 
prospered, too, since his days stealing cars on Chatsworth. He has made the 
journey out to Hollywood, winning the lead role in the action filmWanted last 
year after acclaimed performances inAtonement and The Last King of Scotland.

Since then he has appeared to lie comparatively low in his home in Hornsey, 
north London, enjoying becoming a father to Duff's baby son, Andrew, last 
summer. In fact, the actor is due to erupt onto cinema screens in June in the 
next X-Men film,First Class, in which he takes the part of Charles Xavier, or 
Professor X, the younger version of a character previously played by Patrick 
Stewart.

"To play the young Patrick Stewart and to fully engage at warp factor 9 with 
any part he's played is great fun," McAvoy toldEmpire magazine this month as he 
stood on the set in his blue and yellow X-Men uniform.

It will be a big change of tone when he moves on to make a big screen version 
of Tolstoy'sAnna Karenina alongside Keira Knightley and Jude Law for the 
Atonement director Joe Wright later in the year.

Alongside these prominent Shameless stars are many others also in the 
ascendant, such as Gerard Kearns, who played Ian Gallagher and went on toMark 
of Cain; Jody Latham who played Lip Gallagher and is now in EastEnders; and Ben 
Batt, who played Joe Pritchard, and has since appeared in Jimmy McGovern's
Accused and in Peter Kosminsky's The Promise; or Rebecca Ryan who played Debbie 
Gallagher and is now in the BBC's award-winning showWaterloo Road.

The story behind the discovery of all these talents is largely the story of 
Beverley Keogh, who helped develop the show in 2003 for Abbott and who still 
works with fellow casting director David Shaw to bring the right faces to
Shameless.

Keogh is based in Manchester and runs casting sessions across the country for 
a long roster of shows includingQueer As Folk, Fat Friends, Clocking Off and 
Life On Mars. Discreet and retiring, Keogh and Shaw rarely comment on their 
work, preferring to put forward their talent instead, but their handiwork can 
also be spotted in the work of Ken Loach and Jimmy McGovern.

When it first hit screens in 2004 the impact of Shameless was immediate. Duff 
and McAvoy were offered barrel-loads of work and left reluctantly after two 
series. Duff, who was playing 20-year-old Fiona at the age of 33, has described 
it as a very hard decision. "I knew, creatively, it was time to move on. We 
filmed the second series for seven months and I just didn't want to be doing 
something for that long again that was the same," she said.

Since then she has played Margot Fonteyn in a BBC4 film and took the role of 
John Lennon's mother in Sam Taylor Wood's debut feature filmNowhere Boy in 
2009. In the same year she appeared as Sasha Tolstoy inThe Last Station, with 
Helen Mirren. Her stage performances as Joan of Arc and now as Alma Rattenbury 
in Cause Célèbre have been highly praised.

"Admittedly Anne-Marie Duff is not obvious casting as the happily hedonistic 
Alma. But she invests the role with a fragile intensity as if she is 
experiencing a bad dream, and has one wonderful moment when her eyes gaze 
adoringly at her young son who has been strategically placed in the courtroom," 
wrote Michael Billington in a review in theGuardian.

Charles Spencer in the Telegraph suggested that Duff captured "all the 
complexity of a woman driven by love and lust, at times repellent in her 
manipulation and vulgarity, at others deeply moving in her flayed emotions and 
what we come to recognise as a truly noble generosity of spirit".

Judicious casting by Keogh and Shaw has also helped the careers of established 
actors. Threlfall, who already had a reputation as a great actor after 
television roles such as Leslie Titmuss, the unappealing MP in John Mortimer's
Paradise Postponed, and who had enjoyed a theatrical career that started with 
the role of Smike the foundling in Trevor Nunn's epic staging of Dickens's
Nicholas Nickleby, is now ingrained in mainstream popular culture after eight 
series playing Frank. Other experienced actors, including the likes of Marjorie 
Yates, Sean Gilder, Jack Deam and Anne Reid, have also benefited from the
Shameless factor.

Keogh and Shaw are the first to point out that it is not just the on-screen 
talent that has usedShameless as a launchpad. The writers and directors who 
first brought the show to British screens have also gone to influential 
positions in the industry. Writer Jack Thorne, for instance, has followed in 
Abbott's footsteps writingThe Scouting Book for Boys, while Danny Brocklehurst 
has writtenSorted, the nuclear war drama Decades for the BBC and Exile, which 
was created by Abbott.

Mark Mylod, who directed the first episode of Shameless, is now a co-producer 
on the HBO television seriesEntourage in America and has also directed the 
American version ofShameless, while fellow director Dearbhla Walsh won an Emmy 
for her work on Andrew Davies's adaptation ofLittle Dorrit and then filmed the 
thrillerThe Silence and the historical drama The Tudors.

The Chatsworth story is not over yet. With 22 new episodes going out this year 
in total,Shameless will celebrate its 100th episode this season and series 
eight is due to resume on 2 August. Is this perhaps the year that will propel 
Ciarán Griffiths, the actor who has played the aggressive and sexually 
disoriented Mickey Maguire since series four, to wider stardom?
 