
A generation ago, discovering the existence of the Ethiopian famine – let 
alone delivering any help – involved days of travel in vintage DC-3 aircraft 
and along unmade roads. With the disaster areas lacking fixed-line telephones 
information had to be communicated by telex from the capital (or frequently, to 
avoid censorship, from neighbouring Kenya).

Such communication difficulties meant that a usual early predictor of African 
famine, the plummeting of livestock prices, was missed. The first warning signs 
of the disaster came when peasants left their land by the thousand in search of 
relief, by which time it was, generally, too late.

Thirty years on, such a communications blackout is almost unthinkable. For 
example, grim as the refugee situation in Syria and neighbouring countries is 
today, at least some instant communication channels are open to the outside 
world. Thanks to mobile telephones, the internet and social media – all unknown 
in the 1980s – information from relief workers and the combatants streams 
continuously into the public domain.

Better communication technology is also playing its part in preventing 
disasters. Earlier this year, Sierra Leone – still recovering from a 
long-running civil war and cholera outbreak that killed hundreds last year – 
set up a mobile technology initiative aimed at saving children's lives.

An innovative location-targeted SMS system called the Trilogy Emergency Relief 
Application <http://www.ifrc.org/en/what-we-do/beneficiary-communications/tera/>
 (Tera), set up by the Red Cross with help from mobile communications 
providers, will be able to flash messages to 36,000 people an hour at the touch 
of a button. The idea is to disseminate information on new disease outbreaks 
and other emergencies, such as fires or floods.

The first use of Tera in Sierra Leone is to spread information on preventing 
malaria, which claims more than 16,000 lives in the country every year.

"We can use it to warn people when emergencies or outbreaks start and to give 
them vital information on preventing diseases like malaria and cholera," says 
Sharon Reader, project manager at the Red Cross.

"Even better, Tera is a two-way system so we can quickly assess the areas with 
the greatest need after an emergency, and respond to requests for information 
on a large scale. Harnessing technology in this way is really helping the Red 
Cross to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our aid operations."

Sierra Leone is the second country in the world to install the Tera SMS 
system. Mobile messaging's value was demonstrated in Haiti, following the 
earthquake in 2010. In the aftermath of the disaster, the Red Cross sent out 
more than 45m texts to subscribers of the local mobile network Voila.

Followup studies showed that of the people who had received such a message, 
95% reported that they found the information useful and 90% changed something 
in their lives or made some kind of preparation as a result. Advice on health 
and hurricane preparedness was the most highly valued, remembered and shared. 
This suggests that even in a population as poor as Haiti's, consumer technology 
can be relevant to people's needs.

Promising as such initiatives are, the potential of information technology to 
prevent and respond to disasters is far from being fully realised. A study 
published by theSave the Children <http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/> charity, 
and sponsored by theVodafone Foundation 
<http://www.vodafone.com/content/index/about/foundation.html>, last year called 
for more efforts to prepare technology and procedures before disaster strikes.

The Mobile Technology in Emergencies 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/resources/online-library/mobile-technology-emergencies>
 report concluded that mobile phones can be used for assessing needs, enabling 
rapid mass communications and improving transparency through feedback and 
complaints.

In Bangladesh, for example, where mobile phones are used broadly across the 
country, systems for communication in emergencies such as floods have now been 
established.

"Mobiles are working very well, because SMS can be sent quickly in an 
emergency situation," the report says.

"In emergency response this has enormous potential, as there are some areas 
where TV and radio is not available. A field worker can send an SMS to 
colleagues and they can ask for people to spread it to others and get the 
message to the remote corners of the country."

However, the Save the Children report concludes that in much of the developing 
world such use of mobiles "is hampered by a lack of collaboration and 
knowledge-sharing between humanitarian agencies, network operators and 
governments".

One problem is that mobile networks are themselves vulnerable in disasters. 
Even when power supplies and base stations are not damaged by earthquake or 
flood, networks can collapse through overload.

Meanwhile, people most affected by disaster are generally those with least 
access to mobile telephones – the very poorest, women and people who are unable 
to read.

The report calls on governments to recognise communications as an essential 
component of response efforts: following disasters "the restoration of mobile 
networks should be regarded as a life-saving humanitarian priority".

Most important, the report recommends field testing of the proposed solutions, 
assessing viability and engaging directly with beneficiaries – before the next 
disaster strikes.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. Become GSB member 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/sustainable-business/> to get more stories 
like this direct to your inbox
 