
The tactical battle explains the pattern of a football match but the result is 
dependent upon small moments – andChelsea’s 3-1 victory against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 was a perfect example. Had Kevin De Bruyne, the outstanding player for the 
first hour, converted an open goal to put Manchester City 2-0 ahead, the story 
would have been about how Pep Guardiola had exposed Antonio Conte’s 3-4-3 
system. Instead, De Bruyne somehow contrived to hit the bar and Chelsea’s 
subsequent comeback means Guardiola’s system is questioned. The reality is not 
quite so simple.

Manchester City’s lack of mental edge exposed in Pep Guardiola challenge | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chlesa-premier-league-pep-guardiola>
This was a frantic, energetic, end-to-end contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-live-report>
 that was highly tactical and ludicrously open. Guardiola’s choice of formation 
was, as ever, unpredictable, even once his starting XI was announced but was 
something approaching a 3-2-4-1. Guardiola would go three against three at the 
back, which depended upon the wingers, Leroy Sané and Jesús Navas, tracking 
Chelsea’s wing-backs diligently. It meant that there were essentially two major 
tactical features of this game: first, it was about the wing-backs switching 
off and neglecting their defensive responsibilities; second, it was about City 
leaving themselves three against three in defence and Chelsea breaking past 
them with ease.

The wing-back situation was obvious throughout the first half. Despite some 
impressive recent showings, Victor Moses is not a natural in the position and 
his defensive shortcomings were exposed when David Silva floated a wonderful 
ball over the top for Sané, breaking past him as he ball-watched. Sané could 
not quite convert. Going the other way, however, the attack-minded Sané had 
serious problems when forced to track Moses.
 None of the four wing-backs proved particularly good at tracking their 
opponent - De Bruyne, meanwhile, drifted into the space between Alonso and 
Hazard to become the first half’s most dangerous player. Photograph: Guardian 
On the opposite flank, Navas sometimes ended up at right-back, pushed there by 
Marcos Alonso. Sometimes he was attracted too easily to his fellow Spaniard, 
which was the case for Chelsea’s first good goalscoring opportunity, when Eden 
Hazard accelerated into the space behind him, rounded Claudio Bravo but 
surprisingly elected not to shoot from a very tight angle.

Alonso, meanwhile, is a more natural wing-back than Sané, Navas or Moses, and 
initially performed his defensive responsibilities well, sticking tight to 
Navas. However, Hazard’s lack of interest in defending meant there was space 
towards that flank, so De Bruyne drifted into that zone and repeatedly tried 
powerful, low crosses from an inside-right position. Alonso started to 
struggle, though, and eventually it was Navas who provided the cross for City’s 
opener, clumsily diverted into his own net by Gary Cahill.

Navas also crossed for that crucial De Bruyne miss and while City continued to 
dominate possession, Chelsea took charge – and took advantage of City’s lack of 
a spare man at the back, too. Whereas Guardiola used Silva and De Bruyne to 
overload Chelsea in midfield, ensuring that City dominated possession, Hazard 
and Willian – on for Pedro in the 50th minute – quickly moved high up against 
the City back three. IfChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 
could transfer the ball quickly into attack, the attackers simply had one man 
to beat to get through on goal. That was exactly what happened repeatedly 
throughout the second half.

Chelsea’s goals were all particularly direct. First, Cesc Fàbregas received a 
short pass inside his own half, glancing up twice to check Diego Costa’s 
positioning even before controlling the ball, and then launched a long, 
pinpoint pass to the striker’s chest. Costa only had Nicolás Otamendi to 
outmuscle before smashing the ball past Claudio Bravo. It was wonderful play 
from Fàbregas, who was making his first start in this 3-4-3 system and offered 
a greater range of passing than the injured Nemanja Matic, which was perfect 
for a direct approach.

The second goal was entirely different – a classic counterattacking move 
involving the front three: Hazard bringing the ball out of defence and Costa 
coming short and playing the ball perfectly into the path of the onrushing 
Willian to smash home. But again, it only needed one Chelsea attacker to beat 
his opponent, Costa getting the better of Otamendi again by turning him smartly 
in the centre circle.

Pep Guardiola sorry for City fracas but refuses to blame Sergio Agüero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-chelsea>
The third arrived in stoppage time, after Guardiola had gambled by introducing 
the striker Kelechi Iheanacho in place of the centre-back John Stones. But it 
was, yet again, entirely simple and involved one Chelsea attacker beating a 
City defender, with Hazard streaking away from Aleksandar Kolarov before 
finishing coolly to cap an outstanding counterattacking performance after 
half-time.

Eventually Chelsea’s win felt comfortable – but more than Conte getting the 
better of Guardiola, this was a fascinating, complex tactical battle unlike 
anything the Premier League has produced before: 3-4-3 against 3-2-4-1. In a 
tactical sense, the summer arrival of Guardiola and Conte has taken the Premier 
League to a new level.
 