
I think I have written some version of the year-end retrospective, or the New 
Year resolution listicle, or both, every year since I became a writer. Humans 
love a post-mortem; it’s almost compulsive. We do it even when it’s not our job 
– we zoom out, zoom in, sum up, assess, recontextualise our experiences as 
they’re happening, hold this arbitrary chunk of time up against romanticised 
memories of arbitrary time chunks past. And every year we declare the outgoing 
year to have been the worst year ever. This time, though, we may finally be 
right.

I remember writing, “Go fuck yourself, 2011.” I called 2014 a “garbage year” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/30/11-things-2014-tara-hero-cat-chris-pratt-roxane-gay>
 and “the most dismal misery parade on record”. A year ago this weekI wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/06/blacklivesmatter-internet-trolls-best-worst-2015>
, “Perhaps the close of every year feels this borderline apocalyptic, and we 
simply lose perspective each time, but 2015 seems like it has to be the darkest 
year in my living memory.” Those sentiments felt a tad melodramatic back when I 
wrote them, but they don’t read as histrionics to me now. That’s exactly what 
it feels like to be hurtling toward a catastrophe whose shape you can’t quite 
make out. (Well, mystery solved.)

The problem with electing a petty, impulsive, opportunistic pinball to be your 
president is … I have no idea. He could do anything. There is no precedent. 
There’s no way to plan. Looking ahead to 2017 doesn’t invite New Year 
resolutions so much as what one friend of mine called “emotional doomsday 
prepping”. So here are the things I’m currently clinging to – the things I know 
I can do.

1. Hold the line

A lot of seemingly reasonable people are talking in silky tones about the 
importance of “unity” and “compromise” and “empathy” right now. But you don’t 
pull yourself out of quicksand by agreeing to leave one foot in the muck. There 
is no middle ground between equality and racism, or women’s humanity and 
women’s subjugation. Don’t let the rightwing erosion of language shake your 
instincts. Reject false equivalencies.

2. Barricade your uterus

The New York Times reported this week that, in a letter to anti-abortion 
activists 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/11/us/abortion-foes-donald-trump-restrictions-politics.html?_r=0>
, Donald Trump vowed to prioritise “putting anti-abortion justices on the 
supreme court; passing a national 20-week ban like Ohio’s; eliminating federal 
money for Planned Parenthood as long as its clinics perform abortions; and 
making permanent the Hyde amendment, passed annually by Congress to ban 
taxpayer-funded abortions.” If you are a person capable of getting pregnant, 
get a period tracker so you can catch pregnancies as early as possible. Get an 
IUD. StockpilePlan B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/25/teenage-morning-after-pill-over-the-counter-doubles-decade>
, for yourself and others. Get a pap smear while you still have healthcare.

3. Fight your phone phobia

The person who answers the phone in your congressperson’s office has no 
interest in yelling at you or arguing with you or even remembering you. They 
just want to write down your information so they can go and get a lunch.

4. Subscribe to newspapers, using money

Experienced, paid investigative journalists may just save us all. Pay for your 
news so the news can stay in business. But also, read critically. Hold 
editorial boards accountable. Demand diverse newsrooms. Participate in what you 
consume.

5. Believe in protest

Trump is our first reality-TV president, and TV personalities want good 
ratings. Trump hates protests. Hehates Alec Baldwin making fun of him 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787612552654155776?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. He caves in to public opinion. Go out and march and meet people and feel 
something, and don’t let anyone tell you it doesn’t matter.

6. Give what you can

A few days post-election, a smart friend wrote me a smart email. “I feel the 
bottom line for America is that everyone will have to be more political,” he 
wrote, “and this will last for the rest of our lives … Not only should you 
donate to every Democratic senator, congressperson, state legislator, and 
governor in your state or districts, you should donate to organisations that 
preserve civil liberties, education, LGBT rights, medical care, reproductive 
rights/services, and the environment.” Here is the most important part: “For 
most middle- and upper-income people, your taxes are about to be lower. Tax 
yourself if you want the country and the government to look how you wish it 
could look.” Tax yourself.

7. Take care of each other

So many people are in danger under this incoming administration. Don’t forget 
anyone.

8. Take care of yourself

I wrote this 
<http://jezebel.com/5972274/lets-face-ityou-are-not-following-through-on-any-of-this-resolution-shit>
 on December 31, 2012 and found it weirdly comforting.

“Life is really, really hard and surprising. Here’s what has happened to me 
over (approximately) the past year: I moved to a different state, then back 
again; I quit a beloved longterm job and started a bigger, scarier job; I went 
through a soul-shredding break-up and a complicated make-up; I got 
check-frauded for $800,000 (lol – flattering!); I turned 30; I acquired 
children; my dad died; my aunt died; my dog died; my tooth died; and every day, 
during all of that, a bunch of anonymous dickheads told me I was a fat bitch on 
the internet. So, sure, maybe in January 2012 I promised myself I was going to 
run a 10k this year or whatever, but at this point, WHOOOOO CAAAAARES. 
Sometimes life gets in the way of our life goals. Sometimes the worst year is 
also the best year. And that’s hard enough to process without beating ourselves 
up over some artificial standards we imposed when we had no clue what was about 
to happen.”

Forgive yourself for not running a 10k. Call your congressman instead. Let’s 
make 2016 the worst year of all time by making 2017 better.
 