
It didn't take long for Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> to add a whole bunch of 
one‑liners to the movie quote lexicon. Even before the mixed critical reception 
had coalesced into an iron-clad verdict, phrases from the screenplay by Francis 
Coppola, John Milius and Michael Herr (with a little help from Joseph Conrad) 
were already reverberating above and beyond their context in the film: "Saigon. 
Shit.","Terminate … with extreme prejudice", "Charlie don't surf!", "I love the 
smell of napalm in the morning", "Never get out of the boat", "The horror, the 
horror". And so on.

Screenplays are more than just dialogue, of course, yet a well-turned phrase 
can go a long way towards cementing a movie's cult status. Watching Casablanca 
nowadays is to experience a little thrill of recognition at every other line, 
and only partly because, "Play it, Sam" or, "Round up the usual suspects" have 
been adapted as titles for other movies. Ideally, a good quote is not only 
specific to its dramatic context, but has universal application. "We'll always 
have Paris" and "I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship" 
are the gifts that keep on giving.

You could say the same about The Wizard of Oz, or Some Like It Hot, or Sunset 
Boulevard – they're treasure troves for quote collectors. But Apocalypse Now, 
for me, marks the point at which film quotes became self‑conscious and lost 
their innocence, divorcing themselves from their dramatic source to become part 
of the currency of film buffery, a badge of cinematic taste enabling the 
quoters to trade references with like-minded pilgrims while baffling the 
uninitiated.

There's a minor character in Diner who does nothing but quote dialogue from 
Sweet Smell of Success – and not just JJ Hunsecker's catchphrase, "Match me, 
Sidney." But that always struck me as an idea more in tune with the film‑geek 
spirit of the 1980s, when the film was made, rather than 1959, when it was set. 
Because, surely not coincidentally, Apocalypse Now's release in 1979 coincided 
with the video recorder reaching the mass market, which for the first time 
enabled fans to hunt for verbal truffles, watch their favourite scenes 
repeatedly and commit scads of dialogue to memory without having to sit in a 
cinema.

The 1980s also saw a trend towards the vernacular, spearheaded by Bill 
Lancaster's dialogue for The Thing, in which characters reacted not with 
philosophical musings about hills of beans or, "We'll always have Antarctica", 
but by uttering the sort of banalities you or I might say if we'd just glimpsed 
a head sprouting spider legs and scuttling across the floor: "You've got to be 
fucking kidding." It seemed fresh and witty in 1982, but that was before a 
zillion other sci-fi, horror and action movies got in on the act. There are 
only so many ways you can say (to quote Arnold Schwarzenegger in The 
Terminator), "Fuck you, asshole".

We're lucky if a new movie can rustle up a single memorable one-liner, such as 
There Will Be Blood's "I drink your milkshake" (which though a colourful 
metaphor for capitalism seems out of character for Daniel Plainview, who never 
struck me as a milkshake-drinker) or the deceptively mild "That is all" from 
The Devil Wears Prada. But can you think of any films from the noughties that 
are as chock-full of quotable dialogue as Casablanca or The Shining? You're 
more likely to stumble across bon mots "borrowed" from other films, such as The 
Wizard of Oz. If I hear "I've a feeling we're not in Kansas any more" one more 
time (Avatar and Sex and the City 2 are just two of the recent offenders), I'll 
scream.

And, regardless of these films' other merits, I can't see buffs quoting the 
dialogue from The King's Speech or The Social Network in 30 years' time. 
Indeed, after perusing a list of this year's titles, the only phrase from any 
of them that has actually stuck in my brain is Rango's: "I found a human spinal 
chord in my fecal matter once." Which may not match "We'll always have Paris" 
for universal applicability, but I'm going to try and shoehorn it into my 
cocktail party chit-chat anyway.
 