
The negative side of coverage of the Syrian crisis has been dehumanising 
references to “swarms” of refugees, and an emphasis on numbers rather than 
people.

However, one journalist for German newspaper Bild has found a way to use his 
smartphone to help those people tell their stories direct to readers. Or rather 
viewers.

Paul Ronzheimer travelled with a group of Syrian refugees from the Greek 
island of Kos across Europe to their ultimate destination ofGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. Although he was filing copy as he 
went, he was also broadcasting live video using Twitter’s Periscope app.

“At the beginning I had about 1,500 followers, but now I have around 33,000. 
It became really big: one of the videos was played and replayed more than 
90,000 times,” says Ronzheimer.

His broadcasts often focused on individual refugees, with several reappearing 
regularly to talk about their experience. Ronzheimer says that the unedited 
nature of the live broadcasts was an important factor.

“In Germany we have been having a big discussion about the intensity of media 
coverage of this story. But on Periscope, everybody could see it was live,” he 
says.

“It happened. No one was cutting it, no one was putting a two- or three-minute 
piece together after we filmed it. And for Germans, it was really good to 
understand the problems the refugees have been facing.”

He adds that he feels he was able to get “inside the story” in a way that 
would have been tougher with a camera crew. Indeed, at points in the journey, 
they would not have been allowed to film.

“Everybody has smartphones now, so with my small iPhone camera I was able to 
film without it being obvious that I was media,” he says – referring to border 
authorities, as the refugees he was travelling with were fully aware of his 
work.

Periscope’s features include the ability for viewers to comment during the 
broadcasts, which in this case often included questions that the refugees could 
answer live and unmediated.

“It was very interesting: a lot of the critical comments on Periscope came 
from the UK. ‘Why do they all have smartphones if they are refugees? Why are 
they wearing sunglasses?’ and so on,” says Ronzheimer.

“They could directly respond: ‘These are two-Euro sunglasses’ or ‘I need my 
smartphone to communicate with other refugees’. One even had to use his 
smartphone with GPS to navigate the boat to Kos with 30 people on it. So the 
most important thing for refugees is a smartphone, and he was able to explain 
that.”

Ronzheimer says that the majority of feedback was much more positive, 
including viewers asking how they could help the refugees, and offering 
recommendations for the countries they would be travelling through.
Paul Ronzheimer (@ronzheimer) 
We made it to #hungary <https://twitter.com/hashtag/hungary?src=hash> - will 
periscope soon from budapest. Thank you all for watching!@BILD 
<https://twitter.com/BILD> pic.twitter.com/jJM2pHpfxs <http://t.co/jJM2pHpfxs>
 <https://twitter.com/ronzheimer/status/635917710602469382> August 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ronzheimer/status/635917710602469382> 
One downside of Periscope for journalists is that videos can only be replayed 
for up to 24 hours after their live broadcast: follow any of the links tweeted 
out by Ronzheimer during the journey, and you’ll find the videos have been 
removed.

However, the app’s ability to save broadcasts to a smartphone was crucial 
here: Bild took the saved footage and turned it into a16-minute documentary 
hosted on its website 
<http://www.bild.de/politik/ausland/zuwanderung/flucht-aus-der-hoelle-das-video-42352374.bild.html>
.

The footage also found its way into Bild’s print edition. “When the refugees 
came to the German border, I forgot to take pictures, because I switched on 
Periscope to capture the most important scene of the story: that emotional 
moment,” he says.

“So we only had this video and no photographs. But our print edition decided 
to print a screenshot of the Periscope video instead.”

Ronzheimer plans to use Periscope for more stories when it’s appropriate, 
based on the lessons learned during his journey with the Syrian refugees.

“It’s not enough simply to do camera shoots. You have to comment on what you 
see, and always explain why this story is important. And you have to interact a 
lot with the people, and answer questions and comments,” he says.

“For the refugee story, the personalisation is very important, I think. It’s 
not just showing lots of refugees walking on a road: you can ask them how they 
feel.”

Ronzheimer thinks that future news events will see more of the participants 
using apps like Periscope, as well as journalists. But he is excited about the 
potential for the latter.

“It’s a big time for young journalists willing to explore all these things, 
and just to do it. Not everything is perfect: at the beginning it can be 
frustration because you don’t have a lot of followers or comments,” he says.

“But for me, there has been such a revolution in the past five years: I am 
taking pictures on my smartphone, recording videos and now doing Periscope, and 
sometimes writing the text as well on my smartphone. You have to find the right 
balance, but this technology can be a new step in how we tell these stories.”
 