
There we were at the planning table. We had recently built a brand campaign 
for Arts University Bournemouth (AUB <http://aub.ac.uk/>) on the theme of 
"looking at the world from different angles". As part of this, we ripped up the 
typical university prospectus format in favour of a pack of interlocking cards. 
We had an award-winning print publication on our hands, but next we needed to 
take the brand thinking into the digital realm.

The question was: how?

Great ideas and design comes from great relationships. When designers are able 
to build trust and rapport between themselves and a client, ideas can truly 
fly. For us, this was the case with AUB.


Bond and Coyne <http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/> (that's us) is a 
problem-solving agency. We don't work in any one particular media and we like 
to test ourselves. We're not digital specialists but we know what concepts we 
want to push digital to do.


Both of our directors have lectured in design for 12 years and this has meant 
that, as a business, we have an enviable network of around 2,000 new and 
not-so-new creative talents to draw upon should we need it. This has always 
given us confidence to take on the less familiar and to be fully ambitious 
about what we strive to achieve.

So, sat in the studio as a team of bleary-eyed designers in the aftermath of 
award winning glory, it was creative director Martin Coyne who said: "Okay, so 
how can we tangibly prove how creative AUB is?”

Initially we thought about orchestras and about the bringing together of 
sounds to create something beautiful – much like the courses at the university 
coming together to provide a creative education. It could have been a 
sound-based app but it needed to be visual. Also, we felt strongly that the 
university shouldn’tsay it was creative; it should show that it was.


With a deep breath, we stepped into the unknown and began to build our first 
fully-fledged app. Pulling together a team of interested and ambitious 
designers and programmers, our aim was to take the idea of "looking at the 
world from different angles" into a digital form.


It was imperative that we did this in a way that would capture the attention 
and imagination of a young creative audience. As lecturers, we often see 
students stare out the window and we wanted to see how technology could harness 
that curiosity and turn it into something that would engage them in a creative 
process.

We created kscope <http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/kscope.html>, an app that 
turns a smartphone or tablet into a kaleidoscope using the device's camera and 
video functions. You can choose different filters and there is a sliding scale 
to increase or decrease the level of fracturing. Users are able to take kscope 
photos or films and then share these online within kscope galleries.

We did take a risk in launching an app that allows young, creative, 
inquisitive people to share imagery online. We had to trust them to resist the 
urge to look at certain body parts from different angles. We actually only had 
one near-panic when a flesh-coloured image was uploaded. Fortunately, it was an 
elbow.

The app was selected by Apple as a best new app and featured on the iTunes 
homepage. It was downloaded over 21,000 times in its first week and kscope 
images and films have been uploaded from around the globe (all of which can be 
seen on aninteractive world map <http://kscope.aub.ac.uk/>). 

The kaleidoscope element itself was not in our opinion the most innovative 
part of the app, it was the fact that the brand itself was going to be stepping 
back from selling. It has been nominated for an innovation award in education 
marketing and continues to feature in exhibition stands and international 
recruitment campaigns. Most importantly, our work with AUB has helped to 
increase the application rate to the university by over 11%.

The moral of our story? Build great rapport with clients and seek those that 
will be excited by what you do and vice versa; they will trust your instincts 
and you will share the rewards. Have the tenacity to see something through and 
welcome collaborators to help you grow the concept beyond what you can imagine 
alone. Finally, retain your belief in the mantra that "concept is king" and its 
applications will follow.

Mike Bond is strategic director at Bond and Coyne 
<http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/> 

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 