
Say what you like about John Emburey, he could never not be relied on to put 
it there or thereabouts, whether keeping it cat's-arse tight in a diarrhoea 
finish at Uxbridge or sticking his finger on the buzzer for What Happened Next 
on A Question of Sport ("Henman lost, Sue").

And wisdom-wise Embers was on the spot again this week when he said, "Perhaps 
his face doesn't fit - the fact that he's not there in the squad is criminal." 
Sure, technically he was talking about Owais Shah rather than Dave Podmore, but 
we're essentially the same cricketer, except when I'm driving down the M1 at 
125mph I make sure I don't get caught. And now both Shahy and Pod have found 
themselves on the wrong end of the biggest miscarriage of justice since (can 
you stick in someone who was hanged by mistake fellers - not Timothy Evans 
though, Chris Martin Jenkins keeps using him).

Like me, you were probably playing the ECB's new game "Oozthat" when you saw 
the squad that had been selected for the winter tour. Fair play to Shaun Udal, 
who's been picked with an eye to the future. Shaggy's been knocking at the door 
for a good 15 years now and like Pod can be expected to reach full maturity in 
another 10 or so. As with Gilo, I expect him to come through the flames and 
prove yet again that if you're abused enough, you're good enough.

But as regards the rest, a message to the powers-that-be: why not leave the 
slogan "Try something new today" to Sainsbury's. They've got the empty shelves 
problem, whereas the Frizzell championship is bursting with tried and tested 
talent crying out to do itself justice on the sub-continent. Hicky must be 
wondering what else he has to do.

And he isn't alone. Now all the replicas of the sacred urn are back under lock 
and key I think it's safe for your correspondent to put his hand up and claim 
credit for the crucial turning point of the fourth Test: Punter's run-out. A 
month earlier, at the invitation of the Durham committee I'd spent a couple of 
hours with young Gary Pratt, persuading him not to give the game up and become 
a plumber.

I pointed out that the 70 grand or so salary was piss compared to what you 
could pick up as a bits-and-pieces player on the county circuit, and that was 
without even having to bend down very much. Pratty must have taken Pod's pearls 
to heart because we all know what happened at Trent Bridge - and the only time 
the lad found his head stuck down a toilet was as part of Freddie's "welcome to 
the England dressing room" initiation ceremony.

As it happens I'll be spending the next few months answering another cry for 
help. I've heard from my old mate Peter Fitzsimons on the Sydney Morning Herald 
that it's complete chaos there since they lost the Ashes - Test selector Merv 
Hughes has gone bald and has even had his moustache streaked like KP's hair to 
try and bring the guys luck.

Sales of deodorant, mopeds, fried chicken, beer, wine, Castrol, Weetabix and 
all the other stuff the Aussies endorsed have taken a nosedive. In short the 
whole Oz economy is in the dunny and if it weren't for Neighbours and Home and 
Away helping the export market I reckon they'd be on the blower to Kofi Annan 
and his lad for a few food parcels. Except the entire phone system down under 
has been frozen - it's all sub judice until Vodafone vs Orange in the high 
court sorts out which mobile Brett Lee is entitled to dress up as.

So it's Pod to the rescue again. Jacqui won't be coming - she's decided to 
stay and pick up some endorsements of her own now Kate Moss's career seems to 
have gone belly (and nose) up. Anyway she said, she didn't want to go to a 
place where dingos steal your baby. I told her we hadn't got one but she can't 
have heard as she kept her head buried in I'm Pregnant! magazine. But that's 
her decision and luckily Ray Poole my brilliant manager has offered to walk the 
dogs and keep an eye on Jacqui while her fella's away helping the baggy green 
boys come up with a new anthem.

According to Fitz that's what the nation needs most of all now, to lift its 
spirits - "Come On Aussie Come On" is indelibly associated with the 2005 
disaster and "Warney Put Your Wanger Away" has lost a bit of its charm. The 
lads on the SMH sports desk have had a go but, oh dear. "Roo-salem" - I ask you.

Dave Podmore is relying on Christopher Douglas and Andrew Nickolds to keep him 
up to date with news from the party conferences and Emmerdale.
 