
This is an edited extract from the Jan Grodecki annual lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/22/lords-reform-abolition-lord-bingham>
, delivered last night at Leicester University.

Since it is widely believed by those outside the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> itself that it should not, in its 
present form, continue to exist, and since the only models of reform suggested 
– appointment, election, or a combination of the two – are open to compelling 
objections, the case for total abolition is strong. But the Lords also does 
invaluable work, particularly as a revising chamber and in the work of its 
specialist committees. To bring that contribution to an end without replacing 
it would adversely affect, in a serious way, the quality of government in this 
country. Time and again, not least in recent years, we have had cause to thank 
providence for the House of Lords, which on occasion seems more closely attuned 
to the mood of the nation than the popularly elected house. If the Lords were 
abolished, could it be effectively replaced?

I think it could, by establishing a body which – for want of any better name – 
I shall call the Council of the Realm ("the Council", for short). This body 
would differ from theHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>
 superficially in that membership would involve no outdated pretence of 
nobility, and it would differ fundamentally in having no legislative power. It 
could not make law. It could not (save in one respect which I shall discuss 
shortly) obstruct the will of the Commons. There would be no persisting 
democratic deficit.

The Council would, however, resemble the House of Lords in crucial respects. 
Its members, appointed not elected, would be very much the same people, and the 
same sorts of people, as now make up the house. It would perform, but in an 
advisory and not a lawmaking way, the revising function it now performs. Its 
expert committees could function much as they do now. It could debate issues of 
public moment. In this way the most valuable functions of the existing house 
could be preserved, but the features of the house which fuel calls for reform 
could be eliminated.

A proposal as embryonic and, perhaps, novel as this cannot be defined in any 
precise detail, but I must seek to answer 12 of the more obvious questions 
which any consideration of it would be bound to provoke.

1. How would members of the Council be recruited?

On being established, the Council would comprise almost all existing members 
of the House of Lords who are willing to serve, including any hereditary peers 
who are members at the relevant time. Future recruitment would be by 
appointment, effectively on the nomination of a committee of the Council, 
broadly based so as to reflect the main bodies of political opinion but also 
those with no political allegiance. New appointments would be made to provide 
or replace needed expertise or to meet the demands of current business.

2. What would be the size of the Council?

Initially, the Council would be roughly the same size as the existing House of 
Lords, but over time it would be likely to diminish. No maximum or minimum 
number would be specified. Over time, the number of members would be governed 
by the need of the Council to be able to call on members with knowledge and 
experience in politics but also, and particularly, in the multifarious fields 
which fall to be considered in a complex modern state.

3. Would all members be entitled or required to attend all sessions of the 
Council and its committees?

No. Groups of perhaps 20-25 members would be formed to consider particular 
pieces of legislation. Specialist committees would in all probability be 
smaller. Members would attend when nominated and summoned, but not otherwise.

This involves a break with House of Lords practice. The average daily 
attendance 
<http://www.archive.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm45/4534/4534.htm> in 
the house in the 1998-99 parliamentary session was 446. After the departure of 
the hereditaries the number shrank (in 2007-08)to 413 
<http://www.parliament.uk/faq/lords_stats_members.cfm>. These are inordinate 
numbers. The most powerful and perhaps most respected upper house in the world, 
the US Senate, does its work with 100 members.. It is hard to suppose that the 
business of the house could require the attendance of so many members, and this 
feature would not be reproduced in the Council. This pattern of working could 
be expected to yield some saving on the £121.5m which the House of Lords 
currently costs; of that total, only £36m is spent on staff and members' 
expenses, but this is not a negligible sum.

4. How would members of legislative groups and specialist committees be chosen?

Members of legislative groups and specialist committees would be chosen by a 
broadly based and representative selection committee of Council members. The 
object in each case would be to compose a balanced, knowledgeable and objective 
group for the particular task in hand.

5. Would members of the Council be paid?

Apart from a nominal annual retainer, members of the Council would receive an 
appropriate daily or hourly rate for time actually spent on the business of the 
Council pursuant to summons, plus an allowance for expenses reasonably and 
necessarily incurred in order to discharge such business.

6. Would members of the Council have the opportunity to consider the principle 
of proposed legislation?

Yes. Save where there is an emergency giving rise to a need to legislate 
urgently, to be certified as such an emergency by the Speaker of the House of 
Commons, the Council would have the opportunity to consider the principle of 
proposed legislation, as in parliament on second reading, before its 
introduction in the Commons. For that purpose it would have a statutory power 
to call for evidence from ministers and shadow spokesmen, to take evidence from 
experts and to require the production of papers. At this stage, and at all 
later stages, the Council would be required by statute to act within a 
specified period, to prevent the process of legislation becoming unduly 
protracted and enable the government to legislate with reasonable expedition.

7. Would members of the Council have the opportunity to review legislation 
approved by the Commons on a line-by-line basis?

Yes. Its power would, however, be to recommend amendments and not (as now in 
the House of Lords) to amend the text of a bill. The Commons would be subject 
to a statutory obligation to review amendments proposed by the Council.

8. Would the Council have an opportunity to review the legislation again after 
its amendments had been considered by the Commons?

Yes, the process would be repeated, once, more briefly. Statute would provide 
that a measure could not be presented for the royal assent without a 
certificate by the Speaker that there had been compliance with this procedure.

9. Would there be any constraint on the powers of Council committees to 
investigate and report?

The Council would be subject to no constraints not applicable to the House of 
Commons and would, by statute, enjoy the same immunity from suit as now 
attaches to proceedings in the House of Lords. I cannot see any reason why the 
law of contempt should apply to it.

10. Could a government appoint as ministers those who are members of the 
Council as now of the House of Lords?

Yes, although the member could not, while serving as a minister, perform 
duties for the Council. It is indeed desirable that this should be done, since 
the Council will be a pool of able and experienced people knowledgeable in 
their fields. It would ameliorate the present situation in which people of, on 
occasion, modest ability are appointed to ministerial office, come to a 
department with little or no knowledge or experience of the department's 
business and are re-shuffled to another department before they have time to 
learn. It would, moreover, strengthen the ability of the House of Commons to 
hold a government to account if fewer MPs of the majority party held 
ministerial appointments.

Ministers appointed in this way should be answerable to the Commons. A 
procedure would have, therefore, to be established to enable ministers who were 
not elected members of parliament to speak and answer (but not to vote) in the 
Commons. This would remedy what is at present a weakness in our system of 
government. For the last 10 years, for instance, the attorney general has been 
a peer, sitting in the House of Lords. During that time, momentous decisions 
have been taken. In a parliamentary system such as ours, which depends on the 
accountability of ministers to parliament, it cannot be satisfactory that the 
government's chief law officer should be immune from questioning in the elected 
and dominant chamber.

11. Could there be any safeguard, in a unicameral parliament, against 
unilateral legislation by a House of Commons majority to extend its own life?

The safeguard, I suggest, would be a statutory provision stipulating that no 
legislative measure seeking to extend the life of an existing parliament should 
be presented for the royal assent without the certificate of an appropriate 
official that it had been approved by a majority of all members of the Council 
entitled to vote.

12. How can we be sure that the House of Commons or the country would take any 
notice of Council recommendations?

This is of course the crunch question, and the answer is that we cannot be 
sure. The press, the public and the Commons might dismiss the Council as, in 
the current phrase, "a bunch of old farts" of whom no notice need be taken. But 
there are reasons to think that this would not be so. Despite unease at the 
House of Lords' lack of legitimacy, most of its members are personally 
respected and the work of the house is generally admired, rarely disparaged. 
With the democratic deficit made good, the virtues and strengths of the new 
Council would become more obvious.

To conclude: for over a century the future of the House of Lords has been 
regarded as a problem. Our belief in the power of reason generally leads us to 
believe that all problems are amenable to a rational solution if sufficient 
thought is devoted to them. But there is in truth a small category of problems 
which are not amenable to a rational solution, and the problem of reforming the 
House of Lords while preserving its present form is one of them. That is why, 
despite an immense outpouring of time and talent, no solution has been found. 
My solution does not of course preserve the House of Lords in its present form. 
But it is a possible and I think workable solution. AsLord Denning said in a 
1957 case <http://www.uniset.ca/other/css/1958AC379.html>,: "Whatever the 
outcome, I hope I may say, as Holt CJ once did after he had done much research 
on his own: 'I have stirred these points, which wiser heads in time may 
settle'."
 