
My husband has overheard our youngest, adopted 17-year-old daughter talking on 
the phone to her boyfriend. He fears she is going to beat someone up and if she 
does she will very likely face a custodial sentence. She has a long string of 
fairly serious offences behind her and is close to the edge of a magistrate's 
tolerance.

She is also vulnerable and volatile and desperately in need of help that does 
not seem to be available to adopted teenagers, certainly not where we live. My 
nightmare is that if she is placed in custody she will self-harm or explode and 
the damage already done to her as a young child will be compounded.

I rush home. I get on to Facebook and can see from the entries that she is 
once again engaged in a battle with her bete noire, a 15-year-old girl called 
Sara.

I live far too much of my life on Facebook, monitoring my two 
daughters' lives. When things are going well I am able to ignore it, but in bad 
times it is vital.

I ring my daughter and am relieved when she answers the phone. When she is on 
one of her "benders", for want of a better word, we lose all contact. But she 
answers right away, she hears the urgency in my voice, she listens. Relief 
floods through me.

"Kelly, if you hit Sara you will go to prison, simple as that. She is much 
younger than you, she is a kid. You have allowed her to get under your skin and 
she is calling all the shots."

"She has sent all my friends a message saying I am a sket."

"I saw. You have to ignore her."

"I know, I know ... I can't. The more I try and control myself the angrier I 
get."

This is something she tells me constantly. Her anger mushrooms as she tries to 
fight it and she feels increasingly despairing, panic and anger chasing each 
other round in her head. You can see the physical effect on her, see the heat 
rising in her, the heart pounding, her whole body tensing.

"Where are you?"

"With Matilda."

"Matilda who?"

I search frantically on Facebook as she gives me a second name and I find her. 
I go through her posts, look up her friends. Matilda looks OK. I ask how Kelly 
knows her and encourage her to talk to me, hoping that the conversation will 
distract her.

As we talk Kelly seems calm and promises she will come home, but I can't be 
sure.

So I ring her friend Tina and say that I am really worried Kelly is going to 
get into a fight. Tina rings her aunt who lives in the same street as Sara. Her 
aunt can see Kelly and Matilda outside Sara's house. She goes out, remonstrates 
with her, brings Kelly into the security of her own home and calms her. I am so 
grateful and thank them both.

Later, when Kelly is safely home, Tina rings again. She gives her a lecture in 
the way only a good friend can.

"Kelly, what you did today was pathetic, she is younger than you. I feel sorry 
for her to be honest."

"I know, I don't know why I do it." The constant refrain, the perpetual 
inability to understand or control her feelings.

"If she was your age or bigger it would be different ..." the lecture 
continues. All good sense. This is the same Tina who tried to beat up my older 
daughter three years ago, who has a stepfather in jail and an aunt who recently 
smashed a door down in my house and stole over £500 worth of goods.

Tina is a young person trying to change, as is my daughter who suffered abuse 
as a young child. Little is understood about the impact this can have. As a 
mother of adopted girls, we take one day at a time.

Jane Green is a pseudonym. All names have been changed
 