
The Romans app <http://coriniummuseum.org/romans-app/> was created by the 
Corinium Museum in response to a number of factors: the need to find new 
audiences and revenue streams, and the need to adopt modern technology – in 
both instances to make the museum's collections more widely available and 
accessible.

As a small museum outside London, driving footfall is a challenge, so reaching 
out to a global audience to generate new revenue was an appealing element in 
the decision to create an app. The museum is in Cirencester, the UK's second 
largest Roman settlement after London. It (and the town) are blessed with an 
unrivalled collection of Roman artefacts, recognised and studied around the 
world, so the creation of an app was a logical step to combining the needs of 
the museum and its rich content.

The idea was to provide the user with an enhanced tour around Roman 
Cirencester and the museum itself, as well as offer a learning zone, to fulfil 
the requirements of key stages 2 and 3 curriculum education. For schools in the 
local area, the museum is a key destination, but with a number of competitors 
for Roman-related content, providing a link between classroom, museum and the 
town was a important part of the process of creating the app. The app would 
enhance Roman studies in the classroom and also provide teachers with 
unrivalled access to the additional teaching resources provided.

To scope the project and identify the best features we initially undertook 
some research. First, among two local schools – one primary and one secondary. 
Research included workshops with year 3 and year 7 pupils and teachers to 
establish what is was they wanted from a Romans app, and where and how they 
would use it. The responses contributed to the initial design stages of the app.
 The Romans app 
The second stage trialled the app with the same classes to gauge response, to 
see if it met their expectations and – importantly – whether they would use it. 
The results were staggering: 97% of primary and 98% of secondary school pupils 
said they would use the app.

Key to the app's development, we also spoke extensively to local 
archaeologists involved in local excavations, to get their input. We also felt 
that to create a sense of atmosphere in the app, audio content delivered by the 
archaeologists would best communicate, in some cases, the very personal stories 
of the discoveries made during the excavations.

What were the challenges? One was the volume and type of content that should 
be included and in what order. The key was to make sure that the content all 
linked together – from the museum, to the town and the learning zone. Once we 
decided on the structure it was then more of a logistical challenge to manage 
more than 700 different images and their variations for each device. Most of 
the artefacts were also re-shot so that their presentation inside the app could 
be consistent. Without a dedicated team managing this part of the process, it 
was the most challenging aspect.

The app was launched in March 2013 following a successful pitch for funds to 
create it in September 2012. The app meets the objectives we set by allowing 
the museum to have an ongoing revenue stream available to them online. The 
recognition of this as a suitable and sustainable stream for the future has 
meant that planning is already underway to secure funding for the development 
of a second app for the medieval period.

Creatively, and from the curator's perspective, it has allowed a new 
interpretation of the Roman collection, one different from the one currently 
available within the museum. It also allows the collection to go out across the 
globe with downloads already being made in Taiwan, Spain, Canada and the US – 
not bad reach from Cirencester!

Laith Clark is managing director of TapMob <http://www.tapmob.co.uk/>, and 
Amanda Hart is curator of theCorinium Museum <http://coriniummuseum.org/> – 
follow it on Twitter@CoriniumMuseum <http://twitter.com/CoriniumMuseum>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 