
The idea to produce a digital programme came about as part of a larger 
campaign for our autumn season tour in 2012, for which we tested a 
majority-digital approach to marketing. It felt only right that if we were 
cutting down on paper (by 80%) we shouldn't be producing a paper-based souvenir 
programme.

Without the budget or the skills in-house to achieve what we wanted, we sought 
and obtained funding, which in turn led to a collaboration with theUniversity 
of Strathclyde <https://www.strath.ac.uk/cis/> and the creation of a HTML 
version of the programme.

It was well received by our audience, and while our original plan was to take 
the HTML version, manage the content in-house and develop new digital 
programmes for each production thereafter, we found it had limitations and 
reallywhat we wanted was an app <http:>.

We spent the next few months finding the money, but also refining precisely 
what the app would do. We discussed the need for it to be flexible while not 
costing the earth, but also for it to be something we might sell to other arts 
organisations who have similar requirements and might benefit from a simple, 
effective and tailor-made product.

Knowing the appetite of our audience for what goes on behind the stage curtain 
– the planning, costumes, sets, design, music, choreography and dancers – the 
ambition was to create an app that provided an insight into the making of a 
ballet and to give behind the scenes access

The brief was to develop an app that could:

• Be a sales tool for forthcoming shows by linking immediately to online 
tickets
• Be insightful but not repeat content that was already online 
• Offer alternative content from the printed souvenir programmes (which 
audiences cherish)
• Be easy to update with new information as a tour progressed (eg new 
photographs)
• Automatically refresh new content / notify those who have already downloaded 
the app
• Be an app that audiences want to share with friends via social media 
• Notify audiences there is a new issue available and hence a new show coming 
(forward selling)

We partnered with Dog Digital <http://www.dogdigital.com/>, who helped us find 
the solution – aNewsstand app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/genre/ios-newsstand/id6021?mt=8> for iPad. The 
notification of a new issue was critical to the long-term use of the app and 
the opportunity to be a valuable sales tool for us and other organisations.

We ruled out a phone version due to three factors. The first was that our 
audience access stats indicated a higher proportion of iPad users on our 
website. The second (and most important) factor was cost; creating an app for 
both iPhone and iPad wasn't an option. Finally, our beautiful ballet production 
images are best viewed on a larger screen.

We expected the app might be a bit of a slow burn and we didn't have any 
budget left after the build to heavily promote it. We launched it to those most 
engaged with the company via our e-newsletter database and expected that social 
media interest would weave its magic. We've not been disappointed so far.

Content has been a challenge, primarily as we were creating the app for a 
brand new production with no photography in existence. Fortunately, our poster 
image for the show lent itself to creating beautiful pages with intertwining 
forest and sweet themes. We used a mixture of rehearsal images and costume 
fittings before adding a further gallery of production shots during the week of 
opening, a result (and benefit) of being able to add and remove pages with 
in-house access to the back-end.

We also created short films based on the interviews that were being conducted 
for the souvenir programme articles. They served as teaser film versions of the 
printed articles, giving snippets that encourage readers to also buy the 
souvenir programme at the performance for a full version.

In terms of future shows, the app has given us a framework that we can 
customise with page length choices and text placement options, combined with 
images, films or galleries, zoom functions, share functions and audio excerpts.

In the first issue we opted to restrict the advertising pages to Scottish 
Ballet's own products – merchandise, memberships and so on. For the next app, 
the advertising opportunities will be developed to provide an income stream now 
that we have user stats for the first edition.

Why was the app free? The app is a means for us to share what goes on here at 
ScottishBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> with our most loyal 
audiences and, to be honest, we were a little concerned that charging a 
fee-to-access insight into what we do would be counterproductive. However, we 
do hope this app makes them feel inspired to book tickets and keep supporting 
us.

Kirsten Cockburn is head of marketing and corporate sponsorship at Scottish 
Ballet <http://www.scottishballet.co.uk/> – follow the company on Twitter 
@scottishballet <https://twitter.com/scottishballet>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 