
Ever fancied putting on gigs? Not to do the hard work – not negotiating the 
contracts, or booking the venue, or sorting out the PA and desk and backline, 
or making sure it's advertised in the right places, or getting everyone paid 
the right sum of money – but just to do the fun bit, the bit where you say "I 
want to see that band" and then you wait for it to happen?

Last week, music fans in 10 UK cities – Birmingham, Brighton, Bristol, 
Cardiff, Coventry, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester, Nottingham and Sheffield – 
came a little closer to that dream, whenSongkick <http://www.songkick.com/>'s 
Detour <https://detour.songkick.com/metro_areas/24426/discover> service 
expanded beyond its London base for the time.

What Detour does is encourage fans to "pledge" a cash sum towards getting a 
band to visit their town. Detour then takes those pledges to the band's 
management and promoters, suggesting there is a market for their group in that 
town. If the band comes, the pledgers get a ticket – and a refund on any excess 
they have pledged, or a request they make the difference up if their pledge was 
below the ticket price – and Detour gets a cut of the tickets it has been 
responsible for selling.

"It's designed to work within the way things are now," says Ian Hogarth of 
Songkick, one of the brains behind Detour. "The first thing we did was with
Desaparecidos <http://www.desaparecidosband.com/> [one of Conor Oberst's 
projects]. About 100 people pledged, and we reached out to management, the 
promoter and the booking agent. Management told us they wanted to come, but the 
offers they were getting weren't enough." With the guarantee of 100 pledges – 
Hogarth estimates that total ticket sales for a show will be around 10 to 20 
times the number of pledges – they were able to go ahead and book the show.

For promoters, the incentive to adopt Detour lies in the way it can help 
minimise the risk involved in putting on a show. "It's a mechanism whereby 
people can directly express what they're interested in going to see," says 
Anton Lockwood of the promoterDHP 
<http://www.thisisnottingham.co.uk/Setting-course-stars/story-17827755-detail/story.html#axzz2YBICP1l3>
, which has partnered with Songkick. "It provides way more information and a 
mechanism that's never been there before. It won't take the risk out of 
promoting, but in a complex and competitive market – which is getting more 
competitive – it gives us another mechanism."

Lockwood believes it could be an ideal tool in booking comeback tours, where 
no one really knows whether an act who's been away for 20 years will sell 500 
tickets or 5,000 tickets, or for assessing the actual popularity of buzz bands. 
"Every promoter I know, including me, has had that experience of thinking: 
'Everyone I know loves this band – I'll put them on,' and then finding the 
crowd is just those people you already know."

Barry Hogan of All Tomorrow's Parties <http://www.atpfestival.com/home.php> 
discovered how Detour could help him calibrate the size of his promotions when 
ATP and Detour partnered to put on Goat last month. "There were 200 pledges. 
Goat was originally planned for the Scala, but we could see we had enough 
pledges to go to the Electric Ballroom. Now it's opened up from London, I think 
it will spread like wildfire."

Not everyone is completely convinced. Hogarth admits there has been suspicion 
from booking agents. Because the service has been limited to London until now – 
with about 3,000 users – it's hard to find a lot of different experiences to 
cross-reference (an appeal on Twitter brought one industry person who spoke of 
having heard unfavourable things – but nothing more concrete than that). But 
the benefit of whatever doubt there is has to go, at this point, to Detour. Can 
it really be a bad thing to try to open up the gig-going experience, and to 
help promoters know when there really is a market for their band?

We'll leave the last word to Mark Gamble, a fan who made one of the pledges 
that helped bring Desaparecidos over. "You're funding the band directly," he 
says. "It's not a cheap process to tour, and with Detour you're giving the band 
a sense that it's a worthwhile thing. And you're pledging with a load of other 
people who really love the band – so you're getting them to the show, rather 
than the people who just want to talk through the gig."
 