
The remarkable book, which sits at the heart of the London: A City Through Time
 <http://www.heuristicmedia.tv/london-a-city-through-time.php> app, is The 
London Encyclopaedia, a huge labour of love edited over several decades by the 
antiquarian sellerBen Weinreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/apr/12/guardianobituaries3> and 
suggested to us by his son, the photographer Matthew Weinreb.

Understandably the publishers, Pan Macmillan, were initially very sceptical 
that an app could be made from the book, but felt our enthusiasm might at least 
be fun to watch. Large and lovingly-curated reference books are sadly the first 
against the wall in the digital revolution, so digitising one would be an 
interesting experience for all.

The existing book is, frankly, enormous. It covers every subject of which you 
can think on the history ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, from 
the grandiose to the intimate. And the landscape is a remarkable weave to pick 
through: towering cathedrals stand cheek-by-jowl with Roman ruins; tiny streets 
thread their way in and out of skyscrapers; Georgian squares stand over plague 
pits and a warren of tunnels burrow underneath it all. The book is particularly 
detailed on the more obscure places that are the real charms for London's 
residents and visitors, something that guide books can simply never 
comprehensively cover.

The first major job was to wrestle the 900 page PDF of the book into a 
database so that the entries could be fished from anywhere in the app. While 
many entries had associated addresses, many more did not and none had the GPS 
coordinates vital to presenting information on a map. Unable to rely on 
existing online services to accurately locate the entries, we individually 
pinpointed over 4,500 entries by hand.

Not surprisingly, this process took a while – particularly as the book covers 
buildings and streets that crumbled away long ago. Lots of times we had to do 
detective work, using old maps or descriptions to pinpoint where on earth a 
particular castle, theatre or place of execution used to be (Tyburn gallows, 
incidentally, was opposite Marble Arch, right next to a Pret a Manger, which 
might have been useful for the executioners and the crowds had the condemned 
taken their time).

We wanted to give people multiple ways to search through the content 
over-and-above alphabetical browsing, which is a limitation of all 
encyclopaedias. We created eight sections that present information in very 
different ways depending on the user's mood or interests.

The timeline was designed to give a multilayered overview of the full span of 
the history so that users can quickly and visually speed backwards and forwards 
in time. To accompany this we researched and wrote over 2,000 entries for 
events within specific years, each tying into existing relevant articles within 
the database. We created ways of browsing by map, by subject, by notable 
Londoners mentioned in the articles and even by underground lines so that while 
sitting on the tube, you can browse articles relating to the places hurtling by 
above your head.

A key consideration for the app was that many users might not have a 
connection (either no Wi-Fi or because they have turned off roaming) and we 
tried to make as much of the app as possible usable offline. We also wanted it 
to be as useful for people walking around the city as it was for armchair 
tourists. Two of the company's partners, Richard Loncraine and Patrick Uden, 
live in London, and we (myself and Simon Reeves) live in Los Angeles, so that 
gave us both perspectives to work from.

An enormous amount of the app was possible because so many different people 
were passionate about the subject matter and kindly offered their help, 
materials and time. This meant Richard and Patrick spent a lot of time running 
about the city and up cathedral towers photographing maps, etchings and objects 
in the basements of antiquarian sellers and the Museum of London, rushing off 
to record Blue Badge tours and even Timothy Spall at his kitchen table.

Several archives gave us access to their entire catalogues, giving us 
thousands of photographs, articles and etchings to select, tag, crop and make 
presentable for the app. This generosity is a great reflection of the love so 
many people seem to feel for their city – something we hear constantly from 
those who use the app all over the world, and it kept up our enthusiasm 
throughout the long process of making it. Every day we found out new 
interesting things we'd not known and the book's sheer size means we are still 
enjoying it, even though the app is now finished and in the store.

Toby Evetts and Simon Reeves are partners at Heuristic Media 
<http://www.heuristicmedia.tv/> – follow the company on Twitter @Heuristic_Apps 
<https://twitter.com/Heuristic_Apps>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 