
The charity sector is facing a multitude of challenges: increased demand, 
funding cuts and rapid advancements in technology and the way in which we 
communicate.

But the sector continues to embrace new ideas and innovate to prepare for the 
future. In ourrecent Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/apr/20/balancing-innovation-and-risk-charities-live-discussion>
 an expert panel discussed how charities are doing this, how to balance 
innovation and financial risk, the role of collaboration and when charities 
should look to invest in innovation.

Panel

Simon Maclaren, trustee at Scottish Charity Finance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/finance> Group (SCFG)

Judith Miller, treasurer at Small Charities Coalition 
<http://www.smallcharities.org.uk/> and partner at Sayer Vincent 
<http://www.sayervincent.co.uk/home#.U0_xd_aVTe4>

Meredith Niles, head of fundraising innovation at Marie Curie Cancer Care 
<http://www.mariecurie.org.uk/>

Asheem Singh, director of public policy at Acevo <http://www.acevo.org.uk/>

David Hopkins, senior advisory manager, charities and grant making, at the 
Charities Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

Making chief executives and trustees realise when it's a good time to innovate

Meredith Niles: Focus on a balanced view of risks and opportunities. Humans 
tend to be more acutely attuned to what we might lose rather than what we might 
gain. Show what will happen to income if you continue on the current trajectory 
and present inertia as a risk in itself. Bring in experts to help make the case 
for you – trustees may come from backgrounds outside the voluntary sector and 
be less familiar with current trends in the funding environment, so help 
educate them so they can make a more confident decision

David Hopkins: The fear of being left behind can be a useful motivator. What 
I've seen work effectively in helping to persuade more-conservative boards to 
move forward has been the use of examples and case studies from peers and 
competitors. Detailed competitor analysis can be useful here and highlighting 
how change is driving growth.

Judith Miller: Work under regular review. Work out what might be the 
drivers/triggers for them in the context of their organisation. It is also 
about anticipating these triggers so you can pick up on them in enough time.

Asheem Singh: Provide leadership resources. Give chief executives targeted 
leadership resources and equip them not only with professional development but 
also through proper, good-quality personal development training, so they can 
improve the way they react to change, and make decisions positively.

Setting up an innovation development fund

Judith Miller: Set aside reserves for an innovation fund. These might be a 
level of funds you would be content to invest and potentially lose. Alongside 
this you might establish a set of criteria agaisnt which to help you assess 
potential innovation projects.

Meredith Niles: Set up a committee. One thing that some organisations do is to 
have a sort of "innovation investment committee" (including staff and trustees) 
which is responsible for evaluating business cases to make use of the 
innovation fund.

How to balance innovation and risk

Asheem Singh: Risk comes in many forms. Any organisation needs to ensure that 
trustees understand that reputational risk, governance risk and operational 
risk as well as the numbers when considering innovations.

Simon Maclaren: There is no difference between commercial enterprises and 
charities here. If a charity does not have internal access to appropriate 
commercial expertise it should consider either recruiting board members with 
that expertise or buying it in.

Judith Miller: Make your trustees trust you. While you do need to document 
risk management in some way, it can be far more useful to get a member of the 
staff/management team along to a trustee meeting to present and discuss how 
they manage risk on a practical day-to-day basis.

Meredith Niles: Managing risk means confronting it. We are so afraid of risk 
that risk management turns into risk avoidance. A risk register where there are 
meaningful mitigation strategies documented and where there is a calculation of 
the "retained risk" helps put things into perspective.

Innovation is not about doing something new, it is about doing something better

David Hopkins: If there is an opportunity then take it. Start by looking at 
the impact that innovation could have on service users.

Have a back up

David Hopkins: Innovation is attractive to a number of funders and donors. 
Where you can attract funding to underwrite the risk this is sensible and is 
worth exploring at the project design phase so you can bring them on board and 
give a sense of joint endeavour from the very beginning.

Small charities can attract funders too

David Hopkins: Funders recognise that small charities can be a font of 
innovation. Small charities with a promising idea shouldn't be shy of 
approaching a funder with a track record of investing in fresh, innovative 
projects, who will often welcome the approach.

The role of partnerships and collaboration

Judith Miller: Share the risk and potential financial burden. They create 
greater opportunities and can generate bigger, bolder ideas too.

Asheem Singh: Let's leverage our strength – partnerships. Collaboration can 
make a decisive difference.

Simon Maclaren: Not just a buzzword for big funders. It's a great way of 
ensuring that an organisation has access to expertise it might otherwise lack.

How can charities embed innovation and development into their DNA?

Meredith Niles: Recruit the right trustees. We need to be more explicit about 
recruiting more trustees into the sector who see the value in a "test and 
learn" approach.

Judith Miller: Trustees are the champions of innovation. The most innovative 
ideas I have seen brought to a charity have been championed by one of the 
trustees.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 