
When I was a child, one of my jobs was to polish the silverware. Saying this 
makes my family sound far more posh than we were. Our house was chronically 
filled with chaos and noise, and the shoes, toys and general detritus of the 
six children, dog and several guinea pigs who called it home. The silverware 
represented the only shred of civility my beleaguered parents had left, and 
they clutched it with all their might. Hauling the utensils out on special 
occasions meant they hadn’t completely capitulated to the army of small 
children they had created, so haul it out they did. And when they did, it was 
my job to polish it.

This particular chore was one of my most hated. It meant sitting at the 
kitchen table with a roll of paper towel and a bottle of noxious silver 
cleaner, meticulously polishing each fork and spoon, trying to work the polish 
into each crevice without first passing out from the fumes. It was long, 
laborious, and always gave me a headache.

How to green your home: make your own cleaning spray for every task
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
Almost 20 years later, as an adult living a life decidedly absent any need for 
a set of “good silverware”, I discovered a simple, foolproof way to clean real 
silver without the toxic polish, without the fumes and without the piles of 
used paper towels. My reaction to this discovery was equal parts elation and 
rage. It was magic to see, but infuriating, too. I’d wasted whole afternoons of 
my life slaving away at that kitchen table when I could have been doing this 
simple process instead. I’m now going to share this method with you so that my 
childhood travails weren’t entirely in vain.

To begin, you’ll need a plastic container large enough to fit the items you’re 
cleaning, some aluminum foil, boiling water, and a few tablespoons of baking 
soda (bicarbonate of soda, for you Brits).

Bring water to a boil (enough to completely submerge your piece of silver) and 
line your container with a piece of aluminum foil, shiny side up (it’s OK if 
you need to use several sheets overlapping in a larger container). Fill your 
container with boiling water and then add baking soda, roughly 2tbsp per litre 
of boiling water. Next, add the silver, making sure it touches the aluminum 
foil.

Immediately you’ll see a bit of bubbling and fizzing, and gradually you’ll see 
the tarnish being lifted from the silver, revealing the shiny lustre 
underneath. After a few minutes, remove the silver (carefully – it’ll be hot) 
and remove any lingering tarnish by drying it with a soft cloth. If your piece 
is badly tarnished, you may need to repeat the process a few times.

The magic behind this hands-free silver polish is the way that the tarnish 
coating on the silver reacts with aluminum. Sulfur atoms, which adhere to the 
silver to create silver sulfide – that dark, tarnished look – are carried by 
the solution and transfer to the aluminum, forming aluminum sulfide and leaving 
your silver sparkling. Recycle the aluminum foil and you’ve got a waste-free 
way to polish your silver.

Eco-friendly methods are their best when they’re like these two tricks: quick, 
easy, and effective. I’ve never been a very good martyr (just ask my parents, 
who had to listen to me moan and whinge about the silver-polishing) so while my 
motivation for taking a DIY approach tolaundry detergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/06/how-to-make-your-own-laundry-detergent-and-help-save-the-planet>
,cleaning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
, orpersonal care products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/23/make-your-own-toothpaste-lotion-ingredients-environment>
 is ultimately about mitigating my impact on the environment (doing so 
virtually eliminates packaging, drastically reduces waste, and uses non-toxic 
ingredients) it also just has towork.

And when it does, it seems like magic.
 