
Parents in the UK are increasingly aware of problems associated with teenagers 
and alcohol – but is their experience unusual, or is it mirrored in other 
countries around the world? The statistics suggest youngsters here are more 
likely than those elsewhere to get into difficulties over drink.

Last year a survey of 15- and 16-yearolds in the UK, carried out as part of 
the European School Survey Project, found increasing numbers of them are 
suffering serious mental and physical health problems because of alcohol. More 
than one in four said they had suffered an accident or injury because of 
drinking, and one in 10 said they had had sex while intoxicated and later 
regretted it. Overall 54% of the teenagers admitted to binge drinking, which is 
a much higher percentage than the European average of 43%. Britain was fifth 
out of 35 European countries, coming behind the Isle of Man, Denmark, Portugal 
and Malta.

Professor Mark Bellis, of Liverpool John Moores University, says study after 
study shows that British young people are drinking more than teenagers in other 
parts of the world. And, what is more, the very places that might have been 
providing a better model – countries such as Spain and France – are now 
suffering their own problems. "Rather than looking to them so we can import 
what they're getting right, it seems very much as though we're exporting what 
we're getting wrong," he says.

So what is behind today's teenage drinking in Britain? Chris Sorek, chief 
executive of alcohol awareness charity Drinkaware, says: "It's a multi-faceted 
problem, and we have to look at the broad picture of what's going on to work it 
out. Adolescence, as we all know, is a tricky stage in life – youngsters are 
working hard at school, they're having first relationships and they're often 
very concerned about fitting in."

But it was the same for previous generations – so what has changed? "Life is 
more stressful now than it used to be," says Sorek. "Parents are often more 
stressed, which means family life is more stressful than it was. Added to 
which, everything today is instant: the pressures on young people are huge."

Judy Saunders is one of the many parents who have noticed how much their kids 
are drinking, and she worries about it. "Olivia is 17 and I often find an empty 
vodka bottle when I'm tidying her bedroom. Also, when she has friends over and 
they're getting ready to go out, there's usually some drinking going on. It's 
as though they can't have an evening with their mates without alcohol being 
involved."

Another new situation is how many parents have horror stories involving trips 
to hospital. "My daughter fellover coming out of a party when she'd been 
drinking, and ended up being kept in hospital overnight with concussion," says 
parent Sam Foster. "It was a horrible shock. But when I mentioned it to a 
friend, he said exactly the same thing had happened to his child – and the more 
I asked around, the more I noticed how common it was."

Both Foster and Saunders admit, too, that they've noticed that their teenagers 
often "borrow" their alcohol supply. "Sometimes bottles just disappear – other 
times you go to get a gin or a vodka and you realise there's a lot less in the 
bottle than there was last week," says Foster.

So what should parents do? Sorek, who is originally from the US, and has lived 
in Asia and other parts of Europe as well as the UK, thinks that parents in the 
UK need to be a lot more savvy about the importance of talking to youngsters 
about alcohol. "One of the things I find most surprising in Britain is that 
parents wait to talk to their children until they are about 15 – but our 
research shows 13 is the age at which many children first drink. The 
conversation needs to start much sooner."

Alcohol, he says, is part of most people's lives and it's important to 
acknowledge what its role is in your life, and to think about its role in your 
child's life.

Tips for parents

• Be aware of how you role model the use of alcohol in your own life. The 
recommended daily guidelines are 2-3 units for women, 3-4 for men

• Make sure your child understands that different drinks have different 
strengths. The difference between vodka and beer may be obvious to you, but it 
needs to be spelled out for them

• Encourage your child to have a meal before going out to a party. Make sure 
they know it's a good idea to drink lots of water to keep hydrated when 
drinking alcohol

• Make sure they plan how they're getting home, and that they have a working 
mobile phone so they can call you if they need help.
 