
This government is indeed "bleeding the patient" and only making the economy 
sicker (Ed Balls is right on the money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/06/ed-balls-keynesianism-political-reward>
, 7 December) but it is optimistic to state that a blood transfusion in the 
form of a Keynesian economic stimulus will necessarily work.

The coalition spent most of its first year telling us how sick the economy was 
in order to ensure blame for the deficit fell squarely with the last 
government: good politics but very bad economics. (A happy coincidence too that 
the deficit reduction imperative coalesced with its ideological desire for a 
smaller state.) Not surprisingly, businesses and consumers were already 
investing and spending less; the economy was slowing down from the healthier 
growth bequeathed by the lateLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> stimulus even before the cuts 
began to bite.

Without the coalition's dire threats of doom and the impending cuts we would 
still be enjoying growth, rising tax revenues and an enhanced ability to pay 
down the deficit. But now the super-tanker has turned and is heading in the 
wrong direction. A weakened economy, surrounded by weakness, may not respond to 
a transfusion. A European, and wider, stimulus may be what's required for the 
patient(s) to recover and there's little sign of that.

Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> needs to convince his 
critics about the accuracy of his diagnosis but must also do some more work on 
his prescription, which is not such a simple one as Jonathan Freedland suggests.
Neil Wallis
Banbury, Oxfordshire

• Jonathan Freedland failed to address the principal economic issues. We had a 
20-year boom. The rich got incredibly richer, the middle went into debt and the 
poor were unsustainably supported by the state. The principal issues are the 
massively unequal distribution of national income and far too little 
financially relevant employment. Stimulated growth in these circumstances would 
only ensure that everyone but the rich would go on getting poorer. Advocating a 
Keynesian economic recovery is simply a means of not talking about the 
fundamental problems.

In political terms, while the squeezed middle remain concerned with retaining 
their own financial credibility and suspect Labour expects them to pay the 
bills for Labour's social conscience, Labour can forget about getting elected. 
The party has first to agree with the business community how the nation 
constructs a viable economic future.
Martin London
Henllan, Denbighshire

• After Gordon Brown resigned in 2010, Labour wasted two-and-a-half months 
electing a new leader, allowing the coalition to recite over and over its 
mantras about reducing the deficit, implanting its austerity plans into popular 
myth as the solution of choice.

A further concern is the time it has taken Balls to inch his arguments away 
from his own previous administration towards an acceptance of Keynesian 
solutions. Do not forget the Blair-Brown governments presided over much of that 
period when, as Jared Bernstein (Britain risks catching the 'US disease' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/dec/06/jared-bernstein-britain-catching-us-disease?newsfeed=true>
, Society, 7 December) identified, "the bottom half of British society has seen 
its share of prosperity drop from 16% to 12% of national income since 1977. 
During the same time, the tiny elite – the 1% composed of bankers and 
entrepreneurs – have seen their share of the economy double from 2% to more 
than 4%".
In Ecuador, Argentina, Ireland, Greece, Portugal, Italy and the UK, neocon 
economists advocating austerity, austerity, austerity have bled and are 
bleeding these countries dry. It is time to listen to economists likeSteve Keen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Keen>, Ann Pettifor 
<http://www.debtonation.org/> and David Blanchflower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidblanchflower> who at least saw the 
debt crisis coming.
David Murray
Wallington, Surrey

• Jonathan Freedland has misread the likely direction of government economic 
policy. The Tories will change to the Keynesian plan B: borrow and invest. They 
will have little choice; those burdened by too much debt will start to demand a 
debt jubilee. Given the choice between a debt jubilee and plan B, the Tories 
will choose plan B.George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> will reason that at least 
with plan B, the lenders may have some return on their capital rather than 
nothing.

Debt write-offs were the basis of the Jubilee Debt campaign in the 1990s for 
poverty relief in developing countries. People in the United States associated 
with the Occupy movement are already discussing whethera debt write-off is the 
way forward from them too. 
<http://www.debtonation.org/2011/10/jubilee-2012-my-interview-on-salon-com>
Andrew Wood
Oxford

• The only thing that is missing from Jonathan Freedland's piece is an 
analysis of how the coalition's view of the way we should deal with our 
economic crisis has been promoted and peddled at every opportunity, not only by 
Cameron, Osborne et al but also by most of the media. So it's hardly surprising 
that the public is not convinced that the way to deal with our debt is to 
borrow more.

The trouble with the Keynesian view is that it seems to be counterintuitive 
and the government has exploited this to the extent that it's currently 
politically impossible to change from plan A without being thought to be 
reckless. More commentators, respected organisations and so on need to promote 
the Keynesian view – people won't change their opinions as things are at the 
moment.
Jan Hill
London

• The running of household finances, which is often quoted in support of the 
government's plan A – ie when in debt, belts have to be tightened so the debts 
are repaid as quickly as possible, thus enabling the household to get back on 
an even keel – does not seem to be really comparable. Surely it would be more 
appropriate to use the analogy of the owner of a market garden who finds 
herself or himself heavily in debt.

The market gardener can either (a) decide to settle all the debts as quickly 
as possible even though this means there is not enough money to buy seeds, 
fertilisers etc for the next season, or (b) come to an arrangement with the 
creditors to settle the debts more gradually, leaving enough money to invest in 
seeds, fertiliser etc for a successful next season and thus hopefully a gentle 
return to balancing the books. It does not take a genius to decide which is the 
best option.
Tina Wright
Bourne End, Buckinghamshire

• Jonathan Freedland suggests that the public can never be persuaded that a 
suitable strategy to reduce borrowing is to increase borrowing. Clearly when 
presented in that way it sounds nonsensical. However, it obviously depends on 
what the borrowing is for, and, like the "bleeding" metaphor, it cannot be 
difficult to produce an appropriate analogy to explain this. For example, a 
window cleaner who is in debt but borrows more money to buy a ladder to work to 
clear his debt is quite different to one who borrows to survive during his 
unemployment. The former – borrowing for growth – appears to be Labour's 
position, while the latter – borrowing to pay for the unemployment and 
diminished tax revenues their austerity programme has created – appears to be 
the policy of this government.
Pat Gillam
Ipswich, Suffolk

• The issue with public understanding of national economics is that we have 
been sold the metaphor that the country is like a household that has to cut its 
spending to balance the budget. Labour needs to offer the alternative 
comparison that it is like a business that has overspent on expense accounts 
and must therefore be leaner – but also has underinvested in the things that 
will make it competitive for the future, euch as education (of the workforce) 
and new product development (smart and green products and services).
Ben Reason 
London
 