
It is a cruel paradox that at a time when MPs have never worked harder, their 
standing has rarely been lower. I have asserted the absolute necessity of 
seeing through the recommendations ofSir Thomas Legg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2009/oct/13/sir-thomas-legg-note1> 
andSir Christopher Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2009/nov/04/mps-must-accept-kelly-report>
. We have to make it crystal clear that we will dynamite the past arrangements, 
practices and, crucially, cultures that allowed the expenses disaster to take 
place and will do so with as much vigour as Guy Fawkes intended to apply here 
in 1605. Nothing else will allow us back in to the national conversation.

But there have also been profound social changes of which those who want to 
reconnect parliament to the public need to be aware. The first is the decline 
of deference towards institutions. In many ways this is a healthy change. 
Parliament should not be venerated simply because it is old and historic. It 
should have to justify itself to a perhaps sceptical population. There is an 
important difference, however, between scepticism and cynicism and we would be 
mistaken not to recognise how much cynicism there is out there.

Second, we need to appreciate that the nature of the audience that we aspire 
to address has altered. There are a lot of marginalised people among us, and an 
outreach strategy that does not succeed in reaching those people – the 
marginalised – would be a pretty modest enterprise. We also need to appreciate 
that marginalisation is not exclusively a matter of minority status on the 
basis of gender, ethnicity and race or sexuality but that it also involves 
social class, geographical location and family status as well.

Third, we have to be aware of a fundamental inequality of information in 
Britain today. When I was a child, the vast majority of families had a national 
newspaper in the home and watched the news on one or other of the main 
terrestrial television stations. That is no longer valid. A further two 
categories of citizen have emerged. One is what might be identified as the 
"super-informed", those whose access to multiple news channels and mastery of 
the internet means that they are capable of acquainting themselves with more 
information about politics than any humans in history.

There is also, I fear, a rather larger minority, the "under-informed", for 
whom the arrival of more television options and the availability of celebrity 
magazines mean that it is possible to avoid political news almost entirely. We 
have to construct an approach that makes contact with these people as well. It 
is not good enough merely to make the super-informed, as wonderful a set of 
souls as they are, yet more super-informed.

All of this might lead one to the conclusion that the quest to make parliament 
more relevant to the public is doomed. I do not believe that to be the case. 
There has been a huge movement away from party politics towards political 
activism of other forms. Much of the country may remain capable of intense 
interest in issues that are undoubtedly political, but people do not see animal 
welfare, global warming or international poverty as fitting neatly into party 
politics. Voters do not view these concerns as central to what the Commons is 
about either. Such people are willing to demonstrate outside parliament and 
chant their concerns at its walls. They do not believe that it would be 
especially profitable for them to engage with parliament any more than they 
wish to become a member of a political party.

Any strategy has to be aware of two very strong perceptions. The first is that 
we have a politicians' parliament and not a people's parliament. The second is 
that we have a political party parliament and not a public policy parliament. 
Neither of these observations is actually true but both need to be challenged. 
We have already begun to encourage more people to come into the Commons. The 
top priority is a new education centre, which should be open by 2013 and which 
will transform the experience of those who visit Westminster, allowing 100,000 
individuals each year the opportunity to experience parliament first hand. 
Other schemes include opening up the Commons at weekends and creating a wider 
range of tours to suit different specialist interests. Parliament is now 
beckoning people in.

Select committees have the capacity to draw the sceptical but activist voter 
back into the Palace of Westminster. They have their own style, they are 
infinitely easier for individuals and organisations to submit their views to, 
and they look at issues that matter enormously but do not organise themselves 
in party political packages. It is possible for the public to participate by 
presenting evidence to these committees directly, which is obviously impossible 
to do in the chamber itself. Those who appear in front of select committees do 
so in lively and unpredictable exchanges and are not always the "usual 
suspects", or in the "usual places".

I also intend to establish the first Speaker's Advisory Council on Public 
Engagement. It will consist of external figures with stellar careers consisting 
of anticipating or responding to the needs of the public as citizens, consumers 
and customers, offering their time without payment. It will provide an 
invaluable sounding board for parliamentarians and parliamentary staff, 
encouraging them in their endeavours and making constructive suggestions as to 
how the outreach challenge can be met.

Not all of this will be universally applauded. It will doubtless be denounced 
in some quarters as public relations and not what it really is, public 
engagement. I expect such criticism and am not troubled by it. As Robert 
Kennedy once said sagely, "one in five people are against everything all the 
time". It is the other 80% of the UK's populace that concern me. The outreach 
agenda is, along with the restoration of the backbench MP as a political actor, 
the yardstick against which I want to be measured.

• This is an edited extract of a speech given by John Bercow, the Commons 
speaker, on 30 November. The full version is availablehere 
<http://news.parliament.uk/2009/11/speaker-calls-for-a-reconnection-between-parliament-and-public/>
 