
In our obsessive consumer culture, one of the most radical choices you can 
make is choosing to create, rather than consume. This sounds like a lofty goal, 
and you may think I’m referring to great works of political art or slyly 
subversive literature, but I’m actually talking making the products you use in 
your day-to-day life. Such as … your kitchen spray.


Revolution begins at home! Starting small is nothing to be ashamed of – it 
means that you’restarting!

Don’t let the naysayers tell you that you aren’t making a difference, either – 
you are. Each time you make your own product, you’re taking an active, 
participatory role in your life. You are educating yourself about the 
ingredients you use in your home and on your body. And each and every time you 
create something from natural ingredients, you leave a plastic bottle on the 
shelf, and prevent the further flow of toxic chemicalsinto our homes and our 
oceans 
<http://www.davidsuzuki.org/issues/health/science/toxics/the-dirt-on-toxic-chemicals-in-household-cleaning-products>
.

OK, enough rhetoric! Let’s get to the goods. 

Buying begets buying: how stuff has consumed the average American's life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/20/consumption-consumerism-americans-buying-stuff>
One of the simplest ways to start is by opening your stuffed-to-overflowing 
cleaning closet. If you’re like I was, it will be filled with redundancies: 
needlessly specific products for bizarrely distinct applications. The sooner we 
simplify, the better.

Whittle your cleaning routine down to these three standby make-it-yourself 
products and you’ll free up some time, ditch the harmful chemicals, and get a 
clean house.

Once you’ve got these recipes under your belt, you’ll be able to streamline 
your housework routine and skip the cleaning aisle altogether – and then 
perhaps you can get to work planning that magnum opus.

•••

First, a great all-purpose spray. I use this everywhere, from the bathroom to 
the kitchen to the three-foot section of hardwood floor my three-year-old 
recently decided would look better covered in red crayon. I don’t mess around 
with hard-to-find or pricey ingredients; this spray is basic, it’s inexpensive, 
and it works.

All-purpose spray

Ingredients

Hot water

1/4 cup white vinegar

2 tbsp Dr Bronner’s pure-Castile liquid soap (or Eco-friendly dishwashing 
liquid if you don’t have Dr Bronner’s)

1 tbsp Borax (optional)

Directions: Fill a spray bottle with hot water, leaving a few inches at the 
top. Add the rest of the ingredients, give it a gentle shake to combine, then 
get trigger happy. Feel free to add essential oils – peppermint as an upper, 
lavender as a downer, or tea tree oil to boost the disinfecting power of the 
spray.
This spray can replace the majority of your cleaning arsenal – you truly don’t 
need special products for tile floors, counters, bathrooms and toys. Don’t be 
worried about germs, either; arecent study showed that antibacterial products 
are no more effective at eliminating bacteria than plain old soap and water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/16/antibacterial-soap-with-triclosan-found-to-be-no-real-threat-to-germs>
. You just end up paying more for them and washing toxic ingredients down the 
drain.

Glass and window cleaner

Now, for glass and windows, Grandma was right. Nothing beats a 50/50 mixture 
of white vinegar and water, wiped with a soft rag or microfibre cloth. It 
really is that simple.

The big task cleaner

And last but not least: a scrub that does wonders for toilets, nitty gritty 
bathtub rings, and dingy sinks.

Ingredients

1/4 cup baking soda

1 Tbsp Dr Bronner’s pure-Castile liquid soap (or dishwashing liquid)

Directions: Combine both ingredients, then add warm water until you get a 
loose paste. Apply to a non-abrasive scouring pad and use the scrub to bring 
tubs, sinks and toilets to a gleaming shine. (If you have a toilet with a truly 
stubborn ring, a natural pumice stone will take it off in no time flat.)

We buy things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/03/advertising-overconsumption-psychology>
. As consumers, that’s what we do. But over the years, I think we’ve forgotten 
that we don’thave to. We have options, and when our homes begin overflowing 
with products which irritate our lungs, burn our skin, and wreak havoc on the 
natural world through their creation and disposal, we are long overdue to 
explore those alternatives.
 