
Ever since the military success of the British-led mission to oust Muammar 
Gaddafi in 2011,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has recoiled from any 
overarching definition of his approach to foreign intervention. He has 
reassured MPs there will be no Cameron Doctrine.

It may be in part because he is a practical shire Tory and shire Tories shun 
theory, especially in foreign policy. Doctrines lead to inflexibility, 
utopianism and at worst messianic interventions that create unforeseen killing 
fields of religious or ethnic conflict.

In opposition Cameron was fond of saying: "You cannot drop democracy on a 
country from 30,000ft."Foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/foreignpolicy> was one of the few areas 
in which he was willing to set himself apart from Tony Blair. His cautious 
stance also reflected the prevailing mood in Whitehall post-Iraq, as well as a 
certain war wariness in the Ministry of Defence faced by the unproductive grind 
in Afghanistan.

Barack Obama's own determination to close "the decade of war" added to the 
instinct to hunker down and bring the troops home.

Yet, as his sweep this week through Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, Libya and Liberia has shown, 
something has altered in the Cameron psyche.

It is still impossible to imagine Cameron making a speech similar to Blair's 
Chicago address setting out the case for liberal interventionism, but the 
combination of the Gaddafi downfall, the growing UK military alliance with 
France, the Arab spring, and now his chairmanship of theG8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g8> this year has emboldened him.

He may remain an instinctive conformist, but he has become a conformist with a 
cause. His language and actions have changed. He talks of an existential and 
generational threat posed by al-Qaida and its offshoots in northern Africa, and 
now draws a direct link between this new terrorism and a threat to British 
national interests both at home and abroad.

Countries that were off limits on the Foreign Office map are starting to be 
re-examined. The hostage crisis in southern Algeria alerted No 10 to how sparse 
their contacts were with the country, even though it was a regional power 
broker.

The idea that the country should be seen solely as a French sphere of 
influence is now regarded as a form of outmoded post-colonial thinking. The aim 
is to offer intelligence to the Algerians, a commodity they rate.

In Tripoli on Thursday at his press conference Cameron acknowledged regime 
change was sometimes necessary even if it came at a price. "When a brutal 
dictator is removed after 40 years you inevitably take the lid off all sorts of 
pressures and tensions that have to be dealt with."

But he said it was a fiction to suggest Britain would be safer if strongmen 
like Gaddafi were still in power. "The history of brutal dictatorships in north 
Africa and the Middle East has led some to think that somehow they will make us 
safer at home. That is completely wrong. I think it stores up problems for the 
future and in the long run. I think we are safer if we have secure stable, 
prosperous democracies. That is why I think the Arab spring is still part of 
the solution rather than the problem."

It was also striking that he put democracy at the heart of the fight against 
terrorism. "If we are to have a successful generational struggle against 
Islamic extremism, the alternative of a more open society and a more open 
democracy has to be part of the answer."

He is much taken by the theory of ungoverned spaces – that failed states 
become the incubators for terror, the argument that led to the Bush 
intervention in Afghanistan. Asked by Tom Bradby from ITN whether in office the 
merits of Blair's foreign policy had become clearer, he did not reject the 
notion.

Yet Cameron refuses to be seen as a born-again neocon. For a start, British 
officials insist that when Cameron recently talked of a generational struggle 
against terrorism, he was only making reference to the longstanding worldwide 
terrorist threat, and not something new, particularly focused on north Africa. 
He says the percentage of the threat to Britain coming from Afghanistan and 
Pakistan has been reduced, but only from 75% to 50%. Indeed, that is one reason 
why he will be hosting a rare conference at Chequers on Sunday at which the 
Pakistani and Afghan leaderships will discuss a joint security approach after 
the British leave in 2015.

He stresses he is not being drawn into a quagmire in north Mali, saying the 
British contribution is very modest and defined. Privately he feels compelled 
to help the French. With Obama so loth to intervene – to the UK's 
under-reported frustration – the two military powers in Europe are thrown ever 
closer together.

Above all he keeps repeating that he does not see purely military solutions to 
these problems, something he clearly feels Blair was prone to do. He is fond of 
saying: "If you only have a hammer, you see every problem as a nail. It is 
about using all the tools in the box."

Somalia is his model for what he describes as this "tough but intelligent 
approach". The tools include "a combination of tougher action on security, 
counterterrorism co-operation, diplomacy, political solutions and aid".

For Cameron, international aid is not just a moral good, but some soft power 
in the fight against terrorism and reaction. Many view Cameron's commitment to 
the British aid budget as the last withered fig leaf of his rebranding of a 
modern Tory party. But in private and public he is passionate about the issue, 
and gently scathing of those in his party who tell him British aid fosters 
corruption or retards economic growth.

Like Blair in 1995 at the famous fundraising Gleneagles G8 summit, he has been 
given a rare platform as this year's chairman of the G8 to champion the cause 
of aid. Equally his co-chairmanship of the UN's high-level panel on the 
successors to the 2015 millennium development goals – the purpose of his visit 
to Liberia – requires him to take the issue seriously.

He has come up with the notion of a "golden thread" linking aid efforts. In 
essence it is a shift away from purely the quantity of aid, the focus of 
Blair's G8, to addressing issues such as "stable government, lack of 
corruption, human rights, the rule of law and transparent information".

Critics say Cameron's golden thread is just a list, as opposed to a thread. 
But many aid agencies are impressed with the time and political capital he is 
expending on the issue.

But as Blair found to his cost, the more your foreign policies win plaudits 
abroad, the more you must worry what your backbenchers are thinking.
 