

Nearly 300 British veterans of the Iraq war have been warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/09/nearly-300-british-veterans-face-investigation-over-alleged-iraq-war-crimes>
 they are named by official investigators, amid claims of murder, torture, and 
abuse.

The documents have been sent by the Iraq Historic Allegations Team (IHAT 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/iraq-historic-allegations-team-ihat>), a 
unit led by Mark Warwick, a former senior police detective, and set up after 
claims of systemic brutal treatment of Iraqi detainees.

Warwick has also sent reports to Andrew Cayley QC, director of the Service 
Prosecuting Authority (SPA <http://spa.independent.gov.uk/>) - the military 
equivalent of the Crown Prosecution Service.

Now, Leigh Day, the law firm representing hundreds of Iraqis claiming abuse 
and unlawful detention by British troops, has been referred to the Solicitors 
Disciplinary Tribunal.

And the defence secretary, Michael Fallon, has criticised “ambulance-chasing 
British law firms” inhibiting soldiers on the battlefield for fear they would 
be hauled before the courts.

Claims and denials about the abuse and killing of Iraqi detainees are swirling 
around in ugly recriminations, yet another example of the legacy of the 2003 
invasion of Iraq.

Chilcot is unlikely to refer to them in his report, due to be published in the 
summer, though they are some of the many consequences of the ill-conceived 
invasion and the rush to war for which British troops were unprepared.

IHAT is investigated the cases of more than 1,500 possible victims, 280 of 
whom are alleged to have been unlawfully killed.

Cayley, a former war crimes prosecutor, says he will give the cases the 
“thorough scrutiny the law requires” and if prosecution was warranted he would 
not “flinch” from proceeding.


However, he added: “Equally I want to make it absolutely clear that no member 
of the British armed forces will be prosecuted unless there is sufficient 
evidence to do so.”

10 Downing Street has entered the fray, saying David Cameron feared that 
people were being “solicited by lawyers” enticing them into making accusations. 
Cameron was “deeply concerned” that Iraq war veterans could face threats of 
prosecution due to “fabricated” or “unjustified” claims of misconduct, it said.

After complaints by the Ministry of Defence, Leigh Day has been referred to 
the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal. The main allegation involves a document 
that identified nine Iraqis, detained after what became known as the Battle of 
Danny Boy in May 2014, as members of the Mahdi Army Shia militia.

A Leigh Day spokesman said: “We refute all of the allegations that have been 
made against us”. The firm added that the great majority of the claims it has 
brought against the MoD have been successful.

The complaint follows the al-Sweady inquiry, set up to investigate claims that 
British troops tortured and murdered Iraqis.

It concluded that the most serious allegations against UK troops were 
“deliberate lies, reckless speculation and ingrained hostility”, criticism 
which encouraged an already furious MoD to have a go at Leigh Day, and Public 
Interest Lawyers (PiL) the law firms which represented the Iraqis.

Yet the al-Sweady inquiry could have been avoided if the MoD had come clean in 
the first place. All it needed to do was explain why bodies of dead, mutilated, 
and wounded, Iraqis were taken after the battle to a nearby British base before 
being handed over to their families.

(British officers said they wanted to see if the suspected leader of a gang of 
insurgents which killed British military policemen in cold blood nearby a year 
earlier was among the dead or captured at Danny Boy.)

Instead, in what high court judges described as “lamentable” behaviour and 
serious breaches of its duty of candour, the MoD mounted an unnecessary 
cover-up, even claiming that documents previously made public were secret.

An earlier inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/20/al-sweady-inquiry-stopped-iraq-drop-unlawful-deaths>
 concluded that the death of the Iraqi hotel worker Baha Mousa in 2003 was 
caused by “an appalling episode of serious gratuitous violence” orchestrated by 
British soldiers.


In a devastating indictment, it blamed the MoD’s “corporate failure” for the 
use of banned interrogation methods in Iraq.

Yet that inquiry would not have happened without the human rights lawyers now 
so vilified by the MoD.

And the MoD has paid out more than £20m in compensation to more than 300 Iraqi 
civilians as a result of cases brought by Leigh Day and Public Interest Lawyers.

The International Criminal Court is also considering more than 1,000 
allegations of war crimes involving British troops in Iraq.

But despite the plethora of allegations and investigations - more than 1,000 
cases before IHAT, more than 1,000 allegations before the ICC - it is unlikely 
that any British soldier or veteran will be successfully prosecuted, as 
unlikely as the prospect of Paras being successfully prosecuted for shooting 
unarmed civil rights marchers on Bloody Sunday, more than 40 years ago in 
Northern Ireland.

 