
"The month was March, and the weather damp, cloudy, and cold. The sun not 
rising before halfpast five, the night perspective looked sufficiently long at 
halfpast twelve: which was about my time for confronting it."

Charles Dickens was born on 7 February 1812. To celebrate his bicentennial 
year in 2012, the Charles Dickens Museum and Film London launchedDickens 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/07/dickens-200th-birthday-celebrated>
, a year long international programme of events including readings, film 
screenings, theatrical performances and exhibitions.

As an agency, we produced the graphic identity and a set of guidelines for our 
project partners to use, but as we researched Dickens, and the ways in which he 
worked, we wondered (and wanted to investigate) how he might publish today. 
Would he serialise his works in news print, or publish on an iPad? A blog, 
perhaps? We wanted to explore a couple of methods: short run newspapers and a 
bespokeiPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> reading experience.

Most people are familiar with the classic Dickens (when The Muppets do a 
rendition of one of your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/22/muppets-christmas-carol-review>, 
you've reached saturation point), but Dickens was a prolific writer, producing 
15 novels, hundreds of short stories and a huge number of contributions to 
journals and newspapers. His tireless imagination would keep him awake at night 
and during one insomnia fuelled episode he wrote Night Walks, a dark and 
atmospheric account of London after the sun has set. This piece became the 
focus of our first Dickens 2012 publication.
 Shad Thames Wharf, London Bridge, from the Dickens Papers – Night Walks app 
Many of his works were released as instalments in newspapers and it seemed 
fitting to publish our editions in the same format. However, as Dickens 2012 
was not solely retrospective but also about Dickens' relevance today, we felt 
it appropriate to produce a supplementary electronic version as many newspapers 
and journals do now.

We wanted to create an engaging reading experience for the iPad that would 
evoke the feel of traditional editorial design and newsprint while also taking 
advantage of a new format and offering the reader something new. The screen 
size is obviously smaller but this is offset by not being limited by a page 
count or print production cost so we were free to focus on the rhythm and pace 
of the piece without the usual constraints of having to fit within a predefined 
format.

Achieving an elegant transition between the pages was very important for 
maintaining a smooth flow, while adding animations and graphical page breaks to 
highlight certain passages and phrases created a stronger pace. We also needed 
to select the right background colour to avoid retina burn.

We'd decided to retrace the route Dickens follows in Night Walks to compare 
how these parts of London look now, and this became the basis for a visual 
report that runs alongside the main narrative on the app in the form of 
photographs, films and quotes. Our journey can be accessed by flipping the iPad 
round into the landscape aspect, and back into portrait to return to the text.

We didn't stay out until sunrise (it was freezing cold that night and we're 
not insomniacs), but we did stay out until the city had emptied and was at its 
most spacious. The city is far brighter at night than it would have been at the 
original time of writing and some of the areas have changed greatly, but there 
are many similarities to be found in the characters roaming the streets late at 
night. The two versions aim to give a sense of London at night then and now.

We released the app with the support of Film London and the Dickens Museum, 
and it was featured in a few publications. The app is free; we wanted it to 
feel like a celebration of Dickens' work, rather than a money grabbing, in-app 
purchase product. In order to keep costs low, we developed a simple book engine 
that took designs directly from Adobe InDesign. This allowed our designers to 
focus on the look and feel, and our developers to concentrate on making it 
work. The whole project took about a month to complete.

We estimate we had about 10,000 downloads over the year, which is nice – it's 
good to get a great read into lots of people's hands. Did we manage to achieve 
a reading experience that is as good on screen as it is on paper? It's hard to 
say, because people have such a strong emotional connection with a three 
dimensional paper format. But we're proud of what we've achieved, and it's an 
area we want to explore further.

Jon Cefai is creative director at KentLyons <http://www.kentlyons.com/> – 
follow the agency on Twitter@Kent_Lyons <https://twitter.com/Kent_Lyons>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 