
We started with nothing: no studio, no computers, no money. Just a team of 
four hand-picked people and the borrowed keys to a dank archway beneath a 
railway line. It smelled of wet dog and had only a scattering of dim lights, 
but it was good enough to hold a few meetings. While trains hurtled noisily 
over our heads, we came up with the concept of our new game. Naturally, it was 
about transportation.

Lumo Deliveries Inc <http://lumodeliveries.com/game/> is a game about 
delivering boxes of things to and from every country across the world. It can 
be played in seconds but will offer months of entertainment. The whole game is 
based in real-time and uses thousands of real world locations, each geolocated 
to within a few metres. We essentially allow the player to live out their 
lifelong ambition of becoming an international logistics manager!

We're only half joking. The game is a management sim, but from the very first 
moments we decided to make a game without any of the traditional trappings of 
video games. No lives, deaths, crashes or explosions – definitely no guns. But 
also no physical skill or dexterity challenges. The gameplay we want to create 
is entirely in the player's head: the decisions they make to grow the business; 
the care and attention they pay to their growing fleet of drivers and vehicles.

Creatively, we're not like most game developers. We love games but we're not 
particularly led by them. Instead we've always taken our inspiration from a 
much broader canvass of art and design. Our artwork eschews the traditional App 
Store cartoon twee in favour of wild comic book colour and the sharp geometry 
of the 50s and 60s golden age of transport.

So we had an original idea and some incredible visuals that secured the 
funding we needed. Now we could progress.

We were already part of a small group of independent game developers in 
Leamington Spa who were trying to create a shared work space. The local council 
along with some of the larger local game studios also gave us invaluable 
support in the outfitting of the new studio. It was quite humbling and 
reassuring to see that small business endeavours could garner such support – 
that maybe the world isn't as cut-throat as the cynics would have us believe.

In building Lumo Deliveries Inc, we've found that some of our most foolish 
ideas have turned into key features. For example, an average game session can 
last less than a minute as you complete a few deliveries and set the next batch 
off. If you have more time you might want to reward a driver with a 
motivational session of bongo drums, or maybe hypnotise him or her to drive 
faster next time.

Early play sessions have been very encouraging. It's so easy to lose faith in 
your own creativity when in the bubble of development. And as weird as some of 
these ideas might sound, we always kept a very tight focus on the player. What 
would they expect? What would they understand? We trusted our creativity but 
also made sure we backed off and looked at the whole experience with an outside 
perspective. We always tried to ditch our own egos and put the player first.

This has been a key part of our development. We started making prototypes from 
day one. We knew they would be wrong, but this would help us learn what more we 
needed to get it right. Then, as soon as possible, we watch people play. We see 
what they like and what they understand, and more importantly what they don't 
like or understand. We don't accuse them of "playing it wrong" – we listen. We 
then change what we are making, put it in front of more people and do it all 
again. This process helps us stand a better chance of getting it right.

We'll know the full story in a few months when the game goes live and we 
discover if our global game truly has global appeal. In the meantime, watch 
this space.

App facts

Length of the project: eight months' development, two months' post launch 
support
Companies involved: Lumo Developments (app development team); Daedalus 
Partners (investment)
Size of the team: one producer, one designer, one artist and one programmer, 
plus one external musician

More App stories

• How we made the Curiator iPhone app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/30/how-we-made-curiator-iphone-app>
• How we made Radiohead's PolyFauna app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/30/how-we-made-curiator-iphone-app>
• How we made the Uneditions web app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/24/uneditions-web-app-unlimited-theatre>

Jonathan Evans is game designer for Lumo Developments 
<http://www.lumodevelopments.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 