
Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> in the 90s was an 
intense world: hard to get into and with an established set of rules. That’s 
what made the Tango brief stand out. Here was a client saying you can write 
whatever you want, just make Tango famous.

My creative partner, Al Young, and I were pretty anti-advertising in our 
mindsets back then. Cause and effect advertising, ie you come into contact with 
the product and somehow it changes your life for the better, was a big trend. 
Bored and frustrated by the genre, the nucleus of our idea really came from a 
reaction to this.


Desperate to make a name for ourselves after spending what felt like eons 
trying to get into a West End agency, we knew we had to do something bold, 
standout and memorable to make sure we didn’t find ourselves back on the dole.


Coca-Cola was the big name in soft-drink advertising then. Nothing was taking 
on the Coke ads; nothing came close. We knew you couldn’t beat Coke at its own 
game. Where they had huge budget for media spend and advertising campaigns, 
Tango had to generate its own momentum – word of mouth was our media spend.


The actual idea started out as a joke. We said how brilliant it would be if 
you had a drink and something shocking happened, but so quickly that nobody 
else saw it. We also had the idea that it was only when commentators rewound 
the film that you could see what had happened.


The commentators in the advert were actually from an idea we had for another 
ad, but we decided mash the two together (a cardinal sin in adland). We 
originally had American football commentators, but we were asked to make 
everything more British. So we got actor Hugh Dennis to do a Eddie Waring-esque 
commentary and contrasted that with the dry and amusing delivery of 
ex-footballer Ray Wilkins.


At first, we thought the ad would have a fat orange genie who ran up and 
kicked the Tango drinker on the bum. Of course, the advertising authority at 
the time, theBACC <http://www.bacc.org.uk/>, said no way. We got the script 
cleared by changing the kick to a pleasant, Morecambe and Wise-style slap on 
the face. I think it’s safe to say the little slap got a bit out of hand.

We went to the park to do a test film, which basically involved us, two grown 
men, mucking about, “Tangoing” each other. As we messed around we realised the 
“little slap” just wasn’t powerful enough, so we exaggerated it. If you watch 
the ad, the Orange Man’s arms go way back before he slaps the person in the 
face.


We even got jazz performer Gil Scott Heron, because of his deep, charismatic 
voice, to do the “You know you’ve been Tango’d” end-line. He was the first 
person to see the ad and I was shaking with fear, but he loved it.

Somehow we also convinced serious up-and-coming actor Peter Geeves to play the 
Orange Man. We knew as soon as he auditioned – the way he ran with his stomach 
sticking out – that he’d be perfect.


I first knew the ad was huge when I fell asleep on the London Underground one 
evening. I woke up to hear a group of kids talking about and mimicking it. I 
wanted to go up and say: “I did that!”


The ad continued to grow in notoriety. I remember having a conversation with a 
doctor who complained that kids were “Tangoing” each other at the cost of 
perforated ear drums. Naturally, it got banned and we had to write a new 
version, in which the orange man comes up and gives the Tango drinker a big 
kiss – far less likely to perforate the eardrum (skip to 1:20 in the video to 
see the ad).
 Peter Geeves played the ad’s Orange Man. Photograph: Quiet Storm 
At the time advertising tended to be very slick, beautifully-scripted and with 
big budgets, so a lot of the industry didn’t like our ad. One of the big 
advertising professionals called it “oik advertising”. But we loved that. We 
were a combination of a very talented Scotsman, Al and me, helped along by some 
very talented creative directors. We knew we were brave enough to do stuff that 
nobody else would do, or think about doing. I think that’s what made the ad 
what it is. Now, years later, that’s what makes my own agency what it is.


You can say “Tango ad” to people and they still remember it. Some even dress 
up as the Orange Man today. That, for me, is what makes a piece of work great – 
when the general public take it on, play with it and it becomes theirs.


Ad facts

Who: Trevor Robinson OBE (art director), Al Young (copywriter), Jon Leach 
(planner), Axle Chaldecott and Steve Henry (creative directors) and Matt 
Forrest (director)
Companies Involved: Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury 
<http://advertising.about.com/od/international/p/Howell-Henry-Chaldecott-Lury-And-Partners.htm>
 (advertising agency) and Limelight (production company)
Length of the project: two to three months (including research)

Trevor Robinson OBE is executive creative director and founder of Quiet Storm 
<http://quietstorm.co.uk/>


To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’ – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 