 Australians do not know whether they have just committed a very bold act or a 
very small one. By throwing out their conservative prime minister, John Howard, 
in Saturday's election they may have dramatically tipped their nation away from 
the insularity, fear and materialism that he had encouraged. Many Australians 
hope so. But hope is not the same as substance, and even as the incoming Labor 
prime minister, Kevin Rudd, accepted victory he sought to reassure his country 
about the limits to change.
He fought a campaign that defied electoral gravity, achieving a landslide 
victory against a still-popular leader at a time of record prosperity. But this 
brilliant success came at a high cost: Labor's ambitions for government have 
been immensely restricted. Mr Rudd won because he convinced his country of his 
similarities to Mr Howard, as well as his differences - a leader for the 
future, perhaps, but one who will not challenge much about the past.

The defeated Liberal leader appealed to the meaner a side of the national 
character which was not generous: an Australia that defied the world on climate 
change, and sought refuge from its own history on race and the rights of its 
indigenous people. At its worst the Howard government represented a distasteful 
reaction to modernity, and its repeated exploitation of this to achieve 
electoral success offered an unhealthy example to the political right around 
the world. That is why Mr Howard's defeat has a significance that runs beyond 
Australia. The politics of progress beat the politics of retreat.

The immediate consequences will be felt more abroad than at home. Iraq 
featured little in the campaign, but Mr Rudd will move to pull out Australian 
troops, further isolating President Bush. He will attend next month's Bali 
summit on climate change, the first leader to represent his country at such 
talks, and ratify the Kyoto protocol, leaving the United States alone. These 
are important shifts in international policy - but they may not be matched by 
domestic change after a campaign that saw Mr Rudd ape many of Mr Howard's 
policies. Observers in Britain, who may expect a radical shift on the monarchy, 
or the rights of indigenous people, will be left disappointed. Change, when it 
comes, will be gradual - a cleansing of values rather than a revolution in 
policy.

This is what most Australians want and Mr Rudd knows that if he had proposed 
something more radical, he would have lost. There is no doubting his ability or 
his intense hard work. Now he has won he will be tested in office to show 
whether a restrained and stale campaign can nonetheless breed a prime minister 
able to escape caution and govern - as he claims to want to do - for a bigger 
purpose.
 