
Our friend Howard Clark, who has died suddenly aged 63, was a radical pacifist 
and full-time peace activist, organiser and researcher. As a student at the 
University of East Anglia from 1968 to 1971, he co-founded the UEA peace group 
and was a well-known figure on campus, always carrying a bundle of Peace News 
to sell.

Born in Bath into a Methodist family, Howard was educated at the city's 
Kingswood school. After graduating from UEA, he joined Peace News as a 
co-editor. During this time he helped to launch a number of campaigns and 
organisations including LondonGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, the British Withdrawal 
from Northern Ireland Campaign, Campaign Against Arms Trade and the At Ease 
organisation, offering counselling for members of the armed forces.

In 1976 he moved to York, where he threw himself into local community 
activities and grass-roots campaigning against racism and sexism. He also 
became involved in anti-nuclear power campaigning, and in May 1979 he was one 
of the coordinators of nonviolent training for the occupation of the Torness 
nuclear power site, near Dunbar, by the Torness Alliance.

After relocating to Bradford in 1980 he worked with the Alternative Defence 
Commission 
<http://www.bradford.ac.uk/library/special-collections/collections/alternative-defence-commission-archive/>
, which produced the report Defence Without the Bomb. Then in 1985 he landed 
his dream job – working with War Resisters International (WRI) from their 
London office.

Howard was an amazing networker – he listened to people, he remembered names 
and faces. Indeed, many of his friends feel that with his death they have lost 
part of their memory bank. During his time with WRI, he worked closely with 
nonviolent activists from around the globe: the End Conscription Campaign in 
South Africa, the peace and human rights groups in the Warsaw Pact countries of 
eastern Europe, citizens movements in South Asia and anti-conscription groups 
in South America. In 1994 he was one of the founders of the Balkan Peace Team 
and began his long involvement with nonviolent activists in Kosovo – resulting 
in the publication of his book Civil Resistance in Kosovo (2000).

In 1996 Howard moved to Madrid with his partner, Yolanda. Their son, Ismael, 
was born in 2000 followed by their daughter, Violeta, in 2002. They all survive 
him.
 