
Carlos Alberto's role as captain of Brazil's 1970 World Cup-winning team 
ensures he is afforded hero status wherever he goes. His star has fallen in the 
eyes of theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> squad, however, and they 
could be forgiven for quietly hoping England win here on Wednesday due to the 
Azerbaijan coach's astonishing outburst following this drab draw.

Furious at Northern Ireland's pragmatic approach Carlos Alberto launched into 
a tirade against Lawrie Sanchez's side, one which echoed his complaints after 
Wales's visit of five weeks ago.

"I'm sick of having to play shit football teams like Northern Ireland and 
Wales," he said. "They committed over 100 fouls but there was not one yellow 
card. Now I'm looking forward to playing England because they play much better 
football. And at least we will have the chance to show we can play football in 
the right way."

Next September's meeting between the teams in Belfast should be interesting to 
say the least and on this evidence Carlos Alberto's longed-for visit from 
England will end in tears if Sven-Goran Eriksson's team hit anything like top 
gear.

That certainly is the view of Aaron Hughes, who claims his team-mates will not 
take the criticism to heart. "If that's his opinion, then that's his opinion 
and we just have to get on with doing things our way," the Northern Ireland 
captain said.

"He played in a fantastic World Cup-winning team but not everyone can play the 
way they did. We do what we need to do and were unlucky not to win. They didn't 
make any real chances, so we must have done something right. But I'm not going 
to start wishing for a heavy defeat on any team," he added, "although England 
should win comfortably."

It is almost impossible to see how Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> can win on Wednesday. Their 
only threat here came from the long-range efforts of their sweeper Rashad 
Sadygov. For Northern Ireland that night's home game with Austria takes on huge 
significance but they will be boosted by the return of David Healy. With his 
talents a win might have been theirs on Saturday.
 