
This week I'm talking about seasonality, but I'm coming at it from a slightly 
different angle, because we're now in the midst of a rather agreeable seasonal 
crossfire – the waning of summer and the waxing of autumn. This is a time of 
rich culinary potential, as the tapering off of some fine sunshine crops 
overlaps with the nascence of many others that come to fruition in the 
shortening days.

Right now, the soft fruit and berries are starting to fade, but the orchard is 
ripening. And just as the pea and bean vines give their last, the first sweet, 
starchy roots and squashes swell into life. So what's on offer is a brief 
opportunity to combine ingredients that aren't found together during the rest 
of the year.

Beginnings and endings overlay one another all the time in the garden, but a 
good September is often especially rich in such tasty coincidences. Of course, 
our seasons are not set in stone, but they seem to be more mutable than ever 
these days. That's not just because of our increasingly unpredictable weather, 
which moulds and manipulates the seasons in a manner beyond our control. It's 
also because we've learned to nudge nature to expand the cropping time of our 
fruit and veg.

I don't have a problem with seasonal stretching. I'm a fan of the polytunnel, 
which allows me to eat pea shoots in March, radishes in April, early courgettes 
in June, and tender salad leaves through the winter. A little gentle organic 
persuasion, in the form of clever planting schedules, wise selection of 
varieties and the creation of a warm, sheltered and, as far as possible, 
pest-free environment, is one of the great skills of gardener and farmer alike. 
Good husbandry can result in broad beans in May and raspberries in November. 
And that's quite different from air-freighting December strawberries and 
January asparagus from the other side of the world, which isn't so much taking 
a creative approach to seasonality as driving a large, industrial coach and 
horses through the whole concept.

The elasticity of our seasons means we can work within them and still come up 
with surprising and delicious new combinations month by month. In the next few 
weeks I'm hoping to enjoy the tender hearts of my last globe artichokes with a 
clutch of earthy, sautéed wild mushrooms – maybe some parasols, or even ceps. 
And perhaps I'll get to mingle the final aubergines from the greenhouse with 
the first wet walnuts. If I should bag a brace of mid‑September partridge, I 
may be able to serve them with a raspberry sauce, and I can usually depend on 
a crop of summer-seeded nettles, which I'll make into soup with some sweet, 
nutty young celeriac.

With these ideas, and more below, I hope you'll feel inspired into a bit of 
season-bridging cookery. You can't always guarantee these serendipitous 
overlaps – you're at the mercy of the weather to some extent – but when you're 
plumb in the centre of a delicious summer-autumn Venn diagram, it'd be mad not 
to play both ends to the middle.

Discovery apple and raspberry crumble tart

Discoveries are the very first apples to start weighing down the branches as 
autumn begins, and they're are a delight combined with late-autumn raspberries. 
Serves eight to 10.

6-8 Discovery apples (around 750g)
35g butter
2 tbsp soft brown sugar
225g raspberries

For the sweet shortcrust pastry
200g plain flour
35g icing sugar
Pinch of salt
125g cold, unsalted butter, cubed
1 large egg yolk
50-75ml cold milk (or water)

For the crumble
100g plain flour
75g unsalted butter
50g light brown or caster sugar
50g ground hazelnuts or almonds

To make the pastry, put the flour, sugar and salt in a food processor and 
blitz briefly to combine. Add the butter and blitz (or rub in with your 
fingertips) until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the egg yolk and 
enough milk or water to bring the mix into large clumps. Tip out on to a 
lightly floured surface and knead lightly into a ball. Wrap in clingfilm and 
chill for 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Roll out the pastry quite thinly, to 
fit a 24cm tart tin, leaving the excess hanging over the edge of the tin. Prick 
all over with a fork, chill for 10 minutes, then line the pastry with 
greaseproof paper (or foil) and baking beans, and bake blind for 10 minutes. 
Remove the beans and paper, and cook for 10‑12 minutes more, until lightly 
browned, then trim the edges.

Quarter and core the apples, then slice thickly. Heat the butter in a large 
frying pan until foaming, then add the apples. Fry gently for five minutes, 
tossing regularly, until they start to soften, then sprinkle on the sugar and 
stir so it dissolves into the buttery, appley juices. Spread this mixture into 
the baked pastry case, and scatter over the raspberries.

For the crumble, sift the flour into a bowl and rub in the butter until the 
mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the sugar and ground nuts, squeeze into 
lumps, then break these up a bit and scatter over the tart to give it a rough 
topping. Bake for 30 minutes until golden brown. Serve warm or cold with double 
cream.

Pumpkin, sweetcorn and bean soup

The last of summer's corn and green beans meet the first of the autumn 
squashes – inspired by the Chilean dishporotos granados 
<http://www.channel4.com/4food/recipes/chefs/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall/porotos-granados-recipe>
. Serves six.

2 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil 
1 onion, peeled and diced
2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped
1 tsp sweet, smoked paprika
2 tbsp chopped oregano (or marjoram)
100g small dried beans (pinto, navy or cannellini), soaked overnight, or 400g 
tin of beans, drained and rinsed
1 litre vegetable stock
1 bay leaf
750g squash (butternut, crown prince or onion), peeled, deseeded and cut into 
2cm chunks
200g green beans, trimmed and cut into 2cm pieces
Kernels cut from 2 corn cobs 
Sea salt and ground black pepper

Heat the oil in a large pan over a medium heat. Add the onion and garlic, and 
sauté for 10 minutes. Add the paprika and a tablespoon of the oregano. Cook for 
a minute more.

Dried beans version
Drain the beans and add to the pan with the stock and bay leaf. Bring to a 
boil, lower the heat and simmer for 45 minutes, or until the beans are 
completely tender (cooking times for dried beans vary; this may take over an 
hour). Add the squash, stir and simmer for 10-15 minutes, until the squash is 
just tender, add the green beans and corn kernels, and simmer for five minutes 
more.

Tinned beans version
Add the drained, rinsed beans, stock and bay leaf at the same time as the 
squash, and simmer until the squash is just tender, around 10-15 minutes. Add 
the green beans and corn, and simmer for a few minutes more.

To finish both versions, season generously, stir in the remaining oregano, 
leave to settle for a couple of minutes and serve.

Parsnips with plum sauce

This sweet-sour, sticky plum sauce uses the last, fat plums of summer. It's 
delicious in a stir-fry, but even more exquisite on roasted new-season 
parsnips. You could serve them as a side dish to some simply cooked chicken or 
pork, but I like them as a nibble. Serves four to six.

1kg smallish parsnips
2-3 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
Sea salt and ground black pepper

For the plum sauce
500g plums
2 star anise
4 garlic cloves, bashed
1 cinnamon stick
1 tbsp olive oil
25g soft brown sugar
1 tbsp honey
2 tbsp cider vinegar
1 tsp English mustard
A good pinch of cayenne pepper
Salt and pepper

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Halve the plums (no need to take out 
the stones) and put them cut side up in a roasting dish. Add the star anise, 
garlic and cinnamon, and trickle over the oil. Roast for 20-30 minutes, until 
soft and juicy, leave to cool a little, then remove the whole spices and press 
the mixture through a sieve into a saucepan.

To the sieved plum purée, add the sugar, honey, vinegar, mustard and cayenne. 
Bring to a simmer and cook for 10-15 minutes, until thick – it needs to coat 
the parsnips without all running off – and stir often to prevent it catching. 
Once thick, remove from the heat, add salt and pepper to taste, as well as 
sugar or vinegar to get the sweet/sour balance you like, and leave to cool.

Peel the parsnips, trim the tops and tails, then cut lengthwise into quarters 
so you have long, tapering "chips". (You want them quite slender, so if you've 
got really big, fat parsnips, cut them into eighths rather than quarters.) Put 
the parsnip chips in a nonstick oven tray, season, trickle over the oil 
and toss to coat. Roast for 40-50 minutes, stirring halfway through, until the 
parsnips are tender all the way through and starting to crisp and caramelise at 
the thin tips.

Spoon the plum sauce (you should have about 150ml) over the parsnips in their 
dish and turn to coat them. Make sure most of the sauce stays on the parsnips. 
Return to the oven for 10 minutes until sticky and fragrant, and serve straight 
away.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>

Hugh's new book, Three Good Things, is published by Bloomsbury at £25. To 
order a copy for £16 (inc free UK mainland p&p), go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408828588>
 or call 0330 333 6846. 
 