
Almost exactly 12 months after five-year-old April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> was abducted and murdered, her 
family and friends have been finally able to lay her to rest.

Hundreds of mourners, all wearing a splash of pink – April's favourite colour 
– gathered on Thursday to remember the child, who was snatched as she played on 
her bicycle and subsequently killed by former abattoir worker Mark Bridger.

It was a chance for the town of Machynlleth in mid-Wales to say goodbye to 
April, remembered as a bright, fun, sometimes mischievous girl. But it was also 
a time for anger to re-emerge that Bridger still refuses to say what happened 
to her body, which remains missing despite the biggest search in British 
policing history.

The Rev Kathleen Rogers, who led the service, said the number of mourners who 
packed St Peter's church showed how many lives April had touched in her five 
years. They had come, she said, to celebrate the life of a "sweet, innocent 
girl" but said there remained anger and confusion that she had been so cruelly 
taken. People were feeling "pain, emptiness, anger and despair".
 Mourners outside St Peter's church. Photograph: Rebecca Naden/Reuters 
April was abducted by Bridger as she played with a friend close to her home on 
1 October last year. In the spring, he was convicted of her murder and will 
spend the rest of his life in prison.

At the end of his trial, the girl's family appealed for him to reveal where 
her body was, saying that they would find it hard to move on until they could 
recover it.

Bridger has refused to help. All the parents have been left with are 17 
fragments of bone found in the fireplace of his cottage in the village of 
Ceinws, four miles from Machynlleth.

Those scant remains, in a cream-coloured coffin, were driven from the family 
home on the Bryn-y-Gog estate in a hearse drawn by two horses wearing pink 
feathered plumes. April's parents, Paul and Coral, and her brother Harley, 11, 
followed in a car while her 17-year-old sister, Jazmin, walked the mile or so 
to the church, leading scores of mourners who followed the cortege on foot. 
April's mother sobbed as she walked into the church while Harley shook and 
choked back tears.
 A horse-drawn carriage takes the coffin to the church in Machynlleth. 
Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
Inside the church a montage of images of family life, created by Jazmin as 
part of her GCSE coursework, was on display. The 250-strong congregation inside 
the church included schoolfriends of April, police officers who investigated 
the case and rescue workers who helped in the search following her 
disappearance. Also present were counsellors who have worked with residents to 
try to help the community recover.

Others who had not been able to get into the church listened to the service 
relayed via loudspeakers. Among them was a former partner of Bridger and one of 
the jurors at his trial.

Hymns included one composed by a bereavement counsellor following the Dunblane 
tragedy and Blest Are the Pure in Heart, sung in Welsh. A poem by a local 
writer was read out by one of April's teachers. Entitled April, it began: "On 
this beautiful sunlit autumn day, A desperate sadness casts long shadows across 
our anxious and questioning world."
 April Jones, five, who was abducted on 1 October last year. Photograph: 
Dyfed-Powys police/PA 
April's parents said they did not want flowers to be sent but asked that 
donations go to a church project to sponsor a five-year-old girl in Uganda. The 
girl will be sponsored until she finished her education and any spare money 
will be used to help other villagers.

Not all wellwishers had heard the request: one bouquet left at the church 
read: "April, star shining bright in the sky, sleep well." Another said: "Taken 
far too soon. Spread your angel wings."
 