
No British general election has returned a hung parliament in over three 
decades. But recent polls have served as a reminder that aHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> under "no overall 
control" is very much a possibility after next year's election. The polls have 
triggered a wave of speculation about whether the result will be political 
instability, market collapses or even "the death of government".

There's no need to panic. Virtually all other advanced democracies cope 
perfectly well with minority and coalition governments, as has Westminster in 
the past. Asa new report 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/pdfs/making-minority-gov-work.pdf> 
from theConstitution Unit <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/constitution-unit/> and the 
Institute for Government <http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/> argues, a 
hung parliament is very unlikely to be "one of the biggest disasters we could 
suffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/nov/10/hung-parliament-kenneth-clarke>
".

One specific concern about hung parliaments is that governments emerge out of 
secret negotiations rather than directly on the basis of the election result. 
In this way, democratic accountability can be weakened. Some also fear the 
monarch being drawn into this process, having to adjudicate between two leaders 
who both have a claim to the keys of No 10.

But these concerns could be avoided by a relatively simple reform that would 
let the Commons itself decide on who should lead the country. This is what 
happens in many other countries. As in Scotland, parliament would vote on a 
recommendation to the Queen on who to appoint as prime minister, so no formal 
constitutional change would be required. The motion would be debated at the 
start of the parliamentary session, straight after the election, with the 
candidates for PM stating their case, and smaller parties explaining their 
reasons for backing either side. This would be more transparent, more 
comprehensible and less likely to politicise the monarchy than the current 
opaque conventions and processes. There is no reason why all parties could not 
agree to this change now, before the election potentially forces their hands.

To prevent a lengthy government formation process the political parties should 
start preparing early for potential negotiations after an election. In 
particular, they should think hard about their "red lines" and map key areas of 
agreement and disagreement with all other parties, as well as agreeing 
processes for securing the backing of the party at large for any deal made.

Parties should consider the full range of options in terms of types of 
partnership as well as potential partners. Formal coalition is just one 
possibility. Its main advantage for the government is that it can guarantee 
control of parliament, but the price paid is a loss of flexibility, and the 
potential embarrassment of having to negotiate away manifesto pledges to secure 
the deal. Scotland's experience suggests that junior partners like the Liberal 
Democrats may also suffer from erosion of their distinctive identity as they 
become increasingly associated with the lead party.

By contrast, minority government offers greater flexibility and reduces the 
likelihood of splits or inconsistencies between ministers. Without a 
parliamentary majority, ministers must strike ad hoc issue-by-issue deals to 
push through legislation. This may sound difficult, but it can work reasonably 
well so long as government adopts a more open, consultative approach and a 
willingness to compromise, as the minority SNP government in Scotland has 
generally opted to do.

There are also options that offer greater stability than minority rule but 
fewer constraints than formal coalition. In New Zealand, over recent years, the 
largest party has typically formed a minority government loosely supported by a 
number of smaller parties. This guarantees stability in exchange for 
concessions or consultation rights in specific areas. An even more innovative 
arrangement is the appointment of "ministers outside cabinet" who are bound to 
the government line only in the area of their portfolio, but can speak their 
mind on other policy issues.

If they are feeling particularly bold, the parties might also commit to Gordon 
Brown's 2007 pledge to let parliament have the final say on when it is 
dissolved or suspended.

A hung parliament next year remains the outside bet. But it may happen and it 
need not be a disaster. It might even turn out to be an improvement on single 
party dominance, but only if the political parties and the civil service are 
ready for it.
 