
Nasser Hussain delivered a sobering footnote to England's crushing win over 
Australia in the fifth Ashes Test in the early hours of this morning.

While his team-mates scrambled for souvenir stumps and the Barmy Army were 
dancing in the stands, the captain said England's last-gasp win should not 
disguise the fact they were outplayed in the series.

"It was a great Test match, one of the best I've ever played in," Hussain 
said. "But let's not suddenly make out everything's turned round.

"It's the same old story really, we lost the Ashes 4-1, that's the bottom 
line."

England have a recent history of winning "dead rubbers" against Australia but 
have not won a series since 1986-87.

They have lost eight in a row, a record run of defeats, and Hussain said 
Australia would probably win again next time unless changes are made to the way 
cricket is played and organised in England.

"The immediate future against Australia is not great unless we start turning 
things around," he said.

"It's blatantly obvious that Test match cricket is now being played in 
completely different conditions to what we're playing in county cricket at home.

"There's every reason why we should beat Australia in the future, why we 
should have more days like this, but someone has to draw a line and say 'right, 
how are we going to do that?'

"My personal opinion is that this Australia side is the best side I've ever 
played against and if we really do want to be the best side in the world then 
we have to look at what this side are doing."

England finished the series strongly after losing the first three Tests, and 
the Ashes, inside the first 11 days.

They gave the Australians a fright in Melbourne after a generous first innings 
declaration by Steve Waugh then dominated the last two days in Sydney to claim 
a crushing 225-run victory, their biggest winning margin over Australia since 
December 1986.

"Injuries have definitely been our biggest problem, we just needed our full 
side to be available the full time," said Hussain. "The result might have been 
3-2 or still 4-1 but the other Tests would have been closer."

Hussain also defended his decision to bat on in the second innings when it was 
already apparent he had enough runs to win the match.

No team has ever scored more than 276 to win a Test batting last in Sydney but 
Hussain did not declare until his side were 452 in front.

He explained that while it may have been perceived as a negative tactic, he 
continued batting because he knew the Australians would find it difficult 
trying to bat to save a game when they were so used to winning.

"We knew there was plenty of time left in the game, we knew the wicket was 
deteriorating," he said. "We knew they would come at us, we knew they were 
desperate to win 5-0 and we knew the run-rate was never going to be a problem 
for Australia.

"We just had to try and keep them out of the game because it's very difficult 
for an Australian cricketer once they're out of the game."

Veteran paceman Andy Caddick bowled England to victory with a magnificent 
second-innings haul of seven for 94 to finish with 10 for the match for the 
first time in his career.

"To be honest, I didn't know which of my bowlers was going to turn up," 
Hussain said. "But if I knew they were going to turn up like they did today 
then I'd have probably declared a bit earlier and we could have today off."

Australia captain Steve Waugh, meanwhile, believes the hosts blew their chance 
of an historic series cleansweep against England through sloppy fielding.

"We missed our opportunities, we know that," he bemoaned. "We dropped some 
catches that could have turned the game around."

Normally one of the most unforgiving fielding sides in the game, the Aussies 
fumbled a number of chances that came their way during the Test.

Mark Butcher made 124 in England's first innings after being dropped by Damien 
Martyn at gully on 13 then again by wicketkeeper Adam Gilchrist on 43.

Nasser Hussain's first innings 75 came after leg-spinner Stuart MacGill 
dropped a simple return catch when on six and player of the series Michael 
Vaughan made 183 in England's second innings after Justin Langer dropped a 
chance on 102.

"I'm disappointed but you've got to give credit to England, they played very 
good cricket in this Test match," Waugh added.

"We had our opportunities but we weren't quite good enough and England 
certainly outplayed us in a pretty comprehensive win.

"I think the guys are pretty tired... but that's not an excuse, we just didn't 
play well enough. It's hard to maintain that sort of intensity and quality over 
a long period of time."

Despite the result, Waugh said his players enjoyed the match more than the 
four games they won, including the first three which ran for a total of just 11 
days to decide the Ashes.

"I think it's good for cricket. I think the first three Test weren't close and 
weren't contested that well but the last two were excellent," he said.

"It's nice to win and nice to dominate but at the end of the day you get more 
pleasure about doing something special in a real tough, close Test match."
 