
Nasser Hussain yesterday challenged his team point-blank to dig deep over the 
next 10 days and produce a Test victory they can look back on with pride long 
after individual careers are over.

The England captain believes beating Australia in Melbourne in Thursday's 
fourth Test or next week in Sydney would be a mighty achievement, Ashes or no 
Ashes.

"The way I look at it is, the boys have got 10 days to turn around a Test 
match tour," Hussain said. "To go out there and beat Australia in a Test 
regardless of the state of the series is a great achievement. There is still a 
chance left of achieving something positive this winter. The series may be lost 
but we have got to move on from that."

Alec Stewart's England won by 12 runs in Melbourne four years ago when Dean 
Headley took six second-innings wickets to inflict the last home Test defeat on 
Australia. Though Australia had already retained the Ashes, Hussain regards the 
victory as one of the highlights of his career.

"I have fond memories of four years ago and it's an example of why we play the 
game," he said. "For someone like Dean Headley that will be his greatest memory 
as a crick eter, and just because the series had gone is an irrelevance to him 
now.

"We were outplayed for large parts of that game and had to fight back to win. 
You play the game for those special occasions and there are 10 days left for 
these boys to experience the feeling of beating Australia. Australia are 
beatable, like any other side."

Whereas one England victory would make Hussain's tour, even a whitewash would 
not assure his opposite number of keeping his job beyond Sydney, and yesterday 
Steve Waugh's former team-mate Ian Healy advised him to go gently.

Healy said: "The fairytale ending is a nice touch [but] my advice is to do it 
as conservatively as you can. I tried to push through the West Indies, Sri 
Lanka and Zimbabwe and didn't make it. It's up to him how much energy he has 
got and how much willingness he has to work on his game and how much he is 
missing his family. It's a long haul if he does not retire in Sydney."
 