
 Nasser Hussain became the latest member of the England squad to succumb to 
injury when a thigh strain ruled him out of today's festival match against the 
Prime Minister's XI.

The captain suffered the injury during Friday's defeat by New South Wales in 
Sydney and was told to miss the match in Canberra in order to rest before the 
start of the one-day triangular series this week.

The injury is the latest in a long list to strike England's squad since they 
cleared Australian customs on October 18 but Hussain is not expected to miss 
any competitive cricket.

It has at least offered him a valuable chance to rest before the hectic first 
half of the one-day series which will see England play four matches, starting 
against Australia in Sydney on Friday, and fly across the country twice in a 
week.

Hussain's absence left Marcus Trescothick to captain the side at a time when 
the opener needs runs to end the leanest spell of his England career. His top 
score from 13 innings on tour is 72 and the reputation he has built over two 
years is sliding with every failure here.

"I'm still hanging in there and I'm looking forward to each innings," he said. 
"I'm really desperate to do well but maybe I'm trying too hard.

"Sometimes it's not the best thing to be in the nets. You're in there every 
day and playing every other day and you can over-analyse things at times.

"Really, all you need to do is get out in the middle, relax and enjoy your 
time out there. Australia have bowled very well at me in a certain channel but 
I've had that problem all my career and dealt with it. I'm not far away. I've 
gone through these sort of feelings before against other teams and always come 
back. I know you generally return a better player."

Trescothick's temporary loss of confidence is minor beside the survival fight 
by Steve Waugh after his omission from the 30-man provisional World Cup squad. 
Waugh, set to lead his state against Australia today, said: "I believe I'm 
still good enough. I'm like any other player, I've got to get out there and 
perform. I've said I'm available, so that means I've still a chance of 
selection."

Waugh was sacked as Australia's one-day captain in February after they failed 
to qualify for the triangular series final, which was contested by South Africa 
and New Zealand.
 