
The author: Alistair Maclean (1922-1987) was the son of a minister in the 
Scottish Highlands, and saw active service in the second world war in the Royal 
Navy. He became a schoolteacher, but won a short story competition in 1954 that 
encouraged him to put his war experiences into a novel. HMS Ulysses (1955) was 
the result, and was an immediate success, allowing Maclean to become a 
full-time writer. More war novels followed, notably The Guns of Navarone 
(1957), and Maclean moved to Switzerland in 1957 to escape UK tax laws. In the 
1960s, he turned to espionage, writing The Dark Crusader (1961) and The Satan 
Bug (1962) under the pseudonym Ian Stuart. With a string of successful film 
adaptations boosting his name, Maclean's sales flourished in the 1960s, though 
he briefly retired from writing in 1963 to become a hotelier.Where Eagles Dare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/where-eagles-dare> (1967) marked a return to 
his favourite second world war territory. As he struggled with alcoholism in 
the 1970s, Maclean's popularity began to wane, and his novels began to recycle 
old ideas. He died after a stroke in Munich in 1987.

The story: A team of undercover operatives, under the command of Major John 
Smith, are parachuted into the German Alps to rescue an American general from 
whom the Gestapo hope to extract the Allied plans for the "second front", or 
D-Day. Smith knows there are traitors among his team, as one after another dies 
in mysterious circumstances. Aided by an American lieutenant, Schaffer, Smith 
infiltrates the general's prison, Schloss Adler ("Castle Eagle"), and confronts 
his Nazi captors, revealing that the general is in fact simply an actor. He 
also convinces the Germans that he is a double agent, working for Berlin - but 
Smith is really a triple agent, and manages to destroy the Schloss. The real 
traitor turns out to be Colonel Wyatt-Turner, one of the high command who sent 
Smith on his mission in the first place.

The film-makers: Elliott Kastner was one of the first American producers to 
exploit the financial advantages of filming in Europe, and asked Maclean to 
come up with an idea for a second world war story. A film was quickly set up, 
with Maclean also writing the screenplay. Kastner, however, felt Maclean's 
draft was too long, and the US director he had hired, Brian G Hutton (b1935), 
cut the running time significantly. Richard Burton, anxious for a hit film to 
restore his commercial credibility, was Maclean's choice for the lead; Clint 
Eastwood, a star after Sergio Leone's Fistful of Dollars trilogy (1964-66), 
took the support role.

How book and film compare: With Maclean heavily involved, and the screenplay 
already in his mind while he wrote the novel, the final film version conforms 
closely to the original. Only peripheral details are sacrificed, such as 
Schaffer's romance with undercover barmaid Heidi.

Inspirations and influences: The war years and the postwar aftermath provided 
action cinema with new material - firstly with re-creations of key battles and, 
subsequently, tales of true and fictional derring-do, such as an earlier 
Maclean adaptation, The Guns of Navarone (1961). The development of Bond films 
in the early 1960s brought a new dimension to espionage-oriented cinema. Where 
Eagles Dare brings these strands together - fusing the spy story with war 
action - and helped create a wave of patriotic cold war thrillers that arguably 
climaxed with The Spy Who Loved Me (1977).
 