
Ah yes, An American in Paris. Gene Kelly's character is a heel, but audiences 
are so busy ooh-la-la-ing over MGM's soundstage mock-up of Montmartre they 
don't care, and neither, really, does the film, which finally gives way to a 
barely relevant 16-minute ballet inspired by the work of painters such as Dufy, 
Manet and Toulouse-Lautrec. The results, as so often with director Vincente 
Minnelli, pass all the way through kitsch to emerge somewhere on the side of 
sublime.

Minnelli once again dodges the kitsch bullet in Lust for Life, which ends up a 
moving study of Van Gogh, though artist biopics that aim to be tasteful, such 
as Girl with a Pearl Earring, usually end up as upmarket ersatz, best 
appreciated by folk who think film is inferior to more venerable art forms such 
as painting. But I do enjoy a good game of Spot the FamousPainting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting>, which enables those of us 
who studied art history to feel smug, if not vindicated.

Pedro Almodóvar shoehorns a ruddy great reproduction of Titian's Venus 
d'Urbino into The Skin I Live In. (I realise this could have been a whim of his 
production designer, but I like to think Pedro is hands-on when it comes to mad 
surgeon symbolic wallpaper.) Lars von Trier's Melancholia is a trove of 
references to Bruegel (Hunters in the Snow and, even more pertinently, The Land 
of Cockaigne), Millais (Ophelia) and Caravaggio (David and Goliath), while his 
landscapes reek of Friedrich. (If anyone recognises the reindeer drawing, I'd 
love to know its provenance.)

Bruegel crops up again in The Man Who Fell to Earth, with Nicolas Roeg's 
cross-cutting establishing a link between extraterrestrial David Bowie and the 
nemesis he has yet to meet (Rip Torn), who's looking at the picture of Icarus 
plunging unnoticed into the sea. Asia Argento physically enters this same 
painting at the start of her father Dario's psychothriller The Stendhal 
Syndrome, named after a condition in which sufferers are overwhelmed by great 
works of art – inconvenient if, like Asia, you're a detective hunting a serial 
killer in Florence – though, alas, the director sidelines this inspired idea in 
favour of some less inspired sexual sadism.

The Da Vinci Code is, as you'd expect, choc-a-bloc with Leonardo, though I 
prefer my Last Supper posed by beggars a la Buñuel in Viridiana, or by dead 
mice in Steve Carell's Dinner for Schmucks dioramas, which I consider 
preferable to scribbling invisible graffiti all over the Mona Lisa and Virgin 
of the Rocks. I don't care if there is a crazy albino priest trying to kill 
you; if you're curator of the Louvre you should know better.

The Mona Lisa is recognisable even to audiences who think it was painted by a 
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle, so is often used as shorthand for western culture. 
It's packed away prior to the cataclysm of 2012; burned by foot-soldiers of 
Christian Bale (before his humanity is restored by an adorable puppy) in the 
emotion-free future of Equilibrium; wrapped around the umbrella of masterthief 
John Barrymore in Arsène Lupin (an unlikely feat since it's painted on wood, 
not canvas). The makers of Bean, on the other hand, opted to have the lesser 
known (but, crucially, American) Whistler's Mother sneezed on and defaced by 
Rowan Atkinson.

In I Am Legend, Will Smith decorates his apartment with Van Gogh's Starry 
Night and Rousseau's Sleeping Gypsy, though if I'd been the last person in 
Manhattan with the whole of MoMA to choose from, I would have gone for 
Malevich's more soothing (but, crucially, Russian) White on White. But my 
favourite famous painting in films is in Fassbinder's Despair, adapted from the 
Nabokov's novel, in which Dirk Bogarde wears pyjamas patterned with The Raft of 
the Medusa. Géricault's painting, which hangs around the corner from the Mona 
Lisa in the Louvre, was inspired by an incident in which 147 shipwreck 
survivors, set adrift on a makeshift raft off the coast of Mauritania, ended up 
going mad and eating each other. It makes for a lovely recurring motif.
 