
Karen Kiernan's two-week backpacking holiday in Thailand with her boyfriend 
ended in a mad rush to get to Bangkok airport to fly home. The sleeper train 
taking them to the capital from the south of the country in plenty of time to 
make their flight arrived two hours late.

Even though their Gulf Air flight was delayed, Karen and her boyfriend were 
unable to board, and since the airline had no spaces on other flights leaving 
that day they had little choice but to buy seats with another company. The 
cheapest option was Thai Airways, at a cost of £420 each.

Karen, however, was confident she would be able to recover the cost. After 
all, she'd been a customer withColumbus Insurance 
<http://www.columbusdirect.com/> for more than two years and had made no 
previous claims. She had also obtained a form from the stationmaster in Bangkok 
explaining that the train had been delayed.

On returning home, Karen and her boyfriend both filed claims with their 
respective insurers, but while her boyfriend was successful Karen's claim was 
turned down. Why? Because the reason for the train's delay was not stated 
clearly on the stationmaster's form. In fact, Karen had tried to get this 
information included on the paperwork, but faced with station staff with little 
or no English and a plane to catch she had to give up.

It was maddening. Both policies contained exactly the same wording, and both 
travellers had submitted exactly the same form as evidence of the delay.

Fighting the good fight
 It was almost as if the insurer was trying to use the wording of the policy 
to bully Karen into giving up on her claim. In fact, the wording in the policy 
may even have been invalid under the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts 
Regulations 1999, simply because it was too cut and dried and lacked the 
flexibility required by law to cover the variety of situations that may arise 
when travelling abroad.

Why had Columbus Insurance relied on the strict letter of the policy to reject 
Karen's claim? After all, this was just the type of risk she hoped to cover by 
taking out insurance. A spokesman said the firm asks for proof of the reason 
for rail delays to check that the insured had not pulled the emergency cord or 
been involved in any fight or disturbance. He also said it helps the firm to 
better understand the routes taken by travellers abroad.

Following our intervention, Columbus acknowledged that in this case there was 
no question of any skulduggery, and admitted Karen should have been paid 
straight away. The spokesman said some confusion had arisen because Karen had 
admitted having communication problems with the stationmaster, but agreed this 
should not have occurred. The company agreed to pay up immediately and 
apologised to Karen for any distress she may have suffered because of the delay 
in settling her claim.

If at first you don't succeed ...
 Karen's experience shows you mustn't give up straight away if an insurance 
company rejects your claim. If you know you are genuine you have to be 
persistent and gather as much proof of your loss and the circumstances 
surrounding it as you can. Don't be deterred by small print in the policy since 
this is not always written in stone. And if the wording is not about the core 
terms of your policy, such as what is actually insured, it can be legally 
challenged if it is unfair.

However, if you have not been entirely truthful when you take out a policy you 
may render it invalid. You must disclose in full anything that may influence 
the insurer in setting the premium, so be scrupulously honest when you complete 
the proposal. If you supply any false information the insurer is within its 
rights to refuse to pay out. For example, you are usually obliged to inform the 
insurer if you suffer from a recurring illness.

Your health before you travel will be relevant to any claim you make for 
treatment. Some insurers may cover you for pre-existing medical conditions, but 
they won't pay for continuing or routine treatment, or cover you if you travel 
against medical advice.

And if you think you can manage without travel insurance in EU countries where 
there are reciprocal arrangements for treatment, think again. These 
arrangements may not cover all your medical costs, nor will they always pay for 
your accommodation or repatriation if you have an accident or fall ill, so you 
must have a policy to cover these costs.

Cover and claim
 You should aim for a policy that covers personal accident. This will ensure a 
lump sum is paid out if you die or suffer permanent injury while on holiday. 
And don't ignore the possibility of accidents to other people. For example, 
it's possible you could accidentally injure someone or damage their property on 
an activity holiday where you might ski or go scuba diving. For this you need 
personal liability cover, which usually pays out to a maximum amount of £2m.

After medical expenses, the next major worry for travellers is the loss, theft 
or damage of their money or possessions. Most policies cover these events, but 
losses must usually be reported to the police within 24 hours or the claim will 
not be met. If you can't find the police, for whatever reason, then inform your 
local tour representative since insurers will take a pragmatic approach if 
you've done the best you can to let the authorities know. Don't forget there is 
usually a limit of £1,500-£3,000 on claims for personal belongings.

As is the case with other types of insurance, your property will only be 
covered if you take reasonable care of it. An insurer can refuse to pay out if 
you are careless, but don't be fobbed off if you think an insurer is being 
unfair. You only have to exercise reasonable care, which in practice depends on 
the circumstances of the time. To avoid any problems take these simple 
precautions - never leave your possessions unattended, keep all your valuables, 
passports and money in the hotel safe wherever possible, and don't take more 
cash or valuables than you need.

Don't count on your insurer paying in full even if you have a valid claim. 
This is because your policy may contain an excess - the amount of the claim you 
are required to pay yourself. Check the terms of your policy and if this seems 
too high look for a better policy with a lower excess or none at all.

As a condition of the insurer's liability there are usually time limits for 
the notification of a claim, and although these are not absolute and can be 
challenged in the courts, it's always a good idea to inform the insurer of any 
claim you intend to make as soon as possible. As a rule of thumb, you should 
tell the insurer about your claim even before you have details of your loss.
 