
I'm back at that baby-jab problem again - there's something missing from my 
brain. When T had his last injection, it was for TB and I suppose he was six 
months old. "You don't need to come back again till he's one," said the nurse, 
in a friendly voice, which I could just pick out over the blood-curdling 
distress. I affected to think, "Oh, one! That is ages away, that's his whole 
life, again." But, in fact, my subconscious was thinking, "That day will never 
arrive. In fact, this injection has just immunised him against ever having to 
be one year old."

At one, they have the Hib/Men C booster, which are both meningitis. I think. 
Of course I can't look it up now, because he is well over one and still hasn't 
had it, and I will be right-clicking like a zombie until I find a page on the 
wondernet that tells me he's probably already got meningitis of both kinds, 
whatever the difference happens to be. I should have looked it up before I was 
four months late with it, but if I'd been planning to be four months late, I 
would have realised that was a stupid plan.

It's worse now, of course, because he is also late for his MMR (due at 13 
months). I could cheerfully push them both to the back of my mind, except for 
the following: I hate people who don't give their children the MMR. It strikes 
me as risk aversion of the most self-interested kind, feverish in your care for 
your own child, totally relaxed about what happens to everyone else's. Avoiding 
it is the medical equivalent of buying a whole street just to get your kid into 
the right primary school.

In this respect it distils everything that's wrong with the middle classes. 
Yet, at the same time - in that the MMR controversy is totally 
superstition-based, a big fat hoax, a piece of unsubstantiated silliness - it 
runs counter to everything that's supposed to be worthwhile about the middle 
classes, which is that they should at least be able to assess evidence in a 
reasonable way.

It really takes the shine off my bilious ranting when I haven't been to the 
sodding doctor's myself. It also takes the shine off my enjoyment of the Today 
programme, where they talk a lot about the spread of measles, and on top of all 
this, there is the worry that T might actually get measles.

It would be one thing if I felt genuinely ambivalent - raging middle-class 
self-hate on the one hand, neurotic fear that proponents of the MMR/autism link 
might be on to something on the other - but I really do not feel like that at 
all. I don't mind injections, the only bit I mind is where they stick the great 
fat needle in.

I was worrying out loud about all this, I thought for about the 15th time, but 
apparently - C says - for the first, and he said he'd take him. I said he 
didn't understand, it wasn't as simple as just making an appointment and going 
to the nurse. Thicko. You had to sit there and wait while she checked your red 
book, and her face darkened, and she flicked from one page to another, 
questioningly, and then you had to be told off, at enormous length, for being 
so late. Then you had to make up an elaborate excuse for why you were so late. 
Perhaps you moved to Italy, but the economic downturn destroyed your new 
prospects and you had to move back. "And they don't do injections in Italy, 
because of the healing properties in Dolmio?" said C.

"No, you were waiting for your health insurance, which did not take effect 
until you'd been in the job three months."

"What crappy imaginary insurance terms! When I invent an insurance company, 
they'll be more like Bupa."

"Mate, if you want to make up your own lie, then you go right ahead." 

"I'm not going to lie. I'll tell them my girlfriend is spineless and 
disorganised."

"That works. But what if they still tell you off? What if they use you as a 
conduit, to remotely tell me off?"

"Either it's safe to do it late, or it isn't, and we're screwed. They're not 
going to tell anybody off. They'll either do it or they won't."

I don't understand when his life got to be so easy. I do everything I can to 
complicate things. It does not make a dent.
 