
We have lately been close to two deaths of young people. One was a man in his 
early 20s killed in a car accident at the end of our road.

The driver of the car was my youngest daughter's boyfriend and he is waiting 
to hear if he will be taken to court. Every day we walk by the flowers left at 
the scene and the heartbreaking notes. And I mean heartbreaking. The note from 
his father tears you apart. His son was "the only thing I got right in life". 
In her more lucid moments my daughter says: "I hate walking by here, I think 
every time of Ian screaming for people to help his friend." She walks there 
every day. Several times.

The other death was that of a 10-year-old boy who had a heart condition that 
went undetected. He was an only child and his father, my husband's friend, had 
a very troubled childhood himself. He had pulled himself through and his son 
was his world. The grief has overwhelmed him. He cannot leave home as he is 
terrified someone will come and take his son's possessions. He is being 
paranoid, but his reaction gives an insight into his devastated state of mind.

So I find myself writing to let go of some of the pain in me.

And I hear my 17-year-old daughter singing downstairs to let go of some of the 
pain in her. I love to hear her sing. It is one of the things that makes me 
happiest in the world. I am not musical, but I have friends and family who are. 
They all confirm that she really is talented.

But what I hear today is a young woman singing through confusion. The songs 
range from the sad to the aggressive. Her lyrics are all about the "hole in 
her", about betrayal and anger. The more lyrical songs are incredibly painful 
to listen to, it is like hearing a song across a vast divide or chasm. I 
picture this lost girl trying to reach out to people but constantly thwarted by 
her own volatility and fury. And then she comes upstairs and asks me a question.

"Would you be sad if I died?"

"Not really," I say. She smiles. I use this sort of distancing humour all the 
time as a way of coping with her. She shies away from overly direct expressions 
of emotion. But we talk a bit more, and when I can see that she is able to 
listen, I explain just how devastated I would be if she died.

"I would carry on living for your sister and father's sake, but my world would 
be full of pain and everyday would be a struggle."

"But why would you miss me so much when I am such a little shit?"

"Good point," I acknowledge, and again the smile. "We have not had the police 
round in ages. You are in college, you are doing your music. You are amazing. 
Very few people could change as you have done. It is the hardest thing in the 
world to do."

And I tell her how she makes me laugh. How she and her sister, aged 20, whom 
we adopted after they had suffered abuse as toddlers, are the most amazing 
eccentrics and two of the bravest people I know.

What I don't say is that although she is making amazing progress, progress 
that I never thought we would see a few years ago, we still live on a 
knife-edge. What happens if her boyfriend goes to prison? She is in college, 
but currently refusing to go to English and maths classes. If she fails this 
element of the course she will not progress. She will find it hard to get a 
job. She will have nothing to do. She may well reoffend. One day at a time, I 
tell myself, over and over again.
 