
A-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> are a waste of time, 
I once thought. College is pointless. The whole further education system is an 
exam factory churning out a generation of debt-dependents. Not me, though: my 
18-year-old self had it sussed. I dropped out of college on AS results day with 
a smile on my face.

A year later, however, as I watched my friends celebrate their university 
acceptance letters, I began to feel I had made a monumental mistake.

When people ask why I never finished my A-levels, I explain that I left 
college for “a number of reasons”. I tell them that I was going through a tough 
time, that I felt isolated and overwhelmed.

But to be honest, I’m fobbing them off. I actually didn’t finish college 
because I was lazy and immature. I just wasn’t ready.

I’m not the only one that feels this way – far from it: 18 is a young age to 
make such a crucial life decision.

Arash, a 21-year-old foundation engineering student, says: “I didn’t do as 
well as I should have in sixth form but that wasn’t going to stop me from doing 
what I wanted to do. My advice to people who are unsure about uni or think that 
they’re too old is simple: you’re never too old.”

Lewis Wheeler, 20, an access course student from Brighton, agrees. He says he 
was unsure of the direction he wanted to take, so he chose to do an 
apprenticeship first. “I didn’t feel I was in the right frame of mind to make 
such a massive and obviously expensive decision. I definitely wasn’t mature 
enough. I feel like working beforehand has helped me massively as I’ve been 
surrounded by so many different types of people.”

I didn’t have the foresight of Arash and Lewis. After leaving college, I tried 
my hand at a number of things. I rushed into an apprenticeship unrelated to any 
of my career aspirations. Suffice to say that this was a short-lived endeavour. 
Mistake number two was now etched on to my CV.

How I taught myself three A-levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/23/how-i-taught-myself-three-a-levels>
Back to the drawing board I went – and this time I thought about what I 
enjoyed doing with my spare time. I was a keen gym-goer, so becoming a fitness 
instructor seemed logical. I took a course and qualified the same month that 
all of my friends packed up and shipped off to university. It felt great: they 
were embarking on a new and exciting chapter – and so was I.

But again, it wasn’t for me, and it ended shortly after it had begun. I was 
starting to feel like a quitter and I hated it.

A couple of “filler” jobs later, and it was getting harder to shake the 
feeling that I was just making one mistake after another. I decided, just 
before my 20th birthday, that I wanted to give education another try.

I did some research into my options – of which there were few without A-levels 
– and stumbled across the Open University. I spent a few weeks looking into it 
and knew that I had enjoyed studying politics previously. I was keen to 
understand more on the subject. I enrolled on the closest thing that they had 
to a politics degree – politics, philosophy and economics – and waited for my 
course books to drop through the letterbox. I worried that this would be 
another thing that I’d look back on having given up, but was equally determined 
that it wouldn’t be.

Why I won't be studying physics at A-level
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2014/jul/03/why-i-am-dropping-physics-a-level-student>
The further I got into the course the more I became enthralled. I couldn’t 
quite believe it but suddenly I was loving education again. My distance course 
was fantastic and it truly opened doors.

And yet, watching my friends I felt that I was missing something. I still 
wanted the full university experience (overpriced accommodation and all). So I 
applied to the University of Sussex, and was astounded when they made me an 
offer based on the merit of my first year with the OU. They were willing to 
overlook the mess I seemed to have made of my life, and I was deeply grateful.

If I could give one piece of advice based on my experience it would be: don’t 
be afraid of trying the alternatives before you go to university – particularly 
if you’re having doubts. My route into higher education might not have been the 
smoothest, but I don’t regret a thing because now I don’t doubt that I made the 
right choice. Even if I’m now surrounded by 18-year-olds asking me why I look 
older than them.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 