
Shortly after the referendum result in June, I both graduated with my UK 
doctorate and married my British partner. I also started putting together my 
first applications for post-docs back in Finland, my home country.

Ironically it may be difficult for me to get a job there too now – I’m finding 
that because I have done my entire higher education in Britain, and the model 
is different, I may not be a competitive candidate. Because of Brexit, I’m 
stuck. Like many researchers from the European Union in Britain, I’m faced with 
tough decisions about my future.

I’m worried leaving it any longer to move back will only make things more 
complicated, and mean my husband is forced to pay for an expensive visa. 
Staying, I fear, isn’t an option: I worry that I simply won’t be able to secure 
work here.

For the first time in 18 years, I don't feel welcome in Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/21/for-the-first-time-in-18-years-i-dont-feel-welcome-in-britain>
The atmosphere was very different when I moved to the UK nine years ago to 
start my undergraduate degree. I loved how friendly and helpful local people 
were, and my university was so much more international and multicultural than 
suburban Finland.

I was attracted to study in the UK because I could do a bachelor’s and a 
master’s degree in four years, while at home it could take considerably longer. 
I felt welcomed and secure, and I knew I had options because both countries 
were part of the EU.

Happy with my supervisor, I stayed to do a PhD in the city that now felt like 
my second home. But things were starting to change. I ran into Ukip rallies in 
town, heard complaints about NHS tourism and read news about restrictions to EU 
benefits. After the referendum was announced, acquaintances started to forget 
where I was from, and spoke negatively about “immigrants” in front of me.

My husband and I used to imagine our futures as flexible... but now that seems 
virtually impossible.

When I pointed out that I too am foreign, I would be brushed off with an “oh 
no – not you!” It was as though because I’m blond, white, and speak fluent 
English they didn’t think of me as an immigrant.

 People didn’t see that leaving the EU would affect me, and that I would never 
have been able to come here without it – neither would many of my peers.

In this atmosphere I feel lucky to be relatively sheltered, working within a 
university where most people are strongly pro-EU, though the region leaned 
heavily towards Brexit. Some of my EU friends have faced vitriol at their 
workplaces and their co-workers have been calling for a closure of all borders.

My family moved around internationally when I was growing up and the cultural 
awareness that gave me has been invaluable. My husband and I used to imagine 
our futures would be as flexible too, moving between Finland, the UK, and 
elsewhere depending on the opportunities that came along. Perhaps that was 
always a naïve ideal – but certainly now it seems virtually impossible.

My international peers at my university already face incredible difficulty 
trying to gain visas to stay in the UK, whether they have a British partner or 
not. Frankly, with this shift in atmosphere I feel would rather leave than face 
the same.

Brexit exposed deep rifts in Britain. Universities can help heal them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/27/brexit-exposed-deep-rifts-in-britain-universities-can-help-heal-them>
Then there is the academic job market to think about. It’s tough everywhere, 
but – it seems – especially so in the UK. I have applied for dozens of 
post-docs and temporary lectureships in the past six months. I feel relieved 
whenever I secure just a few hours of teaching or a small research grant. I 
don’t think the rejections are linked to my EU status – for now at at least, 
there are just a large number of applications for each post.

So this combination of an impending Brexit and the tough job market means it’s 
no wonder an EU early career researcher might want to get out. But, leaving 
isn’t that simple either.

British higher education is a unique kind of system in which doctoral 
candidates are still treated as students rather than researchers. But in 
Finland – where a doctorate often takes around eight years to complete – PhD 
graduates usually emerge with multiple publications and a strong network of 
colleagues.

In some EU countries, it’s not uncommon for PhD researchers to teach full 
modules and participate in all aspects of departmental life. Of course PhD 
students in Britain do some teaching, but a British doctorate rarely prepares 
you for competing in these other job markets, where expectations for teaching 
experience and research outputs for early career researchers can be much higher.

I’m not trying to paint myself as a victim, I have had it easy in many ways. I 
am lucky that EU structures made it possible for me to come here in the first 
place and I haven’t had to deal with racism.

 Nevertheless, EU early-career-researchers based in Britain now face a new 
pressure to either navigate an impending Brexit or to fit their PhDs and 
experiences of UK higher education in to completely different academic career 
trajectories elsewhere. It’s hard to know what to do. For me, I would like to 
leave Britain, and return home with my English husband in tow, but I’m not sure 
if that will happen in the near future.

Join the higher education network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian. 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 