
England's Ashes victory has been occasion for modesty. Andrew Flintoff 
pronounced over a dawn gin and tonic that he was too overweight and ugly ever 
to be a celebrity and Kevin Pietersen has bridled at the very suggestion that 
he cannot get enough of the limelight.

What burst of pride there was yesterday came from the unlikeliest source. 
Duncan Fletcher, England's Zimbabwean coach, fresh from his award of British 
citizenship and with speculation about a knighthood, voiced disappointment that 
he had not been made coach of the World XI side to face Australia in next 
month's Super Series. After his major part in the revival of English cricket, 
he had a point.

It was a short lament, from a man who rarely reveals his innermost thoughts. 
"It was disappointing. It would have been an honour for me to go out there, but 
it is up to the ICC. We will leave it at that."

The ICC chose John Wright, a New Zealander who successfully coached India. 
Whether Fletcher could have made a diverse XI bond in a few days is a moot 
point but his implementation of England's team ethos has been impressive.

"The first thing I say is that you win as many games in the changing room as 
you do out in the field," he said. "The team spirit was lacking when I joined. 
There were also disciplines which were not in place. The way preparation for 
games was done was based on individuals. To create a team spirit you prepare as 
a group. You have to make people respect each other. That is a key thing: 
working together, helping one another.

"This is a really talented group of play ers. It was just a matter of getting 
a good management side together. Nasser Hussain being made captain made a big 
difference with the discipline. It has grown from there with Michael Vaughan."

In the glow of an Ashes victory he dared to recall a boozy singalong in 
Butcher Shop and Grill in a shopping mall on England's 1999-2000 tour of South 
Africa. "That night in Johannesburg kicked off England cricket. We were 
strangers and there were a lot of youngsters. We had a singsong and away we 
went."

It was Fletcher's insistence upon the England "bubble", where players and 
ancillary staff are protected and the rest - the media included - must know 
their place, which produced the sort of loyalty that allowed the most 
vulnerable - Geraint Jones, Ian Bell, Ashley Giles - to survive the series with 
their support within the team undiminished.

It was also in Fletcher's dressing room that Pietersen's flamboyance was 
accepted within certain team disciplines, which provided the feeling of 
belonging that contributed to his glorious Ashes-winning hundred. It was in 
Fletcher's dressing room that Flintoff learned how not to waste his talent.

"Freddie has had good advice from quite a few people. He worked harder. He is 
an exciting player, talented, and enjoys himself. We don't want to take that 
out of the individual.

"People said things to me when Pietersen came along with his hairstyle and 
earrings. But these things don't bother me as long as the next day you work as 
hard as the rest of the team." Fletcher is optimistic Simon Jones will be fit 
to tour Pakistan and sees his reverse swing as an essential response to the 
hosts' intentions to provide dry, dusty wickets for their spinners. "Jones will 
be the key for us."
 