
Much as I wanted to enjoy Super 8, I kept getting distracted by anachronisms. 
The film is set, specifically, in a small Ohio town in the summer of 1979, yet 
one of the kids compares an alien building block to a Rubik's Cube, which 
didn't go on sale till 1980. (I'd already checked the date when writing about 
Let the Right One In.) The gas station attendant must have been going out with 
someone whose uncle worked at Sony, because he has a Walkman, yet I didn't even 
glimpse Walkmans till late 1979 – and I was living in Tokyo at the time.

Most distracting of all, the kids in JJ Abrams's film are making a zombie 
movie. But why? They might conceivably have caught Night of the Living Dead on 
TV, or sneaked into Dawn of the Dead, which opened in New York in April 1979 
(though, since it didn't have a certificate, wasn't likely to have been showing 
at family cinemas). And I know, because Phelim O'Neill reminded me, that young 
Sam Raimi had already made a zombie movie called Within the Woods in the 
boondocks of Michigan.

But in 1979, zombies had yet to take their place in the pantheon of favourite 
movie monsters. Wouldn't those kids have been more likely to be making a movie 
about vampires, or Frankenstein's monster, or – since they would almost 
certainly have seen Close Encounters of the Third Kind – extraterrestrials?

Yes, I know. I can hear you saying, "But what does it matter? It's only a 
movie." I do try to suspend my disbelief, and normally don't mind modern slang 
cropping up in Roman times or Marie Antoinette wearing Manolo Blahniks, but 
either I'm growing less tolerant or screenwriters are getting lazier, because I 
swear needless anachronism is on the increase.

One of my pet hates is period characters complaining about bad breath for a 
cheap laugh, as happened in both Plunkett & Macleane and Burke & Hare. It 
doesn't take a giant leap of imagination to conclude that, in the 18th or 19th 
centuries, in an era before modern periodontology and Oral-B toothbrushes, 
non-stinky breath would have been the exception rather than the rule.

And don't get me started on vernacular. Again, I'm not a purist on this, but I 
do think screenwriters ought to try a bit harder, maybe even glance at Green's 
Dictionary of Slang now and again. It really does take me out of the moment 
when I hear, for example, the Penvensie children from TheChronicles of Narnia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chronicles-of-narnia> saying "Sorted!" during 
the London blitz, or Susie Salmon from The Lovely Bones talking about 
"mega-blue eyeshadow" in 1973, or Tim Burton's Alice in Wonderland using terms 
such as "bonkers" or "round the bend".

Anachronism was the least of the problems of The Boat That Rocked, but I do 
thinkRichard Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>, born 
only two years after me, should have got the details right. I'm sorry, but no 
one listened to pirate radio over breakfast, and certainly noten famille. And 
when you did listen to Radio Caroline, you spent most of the time turning your 
transistor around in a fruitless effort to get halfway decent reception.

I spent most of X-Men: First Class distracted by Rose Byrne and January 
Jones's anachronistic thigh-skimming miniskirts (I'm sure others were 
distracted by them, too, though probably for different reasons) and most of 
Changeling shaking my head at Angelina Jolie's mouth; believe it or not, there 
was a time – even as recently as the 70s – when big squishy lips were 
considered ugly, and no woman would have dreamed of drawing attention to them 
by wearing bright red lipstick.

But it's the sloppiness in films set during my lifetime that annoys me the 
most. I count it as yet another example of the disrespect shown by film-makers 
to anyone over the age of legal drinking. Hey, we're still here! You could have 
asked us! I'm equally aware that writers and directors don't give a fig. After 
all, why waste energy on research when all your movies are targeted at 
15-year-olds who won't even notice?
 