
An Iraqi detained by British troops after a battle with insurgents said at an 
official inquiry he was blindfolded, beaten, humiliated, interrogated while 
naked, and feared he would be tortured.

"I felt they were out to kill us," Mahdi Jasim Abdullah al-Behadili told the 
public inquiry 
<http://www.alsweadyinquiry.org/linkedfiles/alsweadyinquiry/hearings/oral_hearings/os_d2/northerncontactfinalmediahandout.pdf>
 intoallegations that British soldiers murdered up to 20 unarmed Iraqis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/18/al-sweady-torture-allegations-british-troops>
 and abused up to nine others following a fierce firefight with insurgents on 
14 May 2004.

Behadili, who was 17 when he was seized by the soldiers that day, is the first 
Iraqi detainee to give oral evidence to the inquiry in central London.

He said he was taken prisoner by two soldiers. He was hiding in a ditch after 
hearing the sound of gunfire and aircraft, he said.

One of the soldiers broke his nose and knocked him unconscious. He said he was 
then blindfolded and handcuffed and taken to the Camp Abu Naji, a British base 
north of Basra.

Behadili said he was again knocked unconscious when he was hit on the head 
before being taken for questioning. After he was interrogated, naked sitting on 
a chair, he was threatened with a metal tent peg, he told the inquiry.

Questioned by the inquiry's counsel, Jonathan Acton Davis QC, he said: "I was 
sat on a chair and hit repeatedly every now and then on my back." He added: "I 
was afraid, thinking that I was there to be tortured".

He and other Iraqi detainees were then taken by helicopter to a second British 
base south of Basra. He said they were kept in a cell for a week. "When they 
would see us about to sleep, they would bang on the door," Behadili said.

Acton Davis questioned him later about apparent discrepancies and 
inconsistencies in his statements to the inquiry and, earlier, to the British 
military police. He was shown a photograph of four Iraqis blindfolded and 
handcuffed lying head down. Behadili agreed one of them was him but he said he 
was alone when he was first captured.

He was shown another picture taken by British soldiers showing a cache of 
weapons, including a rocket launcher and Kalashnikov rifles. But he said he did 
not see them and the picture was not of the place where he was captured.

Behadili was not released until the spring of 2005. He is one of a number of 
detainees who say they were abused by British soldiers at the time. Others do 
not say they were ill-treated.

The inquiry is named after Hamid al-Sweady, 19, one of the unarmed civilians 
allegedly killed by British troops after the battle of Danny Boy, named after a 
British checkpoint near Majar al-Kabir on 14 May 2004.

British commanders said they brought dead Iraqis into their base, Camp Abu 
Naji, to identify if any had been responsible for the deaths of six British 
military police in a previous violent incident in the area. The soldiers and 
Ministry of Defence strongly deny the allegations.

The need for the inquiry was conceded in November 2009 by the then defence 
secretary, Bob Ainsworth, after high court judges accused the MoD of 
"lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty of candour during the 
court proceedings.

The inquiry will hear evidence from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and 
Beirut, and from up to 200 military witnesses. It is unlikely to report before 
the end of 2014.
 