
The children's commissioner for England spoke today of his own "pretty awful" 
experience of bullying as a child, as he called on schools to sign up to a 
charter aimed at stamping out the problem.

Prof Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> 
said he had been bullied for his Geordie accent, after he moved from 
Northumberland to London as a 10-year-old boy.

"When I was 10 I moved with my family down to London. Nobody could understand 
what I was saying because of my Geordie accent," he told an anti-bullying 
conference in central London today.

"I was made fun of and it was really pretty awful for me. Then it got better 
when I changed my school and got some friends."

Speaking after the conference, Prof Aynsley-Green, who was born in Bedlington, 
Northumberland, said the experience of being bullied had left psychological 
scars which persisted to this day. He said he had been subjected to verbal 
abuse which had been "really quite horrendous".

Prof Aynsley-Green comments came at the beginning of Anti-Bullying Week, which 
has been marked by a warning from schools minister Jacqui Smith that playground 
bullying "will not be tolerated".

Prof Aynsley-Green used his speech to the Anti-Bullying Alliance event, 
attended mainly by children, to call for every school to sign up to the 
government's Anti-Bullying Charter for Action.

He told the packed gathering that bullying was everywhere - including on 
television, in films and in games. He said it was the duty of adults to give a 
good example to children and young people by not tolerating bullying.

"I think almost everybody experiences bullying either by being bullied or by 
being a bully or being a bystander, someone who stands by and sees somebody 
else being bullied. We have got to make sure all of us play our part [to stop 
bullying]," he said.

Prof Aynsley-Green has been in post as children's commissioner for England 
since July. He acts as an independent voice to make sure that the views and 
experiences of children are taken seriously, he told the children.
 