
Q I want a new suit. From the fashion mags I've seen, skirt suits are in this 
season, but what shape, colour and skirt length do I go for?
Karen

A First things first. A suit is a big investment buy, so take your time and 
try on as many different styles and colours as possible. It's the only way to 
decide what is best for you. My most disastrous buy ever was a suit bought on a 
snap decision in Milan. I wore it once. Now is a great time to invest in a new 
two-piece. As you've already discovered, this season's all about the skirt 
suit. Jackets are short and cropped or very fitted, while the skirts are cut to 
'midi' (just below the knee, a length that's also a big trend for 
autumn/winter). But within these broad guidelines, there's something for 
everyone. Forties glamour is back on the catwalk, bringing sexy pencil skirts 
to suits (my favourite). Alternatively, there are many full-skirted versions, 
or you can go military, with gold-buttoned, double-breasted jackets - look at 
Givenchy's catwalk for the best version of this style. Strong colour is 
abundant in new season suits, and they come in everything from leather to 
tweed. The common theme is feminine design, a treat after last year's 
androgyny. Finish your look with a cinched belt and gloves. Veronica Lake, eat 
your heart out.

Q Are we really supposed to wear Miss Marple-style lace-up shoes for autumn? 
Whatever happened to elegant and sexy?
Joyce

A I'm with you. I hope hell freezes over before you ever see me in a pair - 
even fashion editors have to draw the line somewhere. And in my opinion, 
lace-ups, heeled or flat, are best kept in army barracks or on traffic wardens' 
feet. There are a few fashion doyennes who can carry off the look: Carine 
Roitfeld, French Vogue's ultra-stylish editor, is one of only a handful. But we 
ladies who rely on a sexy heel to add shape to our legs need fear not: there is 
also an abundance of towering high heels available this season and all in an 
eye-catching array of vibrant colours

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 