
Martin Johnson, when England rugby union captain, is said to have had a mantra 
in adversity when his team were behind, or down to fourteen men. It was not 
cerebral. It didn't threaten the words of Oscar Wilde for wit, or for 
philosophical content even those of Joey Barton. Yet somehow it encapsulated 
the message he was trying to put across. "Just get on with it," he would say, 
and that is precisely what his sides did. They got on with it.

Ever since Kevin Pietersen decided that he no longer wished to play ODI 
cricket, and thus, at one and the same time – and disconcertingly for him – 
brought down the curtain on his T20 international career, the England one-day 
team have had to get on with it. It would be foolish to think that Pietersen is 
replaceable because he isn't. His is a unique talent: there is, by the very 
definition, no direct alternative. As part of the master plan, it was 
Pietersen, to his enthusiastic delight, who had been asked to open the innings 
with Alastair Cook, and had responded with back-to-back hundreds in Dubai to 
end a lengthy barren streak. England were winning again and the garden was rosy.

But Pietersen's bombshell meant an alternative and, in serendipitous fashion, 
it appears to have come in the form of Ian Bell, who has flirted with the 
opening role before but never managed to nail it down in particular any more 
than he has a consistent ODI role over 112 matches.

That, for the foreseeable future, has changed. At the Oval, Bell made a 
cultured, measured 75 from 113 balls, by no means racy but appropriate to 
England's pursuit of 252 for their second win of the series, before he was 
bowled attempting to cut the first ball sent down by the Australian captain 
Michael Clarke.

These are runs that go with successive previous scores of 126 and 53 against 
West Indies and 41 at Lord's last Friday. It was a disappointing end, careless 
really, for there was an another hundred beckoning and he will castigate 
himself for not seeing the job through to the end as is required by a side that 
plays a full hand of specialist bowlers with a consequent weakness to the 
batting. Andy Flower has given the batsmen extra responsibility and expects 
absolute concentration in return.

By the time of Bell's dismissal though, in the course of a 90-run partnership 
for the third wicket, Ravi Bopara, after a nervous start, was well into playing 
one of his best innings, perhaps even the best, for England. It is possible, 
probable even, that had Pietersen been playing, one or the other of this pair 
would have missed out. England, through happenstance, are making do very well.

Bopara was not quite able to see things out himself either. He and Eoin 
Morgan, who was within the merest smudge of a mark on Hotspot of being lbw to 
the second ball he faced (Aleem Dar, the third umpire may have heard a noise as 
well for it transpired that the inside edge was scarcely detectable by Snicko 
either), had added 79 in 73 balls for their fourth-wicket partnership when, 
having made 82, with eight fours, from 85 balls and with the testing total of 
two runs needed from 29 deliveries, he attempted the sharpest of singles to 
Brett Lee at mid-off, who flung down the stumps with the batsman still well 
short in his dive.

Two balls later, Morgan's under edge brought the win with 4.2 overs in hand, 
the lefthander finishing unbeaten on 43 from 40 balls. Bopara, who sent down 
five tidy overs as well, for the wicket of Clarke, was man of the match.

So England take a two-nil lead in the five-match series and, astoundingly are 
therefore still on course for a whitewash and elevation to an unprecedented 
position at the top of the world rankings in all three formats.

The third game is at Edgbaston on Wednesday and Australia will do well to 
bounce back from this match. Both sides made changes from the first match with 
Jimmy Anderson not risked with a slight groin strain – Jade Dernbach his 
substitute – and Australia omitting Steve Smith in place of Peter Forrest and 
losing the teenage fast bowler Patrick Cummins to a side strain for which he is 
returning home, although it is said to be more to do with good management than 
a serious problem.

Australia won the toss, batted and either misread the pitch and what would 
constitute a workable total, or got their tactics wrong for they foundered 
horribly in the middle overs, in which they were stifled, and ultimately came 
up 20 or so runs short of the minimum this excellent pitch demanded.

This they managed despite England putting in one of their more lacklustre 
performances in the field, with three catches of varying degrees of difficulty 
going down, misfields and nothing short of a fine effort from Steve Finn, after 
his own fumble, hitting the stumps.

For a while it appeared that Shane Watson might play the definitive innings 
that so often he promises but fails to produce, and he disappointed once again, 
making 66 before chipping to deep midwicket. George Bailey attempted to steer 
the innings, but he too hit the sandbanks, made a sluggish 65 and then perished 
when he tried to add late impetus. There was little else of consequence.
 