
Already the cavalry is on its way. Injuries to Eoin Morgan and Alex Hales, the 
former England's most accomplished Twenty20 batsman and the latter currently 
atop Mount Olympus as the No1 ranked T20 batsman in the world, means thatIan 
Bell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ian-bell>, who had been on a welcome 
sabbatical following one of the more punishing schedules in the past year, will 
join the squad in Barbados at the end of the week for the final preparations 
before the team moves on to Bangladesh for the World T20.

Morgan and Hales missed Friday's opening ODI against West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/28/west-indies-england-one-day-international>
, Morgan with a bruised right knee sustained in a warm-up match earlier in the 
week, and Hales with a thigh strain, and while a certain amount of optimism 
abounds, both have an uncertain prognosis according to the one-day head coach, 
Ashley Giles.

Their recovery or otherwise could determine whether or not a player who some 
believe ought to have been included in the squad in the first place does make 
the trip to Bangladesh and contribute. "It's a fair question," admitted Giles 
when asked if Bell, who was not in the original long list of 30 players 
whittled down to the 14 for the tournament, ought to have been included.

"The players we have in the squad are the right players," he added, "and at 
the moment he is not in the Bangladesh squad. But a number of those who are 
young guys and fit specific roles should we choose to put them in. Probably 
there is a case for saying a few of them are not that used to T20 because they 
have been focused on Test and ODI cricket. But Bell is world class, very 
adaptable in my mind, and especially with a view to the conditions we might 
face in Bangladesh, he could suit.

"But it is also covering those two specific bases. At the moment we don't know 
what is going to happen. Alex might not be fit, Eoin hopefully will be fit, but 
they are two different roles. Bell is adaptable enough to play quite a few of 
those roles and we have enough cover now with Moeen Ali, Michael Lumb, Luke 
Wright and Joe Root, while Ben Stokes has batted three. So we already have lots 
of options. Bell, though, is a top bloke and generally experienced around the 
group."

It would be an intriguing development were Bell to get what would be a 
late-flowering chance, even if it were through the misfortune of another. He is 
one of the most experienced cricketers England have had, having played 98 Tests 
and, with 140 ODIs, is fifth on that list. Yet he has played only seven T20 
matches, the last of them in Melbourne in January 2011. His specific credential 
now would be his ability against spin, which is superior to that of any one 
else in the squad. Friday's opening ODI, largely dominated by spin from both 
sides, gave some sort of precursor to how the Bangladesh tournament might play 
out, with England unable to cope with the mysteries of Sunil Narine in the 
latter stages of the game once Lumb and Moeen had been dismissed.

Lumb, who has the reputation of being ill at ease against spin to the extent 
that teams tend to confront him with it straight away, coped well enough to 
survive Narine, scoring nine of his runs, before going on to complete a fine 
debut century. But not even he read Narine's variations, and only Jos Buttler, 
with a reverse sweep, and Tim Bresnan, who managed a fine glance on Narine's 
final ball, managed boundaries.

England's own bowling at the death will come under scrutiny. Dwayne Bravo and 
Darren Sammy added 116 in the final 10 overs of the innings, as England 
struggled to find the right tactics. "We didn't get the mixture of our plans 
and execution right," said Giles. In part, their idea to bowl yorkers wide of 
off stump to get batsmen to hit into the strong wind, while a sound one, was 
thwarted by subjective interpretation of the playing conditions concerning 
wides in one-day cricket.

There are guidelines drawn within the confines of the crease for the umpires 
and these led to some confusion. According to the senior umpire, Marais 
Erasmus, if a batsman takes guard to the offside of the wicket, the guideline 
effectively moves across with him. But if he simply walks across, the line 
stays put. This is anomalous and England will be seeking clarification for the 
next match and, in particular, for the World T20.
 