
England's stroll to victory by eight wickets ensured that the NatWest trophy 
was theirs even if the No1 status in one-day internationals is beyond them 
after the washout at Edgbaston last week.

England are now 3-0 ahead in the series with one match – at Old Trafford on 
Tuesday – remaining. They had to win 5-0 to go to the top of the ODI table.

It was a surprising day for several reasons: despite all those flood warnings 
play started on time partly due to the heroics of ground staff, who worked 
through the night; the Australians, still ranked No1, were swept aside without 
England having to break sweat, which does not happen very often. Two of 
Australia's stalwarts, Brett Lee and Shane Watson, limped off. So there may 
have been a few youngsters here, blissfully unaware of the scars of previous 
decades, who were feeling very sympathetic towards the tourists last night – a 
most surprising state of affairs.

In this series England have completely outplayed callow opponents. Australia 
needed all the luck that was going in order to compete. In this instance that 
meant winning the toss on a misty, moisty morning. But Michael Clarke called 
incorrectly and soon he was strapping on his pads. This was a day for bowling 
first and Steven Finn, in particular, exploited favourable conditions expertly. 
Twice Finn, who finished with four for 37, found himself on a hat-trick during 
the Australian innings.

The mathematicians among you will already realise that a hat-trick eluded him, 
but Finn's interventions in the sixth over of the innings and the 33rd were 
decisive. Thanks to David Hussey's mixture of diligence and belligerence 
Australia managed to reach 200 but as the sun made a fleeting, bashful 
appearance in the afternoon when England were batting, this was never enough.

Finn's bowling may be significant in a wider context. It is dangerous to draw 
too many conclusions from ODI cricket when considering a Test team, but here 
Finn was bowling in Test-match style and tormenting specialist batsmen. No 
matter what the format of the game he is currently competing with Jimmy 
Anderson for the title of England's best bowler. Any South Africans looking on 
may be hoping that England decide to keep Finn in the wings at The Oval when 
the first Test begins on 19 July.

On Saturday he bowled with pace and accuracy on a damp, tacky pitch. David 
Warner was soon lbw on review to a delivery, which jagged back into his pads; 
the next ball was just as full and just as straight and Peter Forrest missed 
it. The hat-trick delivery to Clarke whistled between bat and pad but eluded 
the stumps.

After Australia had achieved some sort of recovery – from six for two to 96 
for four – Finn struck again. Clarke, badly dropped by Eoin Morgan on eight, 
seemingly lbw on 28 when no review was available and dropped again on 31, had 
ridden his luck in taxing conditions. But when he tried to whip another full 
delivery from Finn through midwicket the ball was too fast and devious and 
splattered the stumps. Next ball Matthew Wade was brilliantly caught via the 
inside edge by Craig Kieswetter behind the stumps.

Another to advance his status, whatever the form of the game, was Ravi Bopara, 
who found this pitch to his liking. He bowled nine cheap overs and dismissed 
George Bailey with a Bedser-style beauty: the ball pitched on middle and then 
proceeded to clip the top of off stump. This was not an isolated incident.

Bopara beat the bat as often as anyone. He is also in line to play against the 
South Africans at The Oval – though this is more because he has demonstrated 
his batting form.

Australia appeared to have the right attack for the conditions with four 
specialist pacemen plus Watson. Yet they never posed a threat to the new "old 
firm" of Alastair Cook and Ian Bell.

Cook twice dispatched wide deliveries from Lee to the cover boundary with a 
hint of disdain. After two overs Lee was removed from the attack; soon he would 
join Watson in the pavilion, nursing a calf strain. Clarke had suddenly run out 
of ammunition.

In any case Bell was playing with such authority that the absence of these 
bowlers scarcely made much difference. Since his elevation to the top of the 
order after Kevin Pietersen's retirement Bell has scored 364 runs in five 
matches and it has looked so easy for him. On Saturday his timing on a sluggish 
pitch was as exquisite as ever.

England were never threatened even when Cook was caught at extra cover and 
Bell had dragged a ball from Clint McKay on to his stumps. Jonathan Trott and 
Bopara calmly guided the side to victory. When the winning runs were hit with 
13 balls to spare there were barely any celebrations from the batsmen – beating 
Australia is becoming so routine.
 