
Arnor Ingvi Traustason supplied the rip-roaring dream climax to this match 
when, with the very final touch of the ball, he finished past Robert Almer to 
claim a scarcely believable winner and continue Iceland’s fairytale at this 
European Championship.

Hallgrimsson: ‘Iceland are not afraid. We know all there is about English 
football’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-heimir-hallgrimsson-taste-victory-england-football-austria-last-16>
Traustason slid as he connected and for a moment appeared unsure if he had 
actually scored or hit the side-netting. When the 23-year-old looked again and 
realised he had registered, up he rose to his feet and what followed was 
bedlam, as high emotion gripped the Stade de France.

Just about all of Iceland’s staff rushed on to the field to mob Traustason and 
amid these unforgettable scenes and sky-splitting noise the referee Szymon 
Marciniak blew for full time. It meant Heimir Hallgrimsson and Lars Lagerback’s 
men had finished second in Group F and will play England in Nice in the last 16 
on Monday.

Traustason was the hero of the hour and his story has a touch of fantasy as he 
did not feature in any of Iceland’s qualifiers for this tournament – making his 
debut last autumn – and the midfielder had entered here only 10 minutes from 
time.

Iceland lined up in their familiar 4-4-2 and Austria were arranged in a 
shape-shifting formation that was a nominal 3-4-2-1, with Christian Fuchs and 
Florian Klein the wide men in midfield and an attacking trio headed by David 
Alaba. This approach from Marcel Koller caused surprise among their opponents 
as the coach had not fielded a back three previously atEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

The pitch-side air was muggy but this did not stop Charlton Athletic’s Johan 
Gudmundsson enjoying a flying start, rattling Almer’s right-post with a peach 
of a 25-yarder virtually from kick-off. This was at the end of some pinball 
passing between Birkir Bjarnason and Gylfi Sigurdsson that allowedIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> to skate through their opponents.

It did not faze Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> and 
they were soon giving Iceland their own scare. Hannes Halldorsson dawdled in 
front of his goal over a clearance and Marko Arnautovic stole the ball and 
appeared to have a simple tap-in. But the forward slipped on the turf and the 
danger fizzled out.

Iceland’s callowness was to prove no hindrance. From a corner along the left 
Aron Gunnarsson, the captain, stopped the ball going safe with a header near 
the far post and in the ensuing scramble Austria were fortunate not to concede.

They were about to and this was from a classic throw-in move. Gunnarsson 
flipped the ball into the area, Kari Arnason applied a flick-on, and Jon Dadi 
Bodvarsson beat Julian Baumgartlinger to slide the ball past a wrong-footed 
Almer.

The blue section of the stadium may have been outnumbered by their red-shirted 
counterparts – there were around 10,000 Icelandic fans present – but the noise 
they made to celebrate the strike was deafening.

From here, though, the rest of this period was more or less controlled by 
Koller’s men. Arnautovic is one of those frustrating only on-his-day 
footballers. Thankfully, for Austria, this was one of them, as he posed a 
threat throughout. There was a pivot-and-shot with his left foot that 
Halldorsson clutched gratefully. He also bulldozed through the Icelandic 
rearguard before running out of grass. And, he turned playmaker on occasion.

When the first half ended Austria had dominated and, sloppily, spurned the 
chance to be on level terms. The referee, who had already turned away an 
Arnautovic appeal for a penalty, had no hesitation in pointing to the spot 
after 36 minutes when he saw Ari Skulason pull at Alaba’s arm as he jumped for 
a header. The left-back was booked but the defender Aleksandar Dragovic hit the 
post from the penalty and sank to his knees.

Football, fire and ice: the inside story of Iceland’s remarkable rise | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/iceland-stunning-rise-euro-2016-gylfi-sigurdsson-lars-lagerback>
Austria began the second half strongly. Arnautovic bent in a cross from the 
left and when the ball broke Alaba fired it at Halldorsson and Arnason cleared. 
Next, Skulason lived particularly dangerously. As a high ball dropped in the 
area he stumbled and then “accidentally” fell into Marcel Sabitzer. Up went the 
shouts for a second penalty, Koller ran along the touchline to add his voice, 
but the referee said no.

At the break Koller had brought on Marc Janko to play as the focal point, and 
Alessandro Schöpf, a midfielder, for the defender, Sebastian Prödl.

The ploy was to try to hit Janko’s height and pose Iceland a new problem.

But it was Schöpf who gave Iceland a question they failed to answer. From a 
central position and in true Ricky Villa-style, he weaved his way in and out of 
traffic, bamboozling the defence, before slotting home a terrific equaliser.

A pulsating contest took the next turn when Sigurdsson was handed a golden 
chance to put Iceland back ahead, following good work from Bjarnason, but he 
could not beat Almer.

Schöpf was proving an inspired replacement, the ball coming to him in space 
close-in but Halldorsson, not for the first time, was his side’s saviour.

Now, though, came an end to the game to remember.
 