
After he'd clobbered public sector workers and poor families on tax credits, 
George Osborne said in his autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/autumn-statement-2011> that he was "worried 
about the combined impact of … green policies … on some of our heavy, 
energy-intensive industries". He continued: "We are not going to save the 
planet by shutting down our steel mills, aluminium smelters and paper 
manufacturers." If we carried on "with endless social and environmental goals … 
businesses will fail, jobs will be lost, and our country will be poorer".

As the Kyoto protocol on global warming runs out and the Durban conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/durban-climate-change-conference-2011> 
to agree a replacement limps towards failure, that was the message from the 
chancellor of what is supposed to be the greenest government ever. Two days 
later,Sir David Attenborough said in a newspaper interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/dec/01/nature-urbanisation-david-attenborough>
 that city dwellers are out of touch with what is happening in the natural 
world and therefore don't take responsibility for the future of the planet. 
Osborne is an urban animal who, apart from the odd week on yachts in the 
Mediterranean or ski slopes in Switzerland, has spent nearly all his life in 
London. So we can't expect him to take responsibility for global warming. He 
has reduced subsidies for solar panels, found £250m in tax relief for the most 
polluting industries, and scrapped plans to increase fuel duty by 3p next month.

Chris Huhne, the climate and energy secretary, ploughs bravely on with his 
carbon plans and emission reduction targets. But though Huhne denies any 
cabinet differences, the man who controls the purse strings – and whose 
speeches are far more closely studied than Huhne's – sings a different tune. 
Osborne's message is that we may as well carry on belching carbon into the 
atmosphere because, if we don't, someone else will – an argument that could 
equally be used to justify selling your daughter into prostitution.

If the British chancellor won't take responsibility, most other political 
leaders in developed countries won't either. The implicit message is that the 
job of tackling global warming can be placed on hold while they sort out the 
economic crisis. That, on more optimistic estimates, will take until about 
2017. The planet will then be perilously close, scientists predict, to the 
tipping point for irreversible climate damage. Some say we need a miracle to 
save the eurozone and the banks. We need a far bigger one to save the planet. 
According to the World Bank's 2010 world development report, if all coal-fired 
plants scheduled to be built in the next 25 years come into operation, their 
lifetime CO2 emissions will equal those of all coal burning since the 
industrial revolution.

Business leaders, particularly in financial services, are now the true rulers 
of the world. Can they take responsibility? It seems not. The world's banks may 
be running out of cash but a report just published by environmental groups 
shows that in 2010 they invested nearly twice as much in coal-fired electricity 
and coal mining as they did in 2005. Our own Barclays and RBS (the latter 84% 
owned by Osborne on our behalf) are among the top 10 in the world for putting 
money into coal. They account for more than 10% of total investment in 
coal-fired plants since 2005.

Can the rest of us save the planet, following the example of Vivienne 
Westwood, who said this week she would donate £1m toCool Earth 
<http://www.coolearth.org/>, an anti-logging group, because "governments are so 
slow, we can't wait for them any more"? Or can we, as consumers, put pressure 
on the corporate sector to act? Alas, in all their many grievances against the 
banks, few people will rate collusion in environmental damage very highly. 
Since 1964 Gallup has asked Americans if the environment should take priority 
even at the risk of curbing economic growth – or, conversely, if they would 
prioritise growth even if the environment suffers – and every year until 2008 
found Americans putting the planet first. Then the priorities reversed and this 
year, the economy wins, 54% to 36%.

As for Britons, their priorities can be judged from Downing Street's 
e-petitions website, where 125,000 have signed a demand for cheaper petrol and 
diesel while a petition last year "to take climate change seriously and invest 
in all forms of renewable energy" attracted just 11 signatures. Not all those 
who want fuel duty cut will be global warming sceptics and some may even think 
of themselves as enthusiastic environmentalists, which usually means sorting 
household waste into the correct recycling bins. Even in good times, when the 
majority profess support for action to prevent climate change, specific 
proposals to do anything significant, such as raising taxes on petrol and 
airline travel or even banning incandescent light bulbs, invariably meet 
determined public opposition. The battle against climate change offers so many 
small guilt-reducing actions – switching off the TV standby, using a little 
less water to boil the veg, taking the bus to the shops – that almost anyone 
can say they're already doing their bit. Right now, even the sort of people who 
used to occupy power stations prefer to march against bankers or student debt.

No, if we want the planet to be saved, we must rely on the politicians. But 
persuading Europeans and Americans that they should tolerate nearly a decade of 
austerity is itself a daunting challenge for leaders who assured voters for 30 
years that neoliberalism could deliver uninterrupted growth.

Global warming presents an even greater challenge. People have to be persuaded 
to make sacrifices for the common good. Neoliberalism, however, has left 
western politicians holding the ring between competing demands for individual 
gratification. They run what the US political theorist Philip Bobbitt calls 
"market states", which have the sole duty of maximising opportunities for their 
individual citizens, and accept no obligation to social justice or collective 
welfare. The common good has become, to western politicians of both left and 
right, a completely alien concept. They have no language in which to convey to 
their electorates the importance and urgency of what needs to be done. They 
will no doubt emerge from Durban with fine words and some semblance of 
agreement or, if nothing else, agreement on when they should make an agreement. 
But for now, the planet will just have to carry on burning.
 