
After decades of market-oriented reforms of human services, there is plenty of 
evidence to show that for-profit provision of such services isat best 
problematic, and at worst disastrous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/face-the-facts-competition-and-profit-dont-work-in-health-education-or-prisons>
.

Shonky vocational education businesses in Australia, PFI hospitals in the UK, 
and private prisons in the US are among the worst examples, but there are many 
more. Convincing success stories are harder to come by.

Australia’s Productivity Commission has long presented itself as the leading 
advocate of evidence-based policy 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/research/supporting/strengthening-evidence>. On the other 
hand, the PC has always been keen on market competition. So, what does the PC 
do when the evidence goes against its policy beliefs? Sadly, if not 
surprisingly, the answer is the same as for partisan policy advocates in 
general: ignore the evidence, and restate the beliefs.

Face the facts: competition and profit don't work in health, education or 
prisons | John Quiggin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/face-the-facts-competition-and-profit-dont-work-in-health-education-or-prisons>
The PC was recently asked to examine the scope for competition and 
contestability 
<https://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/public-sector/articles/contestability.html>
 (code words meaning for-profit provision) in human services in Australia. As 
is usual, the first step was an issues paper, and a call for submissions. 
Unsurprisingly, the inquiry received plenty of evidence regarding the 
superiority of not-for-profit models, and the dangers of for-profit provision. 
The response, in thePreliminary Findings Report 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/current/human-services/identifying-reform/preliminary-findings>
 issued in September, made short work of this evidence, responding with a 
single sentence:

The Commission considers that maximising community welfare from the provision 
of human services does not depend on adopting one type of model or favouring 
one type of service provider.

If, as it would appear from this statement, such central issues as the 
desirability of handing over human services to for-profit businesses are to be 
resolved by an evidence-free restatement of the commission’s longstanding 
beliefs, why bother with the elaborate rigmarole of an inquiry? Anyone?

There was one piece of evidence too glaring to ignore. The multibillion dollar 
fiasco of the Fee-Help student loan scheme in the vocational education and 
training (VET) sector was reaching crisis point just as the inquiry took place. 
In all the PC’s previous work on this topic, competition in vocational training 
was treated as an obviously Good Thing (the only criticism was a brief mention 
of some the problems encountered by international, particularly Indian, 
students, which were the subject of international controversy around 2010).

In the preliminary report, VET Fee-Help 
<https://www.education.gov.au/student-eligibility-vet-fee-help> was picked out 
as an example of What Not To Do, showing the need for “safeguards”. There was 
no mention of the elaborate, but entirely unsuccessful safeguards that were put 
in place in this area, including the establishment of a special regulator, the 
Australian Skills Quality Authority.

ASQA weeded out some of the worst providers, but as became clear, this was not 
a case of “bad apples” requiring industry oversight. The incentives in the 
system guaranteed that corruption and gaming were the norm not the exception. 
Virtually all the big providers used a business model based on extracting 
public subsidies, rather than providing useful education.

Nor was there any concrete suggestion as to what kinds of safeguards might 
have worked better, beyond a generic suggestion of “Better oversight of 
providers and tighter controls on service users’ access to government funds 
would have had administrative costs, but could have helped avoid other costs 
that ended up being much larger”. How would we know if the oversight was 
adequate and the controls were tight enough? The PC is silent on such matters. 
Presumably, the market will sort it out.

Of course, a preliminary report is just that, and might be expected to be 
changed in the light of additional evidence. Plenty of evidence was provided (I 
made a lengthy submission myself). What use did the commission make of all this 
evidence in itsrecently released report 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/current/human-services/identifying-reform/report>
?

The discussion of the VET fiasco was updated to include the effective 
abandonment of the free market model by the commonwealth government in October 
2016, but was otherwise unchanged.

Concern for safeguards was stressed in the introduction but otherwise ignored 
almost completely. There was one reference to “the establishment of new bodies 
if more tailored safeguard arrangements are needed”, that is, a repetition of 
the ASQA model that failed in the VET sector.

More commonly, the needs acknowledged in the introduction are ignored in the 
detailed recommendations and the burden of proof is pushed on to those 
advocating more safeguards. In dental care, “The Commission has not seen any 
evidence that additional quality or safety regulations would be required to 
safeguard consumers if there were to be greater competition, contestability and 
user choice.”

Coalition overhauls vocational training loans in private college crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/coalition-overhauls-vocational-training-loans-in-private-college-crackdown>
As for the crucial issue of for-profit provision, the commission acknowledges 
yet more evidence on the benefits of the not-for-profit model. Its conclusion, 
though, is almost unchanged.

Maximising community welfare from the provision of human services does not 
depend on adopting one type of model or favouring one type of service provider 
over others.

The only difference from the preliminary report is that what was previously a 
statement of the commission’s beliefs is now presented as unchallengeable fact.

Rather than close on a negative tone, I’ll make one suggestion for 
contestability. Private sector consulting firms have demonstrated a 
long-standing expertise in producing impressive looking reports to support the 
(predetermined) conclusion required by the client.

Given the predictability of the Productivity Commission’s conclusions on 
topics like this, private firms would have no difficulty in replicating them. 
Surely this is a service that could do with being opened up to the chill winds 
of competition.
 