
Man the barricades! The workers are united! Well, no, actually they're not. 
This might come as a surprise to those who grapple with tube strikes or to 
frustrated frequent fliers onBritish Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> – but the nation is going 
through its most strife-free period in industrial relations for 80 years.

The number of days' work lost to industrial action dropped to 145,000 in the 
12 months to March – the lowest since records began in 1931, according to the 
Office for National Statistics. The union movement chalked up a series of 
transport walkouts. But other stoppages dwindled into small fry – at aCoca-Cola 
plant in Edmonton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/15/strike-london-coca-cola-plant>
, aTunnock's teacake factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/28/tunnocks-teacake-workers-strike>
 in Scotland and atHeinz baked beans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/29/heinz-beans-strike-wigan-pay> 
in Wigan.

This isn't a one-off. Strikes have been on a downward trend for decades: 
between 1940 and 1990, industrial action consistently wiped out more than a 
million working days every year. As the economy has shifted away from 
manufacturing and union membership has fallen, we've become a much more docile 
bunch. Yet employers aren't satisfied.

A good chunk of the cabinet turned out on Wednesday for the CBI annual dinner 
in London's Grosvenor House hotel: diners included Nick Clegg, Vince Cable, 
Philip Hammond and Eric Pickles. They broke bread with business chiefs ranging 
from BT's Ian Livingston to Barclays' Bob Diamond and Glencore's Simon Murray. 
And they listened to an impassioned appeal from the CBI's outgoing president, 
Helen Alexander: "Strikes disrupt the public and are bad for growth. We want to 
be sure no strike can go ahead unless it has clear support of at least 40% of 
the balloted workforce."

Britain's biggest business lobbying organisation has been galvanised, in part, 
by a recent RMT strike ballot on the London Underground in which just 36% of 
members bothered to vote. And the corporate rumbling is a sure sign of worry 
that there is trouble brewing: public sector unions are preparing for a day of 
action on 30 June when civil servants could join teachers in walkouts 
protesting at pension changes. As many as 500,000 people could take part, 
bringing schools, courts and Whitehall to a halt in a walkout intended to kick 
off a public sector summer of discontent.

Any stoppage, whether it's governmental or private sector, hampers businesses. 
The CBI's director of employment, Neil Carberry, says: "Strikes are 
fundamentally disruptive whether they impact the public or the private sector. 
What we'd want to see is that any unions concerned can demonstrate genuine 
support within the workforce they're calling out on strike."

Some of the CBI's smaller-scale proposals are constructive. The employers want 
14, rather than seven, days' notice of strike dates – which could allow more 
time for negotiation. And a compulsory tidy-up of out-of-date union membership 
lists is long overdue. But imposing a turnout requirement on strike ballots is 
dubious. It assumes that anybody who abstains is voting against action. And it 
would be democratically unique – with the exception of union recognition, no 
other election in Britain levies a "40% of the electorate" hurdle on a yes vote.

It's already difficult to hold a legal strike. Employers routinely succeed in 
overturning ballots in the courts on technicalities. And, with wages failing to 
keep pace with the cost of living, few staff are willing to throw the dice by 
walking out on a whim. Sarah Veale, head of employment rights at the Trades 
Union Congress, says any workforce driven to the point of strike action has a 
grievance reflecting "an underlying level of noise" in an unhappy workplace: 
"We need to have some kind of controlled means of that kind of grievance coming 
out."

In its day-to-day tub-thumping for the business community, the CBI loves to 
churn out surveys asserting its members' views. Some 42% of employers are 
worried about school-leavers' basic English skills, it asserted confidently 
last week. And 30.4m days of bogus illness leave taken by workers throwing 
"sickies" cost the economy £2.7bn last year. The evidence for the latter 
finding? Responses from 223 employers – tiny in comparison to the CBI's 
membership of 240,000 businesses. Hardly a solid basis for an organisation that 
believes so passionately in a turnout quorum in workplace democracy.
 