
In northern Minnesota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota>, there’s 
a near-mythic expanse of lakes and boreal forests known as the North Woods, 
packed with spruces, firs, red and bur oaks, and other trees. It’s in danger of 
vanishing forever.

The North Woods joins the ever-lengthening list of regions threatened by 
climate change. Temperatures in Minnesota have increased by more than 1.5F 
since record keeping began, according to a2013 report by the state’s 
interagency climate adaptation team 
<http://www.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/view-document.html?gid=15414>. 
Temperatures have risen even more in the northern portion of the state, and the 
growth is picking up speed, with more than 80% of the recorded increase 
happening since 1980.

 These increases are expected to continue through the next 50 years, joined by 
more days of extreme heat, heavier precipitation and other changes to the 
region’s climate. As rainfall and other conditions shift because of climate 
change, once iconic species like spruce and fir may move northward, either 
leaving the forests replaced by unproductive grasslands or given over to the 
hardwoods more common further south. Climate change, the state report says, 
will “likely exacerbate and intensify the effects of invasive plant species, 
insect pests, and tree diseases”.

 In other words, the forest – like others across the northern United States 
and southern Canada – could disappear. Now the conservationists most driven to 
save the forest may do so only by changing its nature for good.

In the hope that it may be able to save the North Woods, the Nature 
Conservancy’s North Dakota, South Dakota and Minnesota chapter has begun 
experimenting 
<http://www.nature.org/ourinitiatives/regions/northamerica/unitedstates/minnesota/>
 with a controversial technique that – if proven to be successful – could lead 
to trees being moved from distant reaches of the state’s forests to those most 
threatened by climate change.

Led by Meredith Cornett, the chapter’s science director, the conservancy wants 
to test “assisted migration”, a lightning-rod conservation practice that 
broadly means moving species from one region to another either to help that 
species or the target region adapt to changing conditions.

In actuality, assisted migration is a nuanced concept. The Nature Conservancy 
study, called the Iron Range Experiment, is a small test meant to compare how 
specific tree species – and genotypes, or variations – within those species 
fare under different climate conditions and forestry practices.

Here’s how it will work: Nature Conservancy will plant seeds for 100,000 red 
oak, bur oak and white pine trees on 2,000 acres of federal, state and local 
forests in Minnesota’s Iron Range. Seeds from each species will come from two 
zones: one from within the test range, and another from distant parts of the 
species’ historic range (mostly from southern Minnesota, and, in some cases, a 
portion of Michigan where the trees exist).

Researchers from the University of Minnesota Duluth will then manage these 
test forests in different ways to find out whether varying how the trees are 
planted and managed affect how each species fares; how different climate 
conditions affect their viability; and whether seeds originating from other 
parts of the forest – where different conditions exist – impact how two 
seemingly identical trees withstand the same conditions.

If the trees moved from distant zones prove to adapt well, this kind of 
assisted migration could be adopted as a way to maintain the health of forests 
that might otherwise be decimated by climate change.

Some critics argue that this type of intervention would change the essential 
character of the forest. Indeed, some of the species being moved are the 
hardwoods that may one day replace the North Woods’ conifers in any case as a 
result of climate change.

But Meredith Cornett, the science director of the Nature Conservancy chapter 
conducting the experiment, compares managing forests to restoring historic 
buildings. In both cases, she says, sacrifices are controversial – and, 
perhaps, necessary.

For example, she asks, is it better to restore a historic home to an exact 
copy of its original construction, or to use modern knowledge and new 
technologies to protect the structure? When should such a home’s 
conservationists hew to historic building techniques and finishes, and when 
should they install new wiring, place well-insulated storm windows and avoid 
lead-based paint?

“We’re still trying to maintain the character of the home and keep [it] there 
in the neighborhood, but the world has changed, and we’ve got new tools 
available to us,” Cornett says.

Assisting or transforming?

The term “assisted migration” was coined after proposals to transplant Torreya 
Pines from Florida to North Carolina 
<http://www.orionmagazine.org/index.php/articles/article/2966/> in 2007 sparked 
heated debate.

 But Julie Etterson <http://www.d.umn.edu/~jetterso/>, the University of 
Minnesota biologist conducting the study with the Nature Conservancy, says the 
definition of the practice isn’t completely clear. Critics often seem to judge 
assisted migration projects using a double standard: traditional forestry 
practices are far more disruptive than the movement of small samples of distant 
genotypes that are part of the same species, she claims.

“I think that’s a little bit ridiculous given what foresters do, which is 
wholesale movement of genotypes across the landscape,” Etterson says. “It seems 
like in the context of the lumber industry that’s fine. In the context of 
climate change, you’re breaching some sort of conservation barrier that’s 
inappropriate.”

What’s more, Etterson says, the impact of assisted migration is unclear. In 
fact, clarifying the process and its effects is a large part of the Iron Range 
experiment.

“My general feeling is we just don’t know enough about the consequences of 
genetic mixing to go full force into widespread assisted migration, so I’ve 
been working with the Nature Conservancy in the design of experiments that we 
might do,” she says.

Christopher Preston 
<http://www.humansandnature.org/christopher-preston-scholar-8.php>, an 
environmental ethicist at the University of Montana, says many ecologists would 
consider Etterson’s form of assisted forestry as different from migration for 
agriculture or timber because of the intention behind each practice.

“A lot of environmentalists in the environmental ethics community are a little 
leery of assisted migration because it is [a little] like nature plus the human 
hand,” Preston explains. “Is it better I have these species here through the 
help of my hand or to not have this species at all? Is it better to leave some 
landscapes untouched and let things unfold?”

Many ecologists believe that moving a species, even a tree, from its native 
ecosystem to put it somewhere else transforms it into something else.

“It’s a little bit like a polar bear in a zoo,” Preston says. “Some people 
think that’s no longer a polar bear.”

Who benefits from assisted migration?

For Cornett of the Nature Conservancy, Minnesota’s natural and cultural 
identity is intricately linked, and – she argues – the state needs novel 
approaches to preserve its North Woods. “It is a wild place and it has 
tremendous recreational and cultural value, to say nothing of the jobs it 
supports and so on,” she says.

It’s not hard to see the economic impact of forestry in Minnesota. According 
to a data sheet provided by the Nature Conservancy, the state’s forests are 
responsible for 20,000 jobs and more than $2bn in annual wages, as well as $7bn 
in timber harvest values. The forests are also responsible for hundreds of 
millions of tourism dollars.

The state’s woodlands also provide considerable quality of life benefits for 
people in the region. “When it comes to protecting water quality, healthy 
forests may be as close as we get to a silver bullet,” the Conservancy explains 
in its data sheet. “They are nature’s own water purification system, absorbing 
pollutants and trapping sediment before they damage lakes, rivers and 
groundwater.”

But while there’s no question that Minnesota’s forests benefit its citizens, 
Preston says that environmentalism isn’t only about ensuring that nature serves 
human needs.

“It’s about letting the earth be,” he says. “The ecosystem services language 
is one you have to use carefully. If it’s about restoring the ecosystem 
function, then there are arguments to think that that’s probably a good idea. 
Preserving function with a little bit of help from humans might be something 
that humanity can do.”

Meddling or stewardship?

While some ecologists believe that humans have meddled enough with the 
wilderness, others take a more pragmatic perspective. Cornett argues that there 
is an urgent need to do something to help Minnesota’s forests survive. “We 
could argue that we should just let nature take its course, but nature has 
never really faced this situation before,” she says. “We’ve just never seen 
things changing at this pace.”

Besides, she points out, northern Minnesota’s 6m acres of forests have been 
managed for more than a century. “My sense is we’re choosing to actively manage 
a landscape that has already been actively managed,” she says.

Etterson goes even further, saying that, rather than tinkering with nature, 
the experiment may contribute to re-establishing connections that can no longer 
happen naturally. “It is a little interventionist, but I don’t think it’s 
unnatural,” she says.

While management is an ongoing process, it’s becoming more controversial – 
particularly in light of climate change. In recent weeks, publications ranging 
from Ensia to the New York Times have covered the topic, which is growing 
increasingly hot in scholarly circles.

One scholar discussing this is John Pedlar, a Natural Resources Canada forest 
landscape biologist 
<http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/62/9/835.full.pdf> (pdf). 
Although he still worries about “designer ecosystems”, he says, he’s abandoned 
long-held beliefs about conservation over the last five to 10 years because of 
climate change.

“I was someone who was a real believer of keeping things in their own ranges,” 
he says. “The quote that hits home for me is that ‘climate change changes 
everything.’ It’s true. It’s just a game changer.”

Bill Lascher is a freelance journalist based in Portland, Oregon, currently 
working on a book about World War II-era foreign correspondent Melville Jacoby. 
His website iswww.lascheratlarge.com <http://www.lascheratlarge.com>.

The Vital Signs <https://www.theguardian.com/vital-signs> platform is funded by
Avery Dennison, Domtar and Chiquita. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 