
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> may be thousands of 
miles from home but his heart is lodged firmly in the Greenwich peninsula. East 
London may not be quite as exotic to Scotland's finest as are Bangkok, Tokyo 
and Shanghai – Murray's recent ports of call – but it is the O2 Arena that 
matters most to him.

A year ago Novak Djokovic made his move towards greatness, pouring his energy 
into winning the Davis Cup for Serbia. With that victory to spur him on he has 
swept all before him this year and now Murray wants to follow in his footsteps.

Unbeaten since the US Open, Murray is striving to continue his run and end the 
season with a flourish at theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> in London next month. 
His schedule between now and Christmas is based on the Masters events in 
Shanghai this week and Paris next month with everything geared towards hitting 
peak form for the Tour Finals, worth $1.63m (£1.02m) to the winner. The rest of 
his schedule is undecided – he may play in Valencia or Basel this month or he 
may rest – but London overshadows everything.

"I want to make sure I go into London fresh and not shattered," Murray said. 
"After the US Open I spoke with the guys about a few things to try and work on 
between now and the end of the year – what was going to give me a better chance 
against Rafa and Novak and Roger, give me more chances to win against them, and 
it's been a good start."

Even Murray's winter training will depend on how the rest of this season goes 
but he has dropped the Hopman Cup from his diary in January. Instead he will 
formulate his travel plans depending on how well he does in these final few 
weeks of the year. And he is talking like a man who expects to win wherever he 
plays. "I just wanted to have the option, depending on how the rest of the year 
goes. If I play a lot of matches and do very well, I may not necessarily play 
that [Hopman Cup] week and just train and have more time off and start training 
a little bit closer to the start of the year."

He was given a day off on Wednesday when Dmitry Tursunov pulled out of their 
second‑round match at the Shanghai Rolex Masters with a thigh injury putting 
the Scot through to play Stanislas Wawrinka on Thursday. Rafael Nadal reached 
the third round with a 6-3, 6-2 win over Guillermo García-López.
 