
Abbey, the struggling UK bank bought by Spain's Banco Santander Central 
Hispano last year, today announced another rebranding exercise.

News of the latest makeover came just 18 months after Abbey ditched its logo 
of a couple sheltering under an umbrella.

Meanwhile, the bank reported profits of £273m for 2004 after two years of 
heavy losses, £686m in 2003 and £984m in 2002.

The figure is paltry compared with the £8.1bn profit announced yesterday at 
Royal Bank of Scotland but it signals that Abbey may have turned the corner.

Francisco Gomez-Roldan, Abbey's chief executive, hailed last year's profit at 
Britain's second biggest mortgage lender as a turning point.

"This business has huge potential," he said. "We can now realise this using 
Santander's strength and placing a strong emphasis on execution."

Spain's biggest bank completed the acquisition of the mortgage specialist for 
£9.5bn in November.

Just over a year earlier, Abbey ditched its corporate logo and shortened its 
name from Abbey National in what it said was part of a wider plan to "turn 
banking on its head" and reverse its losses.

The 2003 rebranding exercise cost Abbey £11m; the new revamp, costing another 
£8m, will put Santander's flame logo next to the Abbey name on all 726 retail 
sites in the UK.

Abbey also said it would speed up a cost reduction programme involving the 
previously announced loss of 3,000 Abbey jobs. Two-thirds of the positions are 
now likely to be identified by the end of the March.

The bank said the cuts would be in back-office functions as the bank looked to 
reduce its number of administration sites from the current level of around 30.

It wants more staff in customer-facing roles and says it plans to retrain 
existing staff in order to boost the ranks of its sales team by more than 30%.

Other priorities will see Abbey tackle "unacceptable" levels of staff turnover 
at branches and call centres. The company employs 24,000 people.

Abbey is struggling to revive its retail business amid rising interest rates 
and fierce competition after an ill-fated venture into corporate banking.

Its previous chief executive, Luqman Arnold, set the stage for recovery when 
he sold most of Abbey's corporate banking business.

Last year, total customer loans rose 4%, to £94.3bn, but mortgage lending 
dropped 14%, to £25bn.

For Santander, the Abbey purchase represents a move to reduce exposure to the 
volatile Latin American market. Santander now has 40% of its loans in the UK, 
39% in Spain, 10% in the rest of Europe and 10% in Latin America.

It took a fourth-quarter loss of €33m (£22.7m) compared with €681m a year 
earlier, partly because of the €155m expense of acquiring Abbey.
 