
Gustave Courbet
 Galeries National du Grand Palais, until 28

Jan Edward Steichen: Lives in Photography
 Jeu de Paume, until 30 Jan

L'atelier d'Alberto Giacometti
 Centre Pompidou, until 11 Feb

Two paintings dominate the big, sprawling Gustave Courbet retrospective in the 
Grand Palais. The first is his epic rendering of the funeral of his 
grand-uncle, entitled Un enterrement à Ornans, which takes up an entire wall. 
The second is his intimate - to the point of intrusive - rendering of the 
female genitalia, L'origine du Monde, which, having passed from one anonymous 
owner to another since 1866, now hangs in a small antechamber in the middle of 
the upstairs gallery, drawing a steady stream of viewers who might well be 
approaching a pietà, so hushed and reverent is the atmosphere.

Both works speak of Courbet's often combative creative restlessness, his 
desire to belong, as he put it, 'to no school, to no church, to no institution, 
to no academy...'

From a well-off farming family, he believed that great art should portray - 
and record - ordinary life in all its harshness and struggle. As such, his 
paintings reflected his socialism, and his attendant self-belief, which seems 
to have been never less than total.

When it was first shown in 1850, Un enterrement à Ornans announced in grand 
style the coming ascendancy of the Realist tradition. It was a political as 
well as an artistic statement of intent. 'Un enterrement à Ornans was in 
reality the death of Romanticism,' Courbet said later, sounding like his own 
most vociferous champion. As a youth, too, he painted himself in various 
dramatic poses, one of which, the startling Le désespéré, has the immediacy of 
a snatched photograph. It is also an exercise in self-mythology. As is 
L'Atelier du peintre, another epic work in which Courbet placed himself as the 
central figure in an allegorical group portrait, surrounded by his many friends 
and admirers, one of whom is the other great creative iconoclast of the time, 
Charles Baudelaire.

I have to say that, amid all the vivid hunting scenes, brooding landscapes and 
sumptuously eroticised female nudes, it was the portraits that kept pulling me 
back. The most arresting is La Voyante, in which a young woman's blankly 
staring white face above a white lace collar emerges out of a deep, dark 
background, her eyes gazing at you and somehow beyond you. It is one of the 
great head-on stares in art.

His Portrait de Baudelaire captures his friend in profile in deep meditation, 
a pipe clasped between his lips, a book resting against the deep, dark brown 
wood of an old desk. The painting is a feast of rich, sensuous colours: ochres, 
deep oranges, dark greens. Everything in the frame seems both heightened and 
mundane, particularly the strange, hazy glow that emanates from the wall just 
to the right of Baudelaire's head and shoulders. This is the transgressive 
artist imagined as a recluse, visionary and saint, long before Sartre conferred 
the same on Genet.

Courbet's life became more exciting, and controversial as he grew older. He 
famously refused the Légion d'honneur offered him to him by Napoleon III, and 
his undimmed radicalism eventually lead him to the barricades. During the Paris 
Commune he was elected as a kind of people's director of the art galleries and 
museums, and was instrumental in protecting the treasures therein from looting 
mobs.

Later he was tried for inciting the mob to topple the Vendome Column, and 
served six months in prison.

You can sense some of the tumult and excitement of Courbet's extraordinary 
journey in his paintings, which, towards the end of his relatively short life - 
he died, aged 58, in 1877 - tended towards the erotic. La Femme aux bas blancs 
remains one of the sexiest images in Western art, and, once you have pulled 
your gaze away from those round buttocks and that single white stocking, you 
are confronted by another startling head-on stare, this time coquettish and 
defiant.

For all his celebrating of the everyday, Courbet was a master of the 
heightened moment, a poet of the intimate and the almost profane.

Down the road at the Jeu de Paume, on the corner of the Place de la Concorde, 
another huge show celebrates the life and work ofEdward Steichen, one of the 
masters of 20th century photography. Like Courbet, Steichen was a driven, 
restless spirit, but, as the subtitle of the show - 'Lives in Photography' - 
intimates, his restlessness may have taken him in one too many directions in 
his long lifetime.

There are some 400 vintage prints included here, ranging from the early, 
almost Impressionist, black and white work he made after forsaking painting, to 
the pristine fashion and celebrity shots he took for Vogue and Vanity Fair in 
the 1920s and 1930s.

Though now belatedly recognised as the founding father of modern fashion 
photography, Steichen is much more than that. His early work comes from the era 
when photography was still relatively new and not yet taken altogether 
seriously. It includes several dark studies of woodlands at dusk which are 
exercises in pure atmosphere. The hint of colour that makes these paintings so 
otherworldly was created when Steichen experimented with the application of 
layer upon layer of light-sensitive gum to the prints. One of these early 
experiments, The Pond-Moonlight, sold last year for $2.9m, making it the most 
expensive photograph ever.

The early nude portraits are all shadows and semi-tones, beautifully intimate 
images that sometimes recall blurred pencil sketches. He obviously had a thing 
about women's backs, and many of his nudes are facing away from the lens, 
curving shapes in a formal landscape.

The painterly approach is evident too in his close-up portraits, particularly 
Cyclamen, where one Mrs Philip Lydig stares out enigmatically past the fragile 
flower of the same name. Two decades later he captures the actress and fabled 
beauty Clara Bow in much the same pose. The show is full of such echoes, but 
you often wonder how the unerring eye that took the looming nightscapes of 
Manhattan, upending every cliché of urban landscape photography, and that 
curated the groundbreaking social reportage of The Family of Man show in 1955, 
could also become so seduced by the staged, superficial beauty of the fashion 
editorial.

As a portraitist, though, Steichen was masterful. He captures Garbo at her 
most defiant, Yeats at his most self-important, and Churchill as an angry young 
pug rather than a bulldog. He moved from symbolism to modernism with ease, and 
beyond that into a place where he simply took Steichen photographs. Born in 
Luxembourg, brought up in Milwaukee, he eventually made Paris his second home, 
so it is fitting that this big, intriguing show should settle here for a while, 
and allow us to reappraise one of the most important, if infuriating, presences 
in 20th-century photography.

At the Pompidou Centre there are photographs aplenty too in the wonderful 
celebration of Alberto Giacometti's life and work. Brassai, Man Ray and 
Cartier-Bresson all beat a path to his door, and all took memorable portraits 
of that craggy, professorial face. As the title suggests,L'atelier d'Alberto 
Giacometti is not just an exhibition but an attempt to shed light on the 
working practices of the great sculptor. There are sketchbooks, notebooks, and 
abandoned works-in-progress here, alongside his plaster-splattered easels, 
tables, and cupboards, many of which are decorated with wiry drawings of faces, 
heads and elongated torsos.

What you see, in glimpses, is Giacometti moving towards what would become one 
of the key signatures of 20th-century art, those elongated stick-figures and 
objects that, for me at least, have always evaded any kind of understanding 
other than the purely instinctive.

This show sheds much light on how he got there but left me none the wiser as 
to why I like his work so much. The miniatures on display here are things of 
wonder, though, and brings to mind Blake's notion that great poetry - and, by 
extension, great art - should pertain to 'the minute particular'.

A film showing Giacometti at work gives some intimation of what was surely an 
immense, almost shamanic presence, and you can see, in his furrowed brow and 
eagle eyes, why the great photographers loved him so much. You can also see how 
ahead of his time Giacometti was, how everyone from Beuys to Calder to the 
abstract expressionists owe him a debt.

For all the excavation that the curators of this illuminating show have 
obviously undertaken, the work, even at its most playful, remains mysterious, 
even elusive.
 