
Reform of the global financial system. Who could disagree with that, 
especially in times like these? To call for anew Bretton Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/globaleconomy-g8> 
conference, though, is the easy bit. It's a call that makes a politician sound 
statesmanlike, far-sighted, influential — even visionary. And it is not 
necessarily an insincere or selfishly motivated call either. In troubled times 
most political leaders want to do the right thing. But there is a big problem. 
How would it actually work?

Before looking at Bretton Woods II, take a moment to look at Bretton Woods I. 
The official title of the 1944 conference was imposing — the United Nations 
Monetary and Financial Conference. The reality was very different. Although 44 
nations — including China and the Soviet Union— sent a total of 730 delegates 
to Bretton Woods, this was not a meeting of equals. Some attendees were 
governments in exile, like France. Some were not in full command of their own 
territory, like the Philippines. Others were present as colonial possessions, 
including India. Still others had no intention of subjecting themselves to 
anything agreed by the conference, notably the Soviet Union. All of them were 
at war and many of them were represented by people whose nations were going 
through a traumatic existential challenge. The "never again" mood was immense. 
It played a key role in getting the allies to agree.

In practice Bretton Woods I <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system>
 was dominated, just as the mythology says, by two nations — Britain and the 
United States — and, in the end, by just one of the two, the US. The British 
mythology of Bretton Woods stresses the battle between a declining Britain, 
represented by John Maynard Keynes, which sought to create a global reserve 
system, and the triumphant US, represented by Harry Dexter White, which wanted 
a financial system based on the dollar. Inevitably the Americans won, because 
they were the strongest nation at the table. Bretton Woods I is often compared 
to a poker game. In reality though it was simply a power battle in which the 
most powerful country won and the others — the USSR and its supporters excepted 
— were compelled to accept the settlement, because they got more from being 
part of the US-led system than they did from refusing to be part of it.

These principles need to be born in mind when considering any putative Bretton 
Woods II.Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/barackobama> said the 
other day that this was a time that called for the best ideas and the best 
minds. And it is tempting to imagine the great latterday economists —Ha-Joon 
Chang <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/22/economy-economics>,
Paul Krugman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/14/economics-creditcrunch>, 
Amartya Sen,Joseph Stiglitz <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/josephstiglitz>
 and the rest — all gathering in the New Hampshire mountains 65 years after 
Keynes and White to hammer out a new ideal framework of banking and credit 
reform for the world to follow. It would certainly be a fascinating exercise. 
But the reality is that the first decision about Bretton Woods II would be an 
entirely geopolitical one: which countries would get a seat at the table? Would 
it be a G7 gathering? Or a G8 (the G7 plus Russia)? Or a G20 (the G8 plus 
China, India, Brazil, the EU and several more). Or would it be, as Bretton 
Woods I was, the members of the then unofficial "united nations" — just 44 of 
them in 1944 but now an officially equal 192 (last time I looked) today? Put it 
another way: how can failed international institutions reform themselves?

Merely to ask these questions — each of which would produce a very different 
conference and communiqué depending on which answer was chosen— is to realise 
that it may be much more difficult for the modern nations to do something in 
peacetime that the allied nations of the second world war were able to achieve 
under the pressures of potential oblivion. Not the least of the problems is 
that the very governments that would meet to debate the new order would 
themselves largely be the selfsame governments that failed to control the old 
one. There would, to put it mildly, be conflicting interests around the table. 
One thing that can also be said with absolute certainty is that Bretton Woods 
II would neither be dominated by the US and Britain (whateverGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> may want us to imagine) as 
Bretton Woods I was, nor end in a lasting settlement that centred the global 
economy on the United States system. Any new system would either be a tinkering 
with the old one (useful but nowhere approaching the structural radicalism of 
Bretton Woods I) or would involve radical economic changes that few of the 
participants, even China and Russia, seem yet to want, much less to agree on.

None of this is to say that some sort of radical restructuring of the global 
banking system will not happen. But if it does, it will happen not because of 
economics but because of politics. It will happen because the powers simply 
cannot afford to allow what has happened in 2008 to happen again. Yet even if 
this were the case, the solution would not be as straightforward as it may 
seem. We are said to inhabit a post-Westphalian world in which nation states no 
longer command the globe as they did even in 1944. If that is the case, how can 
the powers, however united, determined and resolute, mould a 21st century world 
economy that marches to their collective drum? Looking at the agenda for any 
such conference it is not hard to see at least one key paradox — that Bretton 
Woods II would essentially mark the end of American economic dominance even 
while President Barack Obama (if he is elected in two weeks) might be the one 
political leader who might just have the authority to make some of it happen.
 