
A four-legged beast 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2013/09/10/tony-abbott.html> resembling 
Tony Abbott snarls from a diamond-shaped road sign, Uluru in the background, a 
desert road in the foreground. The Jakarta Post's warning to its readers? 
"Unpredictable political animal" ahead …

Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> has said 
he will visit Jakarta in the coming days, his first overseas trip as prime 
minister; he has already phoned Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. 
The planned Jakarta visit is seen as indicative of the emphasis Australian 
places on continuing its strong ties with its northern neighbour.

But the new prime minister's plan to buy Indonesian fishing boats and provide 
funds to "wardens" in return for key information about people-smuggling has 
been criticised by Indonesians.

The reaction of the head of the foreign affairs commission, Mahfudz Siddiq – 
"a crazy idea", "degrading and offensive" – was widely reported in Australia, 
but other commentators have also slammed the policy for its assumption that 
complex problems can be overcome by throwing money at the country.

"Outrage in Indonesia over the plan makes sense because Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> is not Australia's colony with 
people available to be 'bought' for another country's interest," Donny Syofyan, 
a lecturer in cultural sciences, wrote in the Jakarta Post on Tuesday.

And the Coalition's plan to stop asylum-seeker boats by turning them back to 
where they came from, when safe to do so, has also been greeted with scepticism.

"It would make a very good camera op if the two navies were standing on each 
side of the waters kicking an illegal migrant boat like a football," Dewi 
Fortuna Anwar, an adviser to Indonesian vice-president Boediono, says 
sarcastically. "I think the two countries would be made to look ridiculous."

Whatever the election rhetoric from the Coalition, Anwar says Canberra will 
still need to work closely with its neighbours. The asylum-seeker problem, she 
says, is a regional one that requires a regional solution.

"I don't think the new government in Canberra will try to impose its 
unilateral solution because that would be a solution that would only lead to 
new complications," notes Anwar.

Each year thousands of asylum seekers – from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, Sri 
Lanka, Myanmar and Somalia – transit through Indonesia where they board 
dilapidated wooden boats to Australia. This year there have been more than 
15,000 unauthorised boat arrivals.

Despite the criticism over asylum policy, Yuli Ismartono, deputy 
editor-in-chief of Tempo magazine, says the press has generally welcomed 
Abbott's victory.

Campaign promises don't always materialise, she says, and for the most part 
Indonesia is adopting a "wait-and-see attitude" to Abbott's new government.

"I think what Indonesia wants is really for Tony Abbott to understand 
Indonesia," she says, "[and] to also understand that Indonesia is trying to do 
its bit to solve the problem of asylum seekers. We are not just letting it 
happen and burdening Australia with this."

Ismartono expects that both governments will be forced to compromise and that 
conflict at the government-to-government level is unlikely.

"The only reaction, when people are egged on by certain parties in the 
government, ie the military, is when Papua comes up," she says.

Independence movements in the restive province of West Papua, and the support 
some Australian NGOs offer the cause, remains a sensitive topic.

Indonesia is likely to seek assurance of its territorial integrity from the 
Abbott government, particularly as theFreedom Flotilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/29/aboard-the-freedom-flotilla> 
vessel left Queensland for West Papua on Monday.
 