
Jelena Jankovic's mother, Snezana, was in tears. She had so wanted her 
daughter to make it into her first grand slam final, but Maria Sharapova 
relentlessly crushed the Serb, even though the Russian could never reproduce 
the brilliance of her quarter-final victory over Justine Henin, the world No1. 
With drizzle in the Melbourne air, the roof was trundled shut just before the 
match began, so that it might just as well have been some soulless indoor WTA 
Tour match anywhere in the world, rather than a slam semi-final.

It must be hoped that when the Wimbledon Centre Court gets its retractable 
roof next year it does not squeeze the life out of the matches played 
underneath it. This is what happens at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, whether the roof is closed 
because there is rain, or because the temperature is simply too high.

Of course, it is a godsend for television and the paying public, but for the 
purist it remains anathema. Indoor tennis is boring and tedious, and the men's 
and women's circuit would be a far better place if every indoor facility was 
blown up. Who needs any more tennis after the US Open, unless it can be played 
out of doors? The season would be shortened dramatically in consequence and 
nobody would miss the indoor circuit one jot. Good riddance.

Much as it is hard not to like Jankovic, who has a cheery smile for most 
occasions, the last 11 days have not been her finest. For the umpteenth time 
against Sharapova she had to call in the trainer, while she has been taking 
painkillers, four at a time, throughout the tournament for one niggle or 
another.Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> would be far better 
if trainers were never allowed on to the court, save in extremis. If a player 
cannot continue because they are injured then that should be that. Let them 
fight on until the pain becomes unbearable, and then hand the match to their 
opponent. That would sort out the minor aches and pains, the wear and tear, 
from the serious injuries. And painkillers should not be allowed either. If you 
cannot start a match without them, then don't start at all.

Mind you, the WTA is intent on reducing the number of tournaments the leading 
players have to take part in to little more than double figures. You sometimes 
wonder if the ultimate aim of Larry Scott, the WTA's chief executive, and his 
crew, is to reduce the number of its tournaments to zero. Then the players 
could happily sit around talking about shopping andhaut couture, which, after 
all, is so much more interesting than tennis.

It looked like being a very bad day for Serbia indeed when Ana Ivanovic, 
Aussie Ana, slumped to a 6-0, 2-0 deficit against Daniela Hantuchova. Suddenly 
it was last year's French Open final all over again, when the young Serb almost 
completely lost her nerve against Henin. Hantuchova, playing her first ever 
slam semi-final, is renowned for pushing the leading players deep into third 
sets, and then choking. And so it was this time, Ivanovic winning 0-6, 6-3, 
6-4. If only it had been out of doors, it might have been exciting.
 