
 Author:  Henry James (1843-1916) was born in New York City, into a wealthy 
family. After a brief spell studying law at Harvard, he devoted himself to a 
literary life while travelling widely in Europe. His first novel, Watch and 
Ward , was written in Venice and Paris before being serialised in the Atlantic 
Monthly in 1871. James stayed in Europe as his writing career progressed, 
living first in Paris and then settling in England in 1876. Early landmarks 
included The Europeans (1878), Daisy Miller (1879), Washington Square (1880) 
and The Portrait of a Lady (1881). In 1898 James moved to Rye, Sussex. Here he 
dictated the story The Turn of the Screw . This and the novel What Maisie Knew 
(1897) marked the start of his great late phase. James then published a string 
of classics including The Wings of the Dove (1902), The Ambassadors (1903), and 
The Golden Bowl (1904). In 1905 he returned to the US for the first time in 25 
years; his negative reactions are recorded in The American Scene (1907). His 
native country's refusal to join in the first world war motivated him to take 
British citizenship in 1915; he suffered a stroke the same year and died three 
months later, shortly after receiving the Order of Merit.

 Story:  James's interest in the unconscious and the spirit world is generally 
thought to have been inspired by family bereavements in the early 1880s. The 
Turn of the Screw was first published serially in Collier's Weekly in 1898. An 
unnamed governess, working in a lonely country estate, believes the two young 
children in her care, Flora and Miles, are being possessed and corrupted by 
apparitions of two dead former servants in the household, steward Peter Quint 
and the previous governess, Miss Jessel. Though the children deny the 
apparitions' presence, Jessel becomes obsessed with exorcising their influence, 
leading to Miles's death.

 The film-makers:  Jack Clayton (1921-1995) started as a teaboy at Alexander 
Korda's London Films and worked his way through the ranks, producing films such 
as Three Men in a Boat (1956), as well as incurring Korda's wrath by marrying 
starlet Christine Norden. After directing an award-winning short film, The 
Bespoke Overcoat (1956), Clayton broke into features with Room at the Top 
(1959), part of the radical kitchen-sink generation of British cinema. He took 
The Innocents as a way of changing artistic direction even though he was forced 
to film in Cinemascope, a format he disliked. Cameraman Freddie Francis had 
just won an Oscar for Sons and Lovers (1960), and created superbly atmospheric 
black-and-white images for the film.

 How book and film compare:  The film excises James's preface, with its 
description of fireside tales; instead, it begins and ends with the same shot 
of the governess (now called Miss Giddens) wringing her hands in apparent 
breakdown. Initial reaction to the book revolved around whether the ghosts were 
hallucinations or not (the first-person narrative encouraged this), but this is 
only a secondary consideration in the film. The Innocents operates more like a 
classic ghost story, but with more sexualised elements brought out - most 
notably in the scene in which Miles kisses Miss Giddens.

 Inspirations and influences:  The Innocents is arguably the leading product 
of the celebrated wave of British-set black-and-white horror films, including 
Night of the Demon (1957) and The Haunting (1963). Interest in the genre perked 
up on the back of the mid-1990s horror revival; The Haunting was remade in 
1999, and The Innocents clearly inspired the Nicole Kidman vehicle The Others 
(2001).
 