
Au Rendez-vous des Chauffeurs, Paris

Opened in 1904 and still serving the no-frills, traditional French dishes 
eaten by the original clientele who gave this small restaurant its name, Le 
Rendez-vous des Chauffeurs used to face one of the biggest taxi ranks in Paris. 
Generations of taxi drivers would clock off and congregate to eat and drink, 
most famously in 1914 when drivers downed last drinks for courage before taking 
an estimated 6,000 soldiers to the Battle Of Marne. Except for the original 
pewter in the bar (requisitioned by the Nazis in 1940) the restaurant has 
remained as it was, and to eat here, even for Parisians, is to experience the 
old days with regulars who've been coming for decades. Rabbit,andouillettes, 
bavettes de boeuf and steak tartare are all on the small menu. A lunch-time 
formule (two courses) costs €11.90. A demi-pichet of Gamay, the house red, 
costs €8.
• 11 rue des Portes Blanches, +33 14 264 0417. 
Sarah Hay, Paris editor, i-D magazine 
<http://www.i-dmagazine.com/primary_index.htm> 

Le Train Bleu, Paris

I first experienced Le Train Bleu <http://www.le-train-bleu.com/>, which is in 
the heart of the Gare de Lyon station, with my father about 15 years ago. The 
moment I arrived it grabbed my imagination with its grandeur and opulence – 
sculptures, gilt and paintings. Built by the Paris-Lyon-Mediterranean Company 
in 1900, it is a piece of Paris, and you experience a real sense of the 
Parisian bistro. The restaurant is famous for French brasserie classics: we had 
steak tartare, foie gras terrine,bavette and Paris-Brest, for which the 
restaurant is well-known for. The Paris-Brest has always been on the menu. Made 
from choux pastry and hazelnut cream it was created to commemorate the cycle 
race between the two cities first held in 1891. The staff at Le Train Bleu all 
look like they have been there since the restaurant opened and the place has an 
incredible buzz about it.
• First floor, Gare de Lyon, 01 43 43 09 06 
Anthony Demetre of London restaurants Wild Honey 
<http://www.wildhoneyrestaurant.co.uk/> and Arbutus 
<http://www.arbutusrestaurant.co.uk/> (arbutusrestaurant.co.uk)

Brasserie Georges, Lyon

Behind Lyon's central Perrache station stands a stocky Lyonnais culinary 
institution, Brasserie Georges. It doesn't occupy the prettiest spot in this 
polished city, but enter to discover a temple to theatrical French dining. As 
you take your seats, smart waiters dance around you with platters, and beer as 
well as wine. This in a town sandwiched between gorgeous Beaujolais and Côtes 
du Rhône vineyards. All that beer hints at the restaurant's origins – it was 
set up as a truebrasserie (brewery) by a family from Alsace in 1836, with 
accompanying restaurant. From the start, the meaty Alsatian cabbage classic,
choucroute, was top of the menu, as it still is today, but substantial 
traditional Lyonnais dishes featured too. The food remains hearty rather than 
subtle. And the atmosphere is not hushed, but loud and jolly. As your meal 
merrily progresses, you realise you've become part of a very long-running show 
at Brasserie Georges.
• 30 cours de Verdun, +33 4 7256 5454. 
Philippe Barbour, author of the Cadogan Rhône-Alpes guide

Lhardy, Madrid

There are older restaurants in Madrid, but I prefer a quick stop at the 
downstairs shop atLhardy <http://www.lhardy.com> (established in 1839) for a 
cup ofcaldo – broth – and a glass of sherry. Served from a silver urn in the 
restaurant's beautiful wood and stone front room, the broth alone clears away 
clouds on a rainy day, but paired with the sherry, it's a ray of sunshine in 
your mouth. There's a restaurant upstairs, where they say the smoked salmon 
sandwiches are fantastic, but in the specialised land of tapas in Madrid, you 
go to one place for one thing and another place for something different. At 
Lhardy, you get the broth. The restaurant has a new outpost in Madrid's 
recently refurbished San Miguel market, where they serve the broth in a 
polystyrene cup, but go to the original for a taste of the real thing, in a 
proper cup.
• Carrera de San Jerónimo 8, +34 522 22 07. 
Joe Ray <http://joe-ray.com/>, food and travel writer and photographer 

La Taberna de Don Mariano, Pedraza, Spain

There is an old taverna on the main square in Pedraza, a fabulous medieval 
town just north of Madrid, in the region of Segovia in the very heart of Spain. 
This 200-year-old bar, run by the same family for generations, has no sign 
showing its name, just a simple wooden sign outside with the wordVINOS on it. 
The current owners' father bought it in 1934 and didn't change it. There is no 
choice; they simply serve a small glass of rosé with cheese, chorizo and some 
bread to accompany it. The low wooden stools and benches have been worn by 
hundreds of years of use. Brass finishings, diligently polished by a black-clad 
grandmother, adorn this otherwise simple tavern.
• Plaza Mayor. 
Javier Bartolomé, co-owner of Spanish tour operator Away From The Crowds 
<http://www.awayfromthecrowds.com/> 

La Traida, A Coruña, Spain

Soft country cheese, sardine empanadas, chicharrones (Galician pulled pork). 
That's it. Never changes. Sisa and Mari Carmen have been working this place all 
their adult lives. Their father opened the place in 1936, and judging by the 
state of some of the posters around the walls, nothing much has changed. The 
basement of a former prison, it has no windows, and its floor is of ancient 
stone. There are three tables with little stools, plus half a dozen barrels to 
lean on. As is common in this type of tavern, the wine is white, straight from 
the barrel, and the barrel comes straight from the country. No vintage, no 
messing. You drink it in little ceramic cups calledcuncas. I order soft country 
cheese from Sobrado, about an hour's drive south at the heart of Galicia's 
cheese-making area. It has been cut into pieces, but is right on the line 
between solid and liquid, so fresh you can hear it mooing.
• Calle de Torreiro, 1, +34 981 229321. 
John Barlow, food and travel writer, author of Everything But the Squeal  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Everything-But-Squeal-Pigging-Northern/dp/1840247401>
(Summersdale £7.99)

La Campana, Rome

One of the world's oldest cities also boasts one of the world's 
longest-established restaurants. Founded in 1518 as an inn forforestieri 
(out-of-towners),La Campana <http://www.ristorantelacampana.com/> had already 
been going for two-and-a-half centuries when Goethe met his Roman proletarian 
muse Faustina here. It was one of Federico Fellini's favourite Roman hangouts 
in the 60s, and neither the menu nor the waiters nor the well-groomed clientele 
have changed much since then. True to its historic credentials, La Campana 
offers some unusual traditional dishes that are on the verge of culinary 
extinction – likevignarola, a delicious springtime soup of broad beans, peas and
guanciale bacon. 
• Vicolo della Campana 18, +39 06 687 5273. 
Lee Marshall, resident Rome expert for travel website simonseeks.com 
<http://www.simonseeks.com/>

Antico Caffe Greco, Rome

Located on busy Via dei Condotti, the Bond Street of Rome, this cafe has 
watered and fed passersby of every class and nationality, famous and unknown, 
since 1760, making it one of the three most ancient cafes in the world (it 
hosted the likes of Byron, Shelley, Keats and Casanova). Filled with red velvet 
chairs, old mirrors, marble tables and lots of black-and-white photographs, it 
has a series of small salons out the back serving hearty, classic Italian 
dishes. I prefer the small wooden bar up front, offering steaming coffee and 
buttery pastries.
• 86 Via dei Condotti, +39 06 679 1700, anticocaffegreco.eu 
<http://www.anticocaffegreco.eu/>. 
Ruth Rogers, chef and author of River Café <http://www.rivercafe.co.uk/> 
Classic Italian Cookbook

Do Mori, Venice

In Venice, there is a 548-year-old wine bar called Do Mori. It is near Rialto 
Bridge and is named after the two moors who served here in the 17th century. It 
is a charming and atmospheric place that amounts to little more than a dark 
corridor between two alleys. The food is simple: small snacks (known asciccheti
) such as salt cod on polenta, anchovies on toast, tiny soft sandwiches called
francobolli (postage stamps) and, in winter, pig's trotter sausage in broth. 
The wine is local: Custoza from the Veneto, Pinot Bianco from Friuli. At around 
11 every morning the place fills up with traders from the nearby Rialto fish 
market, coming in for their firstombra of the day (an ombra is a small glass of 
plonk, literally "shadow"). The service is unsmiling and blunt but you don't 
care; you know that this is the real Venice, hidden, simple, unpretentious, and 
pretty much unchanged for half a century.
• San Polo 429 (entrances on Calle Galiazza and Calle Do Mori), +39 041 522 
5401. 
Russell Norman, owner of Polpo <http://www.polpo.co.uk/> , a Venetian 
restaurant in London's Soho

Ca' d'Oro-alla Vedova, Venice

Venice is full of drinking dens and restaurants which look like they might 
have been there for centuries – low beams laden with copper pots, dim clinking 
of glasses and cutlery, old sea-dog clientele – but which in fact only 
materialised in the past 10 years or so. Venice's oldest restaurants – Poste 
Vecie in San Polo and Osteria Il Milion in Cannaregio – in existence from the 
16th and 18th centuries respectively – are two over-priced tourist traps that 
tend to exploit their age. For far higher standards of traditional gastronomy, 
Ca' d'Oro alla Vedova does an excellentspaghetti alla busara (with scampi). 
While you're in the area, the risotto con le secoe (with beef from around the 
spine) at Dalla Marisa on Fondamenta San Giobbe (00 39 041 720211) is legendary.
• Cannaregio 3912, Ramo Ca'd'Oro, +39 041 528 5324 
Anne Hanley, resident Venice expert for simonseeks.com 
<http://www.simonseeks.com/>

Sostanza, Florence

Sostanza, which opened in 1869, is the oldest trattoria in Florence and looks 
like it. But this is no grand Tuscan gastro palace, dripping with olive oil of 
nun-like virginity. It's got a converted-butcher-shop utilitarian vibe to it, 
all white tiles and hard rustic surfaces. Ditto the food. Much of the cooking 
is done on open smoking coals, and regulars just stride in to the ancient 
kitchen to ask the equally ancient chefs what's good. Sostanza is famous for a 
miraculous spun omelette with artichokes which arrives at the table looking 
like a meringue nest, and for a dish of two roasted chicken breasts in a pan 
frothing over with butter. It is a place of food to die for, both figuratively 
and, if eaten often enough, literally.
• Via della Porcellana, 25, +39 055 21 26 91. 
Jay Rayner <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jayrayner>, Observer 
restaurant critic

Antica Focacceria San Francesco, Palermo, Sicily

Boiled calf spleen – milza – and a slab of caciocavallo cheese on a bun may 
seem a tough snack to swallow, but it has been pulling punters in at Palermo's 
Antica Focacceria San Francesco since 1834, including Giuseppe Garibaldi, who 
stopped off on his way to unify Italy. Run by the Conticello family for five 
generations, the Focacceria now gets clogged with tourists, and the trick is to 
order from the counter and retreat outside to eat in the piazza alongside the 
policemen who stand guard following the family's decision to denounce local 
mobsters who demanded protection money. Cooked up in a large metal vat, the 
spleen is a must, but faint hearts can settle for other hand-held snacks like
arancine al ragù (fried rice balls filled with meat sauce), panelle (chickpea 
fritters) andsfincioni – soft pizzas topped with tomato, anchovy, onion and 
caciocavallo cheese. For a more formal sit-down plate of pasta, try the elegant 
upstairs restaurant.
•Via Paternostro, 58, +39 091 320264. 
Tom Kington, Italy correspondent for The Guardian

Rules, London

In 1798 Thomas Rule was given a last chance by his family to alter his wayward 
ways. He responded by opening Rules Oyster House in Maiden Lane just off The 
Strand and, to the surprise of all, it was an instant success. It is still 
going strong some 212 years and four owners later, giving it a definite claim 
to being the oldest restaurant in London. There have been low points over the 
years, butRules <http://www.rules.co.uk> is currently experiencing something of 
a renaissance. In 2008, a private dining room was transformed into the best bar 
in London under the legendary barman Brian Silva. A cocktail there is an 
absolute must before you descend to the restaurant for supper. Rules continues 
to offer the best of traditional British dishes such as oysters, potted shrimp, 
steak and kidney pudding and rib sticking desserts. Having spent time in its 
kitchen, I can testify to the quality of the ingredients all year round. 
However, it is in cooking game that the kitchen really comes into its own, with 
grouse from its own moors and venison from its own herds served in comfortably 
formal style by the liveried waiters.
• 35 Maiden Lane, 020-7836 5314. 
Simon Majumdar (simonmajumdar.co.uk <http://www.simonmajumdar.co.uk/>), food 
and travel writer. Simon's new book, Eating For Britain, will be published in 
May 2010

U Medvidku, Prague

Loud, overlit, smoky . . . and delectable. Regulars at U Medvidku 
<http://www.umedvidku.cz/> wax lyrical over the delicate beef in beer gravy at 
this 500-plus-year-old pub in Prague's old town. Its half-dozen halls are 
invariably packed but this is no tourist trap. Gruff but efficient waiters 
dispense Budvar beer and expect you to know the menu. They won't suffer long a 
patron not familiar with cesnekova (garlic soup); kachna (duck with sauerkraut 
and potato dumplings) orkoleno (honey-drizzled pork knuckle). If you hope to 
seize your chance at ordering, study the Czech classics on the restaurant's 
website before arriving.
• Na Perstyne 7, +420 2 2421 1916 
Will Tizard, editor, Time Out guide to Prague 

Haci Abdullah, Istanbul

Ottoman culinary traditions endure at Haci Abdullah 
<http://www.haciabdullah.com.tr/>, a restaurant in Istanbul's Beyoglu 
neighbourhood whose roots run back to 1888. The proprietors claim Abdulhamid 
II, the 34th sultan of the Ottoman Empire, personally licensed the original 
premises on Karakoy quay at the mouth of the Golden Horn on the Bosphorus. 
After a couple of changes of location Haci Abdullah now operates up the hill on 
Atif Yilmaz Caddesi, a stone's throw from the Aga mosque. Inside, tulip designs 
and the gilded imperial seal decorate the deep red walls, shelves groan with 
jars of preserved fruit, and great pumpkins and other vegetables are stacked by 
the manager's booth. Waiters in carmine waistcoats serve fare likekeskek (a 
stew of meat and wheat),sarma (cabbage leaf rolls) and ic pilav (rice with pine 
nuts and currants).Komposto (fruit compote with pear slices and pomegranate 
seeds) follows the main courses.
• Aga Camii, Atıf Yılmaz Cad 9/A, +90 212 293 85 61. 
Simon Akam (simonakam.com), travel writer and Istanbul resident

H Folia Tis Kypselis, Athens

Forget smashing plates, smarmy waiters and dodgy Zorba music. H Folia Tis 
Kypselis is a proper Athenian neighbourhood taverna, run by the same family for 
nearly a century. This is where songwriter Theodorakis and his pals hung out in 
the early 60s, and most of today's clientele looks to have been around then. 
You come here to eatpadakia (grilled lamb chops), horta (wild greens) and 
giddily pungenttzatziki. You drink the family's own rosé wine, which is tingly 
and fresh, and at weekends listen to a couple of old boys playing bouzoki and 
guitar and singing broodily rousinglaika (songs). 
• 6 Barbogli Street. 
Kevin Gould <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevingould>, food and travel 
writer
 