
If you're addicted to adding filters to your Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> snaps, and wish you could 
always see the world in grainy high contrast or with that sun-kissed glow, help 
may be at hand. As part of the government's Happy Homes initiative, which will 
see swathes of ailing council blocks retrofitted with colourful cladding panels 
and wood-effect flooring over the next five years, tenants will also be given 
the chance to transform their windows with the application of a tinted filter.

Dubbed Instawindow, the product is aimed at combatting the stress and anxiety 
that comes with living in dilapidated, often over-crowded local authority 
housing estates, with a simple wipe-clean adhesive film.

“The Instawindow is designed to transform even the bleakest views of 
post-industrial wastelands into picture-postcard visions that you'll be dying 
to share with your friends,” says Daisy Faropoll, head of brand at Happy Homes. 
“Whether you prefer that permanent sunset look, or like your colours 
super-saturated, our range of filters caters to every mood. And with an 
easy-peel backing, you can keep mixing it up and curate your own personalised 
viewscape each day.”
 Permanent sunset? … The window filters are designed to transform even the 
bleakest views into 'picture-postcard visions you'll be dying to share with 
your friends'. Photograph: Jonathan Philip Wilson 
Initially trialled across a number of outer London boroughs, the filters are 
named after iconic destinations, from Edmonton Green, which adds a faintly 
pastoral haze to the view, to the more moody Haringrey, which strengthens 
overcast skies and brings an element of gritty urban mystique to the 
surrounding scene. Some residents will be treated to the additional wildcard 
bonus filter of Lolcatford, which comes complete with a smiling kitten decal to 
cheer up every vista.

“The possibilities are only limited by our residents' imagination,” says 
Faropoll. “You could even stick the filter over the bathroom mirror to create 
an Instagram selfie effect.”

During the launch week, tenants will be asked to compete by posting photos 
using the #Instawindow hashtag, with all pictures crowdsourced on to an online 
community hub. “We see it as a way of strengthening bonds between estranged 
neighbours and bringing a healthy dose of inter-borough rivalry,” says 
Faropoll, adding that the best images will be blown up and used to decorate the 
hoardings for forthcoming estate renewal projects.

“It's a win-win solution,” she adds. “The filters have been clinically proven 
to boost residents' morale, combatting seasonal affective disorder and sick 
building syndrome, as well as improving their perception of the surrounding 
area. It has brought huge cost savings too: why spend money upgrading the built 
environment, when it can all be brightened up with a simple strip of coloured 
plastic film?”
 