
Just about every decent hotel in the world offers a succulent hamburger on its 
room service menu. Before much longer, a Chinese dish could be a similar 
staple. The world's largest hotels company, InterContinental, is working on 
plans for a Chinese-style international brand in another signal of the 
importance of the yuan to global business.

InterContinental reckons that Chinese demand for hotel rooms will overtake 
demand from the United States by 2025. The Chinese took an estimated 52m 
international trips last year and 2.1bn overnight trips within their own 
country – a figure likely to rise to 6bn by 2020.

The British company doesn't want to divulge details. But perhaps a Chinese 
brand could look a little bit like the Hong Kong-based Shangri-La chain, which 
offers Asian flair and is to open a London hotel next year in the capital's new 
"shard of glass" skyscraper.

The Chinese public can't get enough of labels – 49% of them believe branded 
goods are superior to non-branded, compared to just 9% of Brits and 16% of 
Americans. A new chain would have hotels throughout China and in markets where 
the Chinese travel in numbers. The opportunity looks compelling: the proportion 
of hotel rooms to people inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is 
just 0.003, compared to 0.015 in the US.

Buckinghamshire-based InterContinental, which was once part of the Bass 
brewing empire, is a curiously unheralded British success story. It spans 4,400 
hotels around the world – including the global Holiday Inn and Crowne Plaza 
chains – and has enough rooms to accommodate the population of Glasgow without 
anybody sharing. But the company tends not to shout about being British. It's 
quite happy for customers at Holiday Inns to sleep soundly in the belief that 
the brand is as American as apple pie.

Of course, the folks in Buckinghamshire don't actually manage all those 
Holiday Inns. The vast majority of the group's hotels are franchised, run on a 
largely independent basis by owner-managers who simply pay a fee to use 
InterContinental's brands. So InterContinental's job is largely one of 
marketing, with a bit of quality control thrown in, and running an 
all-important global reservations system.

The key to the hotels game is consistency. Wherever they may be, regular 
visitors who check in at a Holiday Inn or a Crowne Plaza want the same 
television channels, marble bathroom and room service staples. They can even 
sniff the same scent (a mixture of ginger, white tea, citrus and musk) in 
Holiday Inn reception areas. Robert Barnard, a hotels expert at the consultancy 
firm PKF, says: "The broad standard is that a Holiday Inn in Buenos Aires 
should look the same as a Holiday Inn in Swindon."

InterContinental seems to know what it's doing – its shares have surged 56% in 
a year and profits, announced this week, were up 24% to £239m.

We've heard any number of companies waffling about the fantastic opportunity 
of China and, indeed the rest of the Bric nations (Brazil, Russia and India). 
Everyone from Tesco to Diageo and Durex wants to get in on the economic boom in 
Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou.

Two decades ago, fewer than 10% of Americans had passports. The proportion has 
grown to more than 25%. Who's to say that something similar won't happen in 
China? Scale, marketing muscle and recognition are vital in the hotels 
business. Last year, InterContinental opened 24 hotels in China – including one 
on Shanghai's Bund waterfront. Here's a British company with a decent chance of 
cracking the yuan.

UK Uncut doing what the Treasury will not

As if we needed further proof that the government's Project Merlin pact with 
banks was nothing more than wishy-washy sophistry, news has broken this weekend 
thatBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> paid a paltry £113m 
of corporation tax on its £11.6bn of annual profit. That's a rate of just 1% – 
a level far lower than the headline rate of corporation tax in Ireland 
or Monaco.

This has emerged at an awkward time for Barclays – the revelation, obtained by 
Labour MP Chuka Umunna, comes as UK Uncut tax protesters plan their latest 
assault on the bank's branches. Protests to date have included turning one 
London branch into a library to contrast high-rolling bank profits with the 
closure of local public services. A breakfast club for children and stand-up 
comedy are also being planned to liven up the usual cheque-cashing activities 
in other Barclays outlets.

Barclays points out that it makes money all over the world – in more than 50 
countries – and that by no means all its businesses are eligible for UK tax. 
And it has legitimate losses to offset against taxation, including bad loans 
and the cost of complying with requirements for a much deeper liquidity buffer. 
The bank's total bill from HM Revenue & Customs was £2bn – but the vast 
majority of this was payroll tax deducted from its employees' wages.

On George Osborne's watch, banks are getting a very light squeeze, equivalent 
to being pinched on their little fingers. The industry will be obliged to hand 
over £2.5bn in a one-off levy on their assets. But Alistair Darling's bonus tax 
hasn't been revived.

A bank, like any other major corporation, will always try to minimise its tax 
bill. There's nothing illegal about using complex ruses to shuffle around 
assets and filter certain transactions through offshore centres. But it's 
another respect in which the interests of banks' shareholders diverge from the 
interests of the public. And UK Uncut's small army of campaigners dressed as 
Robin Hood are firing a much more effective warning shot across banks' bows 
than any of the Treasury's policies.

National Express back on track


Hats off to Dean Finch, chief executive of National Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup>, who has steered 
the transport company back from a near-death experience when its east coast 
mainline rail franchise hit the financial buffers two years ago.

The Birmingham-based firm is set to deliver a solid £160m of underlying 2010 
profits this week, bouncing back from £83.5m losses a year ago. It will restore 
dividends after a two-year gap.

Since Finch came, National Express has made peace with the government – which 
had tried to run the company off the railways when it reneged on its 
London-to-Edinburgh franchise. Wisely, Finch opted to steer clear of more 
long-distance rail but National Express has won extensions to its East Anglia 
and c2c commuter franchises.

New management is tidying up the local bus operation and expansion is on the 
cards in Spain and Morocco. The firm is even talking of bidding to run new rail 
links in Florida and Portugal.

It's a far cry from a £350m rescue rights issue in 2009, when National Express 
struggled to fight off bidders. Finch should have enough gas in the tank to see 
off an opportunistic US hedge fund, Elliott Management, which has chosen an odd 
moment to start muttering about a break-up.
 