
In this one-day course, you’ll learn the age-old principles of storytelling in 
order to develop and give a knock-out presentation. TEDxSydney performance 
director, Stephen Feneley, will run you through how to grab an audience’s 
attention from the opening line and provide a story arch that holds them to the 
end.

Stephen will give you tips on how to make your audience care by foregrounding 
the human dimension, telling the story from a personal perspective, no matter 
how dry or technical the subject matter might be. There are basic principles of 
effective communication that remain true regardless of the type of media 
through which we choose to speak to our target audience, whether it be 
customers (existing and potential), the financial markets, regulators or our 
own workforce.

This an intensive one-day version of the 3-hour session we currently have 
available. It will involve strong participation from attendees, who will 
receive one-on-one feedback. You will have your presentation ideas and style 
constructively critiqued in a intimate environment of only 20 people.

This course is for you if...

 * You work in an industry where you have to express ideas clearly and concise 
way 
 * You’re a consultant and you need develop new clients 
 * You’re a startup looking to engage backers 
 * You’re a communications professional 
Course description

This course looks at presentations in depth. The emphasis is on audience 
engagement and is driven, to a large degree, by the audience’s comments and 
observations.

Topics on the day include:

 * Why engage?

 * The importance of establishing a business case for going public

 * A step-by-step guide on how to prepare

 * Control technique – owning the interview and presentation tips

 * Understanding what the media wants & how to provide it on your terms

 * The risks and opportunities of social media 
Stephen Feneley will have a videographer on site to film some participants and 
offer constructive feedback. You will leave this Masterclass with the tools and 
confidence to build an engaging presentation using specific storytelling 
techniques.

Please note: this course is an intensive one-day version of the 3-hour course 
currently on offer. It is strongly encouraged that participants come armed with 
ideas and a pitch ready to be workshopped.

Tutor profile

Stephen Feneley has worked in and around the media for more than three decades 
as a journalist, broadcaster and communications consultant. Starting his career 
on the SydneyDaily Telegraph in 1977, Stephen has reported news and current 
affairs for all three commercial TV networks, including extensive experience as 
a correspondent in the US and Asia. He has also worked as a presenter and 
reporter on various ABC arts programs and has written cultural commentary for 
various print and online publications, including theSunday Age and Crikey.

Parallel to his continued work as a freelance journalist & broadcaster, 
Stephen moved into media training and consulting in 1992. He has coached and 
advised senior executives in a wide range of global corporations, listed 
companies, public sector organisations and advocacy groups in Australia, the UK 
and throughout Europe. Stephen is a seasoned public speaker and moderator of 
public forums, debates & hypotheticals, and he’s produced and directed video 
content for various corporate and industrial clients.

Book now

SYDNEY

Wednesday 5 August, 10am-5pm

MELBOURNE

Friday 21 August, 10am-5pm

Details

Sydney
Dates: Wednesday 5 August
Times: 10am-5pm
Location: Surry Hills
Price: $499
Event capacity: 20
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in.

Melbourne
Dates: Friday 21 August
Times: 10am-5pm
Location: Melbourne
Price: $499
Event capacity: 20
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in.

To contact us, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/about-guardian-masterclasses-australia>
. Terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
.

Returns policy
Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course 
start date. Please see ourterms and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2014/jun/04/terms-and-conditions>
 for more information on our refund policy.
 