
Stuart Braithwaite: Do you remember how Tortoise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/24/tortoise-cluster-review> first 
started out?

Doug McCombs: It was kind of a long process for us actually. John Herndon and 
myself decided we wanted to play together, in the late 80s, and we did a little 
bit here and there. We weren’t sure exactly what we wanted to do but both were 
playing in conventional rock bands; so I think we knew we wanted to do 
something a little different, that touched on other music that we were into. 
Eventually we arrived at the idea of trying to be a bass player and a drummer, 
and that was it. When we started recording stuff I would overdub a bunch of 
bass parts and he would overdub a bunch of drum parts, and eventually we came 
to the conclusion there should be two drummers and two bass players. That’s 
kind of how it all started.

SB: Before you guys got together you all played in punk rock and hardcore 
bands, so when you started playing together and doing the kind of music 
Tortoise do, did you feed on that musical upbringing as well? It almost feels 
like that punk and hardcore was thematically about breaking the rules, but 
actually the music tended to be pretty organised; you almost took that ethos 
and applied it to the music itself.


DM: Definitely. Members of Tortoise, excluding Jeff Parker, all sort of came 
from this 80s background, from what you would call punk bands. I guess a better 
term for it was probably “underground rock bands”. I never really played in a 
hardcore band. My bands were more like X andTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/17/television-sage-gateshead-review>
. By the time we got to Tortoise we had decided we wanted to incorporate all 
these things. Anything we could think of. That was the only thing we made a 
decision about. It could be anything.

SB: I remember you telling me about how you met had something to do with 
skating?

DM: My skating career was over by the mid 80s because I was concentrating on 
playing music, and skateboarding had been such a huge thing in my life that I 
didn’t think there was room for both. John Herndon met Dan Bitney probably 
around 85 or 86 in Wisconsin where Dan lived – he was just skating down the 
street and Dan was like: “Hey do you want to go skate this ramp?” and then they 
both found out they played in rock bands and became friends.

SB: After the band had been going for a while you started adding more 
electronic elements. Earlier records were pretty organic, tape loops and spoken 
word stuff. You seemed to embrace the new 90s sequencing. Do you remember first 
experimenting with that?

DM: One of John McEntire’s focuses at college was synthesis. So he was always 
the guy who was into modular synthesisers – we all were to a degree, but he was 
the first who knew how to get his hands on the stuff. One of the first 
synthesisers we used in Tortoise was the EMF Putney, an early 70s synthesiser. 
We even used that for some sequence onthe first Tortoise album 
<https://open.spotify.com/album/6B999crXkUeJzODjSKtFZg>. The possibilities were 
starting to present themselves as sampling and digital and editing programs 
[came in]. We could take the band’s writing process and explore it to where we 
could write parts of songs and stitch them together using editing programs. 
That wasn’t really until our third album, and even on our second album all that 
weird stuff is edited on tape.


SB: When you guys were making Millions Now Living Will Never Die, did you 
realise that record was going to have the impact it did? It’s almost a game 
changing record.

DM: I don’t know. I mean, when the first Tortoise album came out we all had a 
feeling that we were on to something interesting. Having said that I don’t 
think we thought anyone would like it. We thought some of our friends might, 
and there might be some people interested in a minor underground way. But 
anyway, we got to start making Millions and we really were just excited to be 
assembling this thing. We put our insecurities aside and were all really 
excited and confident we were on to something really cool. And it had no 
bearing at all whether people would be interested in it.

SB: You also get to the point where you don’t really care. You’re so happy 
with what you’re doing, that what other people are thinking about it is either 
a pleasant surprise or a mild annoyance.

DM: It’s hard to say whether we would have maintained that level of confidence 
and been able to really progress without the feedback we got, though. There’s 
no way to undo that feedback. Once we finally released these records and 
realised people were into them it was really gratifying – it helps you move 
forward. It’s like a signifier in some way that says: “All right, I wasn’t 
wrong.”

SB: The last thing I heard from Tortoise was the music you did for a horror 
film [Eduardo Sánchez’sLovely Molly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/28/lovely-molly-review>]. It’s a 
really great and creepy film.

DM: Yeah, I like that movie a lot. It’s such a great opportunity, something 
we’d been hoping to do for years and then to have that movie not really taking 
off…

SB: We’ve always done things that haven’t happened. And it seems like the 
world of music is fickle, but the world of movies isbrutal...

DM: I’m starting to realise that. When you figure out how many movies are out 
there that you’ve never seen because they were never promoted, just shelved by 
the film company, that’s true. It’s way more ruthless than music. But with 
Sánchez, who made one of the most iconic films of the 90s [The Blair Witch 
Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/23/blair-witch-project-film-frightened-me-most-steve-rose>
], and who makes this other great film … I thought, “Oh, I see this will be 
Tortoise’s entrance into the world of film music.” This is going to be our 
chance to do more of this stuff. But it just seems to have remained pretty 
underground. The film’s great and creepy – it was really super-gratifying to 
work on something that intensely and have it turn out the way it did.

SB: Are you working on new music? 

DM: Well the new Tortoise album is probably as of today finished. And that’s 
not coming out until 2016. So we’re not really touring until that. We have a 
few things coming up and something in the fall but Eleventh Dream Day, the band 
I’ve been in for exactly 30 years, had their new album is out in July.
 