
Mark Bridger, April Jones's killer, and Stuart Hazell, the killer of Tia Sharp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tia-sharp>, killed young girls in sexually 
motivated murders within weeks of each other. Neither had previous convictions 
for sexual offences, both exhibited similar leaps from petty criminals to child 
sex killers, and in each case online child abuse images played a part.

The two men accessed online images of child sex abuse, behaviour that 
escalated shortly before they carried out the killings. As a consequence, 
investigators have focused on the danger posed to children from the explosion 
of indecent images of young people online and whether there is a causal link 
between the viewing of such images and an individual going on to sexually 
assault a child, as in the cases of Bridger and Hazell.

For the likes of Google and Facebook, the accessibility of child abuse images 
online is a toxic issue for consumer internet giants who are legally, ethically 
and reputationally obliged to make it as difficult as possible for material to 
be distributed. Yet while the internet giants and major web publishers work to 
ban indecent images of children through the Internet Watch Foundation, critics 
are warning that the situation is getting worse.

The Child Sexual Exploitation & Online Protection Centre (Ceop) says the 
proliferation of indecent images online and the spread of high-speed internet 
connections is putting more children at risk. It says this issue is a key 
threat that the agency is working to tackle. According to Ceop, the number of 
unique child abuse images in circulation on the internet now runs into millions.

Jim Gamble, the founding head of Ceop, said: "One of the problems with the 
internet is that people who harbour a deviant sexual desire for children are 
secretive by nature and the internet allows them a good way to initially 
satisfy that desire by viewing images. But there is this spiral of abuse 
theory: they begin to want more, they want access not to still images but to 
video images, and then they want to get more real experience."

Hazell sought out indecent images of prepubescent girls – in many cases 
searching for children who wore glasses, like Tia Sharp. He viewed mainstream 
fashion sites such as fashionmag.com, which police say paedophiles are known to 
visit, and accessed images of sex including bestiality and incest.

Bridger had a library of between 100 and 150 graphic images, some depicting 
very young girls suffering sadistic sexual abuse by adults, on his laptop, and 
searched online using terms such as "naked young five-year-old girls" and 
"Michael Jackson daughter naked".

These are compelling cases for the spiral of abuse theory, but Dr Elena 
Martellozzo, a criminologist who works with the Metropolitan police and 
specialises in sex offenders' use of the internet, said there was a difficulty 
in being certain about any causal links.

"I have spent 10 years looking at online child abuse and the relationship 
between viewing indecent images and hands-on abusers," she said. "It is very 
difficult to be able to say that viewing indecent images can lead to sexual 
abuse. But what we can definitely say is that, in the great majority of cases, 
when someone has indecently assaulted a child they are then found with indecent 
images on their computers as well."

Google, in particular, is reluctant to be publicly drawn into the debate in 
the wake of the Bridger and Hazell verdicts. The Internet Service Providers 
Association would say suggestions to block internet access completely from 
convicted abusers would be unworkable because of cheap, internet-ready mobile 
devices, and more granular monitoring of the billions of pieces of material 
online would be impossible, logistically and financially.

But there are examples when the major US social networks do act: Facebook is 
still smarting from a campaign led by women's groups who demanded — 
successfully — that the site remove offensive and hateful material that 
appeared to celebrate violence against women, including a photograph of a woman 
in a pool of blood with the caption "I like her for her brains".

And for investigators and analysts, these two men provide powerful patterns to 
examine. Detective Chief Superintendent Hamish Campbell, the recently retired 
head of homicide at Scotland Yard, said: "These cases exhibited such 
similarities that they give police officers who normally work on discrete cases 
the ability to see human behaviour repeating itself in incidents which follow 
sharply on each other."
 