
Small investors with shares in Abbey National should sell out now that it has 
been taken over by Spanish bank Santander, experts said this week.

When Abbey became part of Santander on November 12 last year, shares in Abbey 
were cancelled and ceased trading on the London Stock Exchange.

As a result, Abbey's 1.71 million remaining private shareholders became 
entitled to one Santander share, which will be traded in euros on the Madrid 
Stock Exchange, for each ordinary Abbey share they owned.

They also received a special dividend of 31p per share, which was paid in 
sterling in December.

Santander has a lot going for it. Stockbrokers view it as a well-run business 
with a good performance record - the Spanish equivalent of a UK blue-chip bank.

Its share price has multiplied by 370% over the past 10 years and stood at the 
beginning of this week at just over €9 per share (around £6.40). It also treats 
its Spanish shareholders to an unusually attractive range of perks, from 
discounted medical insurance and dental care to cut-price hams and crates of 
wine.

Keen to keep former Abbey shareholders on its own share register, it is 
promising similar perks for UK supporters. These include exclusive deals on a 
range of accounts including a high-interest savings account for dividends, 
low-cost credit cards and up to £100,000 worth of free personal accident 
insurance.

Despite these pluses, brokers say that a shareholding in a Spanish bank is not 
a suitable investment for most UK small shareholders.

Richard Hunter, head of UK equities at Hargreaves Lansdown Stockbrokers, says: 
"For the vast majority of the 1.7 million UK shareholders - people who have 
just 200 or 300 Abbey shares, typically dating back to when the bank 
demutualised in 1989 - my advice is to take the cash.

"There are complications in terms of Spanish tax in holding Santander shares 
because of declarations you have to make when you get dividends and, in a few 
years' time, it may prove more expensive and tricky to sell European shares. So 
in practical terms, for people with just a small shareholding, it's best to cut 
and run."

Nick Clarke of stockbrokers Charles Stanley says: "It's difficult for a small 
shareholder in the UK to follow a Spanish bank to see how it's performing, and 
there are tax issues and currency exchange issues involved. It makes far more 
sense for small shareholders to sell up and invest in a UK bank you can track 
far more easily - the Royal Bank of Scotland is our main tip for the year."

Shareholders can track Santander's share price in euros with a sterling 
equivalent online at aboutabbey.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international>
. Santander says it's working as quickly as possible to get a secondary share 
price listing on the London Stock Exchange which will enable its UK private 
shareholders to track progress of their invest ment more easily. But that is 
not likely to happen before the summer at best, a spokesman said this week.

A major incentive to sell up now is that Santander is temporarily offering a 
postal dealing account which allows small UK shareholders to sell their holding 
free of charge.

This service also has the massive advantage of saving shareholders from having 
to fill out the complex Spanish tax forms which would be required if you sold 
via any other method. Santander says the commission-free service will remain 
open to UK shareholders until it obtains its London listing.

You can take advantage of this service if you: 

· owned no more than 2,000 Abbey National shares at 4.30pm on November 12 2004 

· live in the UK 

· hold shares through the Grupo Santander nominee service, which is the case 
for all those who still hold certificates in Abbey shares

· sell your entire holding. 

Because the service is postal, you will not have any control over the price 
you receive for shares - it will be the market price at the time the order is 
executed. But you won't beat this route for simplicity, ease and a 
cost-effective sale of your shares.

For more details or to order a postal dealing pack, call 0870-532-9430. This 
is also the number for queries on shareholder benefits and dividends.

Graham Neale of stockbrokers Killik & Co, says: "It is worth taking advantage 
while the offer is open. We also feel that at just over €9 per share, Santander 
is fairly fully priced right now and small shareholders would be better off 
switching to a UK bank stock like RBS or Lloyds TSB."
 