
What should you expect in Monday's WWDC keynote from Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, and what should you not expect? 
From talking to developers and other sources, here are our predictions.

You should get…

Apple TV: App Store access and software development kit (SDK)

The rumblings about Apple doing something in TV have been going on for months. 
However, the expectations that the company will unveil an actual TV set, or 
that it will unveil some sort of content deal with various TV stations, both 
sound wrong. What sounds entirely right, though, is that developers will be 
able to write apps that will bring games and other forms of content to the £99 
set-top box that has picked up in sales recently.

Why won't Apple unveil a TV set? Because there's no need to, and the sets 
themselves are the wrong market. Apple focuses on high-margin, high-growth 
markets (think of iPods, iPhones and iPads), especially where it can get in at 
an early stage. Selling TV sets, however, is a low-margin, low-growth market.

Nor can Apple realistically hope to do content deals with all the TV channels 
around the world, which it would need to if it were going to launch its own 
ultra-amazing all-singing all-dancing TV set. Would it be able, or want, to tie 
up deals with the BBC for iPlayer, and ITV, and Channel 4, and 5, and write the 
necessary apps - and then do it again for France, Germany, Spain...

But, equally, smart TV is a burgeoning market, where Google, Samsung and LG 
are all trying to interest people in the idea of "smart TV" that will be able 
to connect to the internet and show you YouTube clips, and so on.

So offering an SDK which lets apps run on the Apple TV is the simple way 
forward. It lets Apple undermine games console makers (notably Nintendo). It 
lets it sell more games. And developers will be delighted to write apps that 
will deliver content from TV companies – or the TV companies themselves will.

New desktops and laptops

There's a great deal of expectation about "retina-capable" laptops and 
desktops which will have far greater resolution than existing ones; the 
appearance of apps with those capabilities over the past few weeks has 
heightened the rumours. Certainly the laptops are overdue for a refresh - so 
the MacBook Air and Pro are due something new, probably with Intel's Ivy Bridge 
processor. The big question is whether the "professional" desktop Mac Pros will 
get an upgrade; they've languished for months.

Intents

Android and Windows Phone have excellent systems by which third-party apps can 
inform other apps (through a sort of registry system) what they're capable of 
taking as input and outputs; it means that you don't have to explicitly 
connect, say, a Flickr app to the photo gallery in order to be able to "share" 
it from your gallery to Flickr.

iOS is overdue to get this; it would also simplify the process where at 
present Apple has to explicitly write in support for a particular social 
network to the OS (so that adding Twitter at the basic level was treated as a 
big wow; in Android it's just a given that you can tweet a picture). Intents 
will also mean that if MySpace or (lottery ticket alert) Friends Reunited 
suddenly became a giant social network (again?), it won't require Apple to do a 
ground-up rewrite.

Visual overhaul?

This one comes courtesy of Dave Verwer <http://twitter.com/daveverwer>, an iOS 
developer and trainer, who points out that iOS has had much the same look and 
feel for its five years – while Mac OS X has changed its appearance, even 
subtly, with every iteration. Perhaps, he suggests, it will move to something 
more grey.

Killing someone's business model

This one via our apps blogger Stuart Dredge, who points out that over the past 
two years Apple has unveiled something that has killed some third-party product 
– so the "Reader" element of Safari was a serious risk to Instapaper and 
Readability, and some of the Game Center tweaking was a big threat to games 
companies.

This time round, he's expecting that the UDID (unique device ID) tracking will 
be tweaked so as to obviate the need for companies like Flurry, which does 
mobile analytics in apps.

Something different in Maps

The noises about changes in the Maps app – dropping Google's maps in favour of 
Apple's own, or some third party's – have become impossible to ignore, but the 
problem here is that any change has to work worldwide. As one developer said to 
me, it's no good for Apple to adopt OpenStreetMap – the level of detail in 
southern Europe just isn't good enough. There would be a huge defection from 
Maps to Google Maps (you can bet that would appear in the App Store) and those 
people wouldn't return to Maps, perhaps forever. That's not a risk Apple can 
(or would) take.

Yet owning a company that does detailed mapping suggests something. Perhaps 
turn-by-turn navigation. Although in that case, why tell the developers?

What not to expect…

Siri APIs

Yes, lots of people have been saying that these are going to come because, 
well, Siri has been aroundsince October. Two points: first, it's still in beta; 
second, how would you drive third-party apps via a voice-driven interface?

Consider that Siri simply turns speech into text; the API problem means this 
text has to be handed off to the correct app, meaning your problem is now 
twofold. You have to hand the text to the right app (which could be done, 
suggests Dave Addey of Agant, by getting people to preface their spoken phrase 
with the name of the app – which could be provided in phonetic form via an 
SDK); the app then has to process it.

But if you take Agant's UK Train Times app, what are the potential entry 
points? People might want to see where they are on a track. Or find the time of 
the next train to a particular station. Or plan a journey on a particular day 
to a station, and then return on a different one. Figuring out quite what text 
you allow into the app, and how you set up the text-handling interface, would 
be a hell of a thing; and while developers might well be happy to accept that 
challenge, for Apple the problem would come if Siri's speech-to-text 
translation (which is dicey, and reliant on a fast internet connection) doesn't 
quite get it right. That would poison the whole Siri experience, which for 
those outside the US is hardly stellar anyway ("I can only help you find 
businesses in the United States…). Apple doesn't feel likely to do this. It's 
still too early in voice recognition.

An actual TV set with Apple's name on it

See above.

A new iPhone

It's too early. Time was when the announcement of the phone would come, to go 
on sale later, and developers had a few months to get things straight for it. 
This doesn't feel like that time; LTE chipsets aren't yet ready in high enough 
volume (in fact they're constrained) which means that an iPhone announced now 
wouldn't have the high-speed mobile internet capability that is being rolled 
out in the US. True, T-Mobile is testing its 4G connection offering at WWDC 
this week - but I don't think this is really a preface to a 4G iPhone.

Conclusion
In general, remember that people almost always overestimate what Apple is 
going to do - and are then "disappointed" when what is announced doesn't match 
their fevered imaginings. Apple has only rarely exceeded peoples' initial 
expectations (the iPhone is the best example) - but usually then goes on to 
exceed their subsequent disappointment too. If in doubt, dial down your 
excitement. (Some will find this much easier than others.) We'll find out how 
wrong (or right) all this is later on Monday. Join us then.
 