
As Apple prepares for a full week in which it will fete and educate the 
developers who write apps for the iPhone and iPad (and also its Mac computers) 
at its annualWorldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) 
<https://developer.apple.com/wwdc/> in San Francisco - and with Google 
preparing to do the same for those writing Android apps at itsI/O event on 27 
June <https://developers.google.com/events/io/> - the question many are asking 
is: if Android phones outsell iPhones, why do developers still prefer to write 
for Apple first?

It wasn't expected to be this way. Speaking at the LeWeb conference on 7 
December 2011, Google's executive chairman Eric Schmidtwas in ebullient form 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-30685_3-57338276-264/googles-schmidt-android-leads-the-iphone/>
 as he considered the success of Google's Android mobile operating system. 
"Android is ahead of the iPhone now," he told the audience of techies and 
entrepreneurs. Ahead in terms of the number of phones, the quality of the 
software, the lower price, and having more companies making devices that used 
it, he said.

He also had some predictions: "Ultimately, application vendors are driven by 
volume, and volume is favoured by the open approach Google is taking," he said. 
"There are so many manufacturers working so hard to distribute Android phones 
globally that whether you like ICS [Ice Cream Sandwich, the name for version 
4.0 ofAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, released in 
October] or not… you will want to develop for that platform, and perhaps even 
first."

When one Android user told Schmidt it was frustrating to see iPhone and iPad - 
known as "iOS" - versions of apps coming to market before the Android one, 
Schmidt said that in part because of the new software, "my prediction is that 
six months from now you'll say the opposite". That is, that Android versions of 
particular products would be written before the iOS ones.

Calendar time

Six months later, there are few signs of that happening. Instead, even while 
the number of Android phones in use has continued to grow steadily, to more 
than 300m, and with Android phones making more than 50% of the 150m-odd 
smartphones sold worldwide every quarter, developers still look to Apple's 
platform first.

It's not initially obvious why. A huge number of apps are being launched on 
Android. Analytics firm Distimo, which tracks the various app stores, reckons 
that in the first four months of 2012 more than 100,000 apps were added to the
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play store, versus 
63,000 for Apple's App Store. Microsoft's Marketplace, for Windows Phone, and 
BlackBerry's official stores added 35,000 and 22,000 respectively in the same 
period.

But follow the money - a big factor for the important developers, who can 
easily spend thousands writing a new app - and it's a different story. Distimo 
and analyst firm CCS Insight launched their App Vu Global service in early 
April 2012, tracking downloads and revenues from the app stores. Its initial 
findings claimed that Apple's App Store is generating $5.4m every day in app 
sales for the top 200 grossing iPhone and iPad apps. For Google Play, their 
estimate was just $679,000 for the top 200 grossing apps on Google Play, or 
about 12% of Apple's revenue.

Another mobile app-tracking service, Flurry, noted on 7 June 
<http://blog.flurry.com/bid/85911/App-Developers-Signal-Apple-Allegiance-Ahead-of-WWDC-and-Google-I-O>
 that "For every ten apps that developers build, roughly seven are for iOS." 
Though the total volume of apps being developed has doubled - from over 9,000 
in the first quarter of 2011 to more than 18,000 in the second quarter of 2012 
- that 7:3 ratio in Apple's favour has remained consistent.

Part of that has been because iPhone users have shown themselves willing to 
pay for apps in a way that Android users so far have not. In January 2012, 
Apple said that since 2008, when its App Store opened, developers had been paid 
a total of $4bn, of which more than $700m was paid in the last quarter of 2011 
alone. Google hasn't given a comparable figure, though Horace Dediu, who runs 
the Asymco consultancy,puts the figure for Google's total app sales in 2011 at 
$300m <http://www.asymco.com/2012/05/14/the-android-income-statement/> - 
meaning developers would get $210m in total.

In March 2012, Flurry crunched data from developers using its tracking tools 
in their apps, and claimed that given the same number of users per platform, a 
developer who got $1 on the iTunes App Store would get $0.23 from Google Play.

Nine-year headstart in credit cards

That's a key pointer to why developers don't look to Android first. Some cases 
are simple examples of what economists call "opportunity cost". Dave Addey is 
managing director of Agant, a British software developer which has written, 
among others, the Train Times app which costs £4.99 on the iPhone, and uses 
National Rail data to offer real-time data feeds, plan journeys and show 
timetables. "We still prioritise iOS," he says. "Because it's the main platform 
on which people will pay for an app. We haven't done Android apps for business 
reasons. It comes down to this: do you port [translate] to Android, or do you 
develop another app for iOS? In the end, iOS is the better business case. 
Apple's greatest trick has been making it really easy to pay for apps. Once you 
have your iTunes account, you just enter a password." Google is trying to 
emulate that by encouraging people to add a credit card when they first set up 
a phone; but it is coming from a long way behindApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, which started its iTunes Music 
Store selling music online in 2003, and is now one of the web's biggest five 
holders of credit card details, along with Amazon, eBay and PayPal.

Addey points to the problems encountered by Imangi Studios, developer of the 
hugely popular Temple Run game - in which you are pursued along stone-lined 
routes by fast-moving unseen monsters - when it ported the app to Android, 
releasing it at the end of March.

It was a huge success in terms of downloads, hitting 5m in about 10 days. But 
Imangi Studios - a husband-and-wife team, plus a designer - soon discovered 
that Schmidt's promise of Android being ahead in the number of phones and 
manufacturers was only too true. Despite writing it to run on 707 Android 
devices, they said that 99% of the emails requesting support were actually 
complaints that it wouldn't run on the user's particular phone model or version 
of Android. They were pilloried on Facebook, despite having what would be 
regarded by anyone as a successful release.

Breaking up is easy

Those subtle differences between devices are known in the industry as 
"fragmentation". While Apple does have some fragmentation - there are seven 
models of iPhone, three different iPads and four of the non-phone iPod Touch - 
they pale into insignificance compared to Android's, where OpenSignals, which 
provides a network coverage app,recently found 
<http://opensignalmaps.com/reports/fragmentation.php?> 1,363 device models 
running Android, from 599 different brands - though Samsung dominates with 
about 40% of the market.
 Android fragmentation, as perceived by OpenSignals based on devices 
downloading its Android app. Click for original post. 
"It's a problem, especially for testing your app," says Agant's Addey. "You 
need to get a representative set of [Android] handsets so you can try it out. 
But that makes it hard to create a best-of-breed app because of the 
fragmentation, and because people are less likely to have the latest version of 
the [Android] software. You have to build to the lowest common denominator, 
rather than using the latest features."Google's statistics to the beginning of 
June 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2012/jun/03/google-play-android-ics-share>
 say that just 7.1% of phones actively using its Google Play app market run 
version 4.0, or "Ice Cream Sandwich". The most-used version is 2.3, or 
"Gingerbread", released in December 2010, running on 65%; in total, 84.1% of 
devices using Google Play run Android version 2.3 or 2.2, dating back to June 
2010.
 Google Play: proportion of devices running different versions of Android 
accessing within 14-day period, since January 2010. Source: Google 
By contrast, although Apple's oldest handset on sale - the iPhone 3GS - dates 
to June 2009, before Android 2.2, it can run the latest version of iOS – so app 
developers can target apps at features it includes, confident the majority of 
users will be able to run them.

And iPhone users definitely do update. Addey points to data for the UK Train 
Times app, which is available for every iPhone and iPod Touch ever made. The 
latest version of iOS, v5, was released in October 2011: Addey saw the 
proportion of devices using the preceding version, iOS 4, drop dramatically - 
while the proportion using iOS 5 leapt.

Update fever
 iOS versions accessing UK Train Times app feed, by time. Source: Agant. Click 
for larger version with longer time series 
Now, just under nine months since iOS 5's release, 86.2% of devices using the 
Train Times app run iOS 5, 12% use iOS 4, and just 1.7% use iOS 3 (released in 
2009). Other developersput the proportion of iOS 5 users at 75% 
<http://david-smith.org/blog/2012/05/11/ios-5-dot-1-1-upgrade-stats/> - lower, 
but still overwhelming.

"Compare this to the 7.1% uptake of Android 4.0, and it's pretty easy to see 
why we develop new apps for iOS first," Addey says. "Apple is constantly 
pushing its users and developers to be running the latest versions." He says 
Agant has tended to focus on bigger apps, "because we know we can support the 
latest features from Apple." The team's latest product is a World War 2 app for 
the iPad which includes a day-by-day timeline that interacts with a map, Pathe 
newsreel videos, and commentary by the historian Dan Snow.

There's no a priori reason why Apple should be able to get updates out more 
quickly. Changes to the "baseband" software which operates the radio systems in 
mobile phones (to connect to networks) have to be tested and approved by phone 
carriers; Apple has to go through those just like Android handset makers. Such 
changes are part of every major version both of Android and iOS.

But Apple has a clear incentive to roll out updates - to keep users and 
developers happy - whereas carriers and Android handset makers are less eager; 
fragmentation and opportunity cost hits them too, and they may have more 
incentive to encourage people to buy a new handset than see them using the same 
one with newer software.

Putting kids first

However, generalisations about what "developers" are doing in terms of 
platform support are risky. In key fast-growing categories – particularly 
free-to-play social mobile games – a number of companies launch new titles 
simultaneously on iOS and Android, or even on Android first. Glu Mobile, 
TinyCo, Storm8 and TeamLava, who have some of the most lucrative iOS games 
according to Apple's "top grossing" chart, are also fixtures on Android. Some 
companies are adopting an Android-first strategy here too.

Japanese social games publisher DeNA, which recently reported revenues of 
$529m for the first quarter of 2012 alone, chose Android as the platform to 
launch its Mobage community globally in 2011. Its recently-released Rage of 
Bahamut game is on Android but not iOS yet.

US publisher Pocket Gems launched a game called Tap Dragon Park exclusively 
for Android in May. Another US studio, Bionic Panda, focuses on Android games 
rather than iOS.

Certain kinds of apps can only work on Android rather than iOS, too. British 
startup SwiftKey is a good example: its natural-language keyboard app SwiftKey 
X hasnotched up millions of paid downloads on Google's store 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2012/may/30/swiftkey-android-ios-enterprise>
. It works by replacing the default keyboard on Android devices – which Apple 
does not allow on iOS.

"The early adopter community on Android is quite tech-savvy, and very keen to 
shout about the latest thing that they've discovered," says Ben Medlock, chief 
technology officer at SwiftKey. "We're one of the rare paid apps which is 
making money on Android."

Other app categories remain dominated by iOS – for example book-apps and 
children's apps. Swedish developer Toca Boca recently passed its 20 millionth 
kid-app download on iOS, but chief executive Bjorn Jeffery outlines the reasons 
it has so far shunned Android.

"It is a highly fragmented ecosystem to develop for, and the business model 
for upfront sales of apps still has its issues," he says, pointing to a 
question of how to allocate resources. "The answer there is unique to each 
developer, but I don't see 'Android first' becoming something strong in the 
kids app community within a foreseeable amount of time."

Resources are at the heart of why Schmidt's hopes that more companies would 
put Android first are currently certain to be disappointed. Toca Boca, 
Instagram, Temple Run... These companies were well aware of strong demand on 
Android for their apps, and they all knew they could probably make money there. 
But, faced with a decision to double down on iOS or put already-stretched 
resources into Android, they prioritised Apple's platform.

Volume, scale, or revenues?

Schmidt's bold statement that "application vendors are driven by volume" was, 
it turns out, inaccurate. True, the economics for certain kinds of apps 
– particularly free and social ones – are driven by scale. Yet the majority of 
app developers are driven by two simple motives: where they see the most 
revenues, and by the constraints of their resources and team size. And both 
those presently favour Apple - substantially.
 