
Allegations that British soldiers tortured and unlawfully killed Iraqi 
prisoners after a firefight in 2004 are "utterly groundless" and were exploited 
in support of a propaganda campaign against the occupation of the country, a 
public inquiry heard on Monday.

The killing and mistreatment claims are denied by each of the officers and men 
involved in that engagement, and by those involved in the capture and 
interrogation of Iraqis in its aftermath, Neil Garnham QC, counsel for the 
troops, told the inquiry.

"They are denied on the basis that they are wholly untrue," he said. "No Iraqi 
was taken … and then executed. No Iraqi was ill-treated." Garnham, who 
represents more than 480 members of the military, added: "If the military are 
lying, then this is a most massive conspiracy."

Garnham said the evidence that the Al-Sweady inquiry 
<http://www.alsweadyinquiry.org/> will hear from Iraqi witnesses was "seriously 
contaminated", coming as it does from men who were friends or related, and who 
had all denied having been involved in the fighting when they were detained on 
the battlefield at its conclusion. The inquiry is named after Hamid al-Sweady, 
a 19-year-old alleged victim. "A propaganda campaign was created on the basis 
of these false allegations," he said, and the men's British lawyers were 
"duped" into playing their part in support of that campaign.

Jeremy Johnson QC, counsel for the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence>, said there is no credible 
evidence to support the allegation of unlawful killing, "and compelling and 
extensive and independent forensic evidence to refute it".

Garnham conceded that there may be evidence of ill-treatment after capture, 
but allegations of unlawful killing and torture were false. "Just how weak the 
case against the British army is, will emerge over the coming months".

Garnham said that when the prisoners were visited by officials of the 
International Committee of the Red Cross a few days after their capture, none 
alleged that others had been unlawfully killed.

However, the inquiry also heard that the prisoners did tell the Red Cross that 
they had been mistreated, and that the Red Cross inspectors concluded that the 
injuries they saw tended to support the allegations of abuse. Patrick O'Connor 
QC, counsel for a number of former prisoners, told the hearing that within five 
days of firefight in May 2004, the ICRC was reporting its concerns, and by the 
end of that month news of the ICRC's concerns had reached Whitehall and Downing 
Street.

Allegations that there had been "killings in cold blood" at Camp Abu Naji, the 
British base in the south east of the country to which the prisoners were 
taken, had reached senior officers within 24 hours of the firefight, O'Connor 
added.

Yet the Royal Military <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> Police was 
prevented from embarking upon an investigation until June 20th, O'Connor said, 
and when the investigation was finally opened it was inefficient and inadequate.

As a result, O'Connor said, the inquiry would need to establish the truth 
about the allegations, not only to satisfy the former prisoners and the 
families of the dead men, but to exonerate British soldiers who were not 
involved.

O'Connor said it was no surprise that a number of people who had questioned 
the prisoners while serving with a unit known as the Joint Forward 
Interrogation Team had yet to provide the inquiry with signed statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/07/al-sweady-inquiry-gunshot-medical>.

The abuses they are alleged to have perpetrated were "not matters of 
individual, spontaneous misconduct, but planned, calculated and trained abuses 
by branches of the state", and the use of material gleaned during such 
interrogations to take action against the prisoners was "profoundly unlawful 
and a manifest injustice".

O'Connor also said that one soldier had given a statement naming a fellow 
soldier said to have fired shots into "twitching bodies" on the battle field, 
but the inquiry is not going to examine the lawfulness of the force used by 
troops during the firefight.

The inquiry has heard that after the fighting, troops were ordered to recover 
bodies from the battlefield near the town of Majar al-Kabir and take them to 
Camp Abu Naji, to establish whether one was a leading local insurgent.

Allegations of unlawful killings centre on claims that more bodies were handed 
back to local people the next days than had been taken to the camp, as well as 
claims from Iraqi prisoners that they could hear – but not see – others being 
killed nearby after they had been captured. Garnham conceded that the decision 
to recover the bodies may have been a mistake.

In addition, the Iraqi prisoners say they were subsequently mistreated before 
and during interrogation. The inquiry has heard that a number with gunshot 
wounds received no pain relief before interrogation.

The inquiry was established after a number of former prisoners and relatives 
of the dead men brought proceedings in the high court in London, demanding an 
independent investigation in line with the requirements of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. The need for the inquiry was accepted in November 
2009 by the then defence secretary, Bob Ainsworth, after high court judges 
accused the MoD of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty of 
candour during the court proceedings.

Johnson said the MoD accepted that part of the responsibility for the unlawful 
killing and torture allegations persisting so long rested with the MoD itself, 
"for not adequately discharging its procedural obligations".

The inquiry will hear evidence from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and 
Beirut, and from up to 200 military witnesses. It is unlikely to report before 
the end of next year.

• This article was amended on 21 March 2013. The original said Jeremy Johnson, 
counsel for the Ministry of Defence, had conceded that the decision to recover 
bodies from a battlefield near Majar al-Kabir may have been a mistake. In fact 
that concession was made by Neil Garnham, counsel for the troops. The article 
was further amended on 25 March 2013. The original said Garnham conceded that 
there was evidence of ill-treatment of Iraqi prisoners on the battlefield. This 
has been amended to say that he conceded there may be evidence of ill-treatment 
after capture.
 