
British military doctors failed to give any pain relief to Iraqi insurgents 
with gunshot wounds – although they did check their pulses and breathing before 
they were sent for interrogation, a public inquiry into allegations of murder 
and the abuse of unarmed prisoners by UK forces heard on Thursday.

One man who had three bullet wounds and several shrapnel wounds to his right 
leg and foot says he told an army doctor that he was "in agony", but his 
detention record showed that he received no analgesics. He later needed surgery.

Others with gunshot wounds, or injuries including cuts, bruises or broken 
noses that they say were inflicted after capture by British troops, say that 
they were medically examined before interrogation but not given pain relief.

Jonathan Acton Davis QC, counsel to the al-Sweady Inquiry 
<http://www.alsweadyinquiry.org/>, said that the records showed that men 
captured after a fierce battle near the town of Majar al-Kabir in south-east 
Iraq were weighed on arrival at the Shaibah logistics base, and that doctors 
also checked their pulses, respiration, body temperatures, analysed their urine 
for blood, glucose or protein, and even asked whether they had any allergies. 
They were then passed as being fit for detention, and sent for interrogation 
sessions, during which some are alleged to have been assaulted.

While photographs taken shortly afterwards suggested that some of the 
prisoners had not been assaulted with the severity they alleged, other pictures 
and medical records, did tend to support some of the claims, Acton Davis said.

Major David Winfield, the army doctor who examined the man with gunshot wounds 
who alleges he complained of being in great pain, has said that he would have 
given pain relief if requested. Nevertheless, said Acton Davis, the allegations 
made by the prisoners about their medical examinations would need to be 
investigated by the inquiry.

The inquiry, which was ordered more than three years ago, also heard that the 
Ministry of Defence was yet to hand over a key document: the operation 
directive governing the interrogation centre known as the joint forward 
interrogation team (JFIT) at the time that the men were being held there for 
questioning.

This document was needed to establish the orders governing British military 
interrogators, who are alleged to have been involved in the torture of some 
detainees. "We lack one of the critical yardsticks against which to measure the 
conduct alleged against some of the interrogators," Acton Davis said.

Furthermore, several JFIT interrogators had not yet provided the inquiry with 
a signed statement, several months after they had been requested to do so, he 
said.

The inquiry has heard that there is a "stark dispute" between the former 
detainees, and the relatives of up to 20 men said to have been killed 
unlawfully at a separate British military base called Camp Abu Naji, and the 
Ministry of Defence, which insists that there was no mistreatment and no 
killings.

The inquiry was established after a number of former prisoners and relatives 
brought proceedings in the high court in London, demanding an independent 
investigation in line with the requirements of the European Convention on Human 
Rights. The need for the inquiry was accepted in November 2009 by the then 
defence secretary, Bob Ainsworth, after high court judges accused the MoD of 
"lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty of candour during the 
court proceedings.

The inquiry, which is named after Hamid al-Sweady, a 19-year-old alleged 
victim, will hear evidence from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and 
Beirut, and from up to 200 military witnesses. It is unlikely to report before 
the end of next year.

Acton Davis said the first responsibility of the inquiry would be to attempt 
to establish whether 20 Iraqi men were killed during the battle in May 2004 and 
their corpses taken Camp Abu Naji – as the Ministry of Defence insists was the 
case – or whether they were captured alive and then unlawfully killed during 14 
and 15 May 2004.

In addition, the inquiry will examine allegations that five men taken prisoner 
following the same battle were mistreated at the large British logistics base 
at Shaibah, which was JFIT.
 