
Iraqis captured by British troops were told they had been taken to the 
notorious Abu Ghraib prison, used by Saddam Hussein and after the invasion by 
US forces, and said recordings of screams as though someone was being tortured 
were played to scare them, a public inquiry into allegations of murder and 
abuse of unarmed prisoners by UK forces heard on Wednesday.

The prisoners alleged they were abused and humiliated after they were taken 
from a camp north of Basra to a British detention centre at Shaibah further 
south, Jonathan Acton Davis QC, counsel to the al-Sweady inquiry, said.

After their arrival at the detention facility an interpreter told them that 
they were in Abu Ghraib, where US troops had mistreated and humiliated Iraqis 
as pictures shown around the world revealed.

"An interpreter was told to say that to scare the prisoners," according to 
claims made by a captured Iraqi, Acton Davis said.

Other prisoners said they heard "screams from a tape" as if people were being 
tortured. Further allegations included prisoners stripped naked and water being 
poured by them in the searing heat in a mocking manner.

Acton Davis told the inquiry that not all the nine prisoners taken to Shaibah 
made allegations of mistreatment.Military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> police, soldiers who were present at 
the time, in 2004, and the Ministry of Defence say the prisoners were treated 
properly and deny the allegations of murder and abuse.

The inquiry was set up after the MoD failed adequately to investigate 
allegations that British troops murdered up to 20 unarmed prisoners and 
tortured five others at Camp Abu Naji north of Basra following a fierce gun 
battle at a British checkpoint called Danny Boy on 14 May 2004.

The inquiry has shown evidence that some of their death certificates recorded 
what were described as signs of severe mutilation. The inquiry is named after 
the family of Hamid al-Sweady, an alleged victim aged 19. It was forced on the 
MoD after high court judges accused it of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious 
breaches" of its duty of candour to explain what happened at Danny Boy and Camp 
Abu Naji.
 