
Ireland's hopes of ratting Australia in Belfast fizzled out in the drizzle 
after managing just over 10 overs of play in the one-off one-day international. 
Ireland had reached 36 for three, with the veteran paceman Brett Lee taking two 
wickets and the 19-year-old Pat Cummins ending Paul Stirling's promising 
innings at 24. Ireland played a twist on their longstanding relationship with 
Middlesex – Ed Joyce, Eoin Morgan and Stirling all played for Ireland before 
securing contracts at Lord's – by handing an international debut to the club's 
stalwart seamer Tim Murtagh, who has Irish grandparents.

Cameron White, a former Australia captain, spanked 62 not out from 42 balls, 
including four sixes, but could not save hostsNorthamptonshire from a 14-run 
defeat byWorcestershire in the Friends Life t20. Phil Hughes (52) and James 
Cameron (57) steered Worcestershire to 142 for five, and White struggled for 
support in reply. Glamorgan's match with Gloucestershire was rained off.

Pakistan are staring down the barrel of a crushing defeat by Sri Lanka in the 
first Test in Galle after the tourists slumped to 48 for five in pursuit of the 
hosts' first-innings 472. Thirteen wickets fell on day two – Sri Lanka resumed 
on 300 for two but soon lost the captain, Mahela Jayawardene for 62. Kumar 
Sangakkara, who began the day on 111, pressed on but only one of Sri Lanka's 
last seven batsmen, Prasanna Jayawardene (62), passed double figures and four 
went without scoring. Sangakkara was left high, dry and unbeaten on 199 in an 
innings wrecked by off-spin. Saeed Ajmal took five for 146 and Mohammad Hafeez 
three for 55.

Pakistan's batsmen continued the malaise, with Hafeez making 20 before 
becoming the first of Suraj Randiv's two wickets and three further batsmen 
making ducks. Younis Khan remains unbeaten on 15.

South Africa take on Zimbabwe in Harare in the final of the Twenty20 
triangular series
 today 
on Sunday after beating the hosts and eliminating Bangladesh. South Africa 
coasted to victory over Zimbabwe with six wickets and 14 balls to spare. The 
Somerset batsman Hasan Masakadza and Graeme Cremer top‑scored with 36 apiece as 
Zimbabwe reached 124 for six. Wayne Parnell took 3 for 16.

South Africa started their reply in a rollicking fashion, as Richard Levi 
shrugged off the departure of his opening partner Hashim Amla for a duck by 
smiting 54 from 30 balls. Faf du Plessis chipped in with 14, Justin Ontong 24 
and Proteas debutant Farhaan Behardien finished unbeaten on 19.
 