
Goals from Kevin Doyle and Aiden McGeady helped to fire the Republic of Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> into a Euro 2012 
showdown for second place and a play-off spot with Armenia. Doyle's 
seventh-minute strike and McGeady's 20th-minute drive, which was deflected home 
by the defender Ildefons Lima, were enough to secure a 2-0 win which was more 
comfortable than the score suggests.

However, Russia's victory over Slovakia in Zilina means that three points 
againstAndorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> on Tuesday will 
assure them of top spot in Group B and automatic qualification for next 
summer's finals.

In the unlikely event that Dick Advocaat's men lose to the minnows, Ireland 
could overhaul them by beating Armenia in Dublin but the more realistic 
scenario is that a point will be enough to keep the Armenians at bay and send 
Giovanni Trapattoni's team into the play-offs.

However, the Italian will be without the left-back Stephen Ward at the Aviva 
Stadium after he picked up his second yellow card of the campaign and with 
Kevin Kilbane injured, that presents the manager with a selection headache. 
Ward's misfortune aside, Trapattoni will have been happy enough with what he 
saw at the tiny Estadi Comunal as Ireland recorded an eighth successive clean 
sheet.

Ireland arrived in Andorra la Vella knowing anything other than a routine 
victory could prove fatal to their hopes of making it to next summer's finals, 
and equally aware that even a maximum six‑point haul from their final two games 
might only be good enough to book a play-off place. In the event, the prospect 
of anything other than an away victory effectively vanished within 20 minutes 
as Trapattoni's men took the game by the scruff of the neck.

Andorra's part-timers might have been behind as early as the second minute had 
Lima not blocked Robbie Keane's shot, and the goalkeeper Josep Gómes was a 
relieved man two minutes later when, after he had spilled the Ireland captain's 
initial effort, his follow-up crashed against the crossbar.

In the event, Gómes's clean sheet lasted three minutes further. Doyle 
unwittingly blocked Keane's goal-bound shot but was alert enough to react first 
when John O'Shea headed the ball back into the danger area and claim his 10th 
international goal.

Ireland extended their lead after 20 minutes as the left‑winger McGeady, who 
gave the full-back Alexandre Martínez a torrid time, was the beneficiary of 
Glenn Whelan's clever free-kick, which wrong-footed the Andorran defence. 
McGeady had time and space to drill across goal and although Gómes managed to 
make a partial block, the ball was deflected home by Lima.

Andorra offered little as an attacking threat, although the central defender 
Emili García had earlier headed over from a Sergio Moreno free-kick and Lima 
tested Given with a firmly struck free-kick.

The only disappointment for Ireland was Ward's 31st-minute caution for diving 
and the wider consequences for both the player and his team.

Ireland returned from the break knowing the points were all but secure but 
equally aware that there was no room for complacency. They would have killed 
off the game for certain had it not been for Gómes, who blocked Keane's effort 
just after half-time and then tipped McGeady's stinging drive on to the post 
two minutes later.

His opposite number Shay Given had to make a regulation 59th-minute save from 
Martínez after Sean St Ledger had misjudged a high ball, but Ireland should 
really have gone further ahead within two minutes. Damien Duff forced his way 
into the penalty area and managed to bundle the ball through to Keane seven 
yards from goal. The 31-year-old pivoted, but somehow managed to blaze high 
over with the goal at his mercy.

Trapattoni made changes as he attempted to conserve energy in the likes of 
Whelan, Doyle and Duff, but with Keith Fahey, Shane Long and Stephen Hunt 
freshening things up, the visitors continued to dominate. O'Shea went close 
with a 74th-minute header from a Duff corner that just flew over the crossbar. 
With five minutes to go, the substitute Long headed just wide from Keane's 
cross as Ireland coasted to the final whistle.
 