
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has for the first time in 
its history compensated a woman for the trauma caused by forcing her to travel 
to Britain for an abortion.

Pro-choice campaigners in the Republic said the Fine Gael-led minority 
government’s agreement on Wednesday to pay compensation to Amanda Mellet was 
highly significant.


Mellet and her husband James took their case all the way to the UN’s Human 
Rights Committee after the couple were forced to obtain a termination of her 
pregnancy in England.


Irish abortion ban case taken to UN Human Rights Committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/21/irish-abortion-ban-un-human-rights-medical-reasons>
In 2013 Amanda Mellet became the first of three Irish women to formally ask 
the UN to denounce the prohibition on abortions in cases of fatal foetal 
abnormalities as “cruel and inhumane”.


Under Ireland’s strict anti-abortion laws, if Mellet and the other two women 
had remained in the Republic they would have been forced to give birth to 
babies who would be born dead.

Campaigners arguing for a referendum to repeal an amendment to the Irish 
constitution that gives full citizenship rights to the embryo after conception 
welcomed today’s decision by the Dublin government.


Ailbhe Smyth, convenor of the Coalition to Repeal the Eighth Amendment and a 
longtime campaigner on reproductive rights, said: “To the best of my knowledge, 
this is the first time ever that the Irish government has compensated a woman 
for having to leave the country for an abortion. This is long overdue 
acknowledgement of the profound denial of women’s right to autonomy in this 
country.”

“The government must immediately ensure no other woman suffers similar human 
rights violations. The eighth amendment is a profound source of discrimination 
and national shame for Ireland. It is simply not good enough to pass the book 
to the Citizen’s Assembly and not make any commitment to undertake the 
necessary constitutional and legislative reforms to end, once and for all, 
Ireland’s violation of international human rights law and obligations under 
human rights conventions and treaties.

“We cannot, as a country, continue to oversee the violation of women’s human 
rights. We’re saying that women deserve better and Ireland can do much better.”


In June the UNHRC ruled that by forcing Amanda Mellet to leave Ireland for an 
abortion in Britain, the Irish state had inflicted trauma and distress on her.


Ivana Bacik, an Irish Labour party senator and long term campaigner for 
abortion reform in Ireland, said the government’s decision to accept the UNHRC 
ruling was a crucial step towards changing Ireland’s abortion regime.


The Trinity College Dublin law lecturer said: “The UN Human Rights Committee’s 
ruling in June of this year constituted an important acknowledgement that the 
highly restrictive Irish law on abortion violates the human rights of women. 
The government’s acceptance of the ruling through the announcement of the 
compensation award, and Minister Harris’s sincerity in apologising to Ms 
Mellet, are both welcome.


“But we need now to see official recognition that thousands of other women are 
being denied their basic human rights through being denied access to legal 
abortion in Ireland, due to the eighth amendment to the constitution. The UNHRC 
ruling in favour of Ms Mellet made clear the need for us to hold a referendum 
to repeal the eighth amendment.”
 