
Irish trade unions have launched a campaign for a referendum to abolish an 
amendment to the Irish constitution that pro-choice campaigners say prevents 
serious reform of strict anti-abortion laws.

The leaders of some of the country’s biggest unions gathered on a bridge over 
the river Liffey in Dublin on Wednesday morning to call for the repeal of the 
eighth amendment, which gives an unborn child the right to life, for the first 
time since it was passed more than three decades ago.


Irish women need British help to change our abortion laws | Una Mullally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/23/abortion-law-irish-women-northern-irish-women-choice>
The amendment was introduced through a referendum in 1983. Ireland’s then 
politically influential anti-abortion lobby, in alliance with the Catholic 
church, forced the Fine Gael-Labour coalition to hold a national vote to in 
effect make an embryo into an Irish citizen. It passed with 67% voting in 
favour.

Pro-choice groups say the amendment creates a legal “chill factor” among 
medical teams, even in cases where a recent law allows for terminations in very 
limited circumstances, such as when continuing with a pregnancy would result in 
the woman’s death or in cases where she is suicidal.

At the Rosie Hackett bridge, named after a prominent 20th-century Irish 
revolutionary feminist and trade unionist, the country’s trade union leadership 
said it was time to give a new generation of Irish voters a chance to overhaul 
Ireland’s anti-abortion laws.


Mary Diskin, a spokeswoman for the Trade Union Campaign to Repeal the Eighth 
Amendment <https://www.facebook.com/TURepealthe8th/?fref=nf>, said: “Abortion 
is a reality in Ireland: between 1980 and 2014, at least 163,514 women 
registered for terminations abroad; many others gave no personal details.”


She said the near total abortion ban hit lower-paid women hardest given that 
it costs up to €3,000 to travel to Britain for a termination.


Diskin said it was the duty of unions to campaign against “the cruelty to 
women that they have to leave this jurisdiction for a service that is available 
throughout the world but not available here in Ireland”.


Unite’s regional secretary, Jimmy Kelly, said: “Last year, over 3,400 women 
travelled from the Irish Republic to Britain to access abortion. As a 
pro-choice union, Unite has consistently argued that the eighth amendment must 
be repealed as a first step to enabling women to access safe, legal and 
affordable terminations inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.”


However, Kelly expressed some doubt that the Fine Gael-led minority government 
was strong enough to push through legislation that would lead to a new 
referendum on the issue.


“Every issue seems now to be affected by this government being propped up by 
Fianna Fáil and I wouldn’t be hopeful that they make the move that we need made 
to repeal the eighth. It will probably happen in the next government,” he said.
 