
Q I recently booked two tickets online with BA for return flights between 
Birmingham and Frankfurt on March 22 and March 25. I made an error while 
booking the return flight and entered 25 May rather than 25 March. I noticed 
this on receipt of the e-ticket and immediately made the amendments online. It 
must have been half-an-hour at most from making the original booking to the 
amendments, but I was charged £60 for the change.

I contacted BA and asked if this charge could be reimbursed, as it seems 
incredibly steep for a booking error. I acknowledged that all customers could 
use the "error in booking" excuse in an attempt to avoid charges for flight 
amendments, but in this case it had to be reasonable to accept a mistake had 
been made. BA has thus far refused to reimburse the charge.

It seems very poor that they can't exercise any discretion and at least 
provide a reduction in the charge, especially when the mistake was addressed so 
promptly. This is essentially a £60 penalty for a small typographical error. I 
want to know whether you think it is worth me pursuing my enquiries, or whether 
this is the application of terms and conditions with which I have to live?
ET

A If the airline has a term in its booking conditions allowing them to charge 
for a booking alteration, it will only stand up if it is a fair amount. In 
order to satisfy the fairness test, the amount charged must be a genuine 
pre-estimate of what it would cost to put matters right.

In my view, the £60 you have been charged by the airline to deal with an error 
that was corrected online, in minutes rather than hours, is exorbitant. It does 
not in any way reflect the airline's actual administrative costs, and so will 
be classed as an unfair penalty and can be ignored.

You should pursue this matter with the airline, and if they refuse to pay up 
you could ask the Air Transport Users Council 
<http://www.caa.co.uk/default.aspx?categoryid=306> (AUC) to intervene on your 
behalf. If the AUC does not want to get involved, however, you will have to 
claim back your money in the small claims court. Also be aware that the airline 
may retain a small amount to cover their actual administration costs for 
changing the booking.
 