
At last week's NHS Confederation conference, the health secretary Andrew 
Lansley was battered by the biggest hitters in the health service over his 
cowardice on moving and closing services.

Opening the conference Mike Farrar, respected chief executive of the 
confederation, almost begged for some political leadership on the issue of 
"service reconfigurations".

He warned the NHS was endangering lives by "almost waiting for services to 
fail". The announcement just five days later of the financialtroubles of the 
South London Healthcare Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/25/nhs-trust-special-measures-debt>
 lends weight to his contention. He argued the NHS needs to take the difficult 
decisions to move some care – notably for patients with dementia – out of 
hospitals into the community, while specialist services need to be concentrated 
in fewer centres to improve outcomes. In other words, avoid losing lives.

Farrar could not have spelt out more starkly why Lansley needs to sacrifice 
short term political pain to save patients from being caught in a vice of poor 
quality and financially failing hospitals. Just in case Lansley – who was 
waiting to come on stage next - hadn't got the message, Farrar said politicians 
were discredited by worrying about electoral health more than patients' health.

The following day it was the turn of NHS chief executive Sir David Nicholson 
(he pointedly stuck to his old title rather than use his commissioning board 
persona) to give his political master a pummelling. Hespelt out his fury at 
ministers' denigration of NHS staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/21/nhs-boss-incredulous-andrew-lansley?CMP=twt_gu>
 – "people like ourselves who have spent our whole lives trying to improve 
public services" – before stressing the dangers of another Mid-Staffordshire 
style hospital scandal if services were allowed to atrophy rather than being 
restructured.

The third pugilist was Stephen Dorrell, chair of the health select committee 
and former health secretary, who compared the need for reform now with the 
overhaul of mental health provision which followed health minister Enoch 
Powell's famous "water towers" speech <http://studymore.org.uk/xpowell.htm>, 
marking the beginning of the end of the Victorian asylums.

The comparison is apposite. Powell reminded his audience in 1961 that 
"hospital building is not like pyramid building, the erection of memorials to 
endure to a remote posterity. We have to get the idea into our heads that a 
hospital is a shell, a framework, however complex, to contain certain 
processes, and when the processes change or are superseded, then the shell must 
most probably be scrapped and the framework dismantled." A beautiful exposition 
of the argument for reform which only grows in power when read half a century 
later.

But such vision, such eloquence, such honesty about the need for change are 
strangers to Lansley. His convoluted, evasive comments on his position on 
service changes made plain he has not the slightest intention of providing 
leadership on this issue. It appears that he would prefer to risk hospitals 
sliding into failure – which is now happening.

Overall, Lansley's speech was another flop, barely scraping five seconds of 
limp applause at the end. His big failure with NHS audiences is that he never 
empathises with them – he did not engage with a single one of the points Mike 
Farrar had raised immediately before him.

Remarkably, Nicholson compared his feelings towards the reforms to how he felt 
after his father died – denial, anger, depression and finally acceptance. The 
sentiments, if not the comparison, featured in his speech last year. The 
repetition showed he recognised how raw the reforms still are for many people 
as they face losing their jobs or see their career paths fractured.

Preceding Nicholson on stage was Professor Malcolm Grant, chair of the NHS 
Commissioning Board Authority, his urbane, smooth style contrasting with 
Nicholson's gritty oratory. He made a big promise – "the top down culture is 
dead". The board's relationship would be one of enabling, facilitating and 
supporting clinical commissioning groups, not controlling them.

As if that was not revolutionary enough, he also promised to end the blame 
culture – pointing out the one certainty of the board was that it would make 
mistakes.

It would be easy to dismiss these sweeping statements as conference hyperbole, 
or the naivety of someone who does not yet understand how deeply ingrained the 
command-and-control blame culture is in the NHS. But Grant took on the job to 
make a difference. Progress will be slow, uneven and buffeted by counterveiling 
pressures, such as trusts going bankrupt and the Francis inquiry into Mid 
Staffordshire Foundation Trust. But if these reforms are to lead anywhere good, 
some progresss has to be made.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the healthcare network
 <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/healthcare/start.php> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers
 