
With so many factors to consider when choosing a university, students often 
overlook whether to opt for a campus-based or city university.


But it’s worth thinking carefully about where you choose to live for the next 
three years. While some students might be more suited to a countryside campus 
with a community spirit and facilities on their doorstep, others would thrive 
in a city – surrounded by the hustle and bustle, twinkling lights and culture 
on tap.

For students making their first move away from home, the appeal of a campus 
university is obvious. With everything you need on your doorstep and a 
community feel, it’s no wonder that the National Student Survey 2015 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/carousels/national-student-survey-2015-overall-satisfaction-results-full>
 (NSS) found that these universities achieve strong results for student 
satisfaction.

Francesca Surrell, 22, a student nurse at Keele University, opted for a campus 
university. She says: “I like that I can walk to lectures, nights out and to 
the library – only having to find my way around a campus rather than a whole 
city. It instantly felt like home.”

Philip Kruse, 22, is a student at the Technical University of Dortmund in 
Germany – a decentralised campus university with two campuses connected by a 
monorail system.

He says: “My university offers great conditions for studying without 
interruptions from the noise and bustle of the city. And while you might have 
fewer choices of activities inbetween lectures, you can spend more time on 
revision.”

While campus universities are limited in what they offer, city-based 
universities can’t be beaten for choice and atmosphere, according to Jack 
Ridley, 22, a recent graduate of the University of Manchester.

 “Choosing to study in Manchester was the best decision I’ve ever made,” he 
says. “Being in the city gives you unlimited options for going out and eating 
out, which is great when you’re on a student budget. The big city feel is 
complemented by the atmosphere of the student community in places like 
Fallowfield. Cities like Manchester offer the best of both worlds.”

Ursula Oliver, 23, a former Aberystwyth University student, valued the 
convenience of a campus university, but says that students should look for ways 
to spend some of their time away from uni.


What university life is like on a 'forgotten' campus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2014/nov/21/what-university-life-is-like-on-a-forgotten-campus>
“I didn’t live in halls on campus – I think it’s important to have everything 
a little separated so you don’t end up having tunnel vision. After all, part of 
the experience of going to university is being in a new place and exploring. 
Getting out of your comfort zone is important.”

Cem Gurkan, 25, who studied at both UCL and the University of East Anglia and 
has experienced both a city and campus university, agrees that campus life can 
be quite suffocating. He says: “At a campus university you develop close 
communities, you recognise familiar faces, and it offers a sense of belonging. 
But tight communities can often feel intimidating and exclusive.”

Whether you’re leaning towards a campus or city university, make sure you 
visit open days and decide for yourself which type of university you could see 
yourself at for three years – it might be somewhere completely different from 
where you had originally planned.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 