
This week Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> caused 
a stir by revealing he once took crystal meth – or "gack" – with a man called 
"Slim". This led to a failed drugs test, which Agassi explained away by saying 
he had mistakenly drunk one of Slim's own gack-laced smoothies. There has been 
some surprise that the authorities were taken in by this story, but perhaps 
it's not that implausible. Top sports people often out-source their nutrition. 
I once did an interview with Chris Hoy during which he had a man employed 
solely to appear at his elbow and supply him with regular cereal-based energy 
bars.

Looking back, it's not impossible to imagine a scenario where Hoy's bars might 
also have been accidentally spiked with gack, leading to censure, disgrace and 
perhaps a more interesting interview where he didn't talk about having goals 
and being focused but instead made a sneery face and danced too fast for about 
40 minutes.

There has been a suggestion that Agassi's fans might feel betrayed by his 
drug-taking, but this is unlikely. Much more disturbing was the simultaneous 
revelation that he "always hated tennis". Of course, in real life it's no 
secret that everybody hates their job. You might say there are bits of it you 
like: facing fresh challenges, closing a deal or placing a finger over one 
nostril and aggressively "vacating" the other one into the swordfish bisque 
ordered by the drunken party of six in the pinstripes. But generally we assume 
people who like their jobs are either unhappy in some inconsolable way, or 
perhaps the kind of Christians who are just generally well-disposed towards 
everything, and who at first fool you into thinking they actually like you and 
maybe you're going to be great friends, until you realise it doesn't count 
because they have no choice, so you just feel cheated and hostile instead.

Still, a top-class sportsman hating his job seems strangely jarring, 
particularly when it's Agassi, who remains my all-time favourite tennis player, 
even in his brief early period when teenage girls were meant to fancy him, 
before he went overnight from having a swirling honey-roasted bouffant mullet 
to being careworn and bald. On court he looked like a blow struck for pure 
talent, a shambling, pigeon-toed riposte to the two-metre tennis ogre with his 
marmalising right arm. Those rifled returns. The breathtaking angles. Where 
does he get off, you feel, hating tennis – when his tennis looks like that?

This might be less odd in other sports. For example, nobody with any real 
involvement in football actually "enjoys" it, not in the simple way you enjoy 
eating an ice cream or playing a dinked cross-court stop-volley. There are many 
sore points. Playing football is exhilarating, but also frightening and 
painful. Watching a match you have any interest in is usually unpleasant, often 
a source of much impotent rage. Cricket is a joy to play but has complications. 
We expect a reined-in asceticism from our players. If they enjoy it too much we 
accuse them of self-indulgence or underachievement or only wanting to play 
Twenty20 and be rich and happy.

But the real problem with Agassi's coming out as a tennis-hater is that it 
casts a retrospective pall. All those years spent thrilling to his earnest 
flamboyance: suddenly I feel less like a fan and more like Agassi's pushy and 
interfering parent, unsmiling behind my mirrored shades. Because tennis does 
have its dark side. It's one of those activities, like finding fame as a creepy 
falsetto child star, or qualifying as a commercial solicitor, that it's 
possible to get deep into without ever really wanting to do it. And maybe 
they're always going to hate it a bit, these career tennis obsessives, with 
their compulsive, yo-yoing fascination, as fraught with desperate highs as any 
gack-laced Slim-issue goji berry special.
 