
For years now, changing the voting system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform> has been 
proposed as the key remedy for fixing the political system, as politicians 
worry about falling participation in elections. And for years, governments have 
gone "yeah, yeah, let's kick this one into the long grass". Yet suddenly, it 
looks as though Labour, in its dying months, is on the verge of embracing 
voting reform.

For now, ministers are still more than a little coy about it. But take this, 
from foreign secretary David Miliband at a Guardian debate at theLabour 
conference <http://www.guprod.gnl/politics/labourconference> on how to fix the 
political system: "I'm not going to give you my views on it, because we are 
discussing it at the moment, and then I'll be bound by collective 
responsibility." Take equally the fact that ministers who are known to favour 
voting reform are suddenly refusing to talk publicly about it, and you can 
sense the beginning of real movement in government. Yes, voting reform is an 
idea whose time has come – the only questions seem to be which system and 
exactly when.

Lady Helena Kennedy and the constitutional expert and Labour MP Tony Wright, 
expressed their view at the meeting that thereshould be a referendum on voting 
reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/25/labour-party-conference-politics>
 alongside the general election ballot paper. That would undoubtedly secure the 
highest turnout for voting on this issue, but there remain several problems.

As James Purnell pointed out, there would be a difficulty if the referendum 
was won, butLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> lost – would 
the Conservatives be bound by the result? And what if the Conservatives won the 
election and the referendum on voting reform was lost – that would be the end 
of the issue for years. But the undoubted problems are not a reason for not 
pressing ahead. As Kennedy insists, part of the reason for the current public 
anger out there is a feeling that people are not listened to, and that their 
votes don't count for much. And she was right to remind us that one of the 
arguments used against voting reform is that it might not produce strong 
governments – yet strong governments are capable of "bad stuff".

Fixing the electoral system is by no means certain to fix Labour's fortunes. 
Yet reform of the democratic system – from the voting system to House of Lords 
reform to MPs' expenses to making public bodies more accountable – is an 
essential part of Labour's prospectus. One thing is certain: the several calls 
to "fix" the media at the Guardian meeting are bound to fail. Of course, the 
media is far from perfect, and parts of it can be downright mendacious. But to 
suggest the media is the reason for Labour's current malaise is, as David 
Miliband said, just retreating to an old comfort zone. Rather than trying to 
"fix" the media, which sounds horribly like a return to the Soviet Union in the 
1950s, Labour should press full speed ahead with voting reform.
 