
YES – Max Stafford-Clark, theatre director
Athol Fugard's own stand against apartheid and his work in attacking it was 
absolutely exemplary, but that doesn't qualify him to talk about what's 
currently happening on the British stage. His view is diametrically opposed to 
my own belief about the state of theatre at the moment.
It's an extraordinary time for political theatre in this country. London's 
Tricycle is a terrific example of a smaller fringe theatre leading the way. Its 
Afghan season has led to one play,Blood and Gifts by the American writer JT 
Rogers, going to the National, so the influence of the smaller theatres over 
bigger ones within the subsidised sector is enormous and proof again that 
yesterday's experimental theatre becomes tomorrow's mainstream. JT's previous 
play,The Overwhelming, was about the massacre in Rwanda, which refutes Fugard's 
claim that British theatre isn't tackling African issues. Another example is 
Moira Buffini'sWelcome to Thebes, currently at the National, which debates the 
situation in Liberia and is set within the background of Ancient Greece, and 
then there'sEarthquakes in London, which explores climate change.

I was lucky enough to run the Royal Court when socialism and feminism were the 
main issues of the day, and now extremism is one of the key subjects hotly 
debated on our stages today.Mixed Up North, which I directed before Christmas, 
is specifically about Burnley, tackling the issues of extremism and racism that 
have been fostered there and festered. Similarly the play I'm working on at the 
moment,The Big Fellah, is about the Irish-American community raising money for 
the IRA in New York, contrasting Muslim terrorism with Irish terrorism as one 
of the themes of the play. It's a tremendously important subject that has not 
been explored either in journalism or, as yet, in theatre. And although the 
Troubles are now hopefully over, the debate about them has only really just 
begun. I rejoice in the fact that my working career has taken place at a time 
when the theatre is the medium in which the debate about how we live our lives 
and how we have lived them is conducted.

Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> has a responsibility to 
hold a mirror up to our society and necessarily that is to reflect our 
political activity. I think that over the last five years the vigour, 
pertinence and virility of political theatre in this country has been 
unmatched. Particularly when you compare it to political theatre in America. In 
America everyone is always looking for the next big hit; the big buck that will 
transfer to Broadway, and the anticipated response of theNew York Times 
trivialises every debate.

In the UK we're much less likely to think that way and plays such as Enron, 
The Power of Yes, Posh at the Royal Court (which was totally relevant coming up 
to the election as it showed the kind of backgrounds the likes of Cameron and 
Osborne came from) as well as Roy Williams's play about prisons,Category B, 
demonstrate that as well as tackling international issues, British theatre has 
considered almost every subject that is politically relevant to our own society.

And political issues should be tackled by theatre because that's what it does 
best. Whether you're talking about Chekhov or David Hare or all our best 
writers today, what unites them is that their feet are in the mire while their 
imagination and heads are in the clouds. And that seems to me to be the best 
place for theatre to be: with its head in the clouds and its feet in the shite. 
What the theatre does is bring a subject into the realm of public and popular 
debate. That's its brief and I think it is absolutely fulfilling it at the 
moment.

NO – Stephanie Street, actor and playwright

I believe in theatre's unique ability to change the way people think. It 
humanises ideas by making you laugh and weep for the human reality of 
ideologies. When it works, an audience will be changed by the experience. This 
does not happen enough in our contemporary political theatre.

As churlish as this may sound, it was easier for Fugard, with all his courage, 
to make theatre that fought his system. His political reality was a polarised 
one with an understood, binary right and wrong. Now, our political landscape is 
far more slippery and nebulous and our problems too complex for the theatrical 
modes that worked in the heyday of political theatre, in the 1970s and 80s. 
There is not just one bad guy to kick against, but many, and we are far more 
bound up within their systems than we might like to believe.

Theatre is no longer the dissenting voice that challenges the status quo – it 
is so inextricably bound to the status quo that it is hard to know where to aim 
the punches. Somewhere along the way, theatre has stopped being the voice of 
the outsider, fighting to be heard. I wish today's theatre-makers were still 
the terrifying outsiders Mamet describes, who were buried at the crossroads 
with a stake through the heart.

Theatre now, like everything else in Britain, is a commercial enterprise more 
concerned with box-office figures and profit margins than artistic matters. 
"Political" has, in fact, become something of a dirty word for audiences and 
producers, as if it's allowed to happen once in a while but not too much. As if 
too much would overburden a theatre's season. The theatre that will do justice 
to our political reality will never make money because it will never be simple, 
it will never attract big Hollywood names to act in it.

There are, of course, companies and individuals who buck this reality – Out of 
Joint and the Tricycle stick their necks out and do potentially unmarketable 
work. But contemporary theatre cannot have its conscience salved by the work of 
a few companies. For political theatre to live and breathe again, in the way 
Fugard describes, will take commitment from buildings and companies across the 
country to be brave, keep the profits to the minimum and the discussions moving 
forwards.

I am fiercely proud of the work I've done over the last two years: Shades, 
about young British Muslims,The Contingency Plan, about climate change, Mixed 
Up North, about racism in Burnley – each was a valuable step in the right 
direction of taking on new political themes in theatre. But we cannot just have 
"a play about British Muslims", or "a play about climate change", tick the 
relevant boxes and be happy with that. Each issue is hugely complex and 
deserves multiple, varied examinations.The Big Fellah, which I'm currently 
acting in, is not just "another play about the IRA".

Contrary to what so many people suspect, audiences like to be challenged. 
People who sawSisters (my play about British Muslim women which reopened the 
Sheffield Crucible studio earlier this year) liked how diverse the 17 
characters were, how unpredictable their experiences. But in the main, my 
generation of writers and theatre-makers are often only encouraged to make work 
about where we come from and what we know. We are worryingly tied into a 
culture of authenticity, sprung from an oversaturation of reality TV. If the 
reach of political theatre is to grow to fit the boots of the current moment, 
we need to be emboldened and enabled to make bigger, more complex plays.

The Big Fellah, directed by Max Stafford-Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/max-stafford-clark> and featuring Stephanie 
Street, is at Royal and Derngate theatre, Northampton, Tue-Sat, then touring 
nationwide; outofjoint.co.uk
 