
Q I have recently taken out car insurance with a new insurer. I was asked to 
provide proof of my no-claims bonus from my old insurer (in this case Admiral). 
When I rang Admiral they told me they could not provide it as the account was 
still active because they had automatically renewed my insurance and had 
charged my credit card.

When I queried this they said they had sent me a renewal notice and because I 
had not been in touch with them, they had taken my silence as acceptance of the 
contract and had gone ahead and taken the money. When I asked for refund, they 
said they could only do this if I provided them with proof of my new insurance.

As far as I am aware, English law states that silence cannot be taken as 
agreement to a contract. I am very upset that Admiral have done this and 
insisted that I provide proof of new insurance before they will cancel 
something that I never agreed to in the first place.

Are Admiral allowed to take money from me in such a way and are they liable to 
pay any interest and late payment charges accrued in the process? Where do I 
stand with companies that hold my card details and take payment from those 
cards without my consent?
RT

A As a general rule silence cannot be taken as acceptance of a binding 
contract. It may be allowed though if the insurer has sent you a renewals 
notice and told you they would renew the policy if they did not hear from you.

But since you never received the renewal notice it cannot apply in your case 
and your original insurer should cancel the policy and give you a refund 
immediately. You are not legally required to supply proof of your new insurance 
to qualify for the refund.

And since you have now incurred interest and late payment charges as a direct 
result of their bungling you should be able to recover these too. Take this up 
with the senior manager at the head office of your original insurance company.

If this does not have any effect complain to the financial ombudsman: 
www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk <http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk>
 