
Alongside the shocking revelations of the Jimmy Savile child abuse scandal, a 
disturbing picture of misogyny and sexual harassment in the media during the 
1970s and 80s has emerged.Anne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> was cutting her teeth 
as a reporter at the time, before moving to the BBC. Her daughter Emma Wilson 
joined the industry decades later. Oliver Laughland listens in as they discuss 
how far the media has changed.

Anne Robinson: The Jimmy Savile saga has taken on a much darker and uglier 
tone. Theallegations about children at Stoke Mandeville hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/11/jimmy-savile-sex-abuse-claims?newsfeed=true>
 being abused by him while those with a duty of care apparently failed to act 
are truly shocking. We need to distinguish between that and how life was 
generally for women in the workplace in the late 60s and early 70s, when the 
term sexual harassment didn't exist. My first job in Fleet Street was at the 
Daily Mail. There was an idiot chief sub who would yell for you to bring your 
copy over to the back bench. He would take it, drop it on the floor, so that 
you would bend over and pick it up, so that all the guys could have a look at 
your knickers – we weren't allowed to wear trousers in those days.

Emma Wilson: When I started in TV [Jimmy Savile] was definitely someone you 
thought was an odd character, and it doesn't surprise me. One of the things 
that has changed since I entered the industry, aged 19, is that now there are 
women bosses in the hierarchy. The beauty of women is that we talk, and in a 
heartbeat someone's inappropriate behaviour is going to be in a text, in a 
tweet, a phone call. Usually it's expressed in humour – but when you go on to 
the next job, everyone knows which are the dressing rooms to give a wide berth 
to.

AR: Looking back, we used to keep lists of men who weren't safe in taxis, 
"NST", and those who were "NSL", not safe in lifts, they were a bit quicker 
with their hands than NSTs. I think my best experience was with Charlie 
Haughey, who was then Ireland's Minister of Justice. I like to imagine he went 
to his grave with my bruises on his hands after he tried to grope me during the 
1969 Irish elections.

EW: What year was it when Tom Jones chased you around during an interview? 
That's the other side of it, as it's rather flattering sometimes.

AR: It was the late 1960s, I think. I saw him at the airport recently, he 
looked rather good. Not-very-well-dyed hair, but otherwise OK. He said [after 
the interview]: "I'm going on to have a drink at Hugh Hefner's house, do you 
want to come?" and I said, "You bet I do." He was charming. He wasn't predatory 
at all. But if anything had happened and he'd been less of a gentleman, I 
assure you, I would have thought it was my own fault. Power and fame are very 
seductive – they were then and they are now.

Oliver Laughland: But Liz Kershaw and Sandi Toksvig were women at the top of 
their profession, and have made allegations about being molested live on air. 
It happened at roughly the same time you were at theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. Are you shocked?

AR: It's not something I came into contact with. And if I had, I just wouldn't 
have put up with it. But that's me. The conspiracy of silence at Stoke 
Mandeville is far more distressing than the fact that Liz Kershaw didn't have 
the sense to say "Stop" when someone groped her in a BBC studio. What 
disappoints me now is that girls leave school and university with decent brains 
and qualifications, but at no point along the line has anyone taught them a few 
tricks of the trade, whether it's negotiating a salary or how to deal with a 
predatory male.

OL: Were you taught these things by your mum, Emma?

EW: Mum didn't need to because she very cleverly married a Glaswegian man. We 
used to have his old boxing gloves, and I was taught from a very young age to 
have a good right hook.

AR: But Emma, that's your father's dramatic instructions. In fact, what women 
need to learn is to give over a message of: "Don't mess with me." I still think 
it's difficult, particularly in this job market, if you've got a boss who's 
behaving inappropriately, and your job depends upon it. It doesn't matter how 
much legislation there is, if they've got the power over you and your career 
depends on it, you are in a very difficult situation. I remember having just 
had an interview for a news reporter's job on the Sunday Times. It was 1969. I 
then went off on a foreign trip, and another senior Sunday Times journalist who 
was also on the trip, and had a stake in my future, made a pass at me. And I 
thought: "Oh golly what am I going to do?" I want that job, I don't want to 
upset this person. It was difficult to deal with.

EW: That hasn't changed. The bottom line is women are far more concerned about 
offending someone because that will bring more problems. I like your advice 
about having a sticky note on the phone, saying: "Lunches are better for me." 
There are those people you don't have dinner with – the same sort who are not 
safe in taxis – not safe for dinners. I remember working in LA as a runner, 
I was 20 maybe. The assistant director was a big shot – it's always the alphas 
who are trying it on. He asked me out. My roommates all giggled because he 
turned up in a Porsche, and maybe alarm bell number one was the car. But alarm 
bell number two was when I sat down he put his hand on the seat, so that I sat 
on it. That was a while ago, and I think it could still happen today.

AR: I remember David Bailey took my photo a few years ago, and I asked him 
what the difference was between taking a photo now and in the 1960s, and he 
said: "Well in the 60s I would have had you first!"

OL: What would your advice be to young women trying to get into this industry?

AR: Be smart. Be clever and learn. It's the same advice I would have given 20 
or 30 years ago. I had the advantage of being brought up by a mother who 
rightly or wrongly guided me that most men were pretty stupid. I think it 
probably gave me a sense of self and self-protection that has been very useful, 
and I possibly have had less nasty moments than a lot of other women. I just 
wish women had more inbuilt confidence, I wish that more mentors of my age 
would persuade them to handle themselves better.

EW: Don't do anything you wouldn't want to tell your mum about later.

OL: What are your expectations of how this will affect the BBC and the results 
of the inquiry they've pledged?

AR: The BBC will put out another 10 yards of guidelines and lots of producers 
who should be busy making television programmes will have to go to meetings to 
learn about them. In fact, by the time I walk into the BBC next Wednesday 
there'll probably be 25 new ones. The gorgeous runner I've got at the moment 
probably won't be able to step over the door of my dressing room. I know that's 
a very pragmatic view, but a BBC inquiry ain't going to solve the problem. I 
would much rather we cut to the chase and empowered women not to put up with 
this sort of behaviour.
 