
It is widely regarded as the body's least useful organ, a block of intestinal 
tissue that often becomes inflamed and occasionally threatens to kill us.

But the appendix is getting a bad press, says US surgery expert Bill Parker 
<http://surgery.duke.edu/faculty/details/0115196>. Far from being an organ of 
evil, it serves a very useful function – by acting as a safe house for 
beneficial bacteria in our bodies. In effect, the much-reviled organ is really 
a sanctuary for helpful microbes, explains Parker, an assistant professor of 
experimental surgery at Duke University medical centre, in Durham, North 
Carolina.

"My idea is that the appendix is a storehouse, a cultivation centre for the 
normal, beneficial bacteria that our gut needs," he says. "That safe house 
would be necessary and useful in the event that the main compartment of 
bacteria, the large bowel, got contaminated with some kind of infectious 
organism and got flushed out."

The appendix is not unique to Homo sapiens. The great apes, other primates, 
the opossum, the wombat and rabbits: all have appendices. And in each case, 
Parker argues that the appendix behaves in a similar manner: as a resupply 
centre for benign microbes.

A crucial part of Parker's theory rests on the importance of the bacteria 
found in our intestines. Our bodies are made up of around 10 trillion cells. 
However, we carry about 10 times as many microorganisms inside our bodies, and 
most of these are found in our gut. Their relationship with humans is 
symbiotic. The bacteria take some of our sources of energy, our food in other 
words, and in return they help to prevent the growth of harmful, pathogenic 
bacteria, and also produce vitamins and hormones. They are crucial to our 
wellbeing, in short.

"Periodically, bacteria get shed out of the appendix," says Parker. Bacteria 
from the appendix can then reinoculate the system, he adds. "They would reboot 
the system and help those good bacteria get growing again."

Parker first outlined his ideas about the appendix in 2007 and researchers 
have since been searching for evidence to support them. Inthe current issue of 
Scientific American 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=your-appendix-could-save>, 
one group has now revealed that it has found intriguing evidence that suggests 
Parker may be correct. A team led by James Grendell, at Winthrop-University 
hospital on Long Island, studied 254 patients who had histories of gut 
infections caused byClostridium difficile. The bacterium – C diff, as it is 
usually known by doctors – is a deadly pathogen that is often encountered in 
hospitals among patients who have been put on prolonged courses of antibiotics.

These powerful doses of antibiotics can badly deplete the benign bacteria in 
patients' guts. When this happens,C diff – which they pick up from infected 
items in a hospital or nursing home – can grow quickly and take over their gut. 
The patient will then suffer severe bouts of diarrhoea.

But if Parker's idea is right, individuals without an appendix should be more 
likely to have recurrences ofC diff infections than those with one. The latter 
group's appendices would provide sources for replenishing their guts with 
benign bacteria that would hold theC diff at bay.

And that is precisely what Grendell's group found. They discovered that 
patients without an appendix were more than twice as likely to have a 
recurrence ofC difficile infections. Recurrence in individuals with their 
appendix intact occurred in 18% of cases. Recurrence in those without their 
appendix occurred in 45% of cases.

Darwin suggested that the organ was used by ancient humans for digesting 
leaves but as people's diets changed it shrank and degraded to how we find it 
today. But Parker's work is a striking piece of support for the idea that the 
appendix – far from being a redundant evolutionary vestige – has a role to play 
inside our bodies. The work is not proof that Parker is right, but it does 
suggest the scientist is on to something. As he says: "From all the signals 
we're now getting from the scientific community, it looks like we may be right 
on target."

However, Parker stresses he does not believe that people should hesitate in 
having an appendix removed should it become badly infected. Modern medicines 
can today provide the protection that appendices supplied in our evolutionary 
past. "It's really important to say that even though the appendix has a 
function, if you have that pain in the lower-right quadrant, get it taken out," 
he says. "It's life-threatening if you don't get it taken out, and you really 
don't need it in this culture."
 