
Isi Metzstein, who has died aged 83, was jointly responsible for some of the 
most remarkable and distinguished modern architecture in postwar Britain. Under 
the umbrella of the Glasgow practice of Gillespie Kidd & Coia (GKC), for whom 
he worked throughout his career, he and his colleague Andrew MacMillan designed 
a series of striking churches in and around Glasgow, as well as school and 
university buildings further afield, including Robinson College, Cambridge. 
They were also the architects of St Peter's Seminary at Cardross, Argyll and 
Bute, once widely regarded as the finest modern building inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> but now a derelict ruin.

Metzstein was born in Berlin, the son of two Polish Jews, Efraim (who died in 
1933) and Rachel. He escapedGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> 
in 1939 under the Kindertransport scheme. The boy, his siblings and their 
mother were scattered all over Britain until the family was eventually 
reunited. The young Isi had been taken in initially by a family in Hardgate, 
Clydebank, and he remained in Glasgow for the rest of his life.
 Isi Metzstein formed a club for the 'victims of premature scrapheaping'. 
Photograph: Dominik Gigler 
In 1945, having left school, he decided he wanted to become an architect, and 
a chance connection led to an apprenticeship with Jack Coia, the sole surviving 
partner of Gillespie Kidd & Coia, the firm he had taken on in the late 1920s. 
At the same time, Metzstein enrolled for evening classes in architecture at the 
Glasgow School of Art, where he met MacMillan, whom he brought into the firm in 
1954. Together, they were to transform the practice and, as "Andy and Isi", 
became a celebrated double-act, as designers, teachers and talkers.

Coia, the son of Italian immigrants, had reopened the office after the second 
world war and resumed his association with the Roman Catholic archdiocese of 
Glasgow, having built a number of churches in the 1930s. The archdiocese was 
about to embark on a programme of churchbuilding. At first, Coia's archi 
tecture continued in the manner of his prewar work, but soon the influence of 
his two and open-minded assistants became evident, familiar as they were with 
avant-garde buildings in continental Europe, in particular the work of the 
Swiss architect Charles-Édouard Jeanneret, better known asLe Corbusier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier>.

The turning point was the church at Glenrothes, a new town in Fife, which was 
completed in 1957. With its tapering, open plan, austere aesthetic and white 
exterior, this was clearly the creation of different hands. Henceforth, Coia's 
task was to secure the commissions, while the work was carried out by his young 
and expanding office. Although GKC were responsible for schools and some 
housing during the late 1950s and 60s, what stood out was the series of bold 
and inventive churches. It is ironic that, while the Roman Catholic hierarchy 
believed the architect to be the almost mythical Coia, the designing was in 
fact carried out by a Jewish refugee from Berlin and a Glaswegian of Highland 
Presbyterian ancestry.

Metzstein, who described himself as a "lapsed atheist", had a strong sense of 
the numinous, achieved in his churches by the dramatic handling of light in 
dark interiors. Some of the churches were in the tradition of tall and powerful 
brick boxes, such as those at East Kilbride (1962) and Kilsyth (1964). Others – 
St Benedict's, Drumchapel (1970), Our Lady of Good Counsel, Dennistoun (1965) – 
had highly inventive plans and unconventional internal spaces.

However, their masterpiece was undoubtedly St Peter's (1966), where 
neo-Corbusian ranges with a brilliant stepped-section were disposed around an 
existing Victorian mansion.

The work of GKC stood out from that of their equally modern-minded 
contemporaries in England. As Metzstein explained: "We got the unique 
opportunity to design modern buildings that were not modern programmes – 
churches, convents, seminaries … We were relatively young and more excitable, 
maybe … We were designing churches, which are one-off buildings with an 
emotional and religious context."

By good fortune, the firm never jumped aboard the high-rise, system-building 
juggernaut. Metzstein and MacMillan were also unusual in having a serious 
interest in history, appreciating the character of Glasgow's urban fabric of 
stone tenements and extolling the merits of the work of the city's great 
architects of the past, Alexander "Greek" Thomson and Charles Rennie 
Mackintosh, at a time when it was either ignored or under threat.

In 1969, when Coia was awarded the Royal gold medal for architecture, he asked 
that his two partners be associated with the honour. But by then things were 
beginning to go wrong. The patronage of the archdiocese was coming to an end 
(although new jobs appeared in England) and problems were emerging with the 
firm's experimental buildings. As with Frank Lloyd Wright, stories abound about 
leaking roofs and structural problems. The campanile at the East Kilbride 
church was taken down and in 1991 the wonderfully dramatic church at Drumchapel 
was summarily demolished a few days before it was due to be listed. As for St 
Peter's, which was superbly constructed (unlike some of the churches), it was 
rendered almost obsolete as soon as it was finished by the new policy, after 
the Second Vatican Council, of training priests in urban settings. It was 
abandoned by the archdiocese in 1980 and fell prey to vandals. Despite its 
grade A listing by Historic Scotland and its inclusion on the World Monuments 
Fund's list of sites most at risk, the structure remains a ruin.

Metzstein later announced the foundation of the Macallan club (named after his 
favourite whisky), whose members are the architects of buildings "demolished or 
mutilated without the involvement of its designer" and who, "the victims of 
brutal, premature 'scrap-heaping', are witnesses to the fragility of permanence 
which characterises [the] century". This may have been a joke, but it all hurt 
– deeply.

The firm's last building was Robinson College, an complex and inventive 
redbrick response to the growing reaction against the Modern movement, which 
was completed in 1980. Metzstein then devoted himself to teaching 
and lecturing, at the Mackintosh School ofArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/architecture> at the Glasgow School 
of Art (of which MacMillan was head), at the University of Edinburgh (where he 
was professor) and elsewhere.

He was held in great affection and respect by architects all over Britain, and 
was both revered and feared for his incisive and often devastating criticism of 
student work. It was annoying that recognition – and a growing admiration for 
the work of GKC – came so late. When Metzstein and MacMillan were presented 
with an award by the Royal Institute of British Architects for their teaching 
in 2008, Metzstein noted that "it would have been even better to receive this 
while we were still alive".

He remained until the end the conscience of a rational modernity, and was 
"allergic to 'starchitects' whose work fills the magazines". He much disliked 
the posturing arbitrariness of such buildings as Daniel Libeskind's Jewish 
Museum in Berlin, "which I can't take, both as an architect and as a Jew born 
in Berlin".

Behind Metzstein's acerbic wit, uttered in his guttural accent – a distinctive 
combination of German and Glaswegian – was a warm and generous personality. For 
an architect, he was unusually well-informed, intellectually curious and 
cosmopolitan in outlook.He lived with his wife, Dany, also of central European 
Jewish origin, and his family, in Hillhead. At home he created an ideal city 
made of metal tourist souvenir models of buildings which his many friends would 
send him from all over the world.

He is survived by Dany, his children, Mark, Saul and Ruth, and his brother and 
twin sister.

• Isi Israel Metzstein, architect, born 7 July 1928; died 10 January 2012

• This article was amended on 21 March. The original gave Metzstein's full 
name as Israel Metzstein. This has been corrected.
 