
Hundreds of Israelis have lined up outside Israel's parliament building to pay 
their last respects to Ariel Sharon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/jan/12/ariel-sharon-lies-in-state-jerusalem-video>
, the hardline former prime minister and general who died over the weekend.

Sharon's coffin was displayed in a plaza in front of the Knesset, where a 
stream of visitors passed by to take photographs and say farewell. A funeral 
service to be attended by dignitaries from around the world, including the US 
vice-president, Joe Biden, is scheduled for Monday.

Sharon, one of Israel's most iconic and controversial figures, died on 
Saturday at the age of 85, eight years after suffering a stroke that left him 
in a coma.

"My heart is broken. Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> lost 
the King of David. There is no other word to describe this man. They don't make 
people like this anymore," said Uri Rottman, a mourner who said he once served 
in the military with Sharon.

"I feel committed to share the very last moment before they're going to bury 
him," said Eliav Aviram, another former army comrade.

Sharon was a farmer, soldier then politician. He was a leader known for his 
exploits on the battlefield, masterminding Israel's invasion of Lebanon, 
pioneering Jewish settlements beyond the green line and then, late in life, 
initiating a seismic shift in the political landscape by withdrawing from the 
Gaza Strip. To his supporters, he was a war hero. To his critics, he was a war 
criminal.

Israeli authorities closed off streets around the parliament in anticipation 
of huge crowds on Sunday. Visitors were asked not to park in and around the 
city and were brought to the site by special buses.

President Shimon Peres <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shimon-peres> and 
the former prime minister Ehud Olmert, who succeeded Sharon after his 2006 
stroke, was among the visitors. Olmert crossed a roped-off area to stand 
silently next to the flag-draped coffin.

A state memorial is due to take place at the Knesset on Monday. In addition to 
Biden, other expected visitors include the former British PM Tony Blair, the 
Czech PM Jiri Rusnok and the German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier.

Sharon's body will later be taken by military convoy for burial at his farm in 
southern Israel.

News of Sharon's death dominated Israeli newspapers and broadcast reports, and 
Israel's three main TV stations all broadcast live from the memorial. Radio 
stations were filled with interviews with former officials and military men who 
shared stories of Sharon's exploits.

Residents in the West Bank village of Qibya recalled the village's darkest 
hour in October 1953 when 69 people were killed by troops led by Sharon. Qibya 
resident Hamed Ghethan was just four years old when the raid took place. He 
said he could remember older residents placing their hands over the children's 
mouths so they wouldn't make a sound.

"Sharon's name reminds me of … martyrs from my village," said Ghethan, 65, as 
he surveyed the ruins of buildings destroyed in the military action.
 