
Mark Taylor and Alec Stewart both identified the English batsmen's lack of 
grounding in slow bowling as their overriding weakness after the leg-spin of 
Stuart MacGill brought a hollow end to their hopes of a historic Ashes recovery.

Just as Shane Warne's leg-breaks had terrorised batsmen in Taylor's last two 
Ashes series as Australian captain, so England faltered at the last yesterday 
against a new adversary as MacGill's prodigious turn brought him 12 wickets in 
the match. No side has ever beaten Australia in Sydney by chasing a 
fourth-innings total above 200, and England, 98 runs short of their 287 target, 
were no different.

"In the last two Tests, at Melbourne and Sydney, England have been as 
impressive as any side I have faced in three Ashes series," Taylor said. "They 
have had their chances and have taken them. They haven't just made us wobble; 
they have nailed us.

"But the only way you can grow in confidence against this sort of spin bowling 
is by playing against it regularly. England don't get a lot of practice against 
good spin bowling. It doesn't exist in their domestic cricket and they don't 
play Tests in the subcontinent very often.

"The Indians play our spinners best of all. They have a bit of a go at us. 
They know they can handle it, so they challenge it more often."

Stewart was quick to explore a similar theme. "In the last two Tests we have 
showed what we are capable of, but we didn't master Australia's spin bowling," 
he said. "They bowled very well and we came unstuck. If we don't have 
top-quality spinners back home, then our leading batsmen are not going to play 
spin well."

England had employed a team psychologist to explore past traumas; they had 
enlisted the help of the Australian-born leg-spin coach, Peter Philpott, who 
had been MacGill's first tutor at the North Sydney club, and who had the entire 
squad bowling leg-spin in the nets in private net sessions.

It was all to no avail. England's commendable desire to use their feet against 
the spinners repeatedly courted disaster, and for many the sweep shot became a 
liability: MacGill bowled both Graeme Hick and Alex Tudor behind their legs in 
the second innings.

Nasser Hussain and Mark Ramprakash received particular praise from both 
captains. Not only were they England's most productive batsmen of the series - 
increasingly regarded by Australia as the partnership to split - their 
outstanding fielding was also instrumental in reinvigorating an England side 
that dropped as many as 20 catches over the five-Test series.

Identified, along with Graham Thorpe, at the start of the 1990s as England's 
most accomplished young batsmen, their Test pedigree had finally been 
confirmed, even if neither managed to make a hundred in the series. That their 
advancement did not occur more rapidly, however, serves as a reminder about the 
failings of England's domestic system as a breeding ground for quality.

MacGill's Test-best return of seven for 50, achieved more by massive turn than 
a wealth of variety, confirmed him as a pressing rival to his illustrious 
leg-spin partner, Shane Warne. The Warne comeback became more impressive as the 
Test progressed, though he took only two wickets in the match, dismissing Mark 
Butcher in his first over in both innings.

Since his debut against South Africa in Adelaide a year ago, MacGill's 
development has been swift, and Taylor regards his improvement as more mental 
than technical. "It's a bit to do with technique, but it's a lot more in the 
head," Taylor said. "Stuart MacGill was switched on in this game. When he 
isn't, he will say that maybe his front arm isn't right, or his back arm isn't 
right, but it might be largely a mental problem."

Stewart, meanwhile, was left with a very English muddle, stoutly defending the 
reputation of the coach, David Lloyd, who was rumoured over Christmas to be 
considering resignation after next summer's World Cup. "I hope I will be 
working with David Lloyd for a long time yet," Stewart said. "He has done a 
tremendous job. We have never been better prepared. He has not indicated to me 
in any way that he wants to stand down after the World Cup."

 