
It is not a TV genre renowned for high drama. But on Friday Gardeners' World on
BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2>, presented by Monty Don, does 
battle with Alan Titchmarsh's new ITV1 show, Love Your Garden.

Viewers are spared an X-Factor/Strictly scheduling clash, with Titchmarsh's 
offering airing in a half-hour slot before Gardeners' World from 8pm. But they 
are still likely to be watching to see who comes off best for advice, 
inspiration – and ratings.

Titchmarsh, who continues to anchor BBC2's extensive coverage of the Chelsea 
Flower Show, hosted Ground Force and presented Gardeners' World for six years. 
He was succeeded by Don, who left the show in 2008 after a minor stroke, but 
returned this year.

It has been many years since ITV had an evening gardening show, but the 
broadcaster says audience enthusiasm for outdoors shows such as Countrywide and 
The Dales with Ade Edmondson, and Titchmarsh's presenting skills, convinced 
them a show would be a good idea.

Unlike Gardeners' World, which uses Don's glorious – and enormous – garden at 
Long Meadow as its base, Titchmarsh will spend most of his time in domestic 
gardens, advising owners.

"I haven't watched Gardeners' World on a week by week basis, so for me it's 
about what feels right for an ITV1 audience," said Alison Sharman, director of 
daytime and factual programming at ITV. "It's about accessible gardening and an 
author, in Alan, with great authority and passion. You wouldn't get a more 
passionate advocate of gardening."

Sharman denied the scheduling was to do with Gardeners' World, but because the 
ITV1 schedule did not offer many alternatives.

Titchmarsh signed a new two-year deal with ITV in February. Believed to be 
worth about £11m, it also included a further four series of his chatshow.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> appears unworried by the 
rival. "We are delighted with the continued success of Gardeners' World and 
Monty's return has proved a real hit with the audience. We continue to work 
with Alan, including at Chelsea, and wish him the best with the new series."
 