
 Author:  Washington Irving (1783-1859) was the son of a Scottish immigrant, 
and grew up in a strictly Presbyterian enviroment in New York. He became a 
lawyer, but was more interested in travelling in Europe. Much of The Sketch 
Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. (1819-20) was written while Irving was working 
in England; the miscellany of essays, stories and observations earned Irving 
admiration on both sides of the Atlantic and established him as the leading 
figure in post-revolutionary America's attempt to emulate British literary 
accomplishment. The Sketch Book's most famous stories, Rip Van Winkle and The 
Legend of Sleepy Hollow, were purported to have been found "among the papers of 
the late Dietrich Knickerbocker". Irving stayed in Europe until 1832, returning 
to the US a literary hero and taking his place among the social elite (he 
served as ambassador to Spain between 1842-45).

 Story:  In the immediate post-revolutionary period, the small settlement of 
Tarry Town (in the "great state of New York") is the home of schoolteacher 
Ichabod Crane. Crane is courting Katrina Van Tassel (daughter of well-off local 
worthy Baltus Van Tassel) but has a rival in "a burly, roaring, roystering 
blade", Abraham "Brom Bones" Van Brunt. Crane attends a party at the Van 
Tassels', but on his journey home is apparently menaced by the local "goblin", 
the Headless Horseman of Sleepy Hollow. The Horseman is supposedly the ghost of 
a Hessian mercenary (employed in large numbers by the British side in the war 
of independence) decapitated in battle by a cannonball. The next morning, Crane 
has vanished. While the locals believe he has been carried off by the Horseman, 
the tale's ending suggests Crane has in fact used the ghost story as cover for 
his leaving Tarry Town after romantic rejection, and carried on a successful 
career elsewhere in the country.

 The film-maker: Tim Burton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/timburton> 
(b1958) began as an illustrator of Disney cartoons before directing his own 
animations, such as Frankenweenie (1984). Burton then developed his 
idiosyncratic style in live-action films, before he was hired to make Batman 
(1989), which was a critical and commercial hit. Sleepy Hollow originated with 
an idea by horror-movie make-up artist Kevin Yagher, and found its way to 
Burton after the latter had spent a year working on an aborted Superman movie 
in the late 90s.

 How book and film compare:  Burton's film embroiders considerably on Irving's 
book, turning the story into a fully fledged Gothic horror film. Crane is 
recast as a rationality-obsessed detective, sent from New York City to 
investigate a string of grisly slayings. Irving's original plays a good deal on 
truth and gullibility in storytelling, but the film turns the Headless Horseman 
into an unquestioned supernatural manifestation, who is used as an assassin in 
a convoluted murder conspiracy.

 Inspirations and influences:  Burton's work has always fed off an 
appreciation of different forms of the macabre - from the nursery-rhyme 
nastiness of The Nightmare Before Christmas (1993) to the grandiose urban 
Gothic of Batman (1989). Sleepy Hollow takes its cue from the "Germanic", 
folkoric character of Irving's original; Burton recasts the narrative as a 
homage to the period horror of the British Hammer studio and its Roger 
Corman-produced American equivalent, such as The Pit and the Pendulum (1961).
 