
This year I'm going to be performing a translation of Dante's Inferno, 
interwoven with my autobiographical experiences. The poem is all about the 
descent into hell, so, yes, I'll be talking about 'My Booze Hell', and how, 
last year, I finally gave up drinking after an attack of pancreatitis landed me 
in intensive care being pumped full of morphine.

It's not all gloom, however. There'll be some light yodelling and a surprise 
appearance by the world's most beautiful woman. I'm currently advertising for 
Beatrices.

People may not believe it of me, but I actually learned the first chunk of 
Dante's Inferno by heart many years ago in order to impress an Italian au pair 
I was after.

So it's the party trick I can always pull out to impress Italians, although I 
sound like an idiot because my accent's so bad and it's written in medieval 
Italian. But they all know the opening of the Inferno , because it's like 'To 
be or not to be' in Italian.

The first time I appeared at the Festival was in 1977 in a student revue 
called SwingAlongaDante, so there's a nice symmetry. But I must admit surviving 
Edinburgh without alcohol is a brand new experience. For a start, I'll be doing 
matinées.

I was a pretty good drunk, never maudlin or aggressive. I always got home at 
the end of the evening, always cleaned my teeth and got my clothes off before 
falling into bed, although I did get arrested once with Simon Munnery for 
nicking a policeman's helmet.

These days, I'm slightly more judgmental. Drunks are boring after 20 minutes - 
and I speak as one of yore. So I find I become increasingly Italian. I go into 
one bar and have an espresso, then flit off to another one. It's not like a 
public crawl exactly - it's more sophisticated.

Sadly, I'm not a 6am man any more and flirting seems vaguely ridiculous when 
you're stone-cold sober. Alcohol gives you staying power, so you never want to 
leave, but there's only so many bloody cranberry juices you can get down you. I 
am becoming more of an expert on soft drinks, but you get a very poor selection 
in Britain, even in posh restaurants.

So I'm counting on finding a Lebanese restaurant in Edinburgh. They're not a 
drinking culture, so they take more interest in non-alcoholic drinks.

You get these wonderful things like freshly squeezed melon. Failing that, I 
can always nip out for a joint in Princes Street Gardens.

· Dante's Inferno by Arthur Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arthur-smith> is at the Gilded Balloon 
Wine Bar 15-25 August. London preview at the Bedford Pub, 77 Bedford Hill, 
Balham SW12 on Friday 8 August at 8pm
 