
Everyone hates me in the springtime.

As soon as the weather warms up, the clothesline in my backyard gets hauled 
into action and I become physically unable to stop talking about it. My 
Instagram feed becomes littered with bucolic pictures of my dainties fluttering 
in the sunny breeze and I become prone to embarking upon long-winded screeds to 
anyone within earshot about how amazing my sheets smell when they’re dried in 
the fresh air.
In the wintertime, my clothes stagnate in the hamper until it risks 
overflowing or until my daughter runs out of socks. In spring and summer, 
however, I’m a compulsive laundry-doer. A sunny day means a laundry day, and 
laundry days fill me with an embarrassing amount of glee.

It’s a sweet ritual, this clothesline thing. I haul the basket of wet laundry 
to my backyard and balance it on the wobbly stool rescued from a curbside 
garbage pile years ago. One by one I take out our shirts and dresses, T-shirts 
and socks, shake out the wrinkles, attach them with clothespins, then pull the 
line over to pin the next one. Shaking and pinning, smoothing and pulling the 
line. It’s very soothing in its repetition, and only takes me about 10 minutes 
longer than just chucking it in the dryer.

I feel the sun on my face and a mild, pleasant sort of ache in my arms. It’s 
silent and satisfying. When I’m finished I can stand back and survey my work, 
see what I’ve done. It’s a ritual that can’t be rushed in a time wheneverything 
feels rushed.

I’ll admit that the enthusiasm with which I approach this task is excessive, 
perhaps, but it’s also underpinned by some pretty solid data indicating how 
environmentally effective a simple shift like this can be. With 85% of 
households in the US owning tumble dryers (60% in the UK), the energy sucking 
power of these machines is incredible.

According to some estimates, if each household in the UK chose to line dry 
just one load of laundry every week, we could save over a million tonnes of CO2 
each and every year. With many households (especially those with large families 
or small children) running laundry daily, this effect could easily be magnified 
if they made the switch.

If, at this point, you think I’m insanely overeager about laundry and you 
don’t care one iota about CO2 levels, let’s talk about your clothes then. 
Specifically, the horrors they endure inside that dryer drum.

Clothes dryers shrink your clothing twice as much 
<http://www.reviewed.com/science/how-dryers-destroy-your-clothes> as air drying 
does, and more importantly, they can cause irreversible damage. Doubt it? The 
proof’s in the dryer lint. That fuzzy material lining the lint trap is made up 
of tiny shreds of thread from hundreds of microscopic tears in the fabric of 
your clothing. Over time, regular dryer use means your clothes wear out faster 
– that is if you haven’t already shrunk them. This accelerated wear means you 
have to replace your clothing sooner – another cost to you and more waste to 
the landfill.

Whereas dryers work to bump up your energy bills and damage your clothing, the 
sun does double duty as one of the best stain fighters I’ve ever used, 
especially for organic stains like blood, banana or tomato sauce. This should 
be of particular interest to any parents with small, spill-prone children (so, 
all of them?). Ditto for getting your whites bright.

The only remaining issue to discuss is the crunchy clothing. Some object to 
the way towels, in particular, dry stiff and coarse – it’s almost like no one 
appreciates a good exfoliation any more.

A clothesline kit can be found at almost any hardware store; that and some 
bamboo clothespins is all you need to begin your own love affair with your 
clothesline. Of course, not everyone has a backyard – I didn’t for many years – 
and in that case a sturdy folding drying rack on a balcony works just as well. 
I still use one indoors throughout the winter when line-drying would mean 
T-shirt popsicles.

I’m not a particularly zen individual (if I attempt to meditate my mind seems 
to move even faster in an act of retaliation) but this clothesline ritual is 
the closest I get to inner peace.

Maybe now you hate me, too, but give it a try, anyway, would you?

 