
ITV's new chairman, Archie Norman, is understood to be rethinking the 
broadcaster's decision to dump regional news, potentially throwing a further 
obstacle into the path of the government's planto contract this programming out 
to independent suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/regional-tv-news-consortiums>.

Norman has been conducting a strategic review of all ITV's activities since 
taking over from Michael Grade in January and is said to be considering 
reversing his predecessor's decision to withdraw from local news provision for 
the English regions and Wales.

"Archie thinks ITV should continue to do regional news," a source close to the 
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> chairman said. "His sentiment is 
that it is important, not something to walk away from."

ITV's attitude is understood to be hardening against the plan to test 
independently financed news consortiums (IFNCs) in Wales, Scotland and the 
North East and Borders region, which would produce regional bulletins for ITV1. 
The schemeis being rushed through parliament ahead of a likely May general 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/05/digital-economy-bill-pushed-through>
.

ITV currently provides regional news programming for two of the three pilots, 
in Wales and the North-East and Border region, and staff in these areas will 
transfer to the consortiums. STV supplies news for Scotland.

Should ITV wish to make a U-turn on dumping regional news production, the 
decision is not currently in its hands. The Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport is overseeing a tender process involving eight bidders for the three 
pilot schemes, with a decision due to be announced by the culture secretary,Ben 
Bradshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ben-bradshaw>, next Thursday.

The Conservatives are opposed to the plan, however – the shadow culture 
spokesman, Jeremy Hunt, haspromised to block the proposal's passage through 
parliament as part of the digital economy bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/09/tories-digital-economy-regional-news>
.

A source involved in the process said that ITV executives are concerned about 
keeping control of advertising airtime around the regional news slots on ITV1, 
the quality of the proposed replacement services, and the longer-term 
implications of losing control of parts of the schedule on its flagship network.

In the English regions, the main ITV1 regional bulletin goes out between 6pm 
and 6.30pm, with other shorter local updates in the morning and at the end of 
the 1.30pm and 10pm network news programmes.

Another concern within ITV is said to be that is that the consortiums cut 
across Norman's attempts to boost the broadcaster's standing with the City, 
potentially grooming it for a sale or takeover, which could be hampered by a 
series of messy, publicly funded regional news partnerships.

Even if it continues producing local news for the English regions and Wales, 
ITV may look to make further cuts to the budget for the service, now about £60m 
a year.In late 2008 ITV cut 429 regional news staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/01/itv.television> – about 40% of 
the total – and £40m from budget.

ITV insiders said they have been working with the department to ensure the 
bidding process is successful, answering about 200 questions. However, others 
involved in the process dispute this.

During the process of public consultation and drawing up draft contracts the 
bidders needed key details from ITV, such as how many of the existing regional 
news staff they would be expected to transfer to the consortiums, under 
legislation to protect workers' rights.

One bidder said that the final draft contracts from would be suppliers had to 
be submitted by a deadline of Monday 8 March, but claimed ITV dragged its feet 
in providing key details until the Friday and Saturday before the deadline.

ITV is also said to have also tried, unsuccessfully, to demand oversight of 
the bidders' proposals. This is understood to have been rejected in favour of 
more general discussions.

Insiders at ITV admitted some replies were not sent until 5 or 6 March, but 
said that most questions were answered well before then. ITV has employed 
specialist consultants and lawyers on the process.

The selection panel chaired by Richard Hooper is on schedule to make a 
decision on the three winners next Tuesday, 23 March, ahead of Bradshaw's 
announcement on 25 March.

Successful bidders will share a pot of licence fee money from the digital 
switchover surplus worth £40m and will also have to sign a contract with ITV, 
which remains responsible for compliance.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 