
Small investors have hit out at the ITV board, arguing that chief executive 
Adam Crozier's£8.4m pay package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/20/adam-crozier-eight-million-pay-2013>
 and a new bonus scheme are excessive.

ITV chairman Archie Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> 
defended the payout at a shareholder meeting on Wednesday.

He defended the new scheme – which will see Crozier's maximum bonus increase 
from 180% to 200% of his £900,000 salary and his long-term incentive plan 
maximum rise from 225% to 350% of salary – telling investors that he doesn't 
get "handouts just for turning up at work".

ITV's shareholders are understood to have voted to approve Crozier's pay and 
back the new scheme, but several small investors hit out at the plans.

Norman said Crozier's unusually large remuneration was because of a number of 
share schemes vesting, including a multimillion-pound payout agreed as a 
joining package to entice the executive from Royal Mail.

"It may feel a bit like all [Crozier's] Christmases have come at once, I 
rather hope he thinks that too, but the point is the coming together of all 
those schemes combined with fact business has transformed over that period of 
time," said Norman. "I don't want you to get the impression that these were 
handouts for turning up at work."

One investor railed against the £3.95m "golden hello" agreed with Crozier, 
arguing that such an enticement should not be needed to retain top management.

"The management team here started four-and-half years ago when the company was 
in some difficulty, and over that time we have added about £5.1bn to the value 
of the business as at the start of the year," said Norman. "As a consequence 
shareholders have benefited and it is not unreasonable to think that management 
would have received an incentive as a result."

The same investor criticised the new remuneration plans ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> intends to introduce, arguing that 
the performance targets did not seem tough enough.

"The remuneration committee looks extremely closely and takes a great deal of 
advice on remuneration packages," said Norman. "All of this has been consulted 
on with our leading shareholders and the result is we think we are now well set 
up in terms of a remuneration framework for the business for the next four to 
five years. We have the overwhelming support of all our shareholders."

The level of Crozier's bonus payout – up to a maximum potential of 200% of his 
salary – is based on 60% financial performance and 40% personal management 
targets.

Share awards under the new long-term incentive plan will be assessed on 
criteria including adjusted earnings per share, the growth of international 
production revenue, online and pay revenues, and the share of viewing of the 
ITV family of channels.

Non-executive director Andy Haste, the head of ITV's remuneration committee, 
said that the measures used for the LTIP scheme were "hugely critical to future 
success of ITV".

"They are based fundamentally around the shift and shape and strategic 
direction of business," said Norman. "They are very much aligned to strategy of 
the company and to its future creative and financial health."

The official outcome of voting on ITV's resolutions will be made public either 
at the end of Wednesday or early on Thursday.

Royal London Asset Management, which owns a 1.2% stake in ITV, has said it 
voted against the broadcasters' new remuneration policy – although it supported 
Crozier's £8.4m pay last year.

The Association of British Insurers is understood to have issued an "amber 
top" warning, but no major shareholder voiced their concerns at the meeting in 
Westminster, London.

"This is very people-intensive business," said Norman. "We have seen from 
history at ITV that having outstanding management team properly paid and 
committed to the company ... it is vital for the success of our business. It is 
right management should be properly incentivised. I'm perfectly happy, it is 
quite right the management should have done well out of it."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 