
ITV's senior management today complained that it was locked into a "ratings 
rat race" which forced its flagship channel ITV1, home to Coronation Street and 
The X Factor, to air programmes aimed at the "lowest common denominator".

Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, ITV chief 
executive, admitted to a "remarkable lack of diversity" in ITV1's schedule 
compared with 10 years ago and claimed advertising airtime sales restrictions 
had "led us to chase higher-rating programmes, things like soaps and what have 
you".

The ITV chairman, Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, referred to the broadcaster 
being stuck in a "ratings rat race". "We need to be able to move away from the 
ratings rat race we are caught in," the former Asda boss and Tory MP said. "We 
are driven to look for mass audiences, so it in a sense drives us to the lowest 
common denominator."

Crozier, who joined ITV in April after running the Royal Mail and the FA, said 
that ifITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> was allowed to ditch 
Contract Rights Renewal, the mechanism governing airtime sales deals that 
financially punishes ITV1 if viewing levels drop, it would be able to invest 
more in genres including drama, arts and factual.

"Ad revenue has fallen by about 22% since CRR was introduced [in 2003]. That 
has led us to invest less and less in programmes," Crozier told the Lords 
communications committee.

"It has led us to chase higher-rating programmes, things like soaps and what 
have you. And therefore the diversity of our schedule today is very different 
from the diversity of our schedule seven to 10 years ago because we have to 
invest in programmes that drive the biggest audiences, rather than the most 
unique audiences," he said. "Were we not to have CRR in place [and ITV] not 
have to chase volumes of impact that would allow us to have a much more diverse 
schedule. That is certainly the plan."

He added that it was clear that there is a "remarkable lack of diversity" in 
any comparison of ITV's schedule in the past. "Advertisers would like us to 
target more unique audiences, rather than the same audiences again and again 
and again but the system works against that," Crozier said.

Crozier was effectively asked by the committee if he could give a guarantee 
that a CRR-free ITV would create a more diverse schedule by investing in 
regional news, an area the broadcaster has said is too uneconomical to continue 
to maintain in the long term. "Certainly we would put programming right at the 
top [of areas that would benefit from CRR being scrapped]," he said. "ITV has 
regionality at its heart."

Before peers including Lord Bragg, the former ITV controller of arts and 
presenter of The South Bank Show, ditched by the broadcaster last year, Crozier 
added: "Not chasing audiences would open up things like the arts, like more 
drama, like more factual programming."

Crozier also suggested that there was a case for the culture secretary, Jeremy 
Hunt, to step in to look at CRR, rather than it going back to the Competition 
Commission again. In May the competition regulator rejected ITV's latest bid to 
have CRR removed.

"The market has changed fairly demonstrably since 2006 [when the case for 
removing CRR first began to be looked at]," he said. "I think we need to move 
away from a very narrow argument [of the market definition used to look at the 
impact of CRR]. I think that's why we feel part of the solution is the 
government looking at this through secondary legislation."

However, Crozier maintained that ITV did not believe there needed to be a 
entire review of the TV ad trading market alongside any CRR review.

"I believe Ofcom looked into this earlier this year and concluded it wasn't 
right [to launch a review]," he said. "In fact although the market looks opaque 
from the outside those inside know how it works very well. I think having seen 
the fact it has taken four years to look into pieces of the market [with the 
CRR review] a market review could take years."

ITV reckons it has lost about £262m in revenue it could have used in areas 
including boosting programming since CRR was introduced in 2003.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 