
The good times are back at ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>, 
after the broadcaster reported strong profit growth on the back of programming 
successes including Broadchurch and Mr Selfridge.

Britain's largest free-to air broadcaster ruled out a bid for Richard Desmond's
Channel 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>, as it reported 
profits of £581m for 2013, a rise of more than a quarter on the previous year.

Revenues from advertising sales increased, but it was a double-figure leap in 
income from its own ITV Studios – the programme-making and distribution hub 
behind hits such asDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> – that drove profits 
upwards.

Chief executive Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> 
hailed "a significant step forward" for ITV, which has struggled to find its 
feet since it was created by the merger of network heavyweights Granada and 
Carlton in 2004. Crozier, who was parachuted in from the Royal Mail in 2010 to 
rescue the business, said: "All parts of the business are progressing well as 
we continue to rebalance ITV."

The steep rise in profits beat City forecasts, confirming that ITV has escaped 
the debilitating problems of slumping advertising revenue and enormous debt 
that confronted Crozier when he first arrived.

Under his leadership, ITV has reversed the decline in domestic programming, by 
winning audiences and advertisers with mass market hits including Dancing on 
Ice and I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here!

Meanwhile, Downton Abbey and Broadchurch have restored a reputation for drama 
that had been obscured by the success of entertainment formats such as the X 
Factor and I'm a Celebrity.

Crozier said ITV's broadcast channels had enjoyed their best year of viewing, 
while the main ITV channel had seen Emmerdale compete effectively for audiences 
against the BBC's Eastenders.

The strategy of exporting formats has also paid off, with Mr Selfridge, Marple 
and Hell's Kitchen US sold to more than 150 countries, while eight of its 
formats have been sold to multiple countries, including I'm a Celebrity and 
Dancing on Ice. Almost 60% of ITV's content is made by ITV Studios.

Crozier ruled out a bid for Channel 5, saying an offer would have attracted 
regulatory scrutiny, given the combined power of the two channels in the 
advertising market. First-round bids for Channel 5, which is owned by Daily 
Express proprietorRichard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond>, are due on Thursday, with 
BSkyB and the US-based Discovery Communications expected to make a joint bid.

But Crozier said ITV would continue to look at acquisitions, especially in the 
US and Britain. ITV is more than three-and-a-half years into a five-year 
turnaround plan, which includes cutting costs and buying production companies, 
as it attempts to shield its business from the deteriorating market for 
free-to-air advertising.

In a 12-month buying spree, ITV Studios acquired four production companies. It 
has bought The Garden and Big Talk in Britain, in deals aimed at boosting its 
factual entertainment and comedy formats, as well as Thinkfactory Media and 
High Noon Entertainment in the US.

These purchases helped ITV Studios increase its revenue by 20% to £857m, 
although ITV said some of the growth was not due to acquisitions. The 
cost-cutting part of the turnaround plan is set to continue, albeit at a slower 
pace, with further cuts of £10m pencilled in for 2014, after £28m in cuts last 
year.

However, the announcement of a £161m special dividend fell short of market 
expectations, causing ITV shares to slide 3.5% to 199p, with some analysts 
expecting a payout of at least £200m.

Keith Bowman at Hargreaves Lansdown stockbrokers said Crozier's transformation 
plan was "clearly blossoming". But he warned that ITV faced ongoing pressure on 
revenues, with advertising sales likely to be increasingly volatile as 
companies demand slots for live TV events with guaranteed audiences.

Crozier said ITV, which is broadcasting this year's World Cup from Brazil, 
would be "always interested" in future sports rights despite losing the 
Champions League broadcast franchise to BT.
 