
Forget about Ant and Dec. ITV's second- most important double act – chairman 
Archie Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> and chief 
executive Adam Crozier – made their debut in front of the broadcaster's 
shareholders today.

Norman warned ITV's annual general meeting not to expect the bons mots of his 
predecessor, Michael Grade, but opened with a couple of one-liners of which 
another of his on-screen stars, Harry Hill, might have been proud.

"I said when I first joined that I recognise that ITV is in the entertainment 
business, but the board is not meant to be the entertainment," began the former 
Tory MP, a reference tothe turbulence, bordering on farce, that marked the end 
of Grade's reign as executive chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/13/itv-city-saving>.

"It is 13 years to the day since I was elected to parliament as the member of 
parliament for Tunbridge Wells," he continued. "My arrival in the Commons 
coincided with the worst election defeat for the Conservative party for a 
century. I hope my timing at ITV is rather better."

The ripple of laughter that followed suggested the collection of small 
shareholders at the Westminster conference centre – just over the road from 
Norman's old stamping ground – would be easier to please than the judges on 
Britain's Got Talent. The big-rating reality show was inevitably name-checked 
by Norman; it is exactly the sort of primetime hit he wants ITV to produce 
in-house so that the broadcaster pockets the profits instead of the show's 
creator and star, Simon Cowell.

The Archie and Adam show left no one in any doubt about the scale of the 
challenge ahead, with Norman promising the "unvarnished truth" about the state 
of the broadcaster he has inherited.

ITV had lagged behind on new technology, he said, its production arm, ITV 
Studios, was in decline, and the slump in audience for its main channel, ITV1, 
had to be arrested. Plus, it had to take on the challenge of Google while being 
"one of Britain's most regulated companies".

It was no surprise, then, when he said ITV needed a "transformation" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/07/itv-archie-norman-five-year-plan>
. Not an overnight one, but a five-year one, aided by Peter Fincham, the 
"brilliant" ITV director of television, channels and online, and the newly 
recruited managing director of ITV Studios, Kevin Lygo. It remains to be seen 
when Lygo, on a six-month notice period at Channel 4, will be on board.

ITV reported an 8% year-on-year rise in TV ad revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/07/tv-ad-revenue-rise> in the first 
three months of this year, and predicts a World Cup-fuelled 22% surge in the 
second quarter. Crozier, who could earn more than £14m over the next five years 
if he can turn around the broadcaster's fortunes, urged caution.

"Clearly there is an upturn in the advertising market at the moment and of 
course that is helpful," he said. "But I also want to reassure you we are not 
fooled by that in terms of how it affects the fundamentals of the business. 
Although we are seeing some strong upturns in the market, it is still below 
what it was in 2008."

The first question from the floor came from an extravagantly bearded Captain 
David Hawker, a three-minute affair that touched on patriotism, British 
history, football hooliganism and "TV programmes that glamorise violence and 
otherwise bad behaviour and undermine the Judaeo-Christian values upon which 
our laws and society is based".

He added: "I have semi-celebrity status in my hometown." Norman replied: 
"Captain Hawker, I can well understand why you are a celebrity in your 
hometown."

It was as if Grade had never gone away.
 