
ITV chairman Archie Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> 
warned today that the broadcaster could afford "no more false dawns" as he 
outlined a five-year plan to transform the business into one of Britain's 
"fastest changing media companies".

Norman offered ITV shareholders the "unvarnished truth" about the state of the 
broadcaster at its annual meeting today, admitting that its production business,
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> Studios, had not performed well 
enough, and said the broadcaster had lagged behind its rivals in exploiting new 
technology.

He said it was vital that its flagship channel, ITV1, stop shedding audience 
share, and reiterated his predecessors' calls to roll back the burden of 
regulation on the broadcaster, which he described as "one of Britain's most 
regulated companies".

But he said ITV remained a business where the "heart is still beating strong, 
and a business with as much potential as it has challenges".

"It's been a tough year being part of a company where nearly 20% of the 
workforce is being made redundant and programmes you are longing to make have 
been cancelled for budgetary reasons because the country is in recession," 
Norman told shareholders in his debut address to the ITV annual meeting today.

"We have got a lot of talented people, people who have the will to win, people 
who are uncomfortable with the state ITV is in today and very determined to 
make it successful for our shareholders.

"The ITV problem has not been one of failure of ambition or aspiration. We 
have struggled with delivery. From now on we need to make that process of 
change irreversible. We can't afford more false dawns. This time we don't have 
an option. We've got to move the business forwards."

The broadcaster today reported an 8% year on year increase in TV ad revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/07/tv-ad-revenue-rise> in the first 
three months of the year, and is predicting a bumper World Cup-fuelled 22% 
surge in the second quarter.

But Norman warned that the recent media upturn could plunge into reverse by 
the beginning of next year.

"It is a good outlook for the next quarter but these figures have to be seen 
against last year's record decline in advertising," Norman told shareholders. 
"The effect on the economy [of the public sector deficit] could mean we slip 
back into no growth or even negative growth in the early part of 2011."

He said ad revenue was "like a faulty shower. It either blows too hot or too 
cold and it's very rarely somewhere in between."

The ITV chairman said there needed to be a "transformation" of ITV, which he 
described as a "challenged business".

"The board fully recognises that ITV is a challenged business. Gone are the 
days when we can take for granted the steady growth in advertising.

"Free-to-air advertising is probably in long-term decline, and yet we as a 
business remain substantially dependent on it. For us, no change is not an 
option. We have to find different ways of monetising and making value from our 
products on the internet and internationally and so on. We cannot sit where we 
are no matter how much we want to do so."

But Norman warned the change would not happen overnight. "This is a five-year 
journey. It's not that we are not interested in this year's profits and the 
next – we are very interested – we will make the right decisions to create 
shareholder value over three to five years. Where that involves investing a bit 
more money today even though that may not help next year's results but will 
benefit in three years' time, we will do that. Instant change is really no 
change. This isn't superficial. It's fundamental."

Norman said ITV would have to develop its presence on non-traditional 
platforms including the internet, video-on-demand and mobile phones. "We need 
as a company to be on all these platforms and at the forefront of exploiting 
this new technology. At the moment we are, if anything, slightly lagging."

He said ITV Studios, which will be overseen by the broadcaster's newest 
recruit, Kevin Lygo from Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/30/kevin-lygo-channel-4-itv>, "has 
been in general decline over the last few years. Not in terms of profit but in 
terms of share of commissions on ITV1 especially."

Norman also reflected on the recent travails of the ITV board, and its 
faltering search for a chief executive which eventually ended with the
appointment of Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv>, who also made 
his first appearance before ITV shareholders today.

"ITV is in the entertainment business but the board is not meant to be the 
entertainment," Norman said.

"We will have difficult times, it's that sort of company. We are a very public 
company. As far as I can tell we are incapable of doing anything privately; as 
soon as we decide to do anything it is in the Guardian or the Telegraph, but I 
am confident we will succeed in the end."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 