
Though it may seem like only yesterday City investors were calling for 
management scalps at ITV – as the share price plunged and advertising all but 
dried up– that's all changed. Now the company is being touted by analysts as a 
recovery story after thedeparture of Michael Grade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/18/michael-grade-itv-adam-crozier> 
and theappointment of ex-Asda chief Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/06/archie-norman-itv-chairman-challenges>
 as chairman and Adam Crozier, former head of the Royal Mail, as chief 
executive.

They say timing is everything. Crozier and Norman have hit the jackpot, with 
advertising rebounding just as they were getting settled into their offices at 
ITV's headquarters on London's South Bank.

The World Cup and blockbuster hits such as Britain's Got Talent have helped ITV
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> turn the corner, but more 
importantly advertisers have been prepared to spend again as Britain has 
emerged from recession. Interim figures to be published by the company this 
week should make good viewing: advertising is expected to have increased by 
about 20% on a year ago. And as advertising makes up 75% of ITV's revenues, it 
is central to the group's performance.

But structural problems remain. The advertising cake is fragmented since the 
emergence of digital, cable and satellite rivals. And gone are the days when 
the company used to dominate commercial television, and advertisers knew they 
could regularly reach a majority of the population with a well-timed promotion 
during prime-time viewing.

Norman and Crozier have been conducting a strategic review of the group's 
operations, but few believe there will be a "big bang" announcement when the 
half-time numbers are published on Wednesday. "I think that what we will see at 
ITV is evolution rather than revolution," says Paul Richards, media analyst at 
Numis Securities.

Richards believes ITV should do what it does best and focus on improving its 
offering on ITV1. He says rising profits should encourage Crozier and Norman to 
plough millions into programme making, producing its own "quality" non-crime 
drama, rather than being reliant on reality TV.

A TV executive says: "It's all very well paying ever-increasing sums to people 
such as Simon Cowell forThe X Factor, but these programmes have no shelf life 
beyond their first transmission. You can't repeat them. But hit programmes of 
old, such asInspector Morse and Jewel in the Crown can be shown again and 
again. What ITV should be doing is investing heavily in top-notch scripted 
drama and comedy."

How ITV is reshaped by Crozier and Norman matters a lot, because few believe 
the advertising bounce will continue into 2011. "Don't forget that 2009 was 
nasty, so we are coming from a low base," says Richards.

Numis is forecasting just 1% of advertising growth in 2011, against 14% for 
2010 as a whole – assuming there is no double-dip recession. Richards is 
confident that the trading environment will be more stable than in recent 
years: between 2006 and 2009 ITV operating profits halved from £400m to £200m. 
After writedowns and exceptional costs,the company lost £2.7bn in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/04/itv-slashes-costs-profits-drop>, 
the nadir of its fortunes.

The challenge for Norman and Crozier is to find ways of hedging against the 
advertising cycle, which is closely linked to GDP. One solution would be to 
come up with a compellingpay-TV operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/30/itv-prepares-pay-tv-strategy>, 
but that isn't easy when Sky dominates the sector with 9.86 million 
subscribers. Sky has massive bargaining power, so negotiating an agreement that 
makes commercial sense for ITV is "a big ask", says Alex de Groote at Panmure 
Gordon.

He adds: "Everyone remembers the failure of ITV Digital 10 years ago – when 
former ITV head Michael Green lost £1bn on a venture that eventually had to be 
abandoned.

"Aggressive marketing by BSkyB for its own digital service, Sky Digital, made 
the ITV offer look unattractive."

One way around the Sky colossus would be to develop ITV.com and provide a paid 
service via the internet. But with so much free broadcasting available – not 
least from the BBC – there is no guarantee of success.

Norman said recently: "We have no product suitable for a pay platform right 
now. Speculation we might take ITV 2, 3 or 4 onto a pay-tv platform is not 
realistic. Were we to develop a proposition in the pay-TV market we would need 
a very different product than we have at this time. Is there, in principle, a 
case for looking at it [a channel] out of content and programming we have 
already? Absolutely."

ITV's digital offering is being studied by Fru Hazlitt, the former chief 
executive of radio group GCap, who was appointed as ITV's head of advertising 
and online activities with a mandate to look for new sources of income. She 
told theFinancial Times: "ITV has to look at exploiting more activities beyond 
spot advertising. The way you build on that traditional strength is the way you 
will be transformational."

She said Project Canvas, the technology that will blur the distinction between 
computers and TV when it is introduced in 2011, would be a significant part of 
the transformation.

Crozier says it's crucial that the company gets "better at exploiting our 
brands fully across all platforms and reducing our reliance on a single 
volatile revenue stream".

Another key area that ITV's new management is targeting for growth is its 
programme production arm, ITV Studios, which has been neglected. Norman has 
moved to scotch persistent rumours that he would sell off the production 
business to allow ITV the flexibility of buying the best content available on 
the international market. Some shareholders support a sale but Norman does not. 
He says it makes commercial sense for ITV to own as much of its content as 
possible in a world where experts contend that "content is king". That piles on 
the pressure for ITV's production arm to come up with blockbuster hits, and 
preferably ones that can be sold overseas, especially in the US.

To meet the challenge, Norman and Crozier have appointed a new head of ITV 
Studios,Kevin Lygo, who joined from Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/30/kevin-lygo-channel-4-itv> in the 
spring. The production arm had a turnover of nearly £600m last year, but has 
suffered from the loss of a number of senior creative figures as the 
broadcaster slashed costs. It has seen its share of commissions from ITV fall 
from 65% in 2004 to 47% this year. Lygo said that his goal for ITV Studios, the 
home of shows such asHell's Kitchen, Emmerdale and Poirot, was to "keep those 
programmes fresh and relevant, develop new hits and exploit the full value of 
those properties across all platforms in the UK and internationally".

Peter Fincham, ITV's director of television, channels and online, who was 
involved in recruiting Lygo, said that reinvigorating ITV Studios was a "high 
priority" for management.Guardian columnist Steve Hewlett wrote recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/03/itv-kevin-lygo-programmes-inhouse>
 that the strategy is sensible in principle: "Put simply, too many of ITV's 
hits are made (and ultimately owned) by other people – thinkThe X Factor and 
Britain's Got Talent.

"On the upside, those shows help to improve ITV's on-air performance and ad 
income. On the downside, you can't have a credible "profitable content" growth 
strategy if you don't own the content."

But he warns that Lygo's mission is a hard one. "Tension between producers 
incentivised to build their content business and broadcasters strapped to the 
wheel of maximising on-air performance has proved impossible to resolve (in the 
past).

"The temptation to pressure ITV commissioners to favour in-house ideas will be 
hard to resist. But the minute that results in a less-than-optimal on-air 
performance, investors will get nervous."

That is why some City shareholders believe a better option would be for ITV to 
ditch its in-house production operation and simply buy in the best programmes 
from around the world.

Elsewhere, the regulatory climate remains difficult. The company was recently 
knocked by aCompetition Commission review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/27/house-lords-tv-ad-market-inquiry>
, which ruled that restrictions on how much it can charge advertisers must stay 
in place. The contract rights renewal (CRR) system determines advertising rates 
and is designed to prevent ITV abusing its dominant position as the largest 
free-to-air terrestrial broadcaster. The rules were a condition imposed by the 
regulator for waving through the merger of Carlton and Granada in 2003, a deal 
that led to the creation of ITV plc. ITV has long argued that CRR is a 
straitjacket which restricts the group's ability to recover from the 
advertising slump. Norman said CRR's abolition was a priority, but that ITV 
should not depend on rule changes to lift its fortunes.

But what of the mood inside ITV? The company's recent decision to ask 150 of 
its senior staffto undergo psychometric tests 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bb7b6bfa-8a01-11df-bd30-00144feab49a.html> went down 
badly with managers suspecting the exams would be used to root out people that 
ITV wanted to sack. The company denied this was the case and said the process 
was designed merely to understand "the ongoing development needs of each member 
of the team".

One insider said: "There is less enthusiasm for criticising Norman than the 
previous Grade regime. But the atmosphere is hardly upbeat. Norman, Crozier and 
Hazlitt didn't have experience of television before they joined, which hardly 
inspires confidence. But let's see what they come up with. These are early 
days."

Crozier is in line for a pay packet of more than £14m over the next five years 
if he can turn around the broadcaster's fortunes. But can he do it? Toby Syfret 
at Enders Analysis says there is "no magic formula, but the priority should be 
to protect its (48%) share of the television advertising market, and not get 
too preoccupied with diversification".
 