
Eight weeks into Archie Norman's reign at ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>, the main messages sound like those 
Michael Grade presented on his arrival in 2006. ITV1 will continue to be the 
heartbeat of the business, content is still king and the road ahead is long.

None of which should come as a surprise. It has been obvious for years that 
there is no cure-all at ITV. A few voices may advocate a sale of the production 
division, ITV Studios, but virtually no other large commercial broadcaster in 
the world is running in that direction – successful firms generate most of 
their own content. It would be odd to surrender the potentially huge advantage 
of vertical integration to become a giant Channel 4.

But a measure of how far ITV is failing to exploit the advantage is that ITV 
Studios' share of ITV1 commissions fell to 47% last year when the regulations 
allow the ratio to be as high at 75%. Conclusion: seven years after the merger 
of Carlton and Granada, production and broadcasting – the left and right hands 
of ITV – are not pulling together.

How, then, does Norman promise to create a "fizzing" and "re-energised" 
operation in which ITV commissioners might wish to order more programmes from 
their colleagues down the road?

It's the job of Adam Crozier, the soon-to-arrive chief executive, to find the 
answers but a hybrid model of greater co-operation with independents and more 
internal competition appear to be a couple of ideas under consideration. We 
shall see. The biggest challenge, as ever, will be freeing up cash to compete 
with well-resourced independents that rather like the idea of touting their 
best ideas to the BBC and Sky as well as ITV.

The good news for shareholders is that the TV advertising market appears to 
have turned up. The bad news is that the group is still "cautious" about 
revenues over the medium-term and Norman says the "journey to become a very 
different business" could last five years. That assessment looks fair.
 