
ITV's new chief executive, Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, is in line for a pay packet 
of more than £14m over the next five years if he can turn around the ailing 
broadcaster's fortunes.

Crozier, whose move from Royal Mail was announced last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv>, is set to 
earn a smaller basic salary than ITV's previous boss, Michael Grade, but is 
still likely to get £750,000 a year.

On top of that he can earn 150% of his salary again as a bonus for meeting 
certain targets and under a long-term incentive plan, yet to be finalised, he 
could enjoy another £5m over five years.

That takes the total package for the former boss of the FA to £14.4m between 
now and 2014, or the equivalent of almost £3m a year.

Details of the package have emerged since ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> chairman Archie Norman's comments 
that Crozier's pay will be "within the normal range for this type of role and 
challenge".

"It is not in the Tony Ball league, very far from it," Norman added on a call 
to journalists last week. "He will have a strong incentive to make the business 
perform, as you would expect."

Ball reportedly wanted a package worth £42m over five years and his pay 
demands were one of the sticking points that led to theITV board scrapping 
negotiations with the former BSkyB chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/25/itv-tony-ball> in September.

Though smaller than Ball's demands, Crozier's ITV package will swell a bank 
balance already beefed up by his old job at the head ofRoyal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail>. He is reportedly set to 
leave with £2m in bonuses and research by the TaxPayers' Alliance, which 
publishes an annual public sector rich list, found that Crozier was paid 
£1,142,000 at the postal service.

He leaves behind industrial unrest and a business grappling with the need to 
modernise for a business where morale is similarly subdued and investor 
pressure is high. Crozier, who like Norman has no previous experience in 
broadcasting, will need to show shareholders he can deliver the results to 
revive a stock price that has halved since 2007.

The home of Coronation Street and I'm a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! 
enjoyed rating success last year but terrestrial TV channels are struggling to 
sustain audience share as increasing numbers of households sign up to 
multichannel TV.

Older media companies such as ITV also face stiff competition for viewer 
attention and advertiser money from new forms of entertainment such as 
websites, games consoles and mobile phones.

Crozier will have to find new ways for ITV to make money beyond its 
free-to-air advertising model. He is likely to build on ITV's growing success 
at selling its in-house productions to other UK networks and overseas markets. 
Its Come Dine with Me show is already sold to Channel 4 in Britain and the 
format has been bought in more than 20 countries.

The new boss, whose media experience includes a stint running advertising 
agency Saatchi & Saatchi and a sales and marketing role at Telegraph 
Newspapers, may also look into launching new digital channels to complement 
ITV2, ITV3 and ITV4. In a bid to find new revenue streams, ITV could start 
charging for some or all of those channels.

Crozier's appointment to the chief executive role, which he is expected to 
take up at the end of March, ended almost a year of uncertainty around the 
management of the TV company. It had been looking for a new boss for 10 months 
since executive chairman Michael Grade said last March that he would step back 
from his day-to-day management role and become non-executive chairman by the 
end of the year. However, when ITV announced in September that it had broken 
off talks with Ball, it also emerged that the Grade would be leaving the 
company altogether, opening the way for Norman's appointment.

On the regulatory front, Norman and Crozier will lead negotiations with the 
government about further reducing ITV's public service obligations. Norman has 
described ITV as "Britain's most highly regulated company".

Crozier may also have to fend off takeover bids, especially given that 17.9% 
shareholder BSkyB has been ordered by competition authorities to sell most of 
its stake. It could be acquired by a rival broadcaster; there has also been 
plenty of speculation that non-industry suitors could emerge.
 