
Now here's a story – ITV is doing really well. Revenues are up and ratings are 
strong, driven by high-quality, high-value, must-see programming. So much so 
that even the company's beleaguered share price is showing signs of life.

But if you'd listened to the chairman, Archie Norman, and his chief executive, 
Adam Crozier, last week this would not have been the message you would have 
heard.Addressing the House of Lords communications select committee 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/nov/02/itv-adam-crozier-archie-norman>, 
as part of their lordships' inquiry into the workings of the TV advertising 
market, ITV's top team seem to have said almost the opposite.

ITV was the victim of a "ratings rat race" that "drives us to the lowest 
common denominator every time" – forced to "chase ratings to maintain revenues" 
with "things like soaps and what have you", resulting in a schedule 
characterised by "a remarkable lack of diversity". Could this be the same 
network as the one that has The X Factor, Britain's most watched and 
talked-about show, the top-flight costume drama Downton Abbey, hard-hitting 
documentaries about life in prison in midweek prime time and the country's most 
popular soap in its 50th year and in some of the best form of its life?

Needless to say, perhaps, Norman and Crozier's comments have not gone down 
well back at the ranch, where programmers and producers thought they were doing 
creditably well. And advertisers couldn't quite believe what they were hearing 
either: one of them described the bosses talking down the quality of their own 
output as coming close to ITV's "Ratner moment". All the more remarkable as it 
appears (for once) to be the opposite of the truth.

So what were Archie and Adam up to? They were trying to persuade the commitee 
that if ITV were given relief from the dreadedcontract rights renewal mechanism 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/may/12/crr-explained-itv> (CRR) that has 
governed the sale of ITV airtime since the Carlton- Granada merger back in 
2003, it would be a much better place. Their claim is essentially that CRR – 
which allows advertisers to pay less for ITV airtime in proportion to any drop 
in ratings (which you might have expected to happen anyway) – drives the 
network to chase ratings at all costs. And if they didn't have to do that then 
Lord (Melvyn) Bragg – a member of the committee – might get his arts programmes 
back, amidst an altogether richer schedule.

But there are several problems with this line of argument. For a start, what 
ITV called a "ratings rat race" has always been a fact of life for commercial 
broadcasters. It is true that ITV runs more hours of soap than was once the 
case, but that happened well before CRR was born or even thought of. Then the 
idea that high-rating programmes are by definition "lowest common denominator" 
is shown by ITV's own output to be plain wrong. Viewers are a genuinely 
discerning lot and by and large don't watch bad programmes – at least not in 
large numbers.

CRR's focus on ratings overall may theoretically have an impact on ITV's 
programme commissioning – towards higher rating programmes – but that is 
historically what ITV has done anyway. And while CRR has certainly cost ITV 
hundreds of millions of pounds in lost revenue over the years (piquantly it was 
offered up by Carlton and Granada themselves in exchange for regulatory 
permission to merge), its effect on current revenues is much less pronounced as 
ITV's ratings have stabilised and improved. Of course, ITV bosses want shot of 
CRR, not so much because they want to make more arts programmes – pigs might 
fly – but because they will be able to put up their prices to advertisers.

The people who run ITV always have to face in two directions at once. On the 
one hand talking the company up to advertisers, investors and the City, while 
on the other being tempted to talk it down when seeking relief from regulators 
and politicians.

Norman and Crozier may have imagined it was what the members of the select 
committee wanted to hear, but it runs the risk of leaving ITV's top two looking 
as if they have little empathy for, or understanding of, ITV's core proposition 
– mass, popular, quality programming – or worse, perhaps, of the people who 
make it and/or watch it. And if that view takes hold, the good feelings Norman 
and Crozier have generated about ITV's development under them really won't last 
very long at all.

It may not be quite the "Ratner moment" some have suggested, but their words 
could well come back to haunt them.

Steve Hewlett presents Radio 4's The Media Show
 