
Ana Ivanovic will face Daniela Hantuchova in the semi-finals of the Australian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> after finally 
recording her first win over Venus Williams at the fifth attempt. Fourth seed 
Ivanovic had actually never even taken a set off Williams in any of their 
previous four meetings, but managed to win points at the right moments on the 
way to a fiercely contested 7-6 (7-3), 6-4 win.

Neither player was at their fluid best - Williams making 35 unforced errors to 
Ivanovic's 34 - and the advantage passed back and forth in a first set that saw 
six consecutive breaks of serve. Ivanovic held her opening service game before 
breaking Wiliams to take the early 2-0 lead, but neither player would hold 
again until the eighth game, when Williams managed to level the set at 4-4.

Finally both players began to settle into some sort of groove, both holding 
their next two service games to set up a tie-break. Again Williams was sloppy, 
struggling with her serve as Ivanovic to claimed five consecutive points, then 
handing her opponent the set by blasting a routine backhand volley into the net.

Williams quickly moved 3-0 up in the second set after breaking Ivanovic again 
in the second game, but Ivanovic broke back in the fifth game, before a 
backhand into the net from Williams gave her the opportunity to serve for the 
set at 5-4. Once again Williams rallied, earning herself two break points at 
15-40, but Ivanovic dug deep to save both before finally taking the match on 
another unforced error - Williams sending her forehand a long way wide.

"I'm just so happy I pulled through the whole two sets," said Ivanovic 
afterwards. "It was an amazing match, we had lots of long rallies, she's an 
amazing competitor and she was also playing very well today."

Hantuchova had secured her passage to the semi-finals earlier in the day with 
a resounding 6-2, 6-2 win over Agnieszka Radwanska. Hantuchova had never 
previously reached the semi-final of a grand slam, but had little trouble with 
18-year-old Radwanska, who appeared nervous in the early stages despite having 
already beaten second seed Svetlana Kuznetsova and 14th seed Nadia Petrova so 
far in Melbourne.

Hantuchova said she would have "nothing to lose" in her semi-final against 
fourth seed Ivanovic. "I'm in a great position," she said. "I'm just really 
looking forward to be out on the court again, giving my best and seeing what 
happens."

Click right here 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2008/01/23/aussie_ana_winning_fans_as_wel.html>
 for Guardian tennis correspondent Steve Bierley's blog on how Ivanovic is 
winning fans as well as matches in Melbourne.
 