
Jack Newton has urged critics to lay off Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> as sporting greats question the 
Australian golf ace’s decision to skip the Rio Olympics. Jack Nicklaus, fellow 
US golf great Johnny Miller and Australia’s Olympic swimming legend Dawn Fraser 
are among those lamenting Scott’s decision to bypass the sport’s return to the 
Olympic Games.

But eminent Australian golf figure Newton says flak flying Scott’s way is 
unfair. “It’s a personal decision,” Newton told reporters on Thursday. “He’s 
not letting the country down. He’s not letting the Olympics down.”

Australian golfer Adam Scott says no to Rio Olympics selection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/20/australian-golfer-adam-scott-says-no-to-rio-olympics-selection>
Newton noted that when he was Australasian PGA Tour chairman a vote among the 
players on whether golf should return to the Olympics went convincingly against 
it – “as most of the world was saying at the time”. “That was a while ago but I 
can’t see how things could have changed that much. I think the Americans are 
pushing the buttons on this one,” said Newton. He personally doesn’t believe 
golf should be in the Olympics. “It’s never going to be a major,” he said. 
“We’ve already got four majors.”

The winner of a record 18 golf majors, Nicklaus expressed concern after 
Scott’s no-show announcement followed that of fellow former world No.1 Vijay 
Singh of Fiji, fearing the sport’s chances of retaining Olympic status could be 
dented. “I think that’s sad. I think it’s sad for the Olympics and for the game 
of golf,” Nicklaus said. “What I’m concerned about is that golf has a little 
bit of momentum going right now. If the guys don’t want to participate, then we 
might not be in the Olympics after this.”

Never enthused by golf’s admission to the Olympics, Scott cited a heavy 
schedule that includes three majors in seven weeks before the Olympics and 
“other commitments - professional and personal” as the reason behind his 
decision.

But Miller felt Scott should still go to Rio for Australia’s sake. “Playing 
for your country is a lot bigger than playing for yourself,” Miller said. “I 
would say I don’t care how tired you are, and I wouldn’t even care where you 
place in the tournament, but you need to be there to represent your country.”

The outspoken Fraser accused Scott of putting money ahead of national pride. 
“Well done Adam great to put your country on hold so that you can fulfil your 
own schedule,” four-time Olympic gold medallist Fraser wrote in a Facebook 
post. “How much money do you want in life? Not showing much for your country.”

Scott’s fellow Australian tour pro James Nitties rallied behind him, tweeting 
“Adam Scott represents his country by coming back to AUS every year and playing 
events to build the sport... What else do you want! #respect”.

Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Australia chief executive 
Stephen Pitt said Scott’s early decision would enable another medal contender 
to take his place. “We’re obviously disappointed Adam will not play because 
he’s one of the best players in the world, but we understand his position,” 
Pitt said. “This means one of our other elite players will get the chance and 
we’re more than happy that we will field a very strong team in Rio.”

The final major of the year, the US PGA Championship, is played from July 
28-31 and the men’s Olympic golf tournament is from August 11-14, although the 
Games start on August 5.



 