
Author: Manuel Puig (1932-1990) grew up in a small town in the remote 
Argentinian pampas, obsessed with films and dabbling in transvestitism. At 23, 
he won a scholaship to study film-making in Rome, but soon dropped out. After a 
decade of writing film scripts, Puig returned to Buenos Aires in 1967 and 
turned a script into his first novel, a semi-autobiographical fable about a 
movie-world fantasist, Betrayed by Rita Hayworth (1968). However, the 
flamboyant Puig found it difficult to live in Peronist Argentina, and moved to 
Brazil in 1973 and New York three years later. Kiss of the Spider Woman was 
published in 1976. Puig remained in New York - as a high-profile gay writer he 
was regularly attacked in the Argentinian media - and lectured on creative 
writing at Columbia university. He finally settled in 1989 in Cuernavaca, 
Mexico, and died a year later from complications after a gall-bladder operation.

Story: Echoing his film script work,  Kiss of the Spider Woman is written 
almost entirely as dialogue. Two men - a political radical, Arregui, and a gay 
paedophile, Molina, are imprisoned in the same cell in a Buenos Aires 
penitentiary. To pass the time, Molina recites the plots of his favourite 
films, beginning with Jacques Tourneur's 1942 horror movieCat People. Molina's 
camp fetishism initially irritates Arregui - especially when he realises 
another of Molina's favourites is a Nazi propaganda piece. Puig inserts a 
"transcript" of a meeting between Molina and the prison warden, revealing that 
the authorities have demanded Molina inform on Arregui. But as their 
relationship deepens (culminating in a sexual episode), Molina agrees to 
deliver a message for Arregui after he is released. A final "report" reveals 
that Molina is shot dead in the street as he tries to carry out his mission.

The film-maker: Hector Babenco (b1946) grew up in Argentina but settled in 
Brazil in 1969. He began directing features in 1975, but made a major 
international impact withPixote (1981), an account of the appalling life of São 
Paulo street children. Babenco spent four years bringingKiss of the Spider Woman
 to the screen, casting William Hurt in the pivotal role. (Puig hated Hurt's 
performance, despite his winning an Oscar.) Shortly after completing the film, 
Babenco was diagnosed with lymphatic cancer; his doctor, Dráuzio Varella, went 
on to write the prison stories that would become Babenco's most successful film,
Carandiru (2003).

How book and film compare: Though the film's narrative generally sticks close 
to the novel it excises Puig's lengthy footnotes about clinical assessments of 
homosexuality, and replaces Molina's fetishisation of real movies with a 
single, fictitious Nazi-style piece, which is recreated at intervals throughout 
the story. Much of the detail of Molina's lifestyle is lost in the adaptation, 
and the "spider woman" is presented as another of Molina's films - whereas she 
appears in Puig's original as the final image of Arregui's own fantasy as he is 
tortured.

Inspirations and influences: As an evocation of high camp,  Kiss of the Spider 
Woman brought gay cabaret style into mainstream movies, paving the way for 
American treatments of similar themes, such asTorch Song Trilogy (1988). It 
also marked a turning point for Latin American cinema, in the doldrums after 
the politically inspiredcinema novo of the 1960s and 1970s.
 