
In late March, Donald Trump sat down for a town hall-style interview with 
Chris Matthews. The candidate at the time was still crisscrossing himself on 
abortion rights – should Planned Parenthood be defunded? Was Roe v Wade settled 
law? – and Matthews made several attempts to pin him down.

“If you say abortion is a crime or abortion is murder, you have to deal with 
it under law,” Matthews said. “Should abortion be punished?… Do you believe in 
punishment for abortion, yes or no, as a principle?”

After several dodges, Trump replied: “The answer is that there has to be some 
form of punishment.”

The denunciations came almost as fast as Trump’s retraction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/donald-trump-women-abortions-punishment>
. Later in the day, Trump issued a statement saying that a woman should never 
be punished for an abortion – only her doctor. But before he could reverse 
himself, a cry went up almost in unison from reproductive rights activists: 
some women are already being punished for having abortions.

Nearly 44 years after the supreme court ruled that women in the United States 
have a right to a legal abortion, self-induced abortions are still a 
significant phenomenon. As the Guardianreported on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
, every year, there are potentially thousands of women in the US who attempt to 
end their pregnancies by themselves. Some even succeed.

Unwittingly or not, these women are operating in murky legal territory. Only 
seven states have some law that makes it explicitly illegal for a woman to 
attempt her own abortion, and in most states and at the federal level, the law 
says nothing at all. But that hasn’t stopped individual prosecutors from going 
after women who self-induce abortions, or try.

All told, in the United States, a woman who attempts to induce her own 
abortion may potentially be running afoul of any one of 40 different laws – 
including those against child abuse, or drug possession, or practicing medicine 
without a license – according to the Self-InducedAbortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> (SIA) Legal Team, a project 
associated with Berkeley Law. And this is not settled law. Several times, after 
a woman has been jailed and prosecuted, a court has ruled that the law under 
which she was charged didn’t apply to women who attempt their own abortions.

We have gone and created a unique, gender-based crime, where the action 
actually requires a pregnancy to be a crime.
Lynn Paltrow, head of the National Advocates for Pregnant Women 
Last year, Georgia prosecutors attempted to charge Kenlissa Jones with 
attempted murder after authorities claimed that Jones used abortion drugs to 
self-induce a miscarriage. Arkansas prosecutors charged a 37-year-old named 
Anne Bynum for allegedly using the same pills. The best-known of these cases 
even unfolded in Vice-President-elect Mike Pence’s backyard: Purvi Patel, an 
Indiana woman, apparently used abortion drugs she had obtained over the 
internet to try to end her pregnancy in its second trimester. Patel was 
sentenced to 20 years in prison until an appeals court reduced her sentence. A 
push for Pence, who later became governor of Indiana, to clarify whether a 
state law allowed Patel’s prosecution fell on deaf ears.

In several instances, law enforcement agencies have charged women under laws 
ostensibly enacted to protect women. In December 2013, Jennifer Whalen, a 
Pennsylvania woman, was charged with offering medical advice about abortion 
without being medically licensed after she ordered an abortion drug online for 
her pregnant daughter. Thirty-seven states have similar laws requiring abortion 
drugs to be administered by a licensed physician.

It’s very much on individual prosecutors to make these decisions, said Lynn 
Paltrow, the head of the National Advocates for PregnantWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> (NAPW), which has intervened 
in some of these cases on behalf of the women charged. “It does not seem like 
the National Right to Life or some other group was encouraging these 
prosecutions. In many of these cases, hospital staff or local police are 
outraged and want to find a way to respond.”

Hospital workers or social workers may be horrified and feel personally 
obligated
Jeanne Flavin, researcher with NAPW 
Laurie Bertram Roberts, the head of the Mississippi Reproductive Freedom Fund, 
recently encountered a woman whose friend had sent herself to the hospital four 
times by drinking a home abortion cocktail of turpentine and sugar. During her 
most recent hospitalization, doctors threatened to call the police if she tried 
this again, Roberts said. “When we zoom out on this trend, I do think that 
there are a number of things going on. Hospital workers or social workers may 
be horrified and feel personally obligated,” said Jeanne Flavin, a researcher 
with NAPW.


Because these decisions are made on such a local level, a Trump presidency 
will not necessarily result in an explosion of prosecutions. But some predicted 
it could represent an expansion of the restrictions that cause women to take 
matters into their own hands in the first place. “That is something that one 
could reasonably predict in an environment where abortion becomes even illegal, 
or even more inaccessible than it has been,” said Yamani Hernandez, the 
executive director of the National Network of Abortion Funds.

Trump has promised to appoint “pro-life” judges to the supreme court with a 
potential view toward overturning Roe v Wade, the supreme court decision that 
established a right to abortion. In an interview shortly after he won the 
presidency, Trump acknowledged that if Roe v Wade were struck down, some states 
would ban abortion. Ifthe history of abortion before Roe 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/about/gpr/2003/03/lessons-roe-will-past-be-prologue>
 is any guide, thousands of women would travel across state lines to obtain an 
abortion every year. But many more women would seek out illegal providers or 
take matters into their own hands.

•••

On 12 November, a Tennessee grand jury indicted Anna Yocca on three felony 
charges that included aggravated assault and attempted abortion. The charges 
traced back to one day in 2015, when Yocca climbed into a bathtub and inserted 
an unravelled wire hanger into her womb. She began to bleed excessively. Her 
boyfriend rushed her to a hospital, where she gave birth to a premature infant. 
The infant survived – according to the prosecution, he was “forever harmed” – 
and was adopted by another family. Police placed Yocca under arrest and charged 
her, initially, with attempted murder.

What do the most harrowing of these cases have to do with ordinary women – or 
even, for that matter, those who quietly and successfully terminate their own 
pregnancies without any physical tells? These cases, after all, represent just 
a small fraction of women who attempt to induce their own abortions. “We could 
just be seeing the tip of the iceberg if actually, a lot of women are 
successful in inducing abortions on their own,” said Daniel Grossman, a 
clinical professor of OB-GYN at the University of California–San Francisco who 
researches self-induced abortion. One of his studies found evidence that 
potentially 100,000 women in Texas have at some point in their lives attempted 
to self-induce an abortion.

Prosecutions for self-induced abortion are an abuse of the criminal justice 
system
Jill Adams, the chief strategist of the SIA Legal Team 
By contrast, the SIA Legal Team has counted 17 women who have been arrested or 
convicted in relation to an attempt to induce their own abortions in previous 
decades. NAPW has identified about two dozen cases since 1973, the year the 
supreme court ruled in Roe v Wade.

But experts say this handful of cases has an effect on all women by dragging 
reproductive decisions out of the realm of healthcare and into the realm of law 
and justice. “Prosecutions for self-induced abortion are an abuse of the 
criminal justice system,” said Jill Adams, the chief strategist of the SIA 
Legal Team. “Once a woman has decided to end a pregnancy, she should be able to 
do so safely and effectively. Women who self-administer abortion need to be 
supported, not seized. Abortion, whether self-directed or provider-directed, is 
a private experience.”

Yocca’s attorney, in a court filing, agreed, saying her prosecution “makes 
every pregnant woman vulnerable to arrest and prosecution if she is perceived 
to have caused or even risked harm to a human embryo or fetus … and that the 
prosecution is absurd, illogical, and unconstitutional”.

Once law enforcement is in the habit of prosecuting women for abortions, 
Paltrow, the NAPW director, argues, it is not a stretch for them to police any 
behaviors that could conceivably endanger a fetus. Women have been charged with 
attempted abortion for attempting suicide or for injuring themselves 
unintentionally in a car crash. Follow the logic, Paltrow said, and you can 
charge a woman over any conduct she could conceivably have known would endanger 
her pregnancy. In October 2015, New York’s high court vacated the manslaughter 
conviction of Jennifer Jorgensen. She had been charged after she was in a car 
accident (she was not wearing a seatbelt), which caused her to have a 
miscarriage.

In fact, women have been charged with endangerment of a fetus hundreds of 
times in the past few decades.

“We have gone and created a unique, gender-based crime, where the action 
actually requires a pregnancy to be a crime,” said Paltrow. “You’ve created a 
separate and unequal law. And people don’t understand that in a country that 
has so expanded its criminal laws, any prosecutor intent on punishing anybody 
can find a crime.”
 