
Jake Peavy allowed four hits in seven-plus innings to lead the Boston Red Sox 
to a 5-2 victory over theArizona Diamondbacks on Saturday night, winning his 
first start since coming to Boston at the trade deadline.

Peavy (8-5) struck out seven and walked two, giving up Paul Goldschmidt's 
homer in the fourth and leaving with a 3-1 lead after a leadoff single in the 
eighth. Peavy was acquired from theChicago White Sox in a three-team trade that 
included theDetroit Tigers. The former Cy Young winner walked slowly from the 
mound as the crowd rose to a standing ovation, tipping his cap to the fans 
while crossing the first-base line on his way to the dugout.

Shane Victorino and Jarrod Saltalamacchia homered for Boston. Koji Uehara 
pitched the ninth for his 10th save. Patrick Corbin allowed three runs on eight 
hits and two walks, striking out six in six-plus innings for his second 
consecutive loss. Peavy left after giving up a leadoff single to Wil Nieves in 
the eighth, then the Diamondbacks continued to load the bases against Craig 
Breslow. Aaron Hill singled off Junichi Tazawa to make it 3-2 but left fielder 
Jonny Gomes threw out Cliff Pennington at the plate when he tried to score from 
second. Goldschmidt struck out, then Eric Chavez flied out to left to end the 
inning.

Boston made it 5-2 in the bottom half when Saltalamacchia homered into the Red 
Sox bullpen, where Uehara caught it. The Red Sox, who lost the series opener on 
Friday, have won six of their last eight games to hold on to first place in the 
AL East.

In other interleague play, Wil Myers had an RBI single in the bottom of the 
10th inning, lifting theTampa Bay Rays to a 2-1 victory over the San Francisco 
Giants and the New York Yankees beat the San Diego Padres 3-0.

In the National League, Dan Uggla scored a tiebreaking RBI grounder in the 
12th as theAtlanta Braves beat the slumping Philadelphia Phillies 5-4 for their 
ninth straight win. Luis Avilan pitched a scoreless 11th inning to earn the win 
and Craig Kimbrel got the last three outs for his 33rd save as the Braves won 
for the 11th time in 13 games. The Phillies left-hander Jake Diekman pitched a 
perfect 11th but ran into trouble in the 12th. Justin Upton walked leading off 
and went to second on Freddie Freeman's groundout. Walks to Evan Gattis and 
Paul Janish loaded the bases.

After right-hander Justin De Fratus came on, Uggla hit a bounding ball to 
short that looked like it could be a double play, but Uggla was safe when Chase 
Utley's relay pulled an extended Kevin Frandsen off the bag at first.

In Chicago, Chris Capuano scattered six hits over 6 1-3 innings and the Los 
Angeles Dodgers set a team record with their 13th straight road win, 3-0 over 
theChicago Cubs. The Dodgers eclipsed the 1924 mark set by the Brooklyn Robins. 
Carl Crawford broke open a 1-0 game by driving in two runs with a single in the 
sixth inning. Jerry Hairston Jr. singled in the first run in the third for NL 
West-leading Los Angeles, who are 13-2 since the All-Star break and have won 30 
of its last 37 overall.

In other NL games, the Washington Nationals shut out the Milwaukee Brewers 3-0 
and theCincinnati Reds thrashed the St Louis Cardinals 8-3.

In the American League, Ryan Doumit hit the go-ahead single in the seventh 
inning, the bullpen pitched six scoreless innings and theMinnesota Twins beat 
theHouston Astros 6-4. Detroit held on for a 3-0 victory over the punchless 
White Sox, theOakland Athletics beat the Texas Rangers 4-2 and the Seattle 
Mariners cruised to an 8-4 win over the Baltimore Orioles.
 