
James McArthur has conceded that Crystal Palace’s game at Watford on Boxing 
Day has become a “must win” match as Alan Pardew’s beleaguered side desperately 
seek to reinvigorate their season after a miserable run of results.

The defeat against Chelsea on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 was Palace’s eighth loss in 10 top‑flight games, and a 22nd of the calendar 
year, to leave the south London team hovering just above the relegation zone. 
All the optimism generated by an active summer in the transfer market, during 
which the club broke their transfer record first to sign Andros Townsend and 
then Christian Benteke, has long since evaporated with scrutiny intensifying on 
the manager’s position.

Diego Costa sends Chelsea soaring at Palace with 11th straight league win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Pardew must still convince the club’s co-owners and investors that he is the 
right man to instigate a revival, with the likes of Sam Allardyce and Chris 
Coleman mooted as potential replacements, and identify new players to arrest 
the decline in January. But the squad have been left intensely frustrated by a 
year of poor results and recognise that in the wake of narrow defeats against 
Manchester United andChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, 
they cannot afford to lose against an inconsistent Watford at Vicarage Road.

“We stayed in the game against Chelsea, defensively we were very sound, and we 
passed the ball better than we have for a long time, but now we have to take 
those qualities to Watford on Boxing Day,” McArthur said. “That’s now a massive 
game for the club. It’s another chance to turn our season around. It’s not nice 
being down there, I’m not going to lie, but instead of doom and gloom, we need 
to look at the next game as an opportunity to turn it round. There are a lot of 
games to go but, right now, we are in a relegation scrap and we’re not hiding 
away from it.

Antonio Conte wants special future after Chelsea beat Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
“In that changing room, everyone is confident we have more than enough quality 
to climb the table. We have some big characters and it only takes one win for 
us to pick up and build momentum. But we know Watford is a must win for us. Our 
last two defeats have been against top-class sides and we pushed them both all 
the way, but need that killer instinct. There is no doubting the effort and 
determination is there to turn our season around – the spirit here is 
incredible – but we’ve got to take those qualities into the next few games.”

Those sentiments are shared by Pardew, who continues to liaise with the 
chairman, Steve Parish, over the recruitment of a left-back and forward next 
month. “You have to be realistic and say that, this year, the results have not 
been good enough really, so we need to make sure they are better in the next 
year,” said Palace’s manager of almost two years. “We had a great 2015, a 
brilliant 2015. And we now need to replicate that in 2017 in the second half of 
this season and the first half of next season. We can do that. We accept the 
stats everyone is throwing around at us and we have to put it right.”
 