
It may require a peculiarly optimistic view of life to be enthralled by the 
prospect of the fourth one-day international against Australia, which should 
take place on Saturday in Chester-le-Street.

The country has been engulfed by flood warnings and, although Durham may have 
avoided the worst of it, the river Wear was brown and in full spate upon 
arrival. It is not cricket weather. However, the forecast for today is not so 
bad. After the abandonment of the Edgbaston game on Wednesday there is a chance 
of play at the Riverside.

Yet Graeme Swann may be in the best place – somewhere else. He is resting a 
slightly dodgy elbow and so will be spared the possibility of staring out of a 
dressing room window pondering yet again whether there will be any play. Swann, 
like Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad, is one of the crown jewels, a player who 
hopes to play in all three forms of the game for England, and every opportunity 
should be taken to rest him.

Critics of the rotation system often miss a crucial point. It is not the 
number of overs that Broad, Anderson or Swann propel in a summer that is so 
debilitating. In a sense that is the easy bit. An ODI in this era takes three 
days out of a cricketer's life, not one: there is a day of travel, another of 
meticulous preparation the following day and then there is the game. It is the 
time away in yet another gym/hotel room that gnaws away and it makes it worse 
when all that preparation is futile because it is so wet.

However, not everyone in Durham is so gloomy. Swann's absence gives a chance 
to somebody else. First off the bench is likely to be Samit Patel, who has yet 
to play in one of this summer's ODIs but who has always been in the squad. He 
must be hoping for a game at Chester-le Street on Saturday.

So, too, will James Tredwell, the off-spinner from Kent. He last played 
international cricket 16 months ago in the World Cup when he did not disgrace 
himself. Against West Indies in Chennai he took four for 48, enabling England 
to reach the quarter-finals. Since then he has disappeared from view. It is not 
much fun being Swann's understudy. It is very hard to surpass him and Swann's 
body has also proved pretty durable.

Tredwell, the proud owner of six ODI caps as well as a solitary Test cap, 
understands the situation. "You try to emulate Graeme Swann but he is the man 
in possession," he said. "All the time he is doing really well it is going to 
be tough to push him out. It is slightly difficult but you have to enjoy where 
you are.

"If I wasn't a cricketer, I might be a dustman or something. Every day is a 
bonus really" – even if it is a wet one in the very north of England.

It has been a frustrating summer for spinners. The ball is seldom dry and the 
same goes for the pitch. In fact the surface is usually green and friendly to 
seam bowlers. If play is possible here, England may well decide that one 
spinner, in the shape of Patel, may be sufficient to support their battery of 
seamers.

The pack now includes Chris Woakes, who has replaced Jade Dernbach in the 
squad for the past two games.

Spare a thought for the Australians as well. They have travelled a long way 
for this sodden series, which England lead 2-0 with two matches to play. The 
idea was to introduce some of their youngsters to the peculiar pleasures and 
challenges of touring England before next summer's Ashes series. But so far 
they have been soundly beaten; the novices have yet to excel and Pat Cummins, a 
promising paceman, has acquired an injury.

For everyone's peace of mind – including another harassed county chief 
executive – we could do with a few rays of sunshine.

Teams for the fourth NatWest Series match between England and Australia at the 
Riverside

England (from) AN Cook (captain), IR Bell, IJL Trott, RS Bopara, EJG Morgan, C 
Kieswetter (wicketkeeper), SR Patel, TT Bresnan, SCJ Broad, ST Finn, JM 
Anderson, JC Tredwell, CR Woakes, JM Bairstow

Australia (from) MJ Clarke (captain), SR Watson, DA Warner, GJ Bailey, DJ 
Hussey, PJ Forrest, MS Wade (wicketkeeper), B Lee, CJ McKay, JL Pattinson, BW 
Hilfenhaus, XJ Doherty, MG Johnson, SPD Smith

Umpires M Erasmus (SA) and NJ Llong (Eng)

Third umpire Aleem Dar (Pak) Match referee J Srinath (Ind)
 