
Attorneys for Colorado <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> theater 
shooter James Holmes will begin presenting their case on Thursday by trying to 
show he was legally insane when he opened fire on a packed movie premiere, 
killing 12 people and wounding 70.

Defense witnesses will offer a less emotional and more clinical assessment of 
Holmes after two months of often-gruesome testimony from prosecution witnesses, 
including many visibly wounded victims.

Without the scores of victims on their side, Holmes’s defense plans to present 
its evidence in less than a quarter of the time taken by prosecutors. Their 
goal is not only to keep Holmes out of prison, but also to keep him alive. 
Legal experts say the coming days may be defense attorneys’ best chance to 
convince jurors he should not be executed, even if they decide he should be 
convicted.

“What the defense is going to try to do is say, ‘This would have never 
happened but for the intervention in this guy’s life of very serious mental 
illness,’” said George H Kendall, who has handled other high-profile 
death-penalty cases. “While the harms have been overwhelming, there’s just no 
way to disassociate all that carnage from the fact that his control system is 
all screwed up.”

Two state psychiatrists who examined Holmes in the months and years after the 
shooting concluded he was sane. But defense attorneys say Holmes suffered 
schizophrenia and was in the grips of a psychotic episode so severe it rendered 
him unable to tell right from wrong – Colorado’s standard for an insanity 
verdict.

If jurors agree, Holmes would be committed to a state mental hospital 
indefinitely.

The insanity defense is successful in only about 25% of felony trials in which 
it is raised nationally, and the odds are worse in a high-profile homicide.

Holmes’s attorneys will call at least two mental health experts of their own 
who studied Holmes closer to the time of the shooting on 20 July 2012 and 
declared him insane. They will try to show jurors that Holmes’s mental decline 
was far greater than the state doctors knew, in part because those doctors 
analyzed him much later after the attack.

In Colorado, prosecutors have the burden of proof in insanity cases. Most 
states and the federal system place that burden on defendants.

The defense case also is critical because jurors can use information they hear 
in the verdict phase if the trial advances to a sentencing phase. Studies show 
that jurors often enter a penalty phase with their minds made up about an 
appropriate sentence, even though they are instructed not to do so.

“The defense is going to say, ‘There’s no question he was able to inflict a 
ton of carnage here, but do we give society’s harshest sentence to someone who 
is severely mentally ill?’” Kendall said.

Jurors could hear from some of the 20 doctors who treated Holmes after his 
arrest. They could also see jailhouse video of Holmes running head first into 
walls and falling backward off his bed in a November 2012 episode that sent him 
to a hospital.

Some witnesses will look familiar. Defense attorneys have indicated they plan 
to call Lynne Fenton to the stand again. She is a University of Colorado 
psychiatrist who saw Holmes five times before the shooting and grew concerned 
that he was having “paranoid delusions” and “psychotic-level thinking”.

“They are going to present every single witness they possibly can if the court 
allows it, anybody who has evidence regarding mental illness,” said Denver 
defense attorney Iris Eytan, who initially represented Holmes but is no longer 
involved in the case.
 