
James Horner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-horner>, who has died 
aged 61 in a plane crash in California, was one of the most successful and 
admired composers of film soundtracks in Hollywood. He wrote music for more 
than 100 films, and his extensive list of awards included two Academy Awards 
and two Golden Globes, as well as 10 Oscar nominations, seven nominations for 
Golden Globes and three for Bafta awards.

Horner’s music was an integral part of some of the most successful films of 
recent decades. His score for James Cameron’s Titanic (1997) won an Oscar for 
best original dramatic score, and he also won best original song forMy Heart 
Will Go On <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FHG2oizTlpY>, the love theme from 
Titanic, which was co-written with Will Jennings and sung by Celine Dion. It 
became a huge hit in its own right, selling 15m copies. The recording of 
Horner’s Titanic score also sold 27m copies. He had previously collaborated 
with Cameron on Aliens (1986), which had earned him his first Oscar nomination, 
and on the score for Cameron’s 2009 sci-fi fantasy Avatar, which was also 
nominated.

There were several films with Mel Gibson, of which Braveheart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/59015/braveheart> (bringing another 
Oscar nomination) was the most prominent. His Braveheart score, like his work 
on Titanic, showcased Horner’s fondness for folk and ethnic musical influences. 
But he would also cite composers such as Britten, Prokofiev and Tallis as 
influences on his work.

He formed a successful partnership with the director Ron Howard, and his work 
on Apollo 13 (1995) andA Beautiful Mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90285/beautiful.mind> (2001) again put 
him on the Oscars shortlist. With Edward Zwick, a director Horner described as 
“very difficult and very opinionated”, he worked on Glory (1989) and Legends of 
the Fall (1994), earning Golden Globe nominations for each.

Horner was born in Los Angeles to Joan (nee Frankel) and Harry. His father, 
who had been born in Czechoslovakia, moved to the US in 1935, and was an art 
director and set designer who won Oscars for his work on The Heiress (1949) and 
The Hustler (1961). James began playing the piano when he was five, and was 
sent to study at theRoyal College of Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/royalcollegeofmusic> in London. He 
returned to Los Angeles, took a bachelor’s degree in music at the University of 
Southern California, and went on to postgraduate work at University of 
California, Los Angeles.

He began his film career in the late 1970s by working on shorts for the 
American Film Institute <http://www.afi.com>, and wrote his first full-length 
score for 1979’s The Lady in Red (directed by Lewis Teague, but re-released by 
Roger Corman in 1980 as Guns, Sin and Bathtub Gin). After cutting his teeth on 
films such as Oliver Stone’s horror flick The Hand (1981), he made the leap to 
large-scale popular work with Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan (1982), Walter 
Hill’s buddy-cops yarn, 48 Hrs (1982), and Michael Apted’s well-received 1983 
film version of Martin Cruz Smith’s novel Gorky Park.

That same year he wrote the score for The Dresser, Peter Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/10/peter-yates-obituary>’s 
adaptation of Ronald Harwood’s West End and Broadway play. He knew Harwood’s 
daughter, Alex, now a film composer herself, from his time studying in London. 
“I remember my father coming back from a visit to James when he was studying at 
UCLA, and saying he had heard his music and it was all bumps and squeaks,” she 
explained. “Dad asked ‘where are the melodies, James?’ and that was a joke for 
years in our family. Then he became a film composer and he was writing these 
incredible melodies.”

She recalled him as “a lovely person and incredibly gifted, though obviously 
deep down incredibly driven,” adding that he was “one of the last of that old 
school of composers, like John Williams, with proper classical training and 
unbelievable musical knowledge”.

In 1985 came Horner’s first collaboration with Howard, on Cocoon, the 
whimsical tale of a group of senior citizens in Florida being rejuvenated by 
aliens. Cameron’s Aliens followed, as well as An American Tail (1986, another 
Oscar-nominated project for Horner) and Jean-Jacques Annaud’s medieval 
detective story, The Name of the Rose (1986). Annaud became another regular 
partner and the pair later worked together on Enemy at the Gates (2001) and 
2011’s Day of the Falcon.

Alongside his involvement in heavyweight drama productions, Horner worked on 
music for a string of children’s and animated films, including The Rocketeer 
(1991), We’re Back! A Dinosaur’s Story (1993), Casper (1995), and How the 
Grinch Stole Christmas (2000). He perhaps enjoyed these as a respite from the 
demands that often came with major products for big-name directors; he was also 
regularly bedevilled by producers, whom he criticised for being too 
interventionist, particularly on The Amazing Spider-Man in 2012.

At the time of his death Horner had three films slated for release in 2015: 
the boxing drama Southpaw, Annaud’s Wolf Totem, and The 33. But he was not 
solely concerned with film work. In 2014 he premiered hisdouble concerto for 
violin and cello <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tHpElqeGFUY>in Liverpool, and 
in March this year he unveiled his concerto for four horns at the South Bank in 
London.

He is survived by his wife, Sarah, and their two daughters.

• James Roy Horner, composer, born 14 August 1953; died 22 June 2015


• This article was amended on 24 June 2015. Through an editing error, the 
quotation beginning “a lovely person...” was attributed to Ronald rather than 
Alex Harwood. On 14 July, a further amendment was made to details of surviving 
family members.
 