 Japan's government has ordered its navy to end its mission in support of 
coalition forces in Afghanistan after failing to win opposition backing to 
renew the deployment before today's midnight deadline.
Since 2001, Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has provided about 
126m gallons of fuel to US, British and other vessels operating in the Indian 
Ocean. The two Japanese ships on duty - the supply ship Tokiwa and the 
destroyer Kirisame - are expected back home in about three weeks.

Opposition parties, which gained control of the upper house of Japan's 
parliament in July, said the mission did not have a UN mandate and possibly 
violated the country's pacifist constitution, which severely limits the 
military's overseas role.

The prime minister, Yasuko Fukuda, today vowed to pass new legislation that 
would enable Japan to play a smaller, but symbolically important part in the 
US-led war on terror.

"To fulfill our responsibility as part of international efforts towards 
eradicating terrorism, we need to continue our refueling mission," he said in a 
statement. "The government will do all it can to pass the special bill for the 
refueling mission so we can restart our mission as soon as possible."

Earlier this week, Mr Fukuda failed in a last-ditch attempt to persuade Ichiro 
Ozawa, who leads the biggest opposition party, to support the mission.

The withdrawal was a blow to US efforts to keep the coalition together. 
Several senior US officials have publicly urged Mr Ozawa to think again and 
yesterday the ambassadors of the US, Britain and nine other countries met 
dozens of Japanese MPs to stress the value of the country's contribution.

The Australian foreign minister, Alexander Downer, said he was concerned by 
the withdrawal. "Defeating terrorists is one of the highest security challenges 
the world faces," he said. "It is a global challenge and combating terrorism is 
a collective responsibility."

But US defence department spokesman Geoff Morrell said the decision would not 
have "any operational impact whatsoever". Japan provided about one-fifth of all 
fuel consumed by coalition ships between December 2001 and February 2003, 
according to Pentagon data, but only about 7% since then.

Officials in Washington denied that the US defence secretary, Robert Gates, 
would apply more pressure on Japan when he visits Tokyo next week.

The timing of the visit was "purely coincidental", a Pentagon official was 
quoted as telling Japanese reporters in Washington. "I assure you the United 
States has no intention of injecting itself into that legislative process."

The issue is expected to be on the agenda, however, when Mr Fukuda meets the 
US president, George Bush, later this month.
 