
Jason Day and Adam Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> have 
been drawn to start side by side as they chase the biggest payday in Australian 
golf history at the US PGA Tour’s season finale.

Both players are assured of winning the FedEx Cup points race and its US$10m 
($13m) bonus if they can claim victory - and the US$1.4m($1.9m) first prize – 
against the 30-man field in the Tour Championship at East LakeGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club in Atlanta on Sunday.

Fingers will be crossed that world No1 Day can remain fully fit after 
treatment for a pinched joint capsule in his back, which forced him to withdraw 
during the last round of the penultimate playoffs tournament less than two 
weeks ago.

PGA Tour confident golf did enough at Rio 2016 Games to keep Olympic place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/rio-olympics-2016-golf-justin-rose>
He was leaving his arrival late, only flying in on Tuesday evening ahead of 
Thursday’s first round – for which he is paired with world No6 Scott – although 
sources close to his team suggested he should be okay to play.

Day goes into the tournament ranked fourth in the FedEx Cup points standings – 
having started the playoffs in fourth – with Scott third behind leader Dustin 
Johnson and Patrick Reed, while England’s Paul Casey is fifth.

All of the top five can clinch the FedEx Cup with a win, while Scott and Day 
also have a reasonable chance if they come second.

Day is also vying with Johnson for the coveted Tour Player of the Year award 
after his three-win season.

Johnson has the advantage having claimed a major – the US Open – among his 
three wins, so Day would need victory here to have any chance.

Scott has winning form at East Lake, having triumphed in the Tour Championship 
in 2006, the last year before the FedEx Cup began.

He is targeting the event as a chance to cap a somewhat frustrating season 
which still yielded back-to-back victories at the Honda Classic and 
WGC-Cadillac Championship.

“Although I’m disappointed with my play in the Majors, I will have played a 
lot of good golf this year and that’s the way the game goes,” said Scott.

“I’m trying to get the most out of every opportunity and that would certainly 
feel like I’ve had a very good year, if I were to win the Tour Championship.”

A study of recent Tour Championship stats shows victory often comes down to a 
player having an exceptional putting week, including Scott in 2006.

That should suit Day who ranks No1 in putting on tour this season, however 
Scott is 120th.
 