
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> still plans 
to defy his critics by attending Stop the War’s Christmas party on Friday, as 
Labour sources said he was determined to keep his promise to formally hand over 
chairmanship of the coalition.


The Labour leader is facing calls from colleagues including the former shadow 
cabinet ministersTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/jeremy-corbyn-urged-to-pull-out-of-stop-the-war-christmas-fundraiser>
, Caroline Flint and Emma Reynolds to cancel his appearance at the event, after 
the group had to withdraw two controversial statements about Syria and Isis in 
recent weeks.

The anti-war coalition has also come in for criticism from two former backers 
–Green MPCaroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/08/caroline-lucas-steps-down-from-stop-the-war-coalition-role>
 and Peter Tatchell the human rights campaigner – who raised concerns that it 
was not doing enough to support democratic Syrian groups opposing Bashar 
al-Assad.

However, a senior Labour source said Corbyn still planned to attend the 
Christmas fundraiser because he had made a promise to hand over his old role as 
chairman in person. “He said he would hand over the chair properly and he is 
keeping his word,” the source said, describing Stop the War as “credible and 
democratic”.

Stop the War issued a statement 
<http://www.stopwar.org.uk/index.php/news/for-the-avoidance-of-doubt-the-positions-of-the-stop-the-war-coalition>
 on Thursday saying it was “under unprecedented attack” not just because of its 
opposition to the bombing of Syria but because such hostility was “perceived to 
weaken Jeremy Corbyn”.

The group said its positions had been routinely misrepresented by the 
Conservative government, the right of the Labour party and sections of the 
media, and stressed it had never supported the Assad regime or Russian 
intervention in Syria.

It said it was also “utterly opposed to [Islamic State] as a totally 
reactionary and, in the Arab spring, counter-revolutionary force”.


Corbyn faced yet more pressure to withdraw from the Christmas fundraiser on 
Thursday from a new grassroots party organisation calledLabour Internationalist 
<http://labourinternationalist.org.uk/about/>. 


In an open letter signed by more than 500 Labour members, it urged Corbyn to 
reconsider, saying: “We believe that Stop the War Coalition stands apart from 
the Labour movement’s values of internationalism, anti-fascism and solidarity.

“The rush to blame western liberal democracies has resulted in StWC all but 
absolving dictators and terrorists of their butchery. This is not an anti-war 
movement. It is an embarrassing sect belonging to the extreme left. Indeed, 
StWC provides a vehicle for parties and sects that are hostile to the Labour 
party.

“We urge you to distance yourself from this organisation. We believe that 
Labour party unity, and electoral credibility in the face of a Conservative 
government that is pursuing a rightwing domestic agenda, would be advanced if 
you pulled out of this event.”

Tatchell also released a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/stop-the-war-faces-a-coalition-of-critics>
, co-signed by a number of Syrian campaigners and academics, criticising Stop 
the War and urging it to change path. It said: “We write as previous strong 
supporters of the Stop the War Coalition and applaud its mobilisation against 
the disastrous UK and US attack on Iraq. Sadly, since then, on the issue of 
Syria, the StWC has lost its moral compass and authority.

“The StWC has failed to organise or support protests against the Assad 
dictatorship and the regime’s massacre of peaceful democracy protesters in 2011 
– and since. Nor has it shown solidarity with the non-violent Syrian civil 
society movements for democracy and human rights and with the millions of 
innocent civilians killed, wounded and displaced by Assad’s barrel bombs and 
torture chambers. It portrays Isis as the main threat to Syrians, despite Assad 
killing at least six times more civilians.”

This week Lucas confirmed that she had stepped down from the committee of 
patrons of Stop the War. Her spokesperson said: “Caroline was specifically 
troubled by some Stop the War Coalition statements after the Paris atrocities. 
Though the pieces were subsequently taken down, she felt unable to associate 
herself with them.

“She was also concerned that some Syrian voices were not given an opportunity 
to speak at a recent meeting organised by the StWC in parliament. StWC has 
played an important role in building the anti-war movement in Britain, and 
Caroline will continue to work in support of peace.”

The Stop the War Coalition was heavily criticised when it published an article 
that claimed: “Paris reaps whirlwind of western support for extremist violence 
in Middle East, after Isis killed 130 people in the French capital.”

The article, which has since been taken down, added: “Without decades of 
intervention by the US and its allies there would have been no ‘war on terror’ 
and no terrorist attacks in Paris.”

The group was also criticised for another article, also taken down, responding 
to a Commons speech by the shadow foreign secretary,Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn>, on why he would be 
supporting airstrikes in Syria. It read: “Benn does not even seem to realise 
that the jihadist movement that ultimately spawned Daesh is far closer to the 
spirit of internationalism and solidarity that drove the International Brigades 
than Cameron’s bombing campaign.”
 