
When I was growing up, I didn’t have school lunches. Instead I’d go to my 
grandmother’s house in Dundee every day. Her name was Jessie Dorothy Stewart 
and she was a very canny Scotswoman, with a small but good repertoire of dishes 
that we all loved: amazing mince and tatties, with beautiful cloud-like suet 
dumplings (which I’ve never been able to replicate), a wonderful treacle 
dumpling – a suet pudding we were all mad for – and her lentil soup, which 
similarly we were all passionate about. My mother got the recipe from her and 
made it too, and now I make it.

My grandmother was tragically widowed when I was very young – she was only in 
her late 50s, early 60s. I was one of four, so she played a huge part in 
raising us; having lots of grandchildren to look after was very important to 
her: it gave her a sense of purpose.

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for lentils with fennel and sausages | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/08/rachel-roddys-recipe-for-lentils-with-fennel-and-sausages>
She and my mother brought us up proper. She had wonderful relationships with 
all of us, collectively and singularly. She was generous and kind, naughty and 
funny; a great talker. She knew the most marvellous stories about everyone. She 
filled our heads with tales of these extraordinary characters. We were lucky to 
have her.

My grandmother’s lentil soup is a very dour Scottish dish: plain, good, 
ordinary, fine cooking. Just the thing to warm the soul and heart and belly. 
Something for cold days – not something you have at the height of summer. That 
said, when the sun goes down in Scotland, even in the summer, a hot broth is 
just what you want. The weather is pretty changeable on this temperate island 
of ours …

It was the first dish that made me aware of cooking being about hearth and 
home. When it was cooking – it took ages on the hob – it filled the house with 
a wonderful embracing warmth. It’s a lingering memory that I treasure.

We’d have it with lots of crusty bread, fresh from Fisher and Donaldson’s 
bakery down the road (which is still going strong) and lots of butter. Shocking 
amounts of butter really; we were all the size of houses growing up! There was 
a grocer on the Perth Road in Dundee, and you could get him to carve off a 
slice of butter, knock it into a pat and wrap it in paper to bring home.

I know the recipe off by heart. Actually, it’s more a collection of 
ingredients thrown in a pan together than a recipe. I still make it on the rare 
occasions I manage to get out of the restaurant. I’ll go to the butcher’s for 
the smoked ham hock, and a good Indian deli for orange lentils that haven’t 
been sitting on the shelf for years. You need a tiny little nut of lard to 
start the whole proceedings off, then you add the veg, the ham, enough water to 
come two-thirds up the pan and then you leave it to tick over like that for 
three, four hours; sometimes five. Sometimes my grandmother would make it the 
night before, then leave it to settle, and the lentils would break down. She 
made everything seem effortless.

Lentil soup

Serves 6-8
1 nugget of lard 
6-8 carrots, roughly chopped
2 potatoes, roughly chopped
1-2 celery stalks, roughly chopped
1-2 leeks, roughly chopped
2 onions, roughly chopped
200g red split lentils, rinsed
1 ham hock
2 bay leaves
A few sprigs of fresh parsley
Salt and black pepper

1 Fry the vegetables in the lard in a large, deep pan for 10 minutes or so, 
until softened. Add the lentils and fry for a couple of minutes, stirring, then 
add the ham hock and enough water to cover plus a bit more. Add the herbs, 
bring to the boil, then turn down the heat. Skim any froth from the surface and 
simmer, covered but with the lid slightly askew to let out excess steam, for a 
minimum of 2 hours and up to 4-5. Top up with water as necessary until the ham 
is cooked through. Don’t put in too much water, as this is a thick soup: you 
can always add more at the end to thin it out.

2 Take out the hock and herbs and set aside. Take out a third to a half of the 
soup, blend it, then pour that back into the pan. Return it to the hob to heat 
through, stirring to combine.

3 Shred the ham and put it back into the soup, or serve separately. Finish 
with lots of chopped parsley, a little salt, if necessary (the hock will give 
the soup quite a lot), and plenty of black pepper.

Jeremy Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/jeremy-lee> is head chef 
at Quo Vadis restaurant, London; @jeremyleeqv
 