
Hakamada Iwao is believed to be the world's longest-serving death row 
prisoner. The 76-year-old Japanese man has been held on death row in Tokyo for 
the past 44 years, with 30 years in solitary confinement. Hakamada spends each 
day in anguish not knowing if the next day will be his last.

In Japan, death row inmates are given no advance notice as to when they will 
be executed, they can be taken from their cell at any point, and hanged – the 
uncertainty is excruciating. There are serious concerns about the state of 
Hakamada's mental health. Over the past 30 years he has exhibited signs of 
mental illness – described by one psychiatrist as "institutional psychosis" and 
by another as a "state of insanity".
 Hakamada Iwao Photograph: Amnesty International 
Arrested in 1966, Hakamada, a former boxer from Shizuoka prefecture, was 
charged with the murder of his former employer and the man's wife and two 
children in the town of Shimizu. He was interrogated by police for 20 days, up 
to 14 hours a day, without the presence of a lawyer. He confessed to the 
multiple killing but later retracted this confession saying that he had been 
beaten and threatened.

Hakamada has always maintained his innocence, and he is supported by one of 
the judges, Kumamoto Norimichi, from his original trial at the Shizuoka 
District Court that sentenced him to death in 1968. Norimichi spoke out in 2007 
to say he believed Hakamada was innocent. Evidence against Hakamada is 
questionable at best; for example, recent new forensic test results disclosed 
by Hakamada's defence team found no match between Hakamada's DNA and samples 
taken from clothing he is alleged to have worn at the time of the crime.

Amnesty believes Hakamada's trial was unfair. Opposing the death penalty in 
all circumstances, Amnesty is urging the Japanese government to stop the 
execution of Hakamada.

This year, as part of Amnesty's Write for Rights Campaign 
<http://vimeo.com/48147746>, Jeremy Irons has spoken out on behalf of Hakamada 
Iwao. Irons – whose acting career has spanned the four decades that Iwao has 
been on death row – said:

"Just five minutes is all it takes to stand up for someone around the world 
who so desperately needs to know that others care. People like Hakamada Iwao 
who has spent 44 years of his life on death row after an unfair trial. That is 
a cruel injustice.

"Please be part of Amnesty's Write for Rights campaign."

Watch Jeremy Irons's video here 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/content.asp?CategoryID=10673> and take action for 
Hakamada Iwaowww.amnesty.org.uk/hakamada 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=8658>
 