
Germany’s top Jewish group has labelled as “disgusting” plans for a weekend 
auction of Nazi memorabilia that includes Hermann Göring’s silk underpants and 
the brass container for the hydrogen cyanide phial he used to kill himself.

The Central Council of Jews in Germany appealed on Thursday to the auction 
house Hermann Historica to cancel the controversial sale of Nazi relics, 
planned for Saturday in the southern city of Munich.

German law prohibits the open display and distribution of Nazi objects, 
slogans and symbols, but it does not prohibit the purchase or ownership of Nazi 
objects, for example by researchers and collectors.

Auschwitz guard set to hear verdict in Holocaust murder trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/auschwitz-guard-set-to-hear-verdict-in-holocaust-trial>
The council’s president, Josef Schuster, criticised as “scandalous and 
disgusting” the idea of “making business, without any limits, with items of 
Hitler, Göring and Eva Braun”.

“Such items belong in museums or archives, they should not be sold for 
profit,” Schuster told national news agency DPA.

On sale besides Göring’s underwear will be X-ray images of the founder of the 
Gestapo secret police and air force chief.

The auction will also offer the brass container for the hydrogen cyanide phial 
that Göring used to kill himself two hours before his scheduled execution in 
1946 in Nuremberg.

Device used in Nazi coding machine found for sale on eBay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/29/nazi-coding-machine-lorenz-teleprinter-ebay>
The Nazis’ investigation reports on Hitler’s health after the failed 
assassination attempt on him on 20 July 1944, are another featured item.

“Also of historical importance are Hitler’s long black trousers whose pockets 
were leather lined so that he could carry a gun unobtrusively with him,” says a 
statement on the auctioneer’s website.

The items are due to go on public display on Friday under the theme “Hitler 
and the Nazi grandees – a look into the abyss of evil”.

They were formerly owned by the late US army medic John K Lattimer, who was in 
charge of monitoring the health of Nazi war criminals on trial in Nuremberg.
 