
Jimmy Jeggo is the bolter in Ange Postecoglou’s Socceroos squad for two World 
Cup qualifiers next month.

The Vienna-born midfielder, who earned a move to Austrian side Sturm Graz 
after stints with Melbourne Victory and Adelaide United, has a chance to win 
his first Socceroos cap in matches against Saudi Arabia and Japan.

Jeggo, 24, last year’s young A-League player of the season, has established 
himself in Sturm Graz’s midfield during the club’s run to the top of the 
Austrian Bundesliga.

Socceroos still searching for genuine west Asian rivals after UAE victory | 
John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/socceroos-still-searching-for-genuine-west-asian-rivals-after-uae-victory>
He is one of three changes for the squad, with Josh Risdon, Apostolos Giannou 
and Nathan Burns slipping out.

Reliable defender Bailey Wright returns to the 23-man group after an injury 
forced his late withdrawal from last month’s squad.

Left-sided utility Craig Goodwin also comes back into Postecoglou’s camp after 
playing in Australia’s friendly with England in May.

“We’ve made a couple of slight tweaks to the squad in line with our mantra of 
selecting players who are in form and fitness,” Postecoglou said.

“We’d like to have a good look at Craig Goodwin and James Jeggo, who have 
started their seasons well in Europe.”

Tim Cahill is again the only A-League player named, meaning nine local bosses 
will have their full complement of players for the opening round of the season.

First-choice goalkeeper Mat Ryan has held his place despite reports from Spain 
that the gloveman faces three weeks out with a strained knee.

Ryan hasn’t played for his club Valencia since returning from national team 
duty a fortnight ago, putting his position in doubt.

After suffering an injury in Socceroos camp earlier this month, captain Mile 
Jedinak has been named after regaining fitness with club side Aston Villa.

Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> opened its final 
World Cup qualifying push with fine wins over Iraq and United Arab Emirates.

Next month’s matches against Saudi Arabia in Jeddah (October 6) and Japan in 
Melbourne (October 11) are a chance for Australia to consolidate top place in 
the group.

Should the Socceroos score a second victory in the Middle East in as many 
months, they will lead the group on points no matter the result against Japan.

The top two ranked nations from the six-team group, which also includes 
Thailand, qualify for the 2018 World Cup, with a third team sent to a play-off.

Australia Squad

GK: Adam Federici, Mitchell Langerak, Mathew Ryan

Def: Milos Degenek, Alex Gersbach, Ryan McGowan, Trent Sainsbury, Brad Smith, 
Matthew Spiranovic, Bailey Wright

Mid: Craig Goodwin, Jackson Irvine, Mile Jedinak, James Jeggo, Massimo Luongo, 
Mark Milligan, Aaron Mooy, Tommy Rogic

Att: Tim Cahill, Chris Ikonomidis, Tomi Juric, Robbie Kruse, Mathew Leckie
 