
ITV's new management team, Archie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> and Adam Crozier, will have 
their work cut out turning around the broadcaster, according to leading 
independent producer Jimmy Mulville.

The "new Ant and Dec", as Mulville described them, were not dealing with "tins 
of beans or numbers on spreadsheets" - they needed hit shows, "the difficult 
bit".

"If they are going into ITV and thinking they are going to turn it around like

their other big businesses ... I just don't know," said Mulville said of 
Norman and Crozier, ITV's chairman and chief executive, respectively.

"I have not experienced shutting down dozens of rural post offices or selling 
cheap fruit and CDs to the nation. They are not dealing with tins of beans or 
numbers on spreadsheets," he added, delivering the Richard Dunn Memorial 
Lecture at the MediaGuardianEdinburgh International Television Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/edinburghtvfestival> yesterday.

"[Television] is an industry unlike any other, it eventually humbles anyone 
who works in it if they stay long enough ... The difficult bit is getting the 
hit. The rest is simple."

Mulville, who runs independent producer Hat Trick, the company behind Have I 
Got News For You and Outnumbered, said how the major broadcasters fared would 
depend on "how well they deal with the concept of uncertainty". They were at a 
"fork in the road, at a time of great uncertainty and also great opportunity 
for those who make the right choice".

But he said he did not include Channel 5, recently acquired by Daily Express 
and Daily Star ownerRichard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond>, in that. "I haven't 
mentioned Channel 5. Why bother? They have never made a decent programme in 
their lives and they have now been bought by a porn baron. You couldn't make it 
up," Mulville said.

He also railed against the culture of strategists and consultants who he said 
threatened to stifle creativity. "They look at businesses working perfectly 
well in practice and say, ah yes, but do they work in theory? This place is 
crawling with them."

Mulville said if programme-makers were going to take risks then they had to be 
allowed to fail on occasions, which was an inevitable part of the creative 
process.

"I don't think all research is pointless," he added. But he said the "micro 
bloody management of creativity", focus groups and "thick documents of mumbo 
jumbo" would not help broadcasters find the next big hit. "We are wallowing in 
a miasma of overanalytical nonsense."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 