
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jo-wilfried-tsonga> does 
his best to float like a butterfly but his sting was potent enough to remind 
Mardy Fish that the French son of a Congolese handball champion is nicknamed 
Ali for a reason.

Fish, a 29-year-old debutant at the World Tour Finals and flying the American 
flag alone in Greenwich, cut a sad figure in defeat, his second of the week, 
and has to find motivation from somewhere to avoid a whitewash in his final 
match, against the defending champion, Roger Federer.

Tsonga, meanwhile, was refreshed in victory after losing to Federer in the 
first match on Sunday. His next opponent is Rafael Nadal, which, when the eight 
best players are brought together in one tournament, is part of the inevitable 
journey from frying pan to fire.

Tsonga, the world No6, looked buoyant in the second set on Tuesday, though, 
cruising to the finish line 7-6, 6-1 in an hour and a half.

Fish had issues with the chair umpire in the first set but the protracted and 
amicable to-do did little but delay the inevitable.

He had his chances in the tie-break – the third in five singles matches so far 
– and any concerns about his fitness were allayed when he pulled off the 
increasingly familiar running swat between the legs for a wonderful shot under 
pressure.

When Tsonga cranked it up in the second set, though, there was nowhere to 
hide. The rumble in this jungle was over. Federer observed of the 26-year-old 
Frenchman before their match that his main threat is his unpredictability. It 
remains so.

While other players complain of too much tennis, Fish sees it differently – 
even though injury had put him out of two tournaments in a row before this one. 
"When you have injuries, you lose a little bit of confidence," he said.

"You lose confidence in your shot selection, you lose confidence just because 
you can't practise as much or play as many matches.

"I wasn't able to practise more than an hour [at a time] since Paris. I go out 
and play a match two days ago with Rafa, and you can imagine how I felt the 
next morning. He puts it on you physically. I didn't feel great."

All true. But the spectators have come to enjoy themselves. Tsonga, not 
visibly hurting, could be the one to provide the smiles this week.

"I have felt really good on court," he said at the end of a press conference 
that intruded merrily into the schedule set aside for Andy Murray to tell us 
exactly the opposite.
 