
Thomas Johansson fought back from an alarming mid-match slump to beat Jiri 
Novak 7-6, 0-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 in the first semi-final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

It will be the Swede's first grand slam final. Johansson will play either 
seventh seed Tommy Haas of Germany or Russian ninth seed Marat Safin in 
Sunday's match. Haas and Safin meet in the second semi-final tomorrow.

Johansson, the 16th seed, threw his racket in the air in delight after he won 
his fourth match point against a tiring Novak, who pushed a forehand wide and 
long after two hours and 51 minutes on Rod Laver Arena at Melbourne Park.

"This is like a dream come true for me," a delighted Johansson told local 
television.

The 16th seeded Swede looked likely to fall short after Novak completely 
dominated the middle stages of the match, Johansson littering the court with 63 
unforced errors.

Johansson gradually fought his way back against 26th seed Novak and broke the 
Czech's serve for only the third time in the match in the final game of the 
fifth set.

"I was really nervous, I haven't played in the semi-finals of a grand slam 
before and was really tight," Johansson said.

"I was maybe a little bit too relaxed after first set... but for the whole 
match I was really fighting."

Both playing in a grand slam semi for the first time, the two 26-year-olds 
relied on their strong service games as a foundation while they probed for 
signs of a weakness in a dour first set.

That pattern continued through the first-set tiebreak, with neither player 
able to gain an advantage until Novak pushed a forehand just wide. Johansson 
then hammered a service winner to take the tiebreak 7-5.

But Novak quickly got back on track when he broke Johansson's opening serve in 
the second game of the second set, the Swede pushing a tentative backhand long 
for the first break of serve in the match.

Growing in confidence, Novak then broke Johansson's serve twice more in the 
second set as the Swede's unforced error count grew at a rate of roughly two to 
Novak's one.

Johansson regrouped early in the third set, rediscovered his serve and drew 
Novak into long baseline rallies.

But the Swede undid that good work in the 10th game of the third set with more 
errors and then a double fault to hand Novak three break points. Novak needed 
only one and claimed the set.

Johansson finally managed to break the Czech's serve for the first time in the 
fifth game of the fourth set - only his third break point opportunity of the 
match - when he drew Novak into a long baseline rally at 15-40 and punched a 
forehand winner.

He repeated the feat four games later, pushing the match into a fifth set 
decider when Novak netted a backhand on Johansson's seventh set point in a game 
that went to deuce eight times.

Johansson then turned the match firmly in his favour against a tiring Novak at 
the start of the fifth set and cut down his high error rate.

Neither player had made it past the third round in Melbourne before, with 
Johansson's two U.S. Open quarter-finals in 1998 and 2000 his previous best 
grand slam results.

"First of all I have to enjoy this victory then go and try to prepare myself 
for Sunday, I think I'm going to be really nervous for there, too," Johansson 
said.
 