
John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US secretary 
of state, is engaged in intense efforts to coax reluctant Israeli and 
Palestinian leaders towards an agreement to end their decades-old conflict, 
against the unhelpful backdrop of mounting political pressure on both sides to 
reject concessions.

Kerry is shuttling between Jerusalem and the West Bank city of Ramallah this 
weekend for a series of separate meetings with the Israeli prime minister, 
Binyamin Netanyahu, and the Palestinian president,Mahmoud Abbas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-abbas>.

His tenth trip to the region since March last year has coincided with an 
anxious expectation in Israel of the imminent death of former prime minister
Ariel Sharon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon>, who is suffering 
multiple organ failure after being in a coma for eight years.

Kerry is discussing a US-authored "framework agreement" with the two leaders, 
which is intended to set parameters for further negotiations in the hope of 
reaching a final deal. It covers the issues of a border on the basis of the 
1967 line, refugees, security, Jerusalem as a capital for both states, and 
recognition ofIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> as a Jewish 
state.

"We know what the issues are and the parameters," Kerry said when he arrived 
in Jerusalem on Thursday. "The time is soon arriving when leaders will have to 
take tough decisions. In the weeks ahead both sides will have to make tough 
choices." The current series of meetings was intended to "narrow differences on 
a framework that will set guidelines for negotiations", he added.

Neither leader will be asked to formally sign the framework agreement. US 
officials are reportedly undecided on whether to make its contents public, wary 
of creating a political backlash among critics of the negotiations process.

The framework agreement may lead to an extension to the negotiations 
timeframe. The current deadline for reaching a final deal is April, but almost 
no one expects that to be met. Netanyahu is reported to be pressing for an 
additional 12 months of talks; the Palestinians are opposed to any extension. 
An extra six months is a likely compromise.

But rightwing MPs from Likud – the party led by Netanyahu – and Jewish Home, a 
key coalition partner, have called for the framework agreement to be rejected 
by the Israeli leader. Naftali Bennett, the leader of Jewish Home, told 
Netanyahu in the past week that his party would not stay in the coalition if 
red lines were crossed.

Eight Israeli ministers backed a parliamentary bill calling for the de facto 
annexation of the Jordan Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/31/israeli-government-jordan-valley-john-kerry-visit>
, a swath of land in the West Bank which has become a key factor in Israel's 
demands relating to security. Although it is unlikely to be passed, the support 
of key ministers is indicative of the hostility at the heart of the Israeli 
government towards Kerry's initiative.

On the Palestinian side, Abbas faced demands this week from the Palestine 
Liberation Organisation executive committee to walk out of negotiations and 
resume the strategy of signing Palestine up to global bodies such as the 
International Criminal Court.

On Friday, the secretary of state was greeted in Ramallah by demonstrators 
chanting "Kerry go home". In a statement, senior official Yasser Abed Rabbo 
described the framework agreement as a "worthless piece of paper". The 
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat has said Israel is not interested in 
reaching a final deal.

Many analysts have pointed out that resisting pressure in their respective 
political backyards and settling the conflict will require enormous strength 
and courage from both leaders, qualities which each has to this point 
conspicuously lacked.

The attention focused on former Israeli premier Ariel Sharon in the past few 
days, as doctors warned of his impending death, has inevitably revived 
comparisons between the "warrior" leader and his old adversary Netanyahu.

Sharon, an uncompromising rightwinger, confounded the world by dismantling the 
Israeli settlements he had established in Gaza, and effecting a military 
withdrawal in the face of stiff opposition.

"When Sharon reached a dead end, he could find a way out by taking bold steps. 
But for Netanyahu, instead of doing the bold or unexpected thing, everything is 
about his political survival," said Uri Dromi, a political analyst and former 
government official.

"Israelis are now feeling emotional about the imminent loss of a hero, a 
giant, the last of the generation that fought to create our state. And they are 
lamenting the poverty of the current leadership."
 