
A journalist who interviewed Alastair Campbell at home told me, "He's got 
several of your editions of Trollope on his bookshelves." Hardly a revelation 
of Gilligan proportions, but it's flattering when one's dusty scholarship 
intersects with the great affairs of state - even if the connection is a £3.99 
paperback.

I would guess from his rhetoric on the morning after Hutton that Campbell has 
read Trollope's political novels with a connoisseur's attention. "The prime 
minister told the truth," he thundered, "the government told the truth, I told 
the truth. The BBC did not tell the truth." One could imagine the words blaring 
out, with the same indignant self-righteousness, from behind that bushy 
Trollopian beard.

Campbell's statement hammered the theme: "Having been in both journalism and 
politics, I would say this: if the public knew the truth about politicians, 
they would be pleasantly surprised. If the public knew the truth about the way 
certain sections of our media operate, they would be absolutely horrified." By 
my count, he used the T-word half a dozen times in his short statement (Blair, 
in his victory declaration, did not use it once).

Trollope loved the blunt Anglo-Saxon word - simply because it was blunt. Every 
honest Englishman knew instinctively what "truth" meant, without having to 
think twice about it.

Truth-telling was the rule of Anthony's life. He opens his autobiography: 
"This I protest - that nothing I say shall be untrue." The Trollopian plot 
typically revolves around dilemmas of truth. His young politician hero, Phineas 
Finn, finds himself falsely accused of murder. He tells the truth. But the 
press do not believe him; his political friends and opponents do not believe 
him; the courts of law do not believe him. Only by luck and the love of a good 
woman does truth-telling Phineas escape the hangman's rope.

Had Hutton's report gone the other way (as many expected) would not Fleet 
Street be piously obituarising and the Tories dancing jubilantly on the grave 
of Alastair Campbell, Blair's liar-in-chief?

Trollope had some simple remedies for the preservation of truth in public 
life. MPs, he felt, should not be paid (nor were they until 1911). They needed 
to be wealthy before entering political life. Financial independence would 
immunise them against the crude bribe of money and the subtler bribe of 
promotion to government office.

Trollope "hated" the secret ballot, which was introduced during his lifetime, 
in 1872. If you believed something, he believed, you should be prepared 
(literally) to stand up and be counted. Not sneakingly cast your vote like 
someone dashing off to the nearest privy. Truth and manliness were sibling 
virtues. He would, I think, have approved of Campbell's furious expostulations 
on Channel 4. What gentleman could hold his tongue when his honour was so 
impugned?

There were, for Trollope, two arch-enemies to truth in public life. One was 
the Conservative party under that twister, Disraeli. The other great enemy to 
truth was the gutter press - epitomised in the reptilian Quintus Slide and his 
"horgan", The People's Banner. The slimy Slide it is who brings down the noble, 
and truth-telling, Finn.

I would be curious to know when (as I fondly speculate he did) Campbell 
immersed himself in the Palliser novels. It would be nice to think it was at 
that crunch period of his life in 1994 when, having forsworn drink, he turned 
his life around, left employment in the Daily Mirror (banner "Forward with the 
People") and devoted himself - as a born-again and underpaid idealist - to the 
New Labour "cause". Quintus Campbell metamorphosed into Phineas Campbell.

At this very moment the members of the Trollope Society (under its eminent 
chairman, John Letts) will be casting around to raise the £10,000-£25,000 that 
Campbell (via the JLA agency) now charges for one-off speaking engagements. A 
goodly sum. And, if he goes on coining it at that rate, the Trollope de nos 
jours will soon be independently wealthy enough to be really truthful. Roll on.
 