
England will seek to end a season of resurgence by securing a comprehensive 
victory over the minnows of Andorra this evening with their captain,John Terry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/john-terry>, adamant that the current 
side have learnt the patience required to ensure they will prevail comfortably 
in achieving a seventh successive win.

Andorra frustrated England for 49 minutes in Barcelona back in September 
before Joe Cole pierced their defence en route to a 2-0 win. Yet, while that 
performance was unconvincing, they have rarely looked back underFabio Capello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fabio-capello> since and victory tonight 
would put them in position to secure qualification with a draw against Croatia 
at Wembley in September. "We've come on leaps and bounds since we played them 
over there," said Terry. "Football at this level really is getting more and 
more difficult, year after year. Players and teams sit back and, I promise you, 
that makes it difficult.

"They get men behind the ball and play a physical game, making it hard. There 
are only so many crosses and through-balls you can play. But we did well in 
Kazakhstan by not panicking when things weren't going for us early on. We 
stayed patient and that's where we got our joy. Maybe a year ago we'd have 
tried to force it but we have that inner confidence now that, sooner or later, 
we'll get a goal. We might have panicked before, but these days we have more 
about us. Quick and flowing football will make it hard forAndorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> and hopefully we will be able to 
take the momentum we generate into next season."

Key to securing the team's success will be Wayne Rooney's continued 
excellence. Back in September the Manchester United striker was blunt against 
Andorra to leave him with five goals in 29 appearances – and none in five 
matches – for his country. He has since plundered eight in his last six games 
at this level and, should he score twice this evening, would equal both Gary 
Lineker's record of 10 goals in an international season (dating to 1991) and 
Tommy Taylor's achievement in netting eight in a qualification campaign, set 
ahead of the 1958 finals.

"He's matured so much as a player and is so clever, footballing-wise," said 
Terry. "There's no one more natural in his play than him in the world at the 
moment. He causes so many problems for defenders. You see him maturing on and 
off the pitch and I love that hunger he's got about him. The way he flings 
himself into tackles – we all love that passion – this year he's calmed that 
down a bit and that's paying off in his performances."

"He needed the confidence to score goals," said Capello. "This year he has got 
himself into more scoring positions both withEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> and with United. That is so 
important. In the past he would stay too far away from goal but, if you want 
him to score regularly, you need him in the box. I've spoken to him about it 
and told him where I want him to be. Look at the amount of goals scored in the 
Premier League: 75% or 80% are scored from right in front of goal. These days 
Rooney gets himself there."

The striker will fancy his chances of adding to his tally of 22 international 
goals tonight, though much will depend on the supply line down the flanks and 
the space that can be eked out by Theo Walcott and Steven Gerrard. Yet such is 
the team spirit harnessed by Capello so far – the injured goalkeeper David 
James voluntarily visited the team's hotel yesterday to eat with the players – 
that this squad are willing to buy into the work ethic demanded by the manager.

"The boss wants people busting their guts to get into the box to get on the 
end of things, then turning round and running 50 yards to regain our shape," 
added Terry. "It's a lot of work but we enjoy doing that. To finish with seven 
wins from seven would be fantastic but we've got improvements to be made in the 
team – individually and collectively – and in the next year we will see those 
improvements. It's been a long, tough season but this is an opportunity to go 
out on a high."
 