
Ashley Highfield <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, chief 
executive of Johnston Press, a regional newspaper publisher, received a £1.65m 
pay last year, including a £645,000 bonus.

Highfield’s payout, which also includes awards related to his “golden hello”, 
is more than triple the £592,000 he was awarded in 2013.

The company’s remuneration committee, chaired by Camilla Rhodes, also granted 
Highfield a pay rise of almost 7.5%, or £26,000, from £404,000 to £430,000 for 
this year.

Johnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> reported a 
pre-tax loss of £23.9m last year. Underlying profits rose from £54m to £55.5m.

A spokesperson for the NUJ said the pay rise was “unfair while staff are 
poorly paid and suffering stress following Johnston Press’s never-ending cull 
of journalist posts”.

The NUJ’s national organiser, Laura Davison, said: “This announcement will 
stick in the craw of Johnston Press journalists. Saying that Ashley Highfield’s 
increase is broadly consistent with pay awards across the company is 
doublethink of the highest order, when some areas had nothing this year and 
others had increases only following hard local negotiations.

“A pay rise of £26,000 is more than the pay of a news editor on some weekly 
titles in an entire year. The number of jobs axed by JP over the past three 
years has left staff stressed and newsrooms struggling. That’s why Johnston 
Press NUJ members have called on the directors to give up their bonuses and 
invest the money in frontline editorial where it matters.”

Johnston Press justified Highfield’s remuneration by pointing out that there 
was something of a perfect storm of bonus payouts and share awards that became 
due last year.

Highfield received a £483,000 annual bonus, including cash and a deferred 
element that became due after three years, for hitting a number of performance 
targets. The bonus was for – among other things – increasing digital revenue by 
20% from £24m to £28.8m, and growing the company’s digital audience by more 
than 30%. Highfield achieved a core bonus payout that was 49% of the maximum.

However Highfield and the company’s finance chief, Dave King, were also 
eligible for an additional “one-off” bonus last year relating to “strategic 
balance-sheet strength factors”. Johnston Press has been crippled by the 
hangover of debt from the noughties. Under Highfield this has been cut 
dramatically, including from £302m to £184.6m last year, and the business 
managed a successful refinancing and a revision to its pension scheme 
refinancing.

The result of the two bonuses was that Highfield received a total bonus equal 
to 118.5% of his salary.

In addition, Highfield received £645,000 from the company’s long-term 
incentive scheme relating to a “golden hello” from when he joined in 2011. 
Highfield had been offered a performance share plan award of 125% of his 
salary. The PSP vested at Highfield’s third anniversary in November on the 
basis of hitting half of the targets attached to the initial award.

The target related to shareholder returns over his three years as chief 
executive versus the performance of a group of rival companies.

Rhodes said: “The single figure total [£1.65m] is not the actual remuneration 
that Mr Highfield received in respect of 2014. The PSP is a long term plan and, 
therefore, the November 2014 vesting recognises Mr Highfield’s efforts over the 
last three and a half years rather than 2014 alone. The committee is 
comfortable that the incentive outcomes over the relevant periods reflect the 
level of performance achieved in what has been a challenging and difficult 
external environment.”
 