
John Sheardown, the former first secretary at the Canadian embassy in Tehran 
who sheltered fugitive American Embassy staffers at his home during theIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> hostage crisis in 1979 and who had a 
lengthy career in Canada's foreign service, has died at age 88.

His wife, Zena, said Sheardown passed away in an Ottawa hospital on 30 
December and had been treated for Alzheimer's disease for the past four years, 
though he also suffered from other ailments.

Sheardown, a diplomat in Tehran during the Islamic revolution, played a key 
role in the events depicted inBen Affleck's Oscar-contender film Argo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/07/argo-ben-affleck-review>, 
although he was not portrayed in the film.

Almost a week after militant Iranian radicals seized the US embassy in Tehran 
on 4 November 1979, taking 52 Americans hostage for 444 days in retaliation for 
US support for the recently deposed shah, the Canadian diplomat received a call 
from one of the six Americans who had managed to evade capture. American 
consular officer Robert Anders was calling his friend Sheardown for help.

"'What took you so long?'" was Sheardown's reply, said his wife.

After that phone call, the Sheardowns agreed without hesitation to shelter 
four of the six Americans in secrecy in their 20-room house in Tehran. The 
Canadian ambassador, Ken Taylor, housed the other two Americans.

"It would have been selfish for us not to do so," Zena Sheardown said. "There 
weren't many places to hide in Iran, we had the room, they needed our help and 
it was just not in John's nature to refuse help to anyone."

For 79 days, the pair lived a low-profile life in tumultuous Tehran, 
facilitating a household that was comfortable and welcoming for the Americans, 
while helicopters streamed overhead, everyone's nerves calmed only by 
boisterous dinners together and heartfelt hospitality.

"We have a lot of fond memories. We spent American Thanksgiving together, New 
Year's Eve together. Every night we would all sit around for dinner together. 
There was a lot of humor and laughter. It was a nice time to have to spend 
together," she said. "We tried to be protective, but we also went out of our 
way to make them feel as if they weren't imposing on us."

She said her husband became the father figure of the household, whom everyone 
would turn to for advice when they went through moments of fear.

"He kind of became our leader and since he was a pipe smoker and had more of a 
mature nature, he became known as 'Big Daddy,' everyone would wait for Big 
Daddy to come home," she said, chuckling.

While Sheardown might be best known for his role in what became known as the 
Canadian Caper, he is noticeably absent fromArgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/argo>, which tells the story of how the CIA 
used a fake Hollywood film crew to rescue the six US embassy staffers sheltered 
by the Canadians. Affleck has apologized for leaving Sheardown out of the film, 
which he said was the result of time constraints and plot developments.

"It was frustrating," said Zena Sheardown. "It would have been nice if the 
story was told correctly because basically, if the Canadians weren't there to 
help, who knows what would have happened to those Americans."

In a story posted in October on the Slate magazine website, one of the rescued 
American diplomats, Mark Lijek, said Sheardown's role had been "indispensable". 
Lijek said: "Without his enthusiastic welcome we might have tried to survive on 
our own a few more days. We would have failed."

Sheardown was made a Member of the Order of Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> for his role in the rescue. His wife 
later also received the award for her role.

Born in Sandwich, Ontario, later absorbed by Windsor, on 11 October 1924, John 
Vernon Sheardown joined the Royal Canadian Air Force at 18. He flew scores of 
Lancaster bomber missions in World War II. On one mission, he barely managed to 
get his flak-riddled plane back to Britain. With the Lancaster losing power, he 
told his crew to bail out. He tried to wrestle the aircraft under control 
before opting to leap at the last minute. His chute barely had time to open and 
he broke both legs upon impact.

"I often thought he had nine lives with the way he lived his life," his wife 
said.

He stayed in the Canadian Armed Forces after the war, serving in Korea, before 
joining Canada's immigration service around 1962. He was posted in London, 
Glasgow, New Delhi and Los Angeles, during a 27-year diplomatic career.

"He was a proud, dignified man, proud to serve his country, a dedicated 
foreign services officer and well-respected by all," his wife said.

It was that dignified air that caught the eye of his future wife when she 
first spotted him in the Canadian high commission in London. "He looked like an 
English gentleman, he was smoking a pipe, very dapper," she said.

She asked a friend who that was and her friend replied: "That's John 
Sheardown, the kindest man I've ever known. If he was down to his last penny 
and he thought you needed it, he would give it to you."

The two were married in Los Angeles in 1975. It was his second marriage.

"It was a long love story," Zena said, her voice cracking with emotion. "He 
lived a wonderful life and we shared many wonderful years together."

Besides his wife, the former Zena Khan, Sheardown is survived by his sons, 
Robin and John; his sisters, Jean Fitzsimmons and Betty Ann Whitehead; six 
grandchildren; and 10 great-grandchildren.
 