
The Scotsman of the last century, perhaps even the Briton of the last century, 
I most admire isJohn Boyd Orr 
<http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1949/orr-bio.html>. Born a 
farmer's son in 1880, he studied medicine at Glasgow university and was shocked 
by the poverty he saw. Glasgow was then one of the wealthiest cities in the 
British empire, but as we know, the more millionaires a place has the worse off 
are their poorest countrymen.

He wasn't, of course, the only one to be shocked by high levels of infant 
mortality and malnutrition. The Fabians believed they could improve living 
conditions in Britain by working with the government, but Boyd Orr decided to 
do it without aligning himself with a political party. He served with 
distinction in the first world war, and became the founder of the Imperial 
Bureau of Animal Nutrition, then director of research and professor of 
agriculture at Aberdeen. His undeclared agenda was to improve farmers' yields 
as a first step towards abolishing malnutrition. In the 1930s depression, he 
pressurised the government into providing school milk. He became health 
minister during the second world war, and such were the measures he took that 
by the end of the war, at a time when children across Europe were malnourished, 
British children were healthier than any previous generation.

He was made the first director of the UN's food and agriculture organisation 
in 1945, and tried to persuade the biggest grain producing nations to create a 
world grain bank. To some extent he succeeded, but he was appalled that the 
richest nations would only donate food to the most desperately poor in return 
for getting them into debt. He retired in 1948, received the Nobel peace prize 
and was made a lord. He announced that the best hope for humanity was for every 
nation to produce enough food to feed itself, and retired to a Scottish farm. 
He died at the age of 91 approving of an independently governed Scotland.

Alasdair Gray, A Life in Words and Pictures 
<http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/the-festival/whats-on/alasdair-gray-1>, is at the 
Edinburgh International book festival on Saturday 15 August
 