
It certainly hasn’t been the start that John Chayka and the Arizona Coyotes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phoenix-coyotes> were hoping for.


Woe Canada and more: five NHL storylines to watch this season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/woe-canada-nhl-storylines-season>
A wretched six-game road trip came early in the season with the Coyotes 
dropping five of those six games. In the process, they lost starting goalie 
Mike Smith to a lower body injury. Smith returned on Wednesday but through 16 
games the Coyotes have allowed 3.38 goals per game. The rookie-laden squad sits 
in last place in the Pacific Division.

Now sitting at 5-9-2, it is, of course, too early to write off the Coyotes 
already; we’re not yet a month into this NHL season. And Chayka, the 
27-year-old analytically-inclined general manager who represents a new, 
progressive wave of thought in the modernNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl>, isn’t about to abandon the process.

After all, these are the Arizona Coyotes we thought they’d be: young, skilled 
and with a long way to go.

“For a team like us, with a lot of organic growth ahead of it, we feel, all 
things considered, it’s not a bad start,” Chayka recently told the Guardian. 
The Coyotes began the season with five rookies on their roster, four of whom 
had no NHL experience.

“The group we have is going to be get better internally. We don’t have to go 
out and pick up a rental or do something of that nature,” he says. “Our young 
players have come in and given us a spark. There’s ups and downs, just like 
there is with many young players. But at the same time our goal is to ensure 
the ups and greater than the downs. And if we can do that, I think we’ll have 
success this season.”

Success will be relative for the Coyotes. Like many rebuilding teams, the 
“organic” improvement that Chayka mentioned is needed instead of a quick rise 
only to fizzle out again shortly afterwards. The Coyotes’ prospect pool has been
consistently <http://www.thescore.com/news/1064617> ranked 
<http://thehockeywriters.com/nhl-prospect-pools-the-complete-ranking/> as one 
of the best in the NHL.

The team has missed the playoffs the last four seasons and have not finished 
higher than fourth in the Pacific Division. They’ve also finished in the bottom 
three spots in the league in terms of home attendance through each of those 
home games.

Rather than stress about the continued low attendance numbers, Chayka sees the 
team’s location in the desert as a plus for his young, evolving core. We can 
debate about the Coyotes’ viability in a “non-traditional” hockey market until 
we’re blue in the face, but the fact remains that nothing brings fans into an 
arena like a winning club. And as that’s not going to happen overnight, the 
relative lack of media exposure and scrutiny around the Coyotes compared to, 
say, the also young and rebuilding Toronto Maple Leafs, ends up working in 
their benefit.

“I think it’s a huge competitive advantage with the lifestyle in Arizona and 
the approach that can have, where they can just be focused on their game and 
their life and living a pro lifestyle, instead of worrying about media 
speculation about the ups and downs of their games,” Chayka says.

“We’re fortunate enough in this situation with this strategy we have with our 
young players that it’s a benefit for us,” he adds.

Who is Auston Matthews? A handy guide to the NHL's dazzling debutant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/auston-matthews-toronto-maple-leafs-hat-trick-explainer>
For many seasons, the threat of the Coyotes relocating was a constant one. But 
that threat has subsided, perhaps in part to the stability that Chayka has 
brought to the organization. Before being hired as assistant GM, Chayka 
co-founded Stathletes, an sports analytics company from St Catharines, Ontario. 
He quickly rose up the hockey world after meeting NHL super agent Pat Brisson, 
who introduced him to different NHL teams.

When Coyotes GM Don Maloney was fired earlier this year, Chayka seemed like an 
obvious fit, despite the fact that at this point, hewasn’t even half as old 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/hockey/nhl/john-chayka-nhl-1.3577346> as the average 
NHL GM. His age and his background in analytics were obvious talking points.

Quietly, in the dry Arizona heat, the Coyotes appeared to be bucking the trend 
and conducting their business in a progressive manner: they’re considering 
every option in their rebuild and as the league skews younger, Chayka and co 
are already well ahead of the trend.

“As you look across sports,” he says, “there’s been a push to integrate as 
many different kinds of business strategies and best practices as possible. And 
that’s certainly what we’re doing here.”

That includes bucking the trend of hiring former NHL players as General 
Managers and keeping status quo as an old boys’ club.

Now almost a month into his first season as GM, Chayka understands that 
despite being the youngest NHL GM, the perception of management around the 
league doesn’t exactly hold up.

“At times it’s unrightfully categorized as an old boys club,” he says of the 
league. “There’s a lot of great, older guys who are former players who have a 
lot of progressive ideas,” he adds, pointing to 83-year old Scotty Bowman, the 
winningest head coach in NHL history and current senior adviser of hockey 
operations for the Chicago Blackhawks as being “as intelligent as they come.”

“It’s painting people with too broad a brush to call them an old boy,” he says.

Many of the team’s young prospects were already in the pipeline when Chayka 
was hired, including two of this year’s rookies: Christian Dvorak and Laurent 
Dauphin.

Chayka’s moves since he was hired have been shrewd ones: he utilized his 
team’s salary cap space to take on the contract of Pavel Datsyuk, who left the 
Detroit Red Wings for the KHL. In exchange, they moved up in the 2016 draft and 
landed defenceman Jakob Cychrun, who is now in their NHL lineup. They also took 
on Dave Bolland’s $5.5m AAV from the Florida Panthers, a lot of cash 
considering Bolland has not played since last December, is on the lon-term 
injured reserve and his agentsays 
<http://www.sportsnet.ca/hockey/nhl/dave-bolland-may-never-play-says-agent/>: 
“He may never play again.”

As part of that deal Chayka acquired 2015 11th overall pick Lawson Crouse, 
also now a part of the Coyotes roster.

The moves may have been risky. In the eyes of some, Chayka’s hiring itself may 
have been risky.

But these moves and Chayka’s continued vision towards the future of this 
franchise has set them up for long-term success, even if that means taking 
their lumps right now.

“It’s about creating the upside for our team and our organization,” he says. 
“Doing things not just to survive and keep our head above water but doing 
things to win a championship. That involves a lot of draft and development. 
It’s also not easy. That’s why not everybody wins. We’re trying to do things 
the right way and balance the short-term and long-term needs of our players. 
And that’s what we’re currently going through.”

We know that this summer’s first overall NHL draft pick, Auston Matthews, a 
product of Arizona’s minor hockey association, was turned onto the game of 
hockey after going to see a Phoenix Coyotes game. Hetold Vice Sports 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/auston-matthews-and-the-rise-of-hockey-in-the-desert>
 last year that he didn’t think he’d be playing hockey if it weren’t for the 
Coyotes.

Years from now, another future highly-touted prospect from Arizona could make 
waves in the NHL thanks to Chayka’s long-term vision with his young players.

For now, though, Chayka is simply happy to trust the process.
 