
Johnston Press chief executive Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield> has said regional media 
groups and the BBC have agreed in principle a new partnership – but talks are 
at a “crunch point”.

Highfield outlined four areas of focus with the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, but told the Westminster Media Forum: 
“We still need to work through the numbers and we’re under no illusions how 
difficult that might be.”

The News Media Association, chaired by Highfield, and the BBC have been in 
talks for more than a year to find ways they could work more closely to 
strengthen local journalism as part of the corporation’s charter renewal.

Most discussion has focused on how the BBC could fund more journalists, 
potentially employed by local media groups, and take content from them.

Highfield would not be drawn on further detail beyond describing it as a 
“provision by the regional press to the BBC of a comprehensive reporting 
service primarily covering local authorities”.

He said having journalists employed locally by professional organisations and 
providing content to the BBC would be a win for both parties.

The local media would benefit from “a proper commercial framework for use of 
this content by the BBC”.

Highfield said the other three areas being discussed with the BBC were:

• a video bank that would make BBC regional content available to local media 
partners free of charge;

• a shared data journalism unit; and


• an agreement on better linking to local media content on BBC news sites and 
attribution to content originated in the local media.

An audit is also proposed to find the level of content used by BBC sites that 
comes from other local sources.

Highfield said the BBC, the NMA and culture secretary John Whittingdale were 
inching towards a deal, but were at a “crunch point”.

“We are trying to reach an agreement on how it is going to work – how much, 
and when and where,” he said.

Highfield said in an increasingly devolved UK the need for local media to hold 
authorities to account had never been greater.

“All we ask for is a fair ecosystem,” he added. 


 Speaking at the same forum, David Holdsworth, the controller of English 
regions at the BBC, said: “The idea we might use some of the licence fee to 
fund reporters to report on local democracy for all comers is one I think we 
broadly agree on.”


He said the discussion was now on “how far you might go”. 


The BBC had previously suggested a possible 100 reporters and Holdsworth said 
value for licence fee payers was important. “The bigger the number grows the 
more risk that we would have to take some of our other services away to fund 
it.”


He said the BBC would not employ the reporters in such a project, but “some 
form of mechanism” would be needed to oversee it.
 