
John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US secretary 
of state, is engaged in intense efforts this weekend to coax reluctant Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders towards an agreement to end their decades-old conflict.

He is shuttling between Jerusalem and the West Bank city of Ramallah for a 
series of separate meetings with the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin 
Netanyahu, and the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas. His 10th trip to the 
region since March takes place as Israel braces itself for the death of former 
prime ministerAriel Sharon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon>, 
who is suffering multiple organ failure after being in a coma for eight years.

Kerry is discussing a US-authored "framework agreement" with the two leaders 
to set parameters for further negotiations in the hope of reaching a deal. It 
covers the issues of a border on the basis of the 1967 line, refugees, 
security, Jerusalem as a capital for both states, and Arab recognition ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> as a Jewish state. Speaking after 
talks with each leader, Kerry sounded somewhat hopeful about the chances of 
ending the conflict, despite misgivings voiced recently by both sides and a 
lack of tangible signs of movement. "I am confident that the talks we have had 
in the last two days have already fleshed out and even resolved certain kinds 
of issues and presented new opportunities for others," he said after meeting 
Abbas.

"We are not there yet, but we are making progress," Kerry told reporters in 
Ramallah, seat of Abbas's government. "It's a tough process, step by step, day 
by day".

Netanyahu and Abbas will not be asked to formally sign the framework 
agreement. American officials are reportedly undecided on whether to make its 
contents public, wary of creating a political backlash among critics of the 
negotiation process.

The deadline for reaching a final deal is April, but almost no one expects 
that to be met. Netanyahu is reported to be pressing for an additional 12 
months of talks; the Palestinians are opposed to any extension. An extra six 
months is a likely compromise.

Rightwing MPs from Likud – the party led by Netanyahu – and Jewish Home, a key 
coalition partner, have called for the framework agreement to be rejected. 
Naftali Bennett, leader of Jewish Home, has told Netanyahu in the past week 
that his party would not stay in the coalition if red lines were crossed.

Eight Israeli ministers backed a parliamentary bill calling for the de facto 
annexation of the Jordan Valley, a swath of land in the West Bank which has 
become a key factor inIsrael's demands relating to security. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/31/israeli-government-jordan-valley-john-kerry-visit>
 Although it is unlikely to be passed, the support of key ministers is 
indicative of the hostility at the heart of the Israeli government to Kerry's 
initiative.

On the Palestinian side, Abbas faced demands last week from the Palestine 
Liberation Organisation's executive committee to walk out of negotiations and 
resume the strategy of signing Palestine up to global bodies such as the 
international criminal court.

On Friday, the secretary of state was greeted in Ramallah by demonstrators 
chanting "Kerry go home". In a statement, senior official Yasser Abed Rabbo 
described the framework agreement as a "worthless piece of paper". The 
Palestinian chief negotiator, Saeb Erekat, has said Israel is not interested in 
reaching a final deal.

Many analysts have pointed out that resisting pressure in their political 
backyards and settling the conflict will require enormous strength and courage 
from both leaders, qualities each is widely perceived to be lacking.

The attention focused on Sharon in the past few days, as doctors warned of his 
impending death, has inevitably revived comparisons between the "warrior" 
leader and his old adversary Netanyahu. Sharon, an uncompromising rightwinger, 
confounded the world by dismantling the Israeli settlements he had established 
in Gaza, and effecting a military withdrawal in the face of stiff opposition.

"When Sharon reached a dead end, he could find a way out by taking bold steps. 
But for Netanyahu, instead of doing the bold or unexpected thing, everything is 
about his political survival," said Uri Dromi, a political analyst and former 
government official.

"Israelis now feel emotional about the imminent loss of a hero, a giant, the 
last of the generation that fought to create our state. And they are lamenting 
the poverty of the current leadership."
 