
John Hayes is the Conservative MP for South Holland and the Deepings. He 
has been the minister of further education, skills and lifelong learning since 
May 2010.

Where are we on the fraught question of who is entitled to English for 
speakers of other languages (ESOL)?

"We are trying to ensure impact is properly considered, so as well as the 
equality impact assessment we did last November, I have asked for careful 
consideration of the specific impact of ESOL policy to make sure specific 
groups are not penalised. But I make no apologies for saying it is unacceptable 
for the state to subsidise private organisations for staff training costs. They 
have a choice of who to recruit and should not expect language needs to be met 
by the taxpayer. Also, it is not unreasonable where people can contribute that 
they pay half the costs."

In what areas will the government's review of informal adult learning be 
focusing on?

"We must look at the motivation and barriers that encourage or deter people in 
adult learning. Informal learning acts as an important bridge into other forms 
of employment and learning. It is particularly significant for some of the most 
underrepresented groups – women returning to work, those discouraged by earlier 
learning – people for whom informal and 'bite-sized' chunks help them fulfil 
their potential."

How do you secure the "big society" when it needs people secure and stable 
enough to meet those challenges?

"Big society will help bring about that stability. Any number of societies, 
trusts and community organisations are helping the disadvantaged. We will build 
on strong social networks and ties, encouraging them to do more. That's what 
adult learning can do – encourage such groups, supported by government but 
independent of it. Adult community learning is an important tool of social 
mobility and social justice. We must focus on areas where adult learning is not 
strong, rather than areas already advantaged."

Since the end of the government-funded training initiative for people in 
employment, Train to Gain, what is provided for adults in their 40s and 50s?

"We can use apprenticeships not just as a way of starting people in their 
careers but enabling them to upskill and reskill. Under my watch we will create 
more apprenticeships than ever before. To start, as part of the Plan for 
Growth, we announced an £180m package for 50,000 additional apprentices. Three 
quarters of the 100,000 placements over the next five years will be adult 
apprentices."

How does your new vision for craft tie into your wider adult learning plans?

"I do not have a utilitarian view of learning; we need to offer learning in 
all sorts of ways and places for its own value beyond utility. It is in the 
spirit of John Ruskin and William Morris, the arts and crafts movement which I 
believe is stronger in me and Vince [Cable] than it was in previous Labour 
governments. I have a new vision for craft and vocational skills and 
re-emergence of the guilds with new awards for crafts. Calls for parity of 
esteem between academic and vocational led to demotion of practical; we need to 
re-establish the value of practical learning."
 