
“I am heartened and excited”, says Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, chief executive of 
Johnston Press. In these straitened times for local and regional newspapers, 
that’s an unusually upbeat statement.

He is referring to the section about local media in the report on the future 
of the BBC by the Commons culture, media and sport committee 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmcumeds/315/315.pdf>
.


He views the MPs’ call for collaboration between the public service 
broadcaster and commercial press owners as something of a breakthrough moment.

“The politicians have pressed a button with their recommendations in the 
report,” says Highfield. “This should act as the impetus for further dialogue 
between us, because our views are so close.

“The report is positive about the way in which we can work together for our 
mutual benefit. So it is time for a really constructive, coordinated debate and 
it would be helpful for us to meet now”.

He believes it is possible that “a two-way flow” of news-gathering and news 
transmission is within imaginable grasp. “Now we need a structured framework to 
make it work”.

To place this optimism in context, it comes just three weeks after Highfield 
wrotean open letter to the BBC on this site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/05/local-media-can-deliver-bbc-johnston-press-ashley-highfield-letter>
 complaining about the sentiments expressed inthe corporation’s own Future of 
News report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
.

He was upset by the BBC’s apparent intention to park its tanks “on every local 
lawn and offering its version of hyperlocal news controlled from London W1A”. 
And the tanks reference came up again in our conversation.

But he thinks the select committee’s call for a “more symbiotic relationship” 
between the BBC and local press industry reflects not only his views but also 
those of the head of BBC news,James Harding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesharding>.

Highfield believes that he and Harding share an understanding that news should 
be jointly covered in Britain’s towns and cities by theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and local papers. He points to key 
paragraphs in the MPs’ report:

“The BBC must not expect to receive others’ news content without providing 
something in return. We are attracted by the idea of exchanges of content and 
information, where the BBC local websites link to the source of local material 
they have used, and in return the BBC allows others to use its content and 
embed BBC clips on their sites, where these would be of local interest, under a 
licence agreement.

There need not be a financial transaction. However, we also see the case for 
the BBC outsourcing the supply of some local content on a commercial basis, 
where there is an ongoing requirement for such material, and it is a more 
cost-effective way of meeting this need.

We recommend this be ensured by extending the BBC’s independent production 
quota to cover local news”.

Cross-attribution is obviously key to an agreement. Local and regional 
newspaper websites would be delighted to run video clips produced by the BBC. 
Similarly, the BBC would be able to run stories originated by newspaper 
reporters.

Cynics will inevitably point out that the BBC already runs local paper 
stories, without revealing the source. Why should their newsrooms change? But 
Highfield - a former senior BBC executive himself - scoffs at the notion that 
the BBC can afford to ignore the MPs’ report in the run-up to charter review.

Highfield also indicates the significance of the statement made to Media 
Guardian by the committee’s chairman, John Whittingdale:


“I am worried about the parlous state of local newspapers which is quite 
dangerous for local democracy. We should consider using part of the proceeds of 
the licence fee to support local newspapers directly”.

He does not view this as some sort of back-door public subsidy for 
news-gathering, which is anathema to publishers, as Geraldine Allinson, chair 
of the Kent-based KM Group, has made clear.

For Highfield, it is simply a matter of codifying an agreement. And it isn’t, 
he says, only about news. Co-ordinated coverage of sport, the weather and 
entertainment, for example, would be beneficial too.

He believes he speaks for his fellow publishers because there is a consensus 
among them on what should be done.


So let this blog play honest broker. Since the differences between the BBC 
news division and regional newspaper publishers appear to be so narrow, let me 
call on Harding to meet Highfield or vice versa.

It is time to hammer out a workable agreement. It is, after all, in the 
overall public interest to do so.
 