
I know this will sound a bit blasé," Jonathan Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonathan-trott> says as he considers 
England's dominant victory in Australia, "but winning the Ashes is just a 
stepping stone to where we want to go. An important point was made after the 
last Test when someone said that in 2005 England thought winning the Ashes was 
the be-all and end‑all. This team just doesn't think like that. We don't want 
to stand still."

Amid all the Ashes delirium and drunken celebrations, Trott offers sobriety 
and clarity. His resolve was equally obvious in the first of our two 
interviews. The night before the Sydney Test, Trott spoke less about England's 
memorable retention of the Ashes, which had already been guaranteed for the 
first time in 24 years, than a determination to win the series 3‑1. And now, 
despite the continuing hoopla, Trott and England have moved on to their next 
objective – the limited-overs segment of this tour, which is a prelude to next 
month's World Cup.

Trott is neither humourless nor judgmental of the joyous outpouring that has 
enveloped so many England fans. He is just supremely concentrated and 
representative of a team led by the most stable of partnerships in Andy Flower 
and Andrew Strauss. "Obviously we know how important it is to ourselves, as a 
team," Trott says. "But we probably don't quite grasp the size of the feat 
we've achieved – or really appreciate what it means to people. It might only 
hit me when I've retired. But when you're right in the middle it just feels 
like another game of cricket."

He lets slip a dry chuckle, knowing how strange his words will sound. "It was 
quite funny in Sydney. I was standing there, fielding, and suddenly I thought: 
'You know what? I'm actually playing in a fifth Ashes Test.' I hadn't felt the 
enormity before then because the most important thing is to perform 
consistently wherever you are. So we've played some relentless cricket, in the 
sense of wanting to win each and every session and not looking too far ahead. 
That's how we've kept our discipline and focus."

Yesterday, as if to underscore those words, Trott returned to England's 
one‑day team. In a low-key fixture, in Canberra, he and Ian Bell ensured 
another smooth victory over a Prime Minister's XI including Usman Khawaja and 
Brett Lee. Bell struck a sumptuous century while Trott compiled an 
authoritative 48. But even if it is just for our gratification, it seems right 
to make Trott pause and reflect on the past six weeks.

For all his stoicism it must have felt mildly traumatic back in Brisbane, 
during the first over of the series, when he had to walk to the wicket after 
only three balls, following Strauss' uncharacteristically sloppy dismissal. "I 
didn't actually see it," Trott remembers. "I'd gone up to the viewing area and 
all I heard was this huge roar and then I saw Straussy holding his head. It was 
quite funny in a way. And that's important: being able to smile at a situation 
like that."

Surely, in the first over of an Ashes series, the atmosphere must be 
disconcertingly intense? "Yeah, the first three balls I faced were a bit 
surreal. There was one moment, in particular, when it was obvious. The ball 
went to Simon Katich and it came flying back in, almost hitting me. I thought, 
'Jeez, this is the fucking Ashes. The battle is really on.' But you only get 
nervous when you haven't prepared. It's bit a like being at school when you 
haven't studied for an exam. But if you're prepared, it's fine. Ashley Giles 
[the coach at Warwickshire] always says: 'Train hard, play easy …' We have that 
attitude drilled into us at England and that's why we have a sense of freedom 
in the middle."

Alastair Cook said he had been helped enormously by the arrival of Trott at 
the crease. They might have only put on 41 in that first innings, compared to 
their unbroken stand of 329 to save the match, but Trott's composure bolstered 
Cook – who had begun the series as England's supposed weak link. Cook is now 
being hailed as a batting colossus.

"We're very similar, me and Cooky. We're nudgers and nurdlers, and quite 
intense, so we speak a lot. I'm always one for winning small battles – five 
runs here, 10 there. That's how Cooky and I talk, in a very concentrated way. 
But he batted brilliantly all the way through. I've read a few things lately 
where people are saying he looks the complete opening batsman, an unflappable 
player. But six months ago these same journalists were not writing very kind 
things about him. It's amazing how sport turns around; and what you're capable 
of if you get your mind right."

Trott managed to clear his own mind so effectively that despite England 
inflicting three innings defeats on Australia, he scored 445 runs in the series 
at an average of 89. Even some of his most jaundiced critics ended up paying 
homage to him. Michael Vaughan once claimed to have seen Trott celebrating with 
South Africa after they had defeated England a few years ago.

Trott was born in Cape Town and has been friends for years with South African 
players like Paul Harris and Dale Steyn. He denied Vaughan's allegation at the 
time and insisted he had merely patted Harris on the back and offered his 
congratulations. How does he now feel as Vaughan purrs over the way in which 
Trott crafts yet another remorselessTest innings? "Aw, well, I try not to worry 
too much about what people think of me. One thing you learn as an international 
cricketer is that you're either criticised or praised in extreme ways. It's 
part of the craziness that surrounds sport these days."

Some might regret the fact that four of England's players in this series were 
born in South Africa, as was Flower, but no one can claim Trott has batted with 
anything less than total dedication for England. His South African roots might 
also explain why he can remain so measured in the face of traditional Ashes 
hysteria, but Trott is rightly suspicious of anyone who dismisses him as a 
callous mercenary. His commitment to this England team is absolute.

Trott also distrusts the modern rankings system which, after his unbeaten 168 
in Melbourne, saw him rated the third-best batsman in the world. "Belly [Ian 
Bell] came up to me and said, 'Well done – world number three!' I just laughed. 
I can't take it too seriously. There are so many great batsmen out there and 
I've got a long way to go."

As if to illustrate the absurdity, Trott promptly went for nought in his very 
next innings – and slipped to world No4. "Hmmm," is all he murmurs when asked 
about Sydney and his first duck in Tests. An awkward silence follows before, 
eventually, he says: "It was one of those things. I chopped it on to my stumps 
and you could say I was a bit unlucky. Perhaps it was meant to be so the other 
guys [Cook, Bell and Matt Prior] could score the hundreds."

Giles once told Trott that he would never be selected for England unless he 
changed his attitude – which, when he arrived in county cricket from South 
Africa, was too wrapped around personal objectives. "It's not so much a change 
of attitude as a change of focus," Trott says. "It's an understanding that the 
ugly job can be very important to the team. It's not always about getting a big 
hundred. It can be a gutsy 40 in difficult conditions. Also, it's about sharing 
in your team‑mates' success."

Trott, meanwhile, has scored three centuries in his six Ashes Tests. "The Oval 
[in 2009] meant a lot because it was my debut. There was lots of pressure and 
so that was very satisfying. But Melbourne was really special. All my family 
were there – my parents and Abi and Lily [his wife and daughter]. And then 
there was Brisbane. We started our second innings 221 behind and so that one 
stands out."

At The Gabba, Trott withstood the unique trials of technique and temperament 
which make batting at No3 so demanding. "Yeah, coming in after three balls or 
when the score is 188 for one sums up the challenges of this position. I came 
through it OK [Trott scored 135 not out in the second innings as England 
finished on 517 for one]. I only bat at four with Warwickshire because Belly's 
at three. But I feel settled here with England."

He is so concentrated that when Jimmy Anderson was last man out in Melbourne, 
Trott returned to his crease and resumed his obsessive ritual of scratching out 
his guard – as if determined to carry on batting. "I always do that. It's a 
small statement I make – that I intend to do well again when I next go out to 
bat. I even did it in the last one-day series."

Trott, showing such application and patience, might personify the archetypal 
Test batsman – and so it is easy to forget his decent record in Twenty20 and 
one‑day cricket. "People don't think of you as a one-day player until you start 
slogging a fast bowler over his head for six. But I've got something to offer 
England in one‑day cricket. I'm looking to contribute to winning games."

The 29-year-old is more than just methodical and ambitious. He laughs when 
told how his own variation of England's sprinkler dance has left puddles all 
around our house – as my son tries to emulate the Trott technique of actually 
shooting water from his mouth as he does the sprinkler. "Really?" he says, 
surprised that his routine on Graeme Swann's video diary has even been noticed. 
"That comes from a misspent youth at Stellenbosch University. But it shows the 
fun we've had."

There has also been time for fleeting compassion. "We had a drink with the 
Aussies after Sydney. They're getting stick over here and they're obviously a 
bit down. I did feel some sympathy because you know how bad losing feels. We 
remember how devastated we felt after [the third Test at] Perth. So, while 
you're chuffed for yourself and your team-mates, you do think for a moment 
about how they're feeling. But, look, it's England-Australia. You can't be too 
sorry."

Trott and England are intent on steamrollering Australia in the one-day 
series. And, after winning successive Ashes series, as well as being Twenty20 
world champions, could England even win the one-day World Cup in India in early 
April? "Of course," Trott says calmly. "That's what we're set up to do."
 