
Simon Jones is likely to be named next Monday in the England squad for the 
eight-week winter tour of Pakistan, despite still being sidelined with an 
injured right ankle which prevented him bowling in the Ashes decider at The 
Oval.

The 26-year-old Welshman, who failed a fitness test 48 hours before the start 
of the fifth Test, is being given extra time to prove his fitness in a move 
befitting his status within the England set-up. It is still unclear whether the 
bone spur which is causing discomfort around the joint will need surgery, or if 
the course of anti-inflammatory tablets, injections and ice treatment has been 
effective.

Jones took 18 wickets at 21 runs apiece to propel England to the verge of 
victory over Australia before his injury in the fourth Test.

"With this kind of injury you have to be patient and wait," said Dr Peter 
Gregory, the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board's chief medical officer. 
"What we weren't able to do was give him a good rest because of his fitness 
test before the final Test. We will have a better idea at the end of next week. 
There is no definitive on whether to operate or not, it is not as simple as 
that. It is a pain thing and some people can get through better than others."

The England coach Duncan Fletcheris "optimistic" about Jones' progress and 
believes his growing proficiency with reverse swing will be a vital weapon on 
England's next assignment.

"He will be key to us," Fletcher said. "The wickets they produced last time we 
toured were for spinners. If they try to take us on with spin they have a huge 
problem now because it will play into our hands. If they prepare those dry 
wickets we can fight with reverse swing."

Andrew Flintoff, who had an operation to fix a bone spur in February, took 
nearly three months to recover.

Meanwhile, England's "super-sub", Gary Pratt, who found overnight fame as a 
substitute fielder when his throw ran out the Australia captain Ricky Ponting, 
yesterday recalled the controversy that threatened to overshadowed the Ashes 
series. Pratt, who has not been picked by Durham for a first-class game for a 
season and a half and struggled to make the one-day side, said: "I didn't know 
there had been complaints about subs in the one-dayers. But, of course, I was 
on the field for Simon Jones, who was injured. Anyway, I had a beer with Ricky 
on Monday night. Everything was fine. All forgotten."

To suddenly play for England had felt "a bit strange", but was a 
"once-in-a-lifetime" chance. "To be part of the England dressing room was 
something special."
 