
Rising American talent Jordan Spieth shot the round of his life for an 
eight-under-par 63 as his rivals laboured in the Sydney wind to claim his 
second professional title by six strokes at the Australian Open.

The Texan, who shared second place on his US Masters debut in April, fired 
eight birdies in a flawless final round to secure the Stonehaven Cup at 
13-under 271 for the tournament at The AustralianGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club.

The A$1.25 million tournament had been billed as a duel between world No.1 
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> and No.3 Adam 
Scott but 21-year-old Spieth stole the show with his stunning final round.

The world No. 14 was the youngest Australian Open champion since Aaron 
Baddeley won his second title as a teenager in 2000 and the first American 
since Brad Faxon in 1993, when Spieth was just a few months old.

“I didn’t think the round was out there but the putts just kept going in,” 
Spieth said in the greenside presentation. “It’s the best round I’ve ever 
played, the best win I’ve ever had, it’s pretty awesome.”
 Spieth acknowledges the crowd after holing a putt on the ninth. Photograph: 
Mark Metcalfe/Getty Images 
Spieth’s final round score was a record on the newly-reconfigured course but a 
better indication of its quality was that only seven other players finished 
under par for the tournament.

Australian Rod Pampling hit a 68 for second place, a shot better than 
compatriot Brad Rumford (70) in third with another local Greg Chalmers (71) in 
fourth on five-under. All three secured berths at next year’s Open at St 
Andrews.

Scott (71) was fifth on four under, while defending champion McIlroy, whose 
victory at the Royal Sydney last year provided a springboard for his stellar 
2014, finished 15 shots off the pace in a share of 15th after a 72.

Starting the day in a three-way tie for the lead at five-under, Spieth quickly 
eased ahead of his rivals with his first birdie at the third.

After parring the fourth, he really put his foot on the gas and drained birdie 
putts of 10, five and 15 feet on the next three holes to open up a gap of four 
shots over the field.

There were no more birdies - but crucially in the difficult conditions no 
bogeys - until the 14th but that started another strong run and he picked up 
three more shots on the run-in.
 