
Josep Gombau has been announced as the new coach of the Olyroos and will also 
take up a role on Ange Postecoglou’s Socceroos coaching staff.

The Spaniard, who made a big impression during his A-League stint as Adelaide 
United coach, takes over the Australian Under-23 team after Aurelio Vidmar was 
axed in March in the wake of a failed Rio Olympics qualifying campaign.

New guest player rules smoothes Tim Cahill's path to A-League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/new-guest-player-rules-cahill-a-league>
“I am excited by the standard of young players in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>,” Gombau said in a statement 
on Tuesday.

“We will have a target to qualify for the Olympic Games but we will always be 
looking to prepare the players to play for the Socceroos.”

Gombau, who departed Adelaide United last July, was a coach with Barcelona’s 
youth team for six years from 2003 and is renowned as a shrewd developer of 
talent.

The 40-year-old will be based in Sydney in his new role, an appointment 
welcomed by Socceroos coachAnge Postecoglou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou>.

“The Olyroos is a direct feeder into the Socceroos and we feel Josep will 
assist in ensuring the next generation of players are ready to step into the 
national team but importantly also give them the best possible opportunity to 
qualify for the next Olympics,” Postecoglou said.

“He will play a broad role within our structure as we look to build on the 
good work that has been done to provide a smooth transition for younger players 
through the national teams.”

Gombau became a firm favourite with Adelaide United fans over his two seasons 
with the club and is associated with introducing an attacking brand of football.

Successor Guillermo Amor built from this attacking base, but added a steelier 
quality to his Adelaide side, delivering the Reds their first Premiership and 
Championship double.

And Gombau admits it’s a side of his game he’s now worked on.

A-League transfers: Berger joins Sydney FC, Newcastle lure home Duncan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/a-league-berger-sydney-fc-newcastle-duncan>
 “In this moment I am now better coach than when I left Australia one year ago 
because I work a lot on myself.

“And sometimes I take too much care to play beautiful and I don’t care about 
win or lose ... it’s also important to try to win.”


“Ange has found the right balance – we need to play good football and also to 
be competitive,” Gombau told reporters in a teleconference on Tuesday.


 “I like this kind of football, it’s the only way I understand football – to 
have the ball, to try to play football, to try to be the owners of the game and 
try to make the people that come to see us enjoy.”

 Gombau said he would bring many fresh ideas to the job but was reluctant to 
expand before meeting further with Postecoglou and Football Federation 
Australia hierarchy when his term starts in August.

The 40-year-old has been given a four-year contract with the Olyroos.

 