
The Duke of Edinburgh was admitted to hospital on Monday, forcing him to miss 
the Buckingham Palace concert in honour of theQueen's diamond jubilee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen-diamond-jubilee> and the other events 
planned for the close of the long weekend of celebrations on Tuesday.

He was taken to hospital just hours before the concert, which was opened by 
Robbie Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> and 
featured music from every decade of her reign.

The palace said the duke had a bladder infection and had been taken from 
Windsor Castle to the King Edward VII hospital in central London, the facility 
favoured by the royal family. In a statement, it said it was a precautionary 
measure and the duke was disappointed at not being able to attend the concert. 
He is expected to be kept in for observation for several days.

Philip, who is 91 on Sunday, had joined his family on the royal barge during 
the Thames diamond jubilee river pageant. Though he and the Queen, who is 86, 
stood for 80 minutes in the cold and rain, he did not then appear to be in 
discomfort.

His illness will undoubtedly cast a shadow over the bank holiday jubilee 
festivities for the Queen, who has referred to him as "my strength and my stay".

As is her right, the Queen was not in the royal box when the concert, staged 
around the Queen Victoria Memorial outside Buckingham Palace, opened with 
Robbie Williams belting out Let Me Entertain You to the 12,000 who won tickets 
in a ballot for the spectacular. Ducks took flight as fireworks and drums 
kicked off the show. David Cameron and his wife, Samantha, were among guests in 
the royal box.

So many people descended on St James's Park, next to Buckingham Palace, to 
watch the concert on a big screen that police officers declared the park full 
and diverted the overflow to Hyde Park. Organisers estimated crowds at 250,000 
in the Mall, St James's Park and Hyde Park.

One of the show's most bizarre performances came from Grace Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grace-jones>, who performed the whole of her 
hit Slave to Rhythm while hula hooping. Slightly misunderstanding the occasion, 
she left the stage shouting, "We love you, happy birthday our Queen."

The subject of the enthusiasm arrived late and equipped with earplugs, 
understandable for an elderly monarch not overly fond of rock and pop. She wore 
a heavy dark cape to keep warm.

Prince Harry did not take to the stage to reprise his role as the "tambourine 
man" in Sing, the jubilee No 1 hit jointly written byGary Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gary-barlow> and Andrew Lloyd Webber. A 
disappointment for the crowd, perhaps, but no one was going risk him outshining 
his grandmother on the night.

In the royal box Princess Anne and the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan 
Williams ,could be seen singing along gustily with Rolf Harris's rendition of 
Two Little Boys.

Among the lineup were three pop knights, Sir Cliff Richard, Sir Elton John and 
SirPaul McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney>. Madness 
were there too, performing Our House from the palace roof.

Jessie J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jessie-j> and JLS might not be 
such familiar figures to the Queen, but certainly were to her grandchildren, 
who were rocking in the royal box.

John wished the duke a speedy recovery and joked that his illness might be a 
ruse. "He hates pop music," he said of the confirmed Cole Porter fan. "Anything 
to get out of a pop concert."

The Prince of Wales acknowledged his father's absence in an emotional tribute 
on stage as the concert ended. "The only sad thing about this evening is that 
my father cannot be here with us because unfortunately he's been taken unwell," 
he said. "Ladies and gentlemen, if we shout loud enough he might just hear us 
in hospital," he added, as the crowd broke into the most deafening roar of the 
evening, then chanted "Philip, Philip, Philip" as the Queen was visibly moved.

Standing a few feet from his mother, Charles turned to her. "Your Majesty. 
Mummy," he said, just as he had addressed her on her golden jubilee. "A diamond 
jubilee is a unique and special event, some of us have had the joy of 
celebrating three jubilees with you, and I have the medals to prove it. And 
we're now celebrating the life and service of a very special person, over the 
last 60 years."

He added, to huge cheers: "So, as a nation is this our opportunity to thank 
you and my father for always being there for us. For inspiring us with your 
selfless duty and service and for making us proud to be British."

As the concert ended, the Queen removed the cape that had been keeping her 
warm to reveal a gold cocktail dress, trimmed with antique gold lace and 
adorned with Swarovsky crystals. One moment organisers will have been relieved 
not to relive was when, in 1977, the Queen stood torch in hand ready to light 
her silver jubilee beacon – and exclaimed: "Look, look. It's lit already." 
Which it was, having been prematurely ignited by an over-eager squaddie.

However, after watching a dazzling pyrotechnic and son et lumière, which 
enveloped the palace, she lit the national beacon in the Mall, the last of more 
than 4,200 jubilee beacons criss-crossing the UK and the world, drawing the day 
of celebrations to a close.

Crowds had gathered throughout the day. By 6pm, the grey clouds that had 
hovered over London for more than an hour parted to disclose a patch of hazy 
blue sky above Hyde Park and the air filled with the popping of corks and the 
smell of not-so-cheap burgers. There was a festival atmosphere, but it was more 
village fete than Glastonbury: folding chairs and Pimm's rather than rugs and 
cider.

An ironic cheer went up in the park as the rain began to fall, an hour before 
the concert began. But it was the news that the duke had been taken into 
hospital that did more to dampen spirits.

"The Queen will be a bit sad but she'll have her family around her and the 
crowds behind her. Everyone will be praying for him," said Phil Oke from 
Cornwall, clad in union flag trousers, top hat and waistcoat. His wife, Jenny, 
feared the news would upset the Queen.

"It will ruin it for her; they do everything together. It's so sad."
 