
I’m writing under the bedcovers, metaphorically speaking. I’m supposed to be 
on paternity leave but don’t like the idea of not doing this column, so I’m 
working in a few snatched moments between nappy changes and feeds. Nonetheless 
I’m keeping my promise to stay at home and so am taking a break from all the 
activity of the church in the run-up to Christmas. Not only that, but my 
mother-in-law is over from Tel Aviv to coo over her new grandchild and take 
charge of the kitchen. And with her arrival, the common language of the 
vicarage has shifted to Hebrew, with me struggling to keep up. All of which 
draws my attention to something that sociologists of religion often remark 
upon: that many of the great liturgies and festivals of Judaism centre on the 
home in a way that they do not with catholicChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> – Christmas being the only 
possible exception.

With catholic Christianity – and that includes my part of the C of E – 
religion is for church. Very occasionally, I say prayers before meal times. 
Usually, it has to be said, when we have the bishop round for supper. And when 
a parishioner is too ill to make it to Sunday service, I take the eucharist to 
them at home. But all this is small beer compared with the wealth of liturgical 
and semi-liturgical stuff that goes on in the Jewish home: from the three-line 
whip of eating at home on shabbat, to the grand meal of the passover seder, 
from the ceremony of circumcision (traditionally performed at home unless too 
many people want to come), to sitting shiva for the dead.

When Jews fix the mezuzah on the doorpost of their home, they are declaring 
their homes holy in a way that Christians rarely do. And while Jewish weddings 
don’t commonly take place at home, they do take place under the chuppah, which 
symbolises the home. This year, the festival of Hanukah begins on Christmas 
Eve, which further emphasises the contrast. My wife will light Hanukah candles 
at home. I will lightChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> candles in church.

One common explanation for the catholic emphasis on church as opposed to home 
is that catholic Christianity maintained a firm distinction between the sacred 
and the profane. To be holy was to be set apart. To be a priest was not to be 
involved with worldly stuff. God was seen as more intensely present in special 
places and at special times.

What dramatically changed all this was the Reformation and the rejection of 
the idea that the church is the middleman between human beings and God. With 
the Bible in the vernacular, you could read about God at home and not have to 
be told about God in church. This sucks power away from the church and begins 
its relocation to the home.

Thus George Herbert could write, in 1633, words that became a much-loved hymn: 
“A servant with this clause makes drudgery divine: who sweeps a room as for 
Thy laws makes that and th’ action fine.” With the Reformation, the profane 
makes a religious comeback.

In his magisterial Sources of the Self 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sources_of_the_Self>, the philosopher Charles 
Taylor calls this shift in sensibility “the affirmation of ordinary life” and 
links it to the Protestant deification of profane work, the Protestant work 
ethic, and ultimately as setting the scene for capitalism. For as God broke out 
of his imprisonment in churches, he came to be seen not just in the profane 
home but also in profane work. Thus hard work, making money work, previously 
distinguished from God’s holy work done by religious people, came to be 
invested with some higher religious purpose.

But this affirmation of profane work became too successful. For even when 
secularisation took God out of the picture, the Protestant idea persisted that 
not working hard enough is some sort of secular sin or moral failing. And now 
we are slaves to that idea. Which is why I’m going to enjoy a guilt-free 
paternity leave, messing around with my son, eating my mother-in-law’s borscht 
and lighting our candles. My Jewish relatives are all secular Israelis – yet it 
is they, not I, who have introduced religious liturgies into our house. And I 
thank them for bringing God home.Happy Chrismukah 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrismukkah>.

@giles_fraser <https://twitter.com/giles_fraser>
 