
The biggest private litigation battle in British legal history is to be 
decided on Friday when the high court passes judgment in the case of the 
feuding Russian businessmen Boris Berezovsky andRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>.

Mrs Justice Gloster will read her judgment in the case at 10.30am in London's 
Rolls Building, the new commercial wing of the high court.

She is due to speak for an hour, with both oligarchs, their bodyguards, and 
entourages expected in court to hear the result.

Berezovsky, the former Kremlin insider turned bitter critic of Vladimir Putin, 
claims that Abramovich cheated him out of more than $5bn (£3.2bn). Abramovich, 
the owner ofChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> FC, who 
remains on good terms with President Putin, says he doesn't owe Berezovsky 
anything.

The case stems from Russia's murky 1990s, and Boris Yeltsin's controversial 
privatisation programme, which saw the creation in 1995 of the oil firm 
Sibneft. Berezovsky says he and Abramovich were partners in Sibneft, later sold 
to Gazprom for $13bn; Abramovich insists he merely retained Berezovsky because 
of his top-level Kremlin contacts and influence with Yeltsin.

The case heard last autumn was one of the most colourful in high court 
history. Both oligarchs gave evidence – Abramovich speaking in Russian. The two 
men pointedly ignored each other in the corridors. The hearing was a study in 
contrasts, with Berezovsky outspoken and pugnacious in the witness box, and 
Abramovich low-key and cautious.

The multimillion litigation is good news for City lawyers, and is the latest 
in a string of Russian and international disputes that have ended up in the 
high court. Jonathan Sumption QC, now a UK supreme court justice, acted for 
Abramovich, earning a fee rumoured to be over £1m.

Berezovsky's lead barrister is Laurence Rabinowitz QC.

The judgment will be published on the judicial website <>, immediately after 
the judge has risen.
 