
The former world No1 Justine Henin will carry an elbow injury into next month's
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> and says 
she may be six months away from full fitness.

Henin will make her return from injury at the Hopman Cup mixed teams event 
which starts in Perth on Saturday, ensuring she will play at least three 
singles and three doubles matches before the first grand slam of the season.

The seven-times grand slam winner, who last played a major event at Wimbledon 
in June, said her elbow was not completely healed and would have to be closely 
monitored in the lead-up to the Australian Open.

Henin reached last year's Australian Open final in her first grand slam event 
following nearly two years off the tour.

Meanwhile, the American Andy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> says he feels fit for the 
first time in more than six months after overcoming mononucleosis. Roddick, the 
world No8, said he fought the strength-sapping illness for most of last year 
when he failed to reach the quarter-finals at Wimbledon and the French and US 
Opens.

He said he had worked hard to regain his fitness during the recent off-season 
and would look to next week's Brisbane Invitational as a springboard into a 
better 2011. "For me it's just a matter of getting right, getting healthy," 
Roddick said today. "I battled sickness for a big part of last year and from 
there I just felt like I was playing catch-up.

"You train hard and you get hurt in training coming back. You don't train, you 
rest and you try and come back and your body is not right and it shows."

A former world No1, Roddick dropped to No13 in August last year before getting 
back into single figures, but now feels ready to push for the top five.

"It's the first time I've felt right since last May so when you are fit it 
takes a lot of the mental pressure off," Roddick said. "You feel like you can 
play any way you want so I feel fresh and I feel enthused and ready."

Roddick beat the Czech Radek Stepanek in last year's final at Brisbane and 
said he was looking for a similar show of early season form as he builds up for 
next month's Australian Open. "I came in last year and hadn't been playing much 
so this was a really good springboard into the year for me," he said. "I like 
being in the same country but also I like this event. My wife enjoys coming 
here so let's not pretend I make any decisions."

Roddick is seeded two for Brisbane, behind the world No4 Robin Soderling of 
Sweden.
 