
Preamble: So then, now it gets interesting. Jelena Jankovic certainly looked 
the business 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/australianopen2008/story/0,,2244835,00.html> 
(albeit probably for the first time this tournament) as she thumped her way 
past Serena Williams in the wee small hours, so now it's time to find out who 
she'll be playing in the semi-finals. Justine Henin has won amoderately 
impressive 33 matches on the bounce since Marion Bartoli knocked her out of 
Wimbledon last year, but Maria Sharapova looks back to her big-hitting best 
after recovering from last year's shoulder-knack. They've lost something like 1 
1/2 games between them so far this tournament. Should be a corker.

Head-to-head Henin has won six of the eight these have played so far, but 
they're rarely straightforward. Most recently, Henin needed all her steel to 
win a thrilling Madrid Masters final 5-7, 7-5, 6-3.

"I wonder what Sharapova's mother looks like," ponders our Eurosport 
commentator, in a way that sounds ever so slightly pervy.

First set: Henin 0-1 Sharapova* Sharapova gets things going just the way she'd 
want to with a belting serve that Henin can't control and an ace straight down 
the middle of the court to go 30-0 up. The next serve is a fault, but Henin 
pats her backhand into the net. Henin finally takes one point back, wellying a 
deep forehand to the baseline after a short rally, but Sharapova ties it up on 
the next, driving to the net before wrong-footing Henin with a deep volley.

First set: Henin* 0-2 Sharapova At 15-0 down Sharapova uses the first 
challenge of the match to overturn a Henin ace, which then turns into a 
double-fault instead. Suddenly Sharapova has Henin on the back foot, taming her 
serves without much bother and dominating the rallies. A glorious smash gives 
her the 15-40 lead, then Henin nets a routine backhand from the baseline to 
give her the game.

First set: Henin 0-3 Sharapova* It's easy to forget - what with the model 
looks and flimsy frocks - just how powerful Sharapova can be. She's really 
putting everything into her shots so far and it's working well - despite a 
sloppy forehand into the net at 40-0 up, Sharapova drops just the one point on 
the way to holding serve. Henin's won just three points so far.

First set: Henin* 1-3 Sharapova Aah, there's the world No1 we've been waiting 
for. Down 0-30, Henin finally gets her serve going, crushing the ball flat and 
down the line before attacking the net. The next four points all go Henin's 
way, and finally she's got a game on the board.

First set: Henin 1-4 Sharapova* "With Paula Radcliffe running marathons, isn't 
it about time that the women played five sets at grand slams," asks Gary 
Naylor, dredging up a chestnut so old it remembers the days when BBC sit-coms 
were funny. "We'd get better matches in the last eight and we'd see just how 
weak some of the non-top eight players really are." Well, we all know I agree 
Gary - I'd love to watch five sets of these two going at it - but I don't think 
it's going to happen any time soon. Sharapova holds to 15.

First set: Henin* 2-4 Sharapova Ju-ju is unhappy about some noises from the 
crowd - who have begun aping the players' grunting noises, but she should be 
more concerned about the lack of conviction in her groundstrokes from the 
baseline. Too many are barely clearing the service box and Sharapova tears in 
to dispatch one such example to the far corner with a vicious two-handed 
backhand to bring up 30-30. Henin takes the next point, but then double faults 
to make it deuce. Sharapova seizes the first advantage with another backhand, 
but can only get the edge of her frame to Henin's next serve, so the game 
returns to deuce. Henin then finally converts a game point of her own at the 
third attempt.

First set: Henin 2-5 Sharapova* No such trouble for Sharapova holding her 
serve - she drops just the one point, as Henin continues to struggle with those 
booming serves.

First set: Henin* 3-5 Sharapova Henin is smart enough to know something needs 
changing, so she does just that on the first point, adding slice to her 
backhands to take the pace out of the game and lure an over-eager Sharapova 
into a mistake. Henin moves 30-0 up, but a double-fault lets Sharapova back in 
and on the next point the Russian delivers yet another baseline winner. 
Sharapova once again pulls out a successful challenge after appearing to strike 
a forehand long at 30-30, but Henin takes the replayed point anyway, before 
sealing the game with a deft backhand volley after Sharapova's forehand clipped 
a net cord and forced her to attack the net.

First set: Henin 4-5 Sharapova* Well, well, well - after looking totally 
dominant through her first four service games, never dropping more than a 
single point in each, Sharapova finally has a little wobble. First Sharapova 
slams a backhand into the net to make it 30-40, and Henin looked to be in 
control of the rally on break point before striking a bizarre off-target 
forehand wide meekly into the tramlines. No matter - after replying to a 
slightly overhit Sharapova dropshot with an impeccably weighted one of her own 
(though why Sharapova didn't start moving up the court sooner is anyone's 
guess), Henin sees Sharapova - trying a bit too hard to make every shot a 
winner - put another backhand into the middle of the net.

First set: Henin* 4-6 Sharapova That last game ended with an "Allez!" but this 
one begins with a "Come on!" as Sharapova quickly goes 0-30 up when Henin nets 
a backhand of her own. Henin recovers to 30-30, but Sharapova earns a break 
point, drawing Henin to the net with a dropshot before ending a thrilling rally 
with a passing shot down the right. She overhits a forehand on the next point 
though, and we're at deuce. Henin takes the first advantage, but Sharapova 
recovers to take the advantage three times after a series of incredible 
rallies, and finally takes the set when Henin can't quite get enough on the 
ball as she lunges for a backhand while charging the net. Glorious tennis.

Second set: Sharapova* leads Henin 6-4, 1-0 "This is better than watching it 
on telly," lies Alistair Ogilvie. "Never volunteer for table tennis though, 
unless you want RSI." I'll keep that in mind, Alistair. Relieved of the 
pressure of serving for a set, Sharapova is back to her best on service and 
holds to 15.

Second set: Sharapova leads Henin* 6-4, 2-0 Me, oh my, there's some serious 
grunting going on out there now - especially from Sharapova. Then again, 
whatever works - and she soon has break point after an uncharacteristically 
lazy forehand from Henin lands between the tramlines. Ju-Ju makes her work much 
harder for it on the next point - a 20-odd shot rally only coming to an end 
when Sharapova responds to Henin's attempted forehand winner by simply flicking 
a perfect two-handed backhand down the line for the game. Absolutely 
superlative shot.

Second set: Sharapova* leads Henin 6-4, 3-0 I'd say this one could be over 
quickly now, but you never want to count Henin out. Sharapova just looks so 
composed at the moment, though - she's been going for the jugular with sheer 
force from the outset, and - other than that brief wobble at the end of the 
last set - has been in control from pretty much the first point. Once again 
it's a service game to 15, and Henin is beginning to look a little frustrated.

Second set: Sharapova leads Henin* 6-4, 4-0 That might just be that - Henin 
dug deep into her box of tricks in that game - changing up her shorts, dragging 
her opponent across the court, but Sharapova's power just seems to override 
everything right now, as she assaults the net to power a forehand winner across 
Henin's face and into the far corner of the court. Henin gifts her a break 
point with an unforced error, manages to get back to deuce, but then double 
faults to restore the advantage. Sharapova won't be denied again, finding yet 
another clean winner off her back foot.

Second set: Sharapova* leads Henin 6-4, 5-0 Henin gets the chance to break 
straight back after dispatching a Sharapova serve for a rare winner of her own 
and then seeing Sharapova net on the next point as she moves 30-40 up. 
Sharapova rescues that point, but Henin gets another shot after Sharapova 
flicks a wristy backhand long on deuce. Once again, though Sharapova digs out 
an unreturnable serve, and two points later she has the game. That's her sixth 
in a row.

Second set: Sharapova* beats Henin 6-4, 6-0 Henin tries not to give up the 
ghost, willing her way through a gruelling rally before putting away a perfect 
smash to go 15-0 up. But Sharapova is relentless today, full of power, grace 
and buoyed by the self-confidence she has gained over the last 15 games. Three 
more points, three more rallies, and though Henin forces her to find winners on 
all but the last, that is exactly what she does. That really was as perfect a 
performance as you will ever see against an opponent of Henin's calibre. It'll 
be Sharapova against Jankovic in the semi-finals, and right now that looks like 
quite the prospect. Thanks for all your emails.
 