
The men's 100m is hotting up. Justin Gatlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/justin-gatlin> made his fastest-ever start 
to a season at the Diamond League meet on Friday night, winning in 9.87sec. The 
American, the 2004 Olympic champion, came back from a four-year ban for doping 
in 2010, and he says he is being made to feel welcome by the fans. "You have to 
see track and field as a soap opera with spikes on," he said after his win.

If that's the case then, despite what he says, a lot of people are going to 
see him as the villain of the piece. He was only two-hundredths of a second off 
his official personal best of 9.85sec. He has run faster than that in his time, 
but those marks were all struck off the record when he was banned.

Gatlin beat Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell> to 
the line by a single hundredth of a second, and straight after the race he said 
he was coming after Usain Bolt and Yohan Blake too. "Everyone has watched the 
Bolt show for a couple of years," Gatlin said, "and now everyone want to see 
someone else in the mix – I'm glad to step up and hopefully I can take charge 
of that."

Bolt opened his season with a time of 9.82sec in Kingston, and Blake has since 
run 9.84sec in a meet in the Cayman Islands. But Gatlin reckoned his 
performance here was more impressive than either. "Bolt and Blake have opened 
up with 9.8 on home turf, but I'm far away from home and this shows I can run 
very well anywhere round the world." He may have a point too – Gatlin had a 
+0.4m/sec wind behind him, whereas Bolt enjoyed +1.8m/sec worth of help.

Powell had his excuses ready. "It would have been an easy race for me if I had 
got here a few days earlier, but I was jetlagged and felt that in my legs." He 
reckoned it was a freak result. "This will never happen again. Never again."

Gatlin was having none of that. "Never again? I guess he would have to say it 
seven times, because I've beat him seven to three." Gatlin added, in a pointed 
dig at Powell, that "races like this show who's a competitor and who's just a 
runner".

The 30-year-old Gatlin did not make the semi-finals at the world championships 
in 2011, but his victory at the world indoors earlier this year seems to have 
kick-started his revival. "I've got a lot of grit left in these old legs and 
now I want to come back and show I can run to the line with the best of them," 
he said. "This is just one step, but it's a very important step to get to that 
podium in London. I'm just ready for it."

It was a night that suggested the Jamaicans are not going to get it all their 
own way when it comes to the sprints in London this summer. Allyson Felix won 
the women's 100m in a new PB of 10.92sec, holding off Veronica Campbell-Brown 
and Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce. Her US team-mate, Walter Dix, won the men's 200m.

Another man returning from a doping ban, Olympic champion LaShawn Merritt, won 
the 400m in a time of 44.19sec, the fastest in the world this year and his best 
since he came back to the sport last summer.

Britain's Martyn Rooney was trailing in his slipstream but finished strongly 
to record his second successive sub-45 second time. The other British athletes 
produced some mixed results. Emma Jackson set a new PB of 1.59min 37sec in the 
800m. Greg Rutherford, whose leap of 8.35m in California earlier this month is 
the best anywhere so far this year, finished fourth in the long jump with a 
best of the night 7.98m.

The standout performance was from Andrew Osagie, who also set a new personal 
best of 1.44min 64sec in the 800m, beating his old mark by .72 of a second.The 
24-year-old Osagie from Essex was third behind the world-record holder David 
Rudisha, who was roared on by an enthusiastic thicket of Kenyan fans in the 
otherwise thinly-packed stands.

They were having a competition with a similarly raucous group of Ethiopians to 
see who could make the most noise.They soundtracked the race of the night, a 
3,000m clash between Vivian Cheruiyot and Mesret Defar. Cheruiyot won by 
three-hundredths of a second in a sprint finish. The Ethiopians were 
disappointed in the men's race too, when Kenenisa Bekele finished seventh 
behind Kenya's Augustine Choge. Bekele said that he had missed two days of 
training, and was suffering with an ankle injury.
 