
Smiling outside in the warm Adelaide sun, Trudi Klever presents a very 
different figure than in performance with Dutch theatre companyHotel Modern 
<http://www.hotelmodern.nl/>'s Kamp, one of the more intense theatrical works 
in the 2013 Adelaide festival.

Premiering in 2005 with a different cast as a "theatrical memorial" to the 
grandfather of company member Pauline Kalker, murdered in a Nazi extermination 
camp, this is thefirst time Kamp has been presented in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/13/kamp-adelaide-festival>, and 
the first time Klever has performed in the work. Of performing, she says, "you 
can't leave your heart out."

Kamp sees Auschwitz depicted onstage in miniature, at around a 1:20 scale. 
Nazis and Jews are represented by puppets, moved around and filmed by three 
performers, the results being projected live onto the back wall of the stage.

The show is wordless, with a loud and oppressive soundtrack of music and live 
sound, but during the development process Hotel Modern explored presenting the 
work with text, taken from letters by extermination camp management. Says 
Klever, "once you started talking and there was human voice in it everything 
got too small."

Searching for the English word, Klever says the action of adding dialogue made 
the work feel "insignificant."

"It was insignificant because it was only about that specific thing, whereas 
the atmosphere should be wider, should be more abstract in a sense, so that 
there is room for imagination and you can relate to what you are seeing in your 
own personal way: without us directing your thoughts into speech, words, 
meaning."

An essential part of the production happens post-show, when the performers 
invite the audience down onto the stage to view the puppets and ask questions. 
In conversation, I told Klever it was the action of stepping onto the stage and 
sharing the space with the set that made me emotionally overcome by the work.

"Maybe especially in something like this when you are emotionally involved, 
there is something in you that wants to understand why it is emotionally 
involving," she responded. "You want to get up close, you want to break the 
spell or intensify the spell or whatever you want to do, but it's that you have 
to get in contact with it."

This action is also essential for the work, because "sometimes an audience is 
very lame. They sit there and they don't know what to do: they cannot remain 
seated and they cannot stand up. And that is the point where we invite them to 
come and to get things moving."

Klever often talks with a slight hesitancy in comparing the Australian and 
European audiences. "Coming from Europe this is a different thing perhaps," she 
starts. "We've had people in the audience who were in Auschwitz but never 
talked about it. They cannot talk about it. And they see the performers and 
they come up and through these clay puppets, they start talking."

Speaking about the work, Klever's voice is quiet. "When you rehearse you can 
approach from different sides. There was the technical aspect of how to tell 
the story right, and the tempo, the rhythm. And once you start to perform you 
leave all that out and you go.

"But it's a very intense experience. It does get to you." Because of this, 
while touring the company performs a maximum of 10 performances. "That keeps it 
healthy, so to say. Keeps us healthy, keeps the performance healthy."

Klever is keen to make the most out of performing in Australia. As we part, 
the conversation turns from extermination camps to the next day's trip to
Cleland Wildlife Park <http://www.environment.sa.gov.au/clelandwildlife/Home>. 
She smiles: "I promised myself when I got to Australia I definitely want to see 
some animals and some real nice trees and some wildlife, and now we're going to 
get to see it, so I'm over the moon."
 