
· Photo gallery <https://www.theguardian.com/gall/0,8542,708140,00.html>: see 
some of the subverted ads

Hands in pockets, two shady-looking figures in combat trousers attempt to look 
nonchalant. Thirty yards away, a lookout with a mobile phone clamped to his ear 
scans a busy traffic junction for police. Satisfied that the coast is clear, 
the two hooded young men approach a billboard advertising the new series of Auf 
Wiedersehen, Pet. The BBC is about to be visited by crack troops from Anti 
Billboard Brainwashing Action (Abba).

Political graffiti and street art is nothing new. Defacing adverts seen as 
sexist was popular among feminists in the 70s and anti-nuclear protesters in 
the 80s. In the 90s, Canadian "culture jamming" magazineAdbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/adbusters> took the artform to new levels 
with the slick "subvertising" of adverts for American corporate giants such as 
Gap and McDonald's to convey anti-consumerist messages.

Inspired by Adbusters, a loose and underground network of subvertisers has 
sprouted across Britain. Most have links to anti-capitalist, green or anarchist 
groups who will assemble today in Mayfair. There are active groups in at least 
five British cities: Abba operate in Bristol, the New Advertising Standards 
Authority (Nasa) works in south London, and there are also factions in 
Newcastle, Manchester and Oxford. A subvertising website (www.subvertise.org 
<http://www.subvertise.org>) acts as an archive and gallery where almost 500 
subverts are displayed.

Penetrating the secretive world of subvertising was no easy task. 
Anti-capitalist groups are so fed up of their portrayal as mindless, 
rock-wielding thugs that approaches from the mainstream media are viewed with 
extreme suspicion. After weeks of fruitless emails and calls, a recommendation 
from a friend of a friend finally got me a rendezvous in a Bristol pub on 
Monday evening.

Paul, John and Ed (not their real names) arrived on time. Over a quick drink, 
it was explained that I had been checked out and was going to be trusted with a 
subvertising demonstration. The rules were: no personal details, and no photos 
that could identify individuals.

An hour later and I'm trying to look casual while leaning against a signpost 
on an island between six lanes of traffic on the A4044 in Bristol city centre. 
There is an air of military efficiency as the operation unfolds. Ed takes up 
position close to the nearby traffic lights with a mobile phone at the ready. 
Paul, wearing a green hood, sets about the Auf Wiedersehen, Pet billboard with 
a roller dipped in wallpaper paste on the end of a long pole.

John pastes up the letters to create the text "World War III" and "Auf 
Wiedersehen, Planet". Fifty yards away, a police car appears, siren wailing and 
lights flashing. The troops vanish into nearby bushes. When the coast is clear 
again, a large blue wheelie bin is pushed into place. Paul, who is wearing 
sandals, clambers up only to slip off. Several more attempts later and the 
loveable Geordie brickies Oz, Dennis, Barry, Neville, Bomber and Moxey have 
become the hated Blair, Bush, Sharon, Putin, Kofi Annan and Colin Powell. After 
a few problems with the top of Sharon's head falling off, and three more police 
cars going past, the operation is over inside 10 minutes.

Over a pint to celebrate the suc cessful mission, the reasoning behind 
subvertising is explained to me. John is a veteran of the May Day 
demonstrations of recent years. The film-maker who helps run the Subvertise 
website, explains his motivation.

"Advertising is pollution. It is an invasion of our space and privacy which 
supports the consumerist system. It is everywhere and becoming even more 
pervasive with spam emails and text messages. Most of all, subvertising is a 
fun thing to do. If I can put a smile on the face of someone stuck in a traffic 
jam, I'm happy. That is a worthwhile end in itself."

John, who has been doing subverts for several years, has never been caught. 
His methods vary depending on the billboard. Sometimes he works alone, 
sometimes with a lookout. He no longer bothers to wait for nightfall. Sometimes 
a spray can will do while other operations require the use of computers, 
scanners and printers.

He adds: "Desktop publishing programmes allow a more professional job. Some 
people use a fluorescent jacket so that they look as if they are supposed to be 
there. You need to identify your exit points so you know what you are doing if 
you need to leave quickly."

Paul works in IT, is a member of the Socialist Workers' Party and describes 
himself as an environmentalist and a communist. He has done about 15 subverts 
over the past few months. "Adverts lie to people and they are a waste of money. 
The messages go straight into your head. I hate that. I do it partly for 
personal satisfaction, partly to damage the messages of the companies, and 
partly to inform the public."

· Subverts can be seen at www.subvertise.org <http://www.subvertise.org>. A 
short film on subvertising is available online atwww.videonetwork.org 
<http://www.videonetwork.org>

· Photo gallery <https://www.theguardian.com/gall/0,8542,708140,00.html>: see 
some of the subverted ads
 