
I can't think of a better way to end my stay on these pages than with 
something sweet. Well, three somethings, actually, and none of themthat hard to 
make: a sort-of Italian take on the French tarte au citron; a panna cotta that 
takes full advantage of the joys of blood oranges; and a ginger pudding because 
who doesn't love a steamed pudding on a crisp spring day?

Lemon and ricotta tart

The ricotta adds a lovely richness to this not-so-traditional version of the 
classic lemon tart. Serves eight.

4 medium eggs
200g caster sugar
175ml double cream
130ml lemon juice, plus the grated zest of 2 lemons
350g ricotta 
200g raspberry
Icing sugar, for dusting

For the sweet pastry
330g plain flour
A pinch of salt
100g icing sugar
200g cold butter, cut into chunks 
3 eggs

First make the pastry. Sift the flour and salt into a bowl, add the icing 
sugar, then rub in the butter with your fingertips until the mixture resembles 
breadcrumbs. In a small bowl, beat together two of the eggs, then add these to 
the flour mix and work with your hands until it comes together into a dough. 
Take care not to overwork it, otherwise it will become too hard and lose its 
crumbly texture. Wrap in clingfilm and leave to rest for at least an hour.

Meanwhile, get to work on the filling. Whisk the eggs and sugar until the 
sugar dissolves, then fold in the cream, lemon juice and grated zest, and set 
aside.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. On a floured work surface, roll out the 
pastry to about 3mm thick – take care, because it's quite delicate – then use 
it to line a 24cm flan tin (fluted, if possible) with a loose base. Cover the 
pastry with parchment and fill with baking beans, then bake for 20 minutes, 
until just starting to turn golden brown. Remove the beans and parchment, cook 
for five minutes more, then remove from the oven.

Beat the remaining egg from the pastry ingredients, use this to paint the 
inside of the pastry case, then return to the oven for two minutes more. Remove 
and set aside to cool. Turn down the oven to 120C/250F/gas mark ¼.

Once the tart case is cool, break the ricotta into small pieces and scatter 
all over the bottom of the tart case. Pour the lemony custard on top and bake 
again for 35-45 minutes at 140C/285F/gas mark 1, until the filling is set but 
still slightly wobbly in the centre.

Remove from the oven, leave to cool in the tin, then remove. To serve, cover 
the top with raspberries and dust with icing sugar.

Panna cotta, blood orange and cantucci
 Panna cotta, blood orange and cantucci: 'Make the most of blood oranges while 
you can.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian. Food styling Henrietta 
Clancy 
Blood orange season will be over before we know it, so make the most of them 
while you can. These biscotti can be made well ahead of time – they'll keep in 
an airtight container for a good few days. I find it easiest to make the panna 
cotta a day ahead, then pop it in the fridge and forget all about it until it's 
time to serve; failing that, it needs at least four hours in the fridge to set. 
Serves eight.

For the cantucci
180g softened butter
275g caster sugar
4 eggs, beaten
10g baking powder
½ tsp salt
500g '00' flour
½ tsp ground aniseed
175g almonds, roughly chopped 

For the panna cotta
3½ gelatine leaves
700g double cream
475ml full-fat milk
140g caster sugar
1 vanilla pod, cut in half lengthways
4 blood oranges, peeled and cut into segments 

Start with the biscuits. Heat the oven to 150C/300F/gas mark 2. Line two 
baking sheets with baking parchment.

With an electric mixer, cream the butter and sugar until fluffy and pale, then 
add the eggs one by one, beating well after each addition. Fold in all the 
remaining biscuit ingredients. Spoon the mixture into a piping bag fitted with 
a large plain nozzle and pipe it out on to the lined baking sheets in 5cm-wide 
logs, leaving a 3cm gap between them. Bake for 25–30 minutes, until slightly 
risen and golden brown. Transfer to a wire rack and leave until just cool 
enough to handle (they need to be still warm so they're easy to slice). Turn 
down the oven to 130C/260F/gas mark ½. Cut the cantucci diagonally into 1cm 
slices, spread out on the baking sheets and return to the oven for 20 minutes, 
turning halfway through. Remove and set aside to cool.

Now for the panna cotta. Put the gelatine in a bowl, add cold water to cover 
and a handful or two of ice cubes. Put the cream, 350ml of the milk and the 
sugar in a saucepan. Scrape the vanilla seeds into the cream, then drop in the 
empty pod, too. Bring just to a boil, stirring to dissolve the sugar, then 
remove from the heat immediately and lift out and discard the vanilla pod.

Squeeze out the gelatine to remove as much excess water as possible, then add 
to the hot milk mixture. Whisk well, to dissolve the gelatine, then strain 
through a fine sieve into a bowl. Add the remaining cold milk, set the bowl 
over one of iced water and leave to cool, whisking occasionally to prevent 
a skin from forming.

When the mixture is semi-set, pour into individual ramekins or timbales and 
refrigerate for at least four hours, preferably overnight.

To serve, lightly warm the base and sides of the ramekins in hot water, turn 
out the panna cotta on to plates and serve with a few slices of fresh blood 
orange and the biscuits.

Steamed ginger pudding

To finish off, a dessert that's much closer to home. This is an updated 
version of a recipe from my 2011 book Angela's Kitchen. Serves eight.

180g softened butter, plus extra for greasing
180g flour
6 tbsp golden syrup
3 tsp baking powder
180g caster sugar
60g stem ginger, plus 3 tbsp of the syrup from the jar
3 eggs

Grease a one-litre pudding basin with a little butter, then pour in the syrup.

Put all the remaining ingredients into a bowl and mix with an electric whisk 
until smooth. Pour into the prepared basin and cover with a circle of 
greaseproof paper. Take a large piece of foil, fold a pleat down the centre, 
then lay it over the pudding and tie in place with string.

Put the pudding in a steamer and steam for two hours: make sure the water is 
always at a slow simmer and top up with boiling water as necessary. To check 
the pudding is cooked, carefully lift off the foil and greaseproof paper, and 
insert a skewer into the centre: if it comes out clean, it's ready; if not, 
cover again with greaseproof and foil, and cook for 15 minutes longer.

Serve with cream or custard.

• Angela Hartnett is chef/patron of Murano <http://muranolondon.com>, Cafe 
Murano <http://www.cafemurano.co.uk> and Merchants Tavern 
<http://www.merchantstavern.co.uk>, all in London, and Hartnett Holder & Co 
<http://www.limewoodhotel.co.uk/hartnett-holder-and-co/> at Lime Wood in 
Hampshire.
 