
Sometimes, the facts speak for themselves. The most expensive signing in this 
summer’sTwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> Blast scored 225 
runs in 12 innings, with a highest score of 39. His only rival in terms of 
publicity generated throughout the tournament made a grand total of three 
appearances for his county, in which he faced 12 balls, although he did bowl 10 
overs.

Yet Surrey’s bean counters will not be complaining about their investment in 
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, as his 
presence – on advertising billboards around the Kia Oval and then on the field 
– was surely a key factor in record attendances that contributed more than a 
fifth of total ticket sales for the Blast. The irony of Pietersen playing such 
a prominent part in helping the England and Wales Cricket Board acclaim the 
repackaged T20 tournament a success has not been lost on either side.

Lancashire scarcely made a penny directly from Andrew Flintoff’s much-hyped 
comeback, as none of his three appearances came at Old Trafford. But he still 
played a major part in raising the profile of the club, and of the Blast, in 
the north-west and beyond.

Flintoff also made a more memorable contribution in one of his two innings for 
Lancashire than Pietersen in any of his 12 for Surrey,thumping consecutive 
sixes off Oliver Hannon-Dalby to set up a thrilling finish to the final at 
Edgbaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/23/andrew-flintoff-lancashire-warwickshire-natwest-t20-blast-final>
. That came as a pleasant surprise to those who had doubted whether Flintoff, 
at 36, and five years since his last competitive game, could be anything more 
than a novelty act.

But the uncomfortable question remains: how much longer can Pietersen, 
Flintoff and English cricket keep trading on former glories? It is a problem 
Pietersen has freely acknowledged. “I probably should have played a little bit 
more cricket, just because if you really want to perform in T20 cricket and you 
are only playing one day a week, I do think you need to have your eye in,” he 
said in a recent interview withAll Out Cricket. “You need to be playing cricket 
regularly.”

So he made himself available to play for Surrey in their last two County 
Championship fixtures of the season, which would have been his first in white 
clothes and involving a red ball since England’s Ashes whitewash was completed 
in Sydney in January. But Surrey’s cricket director, Alec Stewart, presumably 
with the agreement of Graham Ford, an old South African mentor of Pietersen who 
is now head coach at The Oval, decided that once realistic hopes of promotion 
had disappeared,it was “better for the future of the club” to select younger 
players instead. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/08/kevin-pietersen-surrey-county-championship>

That inevitably raised questions about Surrey’s enthusiasm for adding 
Pietersen to their Championship squad for next season. While welcoming the 
possibility of Pietersen’s extended availability, the club’s chief executive, 
Richard Gould, had added a note of caution, stressing budgetary considerations 
and, specifically, the salary cap.

That was not an issue for Surrey when signing Pietersen this season, as former 
England players are exempt from the cap for the financial year after they have 
lost their central contract. But next year he would have to be fitted beneath 
the cap, which stands at around £2m to cover all competitions – and that might 
makeSurrey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey> considerably less keen, 
given his other commitments in the Indian Premier League in the early weeks of 
the season and possibly the Caribbean Premier League later on.

Rod Bransgrove, the Hampshire chairman who signed Pietersen from 
Nottinghamshire in 2004 but was not heartbrokento lose him to Surrey six years 
later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jun/17/kevin-pietersen-hampshire-exit>, 
describes him and Flintoff as “good signings for T20. In a way, they are now 
more about box office than performance”.

Pietersen has been at pains to stress throughout the summer, whether on 
Twitter or in his newspaper column, how much he is enjoying his new life after 
England, and if you dismiss the cynical protest-too-much interpretation, for 
the next few months he certainly has plenty on his plate.

His autobiography – ghosted by David Walsh, renowned for his dogged pursuit of 
Lance Armstrong – is due out next month, and he is expected to sign up for a 
stint in a new South African T20 competition, known as the Ram Slam, in 
November before heading for Australia to play for Melbourne Stars in the Big 
Bash.

Only then will he make his decisions about 2015, and if Surrey do decide to 
pass, there will doubtless be plenty of other counties keen to capitalise on 
Pietersen’s ability to put bums on seats. But it will inevitably decline unless 
he can start to produce performance to match the hype, and that might be easier 
said than done.

“I remember years and years ago when Ted Dexter retired from first-class 
cricket and said he’d just play in the Sunday League and Gillette Cup, the 
one-day competitions that had not long started,” says Jim Cumbes, who witnessed 
first-hand Flintoff’s commercial appeal to Lancashire as the county’s chief 
executive. He also speaks highly of Pietersen having found him “a delightful 
young man” when he agreed to fill in for Flintoff in providing a competition 
prize years ago.

“Ted was a wonderful player, but that plan was a disaster. He didn’t get any 
runs at all for Sussex, and it all got a bit embarrassing.”
 