
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has spoken 
out against the England and Wales Cricket Board’s decision to reappoint Peter 
Moores as England coach and claimed the only reason Ashley Giles was not given 
the role was because he was “too close” to the former Test batsman.

Pietersen’s criticism of the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> does 
not come as a surprise, given his fractured, bitter relationship with the 
organisation following its decision to sack him in February; nor will his 
negative comments about Moores, given the spectacular fallout in the pair’s 
relationship in 2009, which led to Moores losing his position as England coach 
and Pietersen his as national captain.

However, the 33-year-old’s remarks about Giles may raise some eyebrows, with 
it generally accepted that the 41-year-old was overlooked as a long-time 
successor to Andy Flower as a result of England’s poor showing at the World 
Twenty20 in Bangladesh, when he was in charge of a team that failed to progress 
beyond the group stage and suffered a shock defeat by the Netherlands.

“ I felt really sorry for Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> when he missed out on the 
England head coach job,” said Pietersen in his first column for the Daily 
Telegraph, which is published on Monday. “I spoke to him after [Moores was 
appointed to the role] and told him I thought he had it nailed. But sadly I 
think he was just too close to me for the England and Wales Cricket Board’s 
liking.

“That is the problem. He had spoken too positively about me in Australia 
[during the last Ashes series] for the ECB to give him the job. It is a shame 
for both sides.

“Instead they turned to Peter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores>. First and foremost I believe 
England should not have appointed someone who has done the job before. It was 
time for fresh ideas. But this time there is not a crop of senior players to 
resist his methods or with the personality to challenge him. They might say 
things behind his back but they will not take him on in front of others and 
that will give Peter a better chance of success.”

Pietersen’s comments are bound to leave ECB officials exasperated, no one more 
so than Paul Downton, the managing director, who last month had to apologise to 
the player after questioning his attitude during the recent Ashes whitewash, 
with Pietersen making it clear via a statement that such comments were “in 
breach of the settlement agreement” made with the batsman when his central 
contract was terminated.

However, Pietersen, who returned to domestic action in Surrey’s T20 defeat by 
Essex last Friday, when he scored only five runs, is clearly in the mood to 
talk and also claimed in his column that he is happy no longer to be part of 
the national set-up. “It has been a relief to be out of the dressing room 
because it was not a pleasant place in Australia,” he said. “We were losing and 
in my opinion the environment was poor. I was not alone in thinking that.

“Could I play more Test cricket? Yes, of course, but I’m grateful for what I 
have had and moved on with my life. I am at peace with everything.”
 