
Justin Langer's pronouncement that Australia's players have turned into gym 
junkies could provide an answer for those wondering why England have failed to 
match the athleticism of their opponents on this tour.

Langer's belief that he was captaining a fit and robust bunch of cricketers 
was backed up by a performance that saw Australia A's players take sharp 
catches and make diving stops look easy. It was a performance that saved 
crucial runs in a tight match and brought home the difference between the two 
cricketing cultures on show this winter.

Whereas England have suffered 12 injuries since arriving here 53 days ago, 
Australia prepare for the one-day series free of health scares. Lord MacLaurin, 
chairman of the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board, said last week that Andrew 
Flintoff had not adhered to his recovery programme, an impossible scenario to 
imagine in Australia, where fitness training is a major part of a cricketer's 
life.

"Conditioning yourself and getting match fit is a big thing now," Langer said. 
"The professionalism that is now apparent in the Australian team means that, if 
you are not playing cricket, you spend a lot of time in the gym. It means we 
all look pretty good on the beach, especially the young guys in our squad."

The young guys in the England team yesterday were Rob Key and Ian Blackwell 
and even they would agree they do not fit the photofit of the average 
Australian cricketer. Key has worked hard on his fitness since being told three 
years ago to cut down on the lard intake by Alec Stewart but he still lacks the 
physical prowess of last night's opponents.

One such player is the 21-year-old New South Wales batsman Michael Clarke, who 
threw himself around the SCG outfield and took a sublime diving catch in the 
deep on the same night that Key missed a simple chance at first slip before 
misjudging a skier at mid-on.

Key's mistakes were just a sub-plot to another England defeat. The management 
decided that Nick Knight was the best man to explain the performance and he was 
keen not to let defeat in a warm-up dent confidence.

"It's not much fun to keep losing," Knight said, "but these are only practice 
games and we have come here to win the one-day series. We should be judged on 
that."

England go to Canberra today for a 50-over match against a Prime Minister's XI 
led by Mark Waugh.
 