
It is not too often that 12,020 fans are privy to an England training session. 
Stuart Pearce's Under-21s warmed up for the European Championship in Sweden 
next week with a mismatch againstAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> that might have provided an 
injection of confidence but was little other than a routine work-out. Or, as 
Pearce wrote in his programme notes, an exercise "to help maintain the fluidity 
in the team".

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> were without Nedum 
Onuoha, Micah Richards and Gabriel Agbonlahor through non-serious knocks and 
Theo Walcott and James Milner who are with the senior squad, meaning that 
opportunity knocked for others. It was difficult to say that anyone 
distinguished himself, not because of substandard work but because of the 
woeful standard of the opposition. On this evidence Azerbaijan would have been 
rolled over by a League Two team. The final humiliation came when Pearce sent 
on the Peterborough United goalkeeper Joe Lewis as a substitute striker.

"That was forced on us," said the manager, "because Lee Cattermole had a tight 
calf and we had used our outfield substitutes. The last thing we wanted to do 
was appear disrespectful. I just hope the opposition didn't realise Joe was a 
goalkeeper."

The serious business for England begins next Monday with their opening group 
tie of the finals against Finland. Then come Spain and Germany. Pearce has his 
sights fixed on victory and erasing the disappointment of two years ago, when 
his team lost a semi-final penalty shoot-out to Holland.

England took the lead after 48 seconds through Michael Mancienne and it did 
not take much longer for the yawning chasm in class to become apparent. They 
chased shadows and England played through them at will.

Azerbaijan's evening was summed up by the second goal. The captain Mark 
Noble's shot rebounded off a post on to the goalkeeper, Elchin Sadigov, and in. 
Craig Gardner, whose over-zealous tackling felt out of keeping with the 
occasion, lashed in the third from Kieran Gibbs's through-ball.

The scoreline would have been even heavier but for Sadigov, who made fine 
saves in the second half. He was beaten when his defender Nodar Mammadov kicked 
Cattermole's shot past him before Gibbs helped himself from Danny Rose assists. 
Jack Rodwell also scored with a deflected shot.
 