
Two men who murdered a British couple on honeymoon in Antigua have avoided the 
death penalty but have been jailed for life. Ben and Catherine Mullany were 
shot in their chalet at a luxury hotel. They were buried together in the 
grounds of the same church where they had been married four weeks before.

Kaniel Martin, 23, and Avie Howell, 22, who also killed a shopkeeper two weeks 
later, were given three consecutive life sentences.

The judge said the "cold-hearted killers" had acted with "extreme violence" 
but he said the crimes they have been found guilty of did not justify the death 
penalty because they were not the "rarest of the rare or the worst of the 
worst".

He said he was sad that three people had been killed for such "paltry" gains 
and added that the Mullanys must have been "terrified".

Martin and Howell did not show any emotion when the judge delivered the 
sentence but their relatives wept loudly.

Friends had paid for the Mullanys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/28/ben-catherine-mullany-antigua-honeymoon?INTCMP=SRCH 
PA timeline>, both 31, to travel to Antigua two days after their wedding in 
July 2008 to stay in a chalet at the five-star Cocos Hotel.

At 5am, on the last full day of their honeymoon, the two men burst into their 
chalet and shot the Mullanys in the back of the head before escaping with a 
little cash, two inexpensive mobile phones and a cheap camera.

The Mullanys were discovered by an American nurse. Ms Mullany, a doctor, was 
beyond help but the nurse managed to stabilise Mr Mullany, a student 
physiotherapist.

He was initially conscious but slipped into a coma and was flown back home to 
Swansea's Morriston hospital, where his wife had worked. His life-support was 
turned off a week later.

The couple were buried in the grounds of St John the Evangelist church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/28/antigua-honeymoon-murders-timeline?INTCMP=SRCH>
, Cilybebyll.

Two weeks after killing, the British couple, Howell and Martin, nicknamed 
Sample Dan and Demon, murdered 43-year-old Woneta Anderson at her Morning Glory 
Sunshine shop on Antigua. They shot her dead at close range and ran off with 
two mobile phones and a handful of phone top-up cards.

A bandana with Howell's DNA was found at the scene. While the murder weapon 
was never found, tests later showed the bullets in all three killings came from 
the same gun. Gunshot residue was found on Martin and Howell's clothing.

More than 90 witnesses gave evidence at their trial at Antigua's high court in 
St John's earlier this year. The men protested their innocence and refused to 
face questioning. Relatives of the Mullanys, who had sat through the 
proceedings, broke down in tears as the jury returned its guilty verdicts after 
10 hours of deliberation.

Outside court, the families said there was no joy in the verdicts, "just a 
sense of relief that, after three years of waiting, there is justice for our 
children. These two individuals can never again inflict the same anguish and 
devastation to any other family as they have to ours.

"We will never be able to comprehend the senseless nature of their deaths, the 
total disregard shown for human life and that no remorse has ever been shown."
 