
One of the killers of a British couple murdered on their Caribbean honeymoon 
has escaped from prison, say police.

Newlyweds Ben and Catherine Mullany, from Pontardawe, south Wales, had been 
married for just over a fortnight when they were shot in their hotel room in 
Antigua in 2008.

Local men Avie Howell and Kaniel Martin were convicted of the murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/28/antigua-honeymoon-murders-men-convicted>
 and sentenced to life imprisonment.

Police in Antigua confirmed on Friday that Howell had escaped along with a 
fellow prisoner who had been detained on fraud charges.

Counsellor Jamal Wright, based at St John's police station in Antigua, said: 
"Avie Howell escaped from Her Majesty's prison at about 6am on Thursday along 
with Kenroy Laurie Marshall.

"Apparently they used a sharp implement to cut out a portion of mesh and 
jumped over the northern prison wall, which is about 30ft [9m] high."

Sergeant Raymond Finley said he believed that Howell, who is in his early 20s, 
was still on the island and said local police and defence forces were searching 
for him.

"I understand the victims' families will be very concerned," he added.

Howell and Martin burst into the Mullanys' chalet at the Cocos hotel in July 
2008.

The 31-year-olds, who lived in Rhos, near Pontardawe, were both shot in the 
head while their killers took their mobile phones, cash and a cheap digital 
camera.

Catherine Mullany, a doctor, died instantly. Her physiotherapy student husband 
– who was studying for a degree at the University of West England, Bristol – 
was flown home on a life-support machine.

Despite the efforts of his wife's colleagues at Morriston hospital in Swansea, 
the former South Yorkshire police officer died a week after the shooting.

Three years after the deaths, Howell and Martin were found guilty of murdering 
the honeymoon couple as well as shooting 43-year-old local shopkeeper Woneta 
Anderson.

Last year Howell received an additional four-year sentence for a burglary he 
carried out just weeks before murdering the Mullanys.

The couple's family were said to be "extremely shocked" at the news that 
Howell had been able to escape and were concerned Howell may flee the island.
 