
The Legend of Tarzan review – an inherently problematic remake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/the-legend-of-tarzan-review-an-inherently-problematic-remake>
All of you whingeing about the Ghostbusters remake, the Independence Day 
sequel and 50 Marvel movies coming out in the next year can pipe down now. The 
new Tarzan movie is out. There have been so many Tarzan reboots, it makes 
Spider-Man look like The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen. Since the invention 
of the motion picture, there have been more than 50 films based on Edgar Rice 
Burroughs’ Tarzan character. And I’m not counting documentaries, unlicensed 
works, TV movies, or foreign language adaptations. If you want to lament 
Hollywood’s supposed lack of originality, start with the first Tarzan 
theatrical sequel from 1918, which came outthe same year as the original. I 
supposeTarzan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tarzan> was the Iron Man of his 
time – appearing in every movie as a matter of course. He’s certainly not the 
Iron Man of this time, since that’s, well, Iron Man.

In the pantheon of enduring literary characters, why is a guy in a loincloth 
raised by gorillas so beloved by the people who write the checks in the 
entertainment industry? If you think characters like Batman and Superman are 
hard to relate to, try this: the child of English aristocrats is orphaned and 
brought up in the jungle by a pack of African gorillas. The gorillas name him 
Tarzan, which means “white skin” in Burrough’s made-up gorilla language. In 
addition to being able to understand gorilla-speak, Tarzan develops superhuman 
athletic abilities and teaches himself to read. When European travellers 
(including his soon-to-be wife, Jane Porter) discover him, they teach him 
English and French. Tarzan is the strongest, cleverest person in the history of 
the world. If someone had invented the term “Mary Sue” in 1912, it could have 
applied to Edgar Rice Burroughs and Tarzan. One might not be able to relate to 
a character who can swing from vines, talk to animals, and teach himself to 
read quicker than Rey learned how to wield a lightsaber, but it’s certainly fun 
to imagine being that person.

Like another great English literary hero, James Bond, Tarzan also taps into 
latent notions of colonialism and Great Britain’s cautiously cozying up to what 
it considered more exotic cultures. While James Bond is dispatched by the 
British government to defend the crown and in the process has sexual relations 
with women from every culture imaginable, Tarzan is dropped into the jungle and 
becomes a part of his surroundings. Bond pops into places like Turkey and 
Jamaica and leaves after a job well done. Tarzan grows up in an exotic place 
and, despite his highborn lineage, chooses to stay in that place and reject the 
social order so he can fight mutants with telepathy. Inthe DNA of the character 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarzan_the_Magnificent_(novel)> is the idea that 
a clever white man can bring order to the “dark continent” through his own 
brand of clearly delineated, culturally specific morality.

In the DNA of the character is the idea that a clever white man can bring 
order to the “dark continent”

That’s not exactly the most modern idea of a hero. But it was far more common 
in the early days of heroic pulp fiction. Allan Quartermain begat Tarzan and 
John Carter of Mars, who begat Doc Savage, Flash Gordon, the Phantom, the 
Shadow, Conan the Barbarian and Solomon Kane. And eventually, they gave us 
Superman, Batman, the Fantastic Four, Spider-Man, and the contemporary 
superhero.

There have been numerous attempts to launch the classic pulp heroes into 
feature film franchises akin to today’s mega-blockbuster series. Billy Zane 
played the Phantom. Alec Baldwin turned the Shadow into a masterpiece of art 
deco camp. John Carter of Mars was portrayed by the guy from Friday Night 
Lights. What people fail to realize is that these characters are intrinsically, 
hopelessly dated.

In order to launch a new Tarzan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/the-legend-of-tarzan-review-an-inherently-problematic-remake>
 series, the director David Yates and the writers Adam Cozad and Craig Brewer 
have introduced the political realities of the era into the story. Rather than 
have Tarzan find lost cities or scrap over buried treasure, they’ve made him a 
diplomat in the Congo. Christoph Waltz portrays the villain, a greedy Belgian 
who wants to sell Tarzan for a cache of diamonds. Tarzan encounters African 
tribes and Samuel L Jackson – the go-to actor for any film that wants to make 
sure black people buy tickets – is shoehorned in as a real-life historical 
figure named George Washington Williams.

So, a story that’s usually about Europeans conquering the untamed wilderness 
now has a few more black people in it. Does that make Tarzan less 
anachronistic? No, because what’s really mysterious about Africa in an era when
I can watch a safari on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aLTb-a3c22c>? 
Throw the massive success of The Jungle Book in my face and I will retort that 
The Jungle Book is a Disney-approved remake of the animated film, which plenty 
of parents are still nostalgic for because of Disney’s perpetual promotion of 
its cartoon back catalog. Perhaps there are millions of fans itching for this 
Tarzan film who loved Casper Van Dien and Jane March in Tarzan and the Lost 
City, Christopher Lambert’s 1984 film Greystoke, or the one where Tarzan goes 
deaf from a bomb blast. (It’s calledTarzan’s Deadly Silence 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarzan%27s_Deadly_Silence>, which sounds like 
the name of a Lifetime original movie.)

For some literary creations, it’s possible to hip them up a bit for the iPhone 
generation. Sherlock Holmes gets Robert Downey Jr and a few slow-motion fight 
scenes and Bob’s your uncle. Holmes is just a really witty guy with no social 
skills and a minor opiate addiction. In a different time, he might have been 
the CEO of a tech company in San Francisco. Tarzan’s a dude who lives in a 
treehouse and talks to apes. He lives in Africa and has no black friends.

He’s maybe not the first 20th century hero to appropriate another culture, but 
he’s the most successful at it. It’s an idea that gave birth to Dances with 
Wolves and Avatar. To borrow a term I use very, very rarely, Tarzan is not 
“woke”. He’s easily the least woke fictional character other than C Thomas 
Howellin the movie Soul Man <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soul_Man_(film)>. I 
don’t care if you put the entire cast of Empire in Tarzan. I’m not interested.
 