
The German media giant, the Kirch Gruppe, has been plunged into a potential 
financial crisis after the publisherAxel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> announced it would exercise 
an option to sell the debt-ridden group a stake in one of its TV stations.

The move would force Kirch to cough up £467m and force the company into a 
serious financial crisis.

However, Kirch, which already owns 52.5% of the station, ProSieben-Sat1, is 
fighting the demand, claiming that Axel Springer's manoeuvre is legally void.

The "put" option was agreed in May 2000 and triggered yesterday after 
negotiations to postpone the payment collapsed.

Kirch, which owns the broadcasting rights to the World Cup, is groaning under 
£3.5bn worth of debt, mostly in the form of short term bank loans.

Because the majority of its most valuable assets are pledged as collateral for 
loans, Kirch would struggle to pay Axel Springer by the end of April as 
required.

In an effort to drag Axel Springer back to the negotiating table, Kirch took 
the unusual step of declaring the original agreement "legally void".

It claims Axel Springer had agreed to sell its stake in May but also agreed an 
option to postpone the sale until new capital gains tax laws came in.

"In our opinion and that of our lawyers that makes the agreement legally 
void," a Kirch executive tells the Financial Times.

By instigating legal action, Kirch could stall the payment for months or even 
years while legal proceedings take place.

Kirch is in talks with its creditor banks over restructuring its debt and it 
is thought the additional burden of the payment to Axel Springer will force the 
banks to take a harder line.

Another cloud on the horizon for Kirch is the fact that from October BSkyB can 
trigger a put option for 22% of the group's broadcasting business, forcing it 
to hand over a further £1.1bn.

Last year Kirch admitted it wouldn't be able to find the money if Rupert 
Murdoch's company exercised the option.

The latest developments could reignite the power struggle between old friends 
and adversaries John Malone, owner of Liberty Media and second biggest 
shareholder in Murdoch's News Corporation, and Murdoch himself - both of whom 
are thought to have their eyes on the Kirch empire.

Earlier this month, Malone abandoned plans to buy Murdoch's stake in Kirch 
after the German group's boss, Leo Kirch, objected.
 