
Ospreys 46-13 Leicester, Brewery Field

Ospreys cruised to their first Anglo-Welsh Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglo-welsh-cup> victory with a 
comprehensive eight-tries-to-one victory over a young Leicester side at the 
Brewery Field. A crowd of 6,632 braved the elements to watch the teenage 
fly-half Matthew Morgan stamp his authority on the game, with the wing Kristian 
Phillips crossing twice.

It was a wet night in Bridgend but that did not stop Ospreys opening up a 
29-10 lead at half-time and sealing a bonus point after just 24 minutes. The 
Tigers got on the scoreboard first with a penalty from the outside-half George 
Ford but it was all Ospreys after that. Phillips blazed the trail to the try 
line on nine minutes as he chased his own kick and from that point the tries 
racked up as theLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 
defence imploded.

Morgan went in for his side's second try on 18 minutes, zipping through the 
Tigers defence, and two minutes laterOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> were over again after the wing 
Richard Fussell finished off an impressive team move. The one-way traffic 
continued as the home side scored two more tries in as many minutes with the 
centre Ashley Beck running in at the corner for the bonus point. He was 
followed over by Rhys Webb after a break by Morgan and good link work by Connor 
McInerney.

There was some relief for the English outfit when they grabbed a try back on 
29 minutes, scored from short range by their captain Ben Pienaar.

The second half began much as the first. Ford put over a penalty before 
Phillips replied with a fantastic try. The sixth Ospreys try came with a break 
from Morgan and a brilliantly timed kick ahead for Phillips to successfully 
chase, giving the home side a 34-13 lead. Ospreys added gloss to the scoreline 
with a try for Sonny Parker and a penalty try at the end.

Cardiff Blues 23-23 Exeter, Cardiff City Stadium

The 18-year-old replacement Joseph Griffin knocked over a last-gasp penalty to 
earn a youngCardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> side 
a deserved draw against Exeter Chiefs in their Anglo-Welsh Cup tie at a sodden 
Cardiff City Stadium.

Tries from the hooker Simon Alcott and the wing Nic Sestaret, plus three 
penalties and two conversions from Ryan Davis, gaveExeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> a 23-12 half-time lead, with the 
youngster Gareth Davies replying with four penalties for the Blues.

But the home side altered their approach after the break, keeping the ball in 
hand and running in a try through the full-back Dan Fish, with the fly-half 
Davies adding another penalty before Griffin held his nerve at the death to cap 
a brave comeback.

Cardiff had the Wales squad member Scott Andrews in their front row following 
the withdrawal of John Yapp. Wing Tom James returned from injury while Luke 
Hamilton and Josh Navidi started in the back row. Exeter made 13 changes from 
the side which beat Wasps last week, Andy Miller and Sestaret the only players 
to retain their places, while former Highlanders' centre Jason Shoemark made 
his first start.

The Cardiff fly-half Davies kicked two penalties to one from his opposite 
number Davis in the early going, but it was Exeter who claimed the opening try 
in the 17th minute. They produced a neat, short lineout that saw the scrum-half 
Haydn Thomas feed the hooker Alcott, who raced down the touchline to score a 
try converted by Davis.

Exeter's lead was soon extended to 13-6 by Davis's second penalty as the 
Chiefs pack began to put the squeeze on an inexperienced Cardiff eight, 
particularly at the breakdown. Davis missed with a long-range penalty attempt 
and his opposite number trimmed the lead to four points with his third penalty 
just before the half-hour mark.

But that proved to be only a brief respite for the Blues as nice build-up work 
from the Chiefs laid the foundations for Davis to chip to the right-hand corner 
and allow Sestaret to touch down after juggling the ball as he gathered. Davis 
added the testing touchline conversion to make it 20-9 to the visitors.

Davies's fourth penalty kept Cardiff in the contest before the game was 
delayed for several minutes when Alcott was left face down on the floor after a 
scrum on the Cardiff 10-metre line, but he was able to walk off the field after 
treatment, with Chris Whitehead replacing him. More Blues ill-discipline 
allowed Davis to extend the visitors' lead to 23-12 at the break as his penalty 
went over with the help of a post.

Having been second best for much of the opening 40 minutes, the Blues opened 
the second half with their best passage of attacking play. The fly-half Davies 
made a lovely break and the ball was shipped wide for Richard Mustoe to put 
Fish in at the corner, although Davies could not add the extras.

Davies then scuffed a long-distance penalty but the hosts were growing in 
confidence. An excellent counterattack from James was stopped by good defensive 
work by Luke Arscott as the home side continued to put the pressure on.

Cardiff were opting to keep ball in hand in the testing conditions and a 
slashing break by their captain Dafydd Hewitt set up a situation that saw the 
replacement Owen Williams hauled out just short of the line.

The home side's best chance to score came when they had a five-metre scrum on 
the Chiefs line, but it rolled through 90 degrees and the visitors cleared. 
Davies cut the lead to three with a late penalty before a high tackle allowed 
Griffin to claim a deserved share of the spoils for the hosts.

"We played against a strong side who are doing well in the Premiership," said 
the Cardiff Blues director of rugby Dai Young. "I have watched some of their 
games and they were only two or three players shy of their best side.

"In the first half our kicking put us under pressure, our chase as not good 
enough and allowed them opportunities. In the second half we carried a bit more 
and we thought we could get on the outside of them if kept our depth and it was 
all us in that second half. I am really pleased when you look at the personnel 
we had out.

"We had 23 players we did not consider or could not consider for this game and 
I am really proud of the boys."

Northampton 28-3 Newport Gwent Dragons, Franklins Gardens

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> were much 
too strong for a poor Dragons side, winning 28-3 at Franklin's Gardens in an 
uninspiring tie. The visitors' scrum was a hapless affair and they lost three 
front-row players to the sin-bin, resulting in uncontested scrums.

Northampton, last season's Anglo-Welsh Cup winners, had the better of the 
opening exchanges and took the lead after five minutes when Stephen Myler 
kicked a 25-metre goal. After 15 minutes, the full-back Pat Leach knocked on a 
high kick and at the resulting scrum the Dragons collapsed and were penalised 
for Myler to kick a simple goal.

The Saints dominated the opening quarter but stout defence from the Dragons 
kept their line intact, although the centre Jon Clarke dropped a good pass with 
the line at his mercy.

The Dragons' scrum was rapidly becoming an embarrassment, conceding penalties 
at almost every opportunity. Eventually the patience of the referee, Sean 
Davey, became exhausted and he sent the Dragons' prop Dan Way to the sin-bin 
after 32 minutes.

Not surprisingly Northampton chose another scrum instead of kicking the 
penalty and it paid dividends with the first try of the game. Again the 
visitors went backwards and Ryan Powell had little problem in sending Paul 
Diggin over in the corner for the try, which Myler failed to convert.

On a rare excursion into the Saints' 22, the Dragons earned a penalty, which 
Matthew Jones kicked to reduce the arrears. Then came the highlight of a 
disappointing first half when Shane Geraghty burst on to a pass in his own half 
to split the Dragons' defence, but the full-back stumbled and fell with the 
line beckoning.

The Dragons suffered a further blow when their captain Steve Jones left the 
field with an injury moments before the interval, with his side 11-3 behind. 
The visitors brought on their first-choice half-backs Jason Tovey and Wayne 
Evans for the second half, but within two minutes of the restart Myler had 
extended the Saints' lead with another penalty. Tovey missed a penalty for the 
Dragons before they lost the replacement hooker Lloyd Burns to the sin-bin, 
leading to the introduction of uncontested scrums.

It made no difference to the Saints as Calum Clark immediately drove over for 
a try, which Myler converted, before the outside-half dummied over for another 
which he again converted to make it 28-3.

Nigel Hall came on as a replacement prop for the Dragons and at his first 
scrum was yellow carded for twice collapsing the scrum. However, despite all 
their pressure, the Saints could not score a fourth try and with it a valuable 
bonus point.

"It was a convincing win, I'll take that and we will move on from here," said 
Jim Mallinder, the Northampton coach. "We were a bit sloppy at times, in key 
moments we should have done better. We need to look after the ball more."
 