
Ange Postecoglou’s desire to keep pushing the boundaries is behind nine 
changes to his Socceroos squad for World Cup qualifying matches this month. 
Robbie Kruse returns for the first time since the Asian Cup final win 14 months 
ago, while uncapped trio Apostolos Giannou, Jason Geria and Alex Gersbach give 
the squad a strong flavour of renewal.

Asian Cup winners Matt McKay, Jason Davidson, Alex Wilkinson, Tommy Oar and 
James Troisi will miss the World Cup qualifiers with Tajikistan in Adelaide on 
March 24 and Jordan in Sydney five days later. Postecoglou said their absence 
was not permanent, instead born out of a need to create new options.

FFA axe Olyroos coach Aurelio Vidmar after failed Rio Olympics campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/ffa-axe-olyroos-coach-aurelio-vidmar-after-failed-rio-olympics-campaign>
“If we can get a strong performance in these two games... it means we are 
going to be building some real depth and competition for places,” he said. “I 
think we need to start pushing ahead and that’s the reason I’ve brought some 
new faces into the squad to keep everyone on their toes. There’s another level 
in us and we have to find that. We’re first in our group and winning both games 
will mean we finish there and that’s important.”

In their absence, a host of next-gen bolters get an opportunity. Brad Smith 
has been recalled after an 18-month absence and Terry Antonis is back for the 
first time since the Asian Cup, when he was an unused squad member. Chris 
Ikonomidis and Josh Risdon have been given another chance to impress.

Postecoglou is looking forward to the chance to blood Giannou, who played for 
the Socceroos coach in underage Australian squads before flirting with the 
country of his birth, Greece. The 26-year-old has since moved from the Greek 
league, where he flourished, to the Chinese Super League and Postecoglou has 
him pinned as an alternative to key striker Tim Cahill.

“He was born in Greece like me, came to Australia, his parents obviously came 
here to give opportunities to their kids and he’s making the most of it,” 
Postecoglou said. “The beauty of it is he wants to play forAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>. It’s a fantastic story.”

Postecoglou said Giannou’s emergence cost red-hot Brisbane Roar striker Jamie 
Maclaren a spot in the squad. “He was very close,” he said. “If (Giannou) was 
not available for this one we would have brought him in again. If he continues 
his form he will get an opportunity at the right time.”

Gersbach, 18, and Geria, 22, are the latest to be given a chance as 
full-backs, another national team trouble-spot. Senior pair Mitchell Langerak 
and Matthew Spiranovic also return after injury.

Socceroos squad: Terry Antonis, Nathan Burns, Tim Cahill, Adam Federici, Jason 
Geria, Alex Gersbach, Apostolos Giannou, Chris Ikonomidis, Mile Jedinak, Robbie 
Kruse, Mitchell Langerak, Mathew Leckie, Massimo Luongo, Ryan McGowan, Mark 
Milligan, Aaron Mooy, Josh Risdon, Tommy Rogic, Mathew Ryan, Trent Sainsbury, 
Brad Smith, Matthew Spiranovic, Bailey Wright.



 