
Whether Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>
 are good enough to reach the World Cup in Russia in two years’ time remains 
uncertain but their quest was imbued with vitality following this industrious, 
lively win over lacklustre Azerbaijan.

In a sense, here lay the first real examination of how Michael O’Neill’s side 
can deal with heightened expectations since that memorable, unforgettable 
summer at Euro 2016.

Increasing aspirations accompany such success and, inevitably, there were 
demands to deliver – all the team goals to date had come in a 4-0 win against 
the minnows of San Marino, a result that came between a 0-0 draw with the Czech 
Republic and a 2-0 loss to Germany.

Goals from Kyle Lafferty and Gareth McAuley in the first half, and Conor 
McLaughlin and Chris Brunt later on, epitomised efficiency and professionalism. 
This is the kind of evening O’Neill can readily identify as textbook stuff, the 
first three breakthroughs coming from set plays.

On a sodden Windsor Park surface, a fixture against Robert Prosinecki’s in-form
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> team was a test of 
nerve. Failure to launch, in front of an expectant sell-out crowd would likely 
signal Group C struggles. Now, sitting second, behind the overwhelming 
favourites Germany, they are in a good place.

Northern Ireland’s continued momentum will undoubtedly satisfy O’Neill. He 
enjoyed a better outcome than the last time Azerbaijan visited Belfast – a draw 
four years ago when the then struggling manager was subject of intense scrutiny.

A qualification pathway is beginning to gently appear for the Irish. O’Neill’s 
forensic approach – having had extra time with the squad – paid off and, with 
their handy group position secured for the moment, he has approximately four 
months to plan for an encounter with Norway. Northern Ireland, with their 
steely home form, are entitled to a significant dose of quiet optimism.

The emphatic manner of the win was fully endorsed by O’Neill, who also paid 
tribute to the now injury-free Brunt.

“It was a good night. We couldn’t have asked for more,” said the Northern 
Ireland manager. “We’ve had a good start to the group. We now have a massive 
game in March and if we win we would put a good distance between ourselves and 
Norway.

“That’s what we have to aim to do. Once you get to 10 points then you’re 
within touching distance of getting enough points to qualify. The manner of the 
victory is very encouraging andwe’ve only conceded goals to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/germany-northern-ireland-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
. There have been a lot of positives in this campaign.

“Azerbaijan are very organised and the coach has had a lot of good results so 
far. We made it a very British-style game and ultimately the quality of the 
goals was very emphatic.

“We were excellent defensively and there was concern over Chris Brunt’s early 
injury. But we saw what a top player Chris is, especially after coming back 
from a cruciate knee injury. I’m delighted for him.”

It was somewhat surprising that Azerbaijan were diffident but it was really 
all about the verve and belief that is coursing through Northern Ireland these 
days. Reaching the Euros in France could be, after all, not the glass ceiling 
for this squad.

The character within was illustrated by Brunt. The West Bromwich Albion man 
came in for his first appearance since October 2015, and not even a bandaged 
head from an early collision could impede a man-of-the-match re-emergence. A 
fizzing shot from range late on crowned a personal night of validation.

Lafferty got matters off to a fine start with a casual sweep of his right foot 
in the 27th minute, and after McAuley’s trademark bullet header towards the end 
of the first half, it was increasingly clear there was no way back for the 
Azeris. Another header by right-back McLaughlin served to confirm complete 
dominance.

Prosinecki, meanwhile, admitted it had been a bleak night for Azerbaijan. “We 
tried hard to play but we had problems,” the coach said. “Northern Ireland 
scored their goals from set pieces and they made it hard for us. It is up to us 
to work hard and improve next year.

“It was a disappointing performance but they were silly goals to give away.

“Northern Ireland are a very good team and have played together for a long 
time. Germany are obvious favourites and will win the group. Northern Ireland 
are compact, organised and play well from set pieces. But there is all to play 
for.”

O’Neill also noted that “spirits are high”. That looks like an understatement.
 