
Greek conservatives have elected Kyriakos Mitsotakis as their new leader, 
hoping he can revive their fortunes and challenge leftist prime ministerAlexis 
Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras> who is still popular 
despite opting for austerity.

The conservative New Democracy party seeks to recover from its heavy election 
defeat in September, when Greeks re-elected Tsipras’Syriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> party amid capital controls on bank 
deposits and a harsh third bailout with the country’s foreign lenders.

 Mitsotakis, a 47-year-old reformist lawmaker and scion of one of Greece’s 
most influential political families, is expected to pile pressure on 
41-year-old Tsipras before a crucial parliamentary vote on pension reform, as 
part of the first review of Greece’s bailout programme.

 Mitsotakis ran second to Vangelis Meimarakis in the first round of the party 
leadership election on 20 December, contested by four candidates, and was ahead 
in Sunday’s runoff with 51% of the vote with most of the vote counted.

 “United, we move ahead to the creative rejuvenation and expansion [of the 
party], so that New Democracy becomes the big centre-right party ... that will 
provide a reliable alternative for the country’s governance,” he said when 
victory was clear.

The final result will be announced on Monday. New Democracy ruled Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> alone from 2004 to 2009 but has seen 
its popularity wane during the debt crisis. The party lost an election in 
January that first brought Tsipras to power and a second one in September.

 An ex-banker who has been a critic of trade union practices and state waste, 
Mitsotakis has called Tsipras a liar but also hinted that he could cooperate 
with him on national issues on specific terms.

 His father Constantinos served as prime minister from 1990 to 1993 and his 
older sister, Dora Bakoyianni, was foreign minister from 2006 to 2009.

The defeated Meimarakis, a political veteran, took over as interim party 
leader in July from former prime minister Antonis Samaras, who quit in response 
to a strong no vote in a referendum on the terms of Greece’s third 
international bailout.

 But he stepped down in November, taking responsibility for a botched ballot 
to choose a new party chief.

 New Democracy initially opposed the country’s international bailouts, but 
after winning a parliamentary election in 2012 and forming a coalition with the 
socialist Pasok party, it brought in austerity and unpopular reforms demanded 
by the country’s international lenders.

 On Sunday, anti-establishment protesters stormed into a poll station and 
threw paint in an attack against the conservative party, which they accused of 
links with “corrupt capitalists”.
 