
Only three times in 167 attempts  <http://www.whowins.com/tables/up30.html>has 
a team comeback to win a series when down 3-0 in the NHL playoffs. With the LA 
Kings storming towards the Stanley Cup finals, the Phoenix Coyotes looked down 
and out, but Sunday's win has given some hope.

The difference, on the surface, was Shane Doan, who scored both goals in the 
Phoenix Coyotes' win over the LA Kings Sunday afternoon. But the 2-0 win – a 
surprise, given how the Kings have dominated the series to this point – was 
thanks also to the steady play from Coyotes' goalie Mike Smith, who backstopped 
his team to a shutout, giving them a lift as they go back to Phoenix for Game 5.

The Kings looked sluggish from the start Sunday, a shadow of the team that has 
so far ran roughshod over the Coyotes (along with just about every other team 
they've faced so far this playoff season). Though they outshot Phoenix 36-21, 
but failed to make many of those terribly threatening and didn't create much 
traffic in front of the net.

Apart from part of third period – when they were already down 2-0 – the Kings 
looked lazy, their passes often not connecting and the physical game that has 
come to be a trademark of the team's style was virtually a non-factor. As for 
the power play, forget it. Despite having six of them, the Kings never managed 
to become a serious threat in any.

It was a side of the Kings that harkened back to their maligned days during 
the early part of the regular season, where they were perpetually unable to 
score – not a welcome sight for the capacity crowd at the Staples Center.

On the other side, the Coyotes were much better defensively than in previous 
games this series, showing how they took care of the Nashville Predators in the 
semifinals. Smith was back to his regular form, playing deep in his net and 
gobbling up loose pucks and working well to stop rebounds. He looked much more 
composed in his crease than he did in Game 3, when the Kings were able to get 
into his head, frustrating him and putting him off his game.

Doan notched his first on a tricky backhand from close in that fooled Kings' 
goalie Jonathan Quick. His second came halfway through the second period, and 
left players on the ice (as well as the fans) confused, as it ricocheted off 
the back bar behind Quick and straight back out again. It was assigned to Doan 
after review of the play. Here it is:

.
With the loss, the Kings fall to 11-2 in the playoffs – an impressive tally no 
matter how you slice it, but they'll have to add another to that left-hand 
column before they can call this a done deal.

And, you may ask, who were the teams who overturned 0-3 deficits? The Toronto 
Maple Leafs did so in the 1942 Stanley Cup Finals against the Detroit Red 
Wings. The New York Islanders, 33 years later, in their franchise first playoff 
run, catching the Pittsburgh Penguins in the 1975 Quarterfinals. And finally, 
the Philadelphia Flyers did it 35 years later beating the Boston Bruins in the 
2010 Eastern Conference Semifinals. That Flyers team featured Jeff Carter and 
Mike Richards, who are now both with the Kings, which may give them a momentary 
pause for thought.

Game 5 is Tuesday night at 9pm EDT in Phoenix.
 