
The LA Kings are on the verge of another sweep after beating the Phoenix 
Coyotes 2-1 at home and are just one win away from the Stanley Cup finals. The 
Kings could reach the finals having played just 13 games and,with the Lakers 
and the Clippers struggling in the NBA playoffs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/may/18/miami-heat-chris-bosh-la-lakers-clippers>
, the Kings are now the hot ticket in LA.

The Coyotes dropped a third straight game to the Kings Thursday night at the 
Staples Center. The win again solidifies the Kings – who were the eighth seed 
in the West coming into the postseason – as the team to beat. Having beaten the 
Vancouver Canucks 4-1 and the St Louis Blues 4-0, the Kings could reach the 
Stanley Cup final in as few as 13 playoff games. In the east the Rangers and 
the Devils have already played three seven-game series between them and could 
be heading for another.

The Phoenix Coyotes meanwhile are frustrated, worried and almost out. Phoenix 
was forced to make some changes to its lines going into Thursday night, thanks 
to their frustrated play on Tuesday. Martin Hanzal sat out, thanks to a 
one-game suspension for his hit-from-behind on Kings captain Dustin Brown in 
Game 2. At first, it didn't seem to matter. The Coyotes came out strong in the 
first, keeping the Kings on their heels, deep in their own zone. So much so, in 
fact, they managed to finally score first – their first lead of the series. Not 
only that, the goal was a bit of a weird one, as Daymond Langkow's wobbly shot 
managed to find its way through Jonathan Quick, emerging on the other side of 
the five hole and into the net. It wasn't the first of Quick's mistakes in the 
first, only the most noticeable. So it looked like maybe the Coyotes had a 
chance.

The Kings managed to tie it in the second and both teams fought to maintain 
the game as it was rather than go down one. But that changed only minutes into 
the third, a period the Kings drove into with a foot planted firmly on the gas 
– finally. And what about some Coyote turnovers, you ask? There were a few of 
those, too, and the Kings happened to be in a position to capitalize. Before 
you knew it, Dwight King had notched a second for LA. That was about the same 
time the 'Yotes started to look frustrated again, which was something they'd 
avoided for the most part in the first two periods.

The Kings, and particularly Brown, have mastered the art of button-pushing and 
at times so far this series (like Game 2), Phoenix has presented a fine 
keyboard for the Kings to poke. The rule has to go down the Coyotes bench: 
don't expect the calls to go your way. And don't retaliate. Especially when 
it's Brown.

Going into Game 4, things look increasingly daunting for the Coyotes. At least 
they know this: They can score on Quick. And, if that's not enough, they can 
hold off the Kings for at least a period, and outshoot them at the same time – 
by some margin, in fact, as they did very early on. But they have to be 
tighter, especially through the mid-ice, where the Kings picked off passes more 
than once on Thursday. As for the rest of it? I'm sure they're wondering the 
same thing.

One final thought: Anze Kopitar landed his tenth point in six games Thursday 
night. What you do against that, I'm not sure. I mean, just look at this:

.

The weekend

There's more great hockey coming up this weekend.

Saturday we'll see the Rangers and Devils meet up for Game 3, this time back 
in New Jersey. What Rangers team will show up? Will it be the one from GAme 2 
second period that looked energized and managed to grab a couple goals? Or will 
it be the third period team that gave off a familiar exhausted air as the game 
wound down? It's tough to blame them if the latter is the case, but they can't 
risk going down two games to one against the Devils when they still have one 
more stop at Prudential before they can get home to Manhattan. No home ice 
advantage is a guarantee of anything when you're down 3-1 in the conference 
final.

So will they channel the Moose and assure (themselves, at least) that they can 
still win this thing, no matter what physical state they're in? Or will 
Brodeur's need to exorcise whatever demons he still has from 1994 be enough of 
a difference in the goaltending battle for the Devils to come out on top? At 
this point, either is possible. This has all the makings of another long series.

Sunday it'll be back to LA where the Kings can close it out against the 
Coyotes and move on to the Stanley Cup Final. Look for them to stick to the 
game plan. What else would they do? It's working. If the Kings claim another 
win, they have to be considered a favourite for the Cup no matter who emerges 
from the East, if for no other reason (and there are plenty) that they will 
have simply had more time to rest. Normally, the criticism is that the Eastern 
teams, with their shorter commutes throughout the year, are at an advantage 
when it comes to the finals, as they've usually spent less total time on the 
road. That won't be the case this year, no matter what happens.
 