
The LA Kings are going back to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in 19 
years, after beating the Phoenix Coyotes 4-3 in overtime Tuesday night. The 
winning goal came from Dustin"Pancakes" 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nhl-puck-daddy/kings-dustin-penner-injures-himself-while-eating-stack-155530523.html>
 Penner, deep into a chippy extra frame of the best game this Western 
conference final had to offer.

Now, the Kings will move on to face either the New York Rangers or the New 
Jersey Devils in the finals. The last time LA made it this far was in 1993, 
when the Wayne Gretzky-led Kings lost to the Montreal Canadiens.

Both teams set a furious pace in the first 40 minutes, matching goals during a 
crazy 10-minute span in the second period – one from the Kings finding its way 
in as they were short-handed. The Coyotes looked much the same asin Game 4 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/may/21/la-kings-phoenix-coyotes-comeback>
, managing to be tighter defensively, and executing the forecheck better than 
they had in the first three games. But the Kings were back to normal form, too, 
tightening up their passes and offense since Sunday.

In the end, the night came down to power plays – the ones that were and the 
ones that could have been.

Tied 3-3 already in the third, both teams started to get cautious – and, in 
some cases, careless. The Coyotes were gifted a chance midway through the 
period to go ahead when the Kings gave up a 5-on-3 powerplay, thanks to a 
delay-of-game call. But the 'Yotes only managed to make use of it for a short 
time, until they, too, gave up a penalty. Luckily for the them, the Kings 
powerplay was nowhere near as good as their penalty kill. And as Coyote Derek 
Morris lobbed a loose puck over the glass for yet another delay-of-game penalty 
in the dying moments of the third period, Arizona fans held out hope that the 
trend would continue. No doubt,like Tortorella 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/sports/rangers/he_of_little_faith_JVCPa3O2FU8QI5pp78XnkL?utm_medium=rss&utm_content=Rangers>
, they could do nothing but pray – only this time, for no goals. Someone was 
apparently listening. Up the extra man as the first overtime period started, 
once again, the Kings couldn't make anything happen.

In keeping with the night's theme, overtime will be remembered for more than 
just Penner's winning goal.

Kings faithful were biting nails to a fine dust when LA defenceman Drew 
Doughty was called for interference midway through the extra frame. Incensed, 
Doughty ranted at the referee, tempting an added reprimand. A few minutes 
later, after LA had (you guessed it) killed off the ineffective Phoenix 
powerplay, the refs called Doughty on an offside that wasn't. Again, Doughty 
lost control, arguing there puck was still in play. Only this time, he was 
right. But he wasn't the only one to let his emotions get the better of him.

Fans in Arizona will probably be equally up in arms at the officials over what 
appeared to be a late hit from Kings' captain Dustin Brown late in the extra 
period. As the Coyotes traveled into the offensive zone offside, the play was 
whistled dead. A split second later, Brown collided with Michael Roszival, 
mid-ice, in what looked to be a knee-on-knee hit.Here it is 
<http://youtu.be/CnMzHN_QzBE>.

There was no penalty called on the play, and Coyotes captain Shane Doan took 
his turn berating the referees. Only moments later, when play resumed, Penner 
scored, chipping in a rebound past Coyotes' goalie Mike Smith to win the game.


.
While the Kings took to the ice to celebrate, fans threw debris and garbage at 
them from the stands.

As for the Brown hit, some pundits agreed that no call was the right one. 
TSN's Bob Mckenzie tweeted after the game that, "Based onNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> history, I don't believe league will 
view it as a knee-on-knee hit as much as a bodycheck with incidental leg on leg 
contact." Brown, McKenzie continued, "went into the hit with wide stance but 
his track never deviated from straight line and upper body contact was made. 
Not a classic knee." Puck Daddy writer, Greg Wyshynski seemed to be of a 
similar mind, writing only moments after the hit occurred, "Brown hit him high, 
but on the shoulder. And he didn't lead with his knee."

Brown refused to touch the Clarence Campbell trophy, awarded to the conference 
winning team every year, when it was awarded to the Kings immediately after the 
game. The move is in keeping with normal practice for many teams who believe 
it's bad luck to do so (the real trophy is Lord Stanley's, after all). 
Interestingly, the '93 Kings ignored that tradition, and their subsequent loss 
has fueled the superstition further. As it happens, that might not be the only 
supernatural impediment to the Kings' progression. Overat Grantland, Katie 
Baker highlighted the Marty McSorley curse 
<http://www.grantland.com/blog/the-triangle/post/_/id/27336/the-l-a-kings-and-the-curse-of-marty-mcsorley>
, wherein an illegal stick curvature (and perhaps some effective back-room 
investigative research from the Habs) worked into the Canadiens' eventual 
victory. And that illegal stick? Probably created bad karma for all the Kings 
teams that would follow.

Still, one has to think this team has enough proof now that there isn't a 
whole lot of this world that can stop them. The Kings go into the finals 12-2, 
which put another way means they've only had to play two more games than the 
minimum necessary to get to where they are. The same cannot be said for either 
of the teams they could face in for the Stanley Cup. The Rangers in particular 
have been pushed to the full seven games in each of their series so far, and 
are in tight against a tough Devils team in another that could go all the way. 
With a finals series that will have teams making cross-continental trips every 
few days, the fatigue issue will be yet another factor that could play to LA's 
advantage.

There are, however, things for LA to work on while they wait. Top of the list 
will be the powerplay. Though teams have won a Cup with a similarly poor record 
of scoring with the man advantage (read: 2011 Boston Bruins), it's not worth 
taking the risk. The Kings can score, so there's no reason they shouldn't be 
doing it when they're a man up on the competition. They should also be careful 
not to slip into complacency as they wait for the Eastern final to finish. The 
Rangers and Devils will likely be tired, but the Kings can't have too many 
outings like they did in Game 4 against the Coyotes. This isn't in the bag yet, 
but the outlook is looking good for LA.
 