
Labour has criticised the David Cameron’s “unbelievable” decision to put 
forward sacked cabinet ministerAndrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley> for a top humanitarian job 
at the United Nations.

Mary Creagh, the shadow development secretary, said it appeared the prime 
minister has gifted a “top UN humanitarian job as consolation prize to Andrew 
Lansley for sacking him” as leader of the House of Commons.

The job of the UN’s humanitarian affairs and emergency relief co-ordinator has 
been vacated by Baroness Amos, and the job has been a British-held role since 
2007, although it is not reserved for someone from the UK.

Downing Street has declined to comment on whether the former minister will be 
nominated, but Lansley’s office toldChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> News: “There will be a UN 
recruitment process and he would not wish to pre-empt that or take it for 
granted.”

There was a strong hint during the reshuffle over the summer that Lansley was 
being lined up for a major international role, even though he did not get the 
nomination to be the UK’s European Union commissioner.

During his time as health secretary Lansley oversaw the coalition’s 
controversial NHS reforms. He was moved aside for Jeremy Hunt, and then once 
again from his role as leader of the House of Commons when William Hague 
stepped down as foreign secretary. In his resignation letter Lansley thanked 
Cameron for supporting him in his ambition to find a “challenging and important 
role in international public service”.

Lord Malloch Brown, the former UN deputy secretary-general and a crossbench 
peer, said if Lansley got the job it would be a sign Cameron had used the 
global organisation for a “political dumping”.

He told Channel 4: “This is one of the most difficult, important jobs in the 
world. There are millions of people in desperate situations from Ebola victims 
to victims of war in Syria who are highly dependent on the humanitarian 
activities of the UN. It’s an act of great cynicism to allow someone who does 
not have background and qualification in this area to be put forward.”
 