
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> high command has been 
holding a series of discussions on why the party has not yet made a 
breakthrough with the public on the issue of economic competence, despite 
falling living standards and an admission by the coalition government that its 
growth and borrowing forecasts are worse than foreseen.

Labour officials say the meetings – including one on Tuesday – are routine, 
but privately shadow cabinet members are concerned by polls showing the 
government is managing to avoid blame for the slowdown.

The Labour discussions have reached a new pitch since the autumn statement and 
the government's admission that austerity will continue until after the 
election, so undercutting the central pillar of its deficit reduction plan.

The debates have been stirred up by a paper by the centre-left thinktank 
Policy Network, entitled In the Black, calling for fiscal conservatism.

"It is not over-dramatic to say that the next few weeks, and how we resolve 
this discussion, will determine whether we can win the next election. We need 
to change emphasis in 2012," said one shadow cabinet member.

Another said: "None of us deny we have got a problem on economic credibility 
due to Labour's record in office. We say that publicly. But at the same time 
there is not a serious economist in town who feels the UK just has a debt 
problem, and not a growth problem. That is the dilemma."

Polling figures presented to Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> – from focus groups and deep 
mining of published polls – show voters are receptive to Labour's "don't cut 
too far, too fast" message. But they are repelled by Labour's solution of 
further short-term spending, which reinforces negative perceptions about Labour.

The published polls show disapproval among voters for the Tory record, and a 
Labour lead of around 4%, although the Guardian's pollster ICM recently found 
large Tory leads, possibly off the back of David Cameron's EU veto.

But a YouGov poll held after the autumn statement found 60% of voters thought 
the government was doing badly on the economy.

Yet when asked if the economy would be better off under Labour voters 
disagreed by 37% to 25%. Asked what is responsible for lower than expected 
growth, 44% blamed the debts in the eurozone, 32% the last Labour government, 
31% the banks, and only 28% the government's economic strategy. So only just 
over a quarter blame the government.

Peter Kellner, of YouGov, said: "Most people still think the Tories are 
clearing up Labour's mess. They have thought that for some time, and that view 
is reducing only slightly. An impression has stuck around Labour in the same 
way as the winter of discontent did in the 1980s.

"It is always difficult for an opposition, even two years after an election. 
It is like owning a shop down a dark alleyway. It does not matter how bright 
the lights or how competitive the pricing, you are not going to get many 
customers."

A Miliband aide said the government only gets "ownership" of the economy after 
18 months: "Voters are in a transition period between blaming the last 
government and blaming this one."

Key figures urge patience, claiming that by the middle of next year, as the 
slump continues, voters may accept the message of shadow chancellorEd Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, that the government has ended 
up borrowing more than Labour planned, but only to fund the cost of failure, 
such as unemployment.

One former minister supportive of the current posiiton said: "It would be 
curious if we have got the economic argument right, as we have, and the 
political reward does not follow. I believe in the politics of patience. The 
Tories have been on at Labour and debt since the 2008 budget, and we are only 
18 months into this parliament."

But not everyone is willing to wait. One shadow cabinet member said: "The 
Conservative message discipline has been staggering. The question is, how do we 
respond? Do we bang the table ever harder and continue to shout 'paradox of 
thrift' [the Keynesian argument that if everyone saves, the economy worsens] or 
do we say a lot more about how we will address the deficit.

"It is very high risk leaving the strategy as it is. The danger is, the point 
at which the public will turn to us remains constantly just over the horizon."

One Labour analyst said: "We have to show we 'get' the politics of austerity. 
It is almost a cultural and social issue, as much as public policy problem."

A Miliband ally concurs: "It is not a policy problem, but a stance problem. 
It's as if on TV when asked about the deficit we say 'yes, it is a problem, 
but...' It looks as if something we don't want to talk about it.

"We have to show we emotionally understand what austerity means. We have got 
to show we realise that tax and tax credit transfer socialism is over. That 
does not means setting out a deficit reduction plan now."

Miliband has made speeches warning the Blair-Brown model is over and he is 
preparing the ground for a different strategy, emphasising the need for a 
different kind of responsible capitalism.

But aides say he must go further. "There is a danger in thinking we will be 
vindicated if we just get the words right. Voters have to believe you have been 
on a journey, that there has been some soul searching and you have recovered 
lost credibility. You have to own this issue of austerity and show what social 
democracy in tough times means. It cannot be a few lines in the odd speech.

"There has to be some follow through and and enough symbolism in what the cuts 
means, and how Labour cuts will be different to coalition cuts, based on 
different principles. You cannot wait until 2014-15 after opposing every cut 
and say 'yes we will have tough deficit rules too', the British people will 
just say 'sod off'."

Some argue Labour's five-point plan for growth and jobs suffocates messages 
about its commitment to tackle the deficit. "The five point plan – the main 
theme in much of party messages – requiring heavy short term borrowing has been 
heard with greater clarity than anything else.

"The risk is that it turns off voters since it confirms their impression that 
Labour is still committed to extra spending and so is in denial about the 
deficit crisis".

No one can predict how these rolling discussions will conclude, but all sides 
agree that the issue needs resolution before the Miliband leadership can 
progress.
 