
The genius of modern societies is the way they release individual creativity; 
the danger is growing shared risks.Gordon Brown has rightly said 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/Page18858> that the next general election will be 
the first of the global age. To win again, we need, as he has emphasised, to 
address both sides of the coin.

As we look forward to the manifesto, we know the scale of our electoral 
challenge means we need to be more creative, innovative and forward-looking 
than ever before, empowering and protecting people by using the government 
leadership, market dynamism and civic mobilisation that is necessary to solve 
any big problem. New Labour has been strongest when it has combined Labour's 
social-democratic and radical liberal traditions.

But we also need to learn the right organisational lessons of the past decade. 
If Labour is to lead this change, it needs to be a different kind of party. Not 
different in its passion and purpose, but different in its structures and role. 
The traditional political structures of mainstream political parties are dying 
and our biggest concern is the gap between our membership and our potential 
voter base. We need to expand our reach by building social alliances and 
increasing opportunity for engagement and interaction with our party.

There are important lessons from abroad. Rightly, people look to Barack 
Obama's election campaign. But the presidential system in the United States is 
not ours and there is an example closer to home.Pasok, the Greek socialist party
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panhellenic_Socialist_Movement>, was the only 
European socialist party to fare well in this year's European elections. Pasok 
has also gone furthest in party reform, opening up the party so that more than 
900,000 Greeks, out of a population of 11 million, have equal rights as members 
or "friends". The party has quotas for male and female representation and open 
primaries to select party candidates for local elections. Such engaging and 
deliberative party structures enable Pasok to tap into the energy in 
communities, with resultant electoral success.

In Britain, Labour's first port of call for expanding our reach should be a 
new relationship with three million-plus affiliated trade unionists. We can 
forge a new relationship with them by virtue of their signing up to the 
political fund of their union, making them a much closer part of a genuine 
Labour movement.

And we can go further in other areas, too. We say we want to listen to our 
voters; why not adopt a system of registered voters, as in the US, to create 
the basis for primaries?

The renewal and modernisation of our party will be a key element of our fight 
for a fourth term. I hope that together we can respond – ideologically and 
organisationally – to the challenges of the next decade and ensure it belongs 
to Labour.

This is an edited excerpt of an article published in the current edition of 
Tribune, reproduced by kind permission. The full version can be readhere 
<http://www.tribunemagazine.co.uk/2009/08/07/how-the-next-decade-can-belong-to-labour/>
 