
Labour could be saved from electoral meltdown by a promise of voting reform 
and by support from pro-reform Lib Dem voters, according to a new YouGov 
opinion poll reported inSunday's Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/06/electoral-reform-labour-general-election>
. Nearly a third of Liberal Democrats would be more likely to switch to Labour 
if they were promised a referendum on voting reform. In total, 17% of the 
electorate would be more likely to vote Labour if Gordon Brown promised a 
referendum on a new, fairer voting system. If these voters did vote Labour, it 
might be enough to save dozens of Labour marginal seats. It could deprive David 
Cameron of an outright majority and result in Labour scraping back with enough 
seats to form a potential coalition government with the Lib Dems, Plaid Cymru, 
the SNP and possibly some Green MPs too. This enticing prospect has prompted 
Gordon Brown to reconsider Labour's stonewalling on electoral reform. According 
to the Observer Brown has initiated cabinet discussions on whether to hold a 
referendum. Downing Street officials are already looking at the pros and cons 
of a referendum on the same day as the next general election.

The prime minister has invited a delegation from the Vote for a Change 
<http://www.voteforachange.co.uk/index.php/pages/what-were-doing/> coalition, 
which is leading the campaign for a referendum, to meet him and other 
ministers, several of whom back a referendum as the first step towards a fairer 
voting system and an end to the first-past-the post (FPTP) method used in 
Westminster elections.

Call me cynical, but Labour's latest toying with electoral reform looks a tad 
opportunistic. Faced with a likely election wipeout, party bigwigs are suddenly 
scratching around for a way to save Labour seats. Hey presto, they pull 
electoral reform out of the hat. This sudden sympathy for a fairer voting 
method comes after a decade of the government sitting on its hands. It promised 
reform but did nothing. It trumpeted theJenkins Report 
<http://www.archive.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm40/4090/4090.htm> but 
rejected its recommendations, which were for the adoption of theAlternative 
Vote Plus <http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/article.php?id=56> voting system. 
All subsequent efforts to remedy the bias and corruption of the voting system 
have been kicked into the long grass by the government.

Is Labour's new interest in voting reform genuine or just a con? In recent 
years, whenever the government has been in a tight spot, it has floated the 
idea of voting reform and other constitutional modernisations such as an 
elected second chamber, only to quietly drop them a few months later. Brown 
keeps expressing an "interest" in a fairer voting system but that's about all. 
No policy delivery. He seems to be stringing along election reformers; giving 
them the impression of sympathy with their cause, while not actually changing 
anything.

Are we being conned again? I suspect so. It may all come to nothing, again.

Even if Labour gives the people a referendum at the next election and they 
vote for change, the result is likely to be a fudge. The prime minister is 
known to oppose genuine proportional representation, where the proportion of 
seats won by a party closely corresponds to the proportion of votes cast for 
the party. He favours theAlternative Vote 
<http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/article.php?id=55> method, whereby electors 
number the candidates in the order of their preference (1, 2, 3, 4 etc), with 
the minor candidates being eliminated and their votes being redistributed until 
a candidate wins the backing of at least 50% of the voters. This system is an 
improvement on FPTP but it favours the major parties and would still mean that 
people who vote for smaller parties, which may get 15% of the national vote, 
would continue to have few or no MPs representing them. By veering towards the 
Alternative Vote, Labour seems more concerned with its own party self-interest 
than a genuinely fair and democratic electoral system.

My fear is that Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> might agree to a referendum 
at the time of the next general election but he might rig the referendum 
question to ensure that the Alternative Vote is the only option on offer. This 
would be disastrous. If people voted for the Alternative Vote, we would end up 
with continued non-proportional representation at Westminster. If people voted 
against, we'd be back to square one with FPTP which, in 2005, resulted in 
Labour winning a mere 35% of the vote but bagging 55% of the seats.

If Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is sincere about a 
fair voting system it should hold a referendum on Jenkins' recommendations for 
Alternative Vote Plus. This system would involve electors voting for a 
constituency MP by numbering each candidate in order of preference. Candidates 
would have to get at least 50% of the votes to be elected. Voters would also 
have another "plus" vote for candidates from a party list, to elect additional 
"top up" MPs to help correct any imbalance between the total votes cast for a 
party and seats it won in the constituency section of the ballot.

This is a variation on the existing electoral methods now used for the 
Scottish, Welsh and London elections, theAdditional Member System 
<http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/article.php?id=53>. Using FPTP, electors 
vote for both a constituency MP and for a party. This combines the 
accountability of single-member constituencies with additional MPs based on the 
total vote received by each party; thereby ensuring broad proportionality 
between the number of votes cast for a party and the number of seats it 
secures. It works well in Scotland, Wales and London, why not for the House of 
Commons?

The solution is obvious. Let the people decide. We need all-party agreement 
that there will be a referendum on electoral reform at the same time as the 
next general election and, if people vote for change, that the subsequent 
general election will be based on a proportional system. Over to you Gordon, 
David and Nick. How about it?
 