
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> accused the government of 
imposing a "strivers' tax" and a "mummy tax" on Thursday as it criticised 
government plans to impose a three-year squeeze on a range of benefits aimed at 
both those in and out of work.

In the autumn statement this week George Osborne announced that most benefits 
will rise by only 1% a year for the next three years.

The government said maternity pay would rise by £135 in 2015, but did not 
challenge the claim that this would mean a real terms cut due to the effect of 
inflation. It also insisted working people will benefit from lifting personal 
allowances by approximately £260 a year, or £5 a week, and this would be more 
than the impact of the benefit squeeze for the vast majority of households.

But the shadow minister for women Yvette Cooper said: "This real terms cut in 
maternity pay is effectively a £180 mummy tax on working women – and it's bad 
for the whole family. Evidence shows women on low income are less likely to 
take their full maternity leave because they can't afford to stay off work."

The party's Treasury spokeswoman Catherine McKinnell said: "In the budget the 
small print was the granny tax and in the autumn statement the hidden detail 
was George Osborne's mummy tax, as maternity pay is cut in real terms.

"The government claims they are targeting the work-shy and benefit scroungers, 
but it's just not true. They are hitting millions of working families, and mums 
taking time out from work to look after their newborn baby.

"And all this is happening on the same day that millionaires get an average 
tax cut of over £100,000. It's completely unfair."

The Tories and Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> plan to challenge 
Labour to vote for the 1% yearly rise in an uprating bill probably in the new 
year. If they refuse to do so, the coalition will accuse Labour of not being 
serious about reducing the deficit.

The shadow work and pensions secretary Liam Byrne claimed the 1% rise over 
three years will save £6.7bn, and claimed only 23% of that saving will come 
from jobseeker's allowance, employment support allowance (ESA) and income 
support.

He said "The rest of the balance will come from tax credits, maternity 
allowance, maternity pay, sick pay and housing benefits, which are all claimed 
by working people. The 'strivers' and 'battlers' whom the prime minister 
promised to defend at his party conference will pay the price for the 
government's failure."

Byrne also said £14bn had been taken out of tax credits, and the autumn 
statement will take another £5bn by 2016-17.

Steve Webb, the pensions minister, taunted Byrne by asking if he would abstain 
on the vote or reject the squeeze. Webb said: "He sounds sympathetic and angry, 
but when it comes to the crunch and there is a vote, he disappears and is not 
to be seen." Webb said that disabled living allowance, attendance allowance, 
carer's allowance and the support component of ESA will all rise in line with 
inflation.

In practice it is likely that Labour will vote against the uprating partly 
because they see the break between benefits and prices represents a historic 
change in the way benefits are paid.
 