
Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> have cleared another 
significant hurdle in their attempt to secure the future of Old Trafford as a 
Test-match ground. A judicial review against the planning permission that was 
granted by Trafford Council exactly a year ago has been rejected.

Jim Cumbes, the county's chief executive, spoke of "a huge sense of relief" 
after a high-court decision that allows the club to step up its attempt to 
stage a Test in the next Ashes series in 2013.

"The alternative didn't bear thinking about," he said.

Derwent Holdings, which had appealed against the council's decision to reject 
permission to develop a rival supermarket while clearing a Tesco superstore 
that will provide the bulk of the funding for the Old Trafford development, has 
two weeks in which to apply for the right to appeal again.

Jane le Fevre, the council's acting head of legal services, said: "We are 
reasonably confident it is a safe judgment."

The delay has cost Lancashire £2m of the £7.2m funding they had been promised 
by the now-defunct North West Development Authority and £1m from Sport England 
to double the size of the indoor cricket school at Old Trafford for more 
community use.

Lancashire hope that selling naming rights for the redeveloped ground will 
help to fill that gap, although Cumbes said they still had the time and funds 
to satisfy the demands of the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board to stage an Ashes Test in 
2013.

"It will be tight, but the completion date is still for April 2013," said 
Cumbes. "There are no guarantees but we're in a great position to bid for a 
Test in the next Ashes series. There will be one in Durham, one at the Oval and 
clearly there has be one at Lord's. So there are two more to be allocated, and 
as things stand there isn't one in the midlands or in Lancashire or Yorkshire – 
and there can't be one in Yorkshire, because they already have a game against 
New Zealand that year. So we feel confident, although obviously there are no 
guarantees."

The ECB is expected to finalise the venues for the 2013 series in July.
 