
Mike Watkinson has had better Easter weekends. On Good Friday afternoon, 
Lancashire's cricket director learned thatPeter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores> had been recalled for national 
service, meaning the county will soon be left without a coach in the early 
stages of their return to Division One.

Moores was suited and booted at Lord's on Saturday morning to be put on 
parade, although less than 24 hours later he was back in Manchester in his
Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> tracksuit, 
supervising the usual pre-match warm-up routines on a perishing April day.

Unusually, Watkinson was out there with him and wearing similar attire, 
fuelling speculation that he would be emulating Moores's England comeback by 
returning to his previous position as Lancashire coach, at least for the rest 
of the season. He ruled that out at lunchtime. "Those days have gone," said the 
52-year-old. "I'm wearing a tracksuit because it's cold."

Lancashire's plans therefore remain uncertain. Moores will stay in charge for 
the duration of this match, at his request and with England's blessing. "He's 
doing it because he's passionate about the club," Watkinson said. Gary Yates, 
the former off-spinner who has been his assistant, is likely to take the team 
to Northampton for their next Championship fixture, possibly supported by 
Watkinson or John Stanworth, who won a one-day double as caretaker coach in 
1996 and now runs the academy.

Watkinson hinted that Glen Chapple, the captain who is making his first 
appearance in his 40s, would be regarded as a natural successor, having secured 
his grade-four coaching qualification, and shown enough promise already to be 
invited into the England setup working with younger fast bowlers in South 
Africa during the winter.

Chapple remains a precious asset to Lancashire as a player, as he showed with 
a quick 29 amid a limp lower-order collapse, although he was unable to claim 
his 900th first-class wicket for the county whenWarwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> replied in evening gloom. 
"He's still our go-to cricketer in Championship matches," said Watkinson, who 
ruled out the possibility that Chapple could take over as captain-coach.

He did not quite discount the option of Lancashire recruiting from outside, 
but made it sound unlikely, and there was a straight rebuttal of the rumour 
that they have been sounded out by the England and Wales Cricket Board to take
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> as a straight 
replacement for Moores.

"If we wanted to go through a thorough, robust recruitment process now it 
would take months," Watkinson said. "When we get to the end of the season we've 
got time to breathe."

The day did not improve for Watkinson, or for Moores. Chapple had chosen to 
bat under floodlights, which always seemed a risk. Lancashire were going well 
in mid-afternoon at 164 for three, Luke Procter having joined Paul Horton in a 
positive fourth-wicket stand after Chris Woakes claimed the prize scalp of 
Ashwell Prince caught behind for a second-ball duck.

Then the umpires ruled that the ball was out of shape, ordered a replacement 
and Keith Barker, the Lancastrian left-arm seamer who always seems to perform 
well on the ground graced by his godfather Clive Lloyd, really got into the 
swing of things. Horton was given lbw for a fine 83 to one that he clearly 
thought had swung back too much, and Wayne White fell in similar fashion a 
couple of overs later.

Jeetan Patel, who has been such a good-value overseas signing and not the type 
of off-spinner to complain about the cold, had the left-handed Tom Smith 
snapped up behind in between times, and suddenly Lancashire were 201 for seven.

Chapple joined Jos Buttler, who had leg-glanced his first ball as a Lancashire 
player for four, to counterattack. But Woakes, who had taken over from Barker 
from the Pavilion End and found just as much movement, polished off Buttler 
–caught behind to the sort of loose cut he is trying to eliminate – Chapple and 
Jimmy Anderson for another second-ball duck to complete figures of five for 63.

Warwickshire's attack was still missing Boyd Rankin, who has yet to fully 
recover from the back problems that undermined his Test debut in Sydney in 
January, but this was an impressive response to their opening defeat by Sussex 
under the energetic captaincy of Ian Bell.

Varun Chopra and Will Porterfield then frustrated Anderson and Chapple through 
a little luck but more skill, putting the tin lid on Watkinson's Easter.
 