
Lancashire have refused to confirm or deny reports that Andrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> will be paid on an unusual 
commission basis if and when he appears in their Twenty20 Blast team this 
summer, but left no doubt about their disgust that the details have entered the 
public domain.

The Daily Telegraph and Daily Mail claimed on Monday morning that, in addition 
to his basic contract, Flintoff would receive around £1 for each extra ticket 
sold for matches in which he plays – beginning, if all goes to plan, against 
Yorkshire at Old Trafford on Friday night.

That is not great publicity for either Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> or Flintoff, who have both been 
at pains to stress that the major motivation behind the deal is cricketing 
rather than commercial.

“I’m not saying anything about it, whether it’s accurate or inaccurate doesn’t 
concern me,” said Mike Watkinson, Lancashire’s cricket director. “Our business 
is to have a contractual arrangement with Fred and his management team, which 
is what we’ve done. The only thing I would say is that any player’s contracts 
are strictly confidential as far as we’re concerned, and we would never issue 
any information about them.

“As we said when we announced the deal last week, this is first and foremost 
about cricket. Fred will be picked if he’s deemed worthy of a place in the XI, 
ultimately by Glen Chapple. If he’s not, he won’t.” Chapple has in effect taken 
over as coach since Peter Moores was reappointed by England in April.

Flintoff made the same point himself after an encouraging return to the field 
for his old Northern League club, St Anne’s, on Saturday afternoon,in which he 
bowled 12 overs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/andrew-flintoff-warms-up-st-annes-lancashire>
. He admitted to stiffness afterwards, which he said was hardly surprising as 
“I’ve got a knee full of metal”.

But he offered further evidence of his determination to disprove the sceptics 
by returning to the Old Trafford nets on Sunday, and was back at the ground 
again on Monday morning to join the warm-up before the second day of 
Lancashire’s County Championship fixture against Somerset.

He will now play, all being well, for the second team in the semi-final of 
their T20 competition against Leicestershire at Arundel on Thursday, in the 
hope of convincing Lancashire that he is ready for the grand comeback against 
Yorkshire the following evening.
 