
To Australian cricketers few experiences are more satisfying than playing 
regularly in their powerful Test XI. But one experience that may run it close 
is returning to that XI after a period by the wayside.

All of them have done it, even Steve Waugh, who spent his season in exile 10 
years ago. And Justin Langer has done it more than most; for years he has been 
a kind of permanent auxiliary and has spent most of this tour on dressing-room 
duties; he has probably been keeping their footballs pumped up and minding the 
Vegemite.

Langer's hard-working hundred yesterday will thus have felt like faith 
rewarded, even if his actual recollections may be hazy. It ended with what he 
described as a "heavy impact" on the helmet from Andy Caddick, compelling his 
retirement. But by then he had sailed through the nineties with three hearty, 
vindicating strokes after four hours at the crease.

Langer had taken the long way round to playing yesterday, waiting for his 
first Test cap on English soil longer than some English players. He has four 
seasons of league cricket and three of county cricket behind him, in addition 
to touring here four years ago without forcing his way into the Test XI - the 
last an experience that, until Wednesday, he appeared destined to repeat on 
this visit.

That amounts to 55 first-class games in this country, enough almost for 
honorary Englishness, were it not that he wears his Australian cap with such 
ardour. It remained on for four consecutive days after Australia's last Ashes 
win here, by which time his head must have assumed baggy green contours.

Langer lost his way as a Test batsman not quite a year ago, after three years 
in which he appeared to have acquired a mortgage over the No3 slot.

Aspiring to selection in Australia's one-day side, he strove to prove himself 
as a strokemaker: skittish 20s became his hallmark, the wide half-volley which 
he tried to club too hard his weakness.

More of Langer's old qualities were in evidence yesterday. He drove fluently 
and employed the sweep against Phil Tufnell as disruptively as he had against 
Daniel Vettori in New Zealand last year but otherwise took few chances until 
well established.

Langer's opening partner yesterday was another cricketer who has spent much of 
his international career on the outside looking in. Matthew Hayden has always 
been a favourite in his own state. When national selectors ignored him, 
Queenslanders would quote his handsome record with a sage nod, as though his 
exclusion was another of those tricky southern conspiracies like daylight 
saving.

Elsewhere there have been more doubts. The flat-track bully is not a genus 
confined to England, and some in Australia have deemed Hayden a confirmed 
sighting, at least until an outstanding series in India five months ago.

He can still look ungainly. He lets the ball go on off-stump with a 
premeditated air and a flourish that belies its occasional uncertainty. He also 
tends to plant his front foot. Yet Hayden is a relentlessly positive character 
and has a physical presence at the wicket. He came down the pitch to Tufnell's 
first delivery and, like Langer, swept repeatedly; the spinner's first seven 
overs yielded a run a ball and England were never quite able to restore order.

The player whose absence left Langer and Hayden in harness, Michael Slater, 
could not have been accused of seeking seclusion. He popped up on Channel 4 at 
lunchtime, a mix of chagrin and cheerfulness, to talk through his omission with 
his erstwhile employer.

Slater, though, has problems. He has batted on this tour as though unaware 
that there are four for a boundary regardless of how hard it is hit. His lithe 
and crisp strokeplay in England eight years ago seems a distant memory. Now he 
positively belabours the ball, the bottom hand coming through like a clenched 
fist socking a disagreeable jaw.

At Edgbaston Slater played strokes so avant garde that they could have been 
hung in Tate Modern. It set Australia's series off on the right foot, though 
not perhaps his own. Too many starts since have been squandered through 
misplaced confidence and poor shot selection.

Australia's selectors may expect Slater to wait a while before offering him 
the pleasure of a rehabilitation like Langer's yesterday.
 