
Abbey National shares were trading for the final time today ahead of the 
mortgage lender's £9.3bn acquisition by the Spanish bank Santander.

The company came to the London Stock Exchange 15 years ago when it made the 
move from building society to bank. Many of its investors picked up windfall 
shares when Abbey floated in 1989.

Next week, they will hold shares in Santander. 

Dealings in the newly-enlarged company will begin in Madrid on Tuesday. 
Santander is expected to pursue a secondary listing in London next year.

However, many of the company's 1.7 million small shareholders are likely to 
take advantage of a free dealing service to sell their Santander shares.

The Abbey tie-up will create the fourth largest bank in Europe and the eighth 
largest in the world. It is also Europe's biggest cross-border banking takeover.

Santander hailed the acquisition as an "excellent entry" into the UK market 
and has pledged to drive sales from better use of Abbey's 741-strong branch 
network and through modernisation of the company's IT network.

The Spanish group is valued at around £30bn and has a strong presence in 
Europe and Latin America, employing more than 100,000 people.

A spokesman for Abbey said it would be "business as usual" for the UK banking 
operation following the takeover.

From Monday, Francisco Gomez-Roldan will be at the helm of the UK operation, 
replacing chief executive Luqman Arnold who will remain with Santander on a 
consultancy basis.

Mr Arnold was responsible for a turnaround strategy that included the sale of 
non-core assets, particularly those involved in risky corporate loans and which 
were blamed for two years of heavy losses at the former building society.

Shareholders on the Abbey National share register at close of trading today 
will be eligible for a special dividend payment of 31p a share from Santander.

Abbey was formed following the merger of the Abbey Road Building Society and 
the National Building Society in 1944. It became a plc in July 1989 with a 
share price of 130p. Shares were up 14p at 653.5p today.
 