
The government has said it is planning a clampdown on legal firms pursuing 
what it calls “spurious claims” against military personnel following reports 
thatIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war law firm Public Interest 
Lawyers is to shut down.

The firm, which submitted hundreds of allegations of misconduct and unlawful 
killing by British troops, is to cease operation at the end of August, weeks 
after being stripped of legal aid funding, according to a documentseen by the 
Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3740507/Legal-firm-spent-taxpayer-millions-hounding-troops-closes-down.html>
.

The document submitted to the high court by PIL reportedly asks judges to make 
an order that it has ceased to act for 187 Iraqi claimants due to its 
“permanent closure”. The firm will not pursue a further 1,000 compensation 
claims it planned to lodge.


PIL represented complainants in the £31m Al-Sweady inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-sweady-inquiry> and was criticised when the 
inquiry’s 2014 report concluded the most serious allegations of war crimes 
following a 2004 battle in southern Iraq were based on “deliberate lies, 
reckless speculation and ingrained hostility”.

At the start of August it was announced the firm would no longer receive 
public funding after the legal aid agency (LAA) ruled it had breached 
contractual requirements. The agency took the decision after reviewing 
information submitted by the firm, following aSolicitors Regulation Authority 
<http://www.sra.org.uk/> investigation.


The prime minister, Theresa May, was said to be “very much pleased” at the 
closure of the firm. “We made a manifesto commitment to addressing these types 
of spurious claims that companies like PIL are pursuing,” a No 10 spokesman 
said. “The closure of PIL shows that we are making progress on that, tackling 
these types of firms head-on to make sure we get the right outcome for our 
armed forces who show such bravery in the most difficult of circumstances.”

The spokesman said ministers were currently looking at a suite of measures to 
prevent firms making bogus claims, including strengthening the penalties for 
those who abused the system.

The defence secretary, Michael Fallon, said: “This is the right outcome for 
our armed forces, who show bravery and dedication in difficult circumstances. 
For too long, we’ve seen our legal system abused to impugn them falsely. We are 
now seeing progress and we will be announcing further measures to stamp out 
this practice.”

The long-running Al-Sweady inquiry concluded in its final report that the 
conduct of some soldiers towards detaineesbreached the Geneva convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/16/british-soldiers-accused-grossly-violating-geneva-conventions>
. But it was highly critical of the claims it was initially set up to 
investigate: that Iraqi detainees had been murdered, mutilated and tortured 
following the battle of Danny Boy on 14 May 2004 near al-Amarah in southern 
Iraq.

It found British forces responded to a deadly ambush by insurgents with 
“exemplary courage, resolution and professionalism”. It suggested some of the 
detainees – all described as members or supporters of the Mahdi army insurgent 
group – consciously lied about the most serious allegations to discredit the 
British armed forces.

Phil Shiner, who ran the firm, was charged by the SRA, which referred him to 
the solicitors disciplinary tribunal. Shiner has won the right to have the next 
stage of the disciplinary hearing held behind closed doors.

The firm has had success in the courts, including a case in which it acted for 
Gurkhas who had been captured by Japanese troops, securing them £40m in 
compensation.
 