
The prominent London law firm Leigh Day has been referred to the Solicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> Disciplinary Tribunal (SDT) to 
answer complaints about its handling of legal challenges brought by Iraqi 
detainees against the Ministry of Defence.


The allegations, all denied, relate to the findings of the Al-Sweady inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-sweady-inquiry>, which was established to 
investigate whether British soldiers tortured and murdered detainees following 
the battle of Danny Boy, named after a British checkpoint north of Basra, in 
2004.


The claims brought by the Iraqis, who were represented by Leigh Day and 
another law firm, Public Interest Lawyers, fell apart when a letter was 
disclosed showing that some of theIraqis were members of the rebel Mahdi army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/17/al-sweady-inquiry-uk-troops-mistreated-iraqi-prisoners-not-murder>
.


The inquiry’s chairman, Sir Thayne Forbes, a former high court judge, 
concluded in 2014 that the most serious claims were “deliberate lies, reckless 
speculation and ingrained hostility”.


Leigh Day and Public Interest Lawyers specialise in bringing human rights 
challenges to the courts. Leigh Day has fought cases against Shell, Trafigura, 
BP, Xstrata, Anglo American and Unilever, as well as the British and Japanese 
governments.


The MoD complained to the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA) about the 
behaviour of the two firms at theAl-Sweady inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-sweady-inquiry>. The SRA has now referred 
the case against Leigh Day to the next stage in the process, the SDT. The 
tribunal could yet decide that there is no case to answer.


Leigh Day has said that the list of detainees, which had supposedly not been 
disclosed until a late stage, had originally been provided by a journalist 
working for a British newspaper.


The law firm said it suggested to the journalist that he meet the Royal 
Military <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> Police and show them his 
documents. The firm believes the document was subsequently handed over to the 
MoD.


Other allegations against Leigh Day include acting improperly by holding a 
press conference about the Iraqis’ claims, touting for clients and entering 
into a prohibited referral fee agreement. All the allegations are denied.


Leigh Day condemned the referral to the tribunal as premature. A spokesperson 
said: “Leigh Day stands full square behind the work we have been involved in 
over the last 10 years to assist Iraqis who have claims in relation to abuse 
they say they have suffered.


“No one is above the law; not us, not the British army and not the government. 
This is the British rule of law in action and is surely what our soldiers fight 
to defend.


“The great majority of the claims that we have brought against the MoD which 
have concluded have been successful. The few claims that have failed are proof 
that the system is working.


“Leigh Day has taken care to operate within the rules governing solicitors in 
terms of how it obtained work from Iraqi clients. We refute all of the 
allegations that have been made against us.”


A Public Interest Lawyers spokesperson said: “PIL have not been referred to 
the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal. This has been confirmed by the SRA today. 
PIL has no further comment in respect of this as there is still an ongoing 
investigation.”

Paul Philip, chief executive of the SRA, said: “We have been looking into the 
serious issues arising from the inquiry report since its publication in 
December 2014. Leigh Day has been closely involved in the detail for some years 
before that.

“Our investigation has involved the review of a huge amount of complex and 
detailed evidence.

“The firm has had more than four months to respond to our allegations, and 
then a further seven weeks to respond to additional allegations. In our view 
there is no duplication between the two sets of allegations. They have not as 
yet responded to either set.

“These are serious allegations and there is a clear public interest in 
resolving this matter as quickly as possible. Therefore we have referred Leigh 
Day, and a number of individual solicitors, to the independent Solicitors 
Disciplinary Tribunal. It is now for the tribunal to decide to hear the 
allegations and decide what course of action to take.”
 