 All over the country students are starting to return to university, many of 
them to flats and houses rented from private landlords, friends, or parents. If 
you own one of these properties there is a raft of obligations with which you 
need to comply in order to stay on the right side of the law.
New rules introduced this year give all tenants the right to complain about 
hazardous living conditions such as damp and faulty electrics. If the complaint 
is upheld, landlords can be forced to carry out repairs by a local authority.

Landlords of larger houses in multiple-occupation may have to apply for a 
licence before they can even let the property, and all private landlords must 
take part in a potentially costly tenant deposit scheme 
<http://money.theguardian.com/renting/story/0,,2027803,00.html> (TDS) aimed at 
protecting tenants from landlords who wrongly withhold all or part of a deposit 
at the end of the tenancy.

Under this scheme, landlords or letting agents can only take a deposit from a 
tenant if they are registered with one of the three government-approved TDSs. 
These are run by the Dispute Service <http://www.thedisputeservice.co.uk>, an 
independent, not-for-profit body that requires landlords to provide legitimate 
reasons for making deductions at the end of the tenancy.

Each scheme has slightly different rules about how deposits are held. Two are 
insurance based, allowing the landlord to keep the deposit for the period of 
the tenancy after insuring it to protect tenant's interests. The other is 
custodial, which means the deposit is held independently by the scheme during 
the period of the tenancy.

Within 14 days of receiving a deposit, landlords must provide tenants with 
details of how it is protected. This should be set out in either the tenancy 
agreement or a separate signed deposit information certificate.

It should include information about the landlord's contact address, the 
circumstances when the landlord can take money out of the deposit, and the 
identity of the particular scheme.

Landlords face tough penalties if these rules are not followed since the 
tenant cannot be evicted until the matter is resolved, and the landlord will 
have to pay compensation to the tenant equivalent to three times the deposit.

System sets a standard

A new system has also been introduced for checking the condition of rented 
property. Tenants now have the right to contact an environmental health officer 
and ask them to inspect their home.

A rating system is used to assess potential health and safety hazards such as 
faulty electrics, damp, poor security, poor lighting and noise. If the problem 
is serious the council will require landlords to carry out repairs, or in an 
emergency, do them itself.

Moreover, landlords of certain large shared houses now have to apply for a 
licence from the council. The compulsory licensing requirement applies to all 
houses of at least five people (not from the same family) spread over three or 
more floors.

The council will visit a property to check the condition of the bathroom, 
kitchen and laundry facilities. Checks will be carried out to ensure the 
property is not overcrowded, and an assessment will be made to ensure the 
landlord is capable of managing the property.

Types of agreement

Under the Housing Act 1996, new private tenancies are automatically classed as 
assured shorthold tenancies unless their agreement states otherwise. Assured 
shorthold tenancies give landlords the absolute right to get a property back at 
the end of a tenancy period, which may be as short as six months.

Landlords can remove a tenant who breaches the terms of the tenancy agreement 
before six months are up. If the tenancy runs on after the fixed period, 
landlords can get possession of the property by giving two months' notice.

Assured shorthold tenants have the right in the first fixed period of the 
tenancy agreement to get the rent determined by the rent assessment committee 
<http://www.rpts.gov.uk/our_services/services.htm>, an independent statutory 
body. However, the committee will not interfere unless the landlord is charging 
significantly more than other landlords. The rent it sets will be inline with 
the market rate.

To prevent disputes arising later about who is responsible for doing what, 
landlords should use a written tenancy agreement.

In general, however, landlords are responsible for certain basic repairs to 
any sinks, baths, sanitary installations and heating and hot water systems, and 
to the structure and exterior of the building.

Small repairs such as replacing washers on taps or mending fuses and broken 
locks are usually the tenant's responsibility.

It is important to sort out in advance who is responsible for paying bills. 
Tenants will normally be responsible for the council tax (although this isn't 
an issue for students), water and sewerage charges. But landlords need to make 
sure the agreement is clear about who is responsible for gas, electricity and 
telephone bills before the tenancy begins.
 