
A white police officer singled out the Atlanta Hawks’ Thabo Sefolosha as he 
filed out of a New York nightclub this year, sparking a confrontation that 
resulted in the player’s arrestand a season-ending leg fracture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/09/atlanta-hawks-thabo-sefolosha-suffered-fractured-leg-during-arrest>
, a defense lawyer told jurors Tuesday.

Atlanta Hawks' Thabo Sefolosha suffered fractured leg during arrest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/09/atlanta-hawks-thabo-sefolosha-suffered-fractured-leg-during-arrest>
“I don’t know what he saw,” attorney Alex Spiro said of the officer, JohnPaul 
Giacona, who first told Sefolosha to clear the area early on 8 April. “I think 
he saw a black man in a hoodie.”

Sefolosha, 30, has been charged with misdemeanor obstructing government 
administration, disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. He pleaded not guilty 
and refused a plea deal.

But a prosecutor said Tuesday that the 6ft 6in Sefolosha acted entitled and 
disdainful to officers trying to clear hundreds of people off a street 
following an earlier stabbing outside the club by calling the 5ft 7in Giacona 
“a midget.”

“The defendant does not think he needs to obey the law,” assistant district 
attorney Jesse Matthews said. “He does not like being told what to do.” Giacona 
had just completed three years on the job.

The case stems from a struggle outside the 1Oak nightclub in Manhattan after 
Indiana Pacers forward Chris Copeland and two women were stabbed.

Officers from a unit charged with patrolling area bars and clubs responded to 
that stabbing and were ordered to move hundreds of partygoers off the block, a 
police sergeant testified Tuesday. It was in that process that Sefolosha, his 
team-mate Pero Antic and two women were told by Giacona to leave the block.

Charges against Antic have since been dropped.

Sefolosha disobeyed those orders, then charged at an officer whose back was 
turned before he was stopped by officers and eventually taken to the ground and 
arrested, court documents state.

But pressed by Spiro during cross-examination, Giacona acknowledged that 
although he had previously said he asked Sefolosha to move off the block six 
times he could only remember doing so at least three times. He also said he 
didn’t know how the Swiss national’s leg was injured or hear the sound of 
batons being deployed.

Spiro played video surveillance footage for jurors showing that there were 
patrons closer to the crime scene tape than Sefolosha and his friends were.

Six police officers will be called as witnesses for the prosecution, but the 
judge, Robert Mandelbaum, has denied a defense motion to view their personnel 
files.

Hawks coach Mike Budenholzer said the court case was on his mind Tuesday.

“I think we all care about Thabo,” he said. “I’m hoping for the best. To be 
put in a little of a tough spot, going through this, is not easy for him or his 
family. ... But I just want the best outcome for him. He’s such a good person.”
 