
Imagine being woken up in your student accommodation by an intolerable itch 
and then finding red, scaly skin spanning swathes of your body. That happened 
to me about mid-way through my first term at university.

I was suffering my latest outbreak of psoriasis, a skin condition which affects
around 2% of people in the UK 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/psoriasis/pages/introduction.aspx>, and has been 
linked to heart disease. It's a chronic, debilitating problem that can cause 
sufferers distress physically and psychologically.

I saw university as a time to meet new people and build new bonds, but my 
condition made that harder.

Joining a sports society? Red card to that: wearing shorts and a T-shirt means 
displaying your arms and legs. A film or entertainment society? Lights down, I 
say. Even alcohol was off limits after hearing from fellow sufferers that 
drinking made their condition worse.

But for those of us who have skin conditions –psoriasis, eczema, acne and 
others – it's all about embarrassment and fear.

"You're in a pressured environment," says one student, who suffers from a skin 
problem and wishes to remain anonymous. "You want to go out, have fun, join 
societies and do everything everyone else does, but it's difficult, 
particularly if your condition affects the face, as that's what you're 
presenting to the world.

"You find it can be difficult for people who don't suffer to understand. You 
feel very alone."

Sometimes I am questioned in a seminar or lecture, and soon discover that my 
condition is not just difficult to deal with, but also to talk about. Even 
though there are treatment options, it's still not easy to explain to people 
that it's not a rash or burn and it won't go away completely.

But student life, I've learned, is what you make of it. It's no use sitting 
here and being upset about what is a very uncomfortable thing to have to 
experience.

Living with a skin condition is hard and will always remain so. Not a day goes 
by when I don't wish I could experience university life to the full.

I still won't join a sports society and I'm apprehensive about joining in with 
other students taking photos on nights out, but accepting that this condition 
is part of me and something I will have to live with for the rest of my life is 
an everyday uphill struggle that I'm beginning to overcome.
 Guardian Students banner Photograph: guardian  