
In the digital age, new technology is becoming an ever more important gateway 
to lifelong learning.

Most colleges and universities run their own virtual learning environment, 
through which students can download course materials and communicate with their 
tutors online. The majority of courses now include a digital component, giving 
students the chance to work collaboratively through forums, blogs, wikis and 
video conferencing. All of this, the institutions argue, makes for better 
connection, improved access and increased flexibility – allowing students to 
learn at a time and in a place that best suits them.

The Open University (OU) has been using computers since 1969 to educate its 
distance learners, many of whom work either part-time or full-time, and it now 
has a policy that every student needs a computer. For more disadvantaged 
students, the OU provides training and grants to help them buy a computer and 
get online. "We try to make courses as easy as possible to access," says Niall 
Sclater, OU director of learning innovation. "All you need is a web browser: if 
you can buy a book on Amazon, you should be able to use our websites."

The OU is at the forefront of technological change in using cloud computing as 
a means of delivering education. Cloud computing is where a company or 
institution, instead of building its own IT-infrastructure to host databases or 
software, outsources these to a third party (such as Amazon or Google), which 
hosts the services for you and provides storage. Individuals use the cloud as a 
utility without really needing to understand where the service is coming from.

Martin Bean, OU vice-chancellor, is a strong advocate of the system: "Cloud 
computing allows users to get IT services and data over the internet using a 
web browser, rather than running additional software on their own machines. In 
practice this means that more educational services can be provided in the 
cloud, reducing costs and improving service levels. This allows institutions to 
scale up usage on demand, without having costly, under-utilised data centres."

Instead of hosting its own email system, the OU now provides Google Apps 
through the cloud server, so that all students get an account with Google that 
is OU branded. As Sclater explains: "For us that reduces cost, and it's good 
for the students because they get a better email system than we could maintain, 
plus they don't need to buy [word processing] software because they can access 
it through their web browser."

Sclater anticipates moving more aspects of the OU's operation to the cloud – 
for instance, its assessment system – as these become available. "What it means 
for an institution like ours is reduced costs (and potentially lower fees), and 
the ability to focus on our core business, which is educating students. At the 
same time, everybody gets the latest, most up-to‑date services."

Matt Dean, technical manager of the Association of Colleges, believes cloud 
computing is an increasingly viable option. "The Association of Colleges, for 
instance, currently has its own server – but if that crashes, we lose certain 
forms of capacity. With a cloud, we would be less vulnerable, and there would 
be more back-ups."

But Dean has "real concerns" about data security in a cloud – "especially 
because we are dealing with under-16s and vulnerable adults". For the OU, 
Sclater says that Google hosts data under European or US data protection 
legislation, "which we have deemed satisfactory".

Dean also points to the need for substantial "change management" for an 
institution to adjust to working with the cloud. "Colleges have to think 
strategically about whether this makes sense for them," he says.

In the future, Dean would like to see colleges offering more "blended 
learning" courses, combining online learning with face-to-face tuition. More 
innovative training is needed, he emphasises, to make sure that teachers as 
well as students make the best use of the technology available.

Reaching "informal learners" is another vital service that institutions can 
offer through new technology, and the Open University's free learning resources 
website, OpenLearn, has had more than 15.6 million visits. As Sclater 
emphasises: "Part of our educational mission is to educate people throughout 
the world freely, and encourage some of them to become formal learners, if 
that's of interest to them."
 