
The high expectations of Queens Park Rangers seemed as unrealistic as ever, as 
they slumped to arguably the day's most devastatingChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> defeat. In losing 5-1 at 
home toMiddlesbrough – their worst result in a disappointing recent run in 
which they have collected maximum points only once in six matches – they 
dropped from fifth to ninth in the table.

Boro's win, their first in five matches under their new manager Gordon 
Strachan, took them from 10th to sixth. Their destruction of QPR was started by 
Dave Kitson, who opened the scoring with his third goal in as many games since 
joining on loan from Stoke. Kitson was then upstaged by his striking partner 
Leroy Lita. He made it 2-0 from a penalty and afterQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> pulled one back through Patrick 
Agyemang, Lita capitalised on a mistake by Mikele Leigertwood to get his second 
goal. A Lita shot that hit a post led to Gary O'Neil increasing Boro's lead. He 
had an opportunity to clinch a hat-trick when he and Mark Yeates broke clear, 
but Yeates ignored his pleas for a square pass in favour of getting Boro's 
fifth goal himself.

Blackpool also lost their place in the top six in losing 2-1 at home to 
Barnsley after taking the lead 12 minutes from the end. Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley>, who have been transformed 
since Mark Robins became their manager, equalised with a Bobby Hassell header 
from Iain Hume's corner and added their other goal from an Andy Gray penalty.

It was Blackpool's first home defeat in the Championship. The only team who 
have yet to experience defeat at home areNewcastle, who maintained their 
unbeaten home record in beatingWatford 2-0 despite having Kevin Nolan sent off.

As at Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool>, there was 
plenty of late excitement atPeterborough and Derby County. Peterborough, a goal 
ahead againstSwansea, were hit by two in the last six minutes from the Swansea 
substitute Lee Trundle. However, they also scored during this period, their 
captain George Boyd following an excellent run down the left flank with a low 
cross for Aaron McLean to score a last-minute equaliser.

Derby, too, found themselves 2-1 down against West Bromwich Albion, after 
being ahead. But having conceded a Simon Cox equaliser eight minutes from the 
end and a Graham Dorrans goal in the third minute of stoppage-time, they still 
managed to draw level through their substitute DJ Campbell. Not a bad way for 
Campbell to mark his Derby debut on loan from Leicester – especially as West 
Brom's second goal had stemmed from his mistake in being caught in possession

One on-loan striker making a particular impact is Billy Sharp. His goal in 
Doncaster's 3-0 win at Crystal Palace – their first league away victory of the 
season – brought his total since they borrowed him from Sheffield United to 
seven in 14 games. Another player who stood out wasReading's Jobi McAnuff. He 
set up both goals in the 2-0 win atSheffield Wednesday. It was Wednesday's 
fourth successive home defeat and put them only a point above the relegation 
zone.

An Elland Road crowd of 36,723, the biggest League One gate of the season, saw 
Leedsheld to a 2-2 draw by Huddersfield after twice being ahead. In an 
enthralling match,Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> came agonisingly close to 
inflicting on Leeds their first home defeat in 21 matches with an Anthony 
Pilkington free-kick that hit the underside of the crossbar.

Norwich's Grant Holt, with a far-post header from a Chris Martin cross, scored 
his 19th goal of the season in the 2-0 win overOldham. Who would bet against 
him becoming the first Norwich player to reach the 20-goal mark before 
Christmas since Hugh Curran 40 years ago?

Aldershot, who produced one of the biggest League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> surprises of the 
season with their 5-2 win at Dagenham and Redbridge last Tuesday, increased 
their unbeaten run to eight matches in overcomingChesterfield 1-0. Aldershot, 
who rode their luck at times – notably when Jack Lester hit the post with a 
header – seized the initiative with a goal from their defender Anthony Charles.
 