
As we passed the fifth anniversary of the peak of the financial crisis this 
fall, the giant insurance company AIG was prominently featured in the 
retrospectives. AIG had issued hundreds of billions of dollars of credit 
default swaps (CDS) on subprime mortgage backed securities. When these 
mortgage-backed securities failed en masse,AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> didn't have the money to back them 
up.

This would have forced AIG into bankruptcy. However Lehman had declared 
bankruptcy the day before and the world was still engulfed in the aftershocks. 
The Bush administration and the Federal Reserve board decided that they would 
stop the cascade of failing financial institutions and bail out AIG. As a 
result, the government agreed to honor all the CDS issued by AIG and 
effectively became the owner of the company.

Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> has been in the news 
recently because its mayor, Rahm Emanuel, seems intent on cutting the pensions 
that its current and retired employees have earned. Emanuel insists that the 
city can't afford these pensions and therefore workers and retirees will simply 
have to accept reduced benefits.

If the connection with AIG isn't immediately apparent, then you have to look a 
bit deeper. Folks may recall thatAIG paid out $170m in bonuses 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/15/business/15AIG.html?_r=2&> to its employees 
in March 2009 with its top executives receiving bonuses in the hundreds of 
thousands of dollars.

These were people who not only shared responsibility for driving the company 
into bankruptcy; they also had been at the center of the financial web that 
propelled the housing bubble into ever more dangerous territory. In other 
words, the bonus beneficiaries were among the leading villains in the economic 
disaster that is still inflicting pain across the country.

The prospect of executives of a bailed out company drawing huge bonuses at a 
time when the economy was shedding 600,000 jobs a month provoked outrage across 
the country. President Obama spoke on the issue and said that unfortunately no 
one in his administration was smart enough to find a way that could keep the 
bonuses from being paid. The problem according to Larry Summers, then the head 
of President Obama's National Economic Council, was that the bonuses were 
contractual obligations and they had to be honored.

This provides a striking contrast to what might happen to current and former 
city employees in Chicago and may happen to current and former employers of the 
state of Illinois and Detroit. In these cases, it seems that the contracts 
workers had with their employers may not be honored. Employees who worked 
decades for these governments, with part of their pay taking the form of 
pensions in retirement, are now being told that these governments will not 
follow through on their end of the contract.

The differing treatment of contracts in these situations is striking for 
several reasons. First, the AIG executives stood to gain much more money with 
their bonuses on a per person basis. In contrast to the six-figure bonuses 
going to top executives, pensions for Detroit's workers average just $18,500 a 
year. Pensions for Chicago's workers average over $33,000 a year, but almost 
none of these workers will get Social Security, so this will be their whole 
retirement income.

In contrast to the top AIG executives, who played a role in bankrupting their 
company and sinking the economy, no one has accused workers in Chicago or 
Detroit of doing anything wrong. These were people who taught our kids, put out 
fires, and picked up garbage. They did their jobs.

They also might be excused for thinking that they could count on the 
governments involved to fulfill their end of the contract. After all, both 
Michigan and Illinois have provisions in their constitution stating that 
pensions earned by public sector workers cannot be cut. Since cities like 
Detroit and Chicago are creations of the state governments, workers for these 
cities, like workers for the state government, might have thought the state 
constitution protected their pensions. Apparently they should have hired 
lawyers who could have explained to them why this is not the case.

There is yet another connection between the plans to cut pensions and AIG. The 
bond rating agencies played a prominent role in both cases. In the case of AIG 
meltdown, the bond rating agencies gave investment grade ratings to trillions 
of dollars of mortgage backed securities (MBS). They often gave these ratings 
to dubious issues for the simple reason that they were being paid. As one 
analyst from S&P said in an e-mail, they would rate a new MBS if it "was 
structured by cows 
<http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2008/10/22/rating-agencies-draw-fire-capitol-hill/>
".

The bond rating agencies played a similarly disastrous role in the pension 
problems facing state and local governments. In the stock run-up in the 1990s, 
they green-lighted accounting that essentially assumed that the stock bubble 
would continue in perpetuity, effectively growing without limit. This meant 
that state and local governments didn't have to contribute to their pensions 
since the stock bubble was doing it for them. States like Illinois and cities 
like Chicago clung to this habit even after the bubble burst.

There is one final noteworthy connection between AIG and the Chicago pension 
situation. Chicago's Mayor, Rahm Emanuel, was President Obama's chief of staff 
at the time that no one could figure out how to avoid paying the AIG bonuses. 
Apparently Emanuel has learned more about voiding contractual obligations now 
that it is ordinary workers at other end of the commitment.
 