
When we read a novel, a short story or a work of non-fiction, there is often a 
moment when we have the feeling that we have entered a structure built, 
knowingly or unknowingly, by the writer. I am not talking about the ability to 
picture in our minds the locations or architectural settings described in the 
text, but, rather, the sense of being immersed in a space designed by someone 
else.

At a course called the Laboratory of Literary Architecture 
<http://arts.columbia.edu/laboratory-literary-architecture-workshop-matteo-pericoli>
, which I teach at the Scuola Holden, a creative writing school in Turin, and 
also, this past term, at Columbia University School of the Arts in New York, I 
encourage the students to find – or, rather, extract – and then physically 
build the literary architecture of a text.
 Olivia Tun interprets Concerning the Bodyguard by Donald Barthelme: Three 
sectors of society are represented by three characters in the American 
postmodernist's short story. Tun reinterprets this idea through three 
interdependent skyscrapers, while the inverted framework and exposed 
foundations reflect the narrative's unanswered questions. Photograph: Tony 
Cenicola/Eyevine 
How does it work? Each student brings to class a novel, a story or an essay 
whose inner workings he or she knows intimately. We start with the story, the 
plot, the subject or simply a feeling that the student has about the text. We 
break it down into its most basic elements and analyse the relationship of each 
part to the overall structure, making sure to avoid any literal spatial 
translations of settings, locations, places or architecture.

It is a process of reduction toward a wordless spatial structure. In 
architecture, once you remove the skin – the "language" of walls, roofs and 
slabs – all that remains is sheer space. In writing, once you discard language 
itself, ie words, what's left?

We deal with questions that architects, knowingly or unknowingly, must always 
address: What is space? How does one design and build using space as a 
construction material? How do we perceive space? And how does it affect us?

Once the creative writing students have come up with an idea for their 
structures, they team up with architecture students to construct 3D models. 
Each time I teach the class, this moment has an element of magic: two very 
different disciplines coming together, sharing a language they now both 
understand, knowing exactly where to meet and why. They discuss spatial 
relationships, repetition, reflection, sequence, transparency, tension, pacing, 
chronology and so forth. Any architectural question is answered from a literary 
point of view and any literary issue is addressed by a spatial idea. There is 
no room for arbitrary moves.
 Javier Fuentes interprets The Falls by George Saunders: The paranoia 
experienced by the narrator of Saunders's open-ended short story is reimagined 
by Javier Fuentes in a structure designed to encourage a heightened sense of 
spatial awareness. The base is punctured in the same way that the climactic 
events towards the end of The Falls bring an abrupt end to Saunders's 
stream-of-consciousness narrative, leaving the reader in a state of suspense. 
Photograph: Tony Cenicola/Eyevine 
For someone like me, who trained and has practised as an architect, but has 
spent much of his life drawing, reading and occasionally writing, there is 
great pleasure in watching the writing students, who nervously approached the 
early moments of the course, when paper, cardboard, scissors and pencils sat 
neatly untouched, end up being able to make the tangible out of the intangible 
and mastering highly sophisticated design decisions with liberating fun. For 
students who work in words all the time, being able to think wordlessly about 
literature, at least once, must feel refreshing, revealing and even empowering.

Matteo Pericoli is an architect, teacher, illustrator and author, most 
recently, ofLondon Unfurled 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330517829>
.

The models were all made in the Laboratory of Literary Architecture 
<http://arts.columbia.edu/laboratory-literary-architecture-workshop-matteo-pericoli>
, as part of the Mellon visiting artists and thinkers programme at Columbia 
University School of the Arts.

matteopericoli.com <http://www.matteopericoli.com/> 
 