
The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
have moved to defuse a potentially damaging internal row after Danny Alexander 
said the party would fight the next general election committed to £15bn in 
spending cuts for 2016 and 2017 that had been agreed with the Tories.

In remarks that caused concern to senior Lib Dem colleagues, the chief 
secretary to the Treasury said the parties would set out "well before the next 
general election" how they would deliver the extra savings in the next 
parliament.

Pressure to set out post-election spending plans has been forced on the 
parties by the deteriorating fiscal position set out by George Osborne in his 
autumn statement. The chancellor said lower growth meant a further £15bn of 
cuts would be needed in 2016 and 2017 to eliminate the structural deficit 
within five years.

"As a government we originally set out plans that would meet our targets a 
year early in 2014/15," Alexander said on BBC 2's Newsnight. "But because of 
the way that economic circumstances have deteriorated we need to make this 
commitment for future years, so yes Liberal Democrats andConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> will work together in 
government to set out plans for those following two years and, of course, we 
will both be committed to delivering them.

"We have just decided what the path of spending is in the following two years 
[after the election] and in due course will set out what that means in detail."

Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem deputy leader, questioned the idea that the party 
could be committed to specific spending cuts after 2015. "All governments need 
to make spending plans for the longer term, but any spending plans from the 
government after 2015 can only be provisional and subject to the result of the 
general election," he said.

"The Liberal Democrats will fight the next election on an independent 
manifesto which will be developed through our internal democratic structures, 
and without any collaboration or agreement with other political parties."

It is understood that Alexander's remarks also caused concern among Lib Dem 
cabinet members.

Alexander insisted the two parties would have separate election manifestos but 
his remarks imply they will not simply have the same fiscal objectives, but an 
agreed programme to meet those objectives.

The party said: "At the 2015 election the Liberal Democrats will fight as an 
independent party that delivers economic credibility and greater fairness.

"The coalition government's autumn statement confirmed the spending totals for 
the first two years of the next parliament. We have not as a coalition 
government taken the decisions on the detailed breakdown of spending in these 
years, or even when those decisions will be taken."

A spokesman suggested the two parties might settle a spending review before 
the election setting out how the cuts would be made, but neither party would be 
committed to these spending plans in the election.

The episode shows how the delay in eradicating the deficit makes it more 
difficult for the two parties to disengage before the election.

Asked what was the point of voters backing the Lib Dems, Alexander said: 
"There are a lot of points to vote Liberal Democrat rather than Conservative or 
Labour, but those are things that we will set out at the general election in 
our respective manifestos."

Lord Oakeshott, a Lib Dem peer and ally of the business secretary, Vince 
Cable, questioned Alexander's statement, saying: "The coalition agreement is 
for five years not seven. It is very dangerous for the Liberal Democrats to go 
into the next election tied like a tin can to the tails of the Tories, rather 
than as an independent party capable of forming an alliance with whoever we and 
the electorate choose. In the economic circumstances of the 20s and 30s, the 
Tories proved themselves to be past masters at swallowing up other parties. It 
would be very foolish if we were to make the same mistake again."

Some Lib Dems argue that the two parties would lose credibility with the 
markets if details of spending cuts were withheld, adding that the party at the 
last election attacked Labour for failing to specify what would be cut. The 
current spending review ends months before the 2015 election.
 