
I agree with everything Polly Toynbee said in her article (The injustice is 
breathtaking. Every blow falls on those with less not more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/osborne-class-war-autumn-statement>
, 30 November), but she omitted one important thing – she said nothing about 
the role of the Liberal Democrats.

In my view, the Lib Dems have destroyed themselves as a credible party out of 
greed for power. They have now associated themselves with one of the most 
rightwing Tory parties since Thatcher, which is targeting the poorest and most 
vulnerable people in society.

Services of all sorts that vulnerable people have relied upon are being closed 
wholesale. In my area, for example, there are massive cuts in mental health 
provision whereby it is virtually impossible to get a bed in a psychiatric unit 
or hospital, and many patients are being discharged to GPs' care, denying them 
specialist psychiatric care. This is only one example among many.

The Liberal Democrat party has sold its soul to the devil and will receive 
its judgment from the electorate in due course.
John Lane
London

• As an active Liberal Democrat, I was astounded to hear Danny Alexander MP 
apparently commit the party to supporting a joint economic and fiscal policy 
with the Conservatives beyond the next election (Lib Dem row over party's 
commitment to £15bn spending cuts after next election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/30/liberal-democrats-cuts-danny-alexander?newsfeed=true>
, 1 December 2011).

Apart from the simple fact that the current policy prescriptions have signally 
failed, the chief secretary has sought to bind theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> into an alliance with 
the Tories beyond 2015 and appears to have written the economic objectives of 
the next election manifesto already!

What mandate has he got for this move? Were the democratic bodies of the party 
consulted? Are we on the path to an electoral pact with the Tories? Is that 
what the party wants?
Simon Hebditch
London

• Many Liberal Democrats are dismayed at the way Danny Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander> has signed up to this 
continuation of the utterly predictable failure of George Osborne's economic 
policy and, in doing so, has signed the death warrant of our party.

In order to justify its attack on the welfare state, this government misled 
the electorate into believing that we were in the same boat as Greece when the 
bond markets were not unduly worried about our relatively low national debt, 
that is until unemployment spun out of control as a result of the coalition's 
attack on public sector jobs, and sent the deficit spiralling out of control 
with it.

The comparison with the Greek economy will become a self-fulfilling prophecy 
as we are told to lay down our standard of living for our country, at a time 
when never has so much been owed to so many by so few.
 

Margaret Phelps
Colchester, Essex

• Whilst the move and focus by the coalition to reduce child poverty targets (
Duncan Smith signals change in official child poverty targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/dec/01/child-poverty-target-changes-coalition?newsfeed=true>
, 2 December) is regrettable, it will not mask the effect of how its cuts have 
targeted the poorest in our society. Whether you use a consensual, income or 
subjective method makes no difference to the food on the table. The government 
protests that it is services rather than cash, especially for the under fives, 
that are one of the main determinants of a child's prospects. It cannot have it 
both ways though – it was the coalition that removed the ringfence for Sure 
Start funding, resulting in numerous centres closing.

Indeed it is difficult to find a tangible policy introduced by the coalition 
that aids child poverty, irrespective of how you measure it. Clegg's comments 
that this government would not "balance the books on the backs of the poor" 
ring hollow indeed.
RKM Bridge
Snaith, East Yorkshire

• Why should anyone care what the next Lib Dem manifesto says about future 
spending cuts after the next election? In the light of experience, is there 
anyone who actually believes that what that manifesto says will give any 
reliable indication of what policies the Lib Dems will support once that 
election is over?
Kevin McGrath
Harlow, Essex
 