
Removing suspects' automatic right of appeal against extradition will 
undermine a major safeguard for British citizens facing trial overseas, Liberty 
has warned.

In a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/oct/04/rotten-extradition-law-tahla-case>
, Shami Chakrabarti, director of the civil rights organisation, accuses the 
government of "slipping" the clause into theanti-social behaviour, crime and 
policing bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2013-14/antisocialbehaviourcrimeandpolicingbill.html>
.

Her letter highlights the case of Talha Ahsan, a British poet and translator 
who was extradited to the United States a year ago today on charges of 
supporting terrorism through a pro-jihadi website he is alleged to have 
operated.

Ahsan is awaiting trial in a supermax state prison in Connecticut. He is said 
to have Aspergers Syndrome and fought a six-year legal battle against 
extradition. His supporters point out that the evidence against him was never 
examined in detail by the British courts.

The letter is also signed by Ahsan's brother, Hamja. "There's been much 
promise of extradition reform from politicians of all stripes, but little 
change," it states. "As Talha's ordeal shows, removal can still be ordered 
without a basic case being made in a UK court – even where the alleged activity 
took place.

"Worse still, the government now seeks to dilute existing protections; 
slipping a clause into the anti-social behaviour, crime and policing bill which 
would scrap the automatic right of appeal altogether.

"Talha ... has already been sent halfway across the world, separated from his 
loved ones, imprisoned pre-trial and forced to navigate a completely alien 
legal landscape. This is punishment in itself, irrespective of the end result."

The government's bill slightly relaxes the tight deadlines for lodging an 
appeal against extradition. In return, however, it removes the automatic right 
of appeal against removal. In future the high court will have discretion to 
decide whether an appeal should be heard.

"People like Gary McKinnon [the computer hacker whose extradition to the US 
was eventually blocked] would not have been given leave to appeal," a Liberty 
spokesperson added.

"The Home Office is giving with one hand but taking with the other. Removing 
the automatic right of appeal undermines all the other safeguards.

"Potentially, a very strict test for granting permission could be developed, 
which could have the effect of depriving the majority of individuals of the 
chance to challenge the initial decision to extradite them."

A Home Office spokesperson said: "The proposed filter is aimed at stopping 
individuals using appeals to delay and frustrate the extradition process while 
still allowing those with a genuine case to be heard.

"Our reforms will make the UK's extradition arrangements more open and 
transparent and provide greater safeguards for individuals. It is in the 
overwhelming public interest that our extradition arrangements function 
properly, are effective and efficient."
 