
Liberal and Labor premiers have declared war on the federal government’s $80bn 
in hospital and school funding cuts, pleading with the nation to rise up in 
resistance against cutbacks that will result in thousands fewer teachers and 
hospital beds.


The premiers accused the prime minister, Tony Abbott, of getting his facts 
completely wrong, after he said of the funding cuts on Sunday: “We’ve got an 
enormous amount of time to sit down and work things out … we’re not talking 
about next week, or next month, or even next year.”


The premiers said the federal government’s unilateral termination of scores of 
national partnership agreements would have a massive immediate impact on state 
services – including 1,200 hospital beds and $300m in concessions to pensioners 
and the elderly, starting from 1 July. They demanded an immediate Council of 
Australian Governments (COAG) meeting with the prime minister to “sort this 
mess out”.


A spokeswoman for the prime minister rejected the premiers' demand, saying 
there would be no special COAG before the next scheduled meeting in September. 
The prime minister had already had private conversations with most of the 
premiers, she said.


And the premiers flatly rejected the federal government’s suggestion that they 
should figure out how to raise taxes to meet the shortfall, including possibly 
asking for an increase in the goods and services tax.


The Queensland premier, Campbell Newman, said he knew the “federal government 
wants us to talk about tax increases” but he rejected the strategy, saying: 
“Sorry, we aren’t going there … the federal government should look at their own 
inefficiencies and waste … instead of passing $80bn of problems to the states.”


Newman called on voters to lobby the federal government to defeat the cuts and 
said he had already been lobbying Queensland federal MPs to resist the cutbacks 
from within the Coalition.


“I would like people to pick up the phone and call your local LNP [Liberal 
National Party] member and tell them you’re concerned about this … I’ve been 
ringing and giving a few people an earful because that is how serious this is, 
and there are federal members who understand how serious this is,” he said.


The South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill, said he would be lobbying 
senators to take up their traditional constitutional role as representatives of 
the states to reject the cuts.


The revolt by the premiers came as thousands of Australians rallied in Sydney, 
Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth to protest against the budget, and a 
reinvigorated Labor party began a television advertising campaign about how 
ordinary Australians would “pay” for Abbott’s “lies”.


The NSW premier, Mike Baird, said the budget had created “a mess” by trying to 
pass an $80bn spending cut to the states.


“In simple terms, the cuts that have been put forward we cannot absorb. We can 
give no clearer message to Canberra: we cannot absorb these cuts; these cuts 
have an immediate impact – over a thousand hospital beds nationally are 
impacted by the decisions on health, and this cannot be allowed to proceed,” 
Baird said.


The Victorian premier, Denis Napthine, said the terminated agreements between 
the federal and state governments would cost Victoria about $200m from 1 July, 
on top of the impact of the $80bn cuts in the longer term.


“These are simply unaffordable and unsustainable, and those who will be 
affected are ordinary Australian families,” Napthine said.


Newman also rejected the idea that the cuts would not affect the states for 
some time. He listed scores of organisations that would immediately lose 
federal funding – from the diabetes association, to the heart foundation and 
the association of tuckshops. He also cited pensioner concessions, aged-care 
concessions and local government funding, which he said would inevitably result 
in an increase in rates.


Baird said the long-term impact of the budget cuts was untenable, reducing 
federal hospital funding from 40% to only 14%.


Wetherill saud: “We are all standing here saying no … we will be campaigning 
around this. We have a Senate, it’s a states’ house. We’ll be asking them to 
exercise their responsibilities … because this is unacceptable ...Tony Abbott 
has united the nation against these cuts.”


The newly elected Tasmanian premier, Will Hodgman, said: “What we are seeing 
is something that is untenable and unsustainable.”


Labor is attacking the government’s broken pre-election promises. The 
opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said: “I understand that the prime minister 
said specifically today when it was put to him ... didn't you promise no tax 
increases, no changes to health and education? What the prime minister said 
today, I understand, is ... ‘people hear different things’.


“What a cheeky, presumptuous statement by the prime minister of Australia. It 
is true people heard Tony Abbott say one thing before an election and another 
thing after an election. But, prime minister, Australians know a lie when they 
hear one, and you have been the national championship liar of election promises 
and Australians aren’t going to forget anytime soon, no matter how many weasel 
words you come up with.”

 