
Professor Stephen McNair has spent half a lifetime's research proving it's 
better to be happy than rich – a state some say is best achieved through 
lifelong learning. Now, at last, the government has latched on to the idea and 
David Cameron is planning a happiness index as a measure of success.

McNair, a semi-retired National Institute of Adult Continuing Education 
research fellow, says that in all the guidance about wellbeing, education is 
central. "[It is] particularly important for those in the latter stages of life 
when one is less mobile and having to cope with the death of partners and 
friends: getting out of bed and feeling one has a purpose can be particularly 
challenging."

This is clearly not an issue for 84-year-old Jim Kelly, winner of an Adult 
Learners' Week award in 2010, who has in recent years dedicated himself to a 
wide range of study – everything from gardening to the 1688 "glorious 
revolution". After school days blighted by poverty and bullying teachers, the 
impetus to study came from his granddaughter Becky who, as a two-year-old, grew 
frustrated with his inability to answer her questions. "Don't you know anything 
grandad?" she would ask. Now, 14 years later, he tells the teenager he's 
pleased she asked that question.

Evidence of the benefits of learning during the latter stages of life is 
overwhelming, from research by the Alzheimer's Society showing delayed onset of 
the disease, to reduced dependency on welfare support.

Melissa March is executive director of Learning for the Fourth Age, a charity 
dedicated to bringing trained volunteers into care settings where they work 
with residents. "Our volunteers help people with everything from recovering 
piano-playing after strokes to wanting to tackle Welsh for the first time," she 
explains. "There is lots of interest too in IT and the connections that email 
can bring. Our work helps break down older people's fears about young people 
and opens our volunteers' eyes to the lives of older people with very different 
experiences from their own."

Such improvements bring genuine happiness, as 78-year-old Londoner Maria Tolly 
found. In 1989, health problems spelled an end to her career as a professional 
guitarist, until specialist music technology courses at Morley College and the 
City Lit restored her commitment to making music. "I was concerned that I might 
be sidelined," she recalls, "but actually studying at both institutions has 
proved that age is immaterial – I feel so connected to life thanks to a 
combination of forgetting myself and realising how much I still have to learn." 
Soon she had music commissions ranging from after-school dance groups to 
composing a song for the 100th anniversary of her local park. "I am now 
becoming interested in music videos and I am looking for collaborators."

John Salinas, at 91, is also embracing IT. Each week he drives to his 
computing class and has progressed rapidly from not even knowing how to plug in 
his laptop, to using digital photography.

"John is an inspiration in the learning group of over-60s participants by 
being an example of someone committed to learn, and not letting age or 
knowledge be a barrier to 'getting digital'," says Iona Gibbons, a community 
learning development worker with Bath and North East Somerset county council.

Sharing with friends


For John, the benefits of lifelong learning are clear – the weekly classes 
have given him a new zest for life. "I want to remain active in myself for my 
own health but also access all the information that is on computers, to benefit 
from community opportunities and to meet other people who are in the same boat 
as me," he says. "I see my computer learning as now firmly part of my life and 
can share what I learn with my family and show them what I can do."

For 84-year-old Len Street, a committed contributor to the University of the 
Third Age (U3A) since its creation 19 years ago, it is the companionship while 
learning that leads to a healthier life. He currently runs opera and 
art-history study groups. "When people leave work it is often the company of 
others they miss most – education in older age can be a lifesaver."

The value of learning is no exaggeration, says Fiona Aldridge, Niace programme 
director and author of a recent report into lifelong learning in care settings. 
"The benefits of ensuring that ongoing learning is a part of a care package is 
hard to deny when one learns of some of the best practice in this area. It has 
significant benefits in terms of improving people's mental health and reducing 
their reliance on medication."
 