
Bill and Rosemary Marshall, near Worcester

My wife and I had recently retired and I chanced upon this building on the 
internet. I remember calling my wife over and saying: "Look, it's a shed 
in a field."

The place was called "Cobtun" – "cob" is a primitive but strong building 
material made of clay, straw, water and earth, and "tun" is the old Saxon word 
for a dwelling. It was built in 2001 by Birmingham's Associated Architects. The 
design brief was just nine words long: "Humour, mystery, fantasy, ecological, 
sustainable, independent, contextual, agricultural, invisible."

The cob wall is 2ft thick and 15ft high, and it has been designed to look even 
thicker than that. I think the original name for it was "Mycenaean wall", and 
there's definitely something of a buttress to it. It curves around the house, 
encloses the flower garden and even makes up some of the inside walls. One of 
the bedrooms has an earth wall, which is surprisingly nice to the touch: very 
hard, very tactile; a bit like a piece of Japanese pottery. It doesn't smell, 
and apart from a couple of spiders, we haven't had any surprise visitors. The 
rest of the house is very modern: lots of oak-clad timber with a crisp finish.

It definitely has a cheeky sense of humour. Rather unusually, it's a house 
with 25 sides – and that excludes the annex outside. We had an old corner 
cabinet that we wanted to bring into our new home, but we soon realised that 
there was only one 90-degree corner in the whole house.

Cobtun won the 2005 Riba sustainability award. The oak is from Hertfordshire, 
the wall is made with mud from the meadow, and the cob's stone footing was 
sourced from the Forest of Dean. The roof is made of corrugated aluminium, with 
solar tubes for heating water on top. There are lots of dark concrete surfaces 
inside the house, which store heat from the sun and save us using the 
radiators. There's a utility room within the cob wall with pulleys for drying 
clothes – the cob absorbs the moisture in the atmosphere, so there's no need 
for a tumble dryer. I'd be lying if I said I used to care much about being 
energy efficient. But this house has changed the way we think.
 