
A Very Long Engagement
 (135 mins, 15)
 Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet; starring Audrey Tautou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audrey-tautou>, Gaspard Ulliel, André 
Dussollier, Marion Cotillard, Denis Lavant, Jodie Foster

Unlike the Second World War, during which the British and American film 
industries created the war movie as an entertainment genre, the First World 
War, or as some of us persist in calling it, the Great War, has traditionally 
been a sombre affair in the cinema.

The few exceptions are pictures about aerial combat. The two most memorable 
recent films on the 1914-18 conflict are Stanley Kubrick's Paths of Glory, 
about the callous execution of French soldiers 'to encourage the others', and 
Bertrand Tavernier's La Vie et rien d'autre, in which a French widow confronts 
bureaucratic obfuscation and official hypocrisy as she searches for evidence of 
her husband's death on the Western Front.

Jean-Pierre Jeunet, a film-maker best known hitherto for whimsy and surreal 
tricksiness, has combined elements of both these films in his outstanding A 
Very Long Engagement. Audrey Tautou, star of Jeunet's Amélie, plays Matilde, a 
young Breton orphan determined to discover whether her lover and childhood 
sweetheart, 19-year-old infantryman, Manech (Gaspard Ulliel), actually died 
after being sentenced to death for self-mutilation in 1917.

The movie is based on a novel by Sébastien Japrisot, a writer best known for 
his thrillers (Costa-Gavras's The Sleeping Car Murder is based on a book of 
his) and, in fact, this is a detective story. This is not in itself entirely 
new. In the years after the Second World War, there were a number of thrillers 
that turned on mysterious wartime incidents being investigated in the postwar 
world - Fred Zinnemann's Act of Violence, for instance, and, in a more 
lighthearted vein, Stanley Donen's Charade. But A Very Long Engagement is 
altogether more complicated than these and its meaning goes to the heart of the 
conduct of the war.

Working from the small farmhouse of her kindly adoptive parents on the coast 
of Brittany, Mathilde, who walks with a limp due to childhood polio, sets about 
her task with great vigour, and Jeunet uses Tautou's winsome good looks as an 
innocent mask for her steely determination. She first establishes that Manech 
was one of five poilus sentenced to death for self-mutilation - the others were 
a socialist welder, a Corsican petty criminal, a carpenter and a farmer from 
the Dordogne - and in flashbacks we see the self-inflicted wounds, one of them 
an accidental bullet through the hand that occurs while beating off rats in the 
trenches with the butt of a pistol.

Advertising in the press, securing the services of a colourful Parisian 
private detective (lovely performance from Ticky Holgado), forcing a lawyer 
friend of her late father's to help by pretending to be confined to a 
wheelchair, Mathilde pursues lead after lead. A succession of witnesses 
provides background information as to what happened on the fatal day at Bingo 
Crépuscule, the section of trenches from which the condemned men were forced 
unarmed over the top to face enemy fire in no-man's-land. This cruel and 
unusual form of punishment was dreamt up, it is said, by Marshal Pétain himself.

Through this accumulation of evidence, Mathilde puts together a jigsaw that 
for her solves the problem of what happened to her lover. In a larger way, for 
us, the audience, this carefully assembled puzzle recreates a world of military 
and political madness into which thousands of innocent people were drawn to be 
killed, maimed or mentally impaired.

Meanwhile, as she goes about her task, there is an angel of death conducting a 
parallel mission, exacting a deadly revenge on the officers she holds 
responsible for her lover's humiliating death. One of them she dispatches in a 
brothel, leaving him tied to the bed, his naked body pierced by shards of glass 
from the mirrored ceiling.

It's a remarkably rich movie, full of detail, and it grips and entertains like 
a detective story while never losing sight of the horrors of war. The sequences 
of artillery bombardment of the trenches and of soldiers being mown down by 
machine-gun fire are among the most terrifying and viscerally affecting ever 
filmed.

There is an astonishing visual set piece in a vast barrage balloon hangar 
being used as an emergency hospital. During a German aerial assault, a tethered 
balloon breaks loose and moves slowly upwards towards an unexploded bomb lodged 
in the roof.

Jeunet, his cinematographer Bruno Delbonnel and his production designer Aline 
Bonetto have created distinct visual styles for the various areas and time 
periods. Brittany and the French countryside are bathed in an idyllic golden 
glow, all primary colours have been virtually drained from the trenches and 
battlefields, while the bustling streets of Paris, most notably the 
re-creations of the vegetable market at Les Halles and the traffic in the Place 
de l'Opéra, are given the look of tinted postcards. Altogether a very 
satisfying movie, though some may find the end a trifle abrupt.
 