
Q My husband says I should wear more colour, but I feel confident in darker 
clothing. We're going on holiday and I would love to surprise him! Any advice?
Pam

A Well, I'd advise being yourself, and only add colour if you want to. There's 
nothing worse than being bullied into a look, nothing undermines your 
confidence more. If you really want to brighten your wardrobe, start slowly or 
you'll end up feeling like Su Pollard. There are so many prints and bright 
colours around this summer it's a good time to experiment. To begin, limit 
bright hues to separates and accessories, just choose one, and work from there. 
Marks & Spencer has a fab navy, very fine knitted tunic top with a bright pink 
and orange striped trim (£39.50). It will look great over cut-off trousers and 
it's an easy way to introduce a splash of colour to an outfit, especially with 
'va-va-voom' pink sandals. Try this on your holiday - but more importantly, 
have a really good time.

Q I need last-minute help! A friend has just decided to get married. She's 
asked me and two friends to be bridesmaids. We're in our late twenties, two of 
us are a size 12 and one size 14; our budget is £150 each. Please advise!
Jenny

A Round up the bridesmaids and go out together. Have a look at Debenhams' 
Debut wedding collection. There's a wide selection, so you can try a variety of 
styles and shapes. Check out Monsoon, too, for its pretty dresses. If your 
budget could stretch to £160, try the Alexia dress: strapless, empire-line, 
with an embroidered bodice. But my first port of call would be Coast. They 
always have a great selection, and this season they've excelled at prom-style 
dresses in taffeta and satin, as well as their bridesmaids' line. There are 
beautiful colours from plum to teal, and various lengths. They also offer a 
Coast By Appointment service, where brides and their parties can book a VIP 
room and try on dresses with matching accessories. A bonus: the fitting rooms 
have 360-degree mirrors. And they can recommend a seamstress if adjustments are 
needed. Call 020 7287 9538;coast-stores.com <http://www.coast-stores.com>.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 