
From a British diplomatic point of view, the Litvinenko affair has long been 
viewed as murky water under the bridge. Punishments had already been meted out 
in 2006 and no one in British government circles needed a high court judge to 
convince them thatAlexander Litvinenko’s murder might have happened with 
Vladimir Putin’s knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
.

The British government did not want Sir Robert Owen’s inquiry to be 
established in the first place and would certainly never have wanted its 
explosive findings, implicating the Russian president, to be published at a 
such an excruciatingly sensitive time. As brutal as it may sound, Syria, 
Ukraine and the state of the world economy all take priority over a decade-old 
death.

Marina Litvinenko: 'You can silence one person but not the whole world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/marina-litvinenko-alexander-murder-inquiry-report>
As a result, the severity of Theresa May’s rhetoric in the Commons on Monday 
was not matched by equally strong action. The aim is to contain the argument 
and hope thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> – which has 
plenty of its own problems, not least the rouble hitting all-time lows – will 
take a similar view.

For now, Britain and the west find themselves cast in the role of Russia’s 
supplicant. Putin’s unexpected military intervention in Syria in September has 
transformed the political and military balance in the country. The west, 
probably more than Russia, wants the UN peace talks due to start in Geneva on 
Monday to go ahead.

Indeed there is probably no higher public policy priority in any western 
capital than these talks. An end to the Syrian civil war would not only end 
untold suffering but also relax the migratory pressures that are threatening 
the future of the EU and deal a blow to the Islamic State terror group which 
flourishes amid the chaos.

A huge amount has been invested in preparing for these talks, but the 
invitations have yet to be sent out by the UN. An agreement on the agenda, the 
composition of the opposition delegation and any preconditions that need to be 
met before the talks can start is proving elusive. Russia, as the sponsor of 
Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, holds the key, and at the moment it is 
insisting on certain groups being present among the opposition, much to the 
consternation of Turkey, France and the US who say Moscow is trying to overturn 
an agreed process.

The fear is that Russia does not feel truly invested in the peace talks 
because it feels it is winning in Syria on the ground and in the air. Ian Bond, 
director of foreign policy at the Centre for European reform, argues: “Putin is 
trying to trying to clear the middle ground. The aim is clear everyone off the 
battle field, save Daesh [another term for Isis] and Assad, and he can then 
say, ‘Assad may be up to his neck in blood but he is not going to come after 
you in your cities.’”

Putin's disturbing message for the west: your rules don't apply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-vladimir-putin-russian-exceptionalism>
Bond adds: “Putin is trying to show the west he may not be able to solve the 
Syria crisis, but he can still make it worse for the west.” Recent UNHCR 
refugee flows show that since the Russians began their bombing campaign, the 
numbers moving from the targeted areas are rising sharply.

Bond argues “the collateral damage to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of the migration crisis may not 
have been part of Russia’s original intentions but it is certainly quite 
welcome”. At the same time, Putin is making it harder for the coalition to 
launch independent operations by introducing a lot more anti-aircraft systems 
in Syria.

The British view is that, with existing sanctions against Russia over Ukraine 
retaining only fragile support in the EU, this is not the time to open another 
front.

But one suspects David Cameron has learned a painful lesson. At the outset of 
his premiership, he believed he had struck a strong personal relationship with 
Putin. There was a belief Putin was not loyal to Assad. Now there is nothing 
but disillusionment.

The prime minister is aware of the scale of Russian cybercrime, feels he was 
personally lied to over Ukraine and sees Putin’s defence of Assad as 
destructive. In future he promises he will treat Putin only with “clear eyes 
and a cold heart”.
 