
Litvinenko 'probably murdered on personal orders of Putin'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
Sir Robert Owen’s languid upper-class vowels and baggy London clubland suit 
don’t capture the indefatigable essence of the man. He represents the best of 
the British tradition of the rule of law. His report into the circumstances of 
the death ofAlexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> released last week is 
a classic of the genre – scrupulously evidence-based, impartial and judicious. 
It is what a rule-of-law society should produce.

Litvinenko, Owen judged, was murdered in London by the Russian government 
because, as an ex-KGB agent, and later of FSB (the KGB’s successor), he had 
become an influential, vocal and effective opponent of a profoundly corrupt 
state security structure. A book by Litvinenko –Lubyanka Criminal Group 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lubyanka_Criminal_Group> – presented evidence 
that the Russian security service is deeply entwined with organised crime, both 
in Russia and elsewhere in Europe, including with the mafia. In a second, if 
less convincing, book he claimed that the Russian services colluded in blowing 
up apartment blocks and blamed Chechen terrorists.

After fleeing Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in 2000, 
Litvinenko had gone on to help not just Britain’s MI6, but the Spanish and 
Italian security services in unmasking FSB involvement in criminal activity.

But it was only after Russia’s passing of the 2006 Extremism Law, justifying 
extra-territorial killings of Russians making allegedly libellous statements 
about the government, that Vladimir Putin was able to hit back at a man who, 
days before he was poisoned, had accused him of being both a paedophile and the 
man behind theassassination of the journalist Anna Politkovskya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/26/anna-politkovskaya-moscow-murder>
.

Owen is judicious. The polonium-210 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-33717184>
 that poisoned Litvinenko could only come from a state nuclear reactor and 
could only be given to the FSB with the go-ahead of Putin or his circle.So 
strong is the back-covering culture within the FSB that the director would only 
give the go-ahead for his arms-length operatives to kill Litvinenko with 
Putin’s backing. The need to get rid of Litvinenko was acute. But unable to 
interview either of the two men who travelled to London allegedly to murder 
their quarry, Owen can arrive at only a qualified conclusion: “The FSB 
operation to kill Mr Litvinenko was probably approved by… President Putin.”

The events are horrifying enough – any Londoner could have been harmed – but 
perhaps even more telling is the window it provides into today’s Russia. This 
is a world of routine contract killings, always deniable because they are 
delivered at arm’s length, by a state security service intertwined with 
clandestine gangsters.

The KGB was the security wing of the Soviet Communist party. The FSB is 
Putin’s personalised security wing. Its job is to wreck the reputations – and 
even kill – all those who challenge the regime. Not even China mandates the 
killing of its nationals anywhere in the world if they say something that 
President Xi Jinping considers libellous. This is the law not even of a 
communist dictatorship, but of a tsar. The reaction to Litvinenko’s death in 
Moscow was carelessly gleeful: a traitor had received his just comeuppance.

Mainstream Toryism … is more Putinesque that it cares to admit and our civil 
society can be as vulnerable as Russia’s

Owen’s brief biographies of the key actors in the drama are also telling; they 
are fierce Russian nationalists passionate to avenge what they portray as 
cumulative slights from the west. Concepts such as the rule of law, checked and 
balanced government, democracy and an autonomous, self-governing civil society 
are western viruses that will only contaminate the homeland and its capacity to 
do what it needs to extend Russia’s proper place in the world. In this climate, 
the FSB works with any tool to hand.

The rule of law – impartial judgments that can be referred to independent 
higher courts based on the balance of evidence around clear jurisprudential 
principles and deliberatively legislated democratic law – is the cornerstone 
not merely of liberty, but of prosperity and our civilisation. Britain is 
blessed because it is a rule-of-law society. Russia, for all its military power 
and abundant resources, is damned because it is not.

The growing evidence is that economies such as Russia’s or China’s can use 
command-and-control mechanisms to grow into middle-income per head countries. 
But to become high-income per capita countries is infinitely harder. All the 
energies of civil society and workforces have to be harnessed to create great 
self-standing organisations. These, by developing their own purpose and 
cultures, can marshal the immense amounts of information that are at the core 
of the modern economy – and then produce at scale.

Russia can use command-and-control economics to create a Gazprom. It can never 
create a Google, an Apple, a BBC, a Siemens or even the Anglo-Saxon rock’n’roll 
culture. For that, it would need the rule of law and all the open democratic 
structures that support it.

Yet, we can’t be complacent: current British political culture is very feeble 
on the rule of law. There was a Litvinenko inquiry only because the government 
lost a high court case opposing it, fearing the international ramifications 
(giving offence to Russia). Its response has been beneath feeble. But then with 
honourable exceptions – Michael Gove, Dominic Grieve, Ken Clarke – today’s 
mainstream conservatism is more interested in entrenching permanent Tory 
dominance of the House of Common than in acknowledging the crucial role of 
checks and balances in upholding a rule-of-law society.

It will neuter the second chamber, write European courts out of any role in 
the British legal system, gerrymander the number of seats in the Commons, make 
Scottish MPs second class and emasculate the BBC. In its aims to Torify 
Britain, it is more Putinesque than it cares to acknowledge – and British civil 
society can be vulnerable just like Russia’s.

Meanwhile, Labour has no firmer grip – New Labour flouted international law to 
invade Iraq and its Corbynite successors share a Putinesque worldview that the 
pernicious west is the source of all evil. For Corbyn, the rule of law is an 
ideological concept, the handmaiden of capitalism, and liberation movements 
worldwide are right to distrust it in their struggle against western 
imperialism or its surrogates. To possess military power capable of defending 
us and other rule-of law societies is wrong as a matter of principle. Putin’s 
gangsters and contract killers can be trusted never to threaten us; Trident is 
an expensive bauble.

Alexander Litvinenko, dying in agony, left a last letter cursing Putin and 
declaring his pride in becoming a British citizen – because of what Britain 
stands for. Sir Robert Owen has done more than uncover the truth. He has 
offered a fierce reminder of the importance of the rule of law. Let’s hope it 
is heeded across our political culture.
 