
10.14pm: After six hours of testimony, we're getting much heat and little 
light. The Toyota men have said what they've come to say, so I'm going to sign 
off rather than document more grandstanding by the finest in Congress.
To summarise: Mr Toyoda is very, very sorry about Toyota's faulty accelerator 
pedals. He doesn't know exactly whenToyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> found out about the problem but 
he didn't learn about them personally until late 2009.
His heart goes out to the relatives of those killed or injured, although he's 
not going to commit to paying their healthcare or funeral costs. And Toyota's 
slow response, Toyoda says, is largely down to its overly rapid growth in 
recent years which has taken the focus off safety.
Toyoda will do his best to improve things next time by setting up a special 
safety committee, headed by himself. Oh, and don't try to make him answer 
questions with a 'yes' or a 'no'. He's not going to play that game.

10.06pm: Is somebody going to try to pin Toyoda down?
John Duncan (R-Tennessee), has a go: "I don't believe I've heard a good answer 
as to why it took your company so long to respond to these complaints."
A long monologue from Toyoda, who basically just says he's set up a committee 
to ensure that Toyota's speed of response will be better next time.

10.01pm: Cuellar wants to know in what way Toyota has failed to live up to its 
own high standards.
Toyoda doesn't bother answering, chooses to waffle instead: "Above anything 
else, we'll make a double commitment with new vigour to make safety and 
customer first permeate throughout every Toyota business."
He adds that Toyota will try to be more transparent.

9.56pm: A chummy tone from Henry Cuellar (D-Texas), who has a Toyota factory 
in his San Antonio district. He opens by saying: "Konichiwa."

9.44pm: When did Toyota first learn it had a problem with unintended 
acceleration, asks Danny Davis (R-Illinois). Why did it take so long for Toyota 
to bring the problem to the attention of regulators?
Another lengthy, uninformative answer from Toyoda, who's pretty good at 
waffling: "In the name of our company's tradition and pride, I can clearly say 
that whenever a problem arises, Toyota pursues the facts thoroughly and 
rigorously and looks into those matters in great detail. In doing so, our 
fundamental approach and stance is to give the highest priority to customers' 
safety and convenience....we provide and create products that satisfy the 
mandate of the times - in conserving the environment and in existing in harmony 
with nature....I do not know when we learned about this problem. But I do hope 
you understand the basic attitude of the company that I described."
That settles that, then.

9.38pm: We're really hearing very little from Toyota's head honcho, Akio Toyoda
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/akio-toyoda>. He's leaving his US chief 
to answer virtually all the questions. Toyoda is keeping his head down and when 
he does talk, it's in long, bland monologues of corporate-speak.
Toyoda's just informed us that he treasures Toyota's corporate culture very 
highly and that its values are spread throughout the world. Not very 
enlightening.

9.35pm: "Frankly it's refreshing to see corporate executives show remorse", 
says Jeff Fortenberry (R-Nebraska). He wants to know if Toyota's corporate 
culture is different in the US from in Japan.
Inaba (the Toyota US chief) says he's been surprised at how similar corporate 
cultures are in America andJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, but 
says there are sometimes communication problems because of the language barrier.

9.32pm: The Toyota guys are asked how confident they are that electronics 
isn't the cause of sticky accelerator pedals.
Inaba: "My level of confidence is 100%. I have full trust in Toyota's 
engineers."

9.18pm: The Ohio Democrat Dennis Kucinich has a crack, and he's taking no 
prisoners: "We've heard Mr Toyoda say that Toyota grew to fast. It's 
interesting we're being told that as we investigate cars accelerating out of 
control. It's ironic. The problem wasn't that you were moving too fast but 
moving too slow - too slow to recognise the material defects that were putting 
peoples' lives at risk."

9.13pm: Chaffetz is asking some sticky questions about an internal Toyota 
briefing document that's critical of the US auto safety agency, NHTSA. The 
document says the agency is more focused on "legal" than "engineering" issues.
Rather neatly ducking this question, Toyoda says he doesn't understand the 
document because it's in English, rather than Japanese.

9.08pm: Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah) wonders if Toyota feels it's being treated as 
fairly as an American carmaker would have been by the US government.
"Yes, I believe so," replies Toyoda.

9.01pm: Meanwhile, in other news on the motor industry front - General Motors 
has just announced 
<http://media.gm.com/content/media/us/en/news/news_detail.brand_gm.html/content/Pages/news/us/en/2010/Feb/0224_hummer>
 that it is shutting down the gas-guzzling Hummer brand after a sale to China's 
Sichuan Tengzhong. Bye bye, polluting Hummer.

8.45pm: Carolyn Maloney (D-New York) wants to know if Toyota will assume the 
medical/funeral costs of the Americans who died as a result of accidents 
involving faulty vehicles?
Toyoda says he feels very sorry for those who were killed. Toyota's making 
every effort to make sure accidents aren't repeated.
Maloney: "You didn't answer the question."
Toyota's US chief, Inaba, interjects to say the cases are subject to 
litigation so they'll leave the question up to their legal counsel.

8.35pm: Gerald Connolly (D-Virginia) is puzzled by Toyoda's timeline. The US 
safety regulator, NHTSA, sent a team to Tokyo earlier in 09 to discuss the 
accelerator problem.
Toyoda says a specific team in Toyota's safety unit dealt with NHTS. He knew 
there was a meeting but he wasn't aware of the details.
Connolly says that's "extraordinary compartmentalisation".

8.32pm: Toyoda first became aware of problems with accelerators "sometime 
toward the end of last year". But he can't be sure when the company was first 
made aware, as he was only appointed president in July. He wasn't privvy to 
that sort of information before he got the top job.

8.26pm: Stoical defence from Inaba, who says the document talking about a 
"saving" of $100m in limiting a vehicle recall was produced only a few days 
after his appointment as US chief executive. He was still on an orientation 
tour.
Mica: "Do you realise the people who've been let down? Me, the people who go 
to work every day in my district in Toyota operations and sales."
Toyota's US boss says he doesn't recall the meeting where this was discussed 
and it was totally inconsistent with Toyota's guiding principles.

8.23pm: John Mica (R-Florida) is going in with both feet - he says it's a very 
embarrassing day for Toyota to have the grandson of its founder up before 
Congress.
"I'm embarrassed for you sir. I'm embarrassed for my dealers who I've talked 
to. I'm embarrassed for thousands of hard-working Americans who work in more 
than 10 plants across the United States."
He says it's "appalling" that Toyota boasted in internal documentsof saving 
$100m by restricting a recall of vehicles.
"This discredits everyone," booms Mica.

8.19pm: Toyoda: "I sincerely regret that some people actually encountered 
accidents in Toyota vehicles."
Toyota has made every effort to reproduce and duplicate these accidents, he 
says. But in all these re-enactments, no electronic problems have been found 
with vehicles' throttles.

8.17pm: "It's one thing to say your sorry", says Elijah Cummings (D-Maryland). 
But he's not impressed. He says Americans have been spending their hard-earned 
dollars on Toyotas in a tough economic time. "How do you say to them we can 
trust you now when it seems as if there's no end to this series of promises 
that seem to come short of reaching the goal of safety?"

8.12pm: Dan Burton (R-Indiana) is waving pedals around again. He's got one 
manufactured in Japan and one made by an Indiana company, CTS. Why does Toyota 
put different spec pedals in the same model of car?
Toyoda gives a very, very long answer which is clearly testing the 
congressman's patience. The essence: a car consists of 20,000 to 30,000 parts. 
Suppliers design the pedals, Toyota approves these designs. Sometimes Toyota 
approves more than one design. Toyota doesn't want to be wholly dependent on 
one supplier.

8.06pm: Kanjorski gets tough - Americans grew up in an atmosphere of a great 
deal of faith that something stamped "made in Japan" has a good deal of quality 
- Toyota has damaged that and will be called on to pay compensation for that, 
via the US legal process.

8.03pm: Toyoda: "Our speed of expansion outpaced our development and training 
of people working for us and right now I'm fully aware of that."
He says he's set up a new reporting structure of regional executives since 
taking the top job in June so that customers' complaints can be swiftly 
communicated to head office.

8.01pm: Paul Kanjorski (D-Pennsyvania) tries to get chummy, tells Toyoda that 
when he returns to Japan he'll be able to brag about withstanding a quizzing by 
Congress, considered a badge of courage in the US. But as everything needs 
translating, there's no immediate response. This is going to be a slow and 
frustrating process for the gentlemen of Congress.

7.58pm: Toyoda says Toyota will be setting up a special committee on global 
quality, which will be headed by himself. First meeting to be held on March 
30th.

7.48pm: Towns says he wants yes or no answers. Toyoda isn't playing by the 
rules, though - another long speech in Japanese.
"I'm trying to find out, is that a yes or no," barks Towns before Toyoda's 
answer can be translated.

7.46pm: There are 4 categories of unexpected acceleration, says Toyoda, in 
rather scholarly fashion - problems with electronic throttles, the way the 
vehicle's used, the structure of the car and the structure of the parts.
He's going into a long explanation of fuel supply. Towns tries to interrupt 
but Toyoda isn't playing ball - he's planning to press on, through an 
interpreter, at his own glacial pace.

7.40pm: A softball to start off. Edolphus Towns wants to know - have you told 
US regulators everything you know about sudden accelerator problems?
Toyoda, through an interpreter, says: "According to my understanding, we fully 
shared the information we have with the authorities."

7.36pm: By the way, if anyone wonders why the company's called Toyota and the 
grandson of its founder is called Toyoda, theDetroit News has the answer 
<http://detnews.com/article/20100224/AUTO01/2240405/Lucky-number-reason-for-Toyota-spelling-change>
. It's to do with the number of the number of brush strokes required to write 
the name - Toyota requires eight, which is apparently a luckier number than the 
ten required for the family name.

7.33pm: He pledges to tighten the focus on quality, not quantity. And all 
senior management will be required to drive Toyota vehicles and check where the 
problems lie. He gives a "personal commitment" to fix the problem and put 
customers first.
Toyada finishes and now Yoshimi Inaba, president of Toyota Motor North 
America, is making some opening remarks.

7.29pm: As per his script, Toyoda says he believes Toyota may have expanded 
too fast - and that the company's focus on safety may have become blurred.
"As you well know, I am the grandson of the company's founder, and all Toyota 
vehicles bear my name" he says. "For me, when the cars are damaged, it is as 
though I am as well."

7.26pm: "I myself, like Toyota, am not perfect. At times, we find defects. But 
at all such times, we stop, try to find the defect and make changes to improve 
further," says Toyoda, who is reading from his prepared testimony - available
here 
<http://oversight.house.gov/images/stories/Hearings/Committee_on_Oversight/2010/022410_Toyota/TESTIMONY-Toyoda.pdf>
.

7.23pm: The Toyota pair are warmly welcomed by chairman Towns. Toyoda stares 
forward expressionlessly, listening to events via an interpreter.
Toyoda begins in a confident voice: "I'd first like to state that I love cars 
as much as anybody and I love Toyota as much as anybody."
However, he admits, in the past few months, customers have started to feel 
"uncertain" about the safety of Toyota cars "and I take full responsibility for 
that".

7.20pm: Here comes Akio Toyoda. Dark suit, blue tie, slight scowl. He puts a 
translation microphone in his ear. Sits down calmly and arranges his papers 
neatly. Cameras go click, click, click. Chairman Edolphus Towns is banging his 
gavel.

7.16pm: Huge mob of photographers and camera crews materialise to await the 
arrival of Toyota's boss Akio Toyoda and his US chief, Yoshimi Inaba.

7.07pm: "What a joy, Mr Chairman," declares LaHood jokingly as he's finally 
dismissed after three hours of testimony.
There's now a 10-minute recess, then we'll finally hear from Toyota's 
president, Akio Toyoda.

7.00pm: Marcy Kaptur (D-Ohio) is taking the opportunity to exercise a 
hobbyhorse - she's outraged over Japan's protectionism and says only 3% of the 
Japanese market is open to US cars or automotive parts. Does Toyota's safety 
problem, she wonders, result from an attitude of market superiority and a false 
confidence?

6.50pm: For pity's sake. Joseph Cao, congressman from Louisiana, would just 
like to thank the transport secretary for everything he's done for Louisiana, 
particularly the state's second congressional district, and for his recent 
visit down south. He has no questions though.

6.37pm: Bit of melodrama. Congressman Bilbray declares that "people are dying 
on the streets of San Diego county" and that it's regulators' fault for not 
getting on top of the problem.

6.35pm: The forensic examination of America's transport secretary, Ray LaHood, 
continues as everyone waits for the real event of the day - a quizzing of 
Toyota's president, Akio Toyoda.
Brian Bilbray (C-California) declares himself a Toyota driver and wonders 
whether the Japanese firm's stellar reputation, alongside Mercedes and Porsche, 
at the top of satisfaction tables, created an inverted prejudice against strict 
review of the company.
LaHood gives a brief answer to a very long question, simply replying that he 
doesn't think so.

6.20pm: More gesticulating with props! Dan Burton (R-Indiana) is waving around 
two gas pedals - one made in Japan and one in the US. He demands - why is only 
one of them faulty? The question appears to be rhetorical as the US transport 
secretary isn't given time to reply.

6.13pm: A Massachusetts Democrat, Stephen Lynch, thinks Toyota's dodgy 
accelerators are a software problem, rather than slipping floor mats or sticky 
pedals. He says Apple's co-founder Steve Wozniak, who apparently owns a Toyota 
Prius, agrees with him. Lynch says it's wrong to call in drivers, replace their 
floormats and send them out again thinking their cars are safe.

5.58pm: The wonderfully named Jeff Flake (R-Arizona) wants the US department 
of transport to be extra cautious that it doesn't display favouritism in the 
car industry towards GM and Chrysler, in which the government owns large stakes.
"When it comes to safety, there will be no compromises. There will be no 
sweetheart deals, there will be no cosy relationships," replies LaHood 
robustly. "You have my commitment on that."

5.52pm: The US transport sec denies a "cosy relationship" between US safety 
regulators and the motor manufacturing industry.
"There is not a cosy relationship," says LaHood. "In the last three years, 
we've recalled 23 million cars."

5.28pm: Clearly getting impatient, LaHood asks for a 10-minute "restroom 
break". The committee goes into recess.

5.24pm: Interesting piece from The Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/opinion/displayStory.cfm?story_id=15576506&sa_campaign=twitter>
 asks whether Toyota's problems root back to a target set in 2002 to raise the 
company's global market share from 11% to 15%. Argues that the company became 
reliant on an "outer ring" of suppliers outside Japan who it didn't keep a 
close eye on and didn't have a long relationship with.

5.21pm: "Toyota became a little bit safety deaf," says the US transport sec. 
"I also believe their business model for communicating between North America 
and Japan needs some change."
He adds: "They need to listen to one other and hear what one another are 
saying."

5.15pm: Q: "Do you believe Toyota has been slow to respond to these issues?"
LaHood: "Yes I do. That's the reason we went to Japan. That's the reason I 
spoke to Mr Toyoda directly."

5.14pm: Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-Washington DC) wants to know about the 
notorious culture of secrecy in Japan: "Have you had difficulty penetrating the 
Toyota culture which teaches that these are issues that should not be aired in 
public?"
LaHood admits there have been "some issues" but says he's picked up the phone 
and talked directly to Toyota's president, and that staff from his department 
were dispatched to Tokyo to meet the carmaker face-to-face.

5.03pm: Mark Souder (R-Indiana), who represents a car manufacturing district, 
is trying to inject some common sense into proceedings. He asks LaHood if it's 
true that no vehicle can possibly be 100% safe.
The transport secretary won't give a straight answer: "Our goal is to make 
every vehicle a hundred percent safe."

4.58pm: It's the turn of left winger Dennis Kucinich (D-Ohio), who wants to 
know whether the US government has the power to send investigators to Tokyo to 
rifle through Toyota's internal records and see what it knew, when, about dodgy 
accelerators.
LaHood replies: "We have asked for a voluminous amount of information from 
Toyota which we'll review. If we have to go to Japan and meet with their 
engineers and get more information, that will be part of our review."

4.50pm: A curious phenomenon - a Republican congressman, John Mica, is 
criticising the department of transport for not spending enough. Mica wants to 
know why a budget increase of just $5m has been requested for the US road 
safety agency, NHTSA - "it's a rather small amount".

4.44pm: They're arguing about whether the US road safety authority, NHTSA, has 
enough resources. LaHood says President Obama has authorised recruitment of 66 
extra engineers.

4.36pm: Dan Burton (R-Indiana) wants to know why David Strickland, head of the 
safety agency NHTSA, isn't giving evidence. LaHood says the safety boss has 
"only been on the job for 40 days" and it would be unfair to make him appear.

4.32pm: "I love Portuguese sardines," announces Kanjorski, going off at a 
slightly eccentric tangent. "But if somebody died from botulism from eating 
sardines, I would have no idea where to go, what to do or who to inform."

4.31pm: Paul Kanjorski (D-Pennsylvania) says it's the biggest attendance of 
press and public he's ever seen at one of the committee's hearings: "Obviously 
we've struck a nerve."

4.29pm: Darrell Issa has a prop! He's produced a Toyota pedal and is 
gesticulating with it rather assertively.

4.28pm: The Washington Post's Dana Milbank has a scathing column 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/02/23/AR2010022305209.html?hpid=opinionsbox1>
 about yesterday's evidence by Toyota's US chief, Jim Lentz. He says he 
suffered from repeated amnesia: "Lentz's stammering performance put the 'oy' in 
Toyota."

4.24pm: Towns: "Do you think it's safe to drive a Toyota today?"
There's a rather equivocal response from LaHood, who says his department's 
website lists all cars up for recall: "I want the owners of every one of those 
vehicles to take it to their dealer and make sure it gets fixed."

4.22pm: A full version of LaHood's opening statement is here 
<http://oversight.house.gov/images/stories/Hearings/Committee_on_Oversight/2010/022410_Toyota/TESTIMONY-LaHood.pdf>
. He says he met last night with the Saylor family who lost 4 relatives in a 
Toyota crash in San Diego last year, and offered condolences.
"We will not sleep at DoT and will will work 24 hours to make sure every 
Toyota vehicle is safe to drive."

4.17pm: LaHood says government safety agency receives 30,000 complaints every 
year and looks at every one of them. There were 524 recalls last year involving 
23m vehicles: "We haven't been sitting around on our hands. When people 
complain, we investigate."

4.14pm: Transport secretary Ray LaHood has been sworn in and is giving an 
opening statement. He says safety is his department's "number one priority". 
For some reason, he's talking about texting while driving. Says he's on a 
"rampage" about it because it's a menace to society.

4.08pm: Over to Darrell Issa, the ranking Republican on the committee, who has 
beenpolling his constituents on Twitter <http://twtpoll.com/iarjy9> over what 
to ask. Top question in his poll is whether the US government is biased because 
it owns stakes in Toyota's rivals, General Motors and Chrysler.

4.05pm: There have now been 39 deaths associated with sudden acceleration in 
Toyotas, says Towns: "If the Camry and the Prius were airplanes, they would be 
grounded."

4.03pm: Committee chairman Edolphus Towns (D-New York) has gavelled us in, and 
proceedings are off. He's starting with a lurid description of a fatal Lexus 
crash in San Diego that caused the death of an entire family.
Since 2000, he says one insurance company, State Farm, has reported more than 
900 cases of "SUA" - sudden unintended acceleration - in Toyotas.
Towns says he's sceptical that sticky pedals and floor mats are the root cause 
of the difficulty.
"In the case of Toyota, there is striking evidence that the company was at 
times more concerned with profit than safety," says Towns.

3.58pm: The first panel today will comprise two government officials - 
transport secretary Ray LaHood and David Strickland, who is administrator of 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Akio Toyoda will follow a little later in panel number two. He'll apparently 
be delivering his opening statement in English but will then use an interpreter 
for questions and answers.

3.45pm: Well I wouldn't like to be in the Toyota president's shoes today. Akio 
Toyoda has travelled from Tokyo to give evidence in Congress about his 
company's safety crisis and he's likely to get a Washington-style tough ride.

Toyoda, 53, is the grandson of Toyota's founder. He's been running the 
Japanese carmaker since June and the buck stops with him over faulty 
accelerators and brakes that have been linked to 19 deaths and have caused a 
worldwide recall of 8.5m vehicles.

In written evidence, Toyoda has already humbly apologised 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/feb/24/akio-toyoda-statement-to-congress>
, accepting that Toyota's runaway growth over the past few years has blurred 
the company's focus on safety.

Quite apart from shedding light on Toyota's handling of the scare, today's 
examination by the House committee on oversight and government reform promises 
to be an intriguing clash of cultures. It's highly unusual for a foreign 
captain of industry to appear before Congress. There's already been discussion 
on US television about whether Toyoda will literally bow to lawmakers. AsCNN 
reports 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/BUSINESS/02/24/money.toyoda.culture.clash/index.html?eref=rss_world&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+rss/cnn_world+(RSS:+World)&utm_content=Google+Feedfetcher>
, Japanese dialogue tends to be somewhat indirect, unlike the confrontational 
style favoured in US politics. And Toyoda isn't really accustomed to the 
limelight - at the start of this crisis, he wasnicknamed "no-show Akio" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-akio-toyoda-profile>.
 Jim Lentz on Capitol Hill yesterday 
Let's hope he does better than Toyota's US boss, Jim Lentz, who put in an 
unconvincing performance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-boss-grilled-congress-live>
 before a different Congressional committee yesterday. The action kicks off at 
11am eastern time (4pm in the UK).
 