
Bagdhatis wins 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 6-3 15-0: Ljubicic flings a backhand, which 
has been his lethal weapon at times, into the stands... 15-15 Baghdatis skids 
onto a wide ball but can't pull it in... 30-15 weak backhand return from 
Ljubicic finds the net... 40-15 Baghdatis fires a serve to Ljubicic's forehand, 
and watches it fly back over the baseline back to him... Game, set and the 
match! Baghdatis pushes Ljubicic to the baseline and he can't find the power to 
send the ball back over the net. Marcos Baghdatis has lined up a semi-final 
with David Nalbandian: now that should be a match to watch.

Thanks for following the game with me. The remaining women's quarter-finals, 
and Sebastien Grosjean's meeting with Nicolas Kiefer, will be over by the time 
us lot in Blighty get up, but I'll be back tomorrow for Roger Federer's meeting 
with Nikolay Davydenko.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 5 - 3* Ljubicic has got his 
finger nails firmly into this cliff, sending down an ace and then whipping a 
forehand onto the line. And he aces on a second serve to boot. Followed by 
another. Easy.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 5* - 2 New balls! Tremendous 
rally, Baghdatis in punishing mood with a deep backhand to force the error from 
Ljubicic. And he got over a double fault quick enough to stick another forehand 
right into the corner, where Ljubicic flails unsuccessfully. The Cypriot edges 
ahead with a wicked forehand down the line and Ljubicic's stray backhand means 
the hold.

"What's a pirate's favourite chocolate bar?" asks Matt Warner, attempting some 
pirate-related comic relief. "Bounty." Badoomtsh!

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 4 - 2* Oh lord, the blue and 
white shirted hordes are now waving their shirts in the air and beating their 
chests. Their hero snatched the first point but Ljubicic levels with a strong 
serve. The No7 seed then pushes Baghdatis into a long rally but losing the 
point doesn't dull his ardour: he's all over the next serve to make it 30-30. 
And a tasty little drop shot have Ljubicic cursing once more. One break point 
for the double break: no such luck for Baghdatis, who ends up on the floor. 
Ljubicic holds.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 4* - 1 Ljubicic is giving 
himself a right old rollicking now. I don't speak Croatian but I'm saying his 
mother's not happy to hear that. Baghdatis storms to a 40-0 lead with some 
immense serving but is made to wait by a corking return down the line from the 
Croatian.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 3 - 1* There could be trouble 
at t'mill: Ljubicic is thrown by a line call that goes against him, and he 
fluffs a simple forehand. And then another one. It's 15-30! Oof! 30-30 after 
that rifled serve down the middle, but the break point presents itself after a 
backhand drop shot swirls into the net. Whoomph, there it is! A magnificent 
pass from Baghdatis, who got onto a ball he had no business reaching and 
smacked it across Ljubicic.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 2* - 1 Cracking little forehand 
from Baghdatis, but he'll not get anywhere with the one that followed, dropping 
feet below the baseline. More untidy play on the forehand gives Ljubicic two 
break points. The first is rescued with a Federer-esque, in-the-air forehand, 
and the second is saved with afantastic backhand pass. And that's the game with 
another superb forehand right on the line.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 1 - 1* At the start of this 
match Baghdatis looked like he could get on the end of nine out of 10 
Ivanisevic serves, but he's struggling to do anything off Ljubicic's 
(admittedly much improved) now. He's lucky to be handed two points by Ljubicic 
and some sloppy forehands, but he's got some wild strokes of his own in the 
locker and Ljubicic holds.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6, 1* - 0 A statement of intent 
from Baghdatis: an energetic hold to remind us of what he's capable of.

After four sets: Bagdhatis 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3-6 Ljubicic is serving like a 
different man to the one that started this match, but then Baghdatis isn't 
exactly returning like he was back then. Two set points after another lovely 
backhand, and Baghdatis hands it over on a plate with a low backhand. Here we 
go...

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 3* - 5 A game Ljubicic could do with winning if 
he wants to see in the final set on serve, but he gifts the first three points 
to Baghdatis, who then grabs the last with both hands and a lovely forehand 
volley.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 2 - 5* New balls! And it's Ljubicic who's 
tonking them all over the court - but Baghdatis wriggles his way to a break 
point (double fault, thank you) only to lose it on an incredible rally. You 
know the kind, the ones they play from back when the players wore short shorts 
and had wooden rackets, and your mum says "That's when I liked men's tennis, in 
those days." Ljubicic holds.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 2* - 4 Baghdatis's serve is still fiery and he 
holds easily here.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 1 - 4* Baghdatis looks tired, and it's putting 
confidence into Ljubicic's groundstrokes. We're here for the whole nine yards 
chaps.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 1* - 3 The net, which was helping Baghdatis a 
few games ago, is now pinging his cross-courters back at him and stubbornly 
holding back his serve. And while Ljubicicwas on the receiving end of some 
nasty little whipped forehands, he's now dishing them out. There's the break. 
There's the flippin' break.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 1 - 2* Glorious backhand from Ljubicic, and a 
delightful little drop shot: Baghdatis is being run ragged now.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 1* - 1 That's more like it from Baghdatis. He 
dropped the first point but he had Ljubicic chasing his tail there and 
eventually forced the mistake. And an ace to round off a fine hold.

Baghdatis leads 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 0 - 1* We could be in for the long haul people: 
a love hold from Ljubicic, with Baghdatis not even making a return. It's ok. I 
didn't want lunch anyway. What are you munching on?

Baghdatis leads 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 4 - 6 The mistakes are creeping into Baghdatis's 
game now, simple things like getting the ball over the net seem suddenly 
difficult. And a first double fault to hand Ljubicic two break points is not 
how he probably dreamt it. Ready for another set?

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 4 - 5* Ljubicic's pecker is up all right: another ace 
and then a lethal forehand that Baghdatis, unusually, leaves. Easy hold.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 4* - 4 New balls! But neither player is particularly 
relishing the change - first Baghdatis slings a forehand wide, then Ljubicic's 
backhand goes into orbit. Two stunning aces from Baghdatis follow though, so 
they can't be that bad. Here's something I wasn't expecting to write: Ljubicic 
has a break point after a stray forehand from the Cypriot: ace! He's soon back 
in trouble with a suicidal lob attempt, but this time it's another one of those 
stealthy, low backhands down the line that keeps Ljubicic from the door.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 3 - 4* Gulp. That was the sound ringing around the Rod 
Laver Arena at 0-30, but Ljubicic forced Baghdatis to take on a drop shot he 
didn't have a hope of making to make things a slightly healthier 15-30. And his 
forceful forehands, followed by a menacing scamper into the net, take him to 
40-30 and then the hold.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 3* - 3 Just when you think Baghdatis is losing his 
midas touch, he pulls off a humdinger of a forehand. And he's ruffled 
Ljubicic's feathers with a long forehand that just about found the line - but 
not according to the No7 seed. Ljubicic has an emphatic backhand on him when 
he's in the mood and he pulls one out the bag there, but it's not enough to 
break Baghdatis, who responds with a stunner.

"Baghdatis is a marvel," shrieks an excitable Daniela Ventrone. "Hope to see 
him against Fed Express at the final!"

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 2 - 3* The Croatians in the crowd have found their 
voices, mostly because Ljubicic has found his feet. Fairly easy hold there.

"I'm following this match Georgina, and only partially because Baghdatis's 
girlfriend is really pretty and I want to see more photos of her," says local 
lech Strath. "But anyone who beats Andy "eyes too close together" Roddick gets 
my vote. Good luck to the lad."

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 2* - 2 There's life in the beast yet! Ljubicic uses 
more muscles in one rally than he's used all match to steal a point from 
Baghdatis and threaten a break, but the Cypriot's groundstrokes are absolutely 
fearsome - flat, low and deadly. He holds with a flourish.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 1 - 2* Ljubicic musters some excellent serves, but 
it's hard to think he's doing more than buying time.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 1* - 1 Ljubicic is nowhere to be seen on the Baghdatis 
serve, if someone offered him a warm bath now, I think he'd take it. The 
shoulders are slumped as he watches aces fizz and spin past him. Crikey! He 
found a frankly spiffing forehand to beat Baghdatis there, but in the end it's 
an untroubled hold for Baghdatis.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 6 - 2, 0 - 1* Baghdatis is riffing all over Ljubicic's sorry 
pain here, he's determined to get an early break and put this match to bed. The 
Croatian finds a well-placed forehand volley to see off the possibility, but 
Baghdatis creeps back to deuce. He takes advantage (literally) of a wild 
backhand from Ljubicic and the break is on: [sigh] he comes up with his own 
wild backhand. After exchanging deuce and advantage like Pokemon-happy kids in 
a playground, Ljubicic manages to hold.

"Two exiled Brits watching here in Sydney!" announces Angela Macdonald-Smith. 
"How could people not watch this match? The contrast of styles of these two 
players is just pure drama. And what about those fans - aren't they the real 
thing? Not tennis fans maybe but supporting their man to the hilt just the 
same. Just be thankful you're not sitting right behind them and can enjoy their 
antics from in front of the television screen at home!"

Baghdatis leads 6 - 4, 6 - 2 Cheeky little drop volley from Baghdatis as he 
chases that two-set lead, and the forehand pass that follows it has a hint of 
"screw you" in it too. Easy hold, and whoever made Ljubicic seventh seed here 
is being made to look a fool, a common fool.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 5 - 2* Strong service game from a visibly crushed Ljubicic.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 5* - 1 Such is the bravado of the fearless Baghdatis, he's 
giving points away. Then cruelly snatching them back, amazing cross-court 
forehand then a bullet of a serve. 5-1.

"I suspect you're not getting any e-mails because this isn't Wimbledon and 
there isn't a plucky Brit involved," says Luke Williams. "That's the way it 
goes with British tennis 'fans'. How about a straw poll to see how many Brits 
are actually following this match, or would that be too depressing?" That would 
be kicking a girl when she's down. And then spitting on her.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 4 - 1* Majestic stuff from Baghdatis at times but Ljubicic is 
in no mood to be broken again, sending him off on a wild goose chase for the 
baseline. That youthfully optimistic Baghdatis return is a tough one to deal 
with though, and there's the double break.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 3* - 1 The line calls are being questioned as both players 
start pushing for the line to make the difference, and the net is playing its 
part too: first Baghdatis wins a point after a netcord, then the same inch of 
cord denies him. Break point for Ljubicic: duly wasted.

"This Cypriot guy looks like a happy pirate," says Dimitris of the bandana-ed 
Baghdatis. "He knows his tennis though! Wish I was down under. We have a 
snowstorm in Athens."

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 2 - 1* Baghdatis is absolutely effervescent, throwing himself 
at every shot with apparent abandon. The downside for Ljubicic is that he's 
somehow managing to place them superbly, a spinning forehand creeping over the 
net and eluding the Croatian's racket. Every time you think he's beaten, he 
finds a pass. Ljubicic found himself stuck at the net there and Baghdatis helps 
himself to two break points. And he takes the first!

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 1* - 1 Unreturnable serving from Baghdatis, who leaps into 
his action, and a well-placed dropping forehand means a love game.

Baghdatis 6 - 4, 0 - 1* Baghdatis produces a great cross-court backhand but 
this time Ljubicic is onto it, and the attempted lob from the Cypriot drifts 
long. Ljubicic is hovering a finger dangerously close to the self-destruct 
button with some shaky work on the forehand, but he keeps saving his rear from 
the slicer with that expansive backhand. It's another of those 
deuce-advantage-deuce games, but Ljubicic eventually closes out acing a second 
serve.

Baghdatis wins the first set 6-4 Baghdatis is storming now, a mighty serve all 
he needed to do for 30-0. He's pushing Ljubicic onto the backhand more often 
than not, and serves straight down the line to take the set. The hordes in blue 
and white are in good voice.

"Is no-one emailing you anymore?" asks Jon. And no, they're not, the rascals. 
"I was in Australia this time last year, basking in the Sydney sunshine ... 
where should I go on my holidays this year? Any recommendations?" I hear 
Butlins Bognor has a terrific cabaret this time of year.

Ljubicic 4* - 5 Baghdatis Entertaining rallies here - 23 shots, stattos!, with 
Ljubicic and Baghdatis taking it in turns to bungle shots at the net. Every 
time the Cypriot makes a stupid mistake, he comes back with a stunning shot, 
this time a volley into the corner. And he breaks with a stray one down the 
line from Ljubicic. Baghdatis will serve for the set.

Ljubicic 4 - 4* Baghdatis New balls! Sloppy forehand from Baghdatis, but he 
redeems himself with a sweet backhand across court that Ljubicic can only put 
into the net. Easy hold, and the pressure's straight back on Ljubicic.

Ljubicic 4* - 3 Baghdatis A slightly quicker hold for Ljubicic, whose 
occasional serve-volleying is paying dividends.

Ljubicic 3 - 3* Baghdatis Huge first serve from Baghdatis, straight down the 
line and no hope for Ljubicic. The Croatian is producing some nice netplay 
though, pinging volleys around knowing that Baghdatis will tire eventually. He 
chases every ball like a dog after a stick though, and his powerful 
groundstrokes see him to the hold.

Ljubicic 3* - 2 Baghdatis Baghdatis is absolutely fizzing on court, while 
Ljubicic looks veritably middle-aged. The lack of hair doesn't help on that 
score, but nor does the laboured (and unsuccessful) move into the net, only to 
be passed cross-court by another zinger from Baghdatis. The Croatian comes up 
with a nice lob to rescue one of two break points though, and saves the other 
with a well-timed push down the line. From 0-40 he takes things to deuce with a 
succession of well-thought-out passes to set up a lengthy deuce-advantage-deuce 
tango. [Game-by-gamer takes a stroll along the South Bank, picks up a croissant 
and reads the morning's papers]. And they're still at it. Finally, Ljubicic 
holds.

Ljubicic 2 - 2* Baghdatis Lovely double-handed backhand from Baghdatis to 
leave Ljubicic flat-footed, his groundstrokes match his movement for quality. 
Easy hold to love.

Ljubicic 2* - 1 Baghdatis Ljubicic, by contrast, has a fairly decent serve and 
banks the first ace of the match. Baghdatis has managed some impressive returns 
but he slings a forehand into the net from mid-range almost immediately 
afterwards. Neither player has found their stride or anything like it - these 
first few games have come directly from the Ministry of Silly Walks in those 
terms, but Ljubicic finds a searing forehand from somwhere. And despite an 
energetic display from Baghdatis - my word he can move - Ljubicic just about 
holds.

Ljubicic 1 - 1* Baghdatis Both players are more than capable of a good rally, 
too, Baghdatis emerging with the point thanks to a wild forehand from Ljubicic 
- and again it's Baghdatis's positional sense that earns him the second point, 
at the net. His serve is never going to be a matchwinner for him though and 
Ljubicic sneaks back into the game before the Cypriot holds.

Ljubicic 1* - 0 Baghdatis Ljubicic has a nice backhand on him, and not a bad 
forehand either. Baghdatis's placement of the ball is a delight to watch 
though, dinking a drop shot just over the net before whipping a backhand across 
court behind the Croatian. Ljubicic powers home to hold.

Preamble I'll be honest, the name Marcos Baghdatis didn't mean too much to me 
last week. One fourth-round defeat of Andy Roddick later and you can't escape 
him. He's the one being followed around by about 50,000 Cyprus-flag-bearing 
supporters. Croatia's Ivan Ljubicic will be confident, mind, having put out two 
seeds on his way here. Any predictions?
 