
With the week’s market rally continuing, Lloyds Banking Group has passed the 
break even price on the government’s stake for the first time this year, paving 
the way for further share sales by the chancellor.

In early trading the shares breached the 73.6p level, the average government 
purchase price, and hit 73.8p before slipping back to 73.38p, a 0.31p rise.

In October chancellor George Osborne unveiled plans to sell a £2bn stake in 
the bank to the public - billed as the biggest privatisation for 20 years - 
when the share price was nearly 78p.

But in January he postponed the move  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/george-osborne-postpones-sale-sell-off-last-publicly-owned-lloyds-bank-shares>
after the stock market turbulence during the first weeks of the year, 
particularly in the banking sector where investors became concerned about the 
outlook for profits as well as the effect of negative interest rates on the 
sector’s balance sheets.

The government has been gradually cutting back its stake, from 43% to less 
than 10%, but Osborne is unlikely to revived the public offer until after the 
EU referendum in June.

But if the shares remain above the break-even level for a sustained period, he 
may well decide to edge down the stake by selling in the market or to 
institutions.

Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said:


The continued recovery in the banking sector has seen Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> shares move back 
closer to its 73.6p level breakeven price, increasing the prospects that we 
could well see the government look to pare down its remaining stake in the 
bailed out bank.

Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:



Lloyds bank has reached the magic 73.6p, average government purchase price, 
for the first time this year. The slump in share price had caused George 
Osborne to postpone the proposed sale of their last tranche of Lloyds shares. 
If the share price stabilises above their breakeven level, this opens the door 
for the Chancellor to resume the share sale, which would be welcome news for 
both the Government and prospective investors.

Overall the FTSE 100 has continued its revival, up 21.31 points to 6174.19. 
But it has come off its best levels after weaker than expected UK construction 
data.

Mining companies continue to benefit from recent Chinese measures to stimulate 
the economy, withAntofagasta adding 15.1p to 505.5p and BHP Billiton 20.8p 
better at 761.2p.

Positive results have lifted Virgin Money, up 27.5p to 367.76p, but testing 
groupIntertek has dropped 98p to £29.06 after final results saw a 3.5% rise in 
revenues to £2.1bn but a loss after a £577m impairment charge on past 
acquisitions.

Oil and gas services group Amec Foster Wheeler has jumped more than 6% to 
414.8p after it announced the completion of a £1.7bn refinancing. Analysts at 
Haitong said the shares were being lifted by the news and strength in the crude 
price but added:

Full year results are due on March 10. We see a risk that that company may be 
forced to write down a significant portion of the goodwill associated with the 
Foster Wheeler acquisition at these results. We are a buyer of this stock so 
our message is use any weakness that may ensue from 2015 results to pick this 
stock up.
 