
Scotland’s top prosecutor has reaffirmed Abdelbaset al-Megrahi’s guilt in the 
killing of 270 people in the Lockerbie bombing and has pledged to track down 
his accomplices.

The lord advocate, Frank Mulholland, said no Crown Office investigator or 
prosecutor has raised a concern about the evidence in the bombing of Pan Am 
flight 103 26 years ago.

Al-Megrahi’s part in the bombing has been called into question in a series of 
books, documentaries and testimony to the Scottish parliament.

A petition, Justice for Megrahi, backed by politicians and family members of 
some victims, remains on Holyrood’s books two years after al-Megrahi’s death.

But in an anniversary address to relatives, Mulholland will say his 
investigation “remains on the evidence, and not on speculation and supposition”.

He will travel to Washington to attend a memorial service at Arlington 
cemetery in Washington on Sunday.

Mulholland will say: “The current instability in Libya has meant that some 
investigative opportunities have required to be reassessed, which I know has 
been frustrating for family members.

“However our prosecutors and police officers, working with UK government and 
US colleagues, will continue to pursue this investigation, with the sole aim of 
bringing those who acted along with al-Megrahi to justice.

“There are other significant investigative opportunities open to us which are 
not reliant on obtaining evidence from our Libyan colleagues.

“The Crown will never give up the fight to secure justice for the families of 
those who died.

“It might be 26 years since 270 people lost their lives in the terrorist 
attack but justice has no sell-by date inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

“Over the years many people have worked on the inquiry and all have been given 
the same instruction; to carefully review the evidence and work to identify all 
of those who were involved in the conspiracy to destroy Pan Am flight 103.

“During the 26-year long inquiry not one Crown Office investigator or 
prosecutor has raised a concern about the evidence in this case.

“We remain committed to this investigation and our focus remains on the 
evidence, and not on speculation and supposition.”

Former Liberal Democrat leader Sir Menzies Campbell said: “One of the most 
unsavoury elements of this case is the repeated and unfounded criticism of the 
judges who sat in the trial, and those who heard the subsequent appeal against 
conviction.

“The judges by convention are unable to respond publicly to these criticisms, 
which imply that they were somehow part of a conspiracy.

“In truth, they were all experienced in criminal law and of unquestioned 
integrity.

“It is a curious feature of this case that those who argued most vehemently 
for a special court to be set up to deal with the case are now among the most 
vociferous critics of its verdict.”
 