
The British lawyer for Libya's former intelligence chief, Abdullah al-Senussi, 
has called on Scottish police not to interview him as part of a newLockerbie 
bombing <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lockerbie> inquiry without a lawyer 
being present.

Scottish detectives are due to interview Senussi, once the right-hand man of 
Muammar Gaddafi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi>, hoping he 
can provide details of the bombing that killed 270 people in December 1988.

Last month Scotland's lord advocate, Frank Mulholland QC, visited Tripoli to 
arrange details of the visit afterLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> dropped earlier objections.

But Ben Emmerson QC, appointed to represent Senussi by the international 
criminal court (ICC), said Libya has so far refused him permission to visit his 
client.

In a letter to Mulholland, Emmerson said detectives are in danger of breaking 
Scottish precedent if Senussi, a potential Lockerbie suspect, is interviewed in 
his Tripoli jail cell without a lawyer.

He wrote: "Mr Al-Senussi has been held incommunicado without access to legal 
advice in respect of any proceedings. I am certain that you would wish any 
interview to be conducted between Mr Al-Senussi and Scottish police officers to 
be scrupulously fair, putting its admissibility in subsequent proceedings 
beyond any doubt."

Scottish police are hoping Senussi, Gaddafi's spy chief for most of the 
dictator's 42-year-rule, can answer questions about the bombing of Pan Am 
flight 103 that have eluded investigators for quarter of a century.

A senior member of Emerson's legal team, Amal Alamuddin, said: "Any new 
inquiry into the events surrounding Lockerbie needs to be scrupulously fair, 
and this needs to start with Mr Senussi being given legal counsel during any 
interview with Scottish law officers."

Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
, the only man convicted of the bombing, died in 2012 in Libya protesting his 
innocence.

Libya has appointed two officers to work with Scottish and American Lockerbie 
investigators, with the justice minister, Salah al-Marghani, saying: "We should 
know everything about what happened."

Senussi, indicted by the Hague for crimes against humanity, was captured in 
Mauritania after fleeing Libya after the 2011 Arab spring revolution. He was 
extradited to Libya and last year went on trial, amid tight security, accused 
of crimes committed during the revolution.

Emmerson, who represented the Wikileaks founder, Julian Assange, is also 
appealing against the ICC's decision in October that Libya could take the 
Senussi case, arguing that the country's turmoil raises doubts about its 
ability to hold a fair trial.
 