
Scottish prosecutors have formally asked Libya's interim government to help 
uncover fresh evidence and witnesses in the Lockerbie bombing case.

The Crown Office said it had approached the National Transitional Council 
(NTC) for help in its reopened investigation into the atrocity, when a bomb in 
the cargo hold brought down Pan Am Flight 103 over the town of Lockerbie in 
December 1988.

The inquiry was reopened after former Libyan intelligence agent Abdelbaset al 
Megrahi, the only person convicted of the bombing, was released from prison on 
compassionate grounds two years ago.

According to reports, Libya's interim justice minister Mohammed al-Alagi, 
responding to news of the request, told a press conference: "The case is 
closed." The Crown Office declined to comment on the interim justice minister's 
statement.

Senior lawyers are sceptical about the decision to approach the NTC but the 
Crown Office said the trial court at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands, which 
acquitted Megrahi's alleged accomplice Al-Amin Khalifah Fhimah, had ruled that 
Megrahi had not acted alone.

Its hopes for further evidence were strengthened when senior defectors from 
Gaddafi's regime claimed the Libyan tyrant had been implicated in the bombing.

Legal sources with knowledge of the case pointed out that the Crown Office was 
also braced for the publication in the next few months of a report by the 
Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission stating that Megrahi may have been 
wrongly convicted.

The SCCRC's new evidence led to Megrahi's appeal, which was halted when he was 
released early after his prostate cancer became terminal. The Scottish 
government has promised legislation allowing the SCCRC's report to be published.

The report will be censored to remove a secret intelligence report from 
another government – believed to be Germany – which raises significant doubts 
about the prosecution case against Megrahi. The then foreign secretary, David 
Miliband, issued a public interest immunity certificate banning its publication 
in 2008.

"Lockerbie remains an open inquiry concerning the involvement of others with 
Mr Megrahi in the murder of 270 people," a Crown Office spokesman said.

"The Crown will continue to pursue lines of inquiry that become available and, 
following recent events inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, has 
asked the national transitional council, through the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office, for assistance with the investigation."

A legal source said he would be "extremely surprised" if any new prosecution 
was ever mounted, because of the time since the attack, the reliability of the 
evidence and the difficulties in apprehending any new suspects. "I can't 
imagine for a moment that there's going to be prosecutions," the source said. 
"This is posturing for the relatives in America."
 