
The gate of the luxury mansion remained firmly shut. It was clear Abdelnasser 
al-Megrahi had no intention of letting anyone pass. The world would have to 
accept it was time to let go of his dying brother. A grim saga that began 23 
years ago and 2,000 miles away was all but at an end.

A short distance away lay the cancer-ridden body of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>, the man convicted of 
the 1988 Lockerbie bombing. It was evident on Monday that the campaign for his 
extradition from Libya was effectively over.

Calls for his re-arrest from US senators, lawyers and relatives of the 
Lockerbie bombing appeared redundant given Megrahi's condition, apparently 
close to death, filmed at his mother's house on Sunday and broadcast around the 
world.

The scoop by CNN prompted a media stampede to the mansion in an upmarket 
suburb of Tripoli on Monday morning. Two dozen foreign journalists gathered 
outside in the hope of their own tour of the three-storey, white-walled 
property decorated with marble cladding, intricate Islamic carvings and green 
tiled turrets, watched by six security cameras.

More than once a wrought iron door swung open, offering a glimpse of garden, 
but then closed behind Abdelnasser Megrahi, one of 11 residents. Speaking in 
Arabic, the 53-year-old former military man politely deflected all requests to 
see his brother, answered questions and even joked about English football.

Asked about Megrahi's condition, he replied: "He is very sick. The coma came 
two or three months ago. Sometimes he speaks to his wife or mother, sometimes 
he is in a coma. His life is in danger now."

He reiterated that his brother had been without proper medical attention for 
several days. "Medicines have been stolen and we couldn't get them. He did have 
professional doctors from Italy and Germany and England, but now there is no 
one, only the doctor here. "

He said the family had emailed a medical report to the Scottish government – 
with whom Megrahi is obliged to be in regular contact – on Sunday and requested 
that it send medicine.

Abdelnasser Megrahi also insisted that his brother was not guilty of the 
Lockerbie bombing. "From day one I believed he was innocent. The case was more 
political than a crime. There is no actual evidence. The world knows my brother 
is innocent."

He said Megrahi receives messages of support from Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and around the world and criticised 
the US for continuing to demand his extradition. "He was released by the court. 
He did not escape. The Americans are being too cruel. They don't even respect 
him as human being because of his condition."

The American effort now seems increasingly futile. Scottish first minister, 
Alex Salmond, said recent speculation about Megrahi's disappearance had been 
"completely inaccurate". Salmond told Sky News: "The only people who have any 
authority in this matter are the Scottish government, who have jurisdiction in 
this matter … and the new Libyan transitional council, who are the new duly 
constituted legal authority inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

"We have never had and don't have any intention of asking for the extradition 
of Mr Megrahi. It's quite clear from the Libyan transitional council that 
following their own laws that they'd never any intention of agreeing to such 
extradition."

Andrew Mitchell, the UK government's secretary for international development, 
said the question was now moot: "It's clear that many of these matters are now 
academic as his life is drawing to a close... It's clear from reports today 
that he has not got much longer to live."

The Obama administration said that the Libyan rebels' National Transitional 
Council (NTC) had agreed to review Megrahi's case once it has established a 
fully functioning government.

State department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said: "This is a guy with blood 
on his hands, the lives of innocents. Libya itself under Gaddafi made a hero of 
this guy. Presumably, a new, free, democratic Libya would have a different 
attitude towards a convicted terrorist. So it is in that spirit the NTC will 
look at this case."

Calls for Megrahi to be either taken back into Scottish custody or extradited 
to the US for a fresh trial intensified last week, led by the US Republican 
Mitt Romney, after it emerged that Scottish officials charged with monitoring 
him in Libya after his early release from jail had been unable to make contact.

That raised substantial questions about whether Megrahi had breached the terms 
of his release on licence in August 2009. On Sunday night, East Renfrewshire 
council and the Scottish government issued a joint statement saying they had 
finally made contact with Megrahi's family over the weekend.

However, East Renfrewshire officials have admitted to the Guardian that they 
have not yet spoken to Megrahi in person. Their last contact directly with him 
was on 8 August. They said they were still trying to talk to him, but confirmed 
that his dramatically worsening health was making that task far more difficult.

"We are still in the process of re-establishing contact," a council spokesman 
said on Monday morning. "We have had some contact with the family and we will 
continue with that." Direct contact is "part of the licence and that is what we 
are aiming for, if we can do that", he said.

Romney and US relatives claim Megrahi was not properly punished for his 
alleged role in the Lockerbie atrocity, in which 270 crew, passengers and 
people on the ground were killed when Pan Am Flight 103 was blown up over the 
Scottish town in December 1988.

John Bolton, the former US ambassador to the United Nations, said Megrahi 
should have received the death penalty.

"To me it will be a signal of how serious the rebel government is for good 
relations with the United States and the west if they hand over Megrahi for 
trial," he said. "He killed 270 people. He served roughly 10 years in jail 
before he was released by British authorities. Do the math – that means he 
served roughly two weeks in prison for every person he killed. Two weeks per 
murder. That is not nearly enough."

On Monday the NTC backed down from its previous statement that Megrahi would 
under no circumstances be extradited to Britain. The justice minister, Mohammed 
al-Alagi, had stated that Megrahi would not be handed back to the west, adding 
that he had been judged once and would not be judged again. On Monday, however, 
the minister struck a more ambiguous position, and said Libya was prepared to 
discuss the issue when other more urgent problems had been sorted out.
 