
The Scottish justice secretary, Kenny MacAskill, is to make a statement to 
Holyrood in the wake ofclaims he advised the Lockerbie bomber to drop his appeal
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/feb/27/lockerbie-relatives-urge-inquiry-evidence>
 to smooth the way for his release.

The allegations – strongly denied by the Scottish government – are contained 
in a new book about the bomber which was published on Monday.

In the wake of the allegations, MacAskill, who controversially freed 
Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi> 
in August 2009 on compassionate grounds, faced calls from opposition 
politicians to make a statement to Holyrood.

He will now do that, and answer questions from MSPs on the matter, on 
Wednesday afternoon.

On Monday, a spokesman for the Scottish government categorically denied that 
it "had any involvement of any kind in Mr Al-Megrahi dropping his appeal".

The spokesman insisted that had been "entirely a matter for Mr Al-Megrahi and 
his legal team".

He also branded the book Megrahi: You Are My Jury 
<http://www.megrahiyouaremyjury.net/>, by the writer, researcher and TV 
producer John Ashton, "third-hand hearsay".

MacAskill decided to free the Libyan – the only person convicted of the 
bombing of Pan Am flight 103 in December 1988 which killed 270 people – on 
compassionate grounds.

Megrahi, who has terminal cancer, remains alive today despite being said to 
have three months to live when he was released.

Shortly before being freed, he had dropped his second appeal against his 
conviction. Ashton's book claims MacAskill met a delegation of Libyan officials 
10 days before announcing his decision, including the foreign minister Abdulati 
al-Obedi.

In the book, Megrahi is quoted saying: "Obedi said that towards the end of the 
meeting, MacAskill had asked to speak to him in private.

"Once the others had withdrawn, he stated that MacAskill gave him to 
understand that it would be easier to grant compassionate release if I dropped 
my appeal."

Ashton, who studied the Lockerbie case for 18 years and spent three years as a 
researcher with the bomber's legal team, said: "Mr Megrahi makes clear in the 
book that it was made clear to him by the Libyan official who met with Mr 
MacAskill that it would help his case for compassionate release if he dropped 
his appeal."

The author added that Megrahi "felt very strongly that dropping the appeal 
would help his application for compassionate release".

Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats called on MacAskill to 
make a statement to the Scottish parliament in the wake of the book's 
allegations.

However, the spokesman for the Scottish government said on Monday the claims 
in the book were wrong, and added: "Officials were present at all meetings the 
justice secretary had on this matter at all times."
 