
The only man convicted of the Lockerbie bombing has again protested his 
innocence as Scotland's law chief pledged to find the answers victims' families 
are waiting for.

Two hundred and seventy people were killed when Pan Am Flight 103 exploded 
over the town of Lockerbie on 21 December 1988.

Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
 was convicted in 2001 at a Scottish court sitting at Camp Zeist in the 
Netherlands of carrying out the bombing and sentenced to life imprisonment. He 
was released on compassionate grounds in 2009 after he was diagnosed with 
terminal cancer.

He reiterated his claim that he was not involved in the bombings in what he 
said was the last interview he would give before his death. The interview, 
published in several UK newspapers on Thursday, was reportedly filmed by the 
investigator and former policeman George Thomson on Saturday.

"I am an innocent man," the Libyan said. "I am about to die and I ask now to 
be left in peace with my family."

Megrahi said he had never seen a Maltese shopkeeper whose identification was 
central to his conviction. Tony Gauci had identified Megrahi as buying clothes, 
fragments of which were found among the plane wreckage.

"I never bought clothes from him," Megrahi said. "He dealt with me very 
wrongly. I have never seen him in my life before he came to court."

The interview was published soon after a memorial service marking the 23rd 
anniversary of the bombing was held in the US.

Scotland's lord advocate, Frank Mulholland, attended the service and laid a 
wreath on behalf of the people ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. He also made a speech in remembrance 
of the victims and met their relatives.

Earlier, Mulholland met the FBI director, Robert Mueller, and the US attorney 
general, Eric Holder, to discuss opportunities for stepping up the 
investigation inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> into the 
bombing.

He said: "I think I would be failing in my duty if I didn't properly seek to 
take advantage of the opportunity that has opened up with the fall of Gaddafi," 
he said. "I am determined to get the answers these families deserve."

Al-Amin Khalifah Fhimah stood trial with Megrahi, but was acquitted of any 
involvement.

Mulholland said the idea that Megrahi had acted alone was "risible".

"Opportunities have opened up in Libya this year and we are determined to seek 
to exploit the opportunities to get to Libya, to get Scottish police officers 
in there and seek out any evidence that is available.

"Justice has only partly been done. The evidence pointed to it being an act of 
state-sponsored terrorism.

"Megrahi was a member of the Libyan security service – it is risible to think 
that he acted alone. What we want to do is bring the others to book.

"A huge opportunity has opened up. It was very difficult when Gaddafi was 
alive and in power in Libya, and the answers are in Libya."
 