
Lockerbie bombing victims' relatives have urged the Scottish government to 
stage a public inquiry into allegations that "vital" evidence about the bombing 
was suppressed.

Jim Swire, whose daughter Flora was among 270 people killed in the bombing, 
said the withheld evidence raised profound doubts about the conviction of
Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
, the Libyan man released from jail on compassionate grounds in August 2009.

Documents given to Megrahi's defence lawyers a month before he dropped his 
appeal show that government scientists had found significant differences 
between a bomb timer fragment allegedly found after the attack and the type 
supplied to Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's former regime, Swire said.

A new account of the bombing and Megrahi's conviction, Megrahi: You Are My Jury
 <http://www.megrahiyouaremyjury.net/>, published in Edinburgh on Monday, 
alleges that the Crown Office, the police and Ministry of Defence scientists 
failed to disclose numerous pieces of evidence that damaged their case against 
the Libyan. Speaking at the book's launch with John Moseley, a fellow 
campaigner, Swire, chairman of UK Families Flight 103, said there were 
"mountains of evidence that doesn't seem to be right and that needs to be 
examined".

The timer evidence was "a vital clue", he said. "It's an anomaly that stands 
out plain for all to see." He said he had also pressed Frank Mulholland, the 
lord advocate and Scotland's chief prosecutor, to investigate evidence that the 
bomb could have been put on Pan Am Flight 103 after an undisclosed break-in at 
Heathrow airport and not in Malta as claimed, when they met last Thursday.

Opposition leaders quickly intensified the pressure by demanding that Kenny 
MacAskill, the Scottish justice secretary who released Megrahi, make an 
"urgent" statement to the Scottish parliament after the book alleged he had 
privately urged Megrahi to drop his appeal.

The book, written in close collaboration with Megrahi by a former member of 
his defence team, John Ashton, said MacAskill had made the suggestion in a 
private conversation with Libya's then foreign minister, Abdulati al-Obedi, 
after a formal meeting between the two governments on 10 August 2009 in 
Edinburgh. Quoting Obedi, Megrahi said MacAskill had asked to speak to the 
minister alone. "Once the others had withdrawn, [Obedi] stated that MacAskill 
gave him to understand that it would be easier to grant compassionate release 
if I dropped my appeal. He said he was not demanding that I do so, but the 
message seemed to me to be clear. I was legally entitled to continue the 
appeal, but I could not risk doing so."

Although significant doubts about his conviction had been raised by the 
Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, the next day Megrahi told his lawyer 
Tony Kelly that he was dropping his appeal "with huge reluctance and sadness".

Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, said "these grave allegations" 
suggested the justice secretary wanted Megrahi released to avoid a potentially 
embarrassing appeal.

Willie Rennie, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, said MacAskill had 
serious questions to answer. "Allegations of suppression of evidence and a 
Greenock prison release deal between the justice secretary and Abdelbaset Ali 
al-Megrahi make it essential for a statement to be made to parliament," he said.

A Scottish government spokesman dismissed the allegations about the 
conversation between MacAskill and Obedi as wrong and based on "third hand 
hearsay". He added: "We can say categorically that neither the Scottish 
government had any involvement of any kind in Mr Al-Megrahi dropping his 
appeal, or indeed any interest in it."

He continued: "The Scottish government do not doubt the safety of Mr 
Al-Megrahi's conviction, who was found guilty of an act of state-sponsored 
terrorism and did not act alone."

New interviews with Megrahi to be broadcast by the BBC and Al-Jazeera on 
Monday suggest the Libyan, who is in the final stages of advanced terminal 
prostate cancer, is extremely weak. Swire said he expected Megrahi to die soon. 
They last met in December. "He is so sick that he can't say more than a few 
phrases" and is "wracked with pain", Swire said.

The book, originally intended to be the Libyan's autobiography, includes the 
most detailed testimony from Megrahi so far about the trial and his campaign 
against his conviction. A journalist specialising in the Lockerbie bombing, 
Ashton was a researcher retained to help prepare Megrahi's appeal and paid 
indirectly by the then Libyan regime.

Ashton discloses that in the months leading up to Megrahi's incomplete appeal, 
the defence team was given large volumes of prosecution material on the 
forensic reports, the chief witness against Megrahi and the police's behaviour, 
which was not disclosed at Megrahi's trial in Camp Zeist in the Netherlands.

Claiming there was an "industrial-level failure to disclose", Ashton said the 
new material, which was not given to the defence or at the trial, included:

• documentary evidence that scientists at the Royal Armament Research and 
Development Establishment, now part of the Defence Science and Technology 
Laboratory, discovered there were key differences in the metal coatings used in 
a timer fragment allegedly used in Lockerbie and a control sample from the type 
supplied to the Libyans. One used a coating made wholly of tin; the control 
sample used a tin/lead alloy.

• evidence that the timer fragment had several differences from the 
Swiss-built devices sold to Gaddafi's regime, including the type of circuit 
board it used.

• that Tony Gauci, a Maltese shopkeeper who claimed Megrahi had bought clothes 
allegedly used in the bombing from his shop, was offered a US reward of $2m or 
more, while Gauci's brother Paul could have received $1m, with the help of 
Dumfries and Galloway police.

• that Gauci met Scottish detectives as many as 50 times while the prosecution 
case was being prepared; while making 23 formal statements. Four of the 
statements were not disclosed.

Gauci repeatedly changed his account, including identifying people who looked 
like known Middle Eastern terrorists and giving different dates on which the 
clothes were bought, seriously undermining the prosecution case against Megrahi.

The book quotes Megrahi insisting he was framed for the attack. He does not 
blame Dumfries and Galloway police, saying they were only doing their jobs, but 
accuses the Crown Office of a blatant breach of its obligation to disclose all 
the evidence in the case. "If I was a terrorist, then I was an exceptionally 
stupid one," Megrahi said.

If the prosecution was right, he carried out the attack at times using his own 
passport, stayed in his regular hotel, bought the clothes in a small shop 
rather than a large one, used normal scheduled flights to and from Malta, 
planted the bomb on two feeder flights before Pan Am 103, and used a timer the 
Libyans believed was exclusively made for them.

A Crown Office spokesperson refused to comment on the book's allegations or 
Swire's remarks to avoid prejudicing its ongoing enquiries. The Crown Office 
and Dumfries and Galloway is expecting to send investigators to Tripoli in an 
attempt to uncover any fresh evidence about Libya's involvement in the bombing.

"It is a live investigation," the Crown Office spokesperson said. "Lockerbie 
remains an open case concerning the involvement of others with Megrahi in the 
murder of 270 people."

The defence laboratory DSTL rejected Ashton's allegations about the timer, 
arguing that coatings on circuit boards could be modified. It said the crucial 
issue was the patterns on the circuit board, which clearly showed the Lockerbie 
fragment was of the type used byLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

A spokeswoman said DSTL no longer had complete records for the Lockerbie case, 
and said responsibility for disclosing evidence lay with the police and 
prosecutors.

Its "responsibility was to disclose what they knew to the police, prior to the 
trial, so that the police could discharge their disclosure responsibilities," 
she said.
 