
London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> earned their 
first win in the LV Cup this season by convincingly defeating the holders in an 
entertaining game at the Madejski Stadium. Irish fielded a much stronger side 
than Northampton – the home team contained around half of the Exiles' 
first-choice XV – and the selection paid off. Even allowing for a very slow 
start, Irish were always the more powerful and penetrative side.

The victory kept alive their remote hopes of reaching the semi-finals. 
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> need to beat 
Leeds at Franklin's Gardens this weekend and hope other results go in their 
favour.

The Saints began brightly but the Irish defence held firm and after eight 
minutes they took the lead, when Ryan Lamb kicked a 45-metre penalty. That lead 
should have been swiftly cancelled out but Joe Ford missed a penalty from the 
same distance. However, Saints continued to dominate territory and possession 
and their efforts were rewarded when Ford kicked a simple penalty to make it 
3-3.

The home side's first constructive attacking movement, after 25 minutes, gave 
them the upper hand. The wings Sailosi Tagicakibau and Adam Thompstone ran 
strongly, as did the flanker Jamie Gibson, and Irish progressed into the 
visitors' 22. Saints were penalised and Lamb knocked over the easy kick.

From the restart, Irish produced a flowing movement that brought them the 
first try of the match. Gibson was dragged down short but the hooker Brian 
Blaney drove over for his first try for the club, which Lamb was unable to 
convert.

Just before the interval Ford kicked a long-range penalty, but with the last 
movement of the half Irish extended their lead. A long pass from the flanker 
Steffon Armitage sent Blaney over again for a try which Lamb converted expertly 
from the touchline to leave Saints 18-6 behind at half-time.

The Exiles suffered a setback early in the second half, when Blaney was shown 
a yellow card for deliberate offside. Almost immediately Saints scored their 
first try, when Brett Sharman drove over from close range. The Welsh referee, 
James Jones, had to seek confirmation from his touch judge. Irish responded 
well and the replacement back-rower George Stowers drove over for a try that 
Lamb converted to make it 25-13 at the end of the third quarter. Blaney 
returned from the sin-bin and Irish sealed their bonus-point victory when 
Armitage scored from a lineout close to the line.

There was still time for Irish to produce their best try of the game, when 
Lamb and Elvis Seveali'i combined cleverly to send Daniel Bowden away on an 
unopposed 20m run to the line. Scott Armstrong's excellent individual try for 
Northampton in the last move of the match was only a consolation.
 