
The British foreign secretary, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, has urged the government 
and people of Afghanistan to utilise the support of international donors wisely 
as the country seeks to forge a new chapter in its history.

Speaking at the opening of the London conference on Afghanistan, Hammond said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/foreign-secretary-opens-london-conference-on-afghanistan>
 he anticipated wholesale political, social and economic change in Afghanistan 
over the next 10 years, but emphasised the need for collective responsibility.

“We meet at a time when Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is entering a new chapter in 
its history, the start of a transformation decade, where it will take the lead 
in managing its own development and security,” said Hammond, adding that much 
remained to be done.

“Today we must reaffirm that commitment to support the Afghan people as they 
develop their economy, realise their rights and connect with their region. But 
there are two sides to the commitment: the Afghan people and government … must 
demonstrate to the taxpayers of donor countries that their assistance is being 
used wisely.”

The London Conference comes at a pivotal moment for Afghanistan. The 
withdrawal of most Nato troops has triggered soul-searching about the 
achievements of a 13-year military mission that cost billions of dollars and 
thousands of lives, including those of 2,210 American and 453 British soldiers, 
as well as at least21,000 Afghan civilians 
<http://costsofwar.org/article/afghan-civilians>. 

 The Nato force will shrink from a peak of about 140,000 soldiers in 2011 to 
12,000 after 31 December. Recently, President Barack Obama approved an expanded 
combat mission for the remaining troops, allowing them to engage insurgents and 
provide air support.

Activists fear international funding will begin to dry up after the soldiers 
leave, even as insecurity rises and Taliban insurgents seek to exploit the 
military vacuum and the government’s lack of finances to pay soldiers, or 
kickstart the economy.

There is particular concern about women’s rights. At a pre-summit civil 
society conference on Wednesday, Afghanistan’s chief executive officer, 
Abdullah Abdullah, said he and former rival President Ashraf Ghani – who was 
inaugurated in September after disputed elections – had agreed four cabinet 
posts should be taken by women. Under the previous administration, the figure 
was three.

“The agreement at the moment is that four members of the cabinet will be 
women,” Abdullah said.

However, campaigners have pointed out that policies unveiled over the past few 
years, such as the Elimination of Violence againstWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> law, need to be fully 
implemented if lasting change is to be secured.

Hayatullah Hayat, a member of the secretariat of the civil society joint 
working group, said pledges from both the international community and the 
Afghan government were promising.

“But what we are emphasising is that we want these commitments to be in 
practice … we want the government, as soon as we go back, to put into practice 
all these things and we want the international community to support them,” said 
Hayat.

Before the conference, the Taliban staged a series of bomb and suicide attacks 
in the capital Kabul. Among the targets was a British diplomatic convoy near 
the city.

 Hayat said this was an effort by the militants to ensure their relevance in 
any future negotiations.

 “(The Taliban) want to prove to the world that if they are not considered, 
things will not go in the right direction,” he said. “We hope that with the new 
administration, as soon as the relations between the chief executive officer 
and president are resolved and the cabinet, I hope that we will go towards 
stability.”
 