 The alien spaceship that hovers over Lord's, two stylish new Tube stations, 
the "most beautiful boat shed in the world" and an elegant public lavatory are 
the main contenders for the best new building of the year.
The new Museum of Scotland has also been controversially added to the 
shortlist for the £20,000 Sterling Prize, one of Europe's most prestigious 
architectural awards, despite the fact that the Edinburgh edifice did not win 
any of the normal qualifying categories. The public convenience in Winchester - 
complete with cedar doors - is not in the competition proper, but has been 
nominated for a lesser, smaller buildings prize.

The much-lauded new media centre at Lord's - which has been compared to 
something from outer space - is the most eye-catching of the final eight, which 
also contains a Dublin school, a German training centre and London Jubilee Line 
stations at Stratford and North Greenwich.

The small River And Rowing Museum, in Henley-on-Thames, which this week was 
voted Museum of the Year, is the major surprise of the shortlist, squeezing out 
a plethora of much grander lottery-funded projects. Although the Museum of 
Scotland lost out to it in its own section, the judges included it in the final 
reckoning because of the "outstanding merit" of its design and because it 
"symbolises Scotland's new-found confidence".

Sir Norman Foster is also included for his restoration of the Reichstag in 
Berlin, despite his dispute with the German authorities over alleged "defects" 
in the domed parliament building.

Pointedly, the Royal Institute of British Architects, which runs the prize, 
did not nominate any new homes or hospital buildings. A spokesman, Tony 
Chapman, said: "We felt nothing this year reached the required standard and we 
did not want to devalue the prizes by awarding them anyway."

The Lord's media centre will be many people's favourite for the award, 
although the new Tube stations and the two German buildings are also fancied.

The Riba president, Marco Goldschmied, said: "Our standards are exacting, 
which is why in two categories we decided in the end not to make awards this 
year. We did though call in the Museum of Scotland for consideration for the 
prize, not least because it is a building of enormous cultural as well as 
historical importance."

A private home, however, has been nominated for the Stephen Lawrence Award, 
the £5,000 prize for buildings costing less than half a million pounds, named 
after the murdered black teenager who dreamed of becoming an architect.

Skywood House in Denham, Buckinghamshire, is shortlisted along with the Market 
Lane public conveniences in Winchester, Beetham House at Riverside School in 
Cumbria, and the Sculpture Gallery at Roche Court in Wiltshire.

The full shortlist for the Sterling Prize is the Ranelagh Multi-Denominational 
School, Dublin (O'Donnell and Tuomey); Sto AG Marketing and Training Building, 
Germany (Michael Wilford & Partners); NatWest Media Centre, Lord's cricket 
ground, London (Future Systems); The River and Rowing Museum, Henley (David 
Chipperfield Architects); Reichstag, Berlin (Foster and Partners); North 
Greenwich Jubilee Line station (Alsop Lyall & Stormer with JLE Project Team); 
Stratford regional station (Chris Wilkinson Architects); and the Museum of 
Scotland (Benson & Forsyth).
 