
Our thoughts at this difficult time must be passed to part-time musician 
turned full-time Steve Brookstein Twitter account tribute act Azealia Banks, 
who hasbeen dropped by a London festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/11/azealia-banks-axed-uk-music-festival-zayn-malik-twitter>
 that she was due to headline next month, all because she happens to be an 
objectively terrible person with no redeeming qualities.

Chances are you already know the events that kicked this all off. Banks 
initially claimed thatZayn Malik <https://www.theguardian.com/music/zayn-malik> 
had plagiarised a video of hers, then, when he later tweeted something vague 
and unrelated at nobody in particular, launched into a vicious and sustained 
attack – both racist and homophobic – that lasted for several hours, expanded 
to take in the entire British music industry, then collapsed in on itself in a 
series of exhausted, strangulated yelps. The tweets have since been deleted, 
but the damage had already been done.

There are those who might suggest that being banned from performing will 
prompt Banks into a period of career-salvaging online abstinence, but, at this 
stage, that would be a regrettable misstep. There’s already too much water 
under the bridge for that. No, Banks needs to harness this newfound notoriety. 
She needs to take a leaf out of her presumptive hero Katie Hopkins’s book and 
lean into her awfulness so hard that she eventually drowns in it.

Because God knows it would be lucrative. So far, Banks’s career has been 
limited to marginally impressing a couple of wan-faced Pitchfork writers five 
years ago, which hardly makes her a household name. But binning the music in 
order to become a professional troll would break her through to the mainstream 
in the most spectacular way imaginable.

As it stands, Banks is a maximum of three abhorrent rants away from being 
invited to appear on This Morning, where she could sit on a settee and say 
something so obnoxious about gay people that Philip Schofield would get to pull 
his special disgusted face at her. Then, it’s just a skip and a jump to a 
Channel 5 documentary called something likeAzealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks> – Do Immigrants Definitely 
Murder Babies?, which will, in turn, lead to a cushy gig writing “I hate fat 
people” once a week for a popular newspaper. Then, bingo, she’ll have made it.

This, if anything, is Azealia’s biggest crime. It isn’t that her views are 
genuinely horrifying. It’s that she hasn’t learned how to properly commodify 
them yet. This is fame-building 101. Hopkins would be furious.
 