
The government suffered a big defeat in the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> on Wednesday evening over its 
planned new injunctions to tackle antisocial behaviour.

Peers voted by 306 to 178, majority 128, against the plans amid fears that 
noisy children, carol singers and nudists could fall victim to the new 
injunctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/06/law-to-stop-eveyone-everything>
.

The government wants to replace antisocial behaviour orders (asbos) with a new 
type of measure, an ipna (injunction to prevent nuisance and annoyance).

But peers, led by crossbencher Lord Dear, a former chief constable of West 
Midlands, and supported by several prominent Tories, said the injunctions cast 
the net too wide and put at risk "fundamental freedoms" and free speech.

Peers backed Dear's amendment to the antisocial behaviour, crime and policing 
bill that would replace the phrase "nuisance and annoyance" in the legislation 
with "harassment, alarm or distress" – the words used for asbos. He forced a 
vote on the issue despite the Home Office minister, Lord Taylor of Holbeach, 
promising talks on the issue and possible concessions if he withdrew his 
amendment.

Dear said ipnas could be used for anyone over the age of 10, only required 
proof "on the balance of probability", could last for an indefinite period of 
time and result in a prison term if breached. The crossbench peer said a power 
which had worked for dealing with housing issues would be inappropriate to be 
used in the "public environment".

He warned: "It risks it being used for those who seek to protest peacefully, 
noisy children in the street, street preachers, canvassers, carol singers, 
trick-or-treaters, church bell ringers, clay pigeon shooters, nudists. This is 
a crowded island that we live in and we must exercise a degree surely of 
tolerance and forbearance.

"Because I shall continue to be privately annoyed at those who jump the bus 
queue, those who stand smoking in large groups outside their office, drinkers 
who block the footpath outside a pub on a summer's evening, those who put their 
feet on the seats on public transport, those who protest noisily outside 
parliament or my local bank, but none of that surely should risk an injunctive 
procedure on the grounds of nuisance and annoyance."

Lady Mallalieu, a QC and Labour peer, said: "My main concern is the extent to 
which lowering the threshold to behaviour capable of causing nuisance or 
annoyance to any person has the potential to undermine our fundamental freedoms 
and, in particular, the way in which the proposed law might be used to curb 
protest and freedom of expression."

Peers were told that, under coalition plans, the police, British Transport 
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police>, the Environment Agency, local 
authorities, Transport for London, the health secretary and housing providers 
would be among the bodies able to apply to ipnas.

Lord Mackay of Clashfern, a Conservative former lord chancellor, also opposed 
the government's current wording, telling peers: "One of the fundamental 
freedoms is the freedom of speech and it is surely clear that in exercising 
that one may annoy other people, one or more.

"If I have an opinion which I know some people, many people, will disagree 
with, I'm surely entitled to come out with it. Do I have to reasonably consider 
whether it will cause annoyance to somebody else? And if so, what should be the 
consequence? Am I to muzzle my point of view in order to placate people who may 
be annoyed?"

Labour's Lady Howells of St Davids said she was worried about the effect on 
race relations.

"This clause could have as damaging an effect as the sus laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/10/riots-police-black-community>
, which black people have struggled to have repealed," she said. "It will have 
serious effects on the black communities and the divisions will be further and 
further stretched as we know under the sus laws."

Lord Faulks, a Conservative who is soon to become a justice minister, defended 
the legislation, questioning whether the fears expressed by his fellow peers 
were realistic. He said the applications for an ipna could only be made by an 
agency such as a local authority, adding: "That is in fact a defence against 
inappropriate use. It means that somebody who is the victim of antisocial 
behaviour has to go through the filter of a hard-working agency in order to 
establish there is sufficient basis to seek antisocial behaviour, or ipna in 
this case… the use of an agency provides an important filter."

Faulks said the fact a judge also had to decide on the injunction provided 
another safeguard. "I simply cannot see a judge ordering an injunction for any 
of the sort of trivial matters which have been referred to in the course of the 
argument," he added.

Debate on the bill was later adjourned until Tuesday.
 