
Dieter Pfennig has been found guilty of murdering the Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> schoolgirl Louise Bell 
more than 30 years ago.

The supreme court justice Michael David delivered his verdict on Friday, 
finding the 68-year-old former physics teacher guilty beyond reasonable doubt.


Louise was abducted through her bedroom window in Hackham West in January 
1983. The 10-year-old’s body has never been found.

Her disappearance sparked a police search of unprecedented scale in suburban 
Adelaide and it remained one of South Australia’s most enduring cold cases.


Pfennig was charged in 2013 after DNA scientists in the Netherlands linked him 
to Louise’s pyjama top, which was found after her death.

Dieter Pfennig admitted in jail to murder of schoolgirl Louise Bell, court told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/28/dieter-pfennig-admitted-in-jail-to-of-schoolgirl-louise-bell-court-told>
The former maths and science teacher denied the charge and he did not give 
evidence at his trial, which ran for several months over 2015 and 2016.

During the trial, the prosecutor Sandi McDonald said the chances of a random 
male providing such a DNA match were greater than one in a billion.

But the defence lawyer Paul Charman argued that the evidence fell short of 
proving Pfennig committed the crime.

He said the DNA could have ended up on the top through contact with Pfennig’s 
daughter, who played basketball with Louise.

The pyjama top was found neatly folded on a neighbour’s front lawn, the trial 
heard.

The woman who discovered it also received a phone call from a man who said 
Louise was with him. The voice told her to look under a broken brick at a 
nearby corner, where police found the girl’s earrings.

The court heard Pfennig suffered from insomnia and liked to walk the streets 
at night. He lived in the same neighbourhood as Louise when she went missing.

Prosecutors said Pfennig admitted killing the girl to fellow prison inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/28/dieter-pfennig-admitted-in-jail-to-of-schoolgirl-louise-bell-court-told>
 on two separate occasions while in jail for another child murder.

He was convicted of killing 10-year-old Michael Black in 1989 and he was in 
jail when he was arrested over Louise’s murder.

The trial paused when Pfennig suffered a heart attack in Yatala prison in 
March. He was resuscitated and required surgery before returning to trial three 
weeks later.

Another man, Raymond Geesing, was originally sentenced to life in prison for 
Louise’s murder but that decision was quashed on appeal in 1985.

In 1991, police searched a home that used to belong to Pfennig, pulling up 
floorboards and excavating part of the back yard.

They returned to the home in 2012 and excavated other areas with the aid of 
ground-penetrating radar.

Witnesses at the trial included Pfennig’s daughter, a librarian, a student, 
police officers and forensic specialists.
 