
They began the day with such hopes. By 2pm on a furnace afternoon, with a day 
and almost two sessions to go, the final Test - and with it the series - had 
been lost, England all out for 188, the dream spun away once more by a fizzing, 
beguiling display of leg-spin bowling from Stuart MacGill.

Only Nasser Hussain, with a defiant half-century compiled over almost three 
hours, stood firm before knocking a return catch to the leg-spinner as MacGill 
teased and tormented the England batsmen on his way to innings figures of seven 
for 50 and a match analysis of 12 for 131.

A fellow can be proud when his contribution is rated more significant than one 
of the great Test innings from Michael Slater (one that in the final analysis 
probably made the difference between a drawn series and a 3 1 win for his 
country) or Mark Waugh's first-innings hundred. Doubly proud when in the 
process he has outbowled the finest spinner ever to draw breath.

Shane Warne eased himself gently back into Test cricket, and in his captain's 
estimation, there was not much to choose between the leg-spinner who took a 
dozen wickets and the one who bagged only a brace. But Warne failed to take a 
wicket in 10 overs yesterday when the situation was ripe for him to blossom at 
the moment MacGill, unquestionably, ought to be No1. The forthcoming Caribbean 
tour, when both will go but perhaps only one will play at any one time, could 
provide some selectorial headaches.

The match finished in bizarre fashion. Peter Such had spent much of the 
morning in the nets, perhaps working out how he might score vital runs if 
necessary.

When the opportunity came, and MacGill for once dropped short (his standard of 
accuracy improved dramatically as the series wore on), Such hit the shot of his 
Test match life, carving him towards extra cover. Unfortunately Mark Waugh, in 
an act of self-preservation at silly mid-off, had leapt into the air, and the 
ball, catching him on the right boot, rebounded straight back to the bowler.

The presentations afterwards were all to Australians: to Steve Waugh, a silver 
trophy as player of the series for 498 runs at an average of 83 to MacGill as 
man of the match and, with 27 wickets, the leading bowler and finally, to Mark 
Taylor a cheque and a special trophy. He collected a large Waterford Crystal 
likeness of the Ashes urn to be kept until such occasion as England might win 
it back. "I think I'll smash it, and put the bits in an urn," he joshed. 
Perhaps they can call it the Shards.

No one need write an obituary of this England team, however. Distance may show 
that they lost this match by 98 runs and the series by 3-1, and a conclusion 
may be drawn that not much has changed. But that would be unfair because 
England, as Taylor pointed out, 'came back strongly to worry us.

"To be honest," he admitted - and Taylor has never been less than honest - "I 
thought for three Tests there was not much difference between this side and the 
others that I've seen. There were occasions in the first three matches when it 
could have gone either way but each time it went to us easily. But we were 
challenged in the last 10 days and I respect that."

As if to reinforce Taylor's view, Alec Stewart, before the ceremonials, had 
taken his team across the ground to the site of the old Hill, applauded the 
Barmy Army (okay, he probably has seen Chelsea do something similar), but then 
led his players on a lap of honour.

Anyone trying that in Perth four years ago would have been laughed out of the 
country: here the respect and applause for the efforts of his side were genuine 
and heartfelt. A magnificent crowd total for this Test of more than 142,000 - 
25,000 of them yesterday - is testament enough to that.

Any realistic hope of an England victory yesterday almost certainly rested on 
their most dependable duo, Hussain and Mark Ramprakash, getting through the 
first session, or at any rate the best part of it, by which time the target - 
183 more required at start of play - would have been reduced to more manageable 
proportions.

Instead, inside 20 minutes, Glenn McGrath had sent Ramprakash on his way, 
smartly caught by Taylor low down at first slip to give the Australian captain 
157 Test catches, more than any non-wicketkeeper. Ramprakash had been fretting 
- stifled by some astute field placing and the agility of Justin Langer at 
short extra cover - and the flicked stroke, a poor one, was born out of 
frustration.

A procession ensued, not quite the shuddering collapse of wickets that might 
have been expected, but a steady haemorrhage.

On the hour Graeme Hick, such a fine hitter with a perpendicular bat, tried to 
sweep in ungainly fashion and was bowled behind his legs by MacGill. Then, 
seven overs later, John Crawley thrust a pad forwards to an off-break from 
Colin Miller, who had changed his line of attack to around the wicket. The ball 
pitched on the line of the stumps and straightened, sufficient for the New 
Zealand umpire Steve Dunne to give him out.

Failing to offer a shot was Crawley's mistake for although the delivery would 
still have conformed to the lbw law had he done so, the chances are the umpire 
would not have given it out.

The real killer, though, came shortly before lunch when Hussain, having 
reached his half-century with the aid of just two boundaries, checked a drive 
and MacGill took the return catch. The remaining three England wickets - those 
of Alex Tudor, Dean Headley and Such - were his perks.
 