
Towards the end of Tetsuya Nakashima's stunning revenge psychodrama 
Confessions, there's a bomb blast filmed in a way I can't recall having seen 
before. No mean feat, because explosions are now such an integral part of the 
film-maker's train set that it's hard to think of a modern action movie that 
doesn't feature at least one orgasmic detonation, followed by cool guys 
strolling away with nary a singed eyebrow, not even (as the song goes) 
bothering to look back.

It wasn't always thus. Explosions in movies used to be memorable. Their 
natural bailiwick was the war film, but they also cropped up in gangster movies 
("Made it Ma! Top of the world!" from White Heat) and thrillers. Hitchcock, who 
famously blew up a small boy on a bus in Sabotage (and later told Truffaut he 
regretted it because it had made the public "resentful") used the "bomb under 
the table" to illustrate the difference between surprise and suspense.

Surprise is a bomb going off without the audience having prior knowledge of 
it; suspense means that they know it's there. Powell and Pressburger's The 
Small Back Room, in which David Farrar plays a wartime bomb-disposal expert, 
dispenses with on-screen explosions altogether, but that doesn't stop a 
20-minute sequence on Chesil Beach from being a small masterclass in 
knuckle-gnawing suspense.

Two of the films that marked my childhood dangled the threat of explosive 
detonation for an agonisingly long time before delivering it. The entire 
build-up of Kiss Me Deadly hinges on the significance of the words "Manhattan 
Project, Los Alamos, Trinity", which unsettles the audience more than it seems 
to worry ignorant antihero Mike Hammer, who continues to bulldoze his way 
through the mystery until that extraordinary apocalyptic ending. And the trucks 
laden with nitroglycerine in The Wages of Fear are just a big bang waiting to 
happen – though when something does go off, Henri-Georges Clouzot films it in a 
simple but off-kilter way (later copied in Vertical Limit), which is more 
shocking than any amount of fancy slo-mo or bullet time.

The landmark movie explosions can be counted on your fingers – Zabriskie 
Point, Scanners, The Fury – whereas you could barely squeeze their imitators 
into a stadium. But somewhere around Die Hard, movie-explosion fatigue started 
to set in. In Armageddon, Michael Bay blows up space stations, asteroids the 
size of Texas, Paris, Bruce Willis – basically, everything he can think of. It 
used to take cojones to destroy the world, like Stanley Kubrick in Dr 
Strangelove, or Steve De Jarnatt in Miracle Mile (which begins as a perky 
romcom but builds, astonishingly, to all-out MAD), but nowadaysRoland Emmerich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/roland-emmerich> trashes the planet 
practically every time he makes a film. (We will, however, give a free pass to 
Takashi Miike, who was clearly taking the miike when he came over all Emmerich 
in the cop-versus-Yakuza showdown at the end of Dead or Alive.)

But one can't help feeling directors such as Emmerich and Bay are missing the 
point, treating us to climax after climax when many of us would prefer some 
decent foreplay, at least. "I hear you control your explosions,"Sharon Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sharon-stone> purrs to Sylvester Stallone in 
the absurd but irresistible The Specialist, and you only wish more directors 
would control theirs. For example, there's only one blast in La Scorta, a film 
that has you on the edge of your seat waiting for the mafia to plant a bomb to 
kill off the bodyguards or the judge they're assigned to protect. But director 
Ricky Tognazzi makes it count.

As does Kathryn Bigelow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kathryn-bigelow> in 
The Hurt Locker, where the booby-trapped beginning establishes the stakes, 
shows that everyone is expendable and leaves you on tenterhooks for the rest of 
the film, even when nothing much is going on. But most of today's action-movie 
directors would rather blow something up every two seconds. The more they 
go off, the less ammo they have left. It's not even surprising any more, let 
alone suspenseful.
 