
Tiger Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> is temperamentally 
inclined towards self-improvement rather than self-pity so it is safe to assume 
that if he allowed himself any contemplative moments on his 30th birthday 
yesterday they were not wasted pondering his own sporting mortality. The world 
No1 has a healthy interest in his own past but an even healthier appetite for 
the future. "If you look at a lot of guys' careers, it looks as if their peak 
years are in their 30s," he said this month. "Hopefully, my 30s will be even 
better than my 20s. That would be pretty neat. I think I can make it."

Of course, the psychological demands of golf at the highest level require that 
no man express even a modicum of self-doubt, lest thought manifest itself in 
deed, but in Woods's case it seems there is none. When asked whether he can 
improve on the last, unimaginably brilliant 10 years it seems obvious to him 
and to everyone else who comes within his orbit that he can.

Such confidence is unusual in a sport so capricious as golf but it is not 
misplaced, not least because of what has happened since he made his 
professional debut at the 1996 Greater Milwaukee Open at the age of 20. Then, 
Woods's ambitions stretched no further than attempting to win his PGA Tour 
card. "I was praying not to go to qualifying school," he said. Within seven 
weeks, he had won two PGA tournaments. Seven months later he had won the 
Masters by a record margin.

Since that remarkable week at Augusta, Woods has won nine more majors, 
including two Open Championships at St Andrews, and mopped up 48 victories on 
the PGA Tour in the United States, as well as 17 other wins around the world. 
That record speaks eloquently enough about his performances on the golf course, 
but it fails to capture fully his dominance off it.

Other players have made fortunes and won majors since 1996 but none has come 
close to capturing the public's imagination in the way Woods has, not even the 
combustible John Daly or Colin Montgomerie. When the US Tour commissioner Tim 
Fincham comes to negotiate a billion-dollar television deal next year, he will 
be speak about the commercial worth of every player but he and the television 
companies will know there is only one really worth the money demanded. The fact 
is when Woods is on screen, television audiences multiply fourfold. The fact is 
when Woods is taking part in a tournament, that tournament acquires gravitas 
and meaning.

The public fascination will intensify over the next few years as he pursues 
the only record that he truly cares about: the 18 professional major victories 
accrued by Jack Nicklaus. Even in the digital era, when the public's gaze will 
become ever more fragmented, the compelling narrative provided by Woods's chase 
will ensure professional golf is not cast aside like some sporting Rubik's 
Cube. The question, however, remains: will he actually overcome Nicklaus's 
benchmark?

On the face it, the answer requires little contemplation. As Woods himself 
said, most of the great players did not reach their peak until passing the age 
of 30. Nicklaus himself won four majors between the age of 31 and 33, and six 
after he was 35, including the 1986 Masters, when he was 46 years old.Arnold 
Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer> was another who did 
not blossom fully until the second half of his career, winning six of his seven 
majors after turning 30. Both men have little doubt that Woods has yet to reach 
his peak, for reasons that are as much physiological as historical.

"You go from pure strength to a more managed strength," Palmer said recently 
about the ageing process and its effects on golfers. "Tiger will have the 
strength he always had, but he'll be able to manage it better so he has both 
length and control together. That will lead him to play even better golf."

Nicklaus agrees. "Maturity plays a great part in golf. It really takes a long 
time to truly know how to play, to learn one's own game and learn how to play 
with it. Some players learn earlier, but even then they tend to peak later. I 
can't imagine Tiger being any different. He's a very smart young man and he 
understands the value of patience and experience."

Barring serious injury or the arrival of an as-yet-unidentified golfing 
genius, all that appears to stand between Woods and the fulfilment of such 
predictions are his own performances and desires. If that is the case, the deal 
is all but closed. Like any golfer, he is prone to the vagaries of form but 
unlike any other golfer he appears immune to its effects. Even when he plays 
badly, as he did for spells during this year's Masters, he still wins golf 
tournaments. And when he plays very badly indeed, as he did in the first of 
this year's US PGA Championship at Baltusrol, he is still a contender.

Like every other golfer, he has suffered through slumps (although in his case 
the term must be applied only relatively) but unlike others these slumps have 
been self-induced - the by-product of major swing overhauls he has deemed 
necessary to reach a higher plane. It is this pursuit of perfection, this 
unbreakable spirit, that has shaped Tiger Woods over the last decade and seems 
destined to shape him over the next.
 