
Now then, Best Beloveds – book signings. I spent a goodly portion of yesterday 
afternoon sitting in my study and signing bookplates to be pasted at a later 
date into (I have to assume) books that I have written. On the one hand, this 
spares the readers involved having to be in the same room with me – which many 
would say is a mercy – but on the other hand, it does tend to magnify the high 
levels of absurdity that book signings have always impressed upon me. There I 
was, in my own home, producing well-wishings, congratulations and comments for 
people about whom I know nothing at all and trying to pretend that the addition 
of my cramped and childish scrawl will in some way make a book more lovely. If 
I am told, for example, to recommend myself warmly to Maureen with, "I know 
you'll enjoy this", I am aware that I'm really speaking on behalf of the kind 
(if misguided) friend who thinks Maureen's life will be improved by a spot of 
ALK typing. If I have to say, "With love and kisses to Sidney", then love and 
kisses will be copied out and presumably reach Sidney, but the whole procedure 
will leave me feeling a little as if I'm suddenly thinking more of myself than 
is wise or accurate and indeed handing out favours of a more intimate nature 
than I would associate with a business transaction.

There are, of course, worse signing scenarios. Much worse. I am not a genre 
writer or a major seller, so I have rarely been left behind a table in a book 
shop simply in hopes that would-be readers will spot me – like an unlooked-for 
phalarope, or a bargain set of kitchen containers – and be immediately moved to 
make an impulse purchase and have it defaced by the author forthwith. But this 
doesn't mean that I have absolutely avoided the hour after humiliating hour of 
waiting, trying not to make eye-contact with browsers who are plainly wondering 
who the hell I am and being presented with perhaps one, maybe even two copies 
of my work, either by people who were clearly feeling sorry for me, or mad-eye 
stalkers who try to touch me inappropriately before stealing the mug of cold 
tea I have been nursing in order to give myself anything, anything, anything at 
all to do, because there's nothing I can do (Make notes? For what: another book 
no one will buy? Read someone else's book? Which is clearly doing better than 
yours? Read your own book? No one else will. Hide behind a newspaper? They can 
still see you. Cry? And so you bloody well should ...). Nothing else at all 
that won't simply make my position even more excruciating.

More hopeful are the signings that take place after readings – unless you're 
reading with someone ridiculously successful, as a kind of warm-up act for them 
... How clearly I recall that evening when I was on the bill with Martin Amis 
and Richard Ford. Dear God. Average Ford and Amis queue-dweller: "We've been 
waiting for three months outside the building – so glad we got in. This is 
little Martina – she was conceived in the queue. And Richard – he's two now ... 
We love you. Can we touch your hair? Sorry for talking for so long – we know 
you still have 3,000 other people to deal with ..." First person in ALK queue: 
"Hi. We met when we were both on holiday in Jordan. Um ... I thought I'd turn 
up. So ... You write books, then?" Second person in ALK queue: "I work here. 
You might as well sign this ... keep you busy." And that was my queue. And Mr 
Ford got me to sign a book for him, because he is a kind man. Not that Mr Amis 
isn't – he was just being borne shoulder-high across the foyer by admirers and 
didn't have his hands free.

Size matters, people. And you can't just walk away when you're done. Nobody 
leaves until the last book is Sharpied ... if that means you have to engage 
your tiny clutch of people in deep conversation, sing songs from shows, or open 
your wrists to pass the time, then so be it. This is literature, baby – nobody 
said it would be easy.

Signings after events where you've been flying solo may be slightly less 
soul-destroying. It could be that book-buyers, or owners, will attend a reading 
by you to deepen their experience of ... well, you don't really want to 
consider, but perhaps something that might mean they need a book to be signed. 
On long tours – especially in Germany, for some reason – this may mean a 
combination of tiredness and repetition will mean I actually forget how to 
produce my own signature and experience all manner of existential chaos while 
dutifully reproducing "Viel Glück, Heinrich!" and then something which would 
mean a cheque (in as far as such things still exist) would be instantly 
invalidated.

And then there are the imaginative readers and venues with extravagantly 
leatherbound visitors' books who will wait until your ebb is low and chuck in a 
casual, "Oh and just draw anything you want …" And suddenly there you are for 
all time on big posh pages between Vaclav Havel and Maya Angelou or suchlike, 
simply proving that you have no artistic ability at all, shouldn't be there and 
are a fraud, an upstart impostor and someone whose volumes should be burned at 
every opportunity.

Add in my long-running inability to know what on earth to say to people who 
have been kind enough to stand in a queue in order to speak to me and whose 
names I will inevitably misspell (oh, the number of wrongly-dedicated books I 
have had to hide away and pay for later, after providing replacements) and you 
have a whole bundle of nightmares and possibilities for failure and offence.

But better to have the opportunity to be publicly shamed and to go wrong 
horribly than not. Of course. Better to be published than not. Of course. And – 
even more of course – the printed dedication page, the one I get to write, 
provides me with an opportunity to do something useful in a book, something I 
can be happy about. Over the years and the books, I have been able to thank my 
mother for being my mother, to let my grandfather be happy about a small 
memorial to his wife and to remember him when he was also gone – to express the 
affection I never adequately articulate in person. It's the best I can do. 
Onwards.
 