
Armed police in balaclavas seized the Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> today, an hour before the 
time at which he had agreed to surrender to an arrest warrant on sodomy charges.

The move, two weeks after a 23-year-old male aide complained to police that 
the former deputy prime minister sexually assaulted him, is bound to stoke 
political tensions inMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>.

Tonight after eight hours of questioning Anwar was taken to hospital for 
tests. He was later remanded in custody.

Anwar, 60, who led a resurgent opposition to unprecedented success in March's 
general election, says the charges are "malicious" and fabricated to derail his 
political comeback.

The allegations are a grim echo of his conviction on sodomy charges a decade 
ago, when he served six years in jail. He was sacked from the government, but 
Malaysia's supreme court eventually cleared him and he was released in 2004.

His arrest in 1998 led to weeks of protests. Today hundreds of his supporters 
gathered at the police headquarters where he was being held, but calm prevailed.

"This is not a criminal case but a political case," said Azmin Ali, the vice 
president of Anwar's People's Justice party, who branded the arrest 
"outrageous".

Anwar was returning to Kuala Lumpur from Malaysia's administrative capital of 
Putrajaya when his car was stopped near his home. He was pulled from his car 
into a police vehicle with blacked-out windows and driven away in a large 
convoy.

His wife, Azizah Ismail, said: "I feel apprehensive because my husband … is 
not that well. He has a bad back, he's had surgery. And … he said they were not 
gentle." Anwar was beaten by the police chief after his arrest 10 years ago, 
and appeared in court with a badly bruised face.

No formal charges have been laid and police can hold him for up to 14 days 
without charge. But his senior lawyer, Sankara Nair, said he expected Anwar to 
be charged under the law, which makes sodomy — even between consenting adults — 
punishable by 20 years' imprisonment.

"There is no basis for this whole fabrication and malicious attacks," Anwar 
said before his arrest. "It is just a repeat of the 1998 script. You can see 
the pattern."

The sodomy allegations have already hampered his plans to challenge Abdullah 
Badawi's ruling National Front coalition. It has held power for 51 years but 
lost its two-thirds majority in the elections after opposition parties won 82 
seats in the 222-member parliament, up from 19.
 