
The long-running political drama starring Malaysian opposition leader Anwar 
Ibrahim's relentless campaign to democratically reform Malaysia's government of 
its corruption and nepotism recently took another absurd turn with his criminal 
prosecution forallegedly sodomising a former aide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/02/anwar-ibrahim-sodomy-trial>.

"The charges levelled against me have to be seen in this broader context. The 
fact that the same plot that was hatched in 1998 is being repeated reflects a 
certain bankruptcy and lack of creativity on [the government's] part," says 
Ibrahim in myexclusive interview 
<http://www.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/asiapcf/03/04/malaysia.anwar.interview/> with 
the 62-year-old rabble rouser.

Ibrahim, whose political party won significant seats in the 2008 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/mar/16/malaysiasoppositionreborn>
, is a veteran of such accusations, having spent six years in prison for 
corruption, which he and many others maintain was solely fuelled by a malicious 
government campaign to silence him for his vocal protests. In 2000, he was 
sentenced to nine years on sodomy charges, which were later overturned by the 
supreme court in 2004. He says:
 "Since our unprecedented victory in the March 2008 polls, there have been 
relentless attacks to destabilise our state governments, to threaten and 
intimidate our elected officials and to undermine public confidence in our 
ability to govern. You name it and it's been hurled at us." 
Such harassment, if true, is certainly exacerbated by Ibrahim's pointed 
critique of the government. Most recently, Ibrahim blasted the government's 
official response to the highly publicised 31 December court ruling allowing 
non-Muslims, namely Christians, the freedom to use the word"Allah" for God 
<http://anwaribrahimblog.com/2010/01/26/muslims-have-no-monopoly-over-allah/comment-page-1/>
. The government appealed the court's decision. Subsequently, 11 churches and 
one Sikh temple were attacked, and Christian Malays complained about facing 
widespread harassment throughout the country.

Although Ibrahim fervently believes in the "vast potential of [Malaysian] 
multi-ethnic society," he declares that "the religious tensions currently on 
display are a recent phenomenon in that they are largely the result of a 
political conflict, rather than deep-seated religious antagonisms."

For Ibrahim, the government's response was another myopic and selfish attempt 
to curry favour with religious right-wing elements, which represent a growing 
electorate base for the ruling party, and another "deliberate attempt to 
provoke religious tensions to give a pretext to clamp down on civil liberties 
and justify the continuation of the same old race-based policies of the past".

The government's flirtation and courting of such extremist elements represents 
a "destructive path", according to Ibrahim:
 "The idea that you can be successful in a country as diverse as Malaysia by 
marginalising more than 35% of our non-Malay population is absurd. And to 
further assume that those policies benefit the Malay majority is also 
misplaced. The benefits of these policies are mainly accrued by the family 
members and cronies of [party] leaders – billions are squandered every year." 
Ibrahim believes the government has currently lost all credibility by curbing 
and censoring the press, interfering with the judiciary and escaping 
accountability for its actions by influencing the "free and fair elections" 
process.

To bypass such government restrictions and to ensure his voice is heard, 
Ibrahim and his followers have actively engaged new media, specifically using 
Twitter to constantlytweet updates <http://twitter.com/anwaribrahim> during his 
ongoing trial. Ibrahim explains his strategy:
 "New media has been a cornerstone of the opposition's communications 
strategy. The mainstream press in Malaysia is completely controlled by the 
government, but the internet has remained free. We need to be active online and 
develop innovative ways of reaching out to online and offline constituencies to 
compensate for this information deficit." 
When talking about President Obama, Ibrahim says: 
 "When he won, I shared in the optimism expressed by many that his presidency 
would usher in a new chapter in relations between America and the Muslim world. 
I did not expect he alone to solve all the problems … At this point, few 
[Muslims] see much difference between his foreign policy and that of the Bush 
administration. I remain optimistic for now – it is too soon to offer a final 
verdict." 
Although the president was initially embraced by Muslims worldwide, his 
popularity has consequently subsided in light of the US war in Afghanistan and 
civilian casualties in Pakistan caused by predator drones. The continued 
suffering and occupation of Palestinians continues to dominate the emotions and 
collective mindset of Muslims worldwide and serves as a major grievance against 
the US. Ibrahim explains the phenomenon:
 "Our frustration with the United States stems entirely from its lopsided 
handling of the conflict … If America is seen to be inconsistent in applying 
principles of freedom, justice and self-determination in Palestine, then 
Muslims elsewhere are going to have a hard time believing the rhetoric is real 
… And the failure to achieve a meaningful peace gives authoritarian Muslim 
governments an easy opportunity to score political mileage out of the 
Palestinians' plight. Stoking the flames of anti-Americanism and antisemitism 
is a good distraction from the stench in their own backyard." 
Undoubtedly, Ibrahim will continue to passionately advocate against such 
injustices. However, it remains to be seen if his protests will be that of an 
elected official or as a convicted prisoner serving a lengthy sentence for 
sodomy. In light of such odds, my final question to Ibrahim was whether a true 
democracy could actually emerge and flourish in modern-dayMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and if his years of imprisonment 
and seemingly unending struggle were worth the sacrifice?
 "The answer is yes on both accounts. Democracy can flourish in Malaysia. We 
see it happening before our very eyes and we are on the cusp of something 
great. And if given the chance, I don't think I or the many thousands who have 
sacrificed for the future of this land would want to be anywhere else but here."
 