
Malaysia's opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, today accused the prime 
minister and his wife of involvement in bringing a sodomy case against him and 
said he would seek to put them on the witness stand to prove it.

Anwar's long-awaited trial on charges of sodomising a former male aide was 
postponed by about five hours pending a ruling on whether the defence has the 
right see the prosecution evidence in advance.

The former deputy prime minister has long maintained the allegation is a 
conspiracy to end his political career.

Anwar was almost knocked down by television crews jostling to get near him as 
he arrived at the Kuala Lumpur high court for the start of trial. He emerged 
about 30 minutes later to announce it had been adjourned until late afternoon.

Anwar claims he has evidence that a 25-year-old male former aide, Saiful 
Bukhari Azlan, visited Prime Minister Najib Razak and his wife, Rosmah, a few 
days before makingthe allegation of sodomy against him in August 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/08/malaysia>.

"They were personally involved in this conspiracy and frame-up. We have 
evidence that Saiful Bukhari was in the house with Rosmah and met Najib a few 
days before he lodged the police report," Anwar said. He said he plans to 
subpoena the prime minister and his wife as witnesses.

Najib has acknowledged Saiful came to see him but says it was in connection 
with a university scholarship. Najib was deputy prime minister at the time.

Anwar spent six years in prison after being convicted of corruption and an 
earlier sodomy charge, following his removal from the cabinet in 1998 amid a 
power struggle with the then leader Mahathir Mohamad. He maintained his 
innocence all along and was freed in 2004 when Malaysia's top court overturned 
the sodomy conviction.

Sodomy is a crime in this Muslim-­majority country, carrying a prison sentence 
of up to 20 years.

Anwar, 62, says the latest charge is designed to undermine his three-party 
opposition alliance, which made strong gains during theMarch 2008 general 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/mar/16/malaysiasoppositionreborn>
. Government officials deny plotting against Anwar.

A guilty conviction would bar Anwar from politics for five years from the date 
of his release, and deal a blow to the opposition alliance, which has appeared 
to be on the verge of breaking the ruling party's stranglehold on power for the 
first time since independence in 1957.

But the alliance, whose members have widely differing political ideologies, is 
already showing cracks as long-standing differences emerge. Anwar's conviction 
could widen those differences and also distract people from the country's 
religious tensions and economic problems.

The trial was supposed to start last summer but was delayed by a series of 
applications by defence lawyers. Anwar was in the political wilderness after 
his first sodomy conviction. He revived his career at the March 2008 elections, 
when his alliance won more than one-third of the seats in parliament amid 
public disenchantment with the National Front governing coalition.
 