
Malaysia's political future is up for grabs after opposition leader Anwar 
Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim> was acquitted on 
Monday of sodomy after a two-year court case that divided voters and dominated 
politics.

The 64-year-old was charged in 2008 with sodomising a former aide in a case he 
contended was politically motivated.

With the charges dismissed, analysts said Anwar's next battle would involve 
creating a viable alternative to the ruling National Front coalition, in power 
since 1957, if he is to have a chance of beating it in general elections 
expected to be called this year.

"This [verdict] gives Malaysia an opportunity to move out of dirty politics – 
for the [National Front] to get out of gutter politics, and for the opposition 
to … move on and change its tactic from being the 'martyr' and 'target' to one 
that promotes a positive alternative for voters," said Bridget Welsh,Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> specialist at Singapore Management 
University.

But Anwar, as leader of a three-party coalition that includes Islamists and an 
ethnic Chinese party, will have his work cut out, according to Malaysian 
political analyst Ong Kian Ming.

He said that some voters would see Monday's acquittal as a positive step in 
the reforms recently enacted by the prime minister, Najib Razak. "Had [Anwar] 
been convicted, he could have garnered more public sympathy. That now won't be 
as strong. Najib can now try to capitalise on this by continuing on with his 
political reforms, saying that the judiciary system is free and fair, and … 
gaining some momentum by leading up to the next election."

Najib hopes to regain a strong mandate, despite suffering in popularity polls, 
and has promised economic and civil liberty reforms.

In an interview at home after the verdict, Anwar described Malaysia's "need to 
tackle corruption, unemployment [and create] changes that benefit the civil 
service, quality education", and his coalition's "plans to provide the people 
with all this when we take over Putrajaya [Malaysia's administrative capital]".

"Now that I am vindicated and freed, naturally I will work with my friends and 
… the coalition of opposition parties to ensure we can wrest control," he said.

Experts have warned that the opposition, long seen as underdogs, will now have 
to prove it can truly take control. Ibrahim Suffian of the thinktank Merdeka 
Centre told the Malaysian Insider website that "the positive outcome of the 
case evens out the playing field".

"The next election will now be fought on policy issues, on alternatives of how 
the country can be further governed and developed, and on quality instead of 
sensational issues," he said.

Anwar's acquittal followed a trial whose lurid details grabbed headlines in 
the mainly Muslim country of 28 million, where sex between males is punishable 
even if consensual. Anwar faced a caning and up to 20 years' jail if convicted.

The case rested primarily on testimony by Anwar's accuser, Mohd Saiful Bukhari 
Azlan, 26, as well as semen samples found on Saiful's body that investigators 
said matched Anwar's DNA. Defence lawyers contended that Saiful's testimony 
about the alleged sodomy, at a Kuala Lumpur condominium in 2008, was riddled 
with inconsistencies and the DNA evidence mishandled by investigators.

In his ruling on Monday, judge Mohamad Zabidin Diah told a packed Kuala Lumpur 
courtroom: "The court at this stage could not with 100% certainty exclude the 
possibility that the [DNA] sample is not compromised. Therefore it is not safe 
to rely on the sample."

A jubilant Anwar greeted reporters after the verdict, as his family wept. 
"Thank God justice has prevailed," he said. "I have been vindicated. To be 
honest, I am a little surprised."

Some 5,000 opposition supporters had gathered outside the court, chanting "
reformasi" (reform) as a police helicopter flew overhead and riot police, 
backed by a truck mounted with a water cannon, watched the crowd amid fears 
that the demonstration could turn violent.

Three explosions were reported outside the courthouse, with a preliminary 
investigation finding two explosive devices underneath police cones. Two people 
were injured and taken to hospital, but it is still unclear who was responsible.

The judgment is seen as a positive step forward for Malaysia's judicial system 
and could have a major impact on upcoming general elections.

Anwar and supporters have long said the sodomy allegations were a government 
plot to weaken his opposition coalition. The charges emerged after the grouping 
made unprecedented gains in the 2008 general elections, winning more than a 
third of seats.

and aAnalysts believe Anwar, who has vowed to scale back Malaysia's most 
draconian laws and reunify the racially-divided nation if elected, could 
potentially knock out the incumbent government entirely.

The trial was Anwar's second in 14 years. Once considered Malaysia's heir 
apparent, he served as both deputy prime minister and finance minister in the 
incumbent UMNO party before a spectacular fall from grace with his then 
premier, Mahathir Mohamad, in 1998.

After repeated calls for reform and an end to cronyism, he faced corruption 
and sodomy charges – which he adamantly and famously denied whilst sporting a 
black eye after being beaten by police – and was then jailed for six years 
until his sodomy conviction was overturned in 2004.

Anwar has since become the glue binding together the three very ideologically 
different parties in his opposition alliance.

Anwar's accuser, Saiful, who did not attend the hearing, wrote on Twitter 
after the verdict that he would "remain calm, continue praying and be patient".

In a statement released after the verdict, the Malaysian government said 
ruling proved that "Malaysia has an independent judiciary and this verdict 
proves that the government does not hold sway over judges' decisions.

"The current wave of bold democratic reforms introduced by [Najib] will help 
extend this transparency to all areas of Malaysian life."

But the legal saga may very well continue, as chief prosecutor Yusof Zainal 
Abiden has not yet decided whether to appeal against the acquittal.

Timeline

1993: Anwar Ibrahim, then 46, becomes deputy to premier Mahathir Mohamad. They 
have a very close working relationship and Anwar is seen as the heir apparent.

1998: Despite being named Asian of the year by Newsweek, Anwar sacked after 
falling out with Mahathir over calls for reform and an end to cronyism. He is 
soon charged with corruption and sodomy (the latter based on accusations by his 
family's former driver), charges he dismisses as politically motivated.

1999: Jailed for six years for corruption.

2000: Nine year sentence for sodomy.

2004: Anwar freed after Malaysia's top court overturns his sodomy conviction.

8 March 2008: Anwar leads an opposition coalition to wrest a third of 
parliament's seats and five states from the incumbent National Front coalition, 
which has ruled Malaysia since it became independent from Britain in 1957.

14 April 2008: A ban against Anwar holding public office, related to his 
corruption conviction, expires.

29 June 2008: His former aide, Mohd Saiful Bukhari Azlan, then 23, files a 
police report accusing him of sodomy in a Kuala Lumpur condo. Anwar denies the 
charges.

31 July 2008: Anwar's wife resigns her parliamentary seat in Penang, her 
husband's home state, to allow Anwar to contest the byelection.

7 August 2008: Anwar is charged with sodomy.

26 August 2008: Anwar wins a landslide victory in the Penang byelection, is 
sworn into parliament and declared leader of the opposition.

1 February 2010: Second sodomy trial begins.

9 July 2011: Anwar is injured at a rally calling for clean and fair elections 
after police fire water cannon and teargas at protesters.

10 July 2011: He warns PM Najib Razak's government that a "hibiscus 
revolution" may soon occur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/malaysia-leader-reform-elections-revolution>
 unless protesters' demands for electoral reform and an "end to dirty politics" 
are met.

22 August 2011: In a statement to the high court in Kuala Lumpur, Anwar calls 
the sodomy charge against him "a vile and desperate attempt at character 
assassination".

3-8 January 2012: Anwar embarks on a national tour, rallying support before 
the verdict.

9 January 2012: Anwar is acquitted of sodomy charges. 
 