
The Malaysian opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, today said the police had no 
case against him in a sodomy charge that has thrown Malaysia into political 
uncertainty.

Anwar, who was freed on bail after spending the night in prison, told 
reporters that police should not use the allegation "as a personal vendetta 
against me", but added: "Mind you, they have no case against me."

Anwar has denied the accusation, which he says is a political conspiracy to 
prevent him from challenging an increasingly unpopular government. The 
allegation was brought by a former aide and Anwar was allowed bail on the 
condition that he reported to police on August 18.

Sodomy, even between consenting adults, is a crime punishable by up to 20 
years in prison in mainly MuslimMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>. Anwar, who was once a former 
deputy prime minister, is considering running for Malaysia's leadership.

The government suffered a stunning setback in the March general elections when 
a three-party opposition alliance led by Anwar won five of Malaysia's 13 states 
and left the government with less than a two-thirds majority in parliament.

Anwar, once seen as the heir apparent to former prime minister Mahathir 
Mohamad before being sacked 10 years ago, said the sodomy allegation was a ploy 
to destroy the opposition.

The incident has provoked fears of political instability and hit investor 
confidence.

The home minister, Syed Hamid Albar, admitted the case had hurt Malaysia's 
international reputation.

"It has created some negative perception. He has shown the country in a very 
unfair light," he told reporters. "I do not exclude that (bringing in foreign 
experts) to obtain scientific evidence. But it must not interfere with the 
sovereignty of the country and the way we conduct our laws."

The deputy prime minister, Najib Razak, defended the police action in 
arresting Anwar before he turned up voluntarily to meet investigators, as his 
lawyers said had been arranged.

"We should be transparent so that there will be no apprehension about what the 
police are doing," he said. "And we must always treat Anwar Ibrahim with the 
degree of decorum and respect that he deserves."

Anwar was dismissed as deputy prime minister in 1998 and later jailed for 
corruption and sodomy after leading street protests against Mahathir's 
government during the Asian financial crisis. The supreme court overturned the 
sodomy conviction six years later.

Unlike his previous sacking and arrest, which drew tens of thousands of people 
on to the streets, there was little show of public support for Anwar this time.

Meanwhile, Malaysia's ruling party held a first round of meetings to determine 
whether to keep the prime minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, as head of the party 
after the March electoral setback.

About 19,000 branches of the United Malays National Organisation party are to 
hold meetings in the next month to discuss preparations for the party's 
congress in December, when Abdullah intends to defend his party presidency.

The current meetings will be watched for signs of whether members support 
Abdullah and his plan to hand over power to Razak in mid-2010 in a transition 
some officials insist should be faster.
 