
Malaysia's opposition leader today said he had enough parliamentary support to 
topple the government and urged the prime minister to give up power peacefully.

Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, who has set 
today as the deadline for taking power, refused to spell out what his majority 
would be in the 222-member assembly, but he needs 30 government MPs to defect 
and join his coalition of 82 members.

Political tension has been high in the run-up to today's deadline, as the 
government used its Internal Security Act (ISA) toarrest a leading political 
blogger <https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2008/sep/12/malaysia.internet>, 
a journalist and an opposition politician.

Anwar told supporters at a rally yesterday that he was willing to give the 
prime minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, one or two weeks to accept defeat and 
resign.

But "there is a limit to one's patience, particularly when we have the 
numbers", Anwar said today. He warned the government not to invoke security 
laws to arrest defecting MPs.

"We are firm that victory is finally at hand. Our vision of rebuilding this 
country ... is within reach," he said.

Abdullah brushed off Anwar's claims of having won over enough government MPs. 
"This is Anwar's mirage. It is nothing. It is merely a dream," he said.

The government has been on the back foot after losing its two-thirds 
parliamentary majority in March for the first time since independence over 50 
years ago.

Anwar said that if he formed the next government, he would root out corruption 
and end a system of affirmative action for ethnic Malays, more than half of the 
27 million population.

The opposition says the system has failed the people it was aimed at helping 
and created a class of crony businessmen dependent on the government.

Anwar leading a new government would be a remarkable comeback. He was the 
anointed successor to Malaysia's long-serving leader, Mahathir Mohamad, until 
the two fell out. Anwar was sacked and imprisoned on a sodomy conviction in 
1998. The conviction was overturned in 2004 after he had served six years in 
jail for a related corruption conviction.

Over the last year, Anwar has cobbled together a coalition of three diverse 
political parties, including his multiracial People's Justice party, ahead of 
the pivotal March 8 general elections.

Anwar was charged this year with raping a young male aide. He has dismissed 
both accusations as politically motivated to stop his comeback. No date has 
been set for his trial.

The ruling National Front coalition has been weakened by dissent against 
Abdullah, who has seen his authority erode rapidly since the March vote.

The political uncertainty has hit business and market confidence in one of 
south-east Asia's most stable countries.
 