
Malaysia's governing party has been accused of a series of dirty tricks to 
ensure it keeps hold of power after Sunday's election.

The prime minister has denied chartering planes to move tens of thousands of 
voters into marginal constituencies.

Najib Razak's party, the United Malays National Organisation, said the flights 
had been paid for by supporters and not by the prime minister's office and were 
a routine effort to help people get back home to vote.

The opposition allege a number of other abuses in the lead-up to the closest 
election since independence in 1957.

One researcher found a suspiciously large number of voters over the age of 100 
in the eastern state of Sabah. Nurul Izzah Anwar, the daughter of the 
opposition leader,Anwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, says there are nearly 5,000 
extra voters registered in her constituency in Kuala Lumpur whom she cannot 
trace.

The official election commission says it has done everything it can to ensure 
this is the cleanest election in Malaysian history.

A survey released by the Merdeka Centre, an opinion polling firm, predicted 
that Najib's National Front coalition could win 85 parliamentary seats, while a 
three-member opposition alliance led by Anwar will take 89 seats. It said 46 
seats were too close to call while two seats would go to smaller parties.

The National Front holds 135 seats in the 222-member parliament, while Anwar's 
People's Alliance has 75 seats after some MPs left in recent years to become 
independents.

If the opposition wins, it will mark a remarkable comeback for Anwar, a former 
deputy prime minister who was sacked in 1998 and subsequently jailed on 
corruption and sodomy charges that he claims were fabricated by his political 
enemies. He was released from jail in 2004 and now leads the biggest threat to 
the National Front.

"They are in a dead heat. Both are enjoying equally strong support. It will be 
a very tight contest," said Ibrahim Suffian, the head of the Merdeka Centre.
 