
Male redback spiders at risk of being cannibalised by their sex partners have 
developed a survival tactic: mating only with females too young to eat them.


New research has identified the adaptive behaviour among some males of the 
widow spider genus. Adult females of the genus regularly cannibalise their 
partners during or after mating.

Male Australian redback and brown widow spiders facilitate monogyny – the 
practice of males mating only once – through “self-sacrificial mating 
behaviour” in a bid to increase their chances of paternity.

But a study published in the journal Biology Letters has found that some males 
will avoid becoming a post-coital meal by mating with immature females that are 
not yet experienced in eating their partners.

As if Australia didn't have enough spiders – 13 new species found in Queensland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/27/thirteen-new-spider-species-discovered-australia-bush-blitz>
The benefits of immature mating were twofold, researchers concluded: not only 
did it “rarely end in cannibalism”, it also increased male spiders’ chances of 
successful insemination – and even copulating with a second female as they 
usually survived their first mating.

Though the young females are also not mature enough to conceive immediately, 
the sperm is stored in their two sperm storage organs until they reach 
adulthood, when it fertilises their eggs.

A third of the immature redback spiders collected by researchers were already 
mated.


The study, titled “Copulation with immature females increases male fitness in 
cannibalistic widow spiders”, was co-written by five researchers from Canada 
and Israel.

The study concluded the behaviour may have arisen from the same “extreme 
sexual selection” that was thought to have led to the evolution of male 
self-sacrifice in Australian redback and brown widow spiders.

Maydianne C B Andrade of the University of Toronto Scarborough, one of the 
co-authors, told the Guardian the behaviour was instinctive, not learned, and 
widespread.

“Even in this extreme system where females usually hold all the cards, males 
have evolved a way to shift the balance to favour their own reproductive 
success,” she said.

Andrade had been studying widow spiders for two decades, and the discovery had 
been quite by chance.

“I suspect there is quite a lot going on in nature of which we are unaware.”

But, she warned, the “challenging” tactic was not without risk for the male 
spiders.

It was effective only during a brief developmental window after female 
spiders’ genitalia had developed, but before they had fully matured.

Misjudging that window could be fatal, because females without developed sperm 
storage organs had been observed cannibalising adult males.

Despite that, the study said redback males “successfully find and mate one out 
of three immature females in nature”.

Female redback spiders can store sperm for up to two years and use it to lay 
several batches of eggs. Young spiders are also cannibalistic and will eat 
unhatched eggs and their siblings.

Sydney man dies after redback spider bite, although not yet clear bite to blame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/12/sydney-man-dies-after-redback-spider-bite>
Females take an average of about four months to mature, and may live for two 
to three years. About the size of a large pea, they are significantly larger 
than males, which mature after about three months and live for only about six 
or seven months if they are not killed during mating.

According to a 2002 report 
<http://beheco.oxfordjournals.org/content/14/4/531.full> by Andrade, more than 
80% of redback males die without finding a potential mate in nature, and 65% of 
matings end in the male being eaten.

Males approaching females are also sometimes mistaken for prey and eaten 
before mating occurs.

The same 2002 study found that some male redbacks had evolved to “somersault” 
during copulation, twisting their abdomens on to the fangs of their mates in 
what was construed as an “adaptive male strategy of self-sacrifice” that, if 
they were eaten, increased their chances of paternity.


Dr Robert Raven, an expert in redback spiders at the Queensland museum, was 
effusive about the latest finding.

“These animals are literally beside us, in our houses and so forth, yet we 
know so little about them.”
 