
As the conflict in Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> escalates, 
the region and its complicated politics are dominating the headlines. Much of 
the reporting is short on context, or makes assumptions about what readers do 
and don't know. For those who want the broader picture, here are the five of 
the most important points too often neglected in the coverage:

One: Gaddafi's guns didn't start this conflict, but they helped

It's tempting to view the conflict in Mali as an inevitable consequence of the 
fall of Libya's Muammar Gaddafi. There is some evidence to back this up. 
Gaddafi, for all his craziness – or perhaps because of it – was a stabilising 
force in the Sahel region. His cash supported regional politicians, his 
occasional military support propped up regional governments, and his grandiose 
diplomatic initiatives forced regional cooperation. He was the policeman, and 
without him no country is strong enough to enforce order.

For Mali, Gaddafi was especially important because his army recruited 
thousands of young, fit fighting men from the northern Tuareg ethnic group, 
historically Mali's most vociferous opposition. The Tuaregs are the nomads of 
the Sahel desert, and have long rejected the authority of the government down 
south in Bamako. They've initiated several armed uprisings in the past decades. 
So when Gaddafi's Tuaregs were forced back home to northern Mali – bringing 
with them caches of sophisticated weapons and lots of cash – there was always 
going to be problems.

No one, however, expected a new rebellion to erupt quite so quickly. It was 
just a few months after Gaddafi's death that the first Tuareg-led raids against 
the Malian army were launched. This speed was only possible because the 
necessary political framework had already been laid down by a new-look Tuareg 
group called the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA). The 
MNLA had kicked out some of the Tuareg political old guard, including veteran 
leader Iyad Ag Ghali, and resolved to restart the fight against Bamako's rule. 
This they did, strengthened hugely by the influx of highly trained trained 
soldiers and equipment.

Two: The rebels are a disparate, dysfunctional coalition

It's common in media reports to see the fighters in the north described as 
"the rebels" or even "the terrorists". Although a useful shorthand, this is not 
strictly true because it implies some kind of a cohesive, coordinated 
organisation working together for the same goals. The truth is more 
complicated. "The rebels" are in fact a loose, ever-shifting coalition of four 
main rebel groups, all of which have different aims and motivations.

Let's start with the MNLA, the vanguard of the rebellion; its initial 
offensive pushed Mali's ramshackle army out of most of northern Mali, which the 
MNLA subsequently declared an independent republic called Azawad (recognised by 
nobody). The MNLA is the torch-holder for Tuareg nationalism, and while it pays 
some allegiance to Islamic ideals it puts nationalism before religion. As the 
situation has evolved over the last year, the MNLA has lost out to 
better-organised Islamist groups – who have not been afraid to attack MNLA-held 
positions – and has effectively been cut out of its own rebellion. It's now 
promising to work with international forces to re-take northern Mali from the 
Islamists.

Next up is Ansar Dine, which is the strongest Islamist group in terms of 
popular support and territory controlled. It is led by none other than Iyad Ag 
Ghali – the Tuareg leader sidelined by the MNLA. He underwent a political 
conversion and emerged out the other side as a fundamentalist, Sharia-imposing 
Islamist (how much of this is political opportunism we're not quite sure). 
Ansar Dine insists its goal is to control the whole country and turn it into an 
Islamic state. The links between Ansar Dine and other Islamist groups are 
unclear; certainly Ansar Dine has cooperated closely with them before and 
continues to do so, but it seems more amenable to negotiation than the others.

Then there's the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> (Mujwa), a new, rather shadowy group 
led by the notorious smuggler Sultan Ould Baddy. It's an offshoot of al-Qaida 
in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), started when Ould Baddy was snubbed as AQIM 
chief. Since then AQIM and Mujwa have established a cooperative truce, leaving 
Mujwa to do what it does best: use its religious, political profile as a cover 
for criminal activity, particularly drug-trafficking and possibly 
people-trafficking. At least this is the strong suspicion: it's hard to prove 
anything in the Malian desert right now.

Finally, there's AQIM itself. It has been active in Mali since about 2003, 
using it as a base from which to target other countries. Since the rebellion it 
has become more active, assisting Ansar Dine to take and govern key northern 
cities. However, AQIM is still active elsewhere: it was one of AQIM's main 
commanders, Mokhtar Belmokhtar, who claimed responsibility for last week's 
deadly Algerian hostage situation.

The fractured nature of the rebels in the north has been one of the major 
stumbling blocks to any potential solution: it's hard to negotiate when you're 
not sure who exactly to negotiate with.

Three: Mali's government is about as illegitimate as they come

France, in defending its military intervention in Mali, likes to point to the 
desperate plea for assistance received from Mali's interim prime minister, 
Dioncounda Traore, as if that gives it all the legitimacy it needs. 
Technically, France might be right, but it's worth pondering the legitimacy, or 
lack thereof, of Mali's prime minister and its government.

In March last year, just before planned national elections, President Amadou 
Toumani Toure was quicklyoverthrown in a military coup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/mar/22/mali-rebels-coup>, led by junior 
officers. Elections were scrapped, and under pressure from the international 
community the military appointed a civilian interim government led by Traore. 
Traore's prime minister was the widely respected Cheikh Modibo Diarra, 
Microsoft's former Africa head.

This did not mean that the military – the same military which had failed so 
miserably to protect the north – had given up its grip on power.Traore was 
badly injured 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/may/24/mali-president-traore-medical-tests>
 when the army conspicuously failed to protect him from an angry mob which 
stormed the presidential palace, and spent two months in Paris recovering. 
Diarra, meanwhile, lasted only until he started openly disagreeing with the 
coup leaders,before being ousted 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/dec/11/mali-prime-minister-apology-resignation>
 in what was effectively another coup.

The upshot of all this is that Mali has no representative leadership. While 
the north is split between rebel groups, the south is riven by political 
divisions and a decidedly murky, although military centred power structure – 
hardly a recipe for success.

Four: Al-Qaida's not really here

Don't be confused by the name: al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb is not the same 
as the al-Qaida of Osama bin Laden. Think of it as a franchising operation: 
al-Qaida agrees to let AQIM use its name in order to increase its global 
profile, while AQIM benefits from having the scariest name in the terrorist 
business. In fact, AQIM is the successor of an Algerian Islamist group which 
was smashed by Algerian authorities, and most of its leadership is, in fact, 
Algerian. Its major goal is the imposition of Sharia law in the Sahel region, 
and particularly inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>. 
Tactically, however, it has learned a lot from al-Qaida proper, incorporating 
kidnappings and suicide bombings into its repertoire.

So it's inaccurate, or at least disingenuous, to talk about the "al-Qaida 
presence" in the Sahel as part of a big global al-Qaida expansion; or to put 
the Algerian hostage drama into the context of other al-Qaida operations such 
as 9/11 or the Nairobi embassy bombings. It's more accurate to put the hostage 
drama in the context of Algeria's long-running problems with Islamist 
opposition. Expect to hear more of this generalising al-Qaida talk, however, as 
the Mali situation becomes just another stop in the "War on Terror", 
particularly from media outlets looking to simplify the situation.

Five: Africa had its own plan to fix this mess

Africa wasn't hanging around waiting for France to step and sort out the 
Malian mess. There was another plan in motion, one proposed by the West African 
regional bloc Ecowas and approved by the United Nations security council.

This plan called for a west African intervention force, numbering a little 
more than 3,000 soldiers, to help Mali's army re-take the ground it had lost 
and deal decisively with the various rebel groups. The idea was to take it 
slowly and explore possible political solutions first; also to give military 
planners the time they needed to formulate effective tactics and establish 
supply lines. Deployment of troops was only scheduled for sometime in August. 
This may seem overly cautious, but military men and politicians were convinced 
that a premature intervention would do more harm than good, especially if it 
came before negotiation.

"Negotiation is the best way," said General Carter Ham, head of the US 
military's Africa Command. "Military intervention may be a necessary component. 
But if there is to be military intervention it has to be successful, it cannot 
be done prematurely."

The situation changed, however, with the rebels' swift and unexpected advance 
into southern Mali, amid threats to take the capital Bamako. The government 
panicked and called for immediate reinforcements, provided by France. The west 
African contingent scrambled to ready themselves, but only began arriving in 
Bamako last week – without the negotiations and preparations that they had 
hoped would ease their passage and made a successful resolution to the conflict 
more likely.
 