
A violent and funny Coen Brothers-style tale of murder and camaraderie in gold 
rush California has achieved the distinction of becoming the first western to 
be shortlisted for the Man Booker prize.

Patrick deWitt's The Sisters Brothers was a surprise inclusion in the six 
books announced on Tuesday, although not necessarily for those who have read 
it. Also a surprise was the exclusion of novels by the previous winner,Alan 
Hollinghurst <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst>, and 
twice-shortlisted Sebastian Barry.

Julian Barnes was immediately installed as favourite for The Sense of an 
Ending. He was one of four British writers on the list, which also includes 
Carol Birch for Jamrach's Menagerie and two first-timers,Stephen Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephen-kelman> for Pigeon English and AD 
Miller for Snowdrops. DeWitt, and fellow Canadian Esi Edugyan's Half Blood 
Blues completed the six competing for the £50,000 first prize.

Sheer enjoyment was evidently part of the judges' thinking. The chair of 
judges, former MI5 director Stella Rimington, said: "We want people to buy 
these books and read them, not buy them and admire them."

The Barnes book, at 150 pages, does not take long to read. But judge Gaby Wood 
said readers would be richly rewarded: "In purely technical terms it is one of 
the most masterful things I've ever read and I certainly think, the most 
masterful things Barnes has written," she said. "The total distillation of 
ideas he has been rehearsing for almost all his working life."

Ladbrokes now make Barnes 13/8 favourite. If he does win, it will be painful 
for bookmakers as three-quarters of all money backed has been for the writer 
who has been shortlisted three times (Flaubert's Parrot, England, England and 
Arthur and George) but never won.The wild card on the list is DeWitt, who tells 
the story of Charlie and Eli Sisters, two assassins who work for the shadowy 
"Commodore", and who travel from Oregon to California on the trail of a 
prospector called Hermann Kermit Warm. Mullin called it "sort of black, 
slightly humorous but also rather chilling story and I think people will enjoy 
it".

The inclusion of Kelman – a former warehouseman, care worker and local 
government administrator – will give hope to budding novelists. His story, set 
on a Peckham housing estate, sat for a time on a literary agent's slush pile 
before Bloomsbury won a bidding war to publish it. It tells the story of an 
11-year-old Ghanaian immigrant and parallels have been drawn with the Damilola 
Taylor case. But judge Matthew d'Ancona said: "To describe the novel as merely 
a roman à clef about that case is to undersell it dramatically. It is much more 
than that." The book "fizzes with doubts and anxieties about the way we live 
now" and has accidental topicality after the recent riots for which it reads as 
a "form of grim prophecy."

There were two eastern Europe post-cold cold war novels on the longlist, with 
AD Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ad-miller>, a former Moscow 
correspondent for the Economist, winning out for a novel tracing a young 
Englishman's moral decline in the new Russia. Rimington said Miller managed to 
capture "vividly and succinctly for the first time in a novel that we were 
aware of the atmosphere of Moscow after the collapse of the Soviet Union."

Birch is shortlisted for her tenth novel, one that made the Orange prize 
longlist. It tells the story of a young boy whose life changes when he 
encounters Charles Jamrach, an importer of wild and exotic animals. The list is 
completed by 33-year-old Edugyan, whose story, set in the aftermath of the fall 
of Paris in 1940, was not one judge Susan Hill said she would have picked up, 
had she not been judging.

"I would have missed one of the most original, assured and moving novels," she 
said. "It's quite unlike any other novel I've read about the second world war, 
although it is not just about or set in the war."Of the big omissions – 
Hollinghurst and Barry – Rimington said they had to simply decide on the six 
they thought were the best. Hill said the only way to judge this prize – it's 
her second time – was to not read the author but read the book. "There are no 
hidden agendas and there are no conspiracies," she said.

What is striking is the success of independent publishers with four 
represented on the list – Canongate, Serpent's tail, Atlantic and Granta. The 
Man Booker literary director, Ion Trewin, said: "I think it says something 
about the state of publishing, that the risks are being taken now, rather 
interestingly, by smaller publishers."

Birch and Miller are joint second favourites – 7/2 with Ladbrokes – for the 
prize, which will be presented on 18 October at Guildhall in London.
 