
An escaped murderer who killed a British couple on their honeymoon has died 
after being shot by police in Antigua. Avie Howell was shot during a 
confrontation with a police officer in the remote parish of St Mary on Friday. 
Howell died in hospital about three hours later at midday local time (5pm BST). 
He had absconded from Antigua's jail the previous day.

In 2011, Howell was sentenced to life in prison alongside his accomplice, 
Kaniel Martin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/28/antigua-honeymoon-murders-men-convicted>
 for the murders of Ben and Catherine Mullany. The couple, from Rhos, near 
Pontardawe, south Wales, had been married for just over a fortnight when they 
were shot in their hotel room in Antigua in 2008.

Police had confirmed earlier that Howell had escaped with Kenroy Laurie 
Marshall, who was being held on fraud charges. Counsellor Jamal Wright, based 
at St John's police station, said: "Apparently they used a sharp implement to 
cut out a portion of mesh and jumped over the northern prison wall, which is 
about 30ft [9 metres] high."
 Ben and Catherine Mullany. Photograph: PA 
Howell and Martin burst into the Mullanys' chalet at the Cocos hotel in July 
2008. The couple, both 31, were shot in the head before the killers took their 
mobile phones, cash and a digital camera. Catherine Mullany, a doctor, died 
instantly. Her husband, who was studying physiotherapy at the University of the 
West of England in Bristol, was flown home on a life-support machine. Despite 
the efforts of his wife's colleagues at Morriston hospital in Swansea, the 
former South Yorkshire police officer died a week after the shooting.

Five weeks after attending their wedding in Cilybebyll, their parents were 
attending the couple's funeral.

Three years after the deaths, Howell and Martin were found guilty of murdering 
the honeymoon couple as well as shooting a 43-year-old shopkeeper, Woneta 
Anderson. Last year Howell received an additional four-year sentence for a 
burglary he had carried out weeks before murdering the Mullanys.

The couple's family were said to be "extremely shocked" at the news that 
Howell had been able to escape.
 