
A decade ago I discussed with Ron Atkinson, that least reconstructed of 
football managers, the arrival of suspect European habits in the top tier of 
the English game. At the time, much was being made of the virtues of Arsène 
Wenger's insistence on a scientific nutritious diet for his Arsenal players. 
Atkinson did not have too much truck with wholefoods: "What people forget," he 
said, "is that it's not just the good teams that do it in France and Spain. 
It's the crap teams as well. The pasta and broccoli doesn't help them. If it 
suited a player of mine to have a fry-up before he went out, then he'd have a 
bloody fry-up. When I see these dieticians I always think ofAlf Tupper 
<http://www.toughofthetrack.net/index2.htm> in the Rover comic, who used to win 
the Olympics on fish and chips out of the wrapper ..."

In the years since, that conversation has sometimes come to mind when first 
the national team and then club after club has "gone down the continental 
route" and appointed a manager or coach – a saviour – from across the water. 
One result has been that Atkinson's archetypal Alf Tuppers have long been in 
retreat from perceived sophisticates in slim-fit suits. While British – and 
particularly English – football managers have been caricatured as struggling in 
their native language, the advance of great communicators from abroad – even 
trailing interpreters – has come to seem inexorable. For the first time, this 
Premier League season began with half of the clubs run by coaches brought in 
from the rest of Europe and beyond. As desperation has begun to set in at 
certain clubs, five more have been added since then (two at Fulham alone), but 
for the first time in recent weeks it seems that the stereotype might perhaps 
have run its course.

Even José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho>, the 
singular cause of the universal desire for metrosexual messiahs among Premier 
League directors and fans, recently lamented the influx. "At this moment in the 
Premier League – and I know I'm speaking against myself – I disagree with so 
many foreign coaches in this country," he observed, with particular reference 
to the renaissance of Steve McClaren, who had to take his brolly to the 
Netherlands to restore his reputation. "I don't see a reason for that because I 
don't feel the English managers are in any point behind the foreign ones ... I 
just feel sorry that in a football country like England managers are not 
getting enough jobs in this country. The main culture has to be always British."

If there are signs, with the recent (albeit precarious) appointments of Tim 
Sherwood at Spurs and Garry Monk as an interim at Swansea, that owners are more 
alive to the idea that imports might not always be the answer, then you can 
probably trace the shift to the realisation that for every Special One there is 
also an AVB. The appointment ofAndré Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas>, Mourinho's mini-me, 
first at Chelsea and then again at Spurs was a classic example of the shameless 
attraction of recruiters everywhere for the candidate who looks the part.

Critically, AVB had known only success in his brief career in Portugal; given 
that the long Premier League winter requires above all an ability to cope with 
discontent, that CV proved dramatically and almost instantaneously 
insufficient– twice. Something of the same seems to have done for the mercurial
Michael Laudrup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/michael-laudrup> at 
Swansea (when Monk was appointed there were strange mutterings from the 
boardroom about the manager's affection for Paris and of "our club being 
returned to us") and, though it is very early days, you fear for Ole Gunnar 
Solskjaer at Cardiff, another who has known almost exclusively golden times 
both at Manchester United and in his Norwegian career – no preparation at all, 
you imagine, for employment with Vincent Tan.

It is notable that among clubs in the lower half of the Premier League – which 
is to say, this season, those involved in a 38-game relegation scrap – the 
three most inspired managerial performances have all come from old-school 
British gaffers, men who have crucially known as much of disaster as triumph, 
and lived to tell the tale.

Tony Pulis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tony-pulis> has provided an 
immediate sense of discipline and order at Crystal Palace that has offered a 
real sniff at avoiding what looked inevitable relegation (a fate that the 
former Stoke man, famously, has never suffered). Likewise, Steve Bruce at Hull 
has married pragmatism with a sense of adventure, in a manner that you suspect 
would have had commentators melting had he done it with a Spanish or South 
American inflection, rather than in his affable Geordie. Big Sam's February 
miracle at West Ham, meanwhile, has been a victory for Alf Tupper lovers 
everywhere.

As past England managers Sven‑Goran Eriksson and Fabio Capello knew only too 
well, in what, despite the pseudo‑scientific analysis, is essentially a cultish 
environment of blind faith and desperate hope, one of the greatest assets a 
football manager can bring is a sense of the unknown. As with witch doctors or 
homeopaths, the less the new man says of his methods the more chance he has of 
preserving belief in them.

In this respect homegrown managers have a disadvantage: they can rarely appear 
gnomic, only garrulous or glum. For though as everyone is aware the league 
tables each year can be pretty accurately plotted in advance by revenue and 
spend, miracles are universally expected. (It is an irony that the man who 
deviated most significantly from his predicted position in the money league 
last season, Steve Clarke at West Brom, was among the first to be sacrificed 
this time, for a little-known Pepe Mel, as soon as his club hovered near its 
expected level.)

Predictably, Sherwood and Monk have been praised for their "openness" and 
"honesty" in the weeks that they have transformed the spirit of their 
respective clubs. It remains to be seen whether there is enough mystery in that 
approach to keep them employed.
 