
I cried when the mental health professional told me I had generalised anxiety 
disorder (Gad). It wasn’t sadness that prompted the tears, it was relief. I 
received my diagnosis five years ago, but for the previous 20 years, I’d 
experienced and been treated for symptoms of depression. In that moment in the 
consultation room, however, I realised that the depression was itself a symptom.

The real cause of my troubles was my anxious thoughts and feelings. They are 
ever-present, like discordant elevator music, and the volume and intensity 
increases with particular triggers. These triggers are known as 
anxiety-provoking assumptions (APAs). These are the unshakeable, unchallenged 
and largely false beliefs that anxiety suffers carry with them about themselves 
and the world.

Academic life frequently triggers anxious thoughts and feelings connected to 
my APAs: approval, perfectionism, control, vulnerability and dependency. 
High-pressure events – such as giving a paper at a conference or a job 
interview – prompt worry and stress (as they do for almost everyone), but it’s 
the meaning attached to those events that fuels excessive anxiety and sometimes 
panic attacks.

I’m an approval addict. As a professional, I know that appraisal and critique 
are central tenets of scholarly life, but as a person, receiving and giving 
criticism is difficult and uncomfortable. I can blind-review a journal paper 
just fine, but I dread assessing students’ assignments or being asked questions 
at conferences. My rational mind tells me that I can handle it, but the anxious 
part interprets questions as hostile actions designed to expose me as a fraud.

Over the years, giving in to my approval APA has meant missing out on funding 
and work. Not wishing to upset or offend colleagues has meant that I’ve passed 
up on opportunities that would have progressed my career.

Another of my APAs is perfectionism. This, along with my need for approval, 
means that I draft my tweets half a dozen times before posting. I need 
everything to be perfect first time, every time. My energy is depleted by the 
anxious chatter in my head when I fail to meet the high expectations I impose 
on myself.

My hunger for perfection isn’t helped by my tendency to be a control freak; 
that’s my third APA. A shortage of staff in my department often means that 
there isn’t anyone to delegate to, even if knew how or was prepared to.

As my workload and anxiety increase, the physical sensation of angry 
butterflies in my stomach intensifies, and my brain decides to double down by 
reminding me that I’m neglecting my young family in a bid to stay afloat.

Like many researchers, my work is fixed-term; no research project equals no 
job. Some job security would probably help, but I now accept the uncertainty 
and precariousness of research contracts as an occupational hazard. It’s a 
price worth paying to do the job I love (believe it or not, I absolutely love 
what I do).

Understanding the interplay between the causes of my anxiety and the demands 
of scholarly life has helped me to challenge and change the habits of mind that 
get in the way. In fact, I’ve used the tools of my trade as social scientist to 
help.

When embarking on a course of cognitive behavioural therapy, I approached my 
treatment as if it were a mini research project: uncovering, tweaking and 
testing variables, and observing the effects of the interventions on my mind 
and mood.

I’ve developed a toolkit of techniques to help me gain control of my 
hyperactive imagination. My favourite is “thought court”: weighing up the 
evidence to establish the validity or accuracy of one’s beliefs about oneself, 
others and the world.

I tend to keep my personal life to myself at work, so I’ve chosen not to tell 
my colleagues about my anxiety so far – although this could be my control APA 
again – but I’m confident that they wouldn’t ridicule or reject me if I did.

In the meantime, I try to keep the volume of the elevator music as low as 
possible. When it gets louder, I take strength from knowing that while I’ll 
probably never beat my anxiety, I can at least manage it.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 