
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> judges who 
feel a defendant does not deserve jail time would still be forced to hand out 
sentences of up to seven years under the Palaszczuk government’s proposed 
answer to the state’s contentious anti-bikie laws.

The Queensland Council for Civil Liberties attacked the government’s mandatory 
sentencing model for gang crimes, saying its only exemptions – for informants – 
would encourage fabricated evidence and raise the spectre of police corruption.

The QCCL president, Terry O’Gorman, said the draft laws going before a 
parliamentary committee on Wednesday were “slightly less severe” than the 
Newman government’s Vicious Lawless Association Disestablishment Act (Vlad), 
which mandated 15 to 25 years extra punishment for gang crimes.

Bikie colours likely to be banned in new Queensland organised crime crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/bikie-colours-likely-to-be-banned-in-new-queensland-organised-crackdown>
 O’Gorman said mandatory sentencing remained fundamentally unjust and unfair, 
and could lead to the “outright absurdity” a court being forced to send a 
defendant to jail for seven years for a crime that would otherwise not have 
attracted a jail term.

He pointed to the supply of recreational amounts of cannabis within a group of 
friends as potentially triggering the extra punishment under the proposed 
“serious organised crime circumstance of aggravation”.

The Palasczuk government has retained the mandatory sentencing measure as a 
tool intended to help investigators break the code of silence that protects 
organised crime groups.

 Other sweeping reforms proposed in the government’s serious and organised 
crime legislation amendment bill include consorting laws and raising maximum 
jail terms for child exploitation and drug trafficking.

The only way of evading extra jail time for a gang crime would be to provide 
useful cooperation to police in a serious criminal investigation.

In notes to the draft laws, the government says that is among amendments that 
“potentially breach the fundamental legislative principle” of the Legislative 
Standards Act 1992, which requires laws to have sufficient regard to individual 
rights and liberties.

But this was justified because the punishment would only apply to someone the 
state proved beyond reasonable doubt was “a participant in a criminal 
organisation” who committed a prescribed offence “at the direction of, in 
association with, or for the benefit of a criminal organisation or a 
participant in a criminal organisation”, the notes state.

O’Gorman said these prescribed offences included money laundering, which could 
capture someone who was handed $100 by a bikie looking to buy a bag of dope for 
personal use.

The government kept mandatory sentencing in the draft, despite a committee for 
the Wilson taskforce review into organised crime laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/04/queensland-to-dump-bikies-anti-association-laws>
 voting four to two against mandatory sentencing, with only police unions in 
favour.

But O’Gorman said the government appeared to have since made its decision by 
consulting police and merely briefing the other parties, including the 
Queensland Bar Association and Queensland Law Society.

The Wilson taskforce report noted concerns including the unjust effect of 
mandatory sentencing on Indigenous communities in Western Australia and the 
Northern Territory and in people smuggling cases.


It also noted that mandatory sentencing was an incentive for an accused to 
provide false information in the hope that they could avoid the sentence.

The QCCL called on state parliament crossbenchers to reject the seven-year 
mandatory sentencing to avoid “serious miscarriages of justice”.

One of those crossbenchers, Rob Pyne has indicated he expected crossbench 
opposition to such measures and others, including a ban on wearing bikie 
colours in public, wasunlikely to prevail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/bikie-colours-likely-to-be-banned-in-new-queensland-organised-crackdown>
.

This was because the Liberal National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-national-party> was 
unlikely to oppose any parts of Labor’s gang laws package on civil liberties 
grounds, Pyne said.

O’Gorman said the high court’s observation that under Vlad it was “quite 
possible that a person who would not receive a custodial sentence in the lower 
range of seriousness (for the offence the person was arrested for) would 
nevertheless be sentenced to a mandatory 25 years’ imprisonment” held for the 
new laws.

The explanatory notes to the Palaszczuk government bill state that: “If the 
base component (the sentence a person gets for the offence that person was 
arrested for) does not require the offender to immediately serve a sentence of 
imprisonment, the offender is to immediately begin to serve the mandatory 
component”.

O’Gorman said: “We will inevitably witness the spectre of a person fabricating 
evidence and falsely accusing someone of a crime that they have not committed 
in order to avoid the mandatory sentence.”

“A regime of mandatory minimum sentencing arguably can spawn, as in other 
jurisdictions here and overseas, police corruption.

Futile and costly bikie laws have not addressed ‘organised’ crime but then, 
they didn’t need to | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/futile-and-costly-bikie-laws-have-not-addressed-organised-but-then-they-didnt-need-to>
“An important point is judges are going to have to sentence people to jail 
when an individual judge will say in the circumstances of this, I’ve been told 
by parliament I must give you this sentence, even though I personally think it 
is unjust.

“That’s the whole problem with parliament and mandatory sentencing: it’s 
parliament saying one size fits all.”

O’Gorman said the discretion that would be given to Queensland prosecutors to 
apply the extra punishment would mirror “the now discredited US mandatory 
sentencing scheme”, which the US was in retreat from.

This scheme was “filled with examples of prosecutors misusing their position 
and forcing people to plead guilty under threat of indicting them for offences 
that carried large mandatory sentences”, he said.
 