
After Marcel Koller’s appointment as Austria coach almost five years ago, he 
was sneered at, criticised and questioned. Before taking the job, the former 
Switzerland midfielder had indifferent managerial spells in Germany with Köln 
and Bochum, where he was sacked in 2009. Now he is regarded in Austria asder 
Nationalheld– the national hero. “It is recognition for me that we have 
developed something,” said Koller. Under him,Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> have soared from 77th in the 
Fifa rankings to inside the top 10, ahead of England and France.

For the first time, Austria have secured a place at a European Championship by 
qualifying. When they played at the 2008 tournament as co-hosts they lost two 
and drew one of their three games. Under Koller, though, everything has 
changed. “It is a totally different team to 2008,” said the Watford defender 
Sebastian Prödl. “The whole package is different and our preparation then was 
very different. Not only the players but also the whole setup has really 
advanced. Austrian football has established a brand of football.”

Austria were untouchable during qualification from Group G, finishing eight 
points ahead of second-placed Russia and scoring 22 goals, four of which came 
against Sweden last September. After securing a place at the finals with that 
4-1 victory, Koller celebrated by wearing a beret and eating a baguette in his 
post‑match press conference.

Austria Euro 2016 team guide: tactics, key players and expert predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/austria-euro-2016-team-guide> 
Koller is not your typical coach at Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>. The Swiss uses Facebook and 
Twitter to interact with Austria supporters, posting video messages, photos and 
a general insight to his work. “I have the feeling that fans appreciate it,” 
the 55-year-old said. “They get the chance to see what you do. It is a good 
platform to show what I actually do in the job, without the big details. This 
way I am reachable and I am not in some glass house. We must be reachable to 
the fans and not fake.”

Austria’s matches against Hungary on Tuesday and then against Portugal and 
Iceland will be a first taste of a major tournament for most of the squad. 
Austria last went to a World Cup in 1998 and went out at the group stage under 
Herbert Prohaska. Since then, no Austria manager has enjoyed success. Otto 
Baric, Hans Krankl, Josef Hickersberger and then Karel Bruckner took charge, 
before Bruckner’s tumultuous reign ended after eight months, with seemingly no 
light at the end of the tunnel.Koller’s predecessor Dietmar Constantini shook 
things up and introduced a raw, teenage David Alaba but left after two 
miserable qualifying campaigns for the 2010 and 2012 tournaments.

Koller’s squad may not be dripping with experience but they are littered with 
quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/marc-janko-ride-on-rollercoaster-austria-euro-2016>
, including Bayern Munich’s Alaba, the Austria captain and Leicester City 
defender Christian Fuchs, whom Koller signed for Bochum in 2008, and the Stoke 
winger Marko Arnautovic.
David Alaba 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=David%20Alaba&team=Austria&isSimple=true>
 David Alaba, of Bayern Munich, is one of Austria’s standout players 
“There is no reason to doubt us,” Koller said. “But we cannot just magic 
tournament experience into our squad. We just want to concentrate on our 
football. The players from the top leagues help us with their presence and 
experience. For me as the coach, it is important to draw out these qualities.”

Prödl lauded the “perfect conditions at the hotel and on the pitches” despite 
heat at their Mallemort base, 35 miles north of Marseille, and Koller agrees 
there is no room for excuses. “Not only is the weather hot, but so are we. In 
the buildup to the first game, we certainly cannot say we have not been 
suitably prepared. We have been well received. It is now up to us to perform on 
the pitch.”

Koller insists his team will not underestimate Hungary, who have one of the 
weaker squads at the tournament. “There is no danger of that,” he said. “We had 
a good qualification campaign but that was a while ago. I am not one to live in 
the past. We must now get up to speed again. I think that they are very well 
organised, defensively they are very strong and they play well on the 
counterattack. We must be very concentrated and at the same time aggressive. 
They can hurt us.”

The renaissance under Koller has not been straightforward and his work ethic 
is evidently tireless. “I have no overtime clause,” said the Zurich-born coach 
in an interview last year. Not all of the rise should perhaps be attributed to 
Koller, though. Austria finished fourth at the Under-20 World Cup in Canada in 
2007 and no fewer than five of those players have since established themselves 
as key pillars in the senior squad, including Werder Bremen’s Zlatko Junuzovic.

Koller, whose playing career was spent entirely at Grasshoppers in his 
hometown, is recognised as Austria’s favourite Swiss but is not concerned about 
how his hero status might alter, should his team fail to live up to newfound 
expectations. He is certainly happy, though, and this year extended his 
contract until 2017. “What there is in Switzerland, there is also in Austria,” 
said Koller. “For me, it is important to excite the fans. It’s important to 
pick up the people off the street and get them on board, so that they can fill 
the stadium and enjoy our football. I cannot guarantee a victory but the 
important thing is to fully deliver on the application. I am not worried about 
what happens if I lose it.”
 