
Marco Tardelli has warned the Republic of Ireland not to underestimate Andorra 
as they attempt to secure automatic qualification for Euro 2012. The Republic 
head into their final two Group B games, against the Andorrans on Friday night 
in the Pyrenees and against Armenia at home on Tuesday, knowing two victories 
would edge them ahead ofthe group leaders 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&pstr=cup_comp&CTID=-31&cpid=-31> Russia 
should they slip to defeat in Slovakia.

Having disposed of Andorra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> 
relatively comfortably in September last year, when a 3-1 win at the Aviva 
Stadium cemented a perfect start to the campaign, Ireland will fly out from 
Dublin on Wednesday overwhelming favourites to return with the points.

However, the assistant manager Tardelli's huge experience as player and coach 
means he will be taking nothing for granted at the Estadi Comunal. He said: 
"Psychologically, it is very important. When players think the match is very 
easy, that's when the difficulties start. Andorra are a good team, a strong 
team physically, and also the pitch is not very good. It is bumpy and it could 
be a problem. But we are a good team."

Andorra are yet to take a point from their eight games to date and have scored 
only one goal, Cristian Martínez's strike in Dublin. The group could hardly be 
any more finely poised, with the top four teams all having a mathematical 
chance of emerging from it. Russia enjoy a two-point advantage over 
second-placed Ireland, while Slovakia and Armenia are only a further point 
back. However, the Russians lost 1-0 to Slovakia in Moscow the night the 
Republic were disposing of Andorra, and a repeat in Zilina on Friday would blow 
the race wide open. Even a draw for the Russians would send them into their 
final game against Andorra at home knowing a victory would leave them in an 
unassailable position.

At the very worst, two wins would secure a play-off berth for Giovanni 
Trapattoni's men, although they could be forgiven for wanting to avoid that 
lottery after their controversial World Cup exit at the hands – literally, in 
the case of Thierry Henry – of France two years ago. Asked if he believes 
Slovakia could do the Republic a favour by beating Russia, Tardelli replied: 
"It's possible – they beat them in Russia, so it's possible."

What Ireland cannot afford to do is slip up in Andorra and loosen their grip 
on second spot at worst, although Tardelli said both games will be approached 
with the same attention to detail. He said: "I don't know if Armenia will be 
tougher than Andorra. It's very important to win against Andorra, but the two 
matches are very tough."

Ireland will be without their defender Richard Dunne, whose heroics in Russia 
last month were in large part responsible for their 0-0 draw. Dunne picked up 
his fourth yellow card of the campaign at the Luzhniki Stadium and will sit out 
through suspension, although Trapattoni will hope his style of 
backs-to-the-wall stubbornness is not required this time around.

Sean St Ledger, who sat out in Moscow having earned his own one-match ban, is 
available and could be paired with either John O'Shea or Darren O'Dea in the 
middle. O'Shea, Trapattoni's first-choice right-back, was able to train fully 
on Tuesday morning after shaking off a knock, although St Ledger ended the 
session early after a blow to the head.

Tardelli said: "John O'Shea trained with no problems. St Ledger took a little 
bit of a knock to the head, but the other players are all well."

O'Dea and St Ledger lined up in the middle in a game at the end of training, 
but Tardelli was adamant no decision had yet been taken. He said: "No, nothing 
today is an indication. We also have John O'Shea who can play in the middle and 
we have two days to decide."
 