
Alice Munro has been awarded the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, thus becoming its 13th female recipient. It's a thrilling honour for a major 
writer: Munro has long been recognised in North America and the UK, but the 
Nobel will draw international attention, not only to women's writing and 
Canadian writing, but to the short story, Munro's chosen métier and one often 
overlooked.

Whenever the Nobel is conferred, a deluge of media descends – like the pack of 
cards cascading on to that other Alice, she of Wonderland – not only on the 
winner, illuminated in the sudden glare of international publicity like a 
burglar trapped in headlights, but on every other writer who has known the 
chosen one. A quote, a reminiscence, an evaluation! Account for it! Why her? 
they clamour.

Munro herself is unlikely to say much along these lines: Canadians are 
discouraged from bragging – see the Munro story, Who Do You Think You Are? – so 
will probably spend much of her time hiding in the figurative tool shed.

We're all slightly furtive, we writers; especially we Canadian writers, and 
even more especially we Canadian female writers of an earlier generation. "Art 
is what you can get away with," said Canadian Marshall McLuhan, and I invite 
the reader to count how many of the murderers in Munro's stories are ever 
caught. (Answer: none.) Munro understands the undercover heist that is fiction 
writing, as well as its pleasures and fears: how delicious to have done it, but 
what if you get found out?

Back in the 1950s and 60s, when Munro began, there was a feeling that not only 
female writers but Canadians were thought to be both trespassing and 
transgressing.

Munro found herself referred to as "some housewife", and was told that her 
subject matter, being too "domestic", was boring. A male writer told her she 
wrote good stories, but he wouldn't want to sleep with her. "Nobody invited 
him," said Munro tartly. When writers occur in Munro stories, they are 
pretentious, or exploitative of others; or they're being asked by their 
relatives why they aren't famous, or – worse, if female – why they aren't 
better-looking.

The road to the Nobel wasn't an easy one for Munro: the odds that a literary 
star would emerge from her time and place would once have been zero. She was 
born in 1931, and thus experienced the Depression as a child and the second 
world war as a teenager. This was in south-western Ontario, a region that also 
produced Robertson Davies, Graeme Gibson, James Reaney, and Marian Engel, to 
name several.

It's this small-town setting that features most often in her stories – the 
busybodies, the snobberies, the eccentrics, the cutting of swelled heads down 
to size, and the jeering at ambitions, especially artistic ones.

The pressure of cramped conditions may create the determination to break free, 
to gain some sort of mastery; but if you try this, you'd better do it well. 
Otherwise those who have laughed at you will laugh even harder, since an ice 
dancer who tries a triple axel and falls on her behind is hilarious.

Shame and embarrassment are driving forces for Munro's characters, just as 
perfectionism in the writing has been a driving force for her: getting it down, 
getting it right, but also the impossibility of that. Munro chronicles failure 
much more often than she chronicles success, because the task of the writer has 
failure built in. In this she is a romantic: the visionary gleam exists, but it 
can't be grasped, and if you drivel on about it openly the folks in the grocery 
store will think you're a lunatic.

As in much else, Munro is thus quintessentially Canadian. Faced with the Nobel 
she will be modest, she won't get a swelled head. The rest of us, on this 
magnificent occasion, will just have to do that for her.
 