
The Brownlee brothers and their great rival Javier Gómez fell short as Spain’s 
Mario Mola won a thrilling ITU WorldTriathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> event in London.

Mola pipped South Africa’s Richard Murray in a sprint finish in Hyde Park, as 
Alistair Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> slipped 
back to fourth behind João Pereira, of Portugal. Jonny Brownlee, beaten in 
dramatic fashion close to the line in last year’s event, had to settle for 
fifth, with the 2013 winner, Gómez – the man in form after three victories 
already this season – sixth.

The event had been billed as a collision between the Brownlees and Gómez, but 
– as it was over the shorter sprint distance – other contenders came into play. 
Alistair Brownlee, the winner in London in 2009 and 2011 as well as at the 2012 
Olympics, did hit the front with less than two kilometres to go but Mola and 
Murray responded to his push for home and wore him down.

Murray seized control, but Mola had the greater finishing strength in the 
closing metres. Alistair Brownlee, who appeared come close to taking a wrong 
turn entering the final straight, told BBC Sport: “I was just going as hard as 
I could for that last kilometre, trying to put in attack after attack, but it 
wasn’t good enough. They were still faster than me. I went as hard as I could. 
I thought that was the best thing to do, but 100 … 80 metres to go, I just had 
nothing left.”

Alistair and Jonny Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee> 
had been well placed, in seventh and eighth respectively, after the opening 
swim. Mola, at that point, had been down in 22nd, but the field remained 
tightly bunched throughout and the Spaniard was able to move into a challenging 
position early in the 5km run.

Jonny Brownlee said: “It was very tough to run. Normally you get down to a 
group of four or five very quickly, but today the whole way round there was a 
big group. The pace was fast.”

Mola, whose victory was his first in the ITU world series, said: “I tried to 
do everything possible in every race and today I was very lucky to be fighting 
in the last 5km for the win, and then find the strength and energy to get the 
win. I am very happy with that.

“I knew Richard had an amazing last kilometre. I tried to stay behind him and 
when we saw the blue carpet – that is the end – tried to give everything I had 
left.”
 