
Marian Gaborik completed his hat trick in overtime to give the New York Rangers
 a see-sawing 4-3 win over theBoston Bruins on Wednesday.

Gaborik scored twice in the first period and then got the overtime winner as 
he outraced two Bruins opponents, had his first shot blocked by the goalie but 
then hit the rebounded puck in mid-air into the net. Taylor Pyatt also scored 
for the Rangers, who squandered leads of 2-0 and 3-2 en route to avenging a 
season-opening loss at Boston on Saturday.

Brad Marchand and Milan Lucic erased Boston's 2-0 deficit in the second 
period, and Nathan Horton got the Bruins even again at 3-3 with 4:23 left in 
regulation.

James van Riemsdyk scored twice and goalie James Reimer stopped 28 shots as the
Toronto Maple Leafs won 5-2 at the Pittsburgh Penguins. Clarke MacArthur, 
Mikhail Grabovski and Tyler Bozak also scored for Toronto. Sidney Crosby and 
reigning NHL MVP, Evgeni Malkin, scored their first goals of the season for 
Pittsburgh, but the Penguins struggled with Toronto's speed and failed to play 
with the kind of discipline that highlighted opening weekend wins over 
Philadelphia and theNew York Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-rangers>.

Steve Sullivan scored three goals while Oliver Ekman-Larsson had two goals and 
an assist in a 5-1 home win for thePhoenix Coyotes over the Columbus Blue 
Jackets. Sullivan had his eighth career hat trick, and Ekman-Larsson his first 
three-point game. The Coyotes were sounder defensively than in their first two 
games and created some good scoring chances because of it, sending 42 shots on 
goal. Fedor Tyutin scored for Columbus in its first regulation loss of the 
season.

In the all-Canadian battle, Zack Kassian scored in regulation and got the 
winner in the shootout, giving theVancouver Canucks a 3-2 win against the 
visitingCalgary Flames. Kassian scored the decisive shootout goal by deking 
Flames goalie Miikka Kiprusoff in the fifth round. Alex Burrows also scored in 
the shootout for Vancouver, and goalie Cory Schneider secured the win by 
stopping Curtis Glencross on the final shootout attempt.

Mason Raymond also scored for the Canucks, giving them a 2-0 lead about 
halfway through the second period. Alex Tanguay scored in regulation and had 
one in the shootout for Calgary, and Mikael Backlund had the tying goal with 
just under 4 minutes to go in the second period.
 