
One of Britain’s biggest abortion providers put women at risk by failing to 
adequately train staff and neglecting to obtain proper consent from patients, a 
watchdog report has revealed.

Staff at Marie Stopes International (MSI) had “limited training” in 
resuscitation and clinicians were found to be “bulk-signing” forms authorising 
abortions, theCare Quality Commission (CQC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/care-quality-commission> said.

Marie Stopes suspends some abortion services over safety issues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/marie-stopes-suspends-some-abortion-services-over-safety-issues>
Doctors in one location, who were observed obtaining consent from a woman with 
a learning disability, failed to ensure she understood the procedure and 
handled the consultation “poorly and insensitively”, according to the report.

Some staff obtaining consent from patients also appeared to have insufficient 
knowledge of procedures, the CQC added.

The family planning provider suspended surgical abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/marie-stopes-suspends-some-abortion-services-over-safety-issues>
 for girls under 18 and vulnerable women in August after concerns were raised 
by the CQC about patient safety.

It also halted terminations under general anaesthetic or conscious sedation 
and suspended all surgical terminations at the provider’s Norwich centre.

But the organisation, which performs around 70,000 abortions every year, was 
allowed to resume services in October after satisfying the CQC that it had 
improved standards.

The report found that 2,634 incidents had been recorded at MSI locations 
between 2015 and 2016 – a rise of 704 from the previous year – but the 
organisation had provided “limited” explanation as to why this had happened.

Prof Edward Baker, deputy chief inspector of hospitals at the CQC, said a 
number of “serious concerns” had been raised following inspections of MSI 
between April and August.

“Our concerns at a corporate level – particularly around governance 
arrangements, staff training, and around patient safety and safeguarding 
protocols – did not give us the necessary assurance that patients would be 
protected from avoidable harm at all times, that possible safeguarding concerns 
could be identified and that incidents could be reported and learned from,” he 
said.

“While we recognise that MSI has made progress since our inspections, we will 
continue to monitor its services very closely and our planned re-inspections 
will determine exactly how embedded these improvements have been.

“We will not hesitate to take further action if necessary in order to 
guarantee this provider meets the standard of care we expect and that its 
patients deserve.”

Suzanne Ash, interim managing director at Marie Stopes UK, said: “We have 
worked hard with the CQC to regain compliance and we’re grateful to them for 
their assistance.

“Since the inspections, we’ve made considerable changes to our management, 
governance and assurance processes, including extensive training of staff, and 
updating of policies.

“We have learned from this, and intend to continue our focus on providing the 
safe and compassionate care that women expect and deserve.”
 