
 I have to confess I'm always a bit suspicious of other people's summer 
reading lists - I'm convinced they make them up just to look clever. I mean, 
Anthony Beevor's Stalingrad? On summer hols? So, naturally, I toyed with the 
idea of presenting a list that made me look very intellectual (Finnegans Wake 
etc), then decided to just be honest!

1. A Day Late and a Dollar Short by Terry McMillan 
 The title alone is fantastic and after the self-indulgent silliness of How 
Stella Got her Groove back, I'm told that this one is a return to form.

2. Seven Up by Janet Evanovich 
 Reading each new Stephanie Plum adventure is like meeting an old friend. 
Sassy, funny and extremely enjoyable.

3. At Swim-Two-Birds by Flann O' Brien 
 I love Flann O'Brien more than life itself and have read everything he's had 
published... except for this. I've always been beaten back by the convoluted 
plot and have never managed to finish it. But I recently saw this being 
dramatised and now think I've got the hang of it...

4. South from the Limpopo by Dervla Murphy 
 In the last year I've discovered the wonders of travel writing and as I'm 
going to South Africa later in the year, reading this seems like a very good 
idea.

5. Which Lie Did I Tell? by William Goldman 
 The book I'm currently writing is set in Los Angeles on the fringes of the 
movie industry and, in the name of research, I'm reading every 'warts and all' 
Hollywood confessional that I can get my hands on. From the reviews this seems 
like a particularly enjoyable one.

6. Slab Rat by Ted Heller 
 Poor bloke - almost every review compared him to his more famous dad, Joseph. 
Anyway, it's set in the magazine world in New York and it looks like lots of 
fun.

7. English Passengers by Matthew Kneale 
 Won some prize, I'm told. Right then, lets see what all the fuss is about! 

8. Chocolat by Joanne Harris 
 Another one that I've tried to read several times and just couldn't get past 
the first three pages, but I'm tired of feeling left out of the 'Isn't Joanne 
Harris just dreamy?' discussions, so am determined to persist, this time, until 
I have the darn thing good and read.

9. The Holiday by Erica James 
 Don't be fooled by the aga-saga packaging, Erica James writes scalpel-sharp, 
witty books that are as intelligent as they are charming. This is her sixth 
book and all her others have been excellent, so I have high hopes for this one.

10. And of course, last but not least, Stalingrad by Anthony Beevor. No, only 
joking...Babyville by Jane Green is due out in August. I'm told that it's her 
best yet and like the Terry McMillan book, its very title is fantastic.
 