
A fellow prison inmate slashed April Jones's murderer from temple to chin, 
severing an artery, to try to get him to reveal where the child's body was, a 
court has heard.

Juvinal Ferreira attacked Mark Bridger – who claims he does not know what he 
did with April's body – with a weapon fashioned out of a prison-issue razor at 
the high security Wakefield prison in West Yorkshire.

Ferreira, 24, himself a murderer and sex attacker, was sentenced to a second 
life term and was told it will be 2036 before he can be considered for release.

Leeds crown court heard that Ferreira and other life prisoners had talked 
about attacking Bridger to make him reveal what he had done with the body of 
April, whom he abducted as she played near her home in Machynlleth, mid Wales, 
a year ago.

Jonathan Sharp, prosecuting, said: "He said that Bridger's crime had been 
discussed and he claimed people had suggested that if Bridger was attacked, 
rather than say befriended, Bridger would then be more likely to reveal where 
April Jones's body was."

The premeditated attack happened in July, a few weeks after Bridger was jailed 
and just three days after he was allowed to associate with other prisoners for 
the first time.

Ferreira fashioned a weapon out of a prison-issue razor with extra blades 
attached to the handle. Sharp said Ferreira strode up to Bridger with the blade 
held between thumb and forefinger. "He then slashed him down the face, causing 
a deep wound extending from temple to chin.

"He paused for a moment and looked Bridger directly in the eyes, in Bridger's 
own words 'as if to admire his work or show me who it was'."

Bridger also suffered a cut to his arm as he tried to defend himself.

He required more than 30 stitches to the face wound, which required surgery 
under general anaesthetic. He will be scarred for life.

Ferreira admitted wounding with intent. Mr Justice Coulson said: "Convicted 
murderers cannot appoint themselves as unpaid investigators of another crime, 
no matter how serious. They plainly cannot do that by themselves committing 
violent crime to do so."

Robin Frieze, defending, said Ferreira did not attack Bridger to enhance his 
own status in prison, for reward or because he was incited to do it.

"He does not suggest he was put up to it, but he listened to talk within the 
prison and he was under the impression that if he put the complainant in a 
state of fear then it was more likely it would achieve closure for the family 
of his victim," Frieze said. "He appreciates that was a wholly misguided and 
wrong thing to do."

In April 2008 Ferreira raped and murdered 47-year-old Elaine Walpole 
<http://www.norfolk.police.uk/newsandevents/newsstories/2008/december/elainewalpolemurder.aspx>
 in Dereham, Norfolk, after befriending her. He stabbed her through the neck 
and there were bite marks on her face.

Bridger is serving a whole-life term for April's sexually-motivated abduction 
and murder on 1 October last year. April's funeral took place last week when 
the family buried a few burned bones found in Bridger's fireplace.

Last month two prisoners who killed a fellow inmate, convicted child killer 
Subhan Anwar, in the high security Long Lartin prison were told they will serve 
the rest of their lives behind bars.

Gary Smith, 48, and Lee Newell, 44, who were already serving life for 
killings, were both given whole-life sentences by a judge for the "chilling" 
murder of Anwar, who was bound and strangled with his own tracksuit bottoms.

Smith and Newell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/23/prisoners-life-murdering-child-killer>
 followed 24-year-old Anwar into his cell armed with weapons fashioned out of a 
pen and a toothbrush before binding his ankles with tape. After Anwar's death, 
Smith made Newell a cup of hot chocolate before they let prison guards into the 
cell and were taken away into segregation.
 