
This week we had a rare chance to take to the streets and demonstrate our 
feelings as a nation but Dave Podmore has to say he was disgusted by the poor 
turn-out. In my opinion it was the patriotic duty of every red-blooded 
Englishman to get in his SUV, drive to the nearest petrol station and, after 
buying himself sufficient snacks for the duration, blockade it.

But no. This once fair-minded race was apparently more interested in watching 
the England cricket team, plus some women and Ian Bell, parading through the 
streets of London. It was especially disappointing to see them going through 
those parts of the capital which I personally refuse to sully my tyres with as 
long as Mr Livingstone keeps charging eight quid a pop to enter.

I'm not saying winning the Ashes hasn't been important - anyone who overheard 
Tony Blair congratulating Kevin Pietersen on his superb drop-goal knows that it 
was. It's just that there is a world out there where issues of global 
seriousness are occurring even as I dictate. The price of petrol is one. 
Another is the breakdown of law and order that sees Jeremy Clarkson being 
pelted with a custard (or was it banoffee) pie while getting his doctorate at 
Oxford Learning Solutions University. Political apathy also allowed Jacqui's 
pro-fur demonstration in the Body Shop to pass almost unnoticed except by a 
frisky labrador who took a shine to her raccoon gilet.

Five days on, the sports pages are still full of pictures of Fred Flintoff 
smoking and drinking. Although obviously I'm proud as hell to have coached the 
big lad in the art of giving an interview after 27 hours on the lash I still 
think the media's got its priorities wrong.

Over the last few days there's been virtually no coverage of what is arguably 
the most exciting bowl-out entertainment ever witnessed at Grace Road's indoor 
school. The International Twenty-20 Club Championship has seen the likes of the 
Chilaw Marians from Sri Lanka going head to head in the shed with the Nashua 
Titans and believe me we all smoke and drink plenty in the PCA Masters XI - 
especially after the duty-free Superkings the Faisalabad Wolves brought to the 
party. Yet do News 24 clear their schedules for us?

I assume you saw the fun and games in Trafalgar Square on Tuesday since it was 
shown compulsorily on all five terrestrial channels plus UKTV History and QVC 
("Free to air" it's called - I'm told the idea originated on North Korean state 
television). Don't get me wrong, I'm all for public displays of emotion 
involving Rory Bremner and David "Loon" English, and nobody could say Pod 
hasn't got a sentimental side - look at the bags of badgers' blood I threw at 
David Blunkett during the fox-hunting debate. But Tuesday went too far. Getting 
in touch with your feelings might be very healthy but at the end of the day 
sport is a business not a princess's funeral.

The rebuilding process has to start now. The first thing that must change is 
the spectacle of England cricketers appearing publicly in the condition they 
did on Tuesday morning - that is to say carrying their nippers on their 
shoulders. Going around married, sprogged up to the eyeballs and travelling by 
bus if you please is not exactly the best way to lure young lads away from 
footie and darts. Those shots of Harmy sitting with a bottle of beer on the 
kids' climbing frame in the garden of 10 Downing Street didn't help. It was 
like watching Play School, and that's a programme no cricketer is going to be 
asked to present - I tried.

I admit that dragging your kids around in front of the cameras might put them 
in the frame for people-carrier ads and if that's the way Freddie wants to go 
good luck to him but it's a bit short-sighted when there's film companies, hair 
replacement clinics and pizza chains queueing up. There's money to be made but 
only if you want it badly enough. I can't believe Rexona deodorant will want to 
be associated with the smell of failure coming off Ricky Ponting so there's an 
opening there for any English youngster who's prepared to work hard and dress 
up as an aerosol spray.

There's been a lot of talk about OBEs for the lads and a knighthood for Duncan 
Fletcher but if we really want a memorial to their achievement how about 
replacing that statue of the pregnant bird with no arms in Trafalgar Square 
with one of Warnie dropping KP? They can replace it with something else once 
we've lost the Ashes again.

Dave Podmore achieved a record 40 flattened stewards in a five-match series 
with the help of Christopher Douglas and Andrew Nickolds
 