
Providing extra protection for the killer of April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones>, five, after he was attacked in 
jail will strain already overstretched resources, representatives of prison 
officers have said.

Mark Bridger, 47, was treated in hospital after allegedly being slashed across 
the face with a makeshift blade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/09/mark-bridger-attacked-prison-april-jones>
 by an inmate at Wakefield prison, West Yorkshire. The police and the justice 
ministry are investigating but it is almost certain that more security measures 
will have to be put in place to keep Bridger safe.

Glyn Travis, assistant secretary at the prison officers' union, the POA, said 
that after Soham killer Ian Huntley was attacked in Wakefield he had to be 
accompanied by two officers at all times when he walked around the prison.

"It's possible he [Bridger] will get that level of protection," Travis said. 
"You're talking £100,000 a year for the taxpayer. This will cause problems 
because additional resources will be diverted to ensure he is protected."

The POA said the attack, which took place on Monday afternoon, exposed a 
growing problem in UK prisons. It said there were 43 prisoner-on-prisoner 
assaults a day on average and eight assaults on members of staff.

Travis said the situation was being exacerbated by cost-saving measures forced 
on prisons by the government. "Eventually something's got to give," he said.

Wakefield, originally built as a correction house in the 16th century, is home 
to some of Britain's most notorious offenders including the child killers Roy 
Whiting, Robert Black and Levi Bellfield.

Bridger was convicted of abducting five-year-old April as she played on her 
bicycle in the mid-Wales town of Machynlleth and murdering her, possibly after 
sexually assaulting her. He was also found guilty of destroying, disposing of 
or concealing her remains, which have not been found.

During his trial Bridger was held on remand at HMP Manchester, formerly 
Strangeways, where he was kept in isolation and under constant surveillance for 
fear he would be attacked or harm himself.

After his conviction at Mold crown court in north Wales in May, Bridger was 
moved to Wakefield, sometimes referred to as the "Monster Mansion" because of 
the number of dangerous inmates it houses. At the time prison sources 
acknowledged that his life would be under constant threat there.

It is not known where in the prison the attack happened. Wakefield includes a 
"prison within a prison" – the close supervision centre where about half a 
dozen of the most challenging inmates in the entire British prison system are 
held – and a segregation area for men who need protection from other inmates.

An inspection last year found that the jail was "reasonably safe" and 
concluded: "The numbers of self-harm, bullying and use of force incidents were 
low. Most prisoners reported feeling safe."

The inspection found there was a high concentration of men convicted of very 
serious sexual attacks in Wakefield who were "in denial" about their offences. 
Thereport (pdf) 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmipris/prison-and-yoi-inspections/wakefield/wakefield-2012.pdf>
 said: "The prison service should consider whether it is right to place such a 
concentration of men in denial in one establishment."

in 2005 while he was in Wakefield, Bridger was given a whole-life sentence 
after a jury took four hours to find him guilty. It emerged during the 
month-long trial that Bridger had a collection of images of girls being 
sexually abused, and had collated pictures of April and her sisters from 
Facebook.
 