
For Wales it was a point that could have been three and also came at a cost, 
yet once the dust settles and Chris Coleman and his players clear their heads, 
they will come to view this as a valuable result. Despite leading twice, Wales 
were never in control of the game and Marko Arnautovic ruthlessly capitalised 
on some slack defending to earnAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> the draw that they deserved.

While Coleman was bitterly disappointed with the way Wales gifted Austria and 
Arnautovic a second goal shortly after the interval, the sight of Joe Allen 
pulling up with a hamstring problem was every bit as troubling. With fellow 
midfielder Aaron Ramsey already missing through injury, the loss of Allen is a 
blow thatWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> could really do 
without ahead of Sunday’s home match against Georgia.

The Stoke City player opened the scoring against Austria with a brilliant 
volley – his third goal in as many matches for club and country – and Wales 
will badly miss his craft and guile against a Georgia side that are likely to 
come to Cardiff with the intention of frustrating Coleman’s team.

The manager said that Allen “had a twinge in the hamstring” and revealed that 
the 26-year-old would undergo a scan in the next 24 hours to establish the 
extent of the problem. He made it clear, however, that Wales would not be 
prepared to take any risks and on that basis it seems highly unlikely that 
Allen will feature against Georgia.

Republic of Ireland win ugly but Robbie Brady injury mars result against 
Georgia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/republic-of-ireland-georgia-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
“That’s how it is,” Coleman said, when it was put to him that Wales will badly 
miss two of their most creative players. “We probably won’t have Joe, we 
already don’t have Rambo. Have we got enough to get a result on Sunday without 
Joe Allen? Yes, we have. So I won’t make any excuses.”

In the end Wales just about got over the line against Austria. Hanging on at 
times and indebted to some fine goalkeeping from Wayne Hennessey, the visitors 
managed to keep Austria at bay in the final half hour to collect a point from 
what is their toughest qualification game on paper.

Coleman was the first to admit that it was not pretty to watch – it says much 
about this Wales performance that they looked most dangerous when Gareth Bale 
was taking long throws – yet there was also satisfaction to be taken from the 
result they gleaned in difficult circumstances.

“People look at us, because of what happened in the tournament [the European 
Championship finals in the summer], and think we will come into his campaign 
and play every game as if we’re Barcelona or Spain, but it just doesn’t work 
like that,” the Wales manager said.

World Cup qualifying roundup: De Rossi earns draw for Italy against Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/world-cup-qualifying-roundup-de-rossi-draw-italy-spain-iceland-finland>
“Sometimes you have to pick a result up and play ugly and that was how you 
would describe that performance tonight.

“In terms of quality with the ball, we gave away a lot of possession, we made 
a lot of mistakes and we looked indecisive, which is not something you can say 
about this team on too many occasions.

“To give them a goal from the restart within two or three minutes ... we don’t 
do things like that,” Coleman added. “We started slow and nervous [in the 
second half], they got a goal and they came for us for 20 minutes, but I’ve got 
to give credit to the players for hanging on.”

While it was difficult to remember a Wales game when Bale was so anonymous for 
long periods, the Real Madrid forward still managed to have a hand in both 
goals. It was Bale’s run and cross down the left that led to Allen, after some 
poor defending from Kevin Wimmer, striking a glorious 22-yard left-footed 
volley into the far corner of the net.

Austria, however, were level only six minutes later. David Alaba, the Bayern 
Munich left-back who plays in central midfield for his country, showed his 
class with a pitching wedge pass over the top of the Wales defence that picked 
out Arnautovic’s clever run. Darting in from the left, the Stoke winger got 
away from Chris Gunter before stooping to head past Hennessey.

Although Coleman was entitled to be annoyed with the Austria coach Marcel 
Koller’s pre-match claim that Wales were lucky at Euro 2016, there was no doubt 
that the visitors benefited from a large slice of good fortune on the stroke of 
half-time. Bale’s long throw was flicked on by Sam Vokes and when goalkeeper 
Robert Almer blocked James Chester’s diving header with his legs, the ball 
bounced off Wimmer and over the line.

Then came the error that led to Austria’s second equaliser. Allen’s careless 
pass inside the Wales half had Chester stretching for a ball that he was unable 
to control and Arnautovic pounced. Sprinting clear in the inside left channel, 
Arnautovic expertly steered the ball into the far corner and Austria were level 
again.
 