
Nine long and largely hungover days have passed since Michael Vaughan held the 
Ashes urn aloft but only now are the ramifications of England's 2-1 series 
victory being felt in Australia.

Damien Martyn, Jason Gillespie and Michael Kasprowicz have all paid the price 
for their poor performances throughout the series by being left out of 
Australia's squad for the six-day Super Series Test against a World XI in 
Sydney, starting on October 14.

The embattled opening batsman Matthew Hayden is retained, presumably on the 
strength of his fighting century in the fifth Test at The Oval, but he has been 
dropped from Australia's squad for the three one-day matches against the World 
XI in Melbourne earlier next month.

The dropping of Martyn is perhaps most indicative of how thoroughly England 
have shaken Australia. His replacement, the all-rounder Shane Watson, is 
considered the most likely candidate to play an Andrew Flintoff-type role for 
the Australians, providing greater flexibility in the team and allowing the 
selectors to call on the leg-spinner Stuart MacGill as a fifth front-line 
bowling option.

"We consider it is time to make some adjustments to the batting-line up after 
some disappointing results in England," said Australia's chairman of selectors 
Trevor Hohns. "We expect that all three players who have not been selected will 
go back to state cricket and get back to the sort of form they were in 12 
months ago."

Hohns said adding an all-rounder like Watson gave the squad more flexibility. 
"We can choose to play two spinners if the pitch looks like it will offer them 
something or we can play four bowlers with Watson providing a fifth option," he 
said.

For Martyn, in particular, demotion will be disappointing. Regarded as the 
side's best batsman in the 18 months prior to the Ashes, the Western Australian 
right-hander averaged 78.33 on Australia's last tour to New Zealand and 103.33 
against Pakistan last Australian summer. More significantly he was named the 
man of the series after Australia's historic victory in India last year, during 
which he scored 444 runs at 55.50.

The Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes>, however, were another 
matter. The recipient of some poor lbw decisions, Martyn nonetheless did 
himself few favours by repeatedly falling across his crease and leaving himself 
vulnerable to the reverse swinging ball into the pads. Should he have played 
his last Test, he will leave the game with 4,125 runs from 61 matches at 47.96.

The omissions of Gillespie and Kasprowicz were more predictable, given that 
both pace bowlers were dropped during Australia's unsuccessful Ashes campaign 
after extended periods of poor form.

Australia Test squad: Michael Clarke, Adam Gilchrist, Matthew Hayden, Brad 
Hodge, Simon Katich, Justin Langer, Brett Lee, Stuart MacGill, Glenn McGrath, 
Ricky Ponting (captain), Shaun Tait, Shane Warne, Shane Watson.

Australia one-day squad: Nathan Bracken, Michael Clarke, Adam Gilchrist, Brad 
Hogg, James Hopes, Michael Hussey, Simon Katich, Brett Lee, Damien Martyn, 
Glenn McGrath, Ricky Ponting (captain), Andrew Symonds, Shaun Tait, Shane 
Watson.
 