
Even Masters traditions must come to an end. Arnold Palmer’s status in golf, 
let alone at the Augusta National venue where he was presented with a Green 
Jacket four times, will for ever remain as legendary.

Jordan Spieth casts spell again in ominous warning to rivals at Masters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/jordan-spieth-masters-2016-six-under-par-66>
Palmer’s health has been in decline for some time, meaning he stood as an 
onlookeron the 1st tee here on Thursday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/07/the-masters-2016-first-round-live>
 rather than hitting a ceremonial opening drive. Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player 
played at 8.05am as normal but all attention was on Palmer, who was visibly 
frail and emotional.

For a few moments, Nicklaus in particular was clearly moved. The concept of 
hauling an ill 86-year-old man on to a golf course first thing in the morning 
might appear needless, or even poor taste, to some but the mutual affection 
between Palmer and the Masters is such that it was impossible to criticise. As 
Palmer offered a thumbs up for the cameras, the sense of poignancy was 
unavoidable.

“I think that everybody was happy to see Arnold out on the tee,” said 
Nicklaus. “I think Arnold was happy to be on the tee. I think he would have 
preferred to hit a golf ball.

“I talked to him at the Masters champions’ dinner. I said: ‘Arnold, when 
you’re out there, what if we just take you up and had you hit, I don’t care if 
you putt it off the tee, I think everybody would love to have you do anything.’ 
He said: ‘Let me think about it.’ I said: ‘OK.’

“So this morning I talked to him and I said: ‘What do you want to do?’ He 
said: ‘I’m good.’ I said: ‘Fine, let’s leave it alone.’ So I think probably the 
right thing. Arnold’s balance is not good and that’s what they were worried 
about.

“But I think he was delighted to be out there. I think we were delighted to 
have him there. I think both Gary and I felt it was more about Arnold this 
morning than anything else and I think that was just fine.”

Between them, Palmer, Nicklaus and Player claimed 34 majors. Their competitive 
instincts were famous, the friendship the trio built up equally so. Both 
aspects remain firmly in place; after a one-hour warmup session, Player 
outdrove Nicklaus this time.

“I think that we had a very unusual friendship among competitors,” said 
Player. “It was so fiercely competitive and we made it very clear we wanted to 
beat the hell out of each other. When we did, we looked the other man in the 
eye and said: ‘Well done.’ So we built a friendship, travelling extensively 
around the world.

“We won something like 50 major championships – senior and regular tour – and 
we must have won over 350 golf tournaments. And to have longevity has been a 
special gift.

“To come here today and to be on the tee with Arnold being a part of us, it 
was gratifying and sad, because everything shall pass. But it was nice to have 
him on the tee. I dedicated my first tee shot to him in respect.”

Player delighted galleries when recording a hole in one during Wednesday’s 
par-three contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/masters-2016-jimmy-walker-wins-pre-tournament-par-three-gary-player-hole-in-one>
. Tom Watson made up an illustrious three-ball for that, with Nicklaus 
admitting this may become the norm. “My guess is that Tom will probably join us 
for several years to come,” said the 18-time major champion.

Billy Payne, the Augusta National chairman, claimed it was “premature” to 
suggest Watson may assume 1st tee duties from Palmer. This Masters marks 
Watson’s last as a player. “We will deal with that when the time comes,” said 
Payne. Time, sadly, is Palmer’s enemy.
 