
My father, the writer and architectural historian Matthew Hyde, who has died 
after a stroke aged 68, was the author of several revised Pevsner Buildings of 
England architectural guides, a culmination of his lifelong love of 
architecture. Music was another lasting interest; he was a church organist and 
valued singer in numerous choirs.

Matthew was born in London, son of John Hyde, who worked in the Foreign 
Office, and the novelist Lavender Lloyd. When his father left them, his mother 
took Matthew to Kenya, where she had grown up; her father, a British army 
officer formerly serving in Pakistan, had bought Karen House, the former home 
of Karen Blixen, author of Out of Africa, and Matthew spent his first years 
there. His early memories included hearing his mother tapping at the typewriter.

Returning to the UK in 1956, he attended St Paul’s school, Hammersmith. While 
studying general science at Bristol University, he met Maria Olive; the two 
married in 1968. Soon after, with two young children, they moved to 
Macclesfield and Matthew found work teaching rural studies and biology.

Self-sufficiency years followed, with a goat, chickens, and a Landrover in 
which Matthew once transported an entire gothic window scavenged from a 
demolished church in Manchester (it became a garden folly). The family appeared 
on Granada TV’s House for the Future (1974) about an early eco-build 
conversion; the introductory shot of our pre-insulation home was Matthew 
playing the piano with a draft howling up his bell-bottom trousers.

When Parrs Wood Rural Studies Centre in Manchester closed due to 1980s cuts, 
Matthew took redundancy and completed an MA in architectural history at Keele 
University.

He lectured and taught part-time in Manchester museums and galleries, and 
wrote books on local history and architecture including The Villas of Alderley 
Edge (1999), Lindow and the Bog Warriors (2002), with Christine Pemberton, and 
an early work of psychogeography Around the M60: Manchester’s Orbital Motorway 
(2004), with Aidan O’Rourke and Peter Portland.

He made the leap to full-time writing with the revised Pevsner architectural 
guides for Yale University Press. Matthew is joint author for Lancashire: 
Manchester and the South-East (2004) and Cheshire (2011); and author of Cumbria 
(2010), which was praised for its idiosyncratic style which brought the 
buildings alive. Arts and Crafts Houses in the Lake District (2014), with Esme 
Whittaker and Val Corbett, won the Bookends prize for arts and literature at 
the Lakeland book of the year awards 2015.

Copies of his last book, Britain’s Lost Churches, arrived a week after he 
died. A lament to a vanishing heritage and an exploration of the surprising new 
uses found for churches, it reflects Matthew’s curiosity and sense of 
story-telling, and his deep love for the creators and architecture of these 
buildings, lost, abandoned, rebuilt or reborn.

He is survived by Maria, three children, Joseph, Alice and me, and two 
grandchildren.
 