
Amelie Mauresmo barely worked up a sweat as she crushed Nicole Vaidisova 6-1, 
6-1 in the fourth round in Melbourne.

The third seed was in deadly form from the opening serve and dispatched of her 
16-year-old opponent in less than an hour. Mauresmo produced just one unforced 
error to the Czech teenager's 34 as she booked her place in the quarter-finals.

Mauresmo signalled her intentions early on by breaking Vaidisova's opening 
service game and then racing away with the set in just 23 minutes. The second 
set began in similar fashion with Mauresmo holding her serve with ease.

Vaidisova's inexperience soon became evident as Mauresmo had no trouble 
continuing to break her service games and rushing to a 5-0 lead. The youngster 
found some form to hold her next service game but Mauresmo wrapped things up on 
serve. Mauresmo now faces Patty Schnyder, who beat 12th seed Anastasia Myskina 
with similar ease 6-2, 6-1, in the last eight and is happy with the way her 
form is improving.

"I feel that my game is really coming together," Mauresmo said. "I'm feeling 
the ball much better than at the beginning of last week.

"I think it gives you a lot of confidence to have these kind of matches and 
also not to spend too much time on the court.

"Physically I'm feeling well, I didn't need to push myself a lot today. That's 
good for the future, I think."

Kim Clijsters, meanwhile, struggled to get on top of Francesca Schiavone on 
centre-court.

The second seed looked troubled by injury as she hit an uncharacteristic 43 
unforced errors to make victory tough for her - she was perhaps fortunate that 
Schiavone failed to capitalise on those mistakes to take the match 7-6 (7-5), 
6-4.

Clijsters looked rusty and the Italian looked to have nabbed a surprise first 
set lead when ahead 4-1 in the tiebreaker before Clijsters came back strongly 
to win it 7-5. The pair exchanged breaks in the second set before Clijsters 
broke a second time to claim the match.

Martina Hingis stormed through the first set in her fourth round tie against 
Samantha Stosur 6-1, but was made to work harder for the second set and the 
match, winning the tie-break 10-8.
 