
Amelie Mauresmo ended her long wait for a first grand slam title by overcoming 
Justine Henin-Hardenne this morning. The match ended in the same way as her 
semi-final encounter with Kim Clijsters - with her opponent retiring - but 
Mauresmo was in emphatic form and lead 6-1, 2-0 before Henin-Hardenne withdrew.

"It would have been probably different if the match went to the end but the 
joy is here," Mauresmo said afterwards - determined not to let the Belgian's 
stomach upset take the credit for her victory. "I've been waiting so long for 
this and really worked hard for this, it's a really great achievement. I'm 
probably the proudest woman now," she said after lifting the trophy in her 32nd 
grand slam tournament.

Mauresmo said she had bought a special bottle of wine, reported to be a 1937 
Chateau d'Yquem Sauternes, several years ago to open when she won her first 
grand slam.

"Now I'm going to have to open it. We will have, I'm sure, more than one," she 
said.

Mauresmo showed no signs of choking as she broke Henin-Hardenne twice to storm 
to a 5-0 lead in the first set. Henin-Hardenne looked out of sorts and produced 
20 unforced errors in the match. Her usually immaculate backhand faltered and 
she struggled to get even a third of her first serves in.

The Frenchwoman took the set in just over half an hour and broke 
Henin-Hardenne in the first game of the second set to establish a comfortable 
lead. Henin-Hardenne was clearly struggling by this point and retired. She said 
her upset stomach was down to anti-inflammatory tablets she was taking for a 
shoulder injury: she had doubled her dose coming into the tournament.

But, she said, she had no regrets.

"It's my decision, my choice. I decided to walk on the court because I'm 
professional, I want to try," she said. "Everyone has the right to think that 
[I should have carried on] but it's my health," added a tearful Henin-Hardenne. 
"I'm feeling very disappointed to lose the tournament this way. I'm feeling so 
sick, I couldn't stay on the court any more. It's very frustrating that it ends 
this way.

"I have to think about myself right now. It's me that was feeling bad."

By contrast Mauresmo, who becomes the world No2 on the back of this victory, 
said she would have played through the pain barrier to complete the match.

"I was ready to die on the court today," she said. 

Henin-Hardenne went into the match as clear favourite after her Sydney 
International win two weeks ago, but instead will go into the record books as 
the first woman to retire from a grand slam final in the Open era.
 