
Formula one boss Max Mosley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley> has 
filed a £1.2m lawsuit against the publisher of Germany's largest newspaper 
following his privacy win against the News of the World.

The lawsuit - over breach of trust, violations of copyright laws and fraud - 
was launched after the Bild newspaper followed up the News of the World's 
original story in March, which wrongly alleged that Mosley's sadomasochistic 
sex session with five prostitutes had "Nazi connotations".

Mosley's action claimed Bild's publisher Axel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> AG had spent money on 
"illegal purposes" by paying for the News of the World's video and photos.

According to the lawsuit, Mosley is demanding €1m (£788,000) from Bild and 
€500,000 from its online edition in damages for their text, photo and video 
reports.

The prosecutor's office in Berlin has also opened an investigation based on 
Mosley's lawsuit, spokeswoman Simone Herbeth told the Associated Press today.

It is thought further action could also be taken against publishers in France.

Mosley won his high court action against the News of the World yesterday after 
Mr Justice Eady ruled there was no public interest in the story.

He was awarded £60,000 in damages plus legal costs estimated at around 
£450,000. The newspaper must also pay its own legal costs of about £400,000.

The Times today suggested Mosley was also preparing to launch a libel action 
against the News of the World following his privacy win.

London law firm Steeles refused to comment when contacted by 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, but a source at the firm said: "There would be a time to 
talk about other things but that time is not now."

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 