
Australia gained the sweetest revenge for last week's Headingley indignity a 
few minutes before tea at the Oval yesterday. There was nothing to it: Glenn 
McGrath to Phil Tufnell, an edge to Shane Warne at slip and it was all over.

Bowled out for 184 the second time around, England had lost the final Test by 
an innings and 25 runs, and the series 4-1, which was a fair reflection of the 
disparity between the sides. England have been outclassed all the way, although 
there is no disgrace in that.

After the presentations - Steve Waugh accepting the large crystal replica of 
the Ashes urn with as much grace as someone who covets the real thing could 
muster - there was a lap of honour, much champagne spraying and then a ritual 
disposal of kit to the Australian throng which had gathered in front of the 
dressing rooms. It was the start of what was surely a long, lush and noisy 
night.

Yet again the magnificent McGrath, in his absolute pomp now as a fast bowler, 
had been the principal destroyer, the last two wickets in three balls giving 
him a five-wicket haul for the third time in Tests this summer and 32 wickets 
in the series.

England's coach Duncan Fletcher had no hestitation in nominating him as 
Australia's man of the series. Few would argue with that for he is enshrined 
now in the records as the most successful fast bowler that country has 
produced, passing Dennis Lillee's 355 wickets during the day.

Only one Australian stands ahead of him, but what a man. In a series that has 
benefited seam, Warne has been astonishing, and no less so yesterday when he 
bowled the first complete over of the day and did not stop until he had sent 
down 25 more.

His progress towards what surely would have been another five-wicket harvest 
was halted only by a stubborn ninth-wicket stand between James Ormond and 
Darren Gough, whose unbeaten 39 was the top score of the innings.

But he bowled brilliantly, a wiser bird these days than the man of many tricks 
who first came here eight years ago and none the worse for that. He spun his 
leg-breaks vast distances as the Oval pitch began to wear, adding four for 64 
to his seven in the first innings - he took 11 for 229 in all - a performance 
against England bettered only by his 11 for 110 at the Gabba in December 1994. 
The man of the match here, he finished the series with only one wicket fewer 
than McGrath and a career total of 407, placing him fifth in the all-time list. 
When Warne and McGrath bowled in tandem, Australia were generally irresistible.

Under the circumstances, with the gloom and rain of Sunday giving way to more 
glorious weather, England would certainly have nursed hopes of scoring 169 more 
runs to make Australia bat again and, despite the loss of Mike Atherton the 
previous morning, of getting through the day for a draw.

The first hour, during which they lost four wickets for nine runs as Warne and 
McGrath turned the screw, soon dashed such optimism. Warne made the first 
incision, having Mark Butcher, England's man of the series, caught by Waugh at 
silly point from pad and bat.

McGrath responded in the next over with two wicked deliveries in succession to 
Marcus Trescothick. The first the batsman edged shoulder high between first and 
second slip, where Ricky Ponting - there because of the hand injury sustained 
by Mark Waugh on Sunday - moved in front of Warne at first slip and dropped the 
chance. McGrath dug in the next ball fractionally and it flew at Trescothick's 
gloves, ballooning into the air to give the bowler a simple return catch.

Nasser Hussain followed almost immediately, lbw to a quicker ball from Warne, 
and then Usman Afzaal stretched wide outside off-stump and was well caught by 
Ponting, leaving the innings in tatters at 55 for five.

Mark Ramprakash and Alec Stewart steadied things for a while, adding 40 before 
Ramprakash steered Warne to gully. Stewart and Andy Caddick were bowled, by 
Warne and Brett Lee respectively, with successive balls and only the 
ninth-wicket stand gave England the vaguest chance of avoiding an innings 
defeat. McGrath saw to that notion.

Australia have now won all but three of their last 23 Tests, the astounding 
pace at which they play the game an insurance against any inclement weather. At 
times England responded well and played spirited stuff themselves. A lesson has 
certainly been learned.

Now, though, begins the process of rebuilding. Hussain cannot hide his 
disappointment that Gough and Stewart have turned down the tour of India and it 
may well be that we have seen the last of both.

The way back into the side, as Graham Thorpe discovered last season, is by no 
means a straight passage, and things tend to get overtaken by events. Certainly 
the pair have chosen to take a risky course, especially Stewart who is 38 years 
old.

Both players were being given the opportunity by the selectors to reconsider 
last night before a final decision was made. But it may well and truly be time 
for the turning over of a new leaf.
 