
"All right, Suze?" says Angela Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/angelahartnett> as she greets Suzanna 
Kean with an affectionate, matey hello. The 25-year-old, now sous chef at 
London's Maze, worked with Hartnett on the opening of her Mayfair restaurant 
Murano. She stayed two-and-a-half years, starting as chef de partie before 
quickly progressing. "I had implicit trust in Suzanna," declares Hartnett. 
Having cut her teeth under the Ramsay regime, it's safe to assume such trust 
would not be easy to gain. "She naturally understood about consistency, which 
is so important."

Kean has always been reliable, even as a teenager, when she would peel 
"mountains" of vegetables for her mother, who worked in a care home. "I 
actually really enjoyed it," she confesses. She studied catering at Glenrothes 
college before coming to London six-and-a-half years ago, landing a job at 
Scott's before joining Hartnett at Murano. In Scotland, Kean was the only girl 
in the kitchen "nine times out of 10" but says that there are "far more" in 
London. Not that it bothers her. "You get no special treatment being a woman. 
Graft is part of the job, but you know that from the first day at college."

She does, however, feel like some men of a certain generation in the industry 
don't take younger female chefs seriously. "Sometimes those men don't listen to 
women," she says. "So you have to just be that little bit stronger, really 
believe in yourself." Hartnett believes "the male-female thing" is the same in 
any industry. "It's just about whether you can hack it or not," she says. 
"Plenty of blokes can't. Women who succeed in our industry are women who want 
to do well for themselves, full stop. If you want to do well, and have the 
passion, you just get on with it, nothing stands in your way."

It must be nice having other girls around, though? "It is," says Kean. "The 
guys don't swear as much but I'm worse than them to be honest."

Hartnett says she can "talk shite" and "have a gossip" with Kean, and you can 
definitely imagine seeing the two of them together. But would she trust a woman 
more than a man? "I don't know, is the honest answer. But I know I'd want to go 
out for a drink with her after work."
 