
A promising medical student killed himself four weeks after being prescribed a 
controversial acne drug, an inquest in Manchester heard yesterday.

Jon Medland, 22, was in the final year of his medical degree at Manchester 
University when he hanged himself at his student lodgings early on January 13 
this year.

Leonard Gorodkin, the Manchester coroner, was told that in a short time Mr 
Medland had been transformed from a "bubbly, outgoing" young man with a love of 
student life and Manchester United to becoming withdrawn and depressed with 
suicidal thoughts. Mr Medland had suffered from mild acne for several years, 
but the inquest heard that he had become self-conscious about dealing with 
patients.

By last autumn he had tried three different types of antibiotic and various 
topical treatments, and although he had noticed some improvement in his skin, 
the acne had not cleared.

Through his own research, Mr Medland had learned of the drug Roaccutane, used 
to treat more severe cases of acne. Mr Medland was referred by his GP to Dr 
Haydn Muston, consultant dermatologist at Withington Hospital, Manchester, and 
attended his first appointment on December 11.

Dr Muston told Mr Gorodkin that it was not standard practice to prescribe 
treatment at the initial appointment, but as Mr Medland was a medical student 
and had already researched the possible side-effects of the drug, he wrote him 
a prescription that day. "I felt Jon wanted to get started," he said.

Mr Medland went home to Devon for Christmas, where his family and his 
girlfriend noticed nothing unusual about his behaviour, the hearing was told. 
It was only once he had begun a placement at a medical practice in Shrewsbury 
on January 5 he began to complain of feeling tired and stressed, and had doubts 
about his academic abilities.

He told friends and family that he feared his mental state was somehow 
connected to the Roaccutane, and that he had "read somewhere" that the effects 
might not cease when he stopped taking the drug. They told him to stop taking 
the Roaccutane tablets, which he did on January 8.

The inquest heard that the following day he returned to Manchester where his 
flatmates noticed that he was uncharacteristically quiet. He began acting 
strangely and told them he had been experiencing suicidal thoughts.

Though Mr Medland had been due to see Dr Muston for a follow-up appointment 
that week, his flatmates urged him to see his GP, which he did on January 12, 
and was prescribed the anti-depressant Citalopram. The following day, Mr 
Medland's flatmate found him dead in his room.

Recording a verdict that Mr Medley killed himself, Mr Gorodkin said: "For a 
drug to affect a person of a very solid life foundation, if it can lead them to 
take their own life, then it deserves further investigation, if a link can be 
proved.

"But I cannot say with any certainty that the effects of the drug Roaccutane 
led him to take his own life. All I can say is that the warnings that are 
already present should be made very clearly and strongly."

Earlier this year, European medicine watchdogs announced a review of 
Roaccutane's safety record, following concern regarding alleged links to 
suicide and depression.

The drug's manufacturer, Roche, says that 13 million people worldwide have 
used Roaccutane, and although it is not possible to say how many of these are 
in Britain, by last January an estimated 375,000 treatment courses may have 
been prescribed.
 