
• To the Paddy Power Political Book awards 
<http://www.politicalbookawards.com/> 2015 at London’s Imax cinema, where the 
winners included Guardian cartoonist Martin Rowson, Andrew Marr revealed his 
next book (presumably another novel because his first one was, er, so 
remarkable) will be “extremely rude about Labour” when collecting a lifetime 
award, and the host Rory Bremner took no prisoners as he laid into Cameron, 
Miliband, Farage, Brown, Obama and Clinton. Was it wise, though, to also target 
the publisher and broadcaster Iain Dale, mocking his LBC gig as on the margins 
of radio? Dale founded the awards (with the prize money provided by Lord 
Ashcroft) and remains the eminence grise behind them, so the impressionist’s 
chances of a rebooking may have instantly slumped.

• Rumour continues to associate Rebekah Brooks, the former Sun and News of the 
World editor and News International supremo, with a top job that would reunite 
her with Rupert Murdoch; and Monkey can add a potentially confirmatory clue 
with a contact spotting her (unless it was Jessica Chastain) as part of the 
large Murdochian delegation at the recent CES tech trade fair in Las Vegas. 
There have been suggestions that the post could be at the top of 21st Century 
Fox division of his empire, although she would meet double resistance there as 
a Brit and an incomer from newspapers; perhaps instead she’ll be at Rupert’s 
side as nurse when he goes on Twitter, as vital a job as can be imagined given 
his recent doddery splutterings including one tweet consisting just of the 
letters “PO” (he probably meant POTUS, ie Obama, but even the first syllable 
made him too angry to continue).

• Murdoch was notably absent from “Britain’s 500 most influential people” in 
one of his own papers last weekend, when the Sunday Times omitted him from the 
ranks of leaders in publishing, broadcasting, industry or journalism - the 
latter list excluded all newspaper editors “because their influence is a 
given”, but didn’t bother explaining why not one press baron made the cut. 
Among those who were included were an ample group of supposedly fun-to-read 
Sun, Times and Sunday Times columnists (Jeremy Clarkson, Rod Liddle, AA Gill, 
Caitlin Moran), but missing from this peculiar selection were any of News UK’s 
(or anyone else’s) heavyweight political pundits: the likes of Dominic Lawson, 
Adam Boulton, Baron Finkelstein, David Aaronovitch, Phillip Collins and Trevor 
Kavanagh won’t have been happy. Less influential than dressage rider Charlotte 
Dujardin! Or pants model David Gandy!

• Examples of “real W1A” continue to proliferate, and the latest was a press 
release 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/aboutthebbc/entries/70420014-82c8-40b5-8072-38ece1bf2b1e>
from the new BBC Taster service. It quotes Will Saunders, the so-called 
“editorial lead” (probably sounds like “weed”, but rhyming with “dead” is also 
possible), as recalling a fellow exec telling him (about discovering hits) 
“you’ve got to kiss a lot of frogs before you find your Prince Charming”. So, 
Saunders goes on, “to know what to make and what our audiences want from us in 
a fast-changing world we need to kiss a lot more frogs. Welcome to our new 
pond.” No thanks.

• Monkey’s favourite TV subtitling gaffe remains a mishearing of Channel 4 
News’s Fact Check team (as “the Fat Czech team”), but close behind is an 
example recalled in a letter to the Times last week, from coverage of a rowing 
event at the 2012 Olympics. “Girls, don’t give up on that sex offender”, urged 
the hapless wax-eared subtitler, although what the commentator had said was 
“Girls, don’t give up, don’t surrender”.

• In the latest issue of Tatler magazine, it’s the turn of Michael Gove and 
Sarah Vine’s dog in a regular feature spotlighting top people’s pets. Snowy, a 
chatty bichon frise whose words were put into his mouth by Vine, tells us that 
the Osbornes’ dog Lola is his “wife”, and that he sleeps “in a comfy bed 
between my mistress and my master”. Could this explain why the Mail columnist 
always seems in such a cross mood despite her lovely husband and vast income?

• At Sage Gateshead, Alan Davey gave his first speech last week as Radio 3 
controller <http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/speeches/2015/alan-davey-abo>, a 
mystical vision of a utopian world where the station’s ratings go up without 
any dumbing down. Monkey was particularly intrigued by a section in which he 
asked for patience from “those eagle tweeters amongst you”, a hitherto 
unrecognised part of the classical music audience and indeed the avian predator 
community. If the rookie controller really meanteagle-eyed people (following 
him on Twitter), he could probably do with recruiting one or two of them to 
replace the dozy Beebocrats who didn’t notice his slip at any stage as the text 
of his speech made its way from his laptop to the Sage podium and the BBC Media 
Centre site.

• Another top Beeb bod was in philosophical mood too, and it was good to see 
BBC News boss James Harding giving an early name-check to Jerry Seinfeld (after 
Thomas Jefferson but before Jeff Bezos) in his musings onThe Future of News 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/future-of-news>. Perhaps 
quoting Seinfeld - “It’s amazing that the amount of news ... always just 
exactly fits the newspaper” - was a gesture towards belated justice: when the 
eponymous sitcom was on air, the US episodes arrived several years late and 
were insultingly screened post-Paxman on BBC2 at 11.15pm. Or perhaps it was 
just an attempt, unconvincing but endearing, to demonstrate that the former 
Times editor has a sense of humour.

• For Sky spinners, last week’s Scandi drama Fortitude provided an opportunity 
for a well-rehearsed double shuffle. The ratings don’t matter at all, was the 
familiar line in the run-up, as such lavish, stellar Sky Atlantic projects are 
all about prestige and wooing and retaining subscribers. All this was 
shamelessly forgotten, though,when the first episode did well  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/30/fortitude-sky-atlantic-game-of-thrones>
with 700,000-plus viewers, swiftly prompting boasting about how much more this 
figure was than the “slot average”. But didn’t that just show how humiliatingly 
low the mid-evening slot average previously was?
 