
This week we launch MediaGuardian 25 – our survey of Britain's 25 most 
important media companies, covering TV, radio, newspapers, magazines, music and 
digital. Starting with an analysis ofITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>, we'll review the state of the big 
media players.

When Adam Crozier was unveiled as chief executive in January 2010 a 
recession-scarred ITV was struggling to recover from a £2.7bn annual loss and 
had a £1bn debt and pension deficit, leaving jaded investors valuing it at a 
tepid 56p a share. Fast forward three years and Crozier, who will on Monday
unveil ITV's biggest on-screen branding overhaul in 11 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/16/itv-launches-major-brand-overhaul?INTCMP=SRCH>
, has become something of a City darling.

Investors, ignoring signs that Simon Cowell's The X Factor may be running out 
of steam, have pushed ITV's share price to more than double the level it was 
when Crozier arrived – it recently topped £1 for the first time in five years.

Analysts at Liberum have even had the chutzpah to put a target price of a sky 
high 155p on ITV, a level not seen even immediately after the Carlton/Granada 
merger which created the UK's largest advertiser-funded commercial broadcaster 
back in 2004.

An unrelenting focus on hammering the broadcaster's previously parlous 
finances into shape means that Crozier now presides over a debt-free ITV that 
has about £800m in cash, and is expected to report pre-tax profits of about 
£350m when 2012's results are unveiled next month. Under Crozier's 
well-incentivised contract he will be eligible to cash in more than £4m in 
share options in April – on top of his multi-million pound annual pay cheque.

He is now more than halfway through his five-year transformation plan, which 
aims to reduce ITV's dependence on TV ad revenue, primarily by boosting its 
production and distribution business and driving digital revenues. Yet ITV is 
still almost completely reliant on TV advertising – accounting for about £1.5bn 
of a total of £2.2bn revenues – and the broadcaster's fortunes continue to be 
pegged to the state of the notoriously cyclical ad market.

Crozier signed on when ITV was climbing out of the UK's worst ever advertising 
recession – its share price fell as low as 17p – and enjoyed the fruits of a 
recovery in the ad market in his first year in charge in 2010.

"In the very early stages there was some luck, 2010 saw a massive rebound in 
the advertising market, but a programme of fundamental changes takes time," 
says Thomas Singlehurst, head of European media equity research at Citigroup. 
"Real work has been done on the finance and treasury function. At one point 
banks wouldn't touch them. There were issues including real concerns about 
ITV's solvency and a burgeoning pension problem. Lots of these issues have been 
resolved and hence the change in the perception, and share price, in the stock 
market."

But the main investor-pleasing feather in Crozier's cap has been the 
revitalisation of production division ITV Studios, which makes and sells shows 
including Coronation Street, Mr Selfridge and Dancing on Ice. Profits have 
rebounded in the past year, with ITV forecasting more than £100m.

One analyst says that the revenue growth is a better gauge of the 
transformation of the production business, up from £554m to an estimated £700m 
in two years. Crozier still has a lot of work to do to hit his target of 50% of 
ITV's total revenues coming from non-TV advertising sources by the end of 2015. 
In 2010 TV ad revenue accounted for 75% of total ITV revenues, now reduced to 
67%.

ITV's lack of a coherent digital strategy has also historically been nothing 
short of an embarrassment. In 2010 digital revenues were just £28m.

In the past two years the broadcaster has dramatically increased the 
distribution of its online TV service, ITV Player, to platforms including 
Virgin Media, Sky Anytime and handheld and gaming devices such as PS3, Android 
and Apple phones. A digital pay strategy has been introduced which includes 
licensing shows to LoveFilm and Netflix, as well as charging for some 
programmes on the ITV Player.

This has helped fuel digital revenue growth in two years to about £95m in 
2012, however this is still less than 5% of ITV's total revenues.

Mathew Horsman, director at consultancy Mediatique, remains to be convinced 
that Crozier is fundamentally changing the business.

"He hasn't really transformed ITV in the way he set out to do," he says. "It 
is not a bad place to be if those [TV] revenues are being generated. But it 
isn't a completely new beast, he hasn't really gone into pay-TV and has done 
very little in video-on-demand, they are quite small parts of the business. In 
effect he has got away with not transforming ITV."

So while Crozier has sorted out ITV's finances and grown its production 
business, more work needs to be done to ween the company off its TV advertising 
habit.
 