
• Condé Nast UK managing director Nicholas Coleridge features in the 
forthcoming BBC seriesPosh People: Inside Tatler 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2014/british-life-docs>. As well 
as providing soundbites, he makes a decisive intervention that somewhat 
embarrassingly shows up Tatler editor Kate Reardon when she and her top team 
sashay in so he can pass his eye over an issue with the Duchess of Cambridge on 
the cover. That coverline “Are you a slut?”, he wonders; wouldn’t it be best to 
move it much lower, so that it’s not next to the duchess’s eyeline? Out they 
troop, humiliated but with their bacon saved.

• Insensitive timing from Johnston Press chief executive Ashley Highfield on 
the day that a merger of Johnston’s Scotsman titles and Edinburgh Evening News 
wasannounced with the loss of up to 45 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/29/scotsman-titles-merge-job-losses>
. Not the best moment, then, for Highfield (whose Twitter feed says home is 
“Kensington”, ie 400 miles from Edinburgh) totweet a link 
<https://twitter.com/ashleyhi/status/527591993191723008> to an amusing listicle 
of “13 films that perfectly portray what it’s like to work in a soul-destroying 
job”.

• No stranger to embarrassing interviews, the Today programme’s Garry 
Richardson sensed more potential peril as he interviewed John Kirwan, coach of 
rugby’s Barbarians, about how well how he communicates with his younger 
players. “There are funny handshakes,” Kirwan replied, and also by way of 
greeting “you get the odd ‘up G!’. Do you know what that means?” “I don’t, this 
isRadio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>,” murmured Richardson, 
clearly suspecting it could be sleazy or offensive and regretting raising the 
topic. In fact it’s short for “what’s up, gangster?”, Monkey is told, and any 
day now younger Today toilers will be hailing John Humphrys that way. They 
already greet Tony Hall with “up DG!”, of course.


• To the Specsavers Crime and Thriller awards 
<http://www.crimethrillerawards.com/>, televised on ITV3, where the worlds of 
screen crime and book crime come somewhat awkwardly together. But at least they 
could agree on the awfulness of host Bradley Walsh (who derives his flimsy 
credentials for the job from appearing in Law and Order: UK, but has now left 
the ITV show). Link after link was fluffed, interview after interview went 
badly, but what got an otherwise docile audience jeering was his habit of 
greeting any women who joined him on stage – usually actors presenting awards 
or receiving them – as “girls”. When three joined him at once, including the 
feminist authors Val McDermid and Kate Mosse, hopes were high that Walsh would 
at last receive his comeuppance, perhaps by receiving a sock in the chops on 
“as live” TV. In the event they confined themselves to seething, but crime fans 
may find the grotesquely mutilated corpse of a sexist cockney actor turning up 
in the first chapters of a whodunit.

• In the first showdown between Line of Duty 2 and Happy Valley at the Crime 
and Thriller awards, due to be repeated at the Baftas, Sally Wainwright’s drama 
won best series and supporting actor (James Norton) but in the evening’s final 
award Keeley Hawes beat Sarah Lancashire to best actress. Few who were there 
will forget Hawes’s poignant speech, in which she made a few nods to Jed 
Mercurio and other colleagues but primarily gave thanks that “at last I can 
have a pee!”. Bafta organisers may like to ensure their best actress award is 
given early in proceedings to avoid any risk of repetition.

• While Bradley Walsh’s blushes were largely spared by retakes, there was no 
such luck on Wednesday for Radio 1’s Alice Levine in coverage of the Mercury 
prize bizarrely shared between Channel 4 (just five minutes for the 
announcement, including Nick Grimshaw saying the same things twice) and not E4 
but More4 (which otherwise shows no interest in music). Sounding like her Lewis 
Carroll namesake as she quizzed laconic victorious rappers Young Fathers, 
Levine made little headway with such posers as “how does it feel?” (“it’s 
positive”), “did you think you’d win?” (inaudible mumbles) and “how will you 
spend it? (“we’ve not talked about that”). “I imagine it’s an out of body 
experience … ”, she eventually ventured desperately, perhaps thinking more of 
her own predicament than what they were going through. Some tweeters, noting 
that More4’s live feed cut off during the car crash encounter, cruelly 
speculated that it might not be an accident.

• Stardom beckons for Matthew Bell, the dapper Independent on Sunday columnist 
who decamped to Tatler just in time to appear in the forthcomingBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> series Posh People: Inside Tatler - in 
the publicity photo, he is the sole male surrounded by around 30 women. Yet 
while Bell is prominent and appears to be enjoying himself in the opening 
programme, the cunning film-makers (and possibly his colleagues) might be seen 
as setting him up for a fall. When he’s sent to Oxford to investigate the 
Bullingdon Club, we learn that “Matthew has not persuaded any members to talk”; 
and a second assignment to crash summer social occasions ends in double 
failure: crashing a royal garden party turns out to be a crime akin to treason, 
and he is swiftly spotted as a phoney when trying to gain entry to another 
event as a waiter. The obscurity of scribbling columns for the Sindy may come 
to seem preferable.

• Danny Cohen, the BBC’s director of television, has recently become more 
active on Twitter, but not all are convinced that@DannyCohen 
<https://twitter.com/DannyCohen> is authentic, not least because in his BBC3 
days he was the victim of a cruel spoof blog, Secret Blog of a TV Controller. 
Gushy @DannyCohen tweets like “Excited to be Following the wonderful Nigella 
Lawson” have a suspiciously parodic ring, and a heartfelt thought on Tuesday 
(“People can be really odd on Twitter. They follow [people] but then just send 
them immensely rude or aggressive messages. Why bother?”) sounded more like an 
unworldly Twitter-virgin teenager than an on-the-ball top media executive. The 
clincher, though, is the declaration under his photo that he will tweet about 
“telly, books, football”. The real Cohen, as we know from his Who’s Who entry, 
is also obsessed with “meditation, contemporary art, pickle, giraffes”.
 