
In a clearing on the edges of Vazhachal forest, scores of forest-dwelling 
tribal villagers, dressed in their best clothes, are standing in pouring 
monsoon rain. They are waiting outside a dilapidated two-storey concrete 
building that today is serving as a makeshift diagnosis room and pharmacy.

This is Athirapally medical camp, one of several monthly camps that provides 
healthcare services for Kerala's most under-served villages. It is organised by 
the Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences (Aims), a specialist hospital some 
100km away in Kerala's state capital, Kochi. Aims works with the Kerala 
forestry department, which arranges transport so the villagers can attend.

On the first floor, Dr Siddanth Reddy places his stethoscope on eight-year-old 
Bishir's chest. "Most commonly the rural children that come here have fever and 
cough, sometimes breathing difficulties. A big problem is TB, so we take a 
blood count, give a chest x-ray in the telemedicine van, and if there are any 
abnormalities we refer them to our main hospital," he says.

Public healthcare is free in India, yet years of under-investment in public 
health means that facilities are grossly understaffed and under equipped. As a 
result, 80% of Indians seek private healthcare. Such expenditure is the leading 
cause of poverty in India, contributing to the impoverishment of 39 million 
Indians annually. Aims treats about 45,000 patients free of charge each year.

Bishir has a fever. He's been coughing for the past two months. "We hoped it 
would go away," says his mother, Karthu. "The hospital is too far." Like a 
large number of India's rural poor, Bishir never received a BCG vaccination 
against TB. Low rates of immunisation and health awareness mean many Indians 
continue to die from easily preventable diseases.

An ageing population

India's most advanced telemedicine van is at Athirapally today. It is a 
hi-tech mobile diagnostic unit, complete with x-ray, echocardiograph and 
on-board pathology lab. The van was funded by NGO Direct Relief International 
in 2006 and has been used to treat more than 500,000 patients across the 
country.

The van is connected via satellite to Aims, enabling real-time consultations 
with specialists at the hospital. Although static telemedicine units have been 
around for a while, they are dependent on high‑speed broadband, so are less 
useful.

Karthu sits by Bishir, as the van's technical facilitator, Prasanth, completes 
a chest x-ray. The hard copy x-ray is then taken back up to Reddy. There are no 
abnormalities so Reddy gives Bishir a prescription, available on the ground 
floor free of charge, saving Karthu and Bishir a 40km trip to the nearest 
hospital.

"Telemedicine can enable much faster, more efficient and more accurate care. 
It is no good without trained and competent staff, but can be extremely 
beneficial to patients as it can cut costs and save time," says Dr Kumar Menon, 
Aims's director of telemedicine.

India has a massive resource gap of about 2.6 million health workers and, to 
compound problems, nearly 60% of existing health workers practise in urban 
areas.

About 70% of India's population lives in rural areas, often far from 
healthcare providers. Both the World Health Organisation and India's 2005 Rural 
Health Mission consider the use of technology and outreach work imperative to 
bringing better healthcare to India's most vulnerable people.

From within the van, Prasanth takes blood from 66-year-old Shamugan to 
determine his blood sugar level after complaining of depleting vision in one 
eye. He also has severe chest pains and lays on his back while a chest x-ray 
and ECG is performed. "I feel out of breath after only taking a few steps," he 
says, as the ECG beeps in the background.

Once Shamugan's results are collated, the van uses satellite technology to 
connect with the main Aims hospital. Prasanth sends the results and a digital 
image of the x-ray and the ECG to Aims's head of cardiology, Dr Haridas. The 
doctor analyses the results, prescribes the correct course of medication and 
makes an appointment for Shamugan to visit the hospital, which provides free 
healthcare for those living below the poverty line of RS2,000 a month (about 
£26). The details of Shamugan's tele consultation are recorded on the van's 
database, as are Bishir's diagnosis and prescription, and those of every other 
patient seen today.

Specialist care, which is needed for chronic illnesses, such as cardiovascular 
diseases, cancers and diabetes – India's biggest killers and causes of 
disability – is virtually non-existent in rural areas. The World Bank believes 
India is grossly unprepared for the coming burden of non-communicable diseases, 
such as heart disease and cancer, as its population ages. Investment in 
telehealth could be vital for the future, as the burden of such chronic 
diseases will continue to increase significantly over the next 25 years.

Despite these benefits, the use of ICT (information and communication 
technologies) healthcare intervention in India is still very much in its 
infancy and has not benefited the vast majority of the rural or urban poor.

"It involves a lot of expenditure – the government funding has to be there," 
says Dr Alok Agrawal of Delhi's private Apollo Hospital chain, the first 
hospital chain in India to use telemedicine. "You need staff who are 
technically sound and a doctor who knows what he's doing technically. You need 
infrastructure."

Mobile phone penetration has extended throughout India, and leading software 
companies such as IBM and HP are working on health programmes that use 
text-messaging services, or interactive voice responses for those who are not 
literate. This could be particularly useful for chronic disease management.

But although India is the world's second fastest growing economy, progress in 
healthcare has not matched this growth and India compares poorly with countries 
at similar levels of development.

According to Menon and his colleagues, a multi-pronged approach is necessary 
to improve access to quality healthcare for India's poor. All aspects of 
telehealth should be implemented, they believe, from static telephone lines to 
advanced mobile health units. All data must be kept in a repository such as a 
national health grid. This can be used to keep information on areas of disease 
outbreak and could be used to share information on effective healthcare 
practice.

There is general agreement from medical and development professionals that 
health policies must be strengthened and accountability levels raised in order 
to meet the government's recent pledges to increase public health spending. 
Without these interventions, India will almost certainly not reach its 
Millennium Development Goal targets for health and fail to fulfil its economic 
potential.

As Athirapally medical camp packs up for the day, the staff prepare to head 
back to Kochi. The Kerala forestry department uses jeeps to drive the villagers 
as close as they can to the forest, before the villagers disembark and return 
to their homes.
 