
Edinburgh TV festival: the century so far

• Best question: (to distinguished documentary maker Adam Curtis): “Is it true 
that on [long-running Esther Rantzen show] That’s Life! you made the film about 
the dog that said ‘sausages’?” “I have no comment to make,” answered Curtis 
after a Pinter-esque pause.

• Runner-up: “Where do you get that brand of hair gel from, it’s good?” Steve 
Hewlett, relaying an emailed poser to David Abraham after his own questions 
were stonewalled. “God knows, Boots?” the C4 supremo testily replied.

• Most embarrassing moment: Jana Bennett, then BBC head of vision, strummed a 
guitar andsang a recession-related folk song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2009/aug/28/edinburgh-tv-festival-jana-bennett>
 in a festival version of Britain’s Got Talent. “Music to slit your wrists to” 
was Amanda Holden’s verdict.

• Runner-up: Alan Yentob’s appearance in a blue jump-suit in a festival 
edition of Top Gear’s Star In a Reasonably Priced Car. The BBC schmoozing 
supremo’s remarkably slow lap and eventual ranking (fifth out of five) was 
speculatively explained by one colleague as because “he had one hand on the 
steering wheel and the other on the phone to Jagger”.

• Worst dancing: efforts by former BBC DG Lord Birt and Yentob have been 
nominated, but Monkey’s nod goes to perpetual junior DCMS minister Ed “Hazy” 
Vaizey, who reacted to accusations of “dancing like a Tory MP” by protesting 
“but I am a Tory MP”.

• Best pitch anecdote: “I was once pitched to when I was standing naked in the 
shower at Highbury swimming pool, by a very keen female indie, I might add. It 
wasn’t my favourite experience” – ex-BBC2 and BBC4 controller Janice Hadlow.

• Bitchiest jibe: “Around The World In 80 Days, back to London in three” - Rob 
Brydon sums up the not overwhelmingly successful Hollywood career up to 2004 of 
his future The Trip partner Steve Coogan.

• Best recurring double act: Keith Lemon’s festival relationship with his 
boss, ITV head of television Peter Fincham, which first blossomed in a 2012 
Celebrity Juice special when Lemon asked Fincham if he was “a fan of tits” 
(“yes and no”) and cruelly suggested “why not call it Daybreak?” on learning 
the exec’s band was called No Expectations; two years later, Lemon visited the 
luxurious Fincham home in a Controller Through the Keyhole session and claimed 
to find wads of £50 notes hidden away in the owner’s “man cave”

• Most self-defining grooming/fashion item: Mark Thompson’s beard, which as 
two-time MacTaggart lecturer served him equally well as maverick creative 
renegade when Channel 4 chief executive (2002) and as bleak broadcasting 
prophet and BBC boss forced to agree to radical austerity (2010)

• Runner-up: Sky exec Stuart Murphy’s spare pants, mysteriously discovered in 
a living room drawer by Lemon in another Controller Through The Keyhole report 
in which the 70s throwback character sprawled, naked but with modesty protected 
by Murphy’s ties, on the homeowner’s kitchen counter.

• Frostiest interview session: Krishnan Guru-Murthy’s tough cross-examination 
of rookie BBC1 controller Charlotte Moore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aq0GBwM7Uuc> last year, after which her 
furious colleagues Danny Cohen and Ben Stephenson confronted the Channel 4 News 
presenter. He later called their chivalrous intervention “rather sexist”

• Runner-up: Kirsty Young quizzing Jay Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/aug/24/jay-hunt-channel-4-audiences-video>
, newly installed at Channel 4, when the temperature became icier with each 
probing question about C4 offerings such as Big Fat Gypsy Wedding.

• Best rant: “Who the fuck are you?” Birt reportedly asked the then Guardian 
media editor Matt Wells three times at the dinner after Birt’s 2005 MacTaggart. 
“And why are you wearing a tie?” the peer continued. “Nobody else here is 
wearing a tie.” Once Wells introduced himself, Birt said: “So you write 
bollocks, and now you’re going to talk bollocks, too.”

• Silliest PR stunt: Ahead of the channel of year award at the festival one 
year, luckless UKTV gofers were tasked with repeatedly taking suitcases bearing 
stickers saying “the case for Dave” off the baggage carousel at Edinburgh 
airport and then heaving them on again.

• Least TV-aware telly baron: “What!? You mean you don’t watch all the hours 
of programming you make?” Richard Desmond’s perplexity recalled by his head of 
programmes at Channel 5 Ben Frow, who explained that viewing 14 hours a day was 
beyond him.

• Best imaginary programme: “Look out for The Probe, a new BBC1 Saturday night 
show in which police search the homes of previous hosts of BBC1 Saturday night 
shows” - Armando Iannucci.

• Top takedown: “Dr John Malone, resident of Colorado, is understood to be the 
largest landowner in America, was nicknamed ‘Darth Vader’ by Al Gore, currently 
holds a net debt of $41bn and famously hates to pay tax ...”

David Abraham in his MacTaggart warns that the media tycoon already “controls 
Virgin Media, All3Media and Discovery” and could capture ITV

• Best MacTaggart lecture soundbites

“Sometimes you want sit there and say, ‘Not much has happened today, I’d go to 
bed if I were you’.”

Jeremy Paxman (2007) takes a swipe at the over-hyping of news stories.

“The BBC is incapable of distinguishing between what is good for it, and what 
is good for the country ... The scope of its activities and ambitions is 
chilling”

News Corp’s James Murdoch (2009) bashes the Beeb in a MacTaggart that also 
criticised regulators and called UK broadcasting “the Addams Family of world 
media”.

“Profit without purpose is a recipe for disaster”.

Shine boss Elisabeth Murdoch (2012) - the sole female 21st-century lecturer to 
date - makes the case for television driven by “a rigorous set of values” in a 
speech seen as taking aim at her brother James’s anti-BBC polemic three years 
previously.

“[The UK’s independent production sector is] being snapped up almost wholesale

by global media companies at a faster rate than tickets for the public 
execution of Jeremy Clarkson”.

Channel 4 chief executive David Abraham (2014) in a speech that slated 
previous lecturers - the Murdochs, Erich Schmidt, Kevin Spacey - as “a parade 
of Americans telling us how things ought to be done”.
 