
Michael Haneke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke> likes to say 
that his films are easier to make than to watch. Cast and crew have fun, but he 
expects his audience to be disturbed, affronted, even sickened. "On the set I 
make jokes," he said when we met in Paris to discussAmour, which deservedly won 
him the Palme d'Or at Cannes this year. "I can't get too involved, or it turns 
into sentimental soup. I try to keep it light."

What he tried to alleviate while making Amour was a grim anatomy of elderly 
debility and dementia, complete with incontinence, forced feeding and the 
eventual stench of putrefaction. The film follows the decline of an 
octogenarian musician, who after a stroke is nursed at home by her adoring but 
increasingly angry and bewildered husband. The roles are played, as Haneke 
said, by "two great actors who go beyond acting. They both knew that this 
situation will concern them in their own lives in the very near future". 
Emmanuelle Riva is now 85, Jean-Louis Trintignant is 81; because films from the 
1950s preserve their nubile youth – Riva in bed with her Japanese lover in
Hiroshima Mon Amour, Trintignant worshipping the bosom of Bardot in And God 
Created Woman – it's alarming to see them now with stiff but fragile limbs and 
worn, sagging faces. Their anxiety is unfeigned, their injuries not acted. Riva 
had to strip naked for a scene in which a bossy nurse bathes her; she didn't 
believe, until the moment came, that Haneke was really going to oblige her to 
undress. Trintigant's arduous limp is the memento of a motorcycle accident, and 
to compound his afflictions he broke his hand during the filming.

Amour is stark and sometimes brutal, as you would expect from a director who 
specialises in emotional extremity. Haneke'sThe Seventh Continent is about the 
doggedly meticulous suicide of an entire family,Funny Games about the torture 
and slaughter of another household;The Piano Teacher studies the hang-ups of a 
heroine who slices her genitalia with a razor and begs to be whipped. But the 
new film has a grave compassion not seen before in his work. Its subject, as 
Haneke put it, is "How do I deal with the fact that someone I love is 
suffering?", and its private source is the agony of the aunt who brought Haneke 
up when his feckless parents, both actors, realised they had no talent for 
child-raising. At the age of 92, crippled by rheumatism, his aunt overdosed on 
sleeping pills. Haneke found her in time, and rushed her to the hospital. She 
had previously begged him to help her die; he pointed out that since he was her 
heir, he might have ended in prison. A year after her first attempt, she 
swallowed more pills and put herself out of her misery. Though the 
circumstances inAmour are different, Haneke passes on his personal dilemma to 
Trintignant, who copes in his own mad, heroic way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Tuc3zjvJU8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Tuc3zjvJU8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Tuc3zjvJU8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Earlier Haneke films have dealt with a casual, motiveless murder in Benny's 
Video, and the indiscriminate shooting of a crowd in 71 Fragments of a 
Chronology of Chance. But Amour examines dying, a process that is more 
protracted and much more upsetting to watch. There is less drama here, because 
the decay is predictable and wearily gradual. All the same, the climax ofAmour 
is a scene that takes you by surprise and leaves you numb.

Probably, like me, you won't know whether to be outraged or moved to tears by 
what you see. Haneke mistrusts the idea of catharsis, and thinks that Hollywood 
films have prostituted it by supplying "false [because too quick] answers". 
That's why his own plots are unresolved:Hidden is a whodunnit which leaves us 
unsure who did what to whom, and his adaptation of Kafka'sThe Castle breaks 
off, like the unfinished novel, in the middle of a sentence. At the end ofAmour,
 the daughter of Riva and Trintignant, played by Isabelle Huppert, returns to 
her parents' apartment to sit and silently ponder what has happened. She 
represents us; perhaps, Haneke said to me, she incarnates "our bad conscience", 
since we have paid to witness the pain of fictional characters. Is she 
experiencing catharsis, which is a kind of purgation? It depends on what you 
project on to her frozen face; all I know is that my own feelings aboutAmour, 
when I calmed down enough to sort them out, were composed in equal parts of the 
terror and pity that Aristotle thought were the aftermath of tragedy.

The man who devised these torments has a passing resemblance to El Greco's 
emaciated saints. Haneke dresses exclusively in black, offset by a waterfall of 
white hair. Although he refuses to appear in his own films – he casts his wife 
Susanne, an antique dealer, as an extra instead – he has said that he fancies 
playing a Capuchin monk, since they wear such stylish hoods. The remark catches 
his combination of asceticism and elegance: an American journalist once 
described him as "a haute-couture Gandalf", a wizard who is a little too fussy 
about his wardrobe.

Haneke made his name by berating the complacency and amnesia of his native 
Austria and deriding the glossy, spendthrift consumerism of American movies: he 
relished the scandal at Cannes in 1998 when audiences jeered as the family in
The Seventh Continent, having smashed their household goods, flushed wads of 
money down the toilet. Yet the enemy of the bourgeoisie is impeccably 
bourgeois, and when I arrived for our meeting at a swanky hotel near the Arc de 
Triomphe, I found Haneke – just off a flight from Vienna, where he lives – 
tucking into a luxurious lunch in the restaurant. Unhappy about being glimpsed 
in a situation where he wasn't in control, he scuttled upstairs to his suite 
and then, after an interval, made an entrance in the room set aside for our 
interview.

I expected him to be detached, even haughty. Huppert, from whom Haneke 
extracted such a lacerating performance inThe Piano Teacher, once called him "a 
curious combination of Robert Bresson and Alfred Hitchcock". Bresson in films 
likePickpocket or A Man Escaped watches souls striving for redemption; 
Hitchcock inPsycho or Vertigo explores the incurably neurotic mind. Haneke 
mixes the contemplativeness of the one with the mischief and malice of the 
other. Like a god, he studies the world from a distance, unable to intervene, 
perhaps amused by the small, insignificant disasters he observes. Hence his 
fondness for placing the camera far away from its subjects:Hidden coolly 
watches as a child's small world falls apart, his cries muffled by the 
intervening space; andCode Unknown concludes by showing how life, likened by 
Haneke to a flea circus, indifferently unravels on a Paris boulevard.

In person he is affable enough, but he prefers to have his contact with 
reality mediated by a camera. On this occasion his buffer was a translator; 
although Haneke's English is serviceable, he insisted on a go-between. He 
listened impassively as I told him how the climax ofAmour had astounded me. He 
didn't require a translation, but responded by asking, in a syrupy Viennese 
accent, "Was ist die Frage?" (What is the question?) He then sat back to enjoy 
his power and my flustered impotence. I began to understand the discomfort of 
his actors, who are obliged to play by his rules. Huppert had a tantrum when he 
refused to allow her to decide on the motives of her character in his 
apocalyptic fableThe Time of the Wolf. Naomi Watts, whom he directed in the 
American remake ofFunny Games, broke down in tears and protested that she was 
not a marionette as he bossily choreographed a scene in which she bustled about 
the kitchen. Haneke's ideal interpreter was the late Susanne Lothar, who played 
Watts's role as the excruciated wife in the original Austrian version ofFunny 
Games. "She must have been masochistic," said Haneke approvingly, remembering 
that Lothar spent half an hour sobbing in her dressing room to prepare for one 
scene of abuse.

Haneke has a sly, sceptical awareness of the way the cinema manipulates us, 
passing off propaganda or advertising as reality. He is also, however, an arch 
manipulator. Given notice that this was to be an inquisition not a 
conversation, I rephrased my compliments and asked him a question about the 
startling climax ofAmour. On principle he refused to answer. "Ah," he said, 
smirking as I tumbled into the trap, "you are asking me to interpret, and I 
will not. Every meaning is fine, all interpretations are OK. I do not choose 
between them, because I dislike explanations. It happened so with Juliette 
Binoche inHidden. She asked me if the woman she played was having an affair 
with her colleague at work. There were two scenes together with this man: I 
told her to play one as if they were involved, the other as if they were not. I 
doubt that she found this to be helpful advice.

"We must allow,' he said, "for complexities and contradictions. When I am 
asked this kind of thing, I usually say I don't know the answer because I don't 
have such a good relationship with the author." He is of course himself the 
author, or auteur, since he writes all his films as well as directing them, so 
he was pleading lack of self-knowledge. He watched me fume for a moment, then 
giggled – a recurrent mannerism, perhaps an apology for his unco-operativeness, 
perhaps a signal of his temporary triumph.

There is a theory behind this game of hide and seek. His films argue against 
"the disempowerment of the spectator", which is whyAmour begins at a piano 
recital where we survey the audience in the Théâtre des Champs Elysées but 
don't ever see the pianist. "I give the spectator the possibility of 
participating," Haneke said. "The audience completes the film by thinking about 
it; those who watch must not be just consumers ingesting spoon-fed images." I 
was reminded of a scene inAmour when Trintignant spoon-feeds Riva, which might 
be another of Haneke's little parables: she spits the liquid back in his face, 
and he slaps her. "A film cannot stop at the screen," said Haneke, repeating 
one of his mantras. "Cinema is a dialogue." But it's not a dialogue in which he 
wants to take part: while empowering spectators, he chooses to baffle or 
obfuscate interviewers. Another fusillade of giggles filled the silence as I 
started again.

I quoted a comment Trintignant makes in the film, when Huppert arrives to find 
she has been locked out of Riva's sickroom. Trintignant summarises the ghastly 
scene inside, and says "None of this deserves to be shown." If it can't be 
shown to the patient's daughter, how did Haneke justify exposing it to a crowd 
of strangers in a cinema? "A film can show everything," he said, retreating to 
an untested generalisation. "It is different if someone from within the family 
says this. You have only not to betray your idea of what is human behaviour, 
and not add misery to what is actually there." That didn't seem to me to be an 
answer, since Trintignant is not talking about a bedside visit but about the 
propriety of making a spectacle out of decay and death. More giggles covered 
Haneke's reluctance to continue.

I began to understand the reasons for his shiftiness. Amour extends 
Hitchcock's infringements of taboo inPsycho, which Haneke much admires. Hence 
Riva's ordeal in the bathroom, and another almost unwatchable moment that 
corresponds to the revelation of Mrs Bates rotting in the fruit cellar. (At 
least Riva was still able to act, which gave her a way of defending herself; by 
contrast Haneke cast Annie Girardot as a doddering matriarch inHidden at a time 
when Alzheimer's disease had left her unsure of who she was.) Haneke makes us 
witness things from which we would usually avert our eyes. Is he doing so to 
cater to our prurience, as when Huppert visits the peep show inThe Piano Teacher
 and sniffs a semen-caked tissue she picks from a bin while watching a gross, 
grunting video of copulation? Or is he punishing us by compelling us to 
confront mortality, as the young boy inThe White Ribbon does when he studies a 
corpse?

Haneke expects films to cause nightmares. When first taken to the cinema at 
the age of six to see Laurence Olivier'sHamlet, he began screaming in terror 
and had to be ushered out. After seeing Pasolini's Sadean epicSalò, or the 
120 Days of Sodom, he remembers feeling nauseated for a month: that was the 
highest compliment he could pay the film's anthology of perverse and repellent 
sexual tableaux. In the past, he has had no compunction about admitting his 
sadistic motives. "I've been accused of 'raping' the audience," he said in 
2006, "and I admit to that freely. All movies assault the viewer in one way or 
another." He added, rather snakily: "I'm trying to rape the viewer into 
independence."

When Haneke directed Don Giovanni at the Paris Opéra in 2007, he turned 
Mozart's blithe seducer into a psychopathic rapist who ripped the clothes from 
one of his victims and violated her onstage. Haneke explained away the act 
metaphorically: his Don Giovanni was a pumped-up financier in an office tower, 
so we were watching Wall Street fuck the little people of the world. But I 
can't help speculating about his fascination with the ruthless libertine, 
especially since the cast ofAmour includes an operatic baritone who was once a 
notable Don Giovanni: William Shimell plays Huppert's husband, a philandering 
musician. "We met after I saw him as Don Alfonso inCosí Fan Tutte," said 
Haneke. "The part in the film is small, I thought it would be amusing. Why not? 
And he will sing Alfonso when I directCosí in Madrid next year." That too is 
telling, since Alfonso in Mozart's opera is a manipulator, an unmoved mover who 
dares two young male friends to seduce each other's fiancees. Instead of 
questioning Haneke about his self-identification with this elderly cynic, I 
asked why Riva, early in her illness, shudders with disgust at what she calls 
Shimell's "British sense of humour". It's easy to imagine her son-in-law 
jollying her along, boosting her morale by teasing her. Would that be so very 
wrong? "I cannot say," replied Haneke with a disdainful sniff. "I am not 
British." His giggle this time was entirely humourless.

Foiled in my efforts to find out about his handling of people, I mentioned his 
lethal history with livestock. Trintignant traps a pigeon inAmour, and after 
appearing to smother it he chooses, in a beautiful rush of emotional release, 
to fondle and caress the bird. Haneke, I suspect, would have preferred to wring 
its neck, since like a method actor the pigeon ignored his direction. "Ah, that 
was awful! There were little seeds to guide it, but it went its own way through 
the apartment, always differently." It survived, however, unlike its fellow 
creatures in previous Haneke films. The family dog is the first victim inFunny 
Games, several horses have their throats slit in The Time of the Wolf, and 
Benny's Video begins with the butchery of a squealing pig – Haneke's 
perfectionism required the sacrifice of three porkers. Of course he had a 
theory ready to account for this carnage. "It is a hierarchy of power," he 
said. "Men on top, then women, then children, then animals at the lowest end. 
They are the ones that have to bear it."

But how much did these involuntary performers actually have to bear? I prodded 
Haneke about the aquarium inThe Seventh Continent, overturned when the family 
wrecks its house as a prelude to suicide: the tropical fish flap and flounder 
in a sea of shattered glass. "We did our best to protect the fish," he said, 
which is not quite the same as the "no animals were harmed" declaration that 
the RSPCA requires. "To be honest, we did that scene many times. The whole 
studio was flooded, and the crew tried to grab the fish and put them in buckets 
of water every time I called 'cut'. By the end one or two were floating with 
their stomachs up. I believe they died of shock." This time he had the decency 
to not titter.

Blocking my efforts to implicate him in his films, he resumed his theorising. 
"You can use your means in a good and bad way. In German-speaking art, we had 
such a bad experience with the Third Reich, when stories and images were used 
to tell lies. After the war, literature was careful not to do the same, which 
is why writers began to reflect on the stories they told and to make readers 
part of their texts. I do the same." A film, according to this logic, exists 
only in the eye or mind of the beholder; Haneke, preserving his own moral 
superiority, takes no responsibility if someone seesFunny Games as a snuff 
movie orThe Piano Teacher as pornography, and he remains blameless if we view 
Amour as a chilly experiment that vivisects its elderly actors.

Haneke is the most incisive analyst of the kind of evasion he practises in 
interviews: it amounts, in his judgment, to a national psychosis. The Viennese 
parents inBenny's Video cover up the evidence of the murder their son has 
committed at home, and the German pastor inThe White Ribbon indignantly refuses 
to recognise the horrors – including the crucifixion of a pet bird – that 
abound in his household. Haneke is dealing, as he has often said, with 
Austria's suppressed guilt, its refusal to acknowledge its shamingly recent 
past. Born in 1942, he grew up with this collective denial, which has become 
second nature to him; he has no war crimes to live down, but he must sometimes 
be alarmed by the darker, more transgressive impulses of his imagination. I 
didn't ask him about this, because he had already given me his all-purpose 
obstructive answer: he has only a nodding acquaintance with the author, so the 
dubious motives I attribute to him must be my own.

His slipperiness left me feeling frustrated, and I heard the echo of his pesky 
giggle, an aural version of the Cheshire cat's smile, in the Paris street when 
I left. Then I remembered the impactAmour had on me – a tribute to the beatific 
grace of its actors and to their physical and moral courage, yet also to 
Haneke's unsparing quest for the truth about the way we live and die. A film 
director has the right to remain invisible; hauled out of hiding by the 
marketers, he is entitled to conceal or to profess ignorance of the urges that 
underlie his work. But it's easier to watch Haneke's films, harrowing as they 
are, than to meet the man who made them.

Amour is released on 16 November
 