
Michael Carberry <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-carberry> has 
criticised the managerial qualities of Ashley Giles and expressed his shock at 
the permanent exclusion of Kevin Pietersen from the England team.

In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, the opening batsman on the recent 
Ashes tour revealed his anger and disappointment at the way he and other 
England cricketers have been treated by their coaches and selectors.

Carberry, who has not given up hope of playing for England again, defended 
Pietersen's role during the disastrous tour. He also suggested that Giles, the 
England limited-overs coach who on Monday watched his team slump to an 
embarrassingWorld Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> 
defeat to the Netherlands, did not communicate openly. "It's that age-old word, 
man-management," said Carberry, who was England's second-highest run-scorer in 
the Ashes behind Pietersen.

The 33-year-old became so frustrated at being ignored for the one-day series 
in Australia that he finally sought an explanation from Giles, who coaches the 
50-over andTwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> teams and who 
may still be appointed as England's new head coach, despite the humiliation in 
Chittagong against the Dutch.

"I had a brief chat with Ashley during the fifth ODI in Adelaide," Carberry 
said. "His response was that he didn't really know. If you don't know mate, I 
sure as hell won't know."

Carberry's comments will only cast further doubt on the credentials of Giles 
to take overall charge of England across all three formats of the game. Giles' 
hopes have been underpinned by his widely-acknowledged decency as a man and 
approachability as a coach. His results since taking responsibility of the 
50-over and Twenty20 teams last summer have been poor, and reached a nadir 
against the Netherlands, but his conciliatory style was supposed to have been 
popular. Carberry reiterated that this lack of communication and a sense of 
some players feeling ostracised continued a familiar trend. Asked if he had 
been contacted by England's management since the end of the Ashes tour, 
Carberry said: "No. Nothing – which is disappointing but it's the way they tend 
to do things. I don't think it's me alone saying this sort of thing. There have 
been players before me and players now who have felt the same thing."

Carberry conceded that, especially if Giles is appointed the head coach, his 
own Test future is now clouded. "Leaving Adelaide after our brief chat I've got 
to be honest, it didn't fill me with a great deal of optimism. I feel that this 
is a question he should have answered. And, OK, if it's not him answering, it 
should be one of the selectors. But that's the way England like to do things. 
It disappoints me because I'm quite an approachable guy. Maybe I'm a bit 
straight-talking but it's the best way to be in this world – say what's on your 
mind.

"I'm sitting here disappointed I'm not involved in the one-day setup. I seem 
to have been left out for some unknown reason. I don't think it's a cricket 
reason because my one-day stats speak for themselves over the last few seasons. 
So I'm disappointed the selectors haven't fronted up and spoken to me."

England's Twenty20 squad fly home from the World T20, having failed to qualify 
from the group stages. Giles's limited-over team also performed fitfully during 
a brief tour of the West Indies and did not lift the gloom over the English 
game after the humiliation of losing 5-0 in the Ashes.

"It's obvious that since the [Ashes] tour ended some very, very strange 
decisions have been made," Carberry said, while underlining his surprise that 
England had decided never to pick Pietersen again. He described England's best 
and most gifted cricketer, whom Carberry had played with at Hampshire, as being 
especially helpful to him in Australia.

"It was a big surprise," he said of his former Hampshire team-mate's 
exclusion, "because I don't think anyone saw that coming. Through the tour, 
certainly, Kev was very helpful to me. Over the years Kev, as one of the greats 
of the game, has always been very helpful in talking about the mental side. In 
England's position you want to retain that knowledge as much as you can. You 
hope he will still be around the county game for the benefit of the next 
generation."
Kevin Pietersen (@KP24) 
This makes interesting reading guys - http://t.co/9og9xlYVa9 
<http://t.co/9og9xlYVa9>. Hmmmmm.....
 <https://twitter.com/KP24/statuses/450946037143052288> April 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/KP24/statuses/450946037143052288> 
Asked if he felt he had received more constructive feedback from the 
opposition than his own team, Carberry said: "Yeah, I would say so. I've played 
against enough Australians to know they're very cagey with their compliments so 
I must have shown a glimpse of something for them to say: 'Look, mate, you 
stood up through some serious spells …'"
Carberry expressed doubt that much will change within the England camp – even 
after the ECB confirms its new head coach in late April. "It's been an ongoing 
thing for years. I don't think it's something that's going to change 
immediately. They have a way of doing things.

"I've been in the game a long time and you know some guys get given a shorter 
rope than others. I'm probably going to be a bit controversial here but 
throughout my England career, even as a schoolboy, I've always had that shorter 
rope – for some reason. I don't think much has changed now that I've stepped 
into the Test and one-day arena. I'm not going to hide my emotions. I was 
bitterly disappointed.

"At the age I am, I need straight answers. To be told I'm on the radar or 
being talked about? All these lip-service cliches don't interest me any more."
 