
Our friend Michael Craft, who has died aged 75, was an "activist" for peace 
and justice long before the word came into common use. The first independent 
candidate to stand for parliament on a Ban the Bomb platform, in Twickenham in 
1964, he also campaigned against apartheid and organised the Special Action 
Group, which almost stopped the Springboks rugby tour in 1969.

He was there at the start of CND in the late 1950s, shaming sluggish 
university students into action, and many was the Sunday when we were roused by 
him to haul a platform to Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park, London. Michael was 
also a well-known marshal on a succession of Aldermaston marches. He would have 
made a splendid politician, but would never have found a party remotely to his 
taste.

Michael grew up in wartime London and suffered with his brother Maurice from 
an unhappy time as an evacuee in the West Country, which gave him an early 
insight into everyday inhumanity and the need to fight it. He managed to escape 
from poverty with Maurice via the 11-plus and went on to study dentistry at 
Guy's hospital, where he led the debating society, modelling his thrustful 
style on Michael Foot.

As a qualified dentist, Michael soon realised Britain was far behind other 
countries in the field of preventive medicine. He hated treating disease that, 
with some proper education, was eminently avoidable.

In pursuit of fresh insights, he moved to Cambridge, where he promoted the 
Cambridge dental health study. This was to lead to a nationwide school-based 
programme of dental care. He then followed an energetic upward journey from 
dental health into the wider field of social health, lecturing in the 
department of community health at University College London, via the South West 
Thames regional health authority to direct the Jocelyn Chamberlain unit for 
health promotion at St George's hospital, Tooting, and then to run the primary 
care education centre in Ealing.

He also acted as consultant to the School Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Action and Training Project in 
Delhi, an NGO that he helped to establish and which extended its work into 
India's poorest areas.

Michael refused to retire at 65, circulating countless copies of his lengthy 
CV until he was appointed manager of Sure Start in Haringey. "Real" retirement 
included serving as a lead governor at Guy's and St Thomas', and as a member of 
the East London & City research ethics committee.

Michael brought up four sons in a cheerfully riotous family life with his 
first wife Ruth, converting five houses over the years with great ingenuity, 
including his final oasis opposite Clissold Park in Hackney, where he lived 
with his second wife, Stephanie. He was always fascinated by how things – but 
even more by how people – work.

One friend remembers "his deep concern for all of our mental well-being; 
looking intently into your eyes". He was incredibly kind, hospitable and 
generous, but he was always outraged by any kind of injustice.

Michael was a great organiser of parties and social gatherings, and he loved 
talking and listening, he liked jazz and he enjoyed telling Jewish jokes. 
Typically, he left behind a quizzical verdict on himself: "A determined and 
often awkward sod with a sort of creative obstinacy."

Michael is survived by both Ruth and Stephanie, his four sons and three 
siblings.
 