
Michelle Guthrie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-guthrie> has 
hired Jim Rudder, a veteran consultant to Rupert Murdoch’s global pay-TV 
company, Sky, to help restructure the ABC.

A former product executive at Foxtel in Sydney, Rudder has spent most of his 
career working for Sky. The Australian journalist has consulted for Sky 
operations in the UK, Germany, Italy, the US and Australia. He also spent a 
year as news director for Channel Nine in 2003.

Along with the “business transformation expert” Debra Frances, Rudder was 
brought in on a short-term contract in November “to assist the Executive in 
delivering our 2020 strategic objectives”, Guthrie told her executive team in 
an email.

Meet Fran Kelly, disc jockey: ABC bosses defend their music cuts | Amanda Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/25/meet-fran-kelly-disc-jockey-abc-bosses-defend-their-music-cuts>
The ABC’s managing director said the consultants would advise her on 
“infrastructure, our processes and our people” and a “strategic approach to 
lifting performance and transforming work cultures”.

Guardian Australia understands Guthrie presented an early version of her plans 
to the ABC board in November, and now Rudder and Frances were helping her to 
flesh it out. She is expected to brief the board on the restructure on 
Thursday, with a plan to announce it in February 2017.

According to an early version of the restructure, a new position of chief 
content officer will be created to oversee all news, television and radio 
content.

This would mean the directors of news, television and radio would move out of 
the executive and would no longer report directly to Guthrie. If approved this 
would be a demotion for the heads of news (Gaven Morris), radio (Michael Mason) 
and television (Richard Finlayson).

A rare media interview with the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/brand/boss/abc-managing-director-michelle-guthrie-on-her-plan-to-transform-the-national-broadcaster-20161101-gsfb7y#ixzz4S0iVr9te>
 last week hinted at Guthrie’s plans.

“Now Guthrie is about to test the ABC staff’s appetite for more change as she 
pursues a raft of measures that include introducing a flatter structure across 
17 divisions and working out how they can become more integrated,” the AFR 
reported.

“One of the opportunities for us is to look at what level of resource should 
be available for the entire organisation,” Guthrie said. “Our resource 
allocation is very much around individual product rather than around the 
infrastructure layer capability that is common across those products.”

 A spokesman for the ABC confirmed the hiring of Rudder and Frances but would 
not comment on board matters.

“The ABC consistently reviews its operations to ensure it is meeting its 
responsibilities to the charter,” he said. “In a fast-changing media landscape, 
the ABC would be negligent if it didn’t.

“Every media organisation, including the Guardian, is undergoing a similar 
process. The two consultants have been hired for specific tasks related to this 
process.”

Sources said Guthrie had developed her plan with the assistance of her chief 
of staff, Sam Liston.

 In the email to the executive Guthrie said Rudder had contributed substantial 
value to every organisation he had worked for.

ABC boss Michelle Guthrie muddles her answers – then wields the axe | Amanda 
Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/04/abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe>
 “I am confident that the ABC has the people and the expertise to deliver on 
the very important objectives we have set under our 2020 strategic work,” she 
said. “However, it is important that we open ourselves to fresh ideas and 
innovative approaches from a wide range of sources.

 “The input of Debra and Jim will help us develop and implement a strategy 
that is tangible, practical and will deliver best value for audiences, staff 
and the wider community.”

 Following a rough period for Guthrie after cuts to science, religion and 
music specialist programming werecriticised by staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/abc-bosses-morally-and-spiritually-bankrupt-for-axing-catalyst-rn-presenter-says>
 and sections of the community, the AFR article appeared to be an attempt to 
show she had board support.

 The chairman of the ABC, Jim Spigelman, was effusive in the profile about the 
managing director’s strategy. “The board was overjoyed at the final decision,” 
Spigelman said of Guthrie’s appointment.

“Michelle emerged at every stage on any criteria. She’s pushing it faster than 
Mark [Scott, her predecessor] did. Mark changed the culture of the place and 
its positioning and reputation.

“I have every confidence that Michelle will continue to do that and the ABC 
will be regarded as an even more dynamic place.”


Like Rudder, Guthrie has spent most of her career at Murdoch organisations. 
Between 1994 and 2007 she worked as a legal and business development executive 
for the former BSkyB in London, Foxtel in Sydney and Star TV in Hong Kong.
 