
Michael Grade is to return to his talent agent roots as non-executive chairman 
of James Grant Group, the company co-founded by former Radio 1 DJ Peter Powell 
that has TV stars includingAnthony McPartlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and Declan Donnelly on its 
books.

Grade, who left his role as executive chairman of ITV on 31 December last 
year, cut his teeth in the entertainment industry in the mid-1960s as a 
theatrical agent with the Grade Organisation alongside his father Leslie Grade. 
It was from here that Grade launched his career in TV, moving into management 
at London Weekend Television in 1973.

"Michael is a proven leader with unrivalled experience at the top of the 
entertainment industry," said Neil Rodford, chief executive of JGG. "He has 
worked very successfully in creative and talent-driven businesses for over 30 
years and will add the additional depth and business experience required as we 
seek to expand both the management and professional services elements of our 
business."

Powell, JGG's vice chairman and co-founder of the group's media management 
business, added: "Michael understands talent and has held some of the media's 
highest profile positions. His pragmatism, people management skills, reputation 
and business network will prove invaluable to our group. I am very enthusiastic 
about his appointment and I speak for the whole board in welcoming him to our 
group."

JGG also represents ITV stars including This Morning hosts Holly Willoughby 
and Phillip Schofield, interviewer Piers Morgan and gameshow host Vernon Kay.

"I am very excited to be joining JGG," said Grade. "This is a company with a 
fine reputation and, unusually, a diversified group of successful businesses. 
My job is to help the company to realise its ambitions for growth."

Grade, a former chief executive at Channel 4 and chairman of the BBC board of 
governors, is also a non-executive chairman of Pinewood and Shepperton Film 
Studios.

James Grant was launched in 1984 by Powell, the former Radio 1 DJ and 
ex-husband of Anthea Turner, and Russ Lindsay, using their respective middle 
names.

Powell left Radio 1 in 1988 and went on to launch Worldpop.com, which went 
bust in the dotcom crash, before focusing on building James Grant.

In February 2008 the company was acquired by professional and management 
services company Formation Group, which had clients including Wayne Rooney and 
Coleen McLoughlin,in a deal worth nearly £30m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/14/mediatop100200853>. Powell was 
reportedly in line to make as much as £7.5m from the deal, depending upon the 
future performance of the company.

In July last year Gresham Private Equity backed a £20.75m management buy-out 
of five of Formation Group's nine businesses to create James Grant Group 
<http://www.jg-group.co.uk/story/2/gresham-backs-management-buy-out-to-create-james-grant-group-limited.php>
.

Grade started out as a trainee journalist at the Daily Mirror in 1960, moving 
to the role of sports columnist before leaving in 1966 to become a theatrical 
agent at the Grade Organisation. Three years later he joined London Management 
and Representation, becoming joint managing director until 1973.

A move to LWT, first as deputy controller of programmes for entertainment and 
later as overall programming chief and board member, marked Grade's transition 
to TV.

He left LWT in 1981 to join US producer Embassy Television for three years 
before taking the role of controller of BBC1 from 1984 to 1986, and then 
director of programmes at the corporation. The following year Grade defected to 
Channel 4 as chief executive, a role he held for a decade.

After time out from the frontline of the media industry, most notably with 
First Leisure group, Grade returned to the BBC as chairman of the then board of 
governors from 2004 to 2006.

He jumped ship to ITV, starting as executive chairman at the start of 2007, 
and stood down at the end of 2009, after leading the broadcaster through a 
turbulent period that included last year's advertising recession.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 