
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> is to hand over 
its display advertising business to AOL and sell some map-generating technology 
to Uber as it slims down money-losing online operations.


Microsoft is expected instead to focus on its growing search advertising 
business based on the Bing search engine, and displaying maps on its Windows 
devices rather than generating the maps themselves.

Microsoft, which employs hundreds of people in its display ad business around 
the world, said employees would be offered the chance to transfer toAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol>.

 The world’s largest software company no longer gives results for its online 
operations, chiefly the MSN web portal and Bing, but they have lost more than 
$10bn over the past five years. Chief executive Satya Nadella has said Bing 
will turn a profit next fiscal year. “Today’s news is evidence of Microsoft’s 
increased focus on our strengths: in this case search and search advertising 
and building great content and consumer services,” said a Microsoft statement.

 Under a 10-year deal struck with AOL, now a unit of Verizon Communications, 
AOL will sell display ads on MSN, Outlook.com, Xbox, Skype and in some apps in 
major countries. As part of the deal Bing will become the search engine behind 
web searches on AOL starting next year.

 Microsoft also struck a multi-year extension to its existing deal with 
AppNexus, which provides the tech platform for buyers to purchase online ads.

Microsoft and Uber did not disclose financial terms of their deal, under which 
Uber will take over the part of Microsoft’s mapping unit that works on imagery 
acquisition and map data processing.Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> would offer jobs to the 100 or so 
Microsoft employees working in that area, a source familiar with the deal said.

Uber already uses a combination of map services from Google, Apple and China’s 
Baidu, and the source said it would continue to do so.

Microsoft said it would no longer collect mapping imagery itself but would 
continue to work with imagery providers. It already gets much of its map data 
from Finland’s Nokia.
 