
Tony Mowbray fancies Middlesbrough's chances of beating a Premier League team 
to a quarter-final place in the FA Cup after Boro edged in to the last 16 at 
the expense of Aldershot with a 2-1 victory at the Riverside.

With two minutes remaining, the Shots striker Danny Hylton scored his eighth 
Cup goal in four games seemingly to set up a lucrative replay for the League 
Two side after Lukas Jutkiewicz's late opener. But Jutkiewicz spared Boro a 
replay with a winner five minutes into stoppage time.

Mowbray would now gladly welcome top-flight opposition to Teesside and said: 
"In an ideal world it wouldn't be someone from our league. I'd like to play a 
Premier League side or one of the lower-league teams who've done well today.

"Either is suitable for us. A top team that we can frustrate or a lower league 
team we can give problems and try to get through to the next round."

Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> struggled 
to convert their chances against a resilient Aldershot side, who might have 
trailed 3-0 at the break but for the heroics of goalkeeper Jamie Young. And 
Mowbray has identified the midfielder Kieron Dyer, recently released by QPR, as 
the solution to Boro's lack of creativity. "I've had some conversations with 
Kieron," he said. "If he was fit and playing for us he would be a huge asset 
for our club.

"I've watched some footage of him playing against Gareth Bale for QPR and he 
did well.

"He's scored in the FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
against West Brom and he's been available, fit and playing. I'll have to see if 
something can be done and we might be close to that.

"If Kieron plays football for us and helps win football matches then I think 
he would be an asset."

Aldershot's manager, Dean Holdsworth, was left wondering what might have been 
after elation turned to disappointment inside 10 frantic minutes. When asked if 
the result was a cruel one, he said: "It certainly is because I felt we'd 
earned a replay. We've had a fantastic display of commitment from the players 
and we took our goal fantastically well.

"In the dying seconds we had it ripped away from us and that's a big blow for 
the players.

"This is a fantastic football club and there were some good players against us 
but we've held our own.

"[The players] will be very down in the dumps now because they deserve a lot 
more than what they got, but we go back to work on Monday morning. The 
challenge for the rest of the season is to show exactly what they have done, 
home and away, and push on in the division."
 