
When Jeffrey Eugenides <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeffrey-eugenides> 
came to the Guardian book club to discuss his novelMiddlesex, there was 
admiration of the fact that such a sophisticated book, layered with literary 
allusions, should also have been a selection for the Oprah Winfrey book club. 
With its mixture of postmodern narrative trickery and old-fashioned family 
saga, it had managed to reach an unusual range of readers. The novelist 
confessed to taking a conscious pleasure in the trickery, much influenced by 
his own academic reading, but claimed to be entirely surprised that he had also 
produced a bestseller.

The Oprah Winfrey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey> 
website even ran a quiz aboutMiddlesex, the second question of which no reader 
at the Guardian book club would have failed to answer correctly: "In which way 
are Lefty and Desdemona (the narrator's grandparents) not related? a) third 
cousins; b) brother and sister; c) husband and wife; d) aunt and nephew". The 
answer is d), and the fact that the couple are also brother and sister provoked 
some puzzlement. Why was this incest plot necessary?

One visitor to the book club website who objected to the novel's plotting had 
a challenge – for me as much as for the novelist: "I can't quite articulate 
what I dislike so much aboutMiddlesex, but it began with the incest, which 
wasn't a necessary part of the story and which I just found repugnant. If you 
manage to persuade me in this series of Middlesex's value, you'll have achieved 
something."

In our discussion, Eugenides conceded that "some readers have thrown the book 
across the room" at the moment, early in the novel, when Lefty and Desdemona 
consummate their affection. "I sympathise with that," he said. It may feel like 
a shocking turn of the narrative, but the author explained that he had done 
everything he could to make it seem unsurprising. The characters come from a 
deeply insular community whose members are all inter-related. And, as he 
explained, the incest device is biologically necessary. Cal's 5-Alpha-reductase 
deficiency syndrome was caused by a recessive genetic mutation as a result of 
inbreeding. There had to be an explanation as to why this mutation had taken 
root and "flowered" over many generations. "I needed some kind of story to 
catch this idea."

There was, he conceded, a tricky narrative issue here that readers often 
spotted: the possible implication that Cal's condition was the consequence of 
"immorality". If this were an Ibsen play, we would be thinking of the sins of 
one generation being visited upon another, he said. So he had done his best, to 
the exasperation of some readers, to normalise the incest – to remove it from 
morality. (He thought that American readers were more likely to be shocked by 
this than European readers.)

Biological accuracy was clearly Eugenides's priority. All the literary 
imaginings of a changing of sex that he invokes in the novel – Hermaphroditus 
and Salmacis, Tiresias and Orlando – are fanciful, and he was, as he told us, 
doing it for real.

Why, one reader asked, did he decide to make the fictional metamorphosis from 
female to male rather than vice versa? This makes the male condition his final 
and "true" self. "I chose female to male because that is the truth about that 
condition," was the simple answer. The novel had to be faithful to the medical 
textbooks (even if the medical profession comes in for some dark satire in the 
book).

Readers wondered how those who shared Cal's condition might have reacted to 
the book. Eugenides told us that, at a reading in New York only "the other 
day", he had for the first time met someone with the extremely rare 
5-Alpha-reductase deficiency. He had approached Eugenides and handed him a 
letter in which he said that he was grateful for the novel, but angry that he 
had not managed to write the book himself.

The fact that the condition was real gave a more than usual edge to inquiries 
about the novelist's research. Until the recent post-reading encounter, his 
knowledge had all been from books, he said. He had been provoked into writing 
the novel by reading the surprisingly dull autobiography of Herculine Barbin, 
edited by Michel Foucault asMemoirs of a Nineteenth-Century French Hermaphrodite
.

What about Cal's/Callie's teenage experiences? "What research did you do for 
Cal's account of when he is getting changed at school in a female changing 
room? How did you manage to figure out what the atmosphere would be like in 
that female changing room?" The novelist answered that he had simply recalled 
the anxiety of his own pubescent locker-room experience and made a few 
necessary adjustments. "Now," he observed, "no one disrobes in the whole of 
America – it's thought to be too traumatic."

At least one reader wearied of the discussion of gender. She compared it to 
some of the discussion of sexual identity in a previous book club exchange with
Alan Hollinghurst <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst>. This 
had been focused, she remembered, on the analysis of attitudes to gay sexuality 
rather than of the business of fiction. Didn't our author get weary of all the 
talk of gender politics? No, he didn't – he only worried when he was told that 
the novel should have been putting forward an argument.

This reader was clearly more interested in the formal playfulness of the novel 
– but this too has delighted some and irked others. "I love how the narrative 
perspective appears to have evolved through being unsure and experimenting with 
the voice," wrote one book club commenter. Another, however, expressed 
exasperation at Eugenides's impossibly "omniscient" narrator, able to report 
accurately on the unknowable thoughts and actions of other characters. "I read
Middlesex quite recently, and I found this narrative device intensely 
irritating. I couldn't – and can't – see the point of it." But Eugenides did 
point out that others have done this. Perhaps this reader would be irritated by
Tristram Shandy too.

• John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. Next week 
he discussesA Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens.
 