
1 There came a point last winter when the hard work had been completed and the 
finish became a stress-free run to the line. The Ashes had been retained in 
Melbourne after Christmas, but still there remained the possibility that 
Australia could remove some of the gilt by winning the last Test in Sydney. 
Instead, they were blunted, not for the first time, by Alastair Cook, and then, 
for good measure, batted into oblivion by Ian Bell and Matt Prior. The job was 
all but done, and finished by the completion of anotheremphatic bowling display 
on a euphoric morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/07/the-ashes-2010-11-england-australia>
. I spent that evening in the generous company of the ECB chairman and others, 
and in two and a half decades of this job have never felt happier.

2 World Cup final. Perhaps it was written in the stars that India would become 
world champions in the home town of their greatest deity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/apr/04/india-sri-lanka-world-cup-final>
. There was to be no Tendulkar century of centuries that night, but instead the 
occasion was graced first by a sublime hundred from Mahela Jayawardene and then 
by the Indian captain MS Dhoni, who promoted himself up the order, played the 
most perfectly judged innings, and finished the match by launching a huge six 
into the velvet sky and the upper tiers of Wankhede. Afterwards, I walked the 
couple of miles to the Taj Palace hotel, through joyous, honking, celebrating 
gridlock and saw how much it meant to India.

3 Nothing in cricket can match the anticipatory fervour of a full house 
watching a fast bowler, on a hat-trick, champing at the bit at the end of his 
run. A little more than a year ago, Stuart Broad had been on the receiving end, 
Peter Siddle's third victim on the opening day of the Ashes. Now, at Trent 
Bridge,it was Broad's turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jul/30/stuart-broad-england-india>. It 
is the 88th over of the Indian innings and, with the second new ball, he is 
about to turn on its head a match that India were starting to dominate. Dhoni 
plays with leaden feet and Jimmy Anderson at second slip pouches a nonchalant 
catch. Next ball Harbhajan Singh goes lbw, the umpire unable to detect the 
inside edge on to pad and the batsman without recourse to a review. Finally 
Praveen Kumar is castled neck-and-crop through the gate. Despite a first 
innings lead of 67, India lost by 319 runs.

4 When, at Edgbaston, Sreesanth looped a catch to Kevin Pietersen in the gully 
to bring to an end the third Test against India, it secured not only the series 
win but England's place as the No1 ranked Test side in the world. More than a 
decade ago at the Oval, when Nasser Hussain, as England captain, was jeered as 
they became recognised as the worst team around, such status seemed 
unattainable, little more than a pipe-dream of optimistic ECB mission 
statements. Now the Andys, Strauss and Flower, have capped the work started by 
Hussain and Michael Vaughan under Duncan Fletcher, and continued by Peter 
Moores. Recognition for Flower came with the awards of UK coach of the year and 
UK specialist coach of the year. Now he has to keep them at the top.

5 Virender Sehwag is a phenomenon. The injudicious timing of a shoulder 
operation deprived India of his services in England until belatedly, he arrived 
and at short notice played at Edgbaston in the third Test. He got a king pair, 
out first ball in both innings. But then, three weeks ago, glued to my 
television screen to watch him bat in the fourth ODI against West Indies at 
Indore's Holkar stadium, I and millions of others were able to see the real 
Viru. His 219 from 149 balls was of a magnitude unprecedented in 3,223 matches, 
and an innings of such good-humoured brutality – 25 fours and 7 sixes – that by 
his exhausted end, caught on the boundary, the opposition were reduced to 
headshaking admiration. Sometimes you just have to go with the ride.

6 We should be immensely proud of the England women's team, for at times, they 
have reached a level of excellence never seen before in women's cricket. In 
2011, they faltered on occasion, losing their single Ashes Test and ODI series 
in Australia. But beyond that, they have been supreme, dominating T20 in 
particular. In the wicketkeeper Sarah Taylor, they have perhaps the only female 
cricketer capable of playing at first-class level. The captain, Charlotte 
Edwards, meanwhile has achieved the stature of Strauss. At Sydney's Bankstown 
Oval, albeit in a losing cause, she made an unbeaten 114 out of 207, recognised 
as one of the finest innings played by a woman. The ECB has doubled its 
investment in the women's game to ensure they retain pre-eminence.

7 Two cricketers, one from Sri Lanka, the other Indian, produced articulate 
performances off the field that matched any of their achievements on it. In 
early July, Kumar Sangakkara was invited to make the MCC's Cowdrey 'Spirit of 
Cricket' lecture and offered an impassioned insight into Sri Lankan cricket, 
its power struggles and what the game means in his country. Stirring stuff. 
Then, a few weeks ago, in Canberra, Rahul Dravid delivered the annual Bradman 
oration and, as with Sangakkara, produced a perfectly pitched, immaculately 
judged masterpiece. Just like his batting. The game needs to cherish 
ambassadors such as these.

8 Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket>, as a recreational game, 
has to compete as never before, and the ECB is committed not only to attracting 
new participants but to bring back those who have drifted away. One third of 
its net TV revenue is committed to grassroots development. So it was gratifying 
to see a 5% increase in club cricket across all age groups, and the fact that 
the Chance to Shine campaign has introduced cricket to 1.4 million children. 
More than 45,000 coaches have graduated from the Sky Sports ECB coach education 
programme since its launch five years ago. There is a way to go but if that is 
not heartening, then nothing is.

9 We shall never see Dravid bat again in a Test match in England, but what a 
legacy he left. None of India's travails last summer could be laid at his door, 
and to score at Lord's, Trent Bridge and the Oval, three centuries in four 
Tests, mostly in adversity, was remarkable. Calling him the Wall does not do 
him justice. This is the Great Wall.

10 For its participants, all sport is transient. Sooner or later we all become 
ex-players, baton-carriers if you like, to pass on to the next generation. At 
the Oval towards the end of June,Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> asked me if I would present an 
ODI cap to a debutant, Jade Dernbach, a task generally undertaken by more 
notable luminaries. I was honoured, and for the five minutes we stood as a team 
group out in the middle, while I was allowed to address them, I felt once again 
the England player I had been and part of a fellowship. For me it was very 
special.

11 England's one-day performance abroad continues to be mediocre. But even as 
they were being whitewashed in India during October, there was evidence that 
shrewd management of young cricketers is paying dividends. After a summer of 
county cricket, and strength and conditioning programmes, Steve Finn bowled 
with pace, vigour, accuracy, hostility and strength on sluggish pitches. By the 
end of 2012, I expect him to be an integral part of the best pace attack in the 
business.
 