
Mikel Landa won a second successive mountain stage of the Giro d’Italia with 
victory on stage 16 asAlberto Contador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> strengthened his grip on 
the race lead.

The Astana rider won the 174km route from Pinzolo to Aprica, with Steven 
Kruijswijk (LottoNL-Jumbo) second and Contador (Tinkoff-Saxo) third, both 
38secs behind. Katusha’s Yury Trofimov was fourth, two minutes three seconds 
adrift of Landa, as Contador enhanced his position in the leader’s pink jersey.

Giro d'Italia 2015: stages 10 to 15 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/may/26/giro-ditalia-2015-stages-10-to-15-in-pictures>
Fabio Aru began the day in second, 2min 35sec behind Contador after Monday’s 
rest day, but finished the stage 2min 51sec behind his Astana team-mate Landa 
to slip to 4min 52sec adrift overall. Landa, who attacked only after Aru 
struggled on the Mortirolo ascent, moved into second place, 4min 02sec behind 
Contador, whose advantage is commanding. The race concludes in Milan on Sunday.

Contador clung on despite his rivals attacking when he had a puncture, 
contrary to one of cycling’s unwritten rules. “It was a very hard day, an 
incredible stage,” Contador said. “Cycling isn’t mathematics: I had a puncture 
on the descent. Ivan Basso gave me a wheel, but ahead they were going at full 
speed and it was impossible to close the gap immediately.

“It was hard for me, but I’m very happy with the time gaps now. To Mikel 
Landa, I can only say: chapeau. These are the stages that people remember.”

Landa said: “It was a really beautiful day for me, perhaps even better than 
Sunday [when he won stage 15]. We saw that Alberto had a problem, and Katusha 
went full gas, so we worked with them. On the Mortirolo, Fabio Aru wasn’t 
feeling good and he told me to go with Contador and Kruijswijk.

“I really proved that I can be one for the strongest riders on the climbs and 
we still have several uphill finishes left. As a team, we will have to stick 
together and stay attentive, because what happened to Contador could happen to 
one of us.”
 