
When Mike Leigh has anything to do with a party, it tends to be dangerous: 
everything, in his films, starts to unravel. But at this get-together of women 
who regularly act in them, all is well. They are opening the champagne, getting 
ready to smile for the camera, and someone – I think it isAlison Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman> – shouts: "To Mike!". 
Everyone – Imelda Staunton, Ruth Sheen, Lesley Manville, Marion Bailey, Karina 
Fernandez – lifts their glasses. There is much laughter and noisy conversation. 
I know how many of his regulars regret not being here because I have been 
talking to some of them – Brenda Blethyn, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Sally Hawkins 
– in Northampton, Los Angeles and New York. I know, too – because she is 
remembered so often – how everyone wishes Katrin Cartlidge, who died eight 
years ago at 41, were alive and able to join in.

The Mike Leigh marathon has been going on for weeks: I have been considering 
his women. Several box sets later (he has made more than 30 films), an 
extraordinary side-effect has taken hold. It comes and goes but I keep feeling 
I am in a Mike Leigh film. The backs of houses in a city street, non sequiturs 
in family conversation, overheard moments galore. That is a Mike Leigh moment… 
so is that. It is not the first sign of madness. It is the best compliment I 
can pay a man who has transformed the way we see – and hear – everyday life. 
But it is easier to feel one might be aMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh> woman than to generalise about any 
of them. What Leigh has, in common with Pinter, is a genius for dramatising 
ordinary people. Unlike Pinter, he is never sinister nor stylised. Pinter 
enjoys enigma, Leigh is about transparency. You can see right through his 
characters, you know more about them than they do about themselves. And his 
films have a good heart. Alongside misery, there is always human kindness. And 
– tiny but telling detail – his women are forever putting the kettle on (as in 
life) when the troubles of the day are over or, more often, just as they are 
getting under way.

Another Year <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135875/another-year>, 
Leigh's latest, is about to go on general release. It is a beautiful, 
meditative piece about love, growing older and loneliness, divided into four 
seasons. The cinematic light changes as the year wanes and the story darkens. 
It is audacious in its grasp of married happiness: the image of Sheen's 
contented therapist, Gerri (mug in hand), and Jim Broadbent (Tom) in their 
allotment will stay with me for a long time. But so will Manville's lonely 
portrait of a woman unable to live that ordinary dream. The film is sustaining 
or harrowing, depending upon which woman one thinks about.

Living the role

Leigh is said to keep mum about his working methods. But the actors are more 
forthcoming: improvisations, they explain, take months. Each character's 
history begins in one-to-one discussions (like therapy) with the director. 
There is, according to Manville, a "huge amount of interrogation". The words 
"epic" and "organic" keep coming up – and several of the women describe the 
process as like creating a novel. Each actor initially knows nothing about what 
other characters are up to, or rather, as Blethyn explains: "Everything is on a 
need-to-know basis … Leigh says he has nothing at the back of his head but may 
be conducting an experiment … putting two chemicals together." Improvisations 
might involve hours doing nothing more than watching the box – or, sometimes, 
study: Jean-Baptiste researched optometry, Fernandez did occupational therapy 
and flamenco. "Working with Leigh is an act of faith," Jean-Baptiste says, "I 
have never worked on anything since with such depth."

Improvisation is a way of living the role – hours of experience that may never 
make it into the film. And all the actors express a special sense of 
"ownership" about their Mike Leigh characters. "The possession is total," 
Staunton says; Sheen: "You go into such depth. You create them. They are 
yours." Blethyn imagines her character fromSecrets and Lies must still be out 
there somewhere: "You want to ring her and say: 'Hello, Cynthia, how you 
doing?'" Hawkins sums it up: "You invest a lot emotionally. It is very 
demanding. It takes over your life. You know your character so well – what her 
dreams were, what she got for Christmas in 1987, every stage of her life. She 
becomes like part of you from a former life." Steadman describes Leigh as "the 
third eye, the monitor, setting the character up". Bailey used to refer 
jokingly to his interventions as "acts of God".

I decide God will need to be put on the spot – but later. The women must have 
their say first. For convenience, Leigh's women can be divided into two groups: 
happy and unhappy. His films, especially the latest, raise questions about what 
makes women happy.

Ruth Sheen

Ruth Sheen is the happiness supremo. As Gerri, she is serene, almost queenly. 
She was wonderful, too, inHigh Hopes (1988) as Shirley, a younger working-class 
woman who, like Gerri, has green fingers, a heart of gold and dotes on her 
other half. It is a tonic to see wedded camaraderie at the centre of a film – 
but hard to pull off, because it is inherently undramatic. It is equally 
uncommon to focus on women in their 50s – age of invisibility – and bring them 
so richly into focus. "What he is showing inAnother Year," says Sheen, "is a 
family that is the heart. Around them are the lonely and the sad and those 
detached from their emotions – where alcohol is in place of relationships." To 
develop Gerri "took months and months". Sheen can supply all the details of her 
early life – hopeful child, positive young woman, first in her family to get to 
university (Manchester). She is "a thinker, a listener".

Lesley Manville

Lesley Manville <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2007/aug/12/theatre> has 
played in seven Leigh films. "Until I met Mike in my 20s, I played myself all 
the time. Now, thanks to him, I never get typecast. No one says: 'Lesley only 
does depressed … or working-class … or posh.'" As her roles show, Leigh is 
interested not so much in showing Everywoman as any woman – no one too humble. 
And, it is true, Manville can do anything – but she excels at unhappiness.

She starred in All or Nothing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92800/all.or.nothing> (2002) as the 
distraught, anaemic-looking mother of a fat son with heart failure. She and 
Leigh see that film as "the one that got away". Her performance as Penny was 
superb but it cannot trump her Mary inAnother Year. Mary is in the autumn of 
her life. She sees in Gerri a contentment she wishes she had. Manville – a 
single parent herself – knows "a lot of women who are single and childless by 
choice". Mary is not one of them: "She wants love and care and attention. Her 
friend is the bottle, unfortunately." Manville volunteers: "I've witnessed 
women in their 50s in a manic state of pain and loneliness." She felt Sheen's 
character could have been more tolerant: "I used to go to Mike and say: 'Mary 
feels Gerri should be a bit kinder.' He wouldn't comment."

Sally Hawkins


In Happy-Go-Lucky <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/123467/happy-go-lucky> 
(2008),Sally Hawkins <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/sally-hawkins> plays Poppy 
(self-evidently in the happy camp), a primary school teacher who was born 
cheerful.Whatever happens (deranged driving instructors included) she bounces 
back. "She has a talent for happiness," says Hawkins, "she doesn't take things 
personally. She is not on the defensive. She doesn't judge." And here is the 
key to Leigh: everything is character driven – and he doesn't judge. Women are 
happy because of who they are more than because of what happens to them.

Imelda Staunton


The one exception to this is Imelda Staunton's Vera Drake 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102400/vera.drake>, a tender-hearted 
abortionist with a happy family life. When her circumstances change and the 
cops arrest her, the change in her seems absolute, her face a picture of 
despair. Staunton describes working on the role as "exhilarating". It was only 
later that "the fall-out happened.Vera Drake made a dent in my head that, at 
the time, I was not aware of at all. Three or four years later, I was thinking 
about it all the time. I'd lost that family, lost that woman. Vera made a huge 
impact on me."

Staunton has a cameo role in Another Year. And the extraordinary thing is that 
as middle-class, unhappily married Janet, she seems more of a casualty even 
than Vera Drake. Leigh is known for his films about working-class life but does 
not make the case for happiness having much to do with money. Staunton's 
performance is amazing: her misery, as Janet, formidable. She excites 
tremendous, never-to-be-satisfied, curiosity in the audience.

We agree that Leigh has no agenda. Staunton says: "He has no axe to grind 
about women … but they have as strong a role to play as men." If there is a 
generalisation, it is that maternity is the great event – disaster, disrupter 
or blessing – in a woman's life. It is not a subject he ever neglects. There is 
a painful divide – as sometimes in life – between the haves and the have-nots. 
There are women who cannot conceive (like Monica inSecrets and Lies or Barbara 
inMeantime). There are unplanned pregnancies (in Vera Drake; Secrets and Lies; 
All or Nothing). And there is never finding the right man or leaving it too 
late (Mary inAnother Year). In High Hopes, it is Shirley's precarious 
achievement patiently to persuade her partner they should try for a baby. But 
there is no point to prove. This is film mirroring life.

Alison Steadman

Beverly, in Abigail's Party 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/oct/14/television.bbc>, is a mutinous 
exception. She dismisses pregnancy as an illness, involving going to hospital. 
Beverly continues bossily to hold sway over Leigh's female firmament. Alison 
Steadman says: "She is unhappy, fighting to appear happy." Steadman's suburban 
diva, in her layered peach dress, towering over her guests, using first names 
five times in every sentence and turning robotic whenever talking to her 
husband, stunned her audiences. But wasn't it partly because she was such a 
grotesque?

Steadman mildly replies that such extremes exist in real life: "Sitting on the 
bus, you'll see Mike Leigh characters getting on left, right and centre. There 
are extremes – people go from normal to completely over the top." She adds: 
"Most comedy is like a magnifying glass. You enlarge reality slightly."

Steadman was married to Leigh when she made Abigail's Party (she also played 
gorgeously gormless Candice Marie, complete with prim speech impediment and 
bobble hat, in 1976'sNuts in May 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/apr/17/mike-leigh-dvd-review>'). Was the 
work/home balance ever tricky? "No, it wasn't peculiar or difficult. Mike has a 
rule never to discuss work. You put your frock away in the rehearsal room, come 
home and have a normal life."

The director's take

When I ring Mike Leigh he wants, most of all, to celebrate Katrin Cartlidge 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2002/sep/09/guardianobituaries.filmnews> (
Career Girls and Naked). Naked 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/82988/naked> was a one-off – the darkest, 
sexiest, most disturbing of Leigh's films. Cartlidge gave a sense in this – and
Career Girls – of being a woman who wished she could live as a free spirit (not 
easy in practice). She was a brilliant mixture of independence, eccentricity 
and vulnerability. And she had such an odd beauty – like a clever emu. "It is 
terribly sad you can't talk to her. If she'd lived, there is no question I 
would have done more with her," Leigh says. "She was very special. What one 
remembers is the compassionate emotional depth, wit and perception. She never 
said a bad word about anything. As an actor she was courageous – and gorgeous."

He chuckles at the idea of a piece about his women: "I'm someone who has 
deservedly been a signal failure at relationships … but I do have a good 
working relationship with actresses." Aside from talent, what qualities do they 
need? "Patience. A sense of humour. They have to be intelligent character 
actors, turned on by playing people in the street. Not prima donnas. There is a 
great deal of hanging around while other people get it together. But the work 
is harmonious – a loving thing. It is also a laugh."

And Leigh turns out not to be unwilling to talk about improvisations after 
all. He explains the third-person approach (actors never refer to their 
characters as "I") as a security device: "Actors are not thrown on their own 
insecurities, because they are concerned with the character. And yet the people 
who are great at this work know that, despite this conceit, it is themselves 
they are tapping into and an essential truthfulness that comes from within 
them." There is a "creative collusion" that can involve something close to 
"telepathy". It is "esoteric" Leigh suggests. Many of the actors describe it as 
"magical'. He explains that improvisation is a means to an end – huge 
quantities of work have to be discarded (Leigh is a virtuoso editor). The aim 
is to find an "essence… the only thing that matters" and to arrive at "white 
heat" on screen.

Much has been made of Leigh's tendency to use his "old-timers" again and 
again. But he wants to set the record straight: "I'm always up for working with 
new people, like the excellent Karina Fernandez." His promise to returning 
actors is: "We won't go to the same place." He seesAnother Year as a "personal, 
reflective film – I am 67 but can see emotional connections with my first film
Bleak Moments (1971)."

It is true – both films describe loneliness. And what would he say of himself? 
Is he happier now than when he madeBleak Moments nearly 40 years ago?

"Yes and no."

Manville is more upfront. "In the latter part of his career, he's made films 
about reality, his earlier films involved more satire. He is happier where he 
is now. He is at the peak of his profession as a film-maker."
 