
The common complaint about Flat racing’s superstars is that they are wrapped 
in cotton wool as soon as their reputations are made. No such accusation can be 
made in the case of Minding, who was once more on the wrong end of some 
rough-housing before easing to almost inevitable victory in the Nassau Stakes 
here.

This handsome filly was running for the fifth time this year and for the 10th 
time in her career, yet there is no sign of that busy campaign leaving any kind 
of mark. That is, unless you count the six-inch wound she gave herself in May 
when smacking her head on the starting stalls before the Irish 1,000 Guineas.

She was in the wars in the Oaks the following month, when a gap unexpectedly 
closed on her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/minding-ryan-moore-wins-the-oaks-epsom>
 at the top of the straight and she was shuffled back to last before producing 
an astonishing turn of foot that carried her past all her opponents. This 
Nassau found her cannoning off a rival again on her way to glory. Perhaps she 
is a rugby player among horses, enlivened by contact.

The collision came once more at the top of the straight when Ryan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore>, Minding’s jockey, began to edge 
out from behind Swiss Range and Queen’s Trust, who had combined to set a steady 
pace. Alive to the danger of giving the hot favourite a free run, James Doyle 
rushed alongside on Beautiful Romance, forcing Moore to haul back. Briefly, and 
alarmingly for her backers, Minding had her head in the air and was squeezed 
back to last place.

In a bigger field around here, that kind of setback can be enough to end your 
chance, but there were five runners taking part this time and Minding’s quality 
allowed her to cruise back into contention in the manner suggested by odds of 
1-5. It was all over by the furlong pole, though Queen’s Trust kept on well to 
be second and might be Group One quality herself if she does not come up 
against Minding again.

“It was always going to be tactical,” Moore said, “because that’s the only way 
they can beat me.” Asked how much of a problem that collision had been for him, 
he said: “It’d be a problem to another horse, but not really to her.”

Minding’s trainer, Aidan O’Brien, is a man who lives on his nerves when 
top-class races are being run and took a less sanguine view, being visibly 
agitated while biting back an apparent urge to complain about what had 
happened. Was it easy viewing for him? “Not really. Everyone saw it. Hopefully 
she’ll be OK but you’d be nervous watching it because lots of stuff can happen.

“Race-riding is very dangerous at the best of times and, at the speed that 
they’re going on those kind of tracks, a lot of stuff can happen.”

Lee Westwood’s Hoof It rewards heavy betting at Glorious Goodwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/lee-westwood-hoof-it-glorious-goodwood-golf-horse-racing>
The stewards had a look at the incident but concluded that no offence had been 
committed. It was the right decision but surely a relief to Doyle, just the 
same, in light of the five-day ban he had been given for “careless” in the 
opening race.

Now that Minding is thoroughly and repeatedly established as the best of her 
sex, it would be a thrill to see her take on the colts, but O’Brien would offer 
no more than “she can go any route now”, though he did hint that she may stay 
in training next year. His Coolmore employers have plenty of candidates for the 
great middle-distance races to the end of this season and the likelihood is 
that Minding will only get her chance in one if a vacancy arises.

This has been a difficult week for bookmakers, made worse by the successes of 
Minding and another tough three-year-old filly in Dancing Star, the winning 
favourite in the Stewards’ Cup here. She became the first female to land the 
famous sprint handicap since 1992, when it fell to Lochsong, a half-sister to 
Dancing Star’s grandmother.

The major firms have made a loss on Glorious week, but at least one of them 
suffered a self-inflicted wound. The Tote’s system crashed across the country 
before the Nassau and did not recover, despite repeated attempts to reboot it 
from the United States, until after the Stewards’ Cup, costing the pool-betting 
firm, owned by Betfred, millions in turnover.

“A thorough investigation is currently taking place, but we would like to 
apologise to our customers for the inconvenience caused,” the firm said in a 
statement.
 