
Chances are that, now the Christmas presents are unwrapped and large amounts 
of food eaten, you are sitting slumped in varying states of alertness surveying 
a tome of celebrity biography that you found with your name on under the tree. 
Thousands of these celeb biogs were walking out of bookshops in the weeks 
running up to Christmas. Nearly 40,000 a week for Ant and Dec's Ooh! What a 
Lovely pair: Our Story, and over 30,000 a week for Frankie Boyle, while Peter 
Kay, Chris Evans and Jo Brand were all clocking a very respectable 20,000 each 
a week. These are hardback sales figures; lots of money is being made.

Half of the non-fiction hardback bestsellers are celeb biogs, only beaten by 
Delia Smith's latest cookery book andTop Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/dec/22/top-gear>'s output. 
TV has well and truly hijacked the publishing industry. The big sales come when 
people recognise the face on the book from the box – the more recognisable the 
face, the bigger the sales. Welcome to a world of zombie books, because these 
celeb biogs often don't meet any of the normal criteria one would expect of a 
book. Forget authorship: this is writing by a team of ghostwriters. And the 
substance of the book often doesn't stack up to much of a story. First day at 
school, what I remember as a toddler of my mum, how I got bullied at secondary 
school: this is the ordinary stuff of ordinary lives, and it's rather odd that 
people fork out £20 for hundreds of pages of the stuff.

There's a presumption that if you are a good footballer or tennis player, you 
have an interesting story to tell. But why? Watching a sport can be 
exhilarating, reading about it can be as dull as ditchwater. Equally, a rash of 
comedian autobiographies make the dangerous mistake of thinking that if someone 
is funny, their book will be too. Dawn French's was a bestseller last year and 
now doing handsomely as a paperback; a national treasure I'm sure, but the 
book, littered with exclamation marks, is achingly dull. So no story, no 
author, no skill in writing – what's the appeal?

The first explanation is that this is simply a story of commercialisation. The 
celebrity is offered a sum they find hard to resist; the publisher gambles 
on the chance of big sales helped by extensive publicity.

Publishing is like spread betting; 80% of books break even, 10% lose money, 
and 10% make a lot of money.Katie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice> is credited with starting the 
boom, when her book was sold for £10,000 and went on to sell 750,000 copies. 
It's those kinds of winnings that keep publishers gambling. Whether the book is 
any good is secondary to issues of celebrity's profile and likely quantity of 
publicity. It's the latter which drives the requirement that the celebrity digs 
up plenty of dirt; to get headlines you need confessions of drugs, infidelity, 
dishonesty and other lurid details of dysfunctional lives. The celebrity misery 
memoir is about a crude equation of the more shock and awe, the more books sell.

If this sounds overly cynical, an advert 
<http://www.thefreelibrary.com/AN+advertisement+in+The+Guardian+%5B...%5D%3B+Londoner%27s+Diary.-a0212786899>
 a couple of weeks ago for a new editor for Ebury (part of Random House) was 
unabashed. "Amy, Lily or Cheryl – who would you choose?" ran the copy. "Do you 
have the ability to spot the next big thing? Do you possess a sound commercial 
instinct? Are you passionate about popular culture?" The advert prompted a 
flurry of Twitter outrage in publishing by people appalled that the advert 
didn't seem to consider that actual editing skills were needed, only celebrity 
spotting.

But if this is all about money, the cynics take consolation in the fact that 
the boom may be over. Sales figures this year are sharply down. It's a genre 
that may be burning out.

An alternative explanation is more generous to the reader. They are not just 
dupes of a massive commercial operation but actually get something out of 
reading these tomes. Just before Christmas,Tina Brown 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tina_Brown> in a blog on The Daily Beast 
suggested that the seemingly insatiable desire for the details of celebrity 
lives is a response to the imponderable complexity of so many major issues. She 
used the continuing fascination of the Tiger Woods story to illustrate her 
argument; compared with recession, global warming, US healthcare reform or 
Afghanistan, Woods's story seems to offer a kind of parable-like clarity. It's 
a misery memoir in real time, showing one person's seemingly perfect life 
imploding just at the point that many people fear, or are already dealing with, 
losing their jobs or their homes or both. It's a superb form of distraction, 
but also a form of putting into perspective one's own problems. When crisis is 
writ so large – the income crashes; the reputation is smashed; the image of 
having it all, beautiful wife and family, disintegrate in front of a 
billion-strong audience – it makes your own anxieties seem a little smaller.

Certainly, Andre Agassi's fast-selling memoir, Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/08/open-autobiography-andre-agassi>
, published to catch the Christmas market, achieves something of this purpose. 
It doesn't fit the zombie category; it's relatively well-written and has a 
story to tell.

A tale of such a punishing, emotional roller-coaster, it left me feeling 
drained. The man has always absolutely loathed tennis, from the moment his 
bullying father had him smashing balls over the net as a child – a million a 
week. It's a tragic story of how someone ends up trapped by his own compulsions 
– and those of others – to live a life he hated. No one believed Agassi when he 
kept saying he hated tennis. This is the gilded cage of celebrity revealed in 
all its brutality, and you can see exactly why he might need to present a more 
honest account to the world.

Agassi's book is already credited with transcending the genre of "sportsman 
tells tale of inspirational achievement"; it is not a pitch for the 
after-dinner speech circuit. Similarly, Peter Kay's first volume was widely 
praised and sold well. But these relatively decent books are exceptions to the 
rule in an industry that churns out volumes ofKatie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice>, now on to her fourth. A 
celebrity is now regarded as worth more than one book – you can spin the story 
out to three or four at least.

This is a confessional genre, the chance for the celebrity who is much written 
about, speculated about, to put their story. Given libel laws, biographers 
tread warily into these lives, so the reader has only the partial, anxiously 
self-justifying "woe is me" version of a life. Above all, the appetite for 
these books reflects the insatiable curiosity about fame, how it arrives and 
what it feels like. Nothing seems to prompt as much fascination as hearing what 
it is like to be the focus of millions of minds.

Piers Morgan, in his recent television interview with Susan Boyle (her book 
can only be a matter of time, although it might be something of a challenge to 
keep her readers interested during the first 47 years), kept on asking: "Did 
you ever imagine this might happen to you?" It's a question that echoes the 
silent hopes people live with for unimaginable futures of their own, and 
perhaps that's what keeps them turning the pages.
 