
No woman, since Monica Seles, has played with the same implacable intensity as 
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova>. Between 
1990 and the last of her four Australian Open titles here in 1996 Seles won 
nine grand slam titles. Yet all the 18-year-old Russian has so far to show for 
her own unbending determination, aside from several million dollars in the 
bank, is the 2004 Wimbledon title. And the doubts have begun to creep in.

Many had believed she would by now be the dominant force in women's tennis, 
given the decline of the Williams sisters and the fact that Lindsay Davenport, 
the current world No1, has not won a major since her victory here six years 
ago. Yet it has not happened.

Since that triumph on the grass, when she became the second youngest women's 
Wimbledon champion in the Open era, Sharapova has reached three further 
semi-finals and two quarter-finals, the second of those last night when she 
defeated Daniela Hantuchova of Slovakia 6-4,6-4.

There are those who criticise Sharapova for being one-dimensional and unable 
to cope with the unexpected. They are also critical of all her commercial 
activities, arguing that these are distracting her from her tennis.

It is true that her game can appear manufactured rather than natural but 
anyone doubting her ambition has not watched her practise for hour upon hour. 
She arrived here troubled by what appeared to be a shoulder injury but has now 
been diagnosed as a rib problem.

It has not entirely gone away but it no longer appears to be troubling her 
unduly and this week, perhaps, may see her impose her will on her immediate 
rivals.

"I want to save the best for last," she said after beating Hantuchova, the 
third-round conqueror of the reigning champion Serena Williams, who defeated 
Sharapova in last year's semi-final, a match of massive hitting and remarkable 
intensity.

Sharapova let slip three match points and since then has rarely been able to 
produce her best form when it most mattered, losing to Justine Henin-Hardenne 
at the French Open, Venus Williams at Wimbledon and Kim Clijsters at the US 
Open, all three going on to claim the title.

"I feel like I'm playing better and better and improving with every match," 
said Sharapova, who next plays her fellow Russian Nadia Petrova, and then 
either Henin or Davenport, the latter further damaging her ankle during her 
6-2, 6-4 victory over the former US Open champion Svetlana Kuznetsova.

Those who have advocated the moving of the Australian Open to March, to help 
ease the calendar and guard against burn-out injuries, used the extreme heat as 
a further argument for a switch. It will not happen.

There will be changes made in 2008 but the moving of this tournament will not 
be one of them.
 