
The article Negotiating a black hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jun/07/eu> by Alexandros 
Petersen on Cif on June 7, was regretfully unbecoming for such a reputable 
newspaper. The author refers to a conflict of which he either has little 
understanding, or knowingly distorts the truth. He fails to mention how the 
conflict evolved and grossly misjudges its character.

The Nagorno-Karabakh 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/country_profiles/3658938.stm> conflict 
is not an "ethno-religious conflict" and not one over a disputed territory 
where "Armenian Christians [are] against Azerbaijani Muslims". It is about the 
fundamental human rights issue of self-determination, one of being able to 
peacefully live on the land of your ancestors and be the master of your own 
destiny. The current situation is a result of decades-long systematic abuse of 
the human rights and ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Armenian population by 
the Soviet Azeri authorities since the unlawful annexation of the ancient 
Armenian province (Artsakh) to Azerbaijan and later, of pogroms and outright 
military aggression against the peaceful population.

The military phase of the conflict between Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh 
ended with the victory of the latter's hastily-formed defence forces and 
enabled their people to start re-building their lives and homes. Since its 
independence (impeccably proclaimed according to same laws and procedures by 
which Azerbaijan gained independence from the USSR), in the political and 
socio-economic turmoil following the break-up of the Soviet Union and even 
under military aggression, Nagorno-Karabakh has been a surprising case of rule 
of law and well-functioning state machine. Starting with theindependence 
referendum 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/democracy-caucasus/nagorno_reality_4184.jsp> in 
1991, all manifestations of its people's will, which included fourpresidential 
elections <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6905670.stm> and several 
parliamentary and local ones, have been orderly, dignified and democratic 
exercises, as witnessed by numerous independent international observers, 
including, incidentally, members of the UK parliament and the US Congress.

Indeed, Nagorno-Karabakh is not "a governance black hole", but a 
well-functioning democratic entity with strengthening civil society and full 
economic and cultural life, possessing all attributes of an independent state, 
save for international recognition. Its elected authorities have announced on 
several occasions that they would be happy to receive international inspection 
missions who can study the situation in situ and refute any groundless 
allegations. There have been no volunteers to chase ghosts. The allegations of 
all earthly sins in the mentioned article, happily picked en masse from the 
Azeri propaganda machine of libellous campaign of hatred and misinformation 
against Karabakh and enriched by references to all possible evils of our times 
to scare the modern security-conscious citizen are so bizarre that they are at 
best ignored or frowned upon in any more or less informed circles.

However, the author is right in saying that the conflict should concern 
Europe. It should, because although the people of Karabakh have been able to 
stop the regular bombings of their homes by resorting to self-defence, peace 
has not been made final yet and threats of war are heard from the other side of 
the border regularly. It should, because although we keep fingers cross for the 
renewed negotiations between the presidents and foreign ministers to succeed – 
the last, June 6 round was constructive and it was decided tocontinue them 
<http://eafjd.eu/spip.php?breve1362&lang=en> – the continuing military rhetoric 
and the fierce anti-Armenian hate campaign on all levels of society, combined 
with the mentioned ever-growing military budget, are an ominous sign. It is 
much worrying that today, fed on this campaign; more than one-third of Azeris 
are for a military solution while international mediators (the Minsk Group 
co-chair countries) are widely lambasted for theirimpartiality 
<http://www.rferl.org/featuresarticle/2006/3/7424D9A9-C37E-441A-9F06-33D13F018A38.html>
. The oil money paid by the European companies should not facilitate the 
unleashing of another war, the consequences of which will indeed be dire. With 
a fragile ceasefire being maintained simply because of the balance of power, it 
is easy to instigate another war that will hugely increase the toll on human 
life and create new refugees. On top of the already existing one million, about 
400,000 of which by the way are the Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan and from 
Nagorno-Karabakh, this will result in a large-scale humanitarian disaster 
affecting whole of Europe and beyond. This cannot be allowed to happen. This is 
why both past and present Armenian authorities have readily engaged in 
negotiations in good faith and have strived to find lasting peace, despite and 
because of the fact that one party of the conflict, Azerbaijan, refuses to talk 
to Nagorno-Karabakh, the other party.

Security in the modern world is certainly a global problem and in order to 
ensure global peace and security, frozen conflicts should be resolved in a way 
so that the vital interests of all parties are taken into account. That will 
take concessions on both sides and it is a hard thing to do. In order to help, 
the international community, as well as its individual members, should adopt an 
attitude based on values and principles that apply universally. Acknowledging 
that the people of NK have the right to be in charge of their own destiny would 
have helped. It has in other cases. On the other hand, giving in to dirty 
propaganda and trying to discredit one side, be it with either explicit or 
implied allegations does not help and raises questions.
 