
At the end of a long, potholed, water-pooled road in Suame, on the outskirts 
of Ghana's second-largest city, Kumasi, SY Boakye is opening his shop. An 
electric strip light illuminates the dark interior, revealing shelves stacked 
high with liver salts and cough mixture, muscle rubs and aspirin, antibiotics 
and malaria medication.

Across the top of the wooden doorway hangs a row of small flags, each 
emblazoned with the words "Mobilize Against Malaria". The flags indicate that 
Boakye is a trained licensed chemical seller (LCS) and is one of those at the 
forefront of an innovative campaign against malaria.

"I am the chairman for the Licensed Chemical Sellers here in the Ashanti 
region of Ghana," Boakye says, as he sits behind his shop counter. "There have 
been other projects before, but the Mobilize Against Malaria one is the most 
successful. It's the first time we've been consulted."

The Mobilize Against Malaria (MAM) programme, based in Ghana's Ashanti region, 
started in 2007. Devised by FHI 360 (an international non-governmental 
organisation, formerly known as Family Health International), in conjunction 
with the pharmaceutical company Pfizer, the programme aimed to encourage 
malaria prevention, increase the numbers and standard-built capacities of 
community-based providers and provide direct access to early treatment with 
standard antimalarial drugs.

Malaria is a potentially fatal mosquito-born disease. In Ghana, it is 
hyper-endemic, with 100% of the population at risk from infection. It is the 
leading cause of mortality in children under five years old and of adult 
ill-health. According to the Ghana Health Service, malaria accounts for nearly 
40% of all outpatient illnesses.

Malaria is a preventable and curable disease. But due to a lack of awareness, 
misconceptions about the mode of transmission and the non-availability of 
medication, it causes nearly 1 million deaths a year worldwide, 90% of which 
occur in sub-Saharan Africa.

"Many people here didn't know that mosquitoes transmit malaria," Boakye says, 
laying out awareness leaflets on the counter. "We are able to make people 
conscious of this and they can protect themselves. Then if they get malaria 
symptoms, we can treat them or refer them. This is the basis of the Mobilize 
Against Malaria programme."

Boakye's succinct explanation of the programme, in fact, belies the complexity 
and innovation of the new approach, and the links that have been created 
between the public and private sectors in Ghana.

In the past, many malaria projects have focused on eliminating the source of 
malaria transmission – the mosquito. However, the tropical climate and verdant 
environment of sub-Saharan Africa is an ideal breeding ground for mosquitoes 
and it has proved difficult to compete with nature.

The MAM programme, therefore, shifted its focus from elimination towards 
targeted prevention and early treatment, starting at a community level, 
particularly in areas that do not have access to a pharmacy or a hospital.

To accomplish this, FHI 360, GSK and Pfizer focused on those most at risk from 
malaria – pregnant women and children under five. Working with Ghana's National 
Malaria Control Program (NMCP) community-based organisations and other partners 
they developed radio adverts, billboards, posters and community activities such 
as Mothers Against Malaria clubs to raise awareness of malaria and its symptoms.

But once demand for treatment was created, the next issue was how to supply 
the new, more effective artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) drugs that 
the project had advocated for. These drugs are recommended by the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) and Ghana's NMCP, and are subsidised by the Global Fund for 
Aids, TB and Malaria (GFATM)'s affordable medicines facility for malaria, 
making them affordable to everyone. The challenge was to make them accessible.

This is where the project engaged the private sector in the form of LCSs, 
which are small retail outlets that sell basic medicines. They were identified 
as being key to the project. By consulting with LCSs, a network was developed 
through which to distribute the new malaria medication quickly and efficiently.

"There are over 1,000 of them in the region and the communities trust them," 
explains Henry Narh Nagai, FHI 360's country director in Ghana. "It is an 
important factor. We need to work within a structure that the community is 
comfortable with. In so doing you are not only improving access to the most 
potent anti-malaria medicines but you are also building critical capacity and 
reinforcing good health seeking behaviour in a sustainable manner at the 
community level."

However, LCS are private businessmen, rather than health workers, so they 
needed training and support, which the MAM programme delivered.

Intensive training

"The training was intensive and comprehensive, and what we needed," Boakye 
says, reaching for a stack of laminated charts. "These charts are our guide to 
the correct dosage, the symptoms to look out for and the ACT medication to give 
the patient. If the case is severe, we refer them to the hospital or health 
clinic."

The flags now hanging above Boakye's doorway show that he has been trained by 
the MAM project. They are also good for business. After training, many LCS see 
an increase in overall income.

"The branding gives people confidence. They know we have completed the 
training and can help them," Boakye says. "It is good on an economic level and 
a community level."

His last point seems important, as malaria perpetuates a cycle of poverty. 
Beyond the public health implications, malaria is a major obstacle to 
development. It consumes a vast amount of resources, time and reduces 
productivity. So, by integrating the LCS sector into the fight against malaria, 
not only does it provide the necessary health care but it enables communities 
to be more productive and earn more, while also stimulating commerce and the 
potential for growth.

The MAM programme finishes at the end of 2011, but the programme's successful 
model is now being integrated into the national plan and rolled out across 
other regions. There is, however, still the question of how to provide the same 
level of support to the most remote areas, especially in the north of Ghana, 
where incidences of malaria are highest and there is the least access to 
treatment.

"There are still some areas we cannot reach, so they have to come to us," 
Boakye says. "If they don't have a shop or someone to distribute the 
medication, they sometimes have to travel the whole day to get some. In these 
places we continue to emphasise prevention and sleeping under mosquito nets.

"We are in the infant stages of the project, but there has already been 
improvement. People are more aware now."
 