
Senior UK defence officials are expected to be severely criticised this week 
in a report by a judge-led inquiry into the circumstances surrounding one of 
the most violent battles involving British soldiers in recent times.

The al-Sweady inquiry, named after a 19-year-old Iraqi allegedly killed by 
British troops, was set up under former high court judge Sir Thayne Forbes, 
following persistent allegations that the soldiers killed unarmed civilians 
they had captured and brought back to their base in southernIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.

It was forced upon the Ministry of Defence in 2009 when the courts castigated 
it for not conducting its own investigation into the aftermath of a gunfight on 
14 May 2004, known as the battle of Danny Boy, a British checkpoint near Majar 
al-Kabir, north of Basra.

High court judges accused the MoD of “lamentable” behaviour and serious 
breaches of its duty of candour, and for failing to set up an independent 
investigation.

Allegations that soldiers killed and abused Iraqis after they were captured 
appear to have been prompted by an order from British army officers that the 
Iraqis should be brought back to Camp Abu Naji after the battle. Local British 
commanders wanted to see if a ringleader behind the massacre of six British 
military police officers nearby a year earlier was among the dead or wounded.

Iraqi suspicions were increased when James Rands, a British army intelligence 
officer, described how he threw his laptop computer, containing original 
photographs of the bodies of the Iraqis killed, into the Channel from a ferry 
in 2006. But copies of the photographs had been circulated.

Lawyers for the Iraqis have suggested that he got rid of the laptop to conceal 
that he had modified the original files to change the timing of the photographs.

Rands dismissed that as an absurd conspiracy theory. He said by 2006 the 
laptop had broken and he was no longer sure if it held the photos.

He disposed of it because he had become uneasy about having broken army rules 
by storing sensitive material on a personal laptop, he said.

The bodies of the dead were taken to an Iraqi hospital the day after the 
battle – in which weapons ranging from high-velocity rifles to fixed bayonets, 
were used – the inquiry heard. Many were in a horrific state, so horrific that 
the inquiry has said it will not publish photographs of them.

The year-long public inquiry heard dramatic evidence, both of the intense 
fighting after the soldiers were ambushed and how unprepared the troops were 
for the insurgency. Francis Myatt, an army chaplain, told the inquiry: “I’ve 
never seen so many dead in one place.”

Lawyers representing the Iraqis said there was insufficient evidence to 
support the original claims.

“Following the conclusion of the military evidence and current state of 
disclosure by the MoD it is our view there is insufficient material to 
establish that Iraqi civilians were unlawfully killed whilst in the custody of 
British troops at Camp Abu Naji [the British camp north of Basra],” they said.

Lawyers for the soldiers accused the Iraqi witnesses of “persistently and 
deliberately giving false evidence under oath”.
 