
Announce you’ve decided to do an apprenticeship and many will assume you 
either failed to get into university or you want to be a tradesman. “A lot of 
parents and teachers don’t understand that pretty much everything from law to 
web developing can be accessed through a modern apprenticeship,” says Nick 
Boles, minister of state for skills and equalities.

The landscape has moved on, he says: “You can get a degree through an 
apprenticeship, so it’s not about capping your ambition. It’s a choice to 
secure the qualification through working and studying rather than full-time 
study.”

Boles knows that apprenticeships have a bit of an image problem and is keen to 
address it: “We just need to get the message out that these are very 
high-quality programmes.”

June Durrant, deputy principal at Kirklees College in Huddersfield, agrees: 
“The hard thing is getting people to understand that modern apprenticeships 
aren’t an ‘oily rag’ route – that’s not the real picture any more.”

The perception of apprenticeships needs to change 

This is certainly the case for former Kirklees student Luke Warby, 19, who is 
now employed by IT firm ProVu after completing a level 3 apprenticeship in 
professional competence in IT for telecoms professionals combined with a level 
3 in IT systems and principles.

“I found out about the apprenticeship from my progress coach at the college,” 
he says. “As well as the more technical aspects of the job, I’ve learned how to 
deal with customers with different levels of understanding, so I’ve become more 
confident when it comes to things like dealing with people on the telephone. I 
was even awarded an apprentice of the year award last year, so it’s been a 
really good experience all round.”

Warby’s boss, ProVu managing director Darren Garland, says that taking on 
apprentices has given his small business – he has just 20 employees – a 
cost-effective way to get staff up to speed. “We have to train for 6-8 months 
before we see a return, so we look for potential – that can be a graduate or an 
apprentice. We weren’t sure how well it would work at first, but taking on Luke 
and another apprentice, Matt, was such an absolute success we took on a third.”

For many apprentices, the experience of being able to learn on the job 
provides them with a valuable insight into their chosen career and helps them 
to make decisions sooner. Rupinder Kooner, 18, from Wolverhampton, is in her 
third year of a building services in the built environment apprenticeship with 
WSP Parsons Brinckerhoff. It’s an area she might not have chosen had she 
decided to go to university first.

“I can transfer to something like civil engineering or railways, but I’m 
enjoying my current role so much I’m hoping to progress through an HNC and HND, 
and then I’ll only need to study for a year to top up to a degree. I’ll 
probably do that part-time while working at WSP – so I’ll get my qualification 
without all the student debt, as well as getting lots of experience in the 
workplace.”

Kooner agrees with Boles that the perception of apprenticeships needs to 
change. “I came out of school with 12 GCSEs, but when I said I wanted to do an 
apprenticeship, people assumed I wasn’t doing well in school, which wasn’t 
true.”

But Mel Clark, senior recruitment specialist at WSP Parsons Brinckerhoff says 
businesses have a more generous view: “For us, apprenticeships are a valid 
alternative to university. They are much more aligned to what we do as a 
business and go a long way to addressing the skills shortage in our industry.”


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 