
The script had been following a predictable line - until the fourth round. 
Then, like a weather front sweeping in off the Great Australian Bight, all 
changed, with three of the top eight women seeds falling in one day, all in the 
top half.

The biggest casualty was the French Open champion, Anastasia Myskina. She was 
joined by her fellow Russian Elena Dementieva, the runner-up in last year's 
French and US Opens, andVenus Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/venus-williams>.

Williams was defeated 7-5, 7-6 by Alicia Molik who, by reaching her first 
grand slam quarter-final, guaranteed herself a place in the top 10 no matter 
how she fares in tomorrow's match against Lindsay Davenport, the world No1. 
Australia has waited a long time for a woman player of international repute, 
Wendy Turnbull being the last Australian-born player with a top-10 ranking 20 
years ago.

Williams, who won the last of her four grand slam titles at the US Open in 
2001, remained in denial that her days of domination are seemingly over. "I 
would say players are playing better but I would definitely also say that, when 
I'm playing well, I feel like I'm the best."

Williams's contract with Reebok has run out and there were few signs here that 
she is about to resurrect her career. She refused to give Molik any praise and 
infuriated Australians by suggesting that, if this match had been played 
anywhere else in the world, it would not have attracted much attention.

From the US Open of 1999 to Wimbledon 2003 the Williams sisters were a 
dominant force, winning 10 of 16 slam titles, with four to Venus and six to 
Serena. In the last five slam events, however, Venus has managed only one 
quarter-final.

Myskina and Dementieva might be the weakest of the four Russians in the top 10 
but neither had been expected to lose, thereby leaving France's Nathalie Dechy 
and Switzerland's Patty Schnyder to scrap it out tomorrow for a semi-final 
place.

Dechy, who will be playing in her first major quarter-final, defeated Myskina 
6-4, 6-2, the Russian playing such error-strewn tennis that it was all but 
impossible to imagine she won at Roland Garros last year.

Schnyder had her greatest moment here last year when she reached her first 
grand slam semi-final. Yesterday she defeated Dementieva 6-7, 7-6, 6-2.

"I love Australia. It suits my game and the people are so nice," she said. 
Perhaps she should speak to Venus.
 