
Eden 


9pm, Channel 4
Bear Grylls meets Thomas More in this new reality show, in which 23 men and 
women are left isolated in 600 acres of wild Highland countryside for a year. 
Their challenge is not just to survive but to fashion their own Utopia. The 
volunteers seem more skilled and self-sufficient than the usual screeching Big 
Brother showoffs but building a society from scratch – with no electricity and 
only the most basic resources – still seems like an extraordinary task.Graeme 
Virtue

The Somme 1916: From Both Sides of the Wire 


9pm, BBC2
Peter Barton cultivates his role as the James May of the first world war. 
Using German archives he shows how secret allied phone conversations had been 
intercepted for weeks before the offensive. This access and Barton’s intimacy 
with the terrain makes the story of the British “pals battalions”, killed by 
experienced German soldiers they believed had already been wiped out by allied 
bombardment, particularly excruciating.John Robinson

The Big Brexit Debate Live: Divided Britain 


9pm, Channel 5
The “Big Brexit”? Really, Channel 5? Puns, at this point? While pound sterling 
turns into a handful of feathers? While some vast dark matter hurtles towards 
us alongside a recession that’ll make 2008 look like a small overdraft? And why 
a “Debate”? To measure the precise gap in the stable door? Anyway, for what 
it’s worth, politicians, public and experts (not them again) consider what the 
eff happens now.Ali Catterall

Swim the Channel 


9pm, BBC4
More people have now conquered Everest than La Manche, making the subjects of 
this documentary rare indeed. We follow a few contenders as they slather 
themselves in grease, load up on Jelly Babies and, with the aid of boat-bound 
teams of “pilots”, prepare to take the plunge. Pleasingly, we’re not dealing 
with superhumans; the overriding sense is of ordinary people – each with their 
own motivations – grasping for something remarkable.Phil Harrison

Idiotsitter

11pm, Comedy Central
The latest episode of this hidden sitcom gem sees modest mentor Billie loosen 
the reins on moneyed protege Gene as both experience unexpected Mother’s Day 
encounters. For Billie, it’s when her mother sets her up with a dental 
hygienist-cum-biker who proudly boasts a direct trail between his brain and 
mouth. For Gene, it’s when a person called Dan arrives at the family mansion 
announcing himself as her long-estranged ma, Diane.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Ray Donovan 

9pm, Sky Atlantic 
At the end of last season, the Donovans saw off a revenge attack from the 
Minassians, with Jon Voight’s Mickey proving he was still a dab hand at 
throat-slitting. The reverberations from that episode unsurprisingly continue 
through this series. Tonight, there is a further chance for family bonding when 
a Russian mobster breaks into the Donovan household, with Abby’s intervention 
triggering chaos and forcing Ray to seek assurances for his family’s safety.
David Stubbs

FILM

Les Combattants (Thomas Cailley, 2014) 11.15pm, Film4
This fun debut from Thomas Cailley stars Adèle Haenel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adele-haenel> as college dropout 
Madeleine, who enrols in an army boot camp. And since sweet young gardener 
Arnaud (Kévin Asais) is completely smitten with her, he joins up too. They’re 
an engaging couple, pursuing romance while pitched into a challenging, at times 
eerie, survivalist scenario.

SPORT

International Cricket: England v Pakistan The final day’s play from Lord’s, if 
the match has reached this far. 10.30am, Sky Sports 2

Cycling: Tour de France It’s the Tour de Swiss today as the riders head from 
Moirans-en-Montagne to Berne. A day for the sprinters, but one that comes with 
a cobbled climb to finish. 1.15pm, Eurosport 1; 2pm, ITV4

MLB: Chicago Cubs v New York Mets Live clash from Wrigley Field. 12midnight, 
ESPN
 