
Author: Pierre Boulle (1912-1994) grew up in France but took a job in Malaysia 
in 1938. On the outbreak of war, he joined the French army in Indochina, and 
later the Free French after the German occupation of France. For a time, he 
worked undercover for the Resistance with the nom de plume Peter John Rule. In 
1943, he was captured and put in a prison camp. After the war, he returned to 
France much decorated, and published his first book, the spy novel William 
Conrad, in 1950.

His third novel, The Bridge on the River Kwai (1952), drew on his wartime 
experiences and was a worldwide publishing phenomenon. David Lean's film 
adaptation saw Boulle win an Oscar in 1957 for best screenplay without actually 
working on it; the real writers, Michael Wilson and Carl Foreman, were 
blacklisted. Boulle's next major success was Monkey Planet (1963); he continued 
producing novels in the 1970s and 1980s, though without the same impact. Boulle 
died in Paris in 1994.

Story: Monkey Planet was reputedly inspired by a visit Boulle made to a zoo, 
though it is possible to see it as an allegory for wartime attitudes toward 
racial divisions. A manuscript is discovered in a canister floating in deep 
space - it is journalist Ulysse Mérou's report of a trip to Soror, an 
Earth-like planet in orbit around Betelgeuse. There he encounters a tribe of 
primitive human-type beings, but is then captured by Soror's overlords - 
intelligent apes. Mérou becomes the subject of their experiments; he is 
befriended, however, by a chimpanzee scientist, Zira, who aids him in proving 
his credentials as an intelligent being. Mérou returns to Earth, arriving 700 
years after he left, only to find that apes have ousted humans there too. The 
final twist: the beings who pick up the original canister are revealed to be 
chimpanzees.

The film-makers: Producer Arthur Jacobs bought the film rights before Monkey 
Planet's publication but struggled to find money until Charlton Heston, then a 
huge box-office draw, became involved. Heston recommended Jacobs hire Franklin 
J Schaffner (1920- 1989), the director he had just worked with on The War Lord 
(1965). The film wasn't greenlit until a (still-surviving) makeup test proved 
that relatively realistic ape costumes were possible. Edward G Robinson played 
the orang-utang Professor Zaius in the test, but dropped out of the project 
shortly before filming began.

How book and film compare: Boulle's novel underwent significant rewrites, most 
obviously with the memorable Statue of Liberty ending, in which the protagonist 
(renamed Taylor) realises he has never left Earth. This ending apparently 
surfaced in an early draft of the script by Rod Serling, of Twilight Zone fame. 
The film also drew on contemporary themes of civil rights, race war, and 
generational conflicts, all the more so after Kwai scriptwriter and former 
blacklistee Michael Wilson took over the writing.

Inspirations and influences: Taylor's anti-heroic, misanthropic persona fitted 
in well with the late 1960s interest in unconventional characters (it was 
released in 1968, the same year as Bonnie and Clyde), as well as tapping into a 
fad for cheesy caveman movies, such as One Million Years BC (1966). Planet of 
the Apes repositioned Heston as an ambiguous figure, and initiated a series of 
apocalyptic science fiction fables with him at the centre, including The Omega 
Man (1971). A string of Ape sequels and a TV spin-off saw the film become a 
kitsch byword in the 1980s and 1990s, leading to Tim Burton's "reimagined" 2001 
adaptation.
 