
Monkeys have been observed producing sharp stone flakes that closely resemble 
the earliest known tools made by our ancient relatives, proving that this 
ability is not uniquely human.

Previously, modifying stones to create razor-edged fragments was thought to be 
an activity confined to hominins, the family including early humans and their 
more primitive cousins. The latest observations re-write this view, showing 
that monkeys unintentionally produce almost identical artefacts simply by 
smashing stones together.

The findings put archaeologists on alert that they can no longer assume that 
stone flakes they discover are linked to the deliberate crafting of tools by 
early humans as their brains became more sophisticated.

Tomos Proffitt, an archaeologist at the University of Oxford and the study’s 
lead author, said: “At a very fundamental level - if you’re looking at a very 
simple flake - if you had a capuchin flake and a human flake they would be the 
same. It raises really important questions about what level of cognitive 
complexity is required to produce a sophisticated cutting tool.”

Unlike early humans, the flakes produced by the capuchins were the 
unintentional byproduct of hammering stones - an activity that the monkeys 
pursued decisively, but the purpose of which was not clear. Originally 
scientists thought the behaviour was a flamboyant display of aggression in 
response to an intruder, but after more extensive observations the monkeys 
appeared to be seeking out the quartz dust produced by smashing the rocks, 
possibly because it has a nutritional benefit.

Bonobo ape Kanzi creates flint tools to prise open logs | Flora Malein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2012/aug/22/bonobo-kanzi-flint-tools-logs>
“We’re not altogether certain of why they’re doing it,” said Proffitt.

He and colleagues made a series of observations of the wild-bearded capuchin 
monkeys who live in Brazil’s Serra da Capivara National Park, as they visited a 
rocky outcrop and selected rounded quartz hammer stones. The monkeys typically 
pounded their chosen stone on embedded quartz cobbles and then licked the 
quartz dust that this produced.

They made no attempts to use the sharp fragments and showed no interest in 
them,according to the report 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20112> published on Wednesday in 
the journal Nature.


Michael Haslam, a co-author also from the University of Oxford, said the 
emergence of sharp-edged tools has been viewed as a turning point in human 
history. “The fact that we have discovered monkeys can produce the same result 
does throw a bit of a spanner in the works in our thinking on evolutionary 
behaviour and how we attribute such artefacts,” he said. “While humans are not 
unique in making this technology, the manner in which they used them is still 
very different to what the monkeys seem capable of.”

The earliest examples of flaked rocks, reported last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/20/stone-tool-discovery-pushes-back-dawn-of-culture-by-700000-years>
 from a site in Kenya, date back to 3.3m years ago, long before the evolution 
of anatomically modern humans. However, scientists said the latest findings do 
not cast doubt on this discovery or other significant sites, because in each 
case the sites were either accompanied by fossil evidence of hominins, 
cut-marked bones or signs that the tools had been further remodelled after 
being splintered off the rock.

“I don’t think this discovery is going to throw anything into doubt,” said 
Matt Pope, an archaeologist at University College London, who was not involved 
in the work.

But the findings could be relevant to future discoveries of even earlier, 
unrefined stone flake collections. “This is putting us on notice that if we 
find knapped or struck stone tools in the archeological record, they’re not 
necessarily cutting tools,” he said.
 