
 Author:  Born in Edinburgh, Arthur Conan Doyle (1859-1930) qualified as a 
doctor in 1885 and two years later had his first Holmes story, A Study in 
Scarlet, published in Beeton's Christmas Annual while practising as an eye 
specialist in Southsea. In 1891, Doyle became a full-time writer, beginning his 
famous Holmes serials in The Strand Magazine. Doyle served as a medic in the 
Boer war, writing in defence of government policy in 1902, the year in which he 
was knighted. His position assured, Doyle turned out The Lost World in 1912, 
and became increasingly interested in spiritualism, especially after his son's 
death in the first world war. Most notoriously, this resulted in his 1920 
defence of the Cottingley "fairy photograph"; his final book, The Edge of the 
Unknown (1930), detailed his psychic experiences. Doyle died of heart disease 
the same year.

 Story:  Originally published as a serial in The Strand Magazine (complete 
with suitably doctored photographs), The Lost World is told as a series of 
letters by reporter Edward Malone, as he accompanies Professor Challenger and 
Sir John Roxton on an expedition into the Amazon rainforest. Their purpose is 
to confirm or refute Challenger's claim that prehistoric creatures still exist 
there. Having made their way to an isolated mountain plateau, they encounter 
numerous dinosaurs, help an Indian tribe exterminate a savage group of "ape 
men", and return to London with a baby pterodactyl. Doyle drew heavily on 
paleontological studies of the time, but the novel was conceived as a "boys' 
adventure", rather than aimed at the nascent science-fiction readership.

 The film-makers:  Harry Hoyt took the directorial reins, casting significant 
silent-era stars Wallace Beery, Lloyd Hughes and Bessie Love in the lead roles 
- but it is Willis H O'Brien (1886-1962), responsible for virtually inventing 
the art of stop-motion special effects, who is generally acknowledged as the 
person behind the film's impact. Working almost entirely on his own, with 
models provided by a 19-year-old art student, Marcel Delgado, O'Brien animated 
numerous sequences of dinosaurs and other fantasy creatures to interact with 
the actors. Doyle used O'Brien's test footage to play a prank on the Society of 
American Magicians in 1922, presenting it as documentary film.

 How book and film compare:  Doyle's novel underwent radical changes to become 
a silent film. Most significantly, the film-makers invented a major female 
character, Paula White, the daughter of the plateau's discoverer, and who 
becomes the centre of a love triangle with Malone and Roxton. Another major 
departure is the finale: Doyle has Challenger bring a pterodactyl to a 
Zoological Society meeting, but the film uses a brontosaurus - which then 
escapes and destroys large parts of central London.

 Inspirations and influences:  The Lost World pioneered the entire 
dinosaur/giant creature movie genre, most obviously leading to King Kong (1933) 
- originally planned as a Lost World sequel - for which O'Brien provided 
spectacular animated effects. This genre has had regular revivals since, most 
notably in the 1960s, on the back of work by O'Brien protege Ray Harryhausen in 
One Million Years BC (1966) and Valley of Gwangi (1969), and the 1990s via 
Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park (1993) and its sequel, The Lost World (1997), 
which borrows heavily from the 1925 film.
 