
In the early 1960s my wife, Morag Wood, who has died of bone cancer aged 72, 
was active in the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Govan and 
Gorbals Young Socialists. She was involved in demonstrations against the 
Polaris nuclear submarine base on the Holy Loch in Argyll and Bute, and was a 
member of the Scottish Committee of 100, the anti-war group.

Mo was a popular figure on the Glasgow and Paisley folksong scene and helped 
at Matt McGinn's innovative Gorbals adventure playground. Her sister Mary, who 
shared Morag's youthful adventures in grassroots politics, says: "She was 
witty, kind and goodlooking, and we used her, unashamedly, to attract 
attention: pushing her ahead of us through pub doors and crowding in behind as 
heads turned. You never missed Mo in a room."

She was born Morag Gilmartin in Paisley. Her father was a steam-valve engineer 
for John Brown's of Clydebank and her mother a passionate debater on issues of 
the day. Morag became the big sister in a family of six and stayed often with 
her granny, who taught her to knit. Morag attended St Margaret's convent school 
and worked for the thread manufacturer J&P Coats at its Anchor Mill.

As the Holy Loch and later the Cuban missile crisis dominated agendas, Morag 
engaged in the protests. But following the death to cancer of her young sister, 
Kathleen, she left Paisley in 1967 for a fresh start in London. She and I were 
married in 1969 and within the next eight years our three children, Martin, 
Aram and Magda, were born. Morag chose to be a full-time mother and developed 
interests in knitting, jewellery-making, pottery and mythology. Her 
unconditional love made family life happy and secure.

For a number of years, Morag administered the plant records office at the 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew <http://www.kew.org/>, but retired early and 
returned regularly to Paisley to help nurse her ailing mother. She is survived 
by me, our children, and grandchildren Tilde and Ben, and her siblings Mary, 
Martin and Anne.
 