
The election in 2015 is shaping up to be a desperate scramble for cash to fund 
public spending after the Institute for Fiscal Studies warned that the next 
government would need to impose large tax rises or even bigger welfare cuts to 
protect health and education spending.

Responding to the chancellor's autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/05/autumn-statement-2012-key-points>, 
the IFS's director, Paul Johnson, said pushing out the government's austerity 
programme to 2018 would force the next administration to consider "close to 
inconceivable cuts" in the Home Office, transport, local government and other 
"unprotected" areas of government.

He said some departments could face cuts of more than 40% to reach targets set 
by the chancellor.

"The impact on most areas of spending will depend on decisions on the big two 
– welfare and the NHS – which between them account for nearly half of all 
spending. Protect them completely, and protect schools, and every other area of 
spending will have to fall by 16% in the three years after the next election.

"On top of what has happened in this spending review period that would take 
cuts in unprotected departments to an average of over 30%. That looks close to 
inconceivable," he said.

Johnson said adding together the budget cuts covering the eight years of 
austerity from 2010 to 2018, some departments could be forced to provide 
services based on a cut of 40% or more in their budgets.

The situation has worsened following forecasts that a £27bn gap in the 
government's budget has opened up in the two and a half years since the general 
election.

Hopes that the current austerity plans would be limited to two years into the 
next government were dashed by the Office forBudget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility, which said in a report 
to accompany the autumn statement that growth would be 3.6% lower than expected 
by 2018.

The independent Treasury watchdog, set up by the chancellor two years ago, 
said lower growth would limit the government's income from tax receipts and 
force it to borrow more or look for extra savings to continue reducing the 
annual deficit.

Johnson was presenting the much-respected thinktank's analysis of Osborne's 
statement to the Commons on Wednesday, which he said was more like a fully 
fledged budget than the policy review initiated by Gordon Brown.

Osborne told MPs that lower growth over the next five years had forced him to 
extend the Treasury's austerity programme another year to 2018. A spending 
review early next year will detail departmental spending through to 2015/16.

Johnson, who is a former civil service economist, said the effect of the 
Treasury's mini budget was to protect pensioners and people on average earnings 
who paid the basic rate of tax.

State pension payments were protected from the chancellor's move to limit 
inflation rises on benefits and tax credits to 1%, rising instead by a minimum 
2.5%. Basic rate taxpayers were given a lift after a further £240 rise in the 
personal allowance to £9,440.

"Broadly the people who are doing a bit better out of [the autumn statement] 
are pensioners and people in work who are paying basic rate tax," while those 
at the very top and those living on benefits lost out from the changes.

The below-inflation 1% rise in the threshold for the 40p rate of income tax 
will drag a further 1 million workers into the higher rate by 2015.

By that point the 40p rate would be paid by more than 5 million people – more 
than double the level in the 1990s – and would no longer be the preserve of the 
"highly paid few".

The top 10% of earners pay the most under the government's austerity, the IFS 
said, though it admitted many of the measures hitting the richest were 
implemented or devised by the previous Labour government and were continued by 
the coalition.

Johnson said this pattern of cuts in the autumn statement was consistent with 
the government's broader set of tax increases and welfare cuts put in place as 
part of the austerity plan.

"Working-age individuals receiving benefits and tax credits have been hit. The 
richest few per cent have been hit very hard. Those with children have suffered 
more than those without. Pensioners and those in work on more modest incomes 
have borne less of the burden," he said.

But he noted that a £7bn increase – the equivalent of a little more than 1p on 
the basic rate of income tax – would maintain the 80/20 ratio between tax rises 
and spending cuts that the chancellor has previously set as his target for his 
austerity programme.

In a reflection of Conservative thinking on the issue, the party's official 
Twitter account,@ToryTreasury <https://twitter.com/ToryTreasury>, said: "80/20 
was aim for this parliament and that's what we've got. Beyond that we've chosen 
further spending cuts not more tax rises."

Osborne came under fire following the statement from critics on left and 
right, who accused him of complacency in the face of a worsening economic 
outlook.

The chancellor has pointed to the OBR's view that the economy will grow from 
next year, albeit more slowly than before. But Labour said his failure to 
intervene to boost investment and help the economy grow undermined his attempts 
to cut the deficit.

The rightwing thinktank the Centre for Policy Studies said Osborne had failed 
to match the radicalism of Margaret Thatcher. It argued for a shorter, sharper 
shock to the public finances, with steeper cuts to welfare payments and a 
tougher stance on workless households.

"It is fanciful to believe this can be achieved merely by savings in 
administration, or freezing certain departmental spending limits while 
ring-fencing vast swaths of the public sector. What is needed is a fundamental 
re-examination of the scope of government and of the eligibility for government 
transfers," it said.
 