
It's been a good week for dads. And for grandparents. Even for close family 
friends of people who have children. All of them, according to Nick Clegg, 
should be entitled to flexible chunks of parental leave to give them time to 
change nappies, rustle up baby food and worry about nursery fees.

In a well-meaning leap into child-friendly employment policy, the deputy PM 
has declared that families across Britain have "wildly different needs" and 
that cookie-cutter solutions don't recognise this diversity. Parental leave, 
Clegg argues, should be carved up and divvied out any way that suits mothers, 
fathers, relatives and family friends.

These are noble goals. But parental leave is an impossibly thorny issue. A 
balance needs to be struck between fairness to businesses (particularly smaller 
ones) and easing the strain on young families. And the system sketched by Clegg 
has prompted protests by employers. They ask how they are supposed to organise 
cover if every time an employee has a baby in the family, that employee is 
entitled to take short chunks of weeks or months off at their convenience, up 
to a total of a year. Adam Marshall at the British Chambers of Commerce says 
Clegg's plan "shows no understanding of the pressures and needs of small and 
medium-sized businesses".

Most employers are on board with the idea that both men and women should be 
equally entitled to parental leave, but they want that leave to be taken in a 
single block, at reasonable notice. Providing statutory "granny leave" at 
taxpayers' expense goes into the realms of fuzziness: it would be open to 
abuse. Pushing the right to leave even further, to family friends, sounds 
fabulously Scandinavian, but risks creating a free-for-all.

The present system of statutory parental leave costs the government £1.83bn 
annually. Mothers get six weeks' leave at 90% of their usual earnings, then a 
further 33 weeks at an allowance of £124.88 per week. Some employers top this 
up to a more generous level. But it doesn't take much imagination to realise 
that it's much easier for a large corporation, with an HR department and 
hundreds of staff, to cope with absences than for a small business. And there's 
already awkwardness: employers complain that, irrespective of their true 
intentions, almost all mothers are obliged to insist that they intend to return 
to work, because if they don't, they'll lose maternity pay. And the rules have 
changed so often that it's tough for a small-time merchant to keep on top of 
its obligations.

Clegg outlines an oddly dispassionate view of work as an activity that can be 
flipped on and off as easily as a light switch. The reality, as many 
professionals will attest, is rather more complicated. Employees bring skills, 
experience and personal relationships to their jobs. They're not easily 
replaced – particularly for inconsistent, unpredictable spurts of time. One 
frustrated lobbyist told me it was all very well for Clegg to talk about 
families getting ahead but "you can't have a civilised society without 
employment, growth and prosperity".

Curiously, Clegg's generous proposals are at odds with another plank of 
coalition policy: an "employers' charter" – yet to be unveiled, but 
comprehensively leaked by Downing Street – that will make it easier for 
employers to fire people, and increase the cost of pursuing wrongful dismissal 
claims. This is expected to allow companies to fire staff of less than two 
years' standing without fear of recourse from an employment tribunal. It will 
cut back statutory sick pay, introduce a charge of between £30 and £500 to 
lodge a claim of unfair dismissal and generally make it easier to "sack a 
slacker".

On the one hand, then, Clegg wants to give workers more rights. And on the 
other, the government intends to make it harder to stand up for those rights. 
Vince Cable's business department suggests this is all bound up in a broad 
concept of "flexibility". But it is not hard to see the divergent forces of the 
coalition at work here: a Tory arm pushing towards an American-style system of 
employment-at-will, offset by cuddly Lib Dem policies of family leave for 
"alarm clock heroes". It doesn't make for very joined-up thinking. A Britain in 
which grandpa can take childcare leave – but then has to spend hundreds of 
pounds taking his boss to a tribunal for handing him a P45.

Shared norms for the new reality at Davos. Sounds nice

David Cameron, Morgan Tsvangirai, Ban Ki-moon, Marks & Spencer boss Marc 
Bolland and BP's Carl-Henric Svanberg are packing their bags this week for the 
annual global bigwigs' retreat to the mountaintop Swiss resort ofDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>.

The theme of this year's World Economic Forum summit is sublimely vague, 
framed as "shared norms for the new reality". It will be a chance for 
Citigroup's Vikram Pandit to swap notes with Dmitry Medvedev over a hot 
raclette. Or for George Osborne to seek spiritual guidance from the archbishop 
of Dublin.

Klaus Schwab, the forum's veteran chairman, reckons the world is suffering 
from "global burnout syndrome" and, presumably, that alpine air will prove 
reviving. As has become traditional, "the other Davos" will take place in 
Basle, where Greenpeace Switzerland will present a prize for the worst 
corporate human rights offender. Let the brainstorming begin.
 