
The government’s drive to turn around troubled families has helped more than 
105,000 of the hardest-to-help households in England, the communities secretary,
Eric Pickles <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles>, has claimed.

In his latest update of progress on the troubled families programme on 
Tuesday, he said that 105,671 families with complex needs had received support 
from local authority teams by February, putting the scheme on track to achieve 
the prime minister’s goal of helping 120,000 by the end of this parliament.

 Pickles claimed that the programme had already saved taxpayers an estimated 
£1.2bn, from a maximum government investment of £448m.

The initiative – confined to England – works with families that have nine 
different areas of problems, but the definition of whether a family has been 
“turned around” is controversial.

A family is so defined if all children have been back in school for a year 
when they were previously truanting or excluded, and youth crime and antisocial 
behaviour has been significantly cut across the whole family. Or alternatively 
if an adult in the home is no longer claiming benefits and has been working for 
three consecutive months or more.

The government figures show 117,910 families had been contacted and of these 
96,163 families achieved the crime, antisocial behaviour or education targets, 
while 10,508 families reached the employment definition. But this left about 
10,000 families in which no progress had been made.

 Announcing the new figures, Pickles said the average gross cost saving to the 
taxpayer for each troubled family was £12,000 – more than twice the average 
cost of the programme’s intervention at £5,493 a family. The claim is based on 
a new report studying costs and benefits across seven areas – in Manchester 
alone, for every £1 invested in the programme, £2.20 in gross benefits were 
realised.

 He said local authorities had now received payment by results for 90% of the 
families contacted.

 Danny Alexander, the Treasury chief secretary, claimed: “The saving [to] the 
taxpayer of an estimated £1.2bn in the process is proof that we can do more 
with less”.

 Describing the programme as a triumph, Pickles said: “It has worked because 
it has been bold and unafraid of getting tough with those who need it most. It 
has also provided a long-term solution by tackling the root causes of the very 
complex problems these families face.”

Pickles told MPs it was notoriously difficult to undertake a cost-benefit 
analysis of the financial impact of social programmes. “Government is 
absolutely terrible at measuring outcomes,” he said.

But the research published by the Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government 
estimates that an average of £26,200 a family was spent in the 12 months before 
they started receiving support as part of the programme, and an average of more 
than £44,000 was spent on a subgroup of these families who warranted the most 
intensive forms of family intervention.

This includes the cost of police, social work, health and housing crisis 
interventions, alongside significant welfare benefit costs associated with high 
levels of unemployment and ill health.

This compares with an average spend of £12,800 a year on each household in 
England – meaning the cost of the average reactive expenditure on troubled 
families was more than twice the national average and nearly three-and-a-half 
times more for the most complex families.

On average though, fiscal benefits totalling £11,200 a family were identified 
in the 12 months after receiving support. This means families across these 
areas were committing less crime, experiencing less domestic violence, using 
fewer emergency health services, and needed less supervision and support from 
social workers.

Louise Casey <https://www.theguardian.com/society/louisecasey>, who heads the 
troubled families programme, said: “Behind these figures are real people in 
every part of the country whose lives have changed for the better. Families 
with nine serious problems each were never going to be easy to turn around, so 
all credit to the councils and other services who have committed to this 
programme, the many hundreds of frontline staff who have given their all to 
these families, and most of all to the families who have had the courage to 
change and [have] given themselves and their children a better chance in life 
than they had before.”


 Local authorities are paid up to £4,000 on a payment-by-results basis for 
turning around troubled families. The government stressed that its figures were 
not official statistics that had been independently audited and were based on 
returns from 152 local authorities.
 