
Leading doctors in the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> have 
accused the coalition government of a catalogue of broken promises, funding 
cuts and destructive legislation which has left the health service weaker than 
ever before.

In a letter to the Guardian, more than 140 senior doctors pass a damning 
judgment on the government’s stewardship of the NHS, which they say is under 
pressure because of unnecessary market-oriented changes.

Senior doctors assess government’s record on NHS – letter in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/07/senior-doctors-assess-governments-record-on-nhs-letter-in-full>
 “As medical and public health professionals our primary concern is for all 
patients. We invite voters to consider carefully how the NHS has fared over the 
last five years, and to use their vote to ensure that the NHS in England is 
reinstated,” they write.

The signatories to the letter include Dr Clare Gerada, former chair of the 
Royal College of General Practitioners; Prof John Ashton, retired director of 
public health; epidemiologist Prof Michael Coleman; Simon Capewell, professor 
of public health at the University of Liverpool; Trisha Greenhalgh, professor 
of primary care at Oxford; Martin McKee, professor of European public health, 
and Raymond Tallis, emeritus professor of geriatric medicine at the University 
of Manchester.

The letter, which the doctors have written in a private capacity, challenges 
the government on its NHS record and deplores the current pressures facing the 
health service.

Entering the last election, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> assured voters that the NHS 
was safe in Conservative hands. The doctors, however, say the NHS “is withering 
away and if things carry on as they are then in future people will be denied 
care they once had under the NHS and have to pay more for health services. 
Privatisation not only threatens coordinated services but also jeopardises 
training of our future healthcare providers and medical research, particularly 
that of public health.”

Just a week ago, 100 senior business leaders wrote to the Telegraph, claiming 
a Labour government would “threaten jobs and deter investment” in the UK. The 
NHS is a potentially difficult issue for the Tories and a strong suit for 
Labour.

Earlier on Tuesday, the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said he would meet the 
funding challenge thrown down by the NHS chief executive, Simon Stevens, last 
year. Stevens said in October that the health service faced a funding gap of 
£30bn by 2020, of which £22bn could be met through efficiency savings.

Hunt told BBC Radio 4’s World at One programme: “We will give whatever they 
need. It might be more than £8bn, it might be less.”

Within hours of Hunt’s pledge, an earlier draft of the doctors’ letter was 
leaked to the Daily Telegraph, which claimed that Labour had orchestrated it. 
Julian Smith, the Tory candidate defending Skipton and Ripon, told the paper: 
“This Labour stitch-up is another desperate attempt to weaponise the NHS. The 
truth is that only today Andy Burnham said he didn’t support the NHS’s own 
funding plan. Under this government, we’ve got more doctors, more nurses and 
more patients being seen than ever before.”

But Gerada, who organised the letter, denied that the Labour party was 
responsible. “It has not been orchestrated by Labour, it has been put together 
by me and a few other medical leaders,” she told the Telegraph. “I’m not doing 
this from a party political point of view. My views on the health service and 
theHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Social Care Act go 
back and are well known. This letter was drafted by me and some others.

Ways to right the coalition wrongs of NHS reorganisation | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/09/righting-past-wrongs-nhs-reorganisation>
“I am a Labour party member now, but I’m not an activist in the Labour party. 
This is a view of many doctors who have serious concerns about the state of the 
NHS as it is now.”

A Labour spokesperson said: “It’s little surprise that doctors have written 
this letter – they are deeply concerned about the direction of the NHS under 
David Cameron and the consequences for patients of another five years of Tory 
government. The NHS needs Labour’s better plan for 20,000 more nurses and 8,000 
more GPs, paid for with a £2.5bn a year time to care fund, and guaranteed GP 
appointments within 48 hours.”

There’s a painful list of conditions we can’t treat on the NHS | Zara Aziz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/07/list-conditions-cant-treat-nhs-gps>
The letter attacks Andrew Lansley’s NHS shakeup, which was passed by 
parliament in 2012 as the Health and Social Care Act. It is “already leading to 
the rapid and unwanted expansion of the role of commercial companies in the 
NHS. Lansley’s Act is denationalising healthcare because the abolition of the 
duty to provide a NHS throughout England, abdicates government responsibility 
for universal services to ad hoc bodies (such as clinical commissioning groups) 
and competitive markets controlled by private sector-dominated quangos,” the 
doctors write.

The squeeze is hitting patients, they continue: “People may be unaware that 
under the coalition, dozens of accident and emergency departments and maternity 
units have been closed or earmarked for closure or downgrading. In addition, 51 
NHS walk-in centres have been closed or downgraded in this time, and more than 
60 ambulance stations have shut and more than 100 general practices are at risk 
of closure.”

Thousands of NHS beds have closed since 2010, they say, while mental health 
and primary care are in disarray and public health has been “wrenched” out of 
the NHS and is now the responsibility of local authorities.

The way forward is clear, the doctors say. “Abolish all the damaging sections 
of the Health and Social Care Act 2012 that fragment care and drive the NHS 
towards a market-driven, ‘out-for-tender’ mentality where care is provided by 
the lowest bidder. Reversing this costly and inefficient market bureaucracy 
alone will save significant sums. Above all, the duty on the secretary of state 
to provide a health service throughout England must be reinstated – it still 
exists in Scotland and Wales.”








 