
After Morrisons' underwhelming update last week, the supermarket group is back 
in focus on renewed talk of an asset sale to boost shareholder value, despite 
continuing worries about it losing out to discounters like Aldi and Lidl.

Weekend reports suggested an activist US investor, Elliott Associates, was 
pushingMorrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> to sell some 
off its property assets. But Clive Black at Shore Capital said:
 Whilst there can be short-term gains for shareholders from a comprehensive 
property sale programme through distributions, we question whether such 
activity is in the interest of the company in the long-run; will the 
shareholders that may seek short-term radical action be there for the duration? 
Morrisons is a low margin business and the desirability of intensifying 
operational leverage from a major property programme is highly questionable in 
our view. 
Jonathan Pritchard at Oriel Securities was also unimpressed by the idea:
 Talk of activist investors taking stakes in Morrisons may help the shares 
short term but changing the ownership of assets hasn't helped the Tesco and 
Sainsbury's valuation. Whilst using the cash that sale and leasebacks would 
generate would be helpful in the company's attempts to play catch up on 
convenience and online, the lower new large store pipeline means that Morrisons 
doesn't desperately need the cash anyway.

Morrisons has structural problems in the UK with the discounters winning 
market share and its USP hard to decipher. A long term recovery plan is needed, 
rather than financial wizardry with the balance sheet. 
Mike Dennis at Cantor Fitzgerald, however, repeated his idea of the benefits 
of a possible break-up of the group:
 The shares look undervalued, despite expectations of a poor set of 2013 
results and 160 basis point fall in return on capital employed, as Morrisons 
has one of the best retail balance sheets in the UK. We see potential for a 
£1bn buy-back (18% of share capital) via a sale and lease back and reduced 
capex. We also believe Morrisons' property review in March could indicate that 
250-300 of its 495 core, 25,000-45,000 square foot supermarkets are worth 
£7.5bn plus or 95% of its current £7.9bn enterprise value.

Ultimately, Morrisons could sell the majority of its stores, with the approval 
of the Competition Commission, to its main competitors and still have 195 
regional supermarkets with manufacturing assets, worth £2.5bn-£3bn, and this 
could be run by some of the previous management. Morrisons' net asset value per 
share is 234p and we expect a dividend of 13p this year and next yielding 5.5%. 
The prospect of property sales helped propel Morrisons to the top of the FTSE 
100 leaderboard, up 15.2p to 251.3p.

Meanwhile Morrisons' online partner, Ocado, continued its recent gains, up 
another 25.5p to 541p. But HSBC repeated its underweight rating onOcado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado>, albeit raising its price target 
from 200p to 235p. The bank said:
 The core business should deliver growth broadly in line with the industry – 
growth via click and collect is not an option for Ocado. The deal with Morrison 
has proved a "life saver" for Ocado, and will help improve cash flows and 
returns.

We remain underweight as we believe the current valuation (estimated 2014 PE 
of 112 times) anticipates international deals we regard as unlikely.


Still with retail, Debenhams added 4.1p to 85.65p on news Sports Direct 
International, down 8.5p at 747.5p, had bought a 4.63% stake in the department 
store group.

Overall, gains in the banking sector helped push the FTSE 100 17.21 points 
higher to 6757.15. William Nicholls at Capital Spreads said:
 A day very light in data has kept markets quiet at the start of this week – 
the trading range for the FTSE was extraordinarily tight until the US markets 
opened which has helped a small movement to the upside. Most of today's 
volatility has come from the currency markets – sterling in particular, which 
has weakened significantly against the dollar. The pair seem to have hit a bit 
of a ceiling after such a big move last year. The UK economy missed various 
data targets last week and has inflation figures to negotiate tomorrow. Today's 
130 point move in cable [dollar/sterling] certainly suggests some nervousness 
in the air. The sudden concerns surrounding the state of Britain's debt should 
Scotland choose to go independent has only magnified the move. 
Banks benefited from news the Basel Committee was proposing to loosen its 
definitions of leverage ratio. Liberum said:
 In theory relaxed capital should not impact valuation but in practice these 
definitional revisions reduce pressure onBarclays to rapidly shrink its 
investment bank balance sheet which is helpful for valuation.

Ian Gordon at Investec repeated his buy recommendation on Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>, saying:
 On capital, nothing (helpful) comes along for ages and then three doses of 
(surprisingly) good news arrive in quick succession. The UK's PRA led the way 
with its reassuring "key decisions on capital standards" in November and Policy 
Statement 7/13 in December, while yesterday's apparent easing in Basel 3 
leverage ratio requirements offers further comfort, albeit against measures 
where Barclays' compliance was not, in our view, in doubt. Expect a continuing 
relief rally as the Barclays "capital arbitrage" plays out.

Barclays was 8.1p better at 291.70p while Royal Bank of Scotland rose 11.1p to 
368p andLloyds Banking Group was lifted 0.99p to 84.03p.

Amec added 26p to £11.05 after the UK engineer announced a £1.9bn takeover of 
Swiss-based rival Foster Wheeler, despite warning of a £10m hit to earnings 
from exchange rate movements.

Associated British Foods rose 69p to £26.60 ahead of a trading update on 
Thursday, with all eyes on Primark's Christmas sales.

Tullow Oil slid 31.5p to 878p on profit taking after last week's speculation 
that Norway's Statoil could be interested in the oil explorer.

SSE fell 20p to £13.44 after Charles Stanley cut its recommendation on the 
electricity company:
 SSE continues to benefit from solid operational performance and a balanced 
business model. But, while valuation is starting to look attractive, it is hard 
to see shares outperforming under market expectations for muted earnings 
growth, the overhang of the Labour Party's proposed price freeze, protracted 
regulatory uncertainty around the electricity distribution price review, and 
questions about investment opportunities post 2015. We downgrade our 
recommendation to hold [from accumulate].

Lower down the market Premier Foods put on nearly 4% to 134.25p following 
reports US private equity group Gores was in talks to take control of the 
company's Hovis bread business.
 