
Mosquito devices, which emit painful high-frequency sounds audible only to 
children and young adults, could be banned following a debate at the Council of 
Europe tomorrow.

About 5,000 of the devices are thought to be in use in the UK – more than 
anywhere else in Europe – to discourage young people gathering in public areas.

Guardian research has revealed that 25% of local councils use or have used the 
£500 machines. Their use is not formally regulated and in most cases no warning 
or information is given about their installation.

Of the 483 council, police and community partnerships questioned, 22% said 
they endorsed or used the devices. The most recent model has a range up to 40 
metres and can be set to ring continuously, but they could be banned after a 
recent Council of Europe report found them "degrading and discriminatory".

Piotr Wach, of the body's committee on culture, science and education, says 
that while the pulsating acoustic signal does not exceed the sound level 
permitted for short-term exposure, there is no research into the health 
implications for children and unborn babies.

"People over 25 are not aware that they are being exposed to this kind of 
strong acoustic emission because it is outside their hearing range," he said. 
"But for teenagers, it is extremely irritating and often even painful. Many 
children, in particular babies, have dramatic reactions to the sound."

Liberty is considering asking the European court of human rights to rule on 
whether the devices should be banned. Shami Chakrabarti, director of Liberty, 
believes the devices are a clear contravention of young people's human rights. 
"What type of society uses a low-level sonic weapon on its children?" she 
asked. "Imagine the outcry if a machine was designed to cause blanket 
discomfort to members of one sex or ethnic group."

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, a 
former children's commissioner for England, also objects to the "collective 
punishment" imposed on all young people by Mosquitos and has set up the Buzz 
Off campaign calling for a ban.

The Children's Society and the Children's Rights Alliance for England 
complained to the UN committee on the rights of the child last year. The CRAE 
said: "Children who do not talk may be distressed by the noise but be unable to 
move out of the zone."

In response, the UN committee called on all governments to "reconsider the 
Mosquito devices, insofar as they may violate the rights of children".

Their recommendations were ignored by both the Home Office and the EU 
commission, who concluded that there was insufficient information to establish 
guidelines for safe exposure to high frequencies.

Despite this, the Association of Chief Police Officers has refused to give the 
Mosquito national approval – although local forces may still use it – 
"primarily due to lack of evidence that it is safe".
 