
Pascale Gravell, south London, originally from France, mother of five children 
aged between 11 and 18

I know this idea exists that children in France are given alcohol when they're 
young, but personally I've never seen anyone do it and I certainly have never 
done it. In fact, now that I live in England, I realise how little French 
people drink! They open a good bottle and really enjoy every sip.

In France there are more problems than there used to be with young people 
drinking, but in my family it's never been a problem. I have about 100 cousins 
and we're very familyorientated, and I think that makes a difference. If we 
have problems, there are other ways of sorting them out – we don't tend to 
resort to alcohol, so our children don't do that either.

Cheryl Baldridge, Laguna Beach, California, mother of three children aged 11, 
12 and 15

In the US there's the feeling that teenage drinking is worse today than it was 
when we were young. But personally I don't believe that: I think what's changed 
is that parents are a lot more savvy than they used to be. In the past, there 
was far less awareness about teenage drinking; but these days parents are more 
aware of it. When I was in high school there was certainly lots of drinking 
going on – I grew up in a nice area, but it was sometimes a little bit crazy 
and wild. Parents tended to ignore things, so there was a lot more freedom – 
today, parents watch their children much more than they did back then.

Here in the US the minimum drinking age is 21, compared with 18 in the UK, but 
of course teenagers still drink.

There is also less tolerance than there used to be: at last year's high school 
dance in our town, they did random testing for alcohol in the cars as the kids 
arrived, and there were serious repercussions for anyone caught with liquor. 
The message was: if you want to drink, don't come to the ball – and it worked, 
there was no drinking.

Another thing that's heightened worry here is the fact that kids have been 
killed in car crashes after drinking, which has led to a real crackdown on 
drinking and driving. It used to be that parents would say, bring the kids over 
to our house and they can have a few beers here … but these days if a kid 
leaves your house and crashes a car, and they're found to have had alcohol at 
your house, you'll be prosecuted for it. So people are a lot more careful than 
they used to be.

Patricia Silijama, Helsinki, Finland, mother of two teenagers aged 17 and 19 
and two adult children

In Finland we seem to have taken the drinking culture from southern Europe – 
enjoying wine with food – and from Scandinavian countries – drinking a lot at 
weekends. And of course the children pick up our habits, so there's potentially 
too much drinking here and people are worried about it.

Youngsters tend to have a lot more money than they used to do, and it's very 
common at weekends to see them out in the streets with beer. Alcohol is very 
easily available, and many parents have problems at some stage.

Increasingly, though, there's a feeling that things should change. There are 
worries about young people and the amount of alcohol they're drinking – so much 
so that the police have been going around parks and beaches where youngsters 
are known to drink, and checking their papers to make sure they really are 18, 
which is the minimum age for drinking here. If they're found to be underage, 
the alcohol is taken away and the police go to see the parents.

But it's not enough. I read in the paper the other day that more youngsters 
here are dying because of accidents after too much alcohol – and that's such a 
terrible waste of lives.
 