
For a man who numbers the Sydney and Adelaide tournaments among his 11 career 
titles, Tim Henman's record in the Australian Open is decidedly modest. "Sydney 
[which he won in 1997] is one of the strongest tournaments of the year so that 
adds to the frustration, and strengthens the challenge and the motivation to do 
better this time."

And there was no doubting the verve and resolution with which he began, 
defeating the Frenchman Jean-René Lisnard 6-2, 6-4, 6-2 with almost total 
conviction, save for a moment in the second set when an Australian drunk, 
juggling a tray of drinks and a mobile phone, caused Henman's concentration to 
stray. The drinks were dropped, but not Henman's serve, although he did 
double-fault twice.

He had practised in the heat of the day under a swirling wind, but by the time 
he walked on court, at about 7.30pm, the temperature had dropped markedly, as 
had the wind. Lisnard had turned up four hours earlier, believing the match was 
due to start after Argentina's David Nalbandián, a possible fourth-round 
opponent for Henman, had beaten Ricardo Mello of Brazil.

The Frenchman had to be quietly pointed back towards the locker room and must 
have wished he had stayed there as Henman punched volley upon volley beyond his 
reach. Lisnard, 24, has frequently suffered stage fright against more 
illustrious opponents, and Henman cranked up the pressure almost gleefully.

Last year's victory in the Paris Indoor Open, together with the input from 
Paul Annacone, Pete Sampras's former coach, has finally convinced him that he 
will win nothing through caution. It is not easy for him - "but I think I'm 
moving slowly in the right direction".

Next up is the Czech Radek Stepanek, the last player he defeated in Paris in 
2002 before the shoulder operation that caused him to miss last year's 
Australian Open. Stepanek came back from two sets down against Italy's Davide 
Sanguinetti yesterday and was described by Henman as "a dangerous player, with 
a lot of feel", although the British No1 clearly thinks he can beat him.

Swing Low, Sweet Chariot rang out after the second set - "a first for me at a 
tennis match" - and Henman is hoping to cash in on the Rugby World Cup feelgood 
factor. "It's certainly an unusual feeling to come down to Australia having 
beaten them at a major sport, and it has given everyone a lift."

The only major casualty of the second day was Argentina's Guillermo Coria, the 
No5 seed, who lost 7-6, 6-2, 6-4 to Cyril Saulnier of France. Coria had pulled 
a stomach muscle in Auckland before the Australian Open and was clearly still 
handicapped by the injury.

The love duo, Lleyton Hewitt and Kim Clijsters, both won, with Hewitt's 
opponent, Cecil Mamiit of the United States, having to withdraw at 6-2, 6-4, 
0-1 down having injured his ankle. This was the third successive match, 
including the semi-final and final in Sydney last week, that Hewitt's opponent 
has been forced to quit. At this rate he will win his first Australian Open 
title by default.

Clijsters, who entered the tournament with an ankle injury of her own and with 
her participation in some doubt, won 6-3, 6-2 against Marlene Weingartner of 
Germany. "It's not healed but the swelling has gone down and I just hope it 
doesn't flare up again."

Australian tennis twitchers turned up at the Rod Laver Court for a rare 
sighting of Venus Williams, last seen on the Wimbledon Centre Court when she 
lost to her sister Ser ena in the women's final. She defeated her fellow 
American Ashley Harkleroad 6-2, 6-1, although there was the usual post-match 
Williams medical bulletin after she appeared to jar her ankle. Or was it the 
carefully taped knee?

"It was the right ankle. I was going for the swing volley and twisted it. So 
I'll just monitor it and see how it goes. But I'm not anticipating it will be 
so bad." And then it was on to the more important matters of the day: the 
dress, the earrings. And the engagement ring? "No engagement ring. Actually my 
finger has been swollen for weeks now and I can't get this ring off. And the 
earrings - I got those in Hong Kong. I'm just a regular girl, I really am."

Harkleroad had hoped that Williams, after six months out, might be anything 
but, and a little rusty. "But she really wasn't, and I was just a little 
overpowered." Then it was back to rings and things, Harkleroad having recently 
become engaged to Alex Bogomolov Jr. Like his fiancée, he was overpowered in 
losing 6-3, 6-4, 6-0 to the Wimbledon champion Roger Federer.
 