
An avalanche on Mount Everest <https://www.theguardian.com/world/everest> 
early on Friday has killed at least 12 local climbers and left several others 
injured in what is likely to prove one of the most lethal accidents in recent 
history on the world's highest peak.

Officials said 12 bodies had so far been recovered and ferried to base camp, 
while a further three injured climbers were being taken to Kathmandu. As many 
as four climbers are still thought to be missing.

An injured survivor told his relatives that the path up the mountain was 
unstable just before the avalanche. As soon as the avalanche hit, rescuers and 
climbers rushed to help.

Reports suggest a massive avalanche low on the 29,000ft (8,848m) mountain 
caught a work party of local sherpas as they prepared the classic South Col 
route – followed by the peak's first ascensionists in 1953 – for fee-paying 
western climbers.

Sherpa guides had gone early in the morning to fix the ropes which will guide 
and safeguard hundreds of climbers, when the avalanche hit them. Reports said 
the accident had occurred between base camp and Camp 1 in the chaotic and 
extremely dangerous ice fall. The ice fall is composed of a steep glacier which 
fractures as it slides over cliffs, forming massive crevasses, and sherpas have 
to find and maintain a new route through every year.

Tourism ministry spokesman Mohan Krishna Sapkota said the climbers were all 
Nepalese and were preparing the route to the summit ahead of the summer 
climbing season which kicks off later this month.

"The sherpa guides were carrying up equipment and other necessities for 
climbers, when the disaster happened," Sapkota said.

Base camp is currently crowded as peak climbing season on Everest approaches. 
A weather window in May allows the greatest chance of success on the mountain.

In recent years there has been growing controversy over the pay, conditions 
and safety of the local men hired for the risky job of securing the route on 
the mountain to allow largely western climbers on commercial expeditions 
charging up to $50,000 (£30,000) to reach the upper slopes of the mountain in 
relative security.

The Kathmandu-based climbing company Himalayan Climbing Guides Nepal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> confirmed that two of its guides were 
among the dead and four were missing.

"Six climbing guides from our company were taking up tents and supplies … two 
have been found dead and rescue teams are searching for the remaining four," 
manager Umid Bhandari told AFP.

Eight people died on Everest last year, including one of the best-known and 
experienced local sherpa guides who was killed in the ice fall.

The accident will once again raise fears that the mountain is too crowded. 
Nepalese authorities have introduced a series of measures to reduce the number 
of climbers on the peak.

Last year more than 500 climbers reached the summit of Everest. On 19 May 
around 150 climbed the last 915m to the peak within hours of each other, 
causing lengthy delays asmountaineers queued to descend or ascend harder 
sections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/30/everest-mountaineer-crowding-hobby-tragedy>
.

Officials have cut mountaineering fees for many other peaks while requiring 
each climber scaling Everest to bring back 8kg (17.6lbs) of rubbish in an 
attempt to clean up the "roof of the world".

Last year officials floated the idea of installing a ladder on the famous 
Hillary Step, a crucial stretch of technical climbing at nearly 8,840m 
(29,000ft) on Everest, named after its first climber, Sir Edmund Hillary.

Though such innovations are anathema to many purist climbers, some sherpas 
welcome them. Entire communities in the otherwise poor Khumbu region of Nepal
depend on the mountaineering industry for their livelihoods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/28/we-owe-everything-everest-hilary>
.

Relations between international climbers and sherpa guides working on the 
mountain are not always good. Authorities have also stationed soldiers and 
police at Everest base camp following a brawl between commercial climbers and 
Nepalese guides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/30/everest-climbers-sherpa-mob-attack>
 last year.
 