
With a glossy grin, a dry wit and bags of affable Irish-American charm, 
Barclays' chief executive,Bob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-diamond>, is a difficult man to 
discombobulate. His stratospheric career is built on a mastery of canny 
negotiation – and the man from Massachusetts was never going to be outwitted by 
a bunch of backbench MPs in a fusty Westminster committee room.

During a rancorous session last week on bankers' bonuses, the Treasury select 
committee failed to guilt-trip Diamond into a commitment to waive his personal 
pay cheque, which could top £8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/09/barclays-bonus-boss-bob-diamond>
 for 2010. And the Barclays boss, who has already taken home £75m over five 
years, cheerfully dodged an invitation from a Labour MP to opine on whether it 
was easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man 
to enter the kingdom of heaven.

There was, however, an enlightening exchange that is worth reproducing in 
full, because it goes to the heart of the gap in attitudes between bankers and 
the public. It began when David Ruffley, a Conservative MP, cited estimates 
from the Bank of England that the entire banking industry has benefited to the 
tune of £100bn from a bailout of its weaker players.

"Are you grateful to the British taxpayer for subsidising you in this way?" 
Ruffley asked.

Diamond: "There are a couple of answers to this question..." Ruffley: "No, are 
you grateful to the British taxpayer?"

Diamond: "We are very grateful to..." Ruffley: "To the British taxpayer?" 
Diamond: "May I answer? We are very grateful to the central banks around the 
world, to the governments around the world, for the actions they took."

Ruffley: "No, I'm talking about the British government, who stand in the shoes 
of the British public. They say, and this is accepted, that you're too big to 
fail. That makes you more credit-worthy; it means you can borrow much more 
cheaply than if you're a standalone organisation. Now are you grateful to the 
British public?" Diamond: "Can I ask you one question?'

Ruffley: "I ask the questions, you give the answers. Are you grateful to the 
British public?" Diamond: "We're very grateful to the central banks; we're very 
grateful to everybody that's helped the financial system get back..." Ruffley: 
"The British taxpayer?" Diamond: "We're thankful to everyone. But if I can just 
point out, last week we raised money at about 50 to 100 basis points lower 
yield than the government guaranteed banks in the UK."

Evidently, Diamond (who is known internally as RED after his initials) doesn't 
do humble and isn't going to toady to ordinary folk on the street. His view is 
that Barclays wasn't in trouble in the financial crisis, isn't a villain and 
has nothing to be ashamed of. Other banks, including RBS and HBOS, may have 
written rotten mortgages and handed out reckless loans. But not Barclays. So 
why on earth shouldn't his bank distribute £2.5bn in bonuses to its staff? And 
as for an implied government backstop,Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> can raise money on the private 
markets at a lower rate than its state-owned rivals – so, Diamond feels, it 
isn't in thrall to taxpayers at all.

The public disagrees. In the view of many, it wasn't mere individual banks 
that failed. It was the broader system of casino-like trading – of ever more 
opaque derivatives, of credit default swaps and of securitisation that 
big-brained analysts thought would minimise risk from toxic assets instead of 
broadening it to infect an ever widening circle of institutions. And, from the 
perspective of the industry's critics, a glaring question still hasn't been 
answered: why do bankers need such stratospheric pay cheques to motivate them, 
while surgeons, soldiers, teachers, airline pilots, even industrialists will do 
a decent day's work for so much less? Diamond's answer was that Barclays must 
pay top dollar because it competes for staff in a global market, aiming to 
wrestle talent away from the likes of Goldman Sachs, Deutsche Bank and JP 
Morgan. But that's just a way of saying "we're doing it because everybody else 
is doing it".

The real answer lies in Diamond's skilful, wilful evasiveness. Investment 
bankers' core skill is negotiation. They are paid to milk a tiny bit of extra 
margin, a sliver of yield, a little extra profit from a deal. They're 
encouraged to guard their cards fiercely, to spot the most fleeting of 
opportunities for arbitrage, to go an extra mile to make a few quid for every 
corporate client. Money is their working life and bargaining is their business.

Surgeons are motivated by at least a passing interest in medicine alongside 
their pay cheques. Soldiers may enlist because they relish action. The chief 
executive of Facebook has a passing interest in technology. But investment 
bankers are only interested in money – and if they didn't fight for the maximum 
conceivable bonus at all costs, they'd be as incongruous as a chain-smoking 
surgeon or a pacifist private. Calls for voluntary "restraint" are never, ever 
going to work.

BP's about-face

Talk about chutzpah. In a two-fingered gesture to its US critics, BP has 
pulled off a stunt of astounding audacity – Britain's flagship oil company has 
turned its environmentally disastrous Gulf of Mexico spill into a selling point.
At a signing ceremony for BP's tie-up with the Russian state-owned exploration 
firm Rosneft, the Russian deputy prime minister, Igor Sechin, declared that the 
trials and tribulations of its Deepwater Horizon catastrophe had given the 
British company a "competitive advantage". Speaking through an interpreter, he 
offered a somewhat delphic Russian proverb: "For one who has been beaten, we 
could sell you two of those who haven't been beaten yet."

A little idiom was clearly lost in translation. But the general thrust from 
Vladimir Putin's right-hand man was clear – BP hadn't been beaten by spilling 
4.9m barrels of oil off the coast of Louisiana, and had emerged from the 
experience wiser. And BP's chief executive, Bob Dudley, got in on the act, 
suggesting that "lessons learned" from the US spill had turned BP into a "world 
leader in managing inherently risky operations".

This weekend's share-swap with Rosneft, which hands the Russians a 5% stake in 
BP, gives the British firm access to vast acreage of untapped oil reserves in 
the Russian arctic – an exploration area of 125,000 sq km. Using the Gulf of 
Mexico spill as leverage isn't likely to thrill Louisiana's shrimpers. But 
facing political and public opprobrium in American, BP has little choice other 
than to look east.

On hand at Friday night's handshakes was the energy secretary, Chris Huhne, 
who offered an awkward endorsement for a deal with a bunch of Russian oligarchs 
to drill for fossil fuels in the Arctic wilderness. This can't have been what 
he had in mind when he stood for parliament as a Liberal Democrat.
 