 A suicide bomber today killed at least 50 people, including five MPs and 
several children, in northern Afghanistan.
The attack took place as a parliamentary delegation was visiting a sugar 
factory in the town of Baghlan, 95 miles from the capital, Kabul. The bomber 
was on foot and blew himself up as the delegates entered the factory.

The death toll was particularly heavy as large crowds had turned out to greet 
the MPs, who were on an economic factfinding mission. Many of the dead were 
schoolchildren.

If the number of fatalities is confirmed, the attack would be the deadliest in 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> since the 2001 
US-led invasion. Initial reports said as many as 90 people had died.

"I saw bodies lying in the streets and some of the people were stealing the 
weapons of the dead soldiers. Children are screaming for help. It's like a 
nightmare," a resident told Reuters.

He said the blast had killed his two cousins, both schoolgirls. Mostafa 
Kazemi, the opposition spokesman and former commerce minister, and four other 
MPs were among the dead.

"We have recorded 50 people dead so far, but there are still bodies on the 
streets we have not counted and some of the dead have already been taken away 
by their relatives," Baghlan's provincial security chief, Abdurrahman 
Sayedkhail, told Reuters. "The bomber got very close to the delegation as they 
were being greeted. He got very close to Mostafa Kazemi and blew himself up."

The Taliban has killed more than 200 people in more than 130 suicide attacks 
so far this year, trying to show that the government and its western backers 
cannot provide security.

The latest atrocity came a day after the UN general assembly adopted a 
resolution, sponsored by Germany, urging Kabul and the international community 
to continue efforts to rebuild the country.

The 192-member assembly condemned the renewed violence throughout Afghanistan, 
including the rising trend of suicide attacks, "owing to the increased violence 
and terrorist activity by the Taliban, al-Qaida, other extremist groups and 
those involved in the narcotics trade".

Britain, which has the second-largest number of foreign troops to Afghanistan, 
claims that the Taliban is on the defensive militarily, despite the frequent 
bomb attacks.

In the Queen's speech, laying out the legislative programme, Gordon Brown's 
government said it was clear that lasting peace and security would not be 
brought about by military action alone.

The Queen said: "The way forward must be social and economic development 
harnessed to a counter-insurgency strategy that allows for outreach to those 
prepared to renounce violence and sign up to the Afghan government and the 
Afghan constitution."
 