
A group of MPs is suing the CIA in the American courts in an attempt to force 
the agency to hand over information about Britain's secret involvement in its 
extraordinary rendition programme.

In a case thought to set a legal precedent, the group, led by Conservative MP 
Andrew Tyrie, is to file a complaint in a district court in Washington tomorrow 
seeking a judicial review of the agency's failure to disclose the information.

The MPs from the all-party parliamentary group on extraordinary rendition have 
made requests to the CIA, FBI and the department of homeland security over the 
last 12 months, under US freedom of information legislation, seeking more 
information about Britain's role in rendition.

Hundreds of pages of documents have been disclosed but Tyrie said the specific 
information he requested had not been revealed. "The current drip-drip of 
information on rendition is hugely damaging. To achieve closure on rendition we 
need disclosure. It is in everyone's interests that the truth on the US 
rendition programme comes to light. Bringing this litigation against the CIA, 
department of defence, department of justice, and other US government agencies, 
represents a globalisation of accountability for two of the world's leading 
democracies. I hope that this groundbreaking litigation will lead to 
comprehensive disclosure in the US. Only then can we give the public confidence 
that we have got to the bottom of rendition and British involvement in it."

The MPs want to learn more about the use of British airports and airspace, 
about agreements between the US and the UK on rendition, the use of Diego 
Garcia, a British territory in the Indian Ocean, and about the transfer of 
detainees from British to American hands. They have also demanded information 
about specific detainees, including two rendered through Diego Garcia, and 
others whom British special forces inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> handed over to US forces, and who were 
then flown to Afghanistan.

The MPs have submitted Freedom of Information Act requests to UK government 
departments. Most are now with the Information Commissioner's office, pending 
appeals against the government's refusal to disclose the information.

Similar requests are to be made of Australian government departments in an 
attempt to discover more about prisoner-exchange agreements known to have been 
made by the UK, US and Australian governments.

Tyrie has made a series of allegations about Britain's involvement in the 
programme since he establishedthe all-party group 
<http://www.extraordinaryrendition.org/> four years ago: he claims that the UK 
has facilitated rendition; that Diego Garcia was used for rendition; and that 
British troops have been involved in the process. "Each allegation was 
categorically denied," he said. "Each has subsequently been admitted."

In September 2005 the Guardian reported that aircraft involved in the CIA's 
rendition programme had flown into the UK at least 210 times since the al-Qaida 
attacks in the US four years earlier.

Three months after that report, the then foreign secretary, Jack Straw, told 
the Commons foreign affairs committee: "Unless we all start to believe in 
conspiracy theories and that the officials are lying, that I am lying, that 
behind this there is some kind of secret state which is in league with some 
dark forces in the US and also let me say, we believe that secretary 
[Condoleezza] Rice is lying, there simply is no truth in the claims that the 
United Kingdom has been involved in rendition, full stop – because we have not 
been, and so what on earth a judicial inquiry would start to do I have no idea."

Straw and Tony Blair also denied that any rendition flights landed on Diego 
Garcia. In February last year David Miliband, the foreign secretary, said they 
had.

After the government repeatedly denied that British forces in Iraq had been 
involved in rendition, John Hutton, who was defence secretary, admitted this 
year that they had; he also disclosed that two cases were detailed in documents 
sent to Straw and Charles Clarke.

While the government has now admitted to involvement in a small number of 
rendition cases, there is evidence that British troops in Iraq and Afghanistan 
have been involved in many more.

Last year Ben Griffin, a former SAS member who served in Iraq, said a joint 
US/UK task force detained "hundreds if not thousands" of people who were then 
kept at Guantánamo, Bagram and Abu Ghraib. Griffin said a senior officer 
expressed concern that the SAS squadron "were becoming the secret police of 
Baghdad". He said that the task force had broken international law, contravened 
Geneva conventions and disregarded the UN convention against torture, and that 
ministers must have known that British soldiers The defence ministry responded 
by obtaining an injunction to silence Griffin.
 