
Moral outrage can become tedious as well as draining, so it is time to move on 
and decide how to stop a man such asRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> having such power in our 
society again.

But we should take a moment to acknowledge that we were a lot better off at 
the end of the week than we were at the beginning.Rebekah Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade> has gone; the BSkyB deal is 
dead; James Murdoch should certainly lose his job as chairman of the 
broadcaster; that old player Les Hinton deposited his own head on a platter in 
the general rush to atonement; and Rupert Murdoch took space in the competition 
to say he was sorry and mumbled apologies to an ordinary family. This great bad 
man, as the convict Conrad Black knowingly described him in theFT, has been 
humiliated and is finished.

It happened so fast that you could hardly keep track of it and there is still 
juice left in this scandal. Brooks and the Murdochs appear in front the 
Culture, Media and Sport select committee on Tuesday; and Sir Paul Stephenson 
answers questions from the Home Affairs committee. Because of the speed of 
events, we have not properly considered the prime minister's position, but 
let's be clear that the person who has most to lose in the coming week isDavid 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>. I may be going out 
on limb here, but I think his reputation and authority might be critically 
damaged.

One of the more shaming aspects of the phone-hacking affair and all the 
interlocking circles of corruption and compromise is that they expose a huge 
failure in my generation, which has allowed Murdoch to enmesh our politics, 
media and police. After opposing his activities for a good part of that period, 
even I have been astonished at the levels of penetration he achieved – not just 
a man, Andy Coulson, beside the prime minister at Downing Street and Chequers, 
before and after resignation, but a formerNews of the World executive 
discovered to be advising the head of the Metropolitan Police, just as the 
phone-hacking scandal began to get serious two years ago.

After the election last year, nothing changed. In fact, the Conservative-led 
coalition allowed even greater access to these dreadful people and was about to 
return favours by waving through the BSkyB purchase, a deal that was palpably 
against the interests of British society. The full accounting on this has not 
properly begun. What undertakings were given before the poll? We need 
assurances that phone-hacking and other covert methods were not used during the 
last few elections.

But let's get back to the future. As a friend of mine insisted, this is a 
unique opportunity. We have to strike now or see a gradual reversion to the 
status quo that existed before this scandal.

What we should have done years ago was to limit the ownership of national 
newspapers and broadcasting companies by any one individual or concern, 
whatever the profitability of their enterprises. Murdoch owned four newspapers 
and 39% of BSkyB. That is far too much. Richard Desmond controls four 
newspapers and Channel 5. That is far too much. Suggestions that an individual 
should only be allowed one daily and one Sunday title, or a broadcasting 
company, are a start, but the purpose must be to defend us against accumulation 
of power by one man. Our legislators and regulators should start work 
immediately and think about the unaccountable might of internet giants as well.

It is clear that Britain needs fully functioning privacy legislation, not the 
feeble guarantees in the Human Rights Act that Jack Straw was boasting about 
last week. Everyone high and low needs protection from the tabloids, the web 
and the state. This unimaginative, rather shallow government has shown no 
inclination to grapple with the threat to privacy offered from so many 
quarters. It throws up its hands and points to the self-invasions and global 
nature of the web. But a free society cannot exist unless this fundamental 
right is meaningfully supported by laws, which apply equally to the Earthbound 
British tabloids as to Google, which, for instance, tailors its operations to 
comply with laws in China. A strong public interest defence would be part of 
new legislation.

We need firm and intelligent regulation of the media, but we shouldn't allow 
politicians to use this to hobble a free press and so become even less 
accountable. The lesson of the last week is that the public requires greater 
scrutiny and accountability in all areas of the establishment. Politicians and 
journalists should not underestimate the public's anger or the way it might 
develop.

One of the most disturbing parts of this scandal is the light cast on the 
police. It has been shocking to witness former and current assistant 
commissionersAndy Hayman <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/andy-hayman> and John 
Yates blatantly squirming in public. Even more so to watch Neil Wallis, 
formerly of theNews of the World, slink from the shadows of Met commissioner 
Sir Paul Stephenson's office after his arrest. Yates and Sir Paul should go 
immediately. Then we need a complete examination of the ethics, culture, 
effectiveness and recruitment policies of the British police. Some of this will 
be covered by the inquiry into the police investigations into phone-hacking, 
but a more general assessment of their fitness for the modern age is urgently 
required.

A lasting legacy of the Murdoch era is one of diminished standards. So much of 
what he touched was degraded and trashed and at the heart of this gradual 
process of debasement was our own tolerance. Murdoch played to our worst 
instincts and he is responsible for a fair amount of the heartlessness, 
coarseness and spite we see every day in the tabloid press.

For example, stories in the Daily Mail frequently demean its readers. The 
proprietor of Associated Newspapers, Lord Rothermere, should address the 
standards of his papers or one day he too may find his advertisers vanishing 
overnight. TheMail has done sterling work in the area of personal freedom and 
racism and I am not advocating puritanical or castrated newspapers, simply a 
renewal of standards about what is unacceptable and cruel.

The public needs to address its attitudes too – the contempt for the private 
and inner lives of the famous and the disregard for the pain of ordinary people 
is what led Murdoch's journalists to hack phones and pay the police. Let's 
start by grasping that respect for privacy, our own and other people's, is a 
civic responsibility, a moral obligation, which should be applied with the same 
rigour as the laws concerning property.

Politicians should be thinking these things and leading the debate about where 
we find ourselves this weekend. Instead, they are shuffling their feet and 
wondering how to save their skins. With the expulsion of Rupert Murdoch from 
our national life, we have a glorious opportunity for meaningful reform: let's 
seize it.
 