
The best coaches in the world are rendered impotent if their players refuse to 
listen to their advice, and although Brad Gilbert did all in his power to 
change Andy Roddick's game he failed and they split. It took Jimmy Connors, an 
eight-times grand slam champion, to shake up Roddick's game and his five-set 
fourth-round victory over Croatia's Mario Ancic duly kept the much improved 
American on course to meet Roger Federer in the semi-finals of theAustralian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> does not have the 
raw power of Roddick, though he can already hit a mean serve and forehand. 
However, he has far more natural talent - as much as anybody in men's tennis 
except for Federer - and when Gilbert became his coach last year there was no 
need for root and branch change. The American's major influence has been to get 
the teenager to train properly and diligently.

This is what he hopes will show when Murray meets Spain's Rafael Nadal, the 
world No2, today in the Rod Laver arena, the prize being Murray's first slam 
quarter-final. It is no secret that Murray, in his younger days, was always shy 
of pushing his body to the limits on the practice courts and in the gym. Now 
the dime has dropped, as it had to. Murray's talent was always enough to take 
him to the top as a junior and ensure his fledgling professional career went 
reasonably smoothly, but now the hard graft has begun.

Federer and Roddick are big, heavy-boned men, and Murray is intent on filling 
out his upper body and strengthening his legs. He already has a huge advantage 
over Tim Henman who, for all his assiduous training, is essentially a 
lightweight in physical terms and never really had any big weapons.

Mark Grabow, who works with the Golden State Warriors basketball team, based 
in Gilbert's home town of Oakland, has trained a variety of athletes and has 
had such an influence on Murray that the youngster is keen to get back to 
California after the Australian Open in order to further test his physical 
progress.

Murray's third-round victory against Argentina's Juan Ignacio Chela, who beat 
him in the first round here last year, was compulsive if one-sided. Chela has a 
similar game to Murray, although much plainer. Apart from the opening few games 
in the first set, the Argentinian was left for dead. He is one of the game's 
great slow walkers, taking a seeming age to get from his chair to the baseline, 
although once in action he can be surprisingly fleet. He needed to be, as 
Murray worked him around the court at will. It was his best performance here, 
and one of his most complete at any of the slams.

It took Henman five years to reach the fourth round of the Australian Open; 
Murray has done it two. He may have been a little fortunate not to have played 
on one of the less sheltered courts in the middle of the day, as Henman so 
often had to do, but the security of Murray's ground strokes make it so much 
easier for him to cope when the wind gets up, as it does so often here. His win 
over Chela saw him reach the last 16 of a major for the third successive time, 
a true indication of his progress in the last year.

Murray is one of a clutch of young players gathering to challenge Federer's 
dominance. The youngest is Serbia's Novak Djokovic, who is just seven days 
Murray's junior. He has vowed to become the world No1, though all such 
aspirations were put into perspective yesterday when Federer, chasing his 10th 
slam title here, crushed the 19-year-old 6-2, 7-5, 6-3. It was a masterclass.

Federer next faces Spain's Tommy Robredo, who slipped almost unnoticed into 
the top 10 last year under the shadow of Nadal. Robredo has continued to 
confound his numerous critics by reaching the last eight, yesterday defeating 
France's hugely gifted Richard Gasquet 6-4, 6-2, 3-6, 6-4. The other 
quarter-final in the top half of the draw will be between Roddick and his 
fellow American, Mardy Fish.

"We've gotten into each other's faces numerous times, especially when we were 
younger," said Roddick after yesterday's 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, 5-7, 6-4 win over 
Ancic. If Fish, now No42, wins then Roddick would be mortified, for his eyes 
are set firmly on that Federer semi-final, and the chance of only his second 
victory over the Swiss in what would be their 14th meeting.
 