
I'm not really concerned by any criticisms that will arise over Andy's fitness 
from yesterday's defeat to Rafael Nadal. You just have to look at their 
respective records - Nadal has played in 12 grand slams, winning two, and 67 
ATP tournaments, winning 17. Andy's body is still growing, his whole physical 
well-being is being excellently looked after and that fitness will come. I 
think he has come on leaps and bounds and he'll keep progressing over the next 
two years.

As for the defeat itself, naturally Andy will be very disappointed. He will 
have seen it as a big opportunity and, considering the way in which he 
performed, I hope that he'll see it as progress. I'm sure there will be a 
couple of points that he will look back on and say, "I should have done this 
and I should have done that" but he survived so many long points and crises 
from a physical point of view that we've just got to look upon the positives 
from the match. It just shows that when you get down to this level you are 
talking about one or two points in every match that are absolutely crucial.

Anyone who knows about tennis would have realised going into the game that the 
physical side will eventual wear down anyone playing against Rafael Nadal. 
You've almost got to try to beat him in three or four sets because, once he 
gets to a fifth, physiologically you're likely to hit the wall, like in 
marathon running. It's not impossible but it's very, very difficult to go to 
five with Nadal and win the final set.

I feel Andy's now at a stage where he is sitting comfortably within his own 
tennis talent, his fitness, his technique and his mental application. He is 
very comfortable in the knowledge that he can beat anybody in the top five on 
his day and, almost as importantly, will rarely lose to a lesser opponent 
unless there is something very wrong. He has now established himself as a 
top-five player.

Brad Gilbert was an excellent appointment as Andy's coach. It was a very 
high-profile, high-risk appointment but Roger Draper [LTA chief executive] has 
shown he is happy to take risks within British tennis. Some will come off and 
some won't, but the public must not get on his back if sometimes that's the 
case. This one will eventually pay off because everyone can now see Andy is a 
potential grand slam winner over the next four to five years.

It would be nice to think we have got people behind Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> but being realistic he has 
always been an exceptional talent. From under the age of 10 he was always 
competing three years ahead of his age group and we don't have any other 
players in the game at the moment who are two or three years above their age 
group at that standard. What we want to concentrate on are the players that we 
currently have - the Alex Bogdanovics, the Josh Goodalls, the Richard 
Bloomfields, the Alan Makins - to try and get them, with the help of Peter 
Lundgren (Great Britain's Davis Cup coach) and Paul Annacone (head coach of 
men's tennis), into the top 100 and then inspire the players beneath them.

One thing I'm sure of is that British tennis will be able to piggy-back even 
more off Andy Murray than it did off of Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski because 
Andy will appeal to a younger audience. If he is marketed and promoted properly 
he can catch the eye of those who are just starting off in tennis and also the 
players who are already in the system. That is the most important thing from my 
point of view.

Over the next two years people will come to like and respect Andy for the 
character he is. We've been very used to Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski for many 
years but with Andy we will get to know his personality more and he will become 
well liked by the British public because he's maturing by the minute.

In terms of the year ahead for Andy, with Roger Federer and Nadal around it's 
rather like Tim having Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi to contend with. There is 
always a stumbling block and he is going to have to get through those players. 
A grand-slam semi-final would be exceptional, top 10 at the end of the year 
would be great and top five would be beyond all expectations.

Long term, I do see a grand slam winner but the general public should not to 
expect too much too soon and we must all be educated towards the growing pains 
that Andy will go through during the year.

Paul Hutchins, former Great Britain Davis Cup captain, is the Lawn Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association's head of men's tennis
 