
What a difference a year makes. Same court, same player, one year on and a 
first-round loss turned into a third-round victory.Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> took another important step 
towards assuming his place among the game's elite with an impressive 6-3 6-2 
6-4 win over the experienced Argentine Juan Ignacio Chela under the roof of the 
Vodafone Arena at Melbourne Park.

This was easily the best of Murray's three matches so far - all of them 
against Spanish-speaking opposition. Poor Alberto Martin was allowed only one 
game, but Fernando Verdasco's dangerous forehand troubled Murray to such an 
extent that he was behind twice in the first two sets, but he still prevailed 
and now goes into a fascinating fourth-round encounter against another 
Spaniard, world No 2 Rafael Nadal, not having dropped a set. Nadal conceded one 
to Germany's talented Philipp Kohlschreiber in the second round.

Not too much should be read into that because Nadal appeared to be running 
into ominous form as he swept past the young Swiss Stanislas Wawrinka 6-2 6-2 
6-2 on Friday. But as a reality check on exactly how far Murray has come these 
past 12 months, the challenge presented by the powerful left-hander will do 
nicely.

'Nadal is the only top player I have never played,' Murray said. 'He's a 
player I respect a lot and it will be a good test for me. I feel like I have a 
game that can cause him some problems.'

Last year Chela had beaten Murray 6-1 6-3 6-3 in the opening round. There was 
never the remotest hint of such an outcome this time as the 19-year-old Scot 
manoeuvred his opponent about the court at will, deftly changing the pace and 
direction of his backhand and sprinkling his well-oiled game with highly 
effective drop shots.

'I played really well,' Murray said after being cheered off court by fans 
waving Scottish flags. 'I served great the whole match and was able to control 
the rallies off the ground once I had found my range.'

The statistics bear that out. Murray had a first-serve success rate of 71 per 
cent and hit 42 winners, often as a result of sending Chela the wrong way. He 
also worked his way to the net effectively and won 19 of 26 rallies that 
finished with a volley.

The difference from the slightly dishevelled and dejected figure we saw on 
this court a year ago offered a stark reminder of how quickly Murray has grown 
into a formidable competitor. Revealing the class that was always there and the 
maturity that has blossomed under Brad Gilbert's tutelage, Murray allowed 
himself only the occasional barrage of self-abuse that often appears to be 
directed at his coach but is used simply as a way to keep the adrenalin pumping.

It was required on occasion in the third set when Chela broke back twice as 
Murray's concentration slipped, but, in truth, there was never anything to 
worry about once he got on court. His match had been scheduled originally for 
the open-air Margaret Court arena at 7.30pm, but was eventually moved to the 
covered arena after James Blake had beaten Robby Ginepri in straight sets. But 
the starting time by then was 9.30pm, the time Murray had gone to bed the 
previous evening. Waiting around for an uncertain start time is one of the 
challenges a player has to accept and Murray seemed content enough when he 
wandered into the press restaurant at tea time to share a snack with his 
girlfriend Kim Sears and the BBC's Chris Bailey.

There is still much to be learnt about this remarkable young Scot. The sharp 
edge to his personality is there for all to see in the heat of battle, but 
there is scant evidence of it when the smoke clears. Asked if what had happened 
against Chela last year had helped him to step up a gear, Murray said: 'No, I 
don't think so. I wasn't thinking, you know, I want to get revenge on this guy. 
I was just thinking I want to get through to the fourth round of theAustralian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Anyway, he's a really 
nice guy.'

But Murray's progress into the fourth round, which equals his best at a grand 
slam after similar achievements at Wimbledon and the US Open last year, was 
only part of the story of a steamy, rain-drenched night. The other part 
concerned what was going on simultaneously at the Rod Laver Arena. While a Brit 
had been winning, an Australian had been losing, and not just any old Aussie. 
Lleyton Hewitt left his once proud tennis nation bereft of players in the 
second week for the second year running by succumbing to the relentless power 
of the Chilean Fernando Gonzalez 6-2 6-2 5-7 6-4.

Gonzalez, who finished last year ranked No 9 in the world, is coached by Larry 
Stefanki, who had a spell with Tim Henman and nearly accepted an offer to work 
with Murray. Stefanki opted for Gonzalez because he did not want to commit to 
as much time on the road as Murray wanted. It seems to be working for both 
parties, with Stefanki at ease with the soft-spoken Chilean and Murray 
apparently learning how to deal with the constantly upbeat and voluble Gilbert. 
If only the same could be said of Hewitt's relationships. Roger Rasheed walked 
out two weeks ago after taking one tongue lashing too many, just as Jason 
Stoltenberg had done a couple of years before. Where this latest defeat leaves 
Hewitt and his new coach Scott Draper is anyone's guess. The player does not 
seem certain of anything. 'Sitting down and talking about the future with Scott 
is the last thing on my mind at the moment,' Hewitt said. 'Scott's been great 
but, apart from needing more matches, I don't know what I am going to do now.'

Nor could the women's draw provide solace for the home fans. Melbourne's 
Alicia Molik, thankfully fit again after health problems, started brightly 
against No 8 seed Patty Schnyder but was eventually outplayed by the talented 
Swiss 3-6 6-2 6-0. Schnyder's compatriot Martina Hingis was just as impressive, 
beating Japan's Aiko Nakamura 6-2 6-1, while Maria Sharapova was at her 
imperious best against Italy's Tathiana Garbin, winning 6-3 6-1.
 