
Even as North Carolina’s governor, Pat McCrory, refused to comply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/09/lgbt-bathroom-bill-north-carolina-justice-department>
 with federal officials over his state’s so-called “bathroom bill”, 
experimental pop group Animal Collective went forward with its scheduled show 
in the state over the weekend.

It’s not because the band supports the anti-LGBT law that limits bathroom 
access by birth gender. They are part of a growing movement by performers to 
take a different tack.

Rather than boycott the state, as many businesses and performers have, they 
invitedProgress NC Action <http://www.progressncaction.org/> staff members to 
the show, where communications director Logan Smith collected hundreds of 
signatures on a petition against House Bill 2. They have since offered 
downloads of recent concerts on a “pay what you wish” basis to raise funds for 
LGBT organizations.

The new movement, NC Needs You <http://www.ncneedsyou.com/>, has lured major 
artists such as Beyoncé, Mumford and Sons and Duran Duran to come to North 
Carolina as planned, and turn their concerts into fundraisers and activism in 
opposition to the law.

Just after HB2 became law overnight in North Carolina, Bruce Springsteen 
announced his intentions tocancel a concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/08/bruce-springsteen-cancels-north-carolina-concert-lgbt-discrimination-law>
 there. Ringo Starr, Pearl Jam and Demi Lovato followed. They made major public 
statements by cancelling their appearances.

Similar boycotts from major businesses followed, modeling other states that 
have grappled with anti-LGBT laws, including Indiana, where a “religious 
freedom” law prompted a swift national boycott.

But in those early weeks of April, Grayson Haver Currin and Tina Haver Currin, 
who work in media and advertising in the state, were concerned by Springsteen’s 
decision and the boycotts that they were sure would follow. They wanted to 
protect service industry workers and others from being hurt by the boycotts and 
to strengthen the opposition movement, which is mobilizing not just to gather 
signatures on petitions, but also answering calls to crisis hotlines from young 
transgender people who feel threatened by the state’s social climate in the 
wake of the controversial law.

“The community feels embattled and targeted,” said Matt Hirschy, director of 
advancement forEquality NC <http://equalitync.org/>, the state’s largest and 
oldest LGBT advocacy group. “When performers go on stage, make a statement and 
stand in solidarity, they’re saying to the community: ‘They see me. They value 
me.’”

Mumford and Sons were the first band to respond to the Currins. After building 
a website with the logo “NC Needs You – Don’t Cancel Your Show” and a list of 
14 nonprofit organizations in need of support, the couple found themselves 
backstage at a sold-out Mumford concert in Charlotte’s basketball arena, where 
they spoke to the band for three hours about the fledgling effort. Several 
weeks later, the bandannounced on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/mumfordandsons/posts/10154192979128793> that it was 
donating funds to three nonprofit organizations and setting up a fund to 
support other causes.

Several days later, Duran Duran also decided not to cancel a scheduled concert 
and the band’s frontman, Simon Le Bon, spoke to another Charlotte crowd about 
his support for the LGBT community, standing in front of a hugeAmerican flag 
<http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/1106-op-ed-north-carolinas-transgender-fight-needs-musicians-to-show-up/>
 with rainbow stripes.

“I can promise you some politics-free entertainment for about an hour, maybe a 
little longer. And then, well, there’s something we’re going to have a little 
chat about,” Le Bon told the crowd.

In early May, Beyoncé rolled into town. Although she said nothing about HB2 or 
the NC Needs You effort from the stage in Raleigh that night, the next day she 
posted astatement  
<http://www.beyonce.com/equality-nc-formation-world-tour-north-carolina/>on her 
website, complete with a photo of an Equality NC T-shirt bearing the slogan 
“Y’all Means All”.

Hirschy said her statement generated a significant boost in visibility for the 
Equality Now movement. “We gained a thousand followers on Twitter the next 
day,” he said.

James Miller, executive director of the LGBT Center of Raleigh 
<http://www.lgbtcenterofraleigh.com/> – also mentioned on the NC Needs You site 
– said that increased visibility is important for organizations such as his, 
which provides direct services such as youth programs and confidential HIV 
testing. Since HB2 passed, he said, his center has seen an eightfold increase 
in calls compared to the same month a year ago.

Still, he added, LGBT people in need of services may still be unaware of the 
center. Recently, heavy metal group Styx approached Miller about mentioning the 
center during a concert scheduled for 18 May. “This helps spread awareness,” he 
said. “Say a father goes to Styx, and he has a queer son. Now he knows we 
exist.”

Grayson, who is the managing editor for the local alt-weekly newspaper, says 
he is skeptical about state lawmakers repealing HB2, no matter how much 
pressure is exerted by activists. “A lot depends on the DoJ lawsuit,” he said. 
At the same time, he hopes that the combined efforts of the groups benefitting 
from increased support and visibility will lead to votes for more progressive 
candidates in this year’s statewide elections – including for governor. “HB2 is 
a symptom of a larger issue,” he said.

Larry Chavis, a professor at the University of North Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina>, said that many races for 
state office this year will feature candidates running unopposed, so 
legislators may have little incentive to consider reversing their position on 
the law.

“In an election year, (this issue) has a certain intensity,” Chavis said. 
“Some folks here can’t even get their heads around what transgender is. I hope 
that changes with time.”

And given the likely duration of the fight in North Carolina and elsewhere, 
Grayson hopes other places will adopt similar efforts.

“We don’t think boycotts are a bad strategy. Springsteen made a shot across 
the bow and it was important to draw attention to the issue. But in terms of 
long-term interest, momentum and financial support … maybe we have set up a 
model for people to adapt to their own situations.”
 