


A thrash metal band, a melancholy singer and an acid punk quartet are among 
the eclectic lineup of musicians the government are funding to break into the 
international music scene.

The scheme – announced on Thursday by the trade minister Lord Livingston – has 
seen the Department for UK Trade and Investment join forces with BPI, the trade 
body for the British music industry, to select 14 bands deemed worthy of grants 
to bring their live music to foreign ears.

The UKTI said it hoped the diverse musicians, which include the electro outfit 
Metronomy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/metronomy> and Scottish hip-hop 
collective Young Fathers, would use the funding to become the next Bastille, 
Passenger, London Grammar or Alt-J, who all enjoyed commercial success overseas 
last year.

The bands had to go through a rigorous process of selection for the Music 
Export Growth Scheme grants that offer a total £250,000. Each band put forward 
a detailed proposal for an international music or festival project.

These were then put in front of a board of 14 music professionals – who have 
remained anonymous – but whose experience covered "all music genres selected 
labels, publishing, management, live and international departments" according 
to a departmental spokesperson.

The chair of the board was music industry mogul John Kennedy who described the 
range of applications as filled with a "breadth of talent, enthusiasm, passion 
and enthusiasm".

Almost 200 bands applied for the grants, with the final 14 representing a 
wide-varying range of genres and tastes as British musical ambassadors.

Among the musical escapades receiving grants are a European tour for indie 
outfit Band of Skulls, who have made three albums, funding for soul songwriter 
Charli Taft to attend writing camps in Copenhagen and a US tour for the pop duo 
Smoke Fairies. Other successful acts include Bo Ningen, Christian Gregory, 
Julia Biel, Skinny Lister and Lulu James.

The artists said they were honoured to be among those selected as the best of 
new British musical talent worthy of a global audience.

Sheffield duo Slow Club said: "We've toured America a few times now but it's 
an expensive business and making it work can sometimes be difficult. Being able 
to head out there again is really exciting.

"Aside from playing two nights at the Hollywood Bowl I plan to complete my US 
state fridge magnet collection by the end of our album campaign. Thank you BPI 
Music Export Scheme. We owe you a pint."

These sentiments were echoed by Matt Bigland from the Leeds rock group 
Dinosaur Pile-Up, who described the difference the funding would make to his 
band.

"This opportunity is awesome and we are really grateful to the BPI for showing 
faith in our band," he said.

"There is so much amazing British music and so it is even more special to be 
supported in this way – I think the belief the BPI has in us reflects the time 
and effort that the whole band and label team has put in over the last 12 
months in North America."

He continued: " We are climbing the US radio chart, making waves at press and 
are about to jump on a huge support tour over the summer which will see us play 
in front of over 10,000 people a night.

"This will be our third nationwide tour and this funding really does allow us 
to attack these live shows properly and present our music in the best way 
possible; for that we are eternally grateful – it really does make a huge 
difference to the performances we can give – which at the end of the day is 
what it is all about."

Livingston said he hoped the talented bands involved in the scheme would help 
bring jobs and economic growth to the UK through exports.

"The British music industry is a global success story," he said. "From The 
Beatles to Adele to Mumford & Sons, Britannia rules the airwaves and sells more 
records around the world than almost any other country.

"This exporting strength brings jobs and economic growth to the UK and the 
Music Export Growth Scheme lets up-and-coming British artists up the tempo on 
the international stage."
 