
A Muslim convert who targeted members of the public as part of a campaign for 
a sharia state in Britain has been given a groundbreaking asbo, police have 
said.

Jordan Horner, 20, from northeast London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has been ordered to stop preaching in 
public, in a legal first.

He had taken part in vigilante patrols and street protests promoting extreme 
versions ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> in the city's East 
End.

He is also thought to have distributed leaflets and posters advertising a 
"sharia controlled zone" in Waltham Forest, the Metropolitan police said.

Horner appeared at the Old Bailey on Friday, where a series of restrictions 
were imposed.

Among these was an order not to meet with Anjem Choudary, Royal Barnes, 
Ricardo McFarlane or Dean Le Page "except for peaceful worship inside a mosque 
or other Islamic cultural centre".

Barnes, 23, of Hackney, east London, this week pleaded guilty to posting 
videos on YouTube glorifying the horrific killing of FusilierLee Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/lee-rigby> in May last year.

Barnes and his wife, Rebekah Dawson, 22, recorded and uploaded three videos 
shortly after the murder in Woolwich, south London.

In one of the videos posted through his Musa Real Talks account, Barnes hailed 
the murder as a "brilliant day".

In a followup, he mocked the outpouring of public grief, laughing 
uncontrollably as he drove past floral tributes.

He admitted three counts of disseminating a terrorist publication and one of 
inciting murder during a hearing at the Old Bailey. He is currently awaiting 
sentence.

He was also told he must not be in possession of a loudhailer in public or 
enter any educational establishment, unless he is a student there.

As well as being forbidden to preach and hand out leaflets in support of 
sharia law, Horner was banned from defacing public adverts.

The Met said: "Waltham Forest is one of London's most culturally diverse 
boroughs with almost half of its 235,000 residents being of a minority ethnic 
origin and from a multitude of religious backgrounds.

"Discrimination and persecution based on a person's cultural or religious 
background is something the police or council will not tolerate.

Chief Superintendent Mark Collins – Waltham Forest borough's commander – said: 
"The granting of an asbo against Jordan Horner sends a clear message that 
extremist behaviour will not be tolerated on our streets."

The asbo will run for five years and be in effect throughout London.
 