
Maybe 10 days ago, T took a violent dislike to the bath. It was weird - one 
day he considered it, correctly I think, a watery play-park, full of small 
plastic squirting characters and books about dirty pigs. And the next day he 
acted like I'd breaded him and dipped him in hot fat. Seriously. He was not 
just a little bit angry. He was Mr Livid. So I got him straight out. C said he 
must be having an allergic reaction. That seemed to make sense, until we put 
him to bed, and thought about it for a while, and said, nobody's allergic to a 
bath. That's not a real allergy. That's like a playground taunt. You're 
allergic to the bath, and your mum wears hobnail boots, and your dad is a homo 
tied to a tree.

So day two, I put him in the bath, and he went nuts again, and I persisted. 
When yelling did not have the split-second response he is used to, he tried 
another tack, which was climbing out of the bath. I have to admit, I was 
impressed. He looked like Andy McNab, only really small and, of course, naked. 
Don't tell me Andy McNab has never been naked in a sticky situation. So I got 
him out again. This time, C said maybe the gene which we heretofore thought 
he'd avoided - the Williams hatred of getting wet - was finally revealing 
itself. It is true that I hate having a wash of any sort, though I do it 
because I am a slave to convention. My sister, S, barely washes at all. I think 
she had her second child precisely so she could grandly say, "I only have time 
to wash two people a day," and only the most craven idiot would think one of 
those people would be her. But you can't smell her coming, which is more than 
you can say for my brother.

If this is the case, then T has to get over it. It's not the 70s, he can't 
just smell and hope people will think that's cool. So we decided to bath him in 
the morning, thinking maybe if he wasn't tired, he'd be more, you know, open to 
new ideas. Well, old ideas. That didn't work at all. He vented all the rage of 
the evening bath, with a topnote of outraged betrayal; his angry face said: "I 
get out of bed to see you people, and then you do ... you do ... THIS! How can 
I ever trust you again?" Etc, etc.

I asked S about this and she said both of hers did it, they just got over it 
in a few days. So I was all in favour of just leaving him caked in yoghurt. 
It's not like it's going to grow a culture, is it? It's a Petit Filou, all the 
culture is killed off with xanthan gum. C refused to be governed by this 
capricious hygiene avoidance, and pressed on with the morning bath. It went OK, 
but I tried to do it again the next day, and I decided it wasn't worth it. The 
following day, I was in on my own, and I just pretended I'd done it. The day 
after, I experimented with a shower, and I can usefully impart that this was so 
incredibly misguided, from so many angles, it's amazing that the worst thing 
that happened was that I ended up the wettest (I really do not like this, and I 
like it even less with my clothes on).

So we fetch up today, and C is out again (he probably isn't watching the 
football at all; he's probably out looking for a clean, new family), and T and 
I were just watching telly, in readiness for a bath-free bedtime, when I felt 
the back of his head. In our defence, there wasn't anything in his hair, it 
wasn't like you could grab a great big bit of chewing gum, or a cowpat. But it 
was sort of sticky, hard to put your finger on (harder to get your finger off). 
You just have to imagine a person who routinely rubs jam and toast and 
plasticine and mud all over himself, and then imagine what his hair feels like. 
He could have trapped insects in it.

"This is not funny, T," I told him. "You have to be cleaner than this. Even 
your uncle cannot trap flies in his hair." He didn't say anything, but we went 
on to have an incredibly fast, uneventful bath, like the old days. I didn't 
even think he'd remembered who his uncle was; not only does he remember him, 
he's an anti-role-model. So that's cool.
 