
Are you healthy? I like a glass of wine, but I don't smoke, I run regularly, 
and being a vegetarian I'm probably healthy by default. 

Ever spent a night in hospital? Yes, when I was nine and had my tonsils out. 
Two children contracted foot and mouth disease, so our whole ward was sectioned 
off and we weren't allowed visitors unless they were sterilised. I cried every 
day for the 10 days I was in there – at nine I understood what depression was.

Notable accidents? Once I was the 33rd car in a 33-car pile-up, so I wasn't 
actually hurt myself.

What exercise do you take? I run and run and run; it gets my endorphins going, 
it gives me an hour to think, and I get a load of fresh air. I ran the London 
marathon with my mum last year and I loved it – apart from giving birth to 
Lexie, it was the happiest day of my life.

How much do you drink? Every night after Lexie's gone to bed, I have a glass 
of sauvignon blanc with some ice in it while watching EastEnders – it's my 
reward.

Have you ever had therapy? After my divorce I went to a therapist once. I felt 
cured and never went back. I talk quite openly about my feelings, and I'm lucky 
in that I have lots of close friends soI've always got someone I can turn to.

How do you feel about cosmetic surgery? I'd never be able to go under the 
knife because I have a skin condition which means I overproduce scar tissue, 
but I'm all for anything to make anyone feel better. If they invent something 
that doesn't involve a knife I'll definitely be having it in the future. I was 
quoted as saying I'd never use Botox again – what I actually said was: "Never 
say never", but I haven't had any for months.

NHS or private? I have a brilliant NHS doctor who I see with Lexie all the 
time, and I have a private doctor because, for instance, I separated Lexie's 
MMR jab. 

Is sex important to you? Yes. It brings you closer to your partner, and having 
someone who makes you feel sexy and who desires you is the best compliment in 
the world… Although I don't have as much of it as I used to – I have a 
four-year-old child – but it's still important. I still wear matching 
underwear!★

Amanda Holden's Fantasy Lives starts 26 January on ITV1 at 9pm 
 