
Watching England writhing horribly against West Indies in Chennai this week 
was a strangely familiar experience, partly because it represented just another 
flaky layer in the crazedmille-feuille of the current World Cup campaign, and 
partly because I was simultaneously watching archive footage of England 
writhing horribly against West Indies 30 years ago to the day during the 
Barbados Test of 1981. England lost by nearly 300 runs on that occasion, a 
notably low ebb in the brief captaincy career ofIan Botham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ian-botham>.

As it turned out it was also the opening act in the most epically cinematic 
summer of Test cricket England has staged, the 1981 Ashes. I have been helping 
with the script of a documentary film about that summer called FromThe Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes>, which will be in cinemas in May. It 
tells the story of the triptych of Test epics at Headingley, Edgbaston and Old 
Trafford over two grainy, sweaty months that also took in the wedding of Prince 
Charles and Lady Diana Spencer and the Ghost Town-era summer riots of early 
high Thatcherism.

The list of memorable cricket films is short (although it does include the 
2008 Australian addition to the cricket-slasher genre, I Know How Many Runs You 
Scored Last Summer). Hopefully this one will at least be as much fun to watch 
as it has been to watch take shape. There have been many treats, not least 
reviewing the radio and TV archive of the time. Test Match Special can 
sometimes veer towards a drivetime-paced cacophony of samey‑ness but it really 
was a wonderful oddity back then. Key TMS moments during 1981's big Headingley 
turnaround included a lengthy and entirely straight discussion of the correct 
way to address a bishop in written correspondence ("The Most Reverend"), a 
saliva-drenched interlude of almost silent on-air cake-munching and a bit where 
Fred Trueman's musings on Graham Dilley are accompanied by a loud and 
persistent "ching! ching!" noise, which proves to be Trueman lighting his pipe.

Plus there is the marvel of Richie Benaud's hair in its early middle-aged 
pomp, a miraculous silver turban of densely fronded uber-grooming. But mainly 
what strikes you looking back is the general sense of otherworldliness, the 
complete making over of every surface of our urban landscape since, right down 
to the spindly people, jarringly gawky and unself-conscious as they caper about 
on unfenced boundary edges.

There are so many elements to the story – captaincy, class, empire – that 
perhaps the biggest surprise is the ascent throughout of one of the most 
familiar. My first thought had been: maybe this isn't just a story about 
Botham. Perhaps Botham could be cast more broadly as an icon of changing times, 
a triangulation of early 1980s power fringes alongside Di and Thatch. And there 
are many other fascinating actors in the piece, notably the Australians Rod 
Marsh and Kim Hughes. Really, though, what comes through still is the 
self-contained brilliance of Botham's deeds, a refresher of the strident purity 
of early Botham, uncobwebbed by three decades of subsequent superlatives.

My first proper glimpse of Botham came during his later pomp-rock persona. 
These were the peroxide mullet years, when he seemed to play not so much to 
defeat the opposition as to smite the Daily Mail, to garner enough leg room for 
a brief, ringlet-tossing gesture of on-field defiance. In the decades since 
Botham has become a doggedly harrumphing pundit, a charitable fundraising 
phenomenon and ultimately the curator of his own weighty legend, porting about 
with him the imprint of his own supreme Beefiness.

In the film early untarnished Botham is revived swooningly intact. It isn't 
just his helmet-less, Grecian features, or the freewheeling paunchy charisma. 
It's the figures too. By the time England went back to Australia to defend (and 
lose) the urn in 1982-83 Botham had played 54 Tests, scored 11 hundreds and 
taken 249 wickets at 23 with 20 five-fors. Botham, pre-back injuries, was a 
cold, hard, statistical phenomenon.

Really, though, it was outline, that basic swing and zap, that transformed a 
summer that has a natural narrative arc from the low of the second Test at 
Lord's where Botham bagged a pair and resigned as captain, through the 
appointment of Mike Brearley in his place, a move that looks even more 
extraordinary in cinematic review. Brearley was 13 years Botham's senior. 
Together they look like one of those 
flinty-older-man-plus-athletic-younger-guy-in-slacks M&S menswear adverts, but 
driven by Brearley's piercing intelligence they would produce a lovely, 
fruitful, inspiring partnership.

The major turning point of the series, Botham's rearguard 149 at Headingley, 
remains extraordinary as much for its sense of hungover intensity, a grunting, 
belt-unbuckling, kebab-burping triumph of muscle-cricket. Whereas the crowning 
moment, his masterly hundred at Old Trafford, provides the clearest reminder of 
just how luminous he was then, a man entirely possessed by the moment. Watching 
this England team in India, an austere, refined, processed collection of 
sportsmen, early Botham's hall-of-famer uniqueness stands out even more 
starkly. England really do have nothing like him now – and they've had nothing 
like him since.
 