
Anthony Horowitz <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz>’s new 
play imagines as farce what would happen if Saddam Hussein came to dinner. But 
anyone who criticisesDinner with Saddam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/22/dinner-with-saddam-review> as 
inappropriate in the fun it has with Iraqis’ fear of the dictator, bite your 
tongue. It’s in line with Iraqi culture to make fun of our own misery, although 
never about Saddam while he was still ruling.

Fear of Saddam took over every Iraqi heart and mind. He was everywhere and 
anywhere, and any stray negative thought about him made us watch our backs. As 
a child, I grew up watching hours and hours of TV coverage of him surprising 
families in the middle of the afternoon by entering their kitchens and opening 
their refrigerators. I guess this was a dictator’s version of a reality show; 
the entire country could peer into people’s cupboards and see what they were 
having for lunch. I didn’t understand why he revealed the intimate lives of 
people on national TV until the night my family and I had dinner with Saddam.

It wasn’t one dinner but years of lunches and dinners, because my father was 
his private pilot. At times, my parents would be in their bed falling asleep 
when suddenly they had to wake up and entertain Saddam in the middle of the 
night, making sure that they looked bright and excited.

He was charismatic and engaging, but he also spread fear. In the midst of one 
family lunch he asked everyone what they thought of Napoleon. At face value, 
you would think that’s just a lunch conversation among friends. And that is 
indeed how one friend answered, saying: “Napoleon is a man who rolled down from 
the hill of power as fast he rose up to it.” Saddam answered: “Are you 
referring to Napoleon or are you referring to Napoleon [referring to himself]?” 
If there is such thing as air leaving the room, then that was that moment. His 
switch from friendliness to anger was common, and we all knew he killed friends 
and relatives; no one would be spared.

My family and their friend survived that incident, but it was impossible to 
avoid all faux pas. At another dinner, we were surprised to find juicy grapes. 
My mother’s friend could not contain her excitement. “What do you mean?”he told 
her. “All of Iraqis have access to this grape.” Everyone froze. It was not 
true: at times, Iraqis lined for hours to get even basic food items such as 
eggs or chicken.

Saddam was the Mary Antoinette of Iraq; he thought everyone had what he had, 
while most of his population were terrified, short of food, and mourning the 
deaths of those who died in the three wars he’d put the country through. Yet he 
believed he was loved.

Today, Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> has lost one third of its 
territories to Isis, and with the sectarian war and insecurity since 2003, many 
ask if it was not better during Saddam’s time. Fear of Saddam penetrated into 
every aspect of our lives. I would never want to return back to such darkness. 
But these days are dark, too.

Zainab Salbi is the Iraqi author of Between Two Worlds: Escape from Tyranny – 
Growing up in the Shadow of Saddam, and founder of Women for Women International
.
 