
Johnny Marr
Manchester Apollo


Most famous for co-forming and playing guitar with the Smiths, Johnny Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnnymarr> went on to perform with 
Electronic, the The, Modest Mouse and most recently the Cribs. He is now 
working on solo material.

The Apollo has been in my life for as long as I can remember. I used to go 
there when I was about six or seven, when it was called the ABC cinema, to see 
Flash Gordon movies, which were dated even then. I lived two streets away and 
it was an exciting place to have on your doorstep.

In the late 70s, bigger new wave bands such as Buzzcocks and Blondie started 
playing the Apollo, which, to be honest, took some time for me to love as a 
music venue. I initially preferred the Free Trade Hall, which is just a bit 
more rock'n'roll. I used to sneak in there with my mates.

Sneaking in to the Apollo was harder and involved shinning up a drainpipe and 
into the girls' toilet. You'd arrange in advance for a girl to make sure the 
window was open and, just before the main band came on, one of us would climb 
up the drainpipe and through a tiny window. Then you'd run down the backstairs, 
boot the door open and eight scraggly punk kids would run in. It was mostly me 
who was on drainpipe duty because I was the youngest and smallest.

When I was about 13 or 14, I saw Patti Smith at the Apollo and it had a 
profound effect on me. I was right up close to the stage and before she came on 
she played a short film that was pretentious and mysterious and druggy but in a 
good way. The show was an exercise in rock'n'roll as transcendence, like 
standing in front of a portal into another dimension. I was peering into a 
different life and I just wanted to climb in and stay there – so I did. The 
next morning, I did my paper round in even more of a trance than usual.

I never played the Apollo with the Smiths – the first time I played there was 
on the Red Wedge tour with Billy Bragg and Paul Weller in 1986. I was terrified 
because I wasn't with my own band and because it was the Apollo, which had 
massive significance for me. I grew up with tales of the Beatles playing there, 
so it was like being a footballer and playing Wembley.

The best gig I played at the Apollo was with the Cribs in 2009, because they 
knew of the significance of the venue beyond its size. Not every band is as 
concerned with legacy and continuity but the ones I've been in always were. So 
we sometimes picked venues to play on tour against advice. You're often told 
not to play classic venues as you can make more money elsewhere but if people 
are still talking about a gig you played years later, that can be more 
important than the money you make. There are lots of considerations when 
putting a tour together, but I usually just picture the stage and what the 
night might be like and hope everybody else agrees.

There's a grandeur about the Apollo. It was there before British pop culture 
emerged and it's run all the way through it right up to now. I think it will 
always be there.GG
 ‘It feels like the place aches, like it will crumble at any time.’ 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
Hayden Thorpe of Wild Beasts, Wilton's Music Hall, London E1

Kendal four-piece Wild Beasts <https://www.theguardian.com/music/wild-beasts>, 
fronted by Hayden Thorpe, released their third album, Smother, last May. They 
now live in east London

We came across Wilton's <http://www.wiltons.org.uk/> when we were looking for 
a special venue to debutSmother 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/may/05/wild-beasts-smother-review>. We 
were desperate to perform the album in a personal and human place, somewhere 
that had history and had aged, be it cruelly or beautifully. As soon as we saw 
Wilton's we knew it was what we were looking for. It's the oldest surviving 
music hall in the world and it feels like the place aches, like it's about to 
crumble at any minute. In fact, they are in desperate need of investment at the 
moment to keep the place alive.

We almost didn't play the show in the end because of the costs involved. 
Ready-made music venues have sound systems and all the logistical preparations 
you need, but this is a shell, a place almost of the pre-electricity age. Even 
the stage was sloping slightly, so one of the main things was to get Chris, our 
drummer, down to see if he could actually play on it without toppling over. But 
it was fantastic: we played two really memorable nights. I think anyone would 
rather the dust and the slight edge of antiquity than a sticky carpet and 
whatever else comes with today's venues.

Unique venues are a dying breed in Britain. It's the typical story of the 
dampening down of all the edges that really made our towns individual and our 
high streets quirky. As all the venues get bought out by the big boys, they 
become standardised. This has an impact on young musicians and bands: how do 
you make music for that sort of atmosphere? It creates a platform for big, 
standardised music needed to fill these big voids of rooms.

Culturally, it's a tragedy. When we tour in France, the government has 
invested so much money in these really beautiful modern venues. The creative 
arts are one of Britain's biggest exports – we generate huge income for the 
country through our work – but the government seems to think that they will 
survive in spite of cutbacks. They won't. You cut the umbilical cord and 
they're going to starve.

There are some great big venues in the UK, such as the Shepherd's Bush Empire, 
but when you put on a gig at somewhere such as Wilton's, people have to get 
their map out and find out how to get there. It's a bit of an adventure and 
isn't that what art is supposed to do? It's meant to take you out of your 
everyday, give you a shake up and broaden your world a little bit. KF
 ‘It’s on the edgy side – a legal pub with a semi-illegal flavour.’ 
Photograph: Katherine Rose for the Observer 
Roots Manuva, The Macbeth, Hoxton, London N1


Renowned as one of the UK's finest rappers, Roots Manuva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/roots-manuva> grew up in south London and 
now lives in Tottenham. His latest album, 4everevolution, was released last 
October.

If you happen to be out and about in Hoxton, you're guaranteed to see 
something interestingat the Macbeth <http://www.themacbeth.co.uk/>. It's on 
such a nutty road. Hoxton Street connects with Curtain Road, the trendy, 
creative part with the fashion school. But near the pub, it's like a whole 
different planet – people getting shot in the fish and chip shop, a crazy 
council estate and a sixth form college. It's got a mad energy.

The Macbeth attracts such a wide range of performers – from CocknBullKid to 
Muse – that it always seems to have a different vibe. I had my 37th birthday 
party there three years ago. I suppose I wanted to celebrate with people who'd 
been into my records over the years. We put together a band that was supposed 
to comprise every band I've had, a really nutty bunch of musicians doing weird 
renditions of tunes without rehearsing. It was like a crazy circus, that night.

The Macbeth doesn't have the mega-corporate feeling a lot of clubs in London 
have. It's owned and run by musicians and DJs and promoters – it's a really 
good example of creative people handling business, keeping the balance between 
out-and-out entrepreneurship and being true to exposing new ideas and new 
talent. Another thing is, the staff are really into their sound. So they 
actually got a new sound system and insulated it so they weren't making too 
much noise.

The physical place is a bit on the edgy side. The lighting's pretty basic. And 
backstage? You must be crazy! At times, it's been like a constant building 
site, the toilets have not worked or flooded, but that adds to the griminess of 
it – it's a legal pub, but it's got a semi-illegal flavour.

So many bands I've seen there, a few years later they're in the charts. I 
remember seeing Example, and then the next thing, he's in the Top 20. It's 
almost like a training ground.

Running a good live music venue is such a complicated thing. It's about 
attention to the detail, not having the music as just an afterthought. 
Nowadays, the UK is generally a good place to see new creativity. But at times, 
when it seems like the big breweries have control over a lot of venues, you 
need more independent places so there's a better range.GKR
 ‘It encourages you to play well.’ Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
Anna Calvi
Royal Festival Hall, London SE1 


London-born singer-songwriter Anna Calvi's debut album was on last year's 
Mercury prize shortlist and has been nominated for this year's Brit awards.

I did a concert at the Royal Festival Hall last year for Meltdown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/19/meltdown-2011-davies-sexsmith-calvi>
. It's a really beautiful venue. The sound is excellent and you feel like 
you're somewhere with a very rich heritage. I remember feeling rather 
intimidated by all the people sitting in front of me and in the boxes above. 
But a venue like that encourages you to play well. If you go onstage and people 
are talking and drinking and hanging out with friends, there's less pressure on 
you to perform in the most beautifully perfect way that you can.

I've seen some great concerts the Royal Festival Hall there and it 
accommodates lots of different styles of music. A few years ago, there was a 
festival for Messiaen and I remember it was really incredible. The following 
year I saw Patti Smith play there 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jun/19/review-patti-smith-meltdown-festival>
. Somehow, it felt appropriate for both types of music.

You can't beat a sweaty club for great atmosphere, but different venues are 
good for different things and this is one for people who really want to listen. 
It suited my music, too. It allowed me to play quieter songs and really make 
the most of all the dynamics and subtleties of the music, and as a performer 
it's really nice to be able to do that.

London has some amazing venues – Bush Hall, Shepherd's Bush Empire – but 
smaller venues are in trouble. Some really good places, such as the Spitz in 
Spitalfields, have closed down. When I was unsigned, I found a lot of the 
smaller venues quite uninspiring. If you're booked into somewhere smelly and 
ugly with bad sound, it makes a difference to how you perform.

I think it's part of a bigger problem: there is a general lack of respect in 
this country for fledgling musicians. Often, promoters make you feel like you 
should feel lucky to be playing. It's a bit demoralising. I think it's harder 
in England because there are so many bands here trying to break through. It 
gets better when you're a bit higher up the ladder, but I remember what it was 
like and it was tough.KF
 