
I have been obsessed by ancient Rome ever since I was 10. Two books served to 
fuel my passion. The first was Peter Connolly's all-action surveyThe Roman Army
, which boasted on its cover a pulsating illustration of Julius Caesar's 
victory over the Gauls at Alesia. The second wasAsterix the Legionary. Both 
books dealt with the same theme, but in ways that could hardly have been more 
different. While Connolly's book was true to the violent reality of Caesar's 
career, theAsterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> books implied 
that the Gauls and Romans had never actually killed anyone at all. At worst, 
the consequence of a battle was to be left hanging from the branch of a tree 
with stars, the odd black eye and a bump to the head. A world that in 
Connolly's book seemed thrillingly brutal was portrayed in Goscinny and 
Uderzo's cartoons as comfortingly full of fun.

The dimension of darkness that lurks behind the puns and the riotous good 
humour ofAsterix does not exclusively derive from antiquity, though. The first 
book came out in 1961, when memories of the Nazi occupation were still raw. 
"All of Gaul is occupied. All? Not quite!" The village of indomitable Gauls is 
possibly the most brilliant antidote to Vichy that French literature has to 
show. More than that, the incomparable gallery of national stereotypes to be 
found inAsterix, in which the Spaniards all say "¡Hombre!", the Belgians eat 
chocolate, and the British drink tea, offered the postwar world an affectionate 
and reassuring glimpse of itself. The teasing, as its immense popularity across 
Europe demonstrated, seemed to be just what the continent needed.

The death of René Goscinny in 1977 left the writing in the – as it proved – 
less capable hands of Albert Uderzo. Now, with his own retirement,Asterix has 
become tobandes dessinées what George Washington's axe is to historic 
artefacts. As Asterix and Obelix head to the land of the Picts, I and millions 
of other fans will be praying to Toutatis that their new adventure, published 
this week, is a return to form.
 