
For more than 25 years, Arthur Smith, standup comedian, broadcaster, 
bloke-on-panel games and self-professed Night Mayor of Balham (he doesn't do 
days) has opened his act with the line: "Hello, my name isArthur Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arthur-smith>, unless there's anyone here 
from Streatham tax office, in which case my name's Daphne Fairfax."

In fact, as this enjoyably rambunctious memoir makes clear, his name is 
actually neither Daphne nor Arthur, but Brian - though he did come perilously 
close to being professionally known as Captain Wanker. The actor's union, 
Equity, already having a Brian Smith on their books, rejected his initial 
choice of stage name, probably quite sensibly, though it is a pity we were 
denied the chance to hear a Radio 4 announcer deliver the words: "Now it's time 
for Loose Ends, presented by Ned Sherrin and Captain Wanker."

Could there be a greater significance to Smith's multiple identities? Is it 
the key to a protean if haphazard career that has seen the Bermondsey boy 
emerge in numerous guises, from road-sweeper to West End playwright? Not 
really. "Friends studying amateur psychology have theorised on the dichotomy 
between private Brian and public Arthur as the key to my character," he writes, 
"though I think of Arthur merely as the Brian who gets paid."

When he first posited the idea of writing a memoir, comments ranged from "You 
must, Arthur, it is time to erect your monument" to "Oh God, that's just what 
the world needs - another celebrity biography". The book succeeds in the 
principal prerequisite of a showbiz biog in dishing some dirt - in this case, 
atop a Merton borough council bin wagon - and dropping a lot of names. Smith 
starts this remarkably early: "I ran cross-country for London Schools and once 
raced future Olympic champion Steve Ovett. He came second. I was 264th." Yes, 
but does Ovett know any good jokes?

Despite his working-class background (his father, Syd, was a policeman), 
Smith's career followed a fairly regular course for an alternative comedian: 
student revues (albeit at the University of East Anglia rather than Oxbridge) 
and stints at the Edinburgh festival fringe followed by traumatic experiences 
in clubs such as the notorious Tunnel in south-east London, "where many of 
London's top hecklers congregated every Sunday to slaughter open spots and 
established acts alike".

Even as a young Turk, Smith seemed to possess an old soul. "In photos of 
myself as a child I already seem to have the wrinkled and sallow complexion of 
a 20-a-day man." The most moving section of the book deals with a near-fatal 
bout of pancreatitis Smith endured in his 40s, which left him teetotal, 
diabetic and possessed of a peculiarly bleak outlook on life which, he says, 
"is nothing more than a sexually transmitted terminal disease".

With increasing age, Smith appears to have found his metier, as one of the 
original contributors to the TV phenomenon Grumpy Old Men. Having become 
"moderately famous - the best kind of famous to be", he has now embraced his 
true calling as a professional bad-tempered old sod.

In fact, he has been in a bad mood for years, as this quote from his debut 
play, Live Bed Show, makes clear: "This country is shit. The food is shit, the 
government is shit, the weather is shit, the transport system is shit, 
education is shit, life is shit, death is shit, I am shit." And his book is ... 
quite good fun, actually.
 