
The portents do not look good for Malaysia's opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia-pacific/prosecution-finishes-closing-arguments-in-opposition-leader-anwar-ibrahims-sodomy-trial/2011/12/13/gIQAotdJrO_story.html>
, whose trial on highly dubious sodomy charges draws to a close this week. If 
Anwar is found guilty – and the trial judge seems to have made up his mind 
already – he will not be the only or even the most important victim of an 
egregious, politically suspect injustice. Malaysia's democratic reputation will 
have been critically wounded, and for that outrage, Malaysians will have their 
prime minister,Najib Razak <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Najib_Razak>, to thank.

The plodding Najib's overriding objective is winning the general election 
expected next year, possibly within a few months. The son of Malaysia's second 
prime minister, the nephew of its third, president of the dominant United 
Malays National Organisation (Umno), and a former defence minister, Najib was 
born to power and is accustomed to wielding it. As the charismatic leader of 
the opposition coalition, Anwar represents the biggest challenge to his 
continuing ascendancy.

It hardly seems coincidental that the sodomy charges were levelled at Anwar 
shortly after the opposition inflicted unprecedented defeats on Umno and its 
allies in the 2008 elections. Anwar's main campaign plank – combating the 
official, institutionalised discrimination that favours ethnic Malays over the 
country's large ethnic Chinese and Indian minorities – threatened the 
post-colonial order that has kept Umno and its National Front coalition on top 
since 1957.

In a court appearance earlier this year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14611879>, Anwar, 64, a married 
father of six, denied accusations he had had sexual relations with a former 
male aide. Homosexuality is punishable by law in Malaysia by caning and up to 
20 years in jail. The allegations were "a vile and desperate attempt at 
character assassination" and a "blatant and vicious lie" spread by his 
political enemies, he said. "This entire process is nothing but a conspiracy by 
Najib Razak to send me into political oblivion by attempting once again to put 
me behind bars."

Najib flatly rejects the idea of a political vendetta. But the recycling of 
sodomy accusations – Anwar was jailed on a similar charge in 1998 and detained 
until the conviction was quashed in 2004 – suggests a lack of originality 
characteristic of the prime minister. The case turns on the testimony of the 
alleged victim and DNA evidence produced by the prosecution. Defence lawyers 
suggested this week that Anwar's accuser was a "compulsive and consummate liar" 
who may have been put up to it. Yet the trial judge has already declared the 
prosecution's evidence "reliable" and credible", leading Anwar to claim he is 
being denied a fair trial.

Najib gives every appearance of preparing for snap polls on the assumption 
that Anwar will be out of the way and the opposition decapitated. He told 
Umno's annual congress to prepare for battle because "the time is near" and 
urged delegates to work harder, for example by using social media, to attract a 
"new generation of Malaysians who are more critical and have rising 
expectations of the government". The party must adapt or face "tragedy", he 
warned.

To Najib's evident alarm, that tragedy almost occurred in July when tens of 
thousands of protesters took to the streets of Kuala Lumpur. The highly unusual 
public display of discontent was spurred by a range of factors: spending cuts, 
official corruption and cronyism, a defective electoral system, curbs on public 
assembly and debate, and state-imposed censorship considered draconian even by 
regional standards. The example of recent political upheavals in neighbouring 
Thailand and Singapore also played a part. In response,thousands were beaten 
and detained by police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jul/13/malaysia-najib-cameron-protesters>
.

Now Najib is taking no chances as his lieutenants warn that Anwar is fomenting 
an Arab spring-style uprising – a so-called "hibiscus revolution". Having more 
or less reneged on shaky, post-July promises of civil rights reform, Najib is 
now pushing through remodelled restrictions in the form of the Peaceful 
Assembly act.

The act effectively makes peaceful assembly impossible by restricting it to 
undefined "designated places". No gatherings are permitted within 50 meters of 
prohibited places including hospitals, schools or places of worship. The police 
can dictate the date, time and place. Najib's idea of engaging the "new 
generation" of young Malaysians is to ban anyone under the age of 21 from 
organising a protest.

Opposition parties, lawyers and activist groups have condemned the new law, as 
has Amnesty International. But Khairy Jamaluddin, Umno's youth-wing leader, 
articulated Najib's paranoia last month when he accused Anwar's coalition of 
"trying hard to manufacture panic and disorder" by promoting street rallies 
instead of elections. "The opposition often quotes social movements in the 
Middle East to instigate people to take part in street revolutions and in the 
process manufacture a Malaysian version of the Arab spring," Khairy said.

Najib's authoritarian tendencies, blatant political scaremongering, and the 
judicial travesty that is Anwar's trial all suggest Malaysia's western allies, 
including Britain and the US, should take a closer look at their friend.Malaysia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> is valued as a trading partner, 
counterproliferation collaborator, and noncombatant member of the Afghanistan 
coalition. But the government's human rights record and democratic practices 
merit closer scrutiny.

In a visit last year, US secretary of state Hillary Clinton extracted a 
promise that Anwar would receive a fair trial. "The US believes it is important 
for all aspects of the case to be conducted fairly and transparently and in a 
way that increases confidence in the rule of law in Malaysia," she said. In a 
recent speech, Clinton urged all states toend discrimination on grounds of 
sexual orientation <http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2011/12/178368.htm>.

As Anwar's ordeal approaches an ugly climax, it seems increasingly unlikely 
that these benchmarks will be met. The next question is: what will Malaysians 
and their friends do about it?

• This article was amended on 14 December 2011. It originally referred to 
Umno's youth-wing leader as Najib Khairy Jamaluddin. This has now been corrected
 