
The so-called Naked Rambler has been jailed once again, this time for 11 
months, after he defied an order banning him from appearing in public unclothed.

Stephen Gough was not allowed in court for his brief trial at Southampton 
crown court because he refused to put on any clothes. The 53-year-old, of 
Eastleigh in Hampshire, denied breaching an antisocial behaviour order (asbo), 
but offered no defence, and a jury took just 10 minutes to convict him.

Jurors were told Gough had been given an interim asbo in February stipulating 
that he had to cover his genitalia and buttocks when he appeared in public, 
apart from in a changing room, nudist beach or during a medical examination.
 Gough has been convicted 28 times for 46 offences. Photograph: Andrew 
Milligan/PA 
But Simon Jones, prosecuting, said Gough had left Southampton magistrates 
court wearing just his boots and socks. Officers had offered him clothes but he 
refused to take them and was arrested on the court steps still clutching the 
order saying he had to cover up. Jones added: "It was a flagrant disregard of a 
court order."

Gough has been convicted 28 times for 46 offences 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/23/cant-agree-with-naked-rambler>
, mainly in Scotland, where he was repeatedly arrested during attempts to walk 
from Land's End to John O'Groats without clothes. He has been sentenced to more 
than six years in prison in total.

The court was told Gough had been convicted of nine public order counts in his 
home county of Hampshire.
 Naked Rambler Stephen Gough, accompanied by his friend Melanie Roberts. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Gough, a former Royal Marine, has previously said he decided to shed his 
clothes when it dawned on him that he – and all people – were good. His 
argument was that if he was good, then his body was good. "The human body isn't 
offensive," hetold the Guardian in an interview  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/23/naked-rambler-prison>while 
in jail in Perth. "If that's what we're saying, as human beings, then it's not 
rational." Explaining why he was prepared to give up his liberty, he said: 
"People often have to go to prison for many years before others see the light."

Sentencing Gough on Wednesday, the judge, Sarah Munro QC, said this particular 
offence was serious because it was a breach of a court order. Though she 
accepted that Gough believed he had a right to shed his clothes, she added: 
"This is a much more serious offence than the other public order offences. I 
take the view only a substantial custodial sentence is appropriate."

The judge said Gough would be eligible for release on 14 August as he had 
served time on remand.

Eastleigh borough council and Hampshire police had jointly applied for the 
original asbo and it is believed they will seek a permanent order in August.
 