
Top of etc and so on Good cause to be chipper this morning: my two favourite 
players on the women's tour are through to the final (that'll be Henin-Hardenne 
and Mauresmo, in case you haven't readthis story 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/tennis/story/0,,1695203,00.html> yet), and we've 
all got another chance to watch cheeky little upstart Marcos Baghdatis in 
action.

Knocking up The players are on court warming up. Nalbandian is the sensible 
pick to win this, but then so was Ivan Ljubicic, and we all know what happened 
to him. The pair met in Basle last year, and Baghdatis emerged the winner. The 
bookies have got the Argentine at 2/5. Is Baghdatis worth a cheeky punt at 7/4?

Nalbandian *1 - 0 Baghdatis An ace to get us started from Nalbandian, who then 
gives away a sloppy point by dropping a casual volley into the net. Baghdatis 
manages, as is his wont, to get onto the end of the next Nalbandian serve, but 
he looks tight in the backhand and slugs it wide. The nerves are jangling for 
both players, mind - Nalbandian's just whipped a cross-court backhand into that 
pesky net. Superb ball down the line from Nalbandian, dropping just inside the 
baseline, and that's the first game and first hold of the match.

Nalbandian 2 - 0* Baghdatis Delicious forehand volley from Baghdatis, his 
decision to find the far corner completely disguised by his 
extravagant-but-lovable motion. Nalbandian hits back with another of those 
lethal backhands down the line, then finds another to rack up two break 
points... first one goes begging thanks to a driving serve down the middle from 
the Cypriot. And that's the second into the middle of the net off a shaky 
Nalbandian forehand. There then follows several exchanges of advantage, during 
which I type and delete umpteen closing sentences, before Nalbandian puts me 
out of my misery with the early break. Only thanks to a heavy net cord, mind.

"Do you think that the Cypriot guy is gonna make it?" asks Ivica Micic. 
"Nalbandian could prove too much for Baghdatis. One thing is for sure: it's 
gonna be fun." Well we all know bandana = fun, and here we have two fine 
specimens.

Nalbandian *2 - 1 Baghdatis Great start for Nalbandian with another ace, but 
he throws another forehand beyond the baseline to let Baghdatis back in. And he 
takes the opportunity, slamming a dead straight backhand down the line to edge 
ahead. Ooh and that's a backhand into the net from Nalbandian to offer 
Baghdatis two break points... he's done it, we're back on serve.

Nalbandian 2 - 2* Baghdatis Lovely, lovely rally, spoiled slightly for 
Baghdatis by his decision to chip and charge, only to see the ball flight up 
and over his head. Another break looks likely before Baghdatis rustles up his 
first ace of the day, firing the serve right down the middle and feet away from 
Nalbandian's optimistically swiping racket. But a double fault follows and the 
Argentine has two break points... the first is saved after another wonderful 
rally, both players ending up way out of court before Baghdatis finds the 
corner. And the second follows, whistling into the tramlines with Nalbandian's 
backhand. Nalbandian earns a third after pouncing on a net-corded shot from 
Baghdatis, but the Cypriot cooly dispatches one of those backhands down the 
line.

Nalbandian *3 - 2 Baghdatis Marcos Baghdatis says he can't go out in his car 
at the moment, because when he stops at traffic lights fans swarm around the 
car like flies. And they're in fine voice out there this morning. It won't stop 
Nalbandian holding though, Baghdatis is struggling to find winners.

"Yes, the right result for the women's final with pouting Sharapova out," says 
Graham Alder, in that small percentage of men not bewitched by the Russian's 
charms. "And let's go for Baghdatis; Nalbandian's a bit of a grinder."

Nalbandian 3 - 3* Baghdatis Another ace from Baghdatis, who could do with a 
few more serves like that - especially with Nalbandian retuning like he is -
another of those jabbed backhands down the line there. That one goes astray 
though, and Baghdatis wraps things up with a bullet of a serve.

Nalbandian *4 - 3 Baghdatis Nalbandian drops the first point, and puts the 
second just wide after being made to scamper around the baseline by the 
be-bearded [not technically a word, I know, but it has a certain charm, doesn't 
it?] 20-year-old. Baghdatis soon finds himself on the receiving end of some 
dictatorial work from Nalbandian at the baseline, however, and two backhands 
into the net later, that's the game.

Nalbandian 5 - 3* Baghdatis Baghdatis races to 40-0 courtesy of several poorly 
executed forehands from the No4 seed, but is pulled back to 40-30 after a 
slightly dodgy line call. And that's deuce with Nalbandian's overheader into 
the corner. The one Baghdatis isn't standing in. Baghdatis drops the advantage 
after a mishit from Nalbandian snuck in despite a particularly hard stare from 
the Cypriot, and Nalbandian takes the advantage with a backhand that finds a 
mere speck of the line. That's the break.

"I won a £100 free bluesquare bet in the Guardian's football gallery during 
the summer and I'm down to my last £30 quid," says Neil Ardiff. "So have blown 
it all on £15 each-way on Nalbandian to win the tournament. Baghdatis needs to 
flop or I will starve."

Nalbandian wins the first set 6-3 Just in case Marcos Baghdatis was still 
harbouring any plans for an upset, Nalbandian fires a warning shot with some 
destructive serving and a love game. First set Nalbandian.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 1 - 0* Baghdatis drops the first point with a wild 
forehand, but a powerful serve that finds only Nalbandian's frame soon makes up 
for that. Eesh. Nalbandian's knocking him all over the court now though, and 
already he sets up a break point... taken with a finely hit forehand that 
Baghdatis doesn't even chase. I signed up for more of a fight than this!

Nalbandian leads 6-3, *2 - 0 Easy hold for Nalbandian, who isn't really having 
to get out of third gear to hold at the moment, making shots on what had been 
an errant forehand.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 2 - 1* That's more like it! A tense rally ends with 
Baghdatis absolutely launching the ball down court, then smashing Nalbandian's 
floated fetch back at him. And that's a lovely forehand. Nothing extravagant, 
but well-placed and powerful enough for Nalbandian to know a lost cause when he 
sees one.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, *3 - 1 Gah! If you're able to get in to a Nalbandian 
drop shot, you have -have - to make the pass. Baghdatis nudges it well beyond 
the baseline and before you know it it's 30-0. Complacency may well be settling 
into the Nalbandian camp though - that's two in a row he's stick into the net, 
and then Baghdatis fires one onto the baseline that the Argentine can only 
flick despairingly at. Deuce, advantage Baghdatis, deuce, advantage Nalbandian, 
deuce (peach of a backhand), advantage Nalbandian, deuce (pacy rally), 
advantage Nalbandian, game Nalbandian as a last-ditch Baghdatis forehand pings 
into the net.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 4 - 1* Clever stuff from Nalbandian, sending his weary 
opponent into the corner and standing at the net daring Baghdatis to come up 
with the goods. A break to love, and that'll be the second set over, I'm saying.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, *5 - 1 Crestfallen. Me, the crowd, even Baghdatis. 
Nalbandian smells blood, and suddenly all those forehands that were finding the 
net such a huge obstruction are whipping to and from each tramline quicker than 
Baghdatis can scurry. He comes up with a dainty little sliced drop shot just to 
get his name on the board, and Nalbandian fluffs a volley to give him something 
more to smile about, but he soon wipes it away to make it 5-1.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 5 - 2* Ooh, that's nice from Nalbandian, a deceptively 
long ball that drops feet past Baghdatis's sweeping racket. And then a vicious 
backhand that goes from racket to tramline in all of a nanosecond. He doesn't 
get it all his way - slinging a forehand into the stands before a rare 
Baghdatis ace - and in fact he's stuck that backhand way long to hand the 
initiative, in this game at least, back to Baghdatis. He'll have to serve for 
the set.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, *5 - 3 Early hope for Baghdatis as Nalbbandian's 
over-casual forehand finds the net, and he recovers from a brilliant ace out 
wide to return and make it 15-30. And Nalbandian's taken a net cord for 15-40! 
Can Baghdatis recover one break? Ouch. Nalbandian saves the first but Baghdatis 
is on the ground clutching his ankle after falling mid-chase. And it won't hurt 
so much after breaking back with a gorgeous backhand across court!

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 5 - 4* I'm clearly getting overexcited now. Baghdatis 
slammed in an ace on the first point here and the thought "Ace, ace baby" 
flashed across my mind. Thank the lord I didn't write it, eh? Oh. Baghdatis 
thought Nalbandian's forehand went long on the fourth point and the crowd 
agrees, but things were put right when the Argentine found the net with this 
next shot. He's back in it.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, *5 - 5 Whistle! Hoot! Baghdatis takes the first point! 
Boo! Hiss! He's slung that backhand well wide. It's still pantomime season in 
the crowd, and Nalbandian's obliging with some drama - walloping the ball high, 
wide and handsome to go 15-30 under. Och! Baghdatis pushes him this way and 
that to force the error, and that's two break back points... The first 
disappears as Nalbandian apparently finds the baseline with a backhand down the 
line... and he's done it! That's four games in a row! And breathe...

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 6 - 5* What a return from Nalbandian. He's completely 
lost the momentum of earlier but despite a powerful second serve from 
Baghdatis, he gets to it and send it cross-court for the point. And another 
fabulous return, Nalbandian looked awkward getting to it on the backhand but 
put it close enough to Baghdatis to take the point for 15-30. Play's held up by 
some nearby fireworks ("It's a storm!" yell Eurosport) before Baghdatis levels 
at 30-30. And what a time to find that ace! Explosive, right down the middle, a 
line judge decapitator. Ah feck. The fireworks start up again and the Cypriot's 
backhand drops into the net. Double feck. He's done it again. Advantage 
Nalbandian, long forehand, game Nalbandian.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5 Baghdatis is completely thrown by the fireworks, and 
Nalbandian wants to press on while he still has them on his side. Races to 
30-0, up to 40-0 with a perfect, looping forehand approach, and a brilliant 
serve to take the set.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 0 - 1* Fine serve to open the third set from 
Baghdatis, and then a filthy little beast of a forehand down the line that must 
have made only the briefest of acquaintence with the white. He's really going 
for it, shaping up to go cross-court then thumping it down the line again, and 
an ace makes it a love game.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, *1 - 1 Nalbandian's down 0-30 before a wide kick 
serve escapes Baghdatis's attention. Oh and then a fantastic drop shot that the 
Cypriot chases gamely, but it was a winner before it left Nalbandian's racket.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 1 - 2* Corking ace out to the tramline for 30-0, 
and 40-0 comes up with a Nalbandian forehand flying yards wide of the court. 
The next one's long and that's a love game once again for Baghdatis. He 
couldn't really take this all the way?

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, *2 - 2 Devil of a backhand by Baghdatis, I think 
it's scorched a hole just inside the baseline. Nalbandian is pegged back to 
30-30 after clipping the net with a low, flat double-handed forehand, but he 
aces his way to 40-30 and holds with an unreturnable down the middle.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 2 - 3* Brilliant point, Baghdatis rounding off a 
fine rally by poking the ball deep into the corner. And another of those 
massive serves down the middle takes him to game point before Nalbandian sticks 
it long.

I just want you to know that I didn't want any stinking emails, anyway.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, *2 - 4 Baghdatis is springing off his toes and his 
fierce return sees Nalbandian slinging the ball into the middle of the net. And 
the Argentine's put what looked for all the world like a winner wide. Baghdatis 
puts the ball long off the forehand though. He's shouting something. It 
probably translates as "Buggeration." Whatever he's shouting after thatabsolute 
peach of a pass on the forehand, it won't be that. Baghdatis breaks at the 
second time of asking!

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 2 - 5* Yes, yes, yes. Fantastic stuff from the 
Cypriot, a backhand to take home and treasure as he races to the hold. "We are 
going crazy here," says Katerina, who I'm assuming is in Cyprus. "I mean, 5-1 
down, you would think he would roll down and die but not this guy! Not our 
Marcos. He fights and fights and fights. He has the heart of a lion! I would 
say that this is the least productive day Cyprus ever had. Nobody is working. 
Everyone is watching this. At my work over 50% of the people called in 'sick' 
today!"

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, *3 - 5 Nalbandian is still busy grumbling about a 
line call when Baghdatis puts a return right down the line and into the corner, 
and can only watch as the cheeky little chap does it again. You have to hand it 
to the Argentine though, he forces Baghdatis to serve for it with a dinky 
little slice that drops just over the net.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6 Baghdatis is on fire now. No, really. It's not 
funny. Tell him to roll around on the floor or something. First a forehand down 
the line that Inspector Gadget couldn't have got a limb to, then a fierce serve 
down the middle. He sets up two set points, then aces out wide to snaffle up 
the first!

"Be fair - there was no time to breathe let alone send emails during the 
second half of the last set," says Luke Williams. "And I have only just managed 
to bandage up my badly-bitten fingernails to send one now." Is that the 
game-by-game equivalent of an "it's not you" letter?

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, *1 - 0 Nalbandian seemed to have shrugged off 
those early backhand wobbles but that was well wide and he's shaking his head. 
He's easily a good enough player to survive this slight wobble though and sure 
enough he doesn't give much away on serve - brilliant pass there to hold with 
ease.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 1 - 1* Baghdatis has got that serve down the 
middle working every time. Even on the few occasions Nalbandian can fathom that 
dancing service motion of his, he doesn't stand a chance of even putting it off 
course, let along back over the net and in court.

"I'm not used to all this in-depth analysis on the GU whatever-by-whatever 
coverage," moans Tom Chivers. You said 'Gah! If you're able to get in to a 
Nalbandian drop shot, you have - have - to make the pass.' It almost sounds 
like you understand the sport you're writing about. Has there been a change in 
HR policy at the Guardian towards hiring for competency? What happened to 
comforting-yet-meaningless banter about CBB or which telly personalities 
readers would sleep with?" Sorry, sorry, standards are slipping. I do actually 
know about tennis. I should have declared my dark secret sooner.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, *1 - 2 The only points Baghdatis is taking off 
the Nalbandian serve are lucky ones in this game.. a net cord putting the No4 
seed off his stride, then what should have been a winner down the line strayed 
wide. But there's no excuses for that messy forehand! Baghdatis breaks to send 
the crowd loopy. Loopier.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 1 - 3* Nalbandian is clearly feeling the 
pressure, that's a handful of easy winners he's now put long, wide or into 
orbit in the last few games. Admittedly that last one was made a wee bit harder 
by the fact that his racket broke. You can't legislate for a shot like that 
though: Baghdatis rolls around a wicked backhand to leave Nalbandian rooted to 
the spot.

"Hi Amanda," says Timothy, who probably means me. "Thanks very much for your 
live commentary, it brings me closer to events that I'm gutted to be missing. 
Go Marcos! All of Cyprus is with you!" Don't you just hate it when a whole 
nation jumps aboard the bandwagon just because their player's doing well? You'd 
never catch us Brits doing that.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, *2 - 3 Nalbandian looked on course for an easy 
hold, but Baghdatis delayed things with a another of those fizzing backhands 
down the line before the Argentine lummied a backhand into the net. I'm not 
quite sure what lummied means. If anything. But it felt right.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 2 - 4* I don't know how to write the noise 
that you make when you put your thumb and index finger together and kiss them, 
Italian chef style, but that's what I'm doing right now. Perfect little slice 
over the net from Baghdatis, he send Nalbandian this way and that, then aces to 
hold to love.

"Hi GEORGINA!" shrieks Timothy. "I'm at work multi-tasking and trying to 
remain calm, sorry for the typo!" Just make sure it doesn't happen again Tom.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, *3 - 4 I hope Nalbandian has a healthy reserve 
of mental energy, he's getting nothing from the crowd now. They clearly want 
their money's worth. Baghdatis steals the first point but Nalbandian makes sure 
it's all he gets with a vicious whipped backhand.

As a BBC, "British born Cypriot" I, together with the rest of Cypriots 
worldwide are extremely proud at what Baghdatis has already achieved," says 
Vassos Vassou, who perhaps took my bandwagon comment a little too much to 
heart. "We are but a small island and the fact that we have something like this 
to crow about brings a smile to your face and makes the heart beat a little 
faster!

"PS: I hope my boss isn't reading this."

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 3 - 5* By jimini that's a harsh call for 
Baghdatis. But even Paul Scholes could have called the second, it was a mile 
out. Nalbandian has two break back points... and spins the first into the net. 
And the second also finds the net, his attempted backhand down the line staying 
far too flat. He earns a third but wallops that one well past the baseline. Two 
more sloppy forehands from Nalbandian and Baghdatis holds.

Nalbandian leads 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, *4 - 5 Return of the match! Baghdatis couldn't 
do much on the first point but he hauled ass out wide to retrieve the second 
and sent it hurtling back down the line. He'll still have to serve for this set 
though.

Tied after four sets: 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6 Another wayward forehand from 
Nalbandian for the first point, Baghdatis snatches the second without so much 
as a please with a wicked serve out wide, but the third goes Nalbandian's way 
when the Cypriot's whipped backhand finds the net. He pulls one of those 
untouchable serves out of the bag for two set points... and sticks the first 
one about six inches outside the tramline. The second one's a good'n though, 
and it's two sets all!

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian *1 - 0 Baghdatis Nalbandian has come 
out for the last set in fresh shorts and T-shirt. Sweaty beast. It seems to 
have had some effect though, he holds to love.

"I've decided to be a Cypriot for the day, " says Tom Chivers. "I discovered 
during the summer that I can jump a bandwagon as well as anyone, but now that 
the England cricket team has gone back to its feeble roots all my newfound 
knowledge of reverse swing and substitute fielders is useless so it's time to 
bone up on net-cords and bandanas. Come on Baghdadios! Or whatever."

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian 2 - 0* Baghdatis Baghdatis drops the 
first point thanks to some clever placement from Nalbandian, then goes 15-30 
down on the end of a captivating rally. He just couldn't stretch to an 
always-dropping Nalbandian volley. And he's been broken already, what he hoped 
would be a clever little slice going wide.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian *2 - 1 Baghdatis Nalbandian's serve 
down the middle isn't quite as lethal as Baghdatis's but the Cypriot just 
watches it pass with the same caution. A glimmer of hope as Nalbandian slugs a 
backhand pass beyond the baseline... more than a glimmer after that cricket 
shot from the No4 seed... break-back point off another long Nalbandian 
forehand... and there it is! Dreadful, shocking backhand from Nalbandian. It 
could be a long afternoon...

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian 2 - 2* Baghdatis For a worrying 
second (for the Cypriot crowd, anyway) it looked like Nalbandian's return would 
creep in, but the call came - as it does for the second point as the Argentina 
wellys it long again. Lovely ace for 40-0, and another long Nalbandian return. 
A love game and immediately Nalbandian has to serve again.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian *3 - 2 Baghdatis Nalbandian flings a 
forehand into the net to drop the first point on his serve, but he has the 
net-cord to thank for taking the second. Lovely forehand zinging into the 
corner to nudge ahead from Nalbandian... and he leaves Baghdatis stranded by 
the net with a terrific slice towards the back of the court.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian 4 - 2* Baghdatis Nalbandian's 
pecker's up and it's costing Baghdatis. He lines himself up for one of those 
tonking backhands down the line but this time it pings out and offers the 
Argentine three break points. He takes the first with a full-length return.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian *4 - 3 Baghdatis Would you Adam and 
Eve it? He's only gone and racked up three break-back points! And he's grabbed 
the first withthe most lovely little sliced drop shot. We're back on serve.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian 4 - 4* Baghdatis Searing return from 
Nalbandian. I don't know whether Baghdatis was trying to go down the middle 
again, but it strayed too close to the Argentine. Otherwise a clean bill of 
health for Baghdatis - one great forehand, two smashing serves, and the game.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian *4 - 5 Baghdatis Baghdatis has taken 
the first two points off the Nalbandian serve! The crowd are whipping 
themselves up into an almost rather inappropriate frenzy! 0-40 at possibly the 
best point to break! And Nalbandian fluffs a backhand to allow Baghdatis to 
serve for the match.

"I don't like tennis, I just absolutely bloody love it," says Peter McLeod. 
"What a scoring system! The tension never goes away! I sound like a 
sucker-upper, but you're doing a great job." Sucker-uppers are a terribly 
underrated breed, Peter.

Fifth set [6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6] Nalbandian 4 - 5* Baghdatis Shriek! Yell! Roar! 
15-0 with an unreturnable... Polite clap as Nalbandian drives the ball down 
court to level... and it starts to rain. It's crazy. Biblical crazy. It's 
chucking it down with Baghdatis a possible three points from the final. They're 
winding the roof on, but we'll have to wait a minute.

Brief interlude Make that 15 minutes: it's no racer that roof and the ballboys 
are mopping up the court with their towels. Perhaps I'll take this moment to 
remind you that we'll be here same time tomorrow for the Federer-Kiefer semi. 
If you're around at about 11.30am on Saturday we'll have the women's final, 
which should be a magnificent clash between Justine Henin-Hardenne and Amelie 
Mauresmo, and I'm even climbing out of bed at 6am on Sunday to be here for the 
men's final at 8.30am on Sunday. The very least you can do, you bunch of 
ingrates, is join me.

Hopefully not long now... "Are you kidding me?" screams Katerina, sounding 
unhinged enough not to be kidded with. "If Marcos loses the momentum I will 
take it up personally with God!"

They're back! Literally moments from about 30 seconds' worth of tennis. 
Possibly.

Baghdatis wins 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 4-6, 4-6 They're roaring again! From this angle 
(in Farringdon), it looked like Nalbandian was about to pull off a great pass, 
but it went long. Level again! The Argentine pushed Baghdatis out wide and then 
went in for the kill. 30-30. Couldn't do anything about that enormous serve 
though - match point! I could have sworn Baghdatis just put himself into the 
final but the umpire overruled. Deuce. Advantage Baghdatis thanks to a forehand 
into the net from Nalbandian... and he's done it with one of those serves down 
the middle! What a stunning match. Neil Ardiff is going to go hungry.

Thanks for all your emails, see you tomorrow for Federer-Kiefer.
 