
Anthony McPartlin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthonymcpartlin> and 
Declan Donnelly were crowned 'Ant and Decade' at the National Television awards 
tonight after they won the best entertainment presenter prize for the 10th year 
in a row.

The ITV1 pair, who present two of the channel's biggest shows – Britain's Got 
Talent and I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here! – beat Paul O'Grady, Davina 
McCall and the awards host Dermot O'Leary to the gong. I'm A Celebrity ... also 
picked up the entertainment prize, beating the last ever series of Big Brother.

McPartlin and Donnelly were unable to attend the awards in person due to 
filming commitments but thanked viewers in a live video message. McPartlin said 
they were "so so happy", while Donnelly said they were "humbled and honoured".

The award was collected on their behalf by Simon Cowell.

If Ant and Dec's win was predictable then the drama prize proved less so, with 
Waterloo Road – the drama set in a comprehensive school in Rochdale – beating 
fellow BBC1 shows Doctor Who and Sherlock.

It was the first time since Doctor Who returned to BBC1 in 2004 that the show 
has missed out on the best drama prize.

Matt Smith, who replaced David Tennant in the title role last year, also 
missed out on the drama performance prize. It was won by David Jason for his 
role in Touch of Frost, the long running detective drama which came to an end 
last year.

Simon Cowell's X Factor was named best talent show for the second year in a 
row, beating BBC1's Saturday night rival Strictly Come Dancing.

But there was a gong for the show's veteran presenter Bruce Forsyth, who won 
the special recognition prize.

Elsewhere at the awards, which are voted for by viewers, hit sitcom The 
Inbetweeners won the digital programme prize, beating another E4 show, Glee, 
while the comedy prize went to ITV1 sitcom Benidorm.

Top Gear won the factual programme prize while This Morning won the topical 
magazine award.

It has been a good night for Walford, with EastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> triumphing in the serial 
drama prize, Lacey Turner winning the serial drama performance award, and Ricky 
Norwood picking up the newcomer prize. Turner quit the soap at the end of last 
year after playing Stacey Branning for six years.

National Television Awards - the winners

Most popular comedy programme - Benidorm
Most popular entertainment programme - I'm A Celebrity ... Get Me Out Of Here!
Most popular newcomer - Ricky Norwood, EastEnders
Most popular drama - Waterloo Road
Digital choice - The Inbetweeners
Most outstanding serial drama performance - Lacey Turner, EastEnders
Most popular entertainment presenter - Ant & Dec
Topical magazine - This Morning
Most popular factual programme - Top Gear
Most popular talent show - The X Factor
Most outstanding drama performance - David Jason
Special recognition - Bruce Forsyth
Most popular serial drama - EastEnders 
 