
I’ve repeatedly come across the idea that natural means good among 
eco-friendly folks like myself. It has emerged in online forums, conversations 
with friends, and discussions at health food stores. It has also popped up 
regularly in the comments section of this column, where astute readers can 
often be found cautioning against making this assumption.

I happen to agree with them: the assumption that natural equals good is wrong. 
But it’s understandable that people would feel that way, isn’t it? Natural just 
sounds good; easy. Natural sounds like puppies and sunshine and fresh air. 
Natural! The way nature intended! Before meddlesome mankind stuck our big noses 
in and ruined everything, that is.

Give your cosmetics a safety makeover by using this simple website
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/01/cosmetics-database-safety-ingredients-website-health-and-beauty>
The problem is twofold. First: “natural” doesn’t mean good – not entirely and 
not always. Second: “natural” sometimes doesn’t mean anything at all, at least 
not in the way it’s most commonly used – to imbue a product with a vaguely 
positive attribute in the hopes that consumers will buy it.

Beginning with the first point, as we learned from vaginal detox pearls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/10/vaginal-detox-pearls-lysol-douche-feminine-hygiene>
, natural does not necessarily equate to beneficial, effective or even safe. In 
fact, here are some natural things which are also actually quite terrible: 
death, disease, beets, cute little zebra babies being eaten by lions, poisonous 
plants, mosquitoes, hurricanes.

All of these things fit the dictionary definition of the word natural 
(“existing in or caused by nature; not made or caused by humankind”) yet none 
of them are really all that appealing as they relate to humankind. Beets stain 
everything and taste like dirt; sunburns ruin vacations; the seeds of the 
castor oil plant have the distinction of being the Guinness Book of World 
Records holder for world’s most poisonous plant, yet its charming purple 
flowers litter gardens around the world.

It is therefore not enough to see “natural” and read “good for me” in its 
place. It’s no secret that I’m a fan of natural treatments and beauty remedies 
and homemade cleaning products, but in order for them to be useful, they have 
to do more than simply have “natural” as their main attribute. There’s no sense 
in having a natural cleaner that doesn’t clean, or a natural remedy that only 
makes you sicker. In these cases, natural isn’t doing you any favours.

The reverse isn’t necessarily true either. I’m reminded of this daily: without 
the dose of 11 decidedly unnatural pills I take twice a day, my chronic kidney 
condition would make it impossible for me to write this column. My daughter was 
born when surgeons strapped me to a table, cut an incision into my lower 
abdomen and then reached in and pulled her out – it really doesn’t get much 
more unnatural than that. But if it had been left up to nature, my full 
placenta previa would have meant that one of us would have died during labour.

So, on to point two. In the US, at the time of this writing, the US Department 
of Agriculture does not restrict the use of the word “natural” to describe food 
or beverage products unless there are added colours, synthetic substances, or 
flavours.

In other words, meat can be labelled natural while still containing growth 
hormones, and a fruit drink could be labelled natural while being full of 
high-fructose corn syrup, as long as it didn’t also contain red dye #40.

The FDA doesn’t do much better when limiting the use of the word on cosmetics 
and personal care products. According to itswebsite 
<http://www.fda.gov/Cosmetics/ResourcesForYou/Industry/ucm388736.htm#7>, the 
FDA “has not defined the term ‘natural’ and has not established a regulatory 
definition for this term in cosmetic labeling”.

The UK takes a more detailed approach toward labelling food as natural, with 
the Food Standards Agencystating 
<http://www.food.gov.uk/sites/default/files/multimedia/pdfs/markcritguidance.pdf>
 “natural” means essentially that the product is composed of natural 
ingredients, eg ingredients produced by nature, not the work of humans or 
interfered with by us. It later expands on that thought to add that using the 
term “natural” without qualification is only permitted “to describe single 
foods, of a traditional nature, to which nothing has been added and which have 
been subjected only to such processing as to render them suitable for human 
consumption”.

Of course, not all of us are crooks and liars. Products bearing the “natural” 
designation may truthfully denote ingredients produced by nature and minimally 
processed, but as of right now, no government body makes them prove it.

So what does all of this mean for all of us? 

Vaginal 'detox pearls': the latest in our toxic obsession with disinfection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/10/vaginal-detox-pearls-lysol-douche-feminine-hygiene>
Our task, after first limiting our consumption, is to become more educated 
about what we do consume. This means asking why a product is good for us if it 
claims to be; not being fooled by fluffy terms used by corporations to suggest 
health benefits and learning about the ingredients that go into the products we 
use on our skin and in our homes.

Don’t assume that natural equals good. Actually, don’t assume 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svkgOsr7pUc>, period. Ask questions, research, 
learn, and if you’re not happy with what you find out, work to change your 
products, your consumer behaviour, or both.

And then come back, so we can yell at each other in the comments.
 