
Neal Lawson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/neallawson> and Sunder Katwala
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sunderkatwala>

Neal to Sunder

We have been long-time campaigners for electoral reform and have been working 
harder since the expenses crisis. The goal has been a referendum on a 
proportional system on election day. I know we both back PR for issues of 
democratic and social principle but there are two tactical reasons for our 
demand.

First, the Tories might win the election, which would mean no referendum for 
at least four years, and second, by holding the vote on the same day as the 
general election we would get more voters out and encourage people to back 
pro-change parties, ie not the Tories. Indeed, polling is quite clear that this 
"reform dividend" could help deliver a hung parliament. Along the way David 
Cameron gets painted as a democratic dinosaur and at last British politics can 
be released from the straitjacket of first-past-the-post centralism, tribalism 
and adversarialism.

But we haven't quite got that. It looks instead like the government will use 
the constitutional reform and governance bill to pave the way for a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/dec/01/electoral-system-reform-referendum-plan>
 within two years of the next election, ie in the next parliament, but just on 
thealternative vote (AV) 
<http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/votingsystems/systems2.htm#AV> – a system 
that allows preferences but isn't proportional. So there are two problems; 
first it's the wrong system and second it's the wrong date. It should be 
proportional representation (PR) because making everyone's vote count changes 
the terms for politics – it ends the tyranny of middle England in which a few 
fickle voters who can't decide whether they are Labour or Tory hold sway, 
alongside the media might of the Mail and Murdoch.

With AV, politics stays pretty much as it is. And anyway, after the election 
the Tories still look like they will be in power and can repeal the 
legislation, however embarrassing that process might be. So why don't we go for 
PR on election day? We got this far by fighting for what we believe in. Lets 
not sell ourselves short.

Sunder to Neal

The real missed opportunity was about a decade ago: few reformers would start 
from here. The idea of an electoral reform referendum on election day was an 
attractive one. But there were some important obstacles too.

Could it have gone ahead if the Electoral Commission had said that it would 
not be possible to properly regulate spending on the election campaign and 
referendum? And some pro-reform voices might have feared that the timing would 
have made it harder to win, though I think the fact that there would have been 
a larger turnout than in a standalone referendum would have worked in reform's 
favour.

Legislating for a future referendum, and challenging other parties to let the 
people decide, is a positive step forward. I have been in favour of electoral 
reform for a long time. I think the case for PR is a strong one. But there is 
also a good deal to be said for AV, as a major advance on what we have now, 
particularly if combined with PR for a second chamber and local government, 
along with other measures such as devolution and entrenched rights that 
constrain the kind of untrammeled use of majority power we saw in the 1980s.

Requiring every MP to seek 50% of the vote is a major advance. The abolition 
of tactical voting allows every party to poll its full support everywhere – 
Labour in the south, the Tories in the north; Greens and Lib Dems everywhere. 
Never again will you see a "can't win here" election bar chart. The election 
might be about the issues, not the horse race.

AV can see off the most prevalent anti-PR arguments: there are not "two 
classes of MPs"; there are no "tail wags dog" possibilities of a "hinge" party 
permanently in office; and it is probably the most extremist-proof electoral 
system possible. Each of those arguments can be countered. One can attribute 
the rise of the BNP to failings in the current system; but their European 
election breakthrough may have made the case for PR tougher too.

Neal to Sunder

I agree. Labour should have long ago fulfilled its 1997 manifesto commitment 
to a referendum on the electoral system. But the words late, better and never 
still spring to mind. There are always obstacles to change – especially when 
power is being given away. The Electoral Commission has never covered itself in 
glory and should not be an impediment to reform now.

And it may never feel like a good time to take a gamble on a referendum, but 
this, in the wake of the expenses scandal, is the best time and might be the 
last if the Tories get in.

I'm sorry but I'm not a fan of AV. It can lead to even less fair outcomes than 
first-past-the-post and that to me is the critical point; it doesn't break our 
failing political system. The rise of the BNP is not because of the PR system 
used for the Euro elections but the fact that first-past-the-post encourages 
Labour to ignore its core support and just focus on the floating voters. Into 
the vacuum stepped the far right. If everyone's vote counts, which it still 
doesn't under AV, then Labour has to pitch to all parts of its supporter base, 
not just the fickle.

In addition a proportional voting system would allow in new radical voices 
such as the Greens and others who can help change the terms of debate away the 
pro-market economics and rampant individualism of the last three decades.

Labour has always treated democracy as a means to an end; the pursuit of 
power. The world doesn't work like that anymore – change only happens with the 
active consent and participation of the public. PR encourages that culture to 
emerge; AV doesn't. Democracy must be valued as an intrinsic good – the means 
and ends of creating the good society.

Oh, and I don't care if there are two types of MPs as long as they are more 
interested in changing the world than changing their homes.

Sunder to Neal

If you would support the "PR" system advocated by Roy Jenkins (AV+ 
<http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/votingsystems/systems4.htm#AV+>), that is 
fine with me too. But don't forget it is a hybrid system, which would have 
given single-party majority governments on a minority vote in almost every 
postwar general election. The deep antipathy to coalition in British political 
culture may be too strong but it is real. Jenkins recognised that in advocating 
that reform had to understand British political culture in order to change it.

So I am sceptical as to whether the differences between AV and AV+ (15-20% of 
top-up seats), while real, are fundamental. An AV Commons and PR Senate would 
be another way to provide broadly similar checks and balances.

And I think it's a mistake to lump first-past-the-post and AV together. AV is 
much more pluralist and fairer too.

The current system helps parties that have a geographically concentrated vote. 
(Rather bizarrely, it much prefers Welsh nationalists to Scottish 
nationalists.) Whether they are widely loathed or broadly liked doesn't matter 
at all. AV is good for candidates and parties who are broadly popular, 
including with voters of other parties, and bad for pariah parties with intense 
support who are feared by most voters. Surely that's much less arbitrary. Peter 
Kellner hasmade a persuasive case 
<http://www.archive.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm40/4090/volume-2/cmmnt01.PDF>
 that it picks the right winning party, where first-past-the-post can be more 
of a lottery.

I think you may underestimate how much a preferential voting system such as AV 
would change our political culture, during the campaign, and not only in 
post-election negotiations. Candidates need not only mobilise their own votes, 
but to appeal to a majority of voters. This makes possible – and necessary – 
pluralist co-operation across party boundaries, which the present system 
prevents. We see Labour-Green alliances in London mayoral elections, because of 
preferential voting, while under first-past-the-post parties who might appeal 
to similar voters must be attacked as a "wasted" vote. Under AV, they need to 
be respected, as votes you may well also need to win.

If we got AV, then this new pluralism would help many of the campaigns you 
want to see. By all means argue to go further. But you might be making the best 
the enemy of the good.

Neal to Sunder 

Thanks, you make a lot of good points. I agree that experiences such as the 
London mayoral vote, encouraged in part by an AV system, was good for pluralism 
but let's not forget that this new culture was really underpinned by Labour and 
Green co-operation in the Greater London Authority, forced on them by PR.

I think the differences between us are tactical, so let's try to understand 
those differences because basically I think we want pretty much the same 
things. Quite rightly we change our electoral system infrequently to say the 
least. This could be the last chance for a generation, and as such, don't we 
need to get it right?

My problem is that the old politics isn't working; the poor are getting poorer 
and the planet continues to burn. We are running out of time to save a feasible 
centre-left politics, not to mention a planet that people can live on. We have 
to change the terms of debate and that means changing the way we debate. My 
worry, for the reasons I've already outlined above, is that a shift to AV, 
while a slight improvement, won't allow that shift to happen. The corporate 
agenda of the media barons and the City will still hold sway. Only PR breaks 
their stifling hold and gives us a new politics and allows us to build a 
progressive consensus.

My fall-back hope is that if it's to be just AV at a referendum after the 
general election, that might still be enough to encourage the reawakening of 
some kind of anti-Tory coalition, with Cameron revealed as the democratic 
dinosaur he clearly is – enough to deliver at least a hung parliament. Then 
perhaps a more proportional system could be pushed for. But who knows? Then 
it's out of our hands – at the moment we decide – or at least a Labour 
government does. And I guess that's the real point for me: in politics and life 
you have to grab your chance, and the expenses scandal, the feeling that 
politics isn't working and the obvious point that whatever the question Cameron 
is not the answer – gives us that chance.

I think reformers and democrats need to push as hard as possible for the best 
option to transform the hopes of progressive politics. If there is a referendum 
only on AV, whenever it is, I will back it for all the reasons you state over 
first-past-the-post. But until then I think we should push as hard as possible 
for the best feasible system as soon as possible.

Sunder to Neal

There is a risk of agreement breaking out. This seemed a much more heated 
debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/30/labour-conference-fringe>
, on all sides, at a Labour conference fringe event earlier this year. Yes, 
there are different views about strategy and tactics, and substantively too 
about which electoral system would be best. But one of the main dangers for 
electoral reformers has been that the debate has too often become a theological 
quest for the Holy Grail, with each of us trying to convince everyone else 
about our perfect electoral system. Often, there has not been nearly enough 
attention paid to building broad, winning coalitions to make change possible. 
TheVote for a Change campaign <http://www.voteforachange.co.uk/> has done well 
in keeping a broad range of voices together.

The truth is there is no perfect system: we all prioritise and trade off in 
different ways whether what matters most is how we choose the government; the 
balance of views in the national parliament; and how much say we have over our 
local representatives.

So I think AV for the Commons could be part of a strong pluralist reform. But 
I will support whichever more pluralist or more proportional system might 
command a consensus and a chance of winning. That debate remains open. I would 
be wary of pushing for a multi-option referendum – the risk is that it would 
allow those arguing for no change to confuse key issues. But I expect we might 
agree that the best way to settle the question would be to have a citizens' 
convention to choose which alternative system is put to the voters.

I agree with you about the urgency of economic, environmental and political 
challenges. There has been a significant shift in much of the British polity 
over the last decade: it is interesting that support for Westminster PR is 
strongest in Scotland after a decade of devolution. As you note about London, 
new alliances are being created, including by movements such as London Citizens 
and in emerging progressive blogosphere too. The next few months are certainly 
a crucial opportunity. All of these will be new sources of sustained pressure 
for a more pluralist and democratic politics too.
 