
Oh, Best Beloveds, I am tired. I'm almost too tired to talk about the things 
that are tiring me. Then again – as with bad dentistry, unpleasant personal 
experiences and unpleasant gentleman callers – there's something minutely 
empowering about writing down the source of your woes and peering at them in 
effigy. It can become a small rehearsal for future change.

So. Let's start with a small woe. I am tired of my printer. It's a tiny gripe 
in these days of mayhem and threatened water cannons, but for more years than 
I'd like to mention my printer has been the Nick Clegg of office equipment. It 
promised it would fax – it has never managed to send or receive anything like a 
fax. It talked to me through my computer in a cloying and yet convincingly 
masculine voice (until I turned that bit off) about switching it on when it was 
switched on and connecting it when it was connected and supplying it with paper 
when its paper supply was entirely adequate and, above all, it told me big, 
fat, narwhal herds of lies about ink. When it could still talk it would warn 
me, within hours of receiving new cartridges, that my coloured ink was low and 
that my black ink was exhausted and that swingeing cuts in page output or 
desperate foraging for cartridges must immediately ensue. I used to believe it. 
Then I got curious, let things run, and discovered that, on average, my ink 
supplies actually last three months longer than my printer is willing to admit. 
Now it can no longer nag me audibly, it constantly pesters my computer with 
alarmist messages while displaying its own scrolling alerts across its 
irritating little display screen. Since I've decided to switch brands, it also 
repeats dire threats relating to my use of non-proprietorial inks which have 
voided its warranty, threaten its health and may cause me to become sterile 
shortly before my office implodes. I hate it. It's only still in my office 
because – beyond being a money-grabbing, conniving company shill – it is, 
unlike Clegg, basically functional and I need it to hiccup and whine its way 
through what I hope will be the last paper draft of the novel.

I am also – let's be careful here – not tired of the novel, but certainly 
tired because of the novel. I can't quite remember which draft I'm on, but all 
of them have seemed to involve struggling and fumbling on the living room sofa 
(the living room can often reach habitable temperatures) and slathering 
recalcitrant pages with red scribbles, or else thrashing and grim silences in 
bed (also occasionally warmish) or simply giving up, pacing, consuming 
medically unwise quantities of caffeine and then starting in again with thicker 
socks, a different soundtrack and a hot water bottle. I spent – for example – 
Saturday evening, Saturday night and the early hours of Sunday tickling, 
wheedling, gnawing and praying through my last 200 pages – again – before 
crumpling like a wet manifesto and texting a chum in another time zone for 
moral support. (It's important for writers to cultivate chums in enough 
locations to cover their usual writing/panicking/despairing hours. I know from 
bitter experience that you don't want to be stuck for a week in Hungary with a 
manuscript that reads like a migraine and no one you can call.) Even as I type 
this, Dear Readers, in my suitable-for-middle-age glasses and cardigan with 
washable elbow patches (Christ, how did that happen?) I can feel myself folding 
deeper into scraggled monomania. When I go outside I simply fall over – either 
because of the sheet ice and uncollected bin bags underfoot, or simply because 
my brain can no longer sustain coordinated movement while obsessing with 
adequate enthusiasm over the twiddly bit on page 308.

I have reached the point at which I can't tell if the book is all right, or 
vile, or moderately interesting in parts. I can't even tell how many fingers 
I'm holding up. (That's a trick question – I'm not holding up any, I just 
haven't noticed yet.) In short, I'm almost ready to hand the thing in. I have 
corrected and smoothed it and almost tested it enough to be slightly confident 
that it will be consistent under variable conditions. I've worked it over in 
hotel rooms and on trains and in my house. I've leapt at it with energetic 
vigour and while begging inwardly for a minor but debilitating injury that 
would hospitalise me just enough for a wee rest. I've peered at it while in a 
sunny mood and while trying not boot my television through the window on 
learning that my government really has decided to screw everyone with whom it 
is not on first-name terms.

I hate to repeat myself Best Beloveds, but none of the fun I'm describing 
above – and it is fun, it is beautiful fun, it is the time of my life, it is 
years of sheer bloody joy and a mercy and an income and a way of being useful – 
would be happening if I hadn't had a chance at tertiary education. And I'm 
tired of turning on my television, my radio, going and talking to my friends, 
the people I work with and counting off those who wouldn't have got to 
university, who wouldn't have been able to go back to study in later life, who 
wouldn't have been able to train for what they do best under Cameron and 
Clegg's new fee regime.

And this makes me more tired than I can say. As tired as hearing the word 
"free" – as in "Free Education", when we never have had "free" education, just 
as we don't have "free" healthcare – we all pay for both, in advance, and have 
done for generations, because it was thought that both ensured the social 
cohesion, the stability, the economic security, the intellectual development 
and the moral centre of our country. Soon England and Wales will rely on 
charities to educate its young people. I hope Scotland will continue to pursue 
a wiser course – I hope it can begin to demonstrate how much wiser, but I truly 
would rather it didn't have to.

And it makes me tired to hear kettling described as a method of crowd control 
– if it controlled crowds, it would be routinely used on football supporters – 
they turn up in crowds every week – but react rather more badly than most when 
penned in a crush for hours without explanation. Kettling is designed to punish 
insurgents – sorry, demonstrators. (Including potentially dangerous wheelchair 
users and schoolchildren.) It humiliates, panics, frustrates and its results 
are entirely predictable – anyone who wants a fight will get one and God help 
those who didn't. Like Alfie Meadows.

Tired, tired, tired. But I'm writing this with an income and a good life and a 
fresh book nearly finished and plans for next year – which is more than I could 
have dreamed of when I was 20. I'd like more 20-year-olds to end up with more 
than they dreamed of – not head injuries, not stupidly wasted energies, not a 
lack of hope. And we can arrange that. To quote William Beveridge, "The door of 
learning should not shut for anyone at 18, or at any time. Ignorance to its 
present extent is not only unnecessary, but dangerous. Democracies cannot be 
well-governed except on the basis of understanding." Britain was in ruins when 
he wrote that, in debt and shattered after years of war, but its government 
respected its people, its government remembered that it wouldn't exist without 
its people and it acted with justice and it acted with grace. And it could do 
again. As Beveridge also said, " … that which is made by man can by man be 
prevented." Onwards.
 