
In the village of Badume in Kano state, northern Nigeria, Shaaftu Abubakar is 
standing proudly beside a double bed that dominates the airless, one-room house 
she shares with her husband and five-month-old son, Youssef. On the bed Youssef 
lies, gurgling quietly, beneath the protective white mesh of the family's 
mosquito net.

"I have always worried about malaria, especially for my child," explains 
Abubakar. "Many children here get malaria and are very sick, and I worry the 
same will happen to him."

Abubakar's concerns are well founded. According to the World Health 
Organisation, one child dies of malaria in Africa every 45 seconds and in 
Nigeria – a country that shoulders a massive one quarter of the world's malaria 
deaths – an estimated 300,000 children under five die of the disease each year.

But as Abubakar carefully tucks the net into the mattress beneath her son, she 
continues: "Now, I worry a little less. Since we started using the new net we 
have been protected when we sleep. My son is well and the number of mosquitoes 
around us is less."

Abubakar's net is one of 37m free long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) to 
have been distributed via mass campaigns in Nigeria as part of an ambitious 
strategy – led by the Nigerian government and supported by the international 
donor community – to achieve universal coverage of LLINs in Nigeria by 2010.

The nets, which are impregnated with long-lasting insecticides that repel and 
kill mosquitoes on contact, retain their efficacy for around three years, 
making them one of the most cost-effective and powerful anti-malaria 
interventions available. As well as protecting individuals from bites, when 
used correctly and in sufficient numbers they also reduce the number of 
mosquitoes in the environment, helping to avert half of malaria cases and 
reduce child mortality by around 18%.

Mass distribution

Driven by these impressive benefits and following huge logistical 
co-ordination at national, state and local level, mass distribution of free 
LLINs has so far been completed in 27 of Nigeria's 37 states.

"In the first two years of the campaign, between 2008 and 2010, ownership of 
nets increased from only 4% to over 40% of households nationally," says Dr 
Ebenezer Baba of the Malaria Consortium-led UK Aid-funded programme SuNMaP 
(Support to National Malaria Programme). "In Kano state alone we distributed 2m 
LLINs. To put that into perspective, it took 140 40-foot trucks to transport 
those nets."

But if the high levels of coverage that have been achieved in these states are 
to be sustained, mass distribution programmes are only the beginning.

Chioma Amajoh, director of integrated vector management at the Nigerian 
National Malaria Control Programme (NMCP), agrees: "The long-term work is just 
beginning. We must remember we are dealing with people, and people are complex. 
It is not enough just to get the LLINs out to them. We also have to make sure 
they use them and know how to care for, maintain and replace them."

According to Babafunke Fagbemi, executive director at the Johns Hopkins Center 
for Communication Programs in Nigeria, behaviour change communication (BCC) 
tools such as radio jingles and television dramas are playing a central role in 
addressing issues around use. "To give an example, negative rumours are a big 
hurdle for LLIN use in Nigeria. So work has been done in communities to 
understand the cause of these rumours and from that understanding, different 
BCC messages have been developed to dispel those rumours, while promoting 
correct use, maintenance and channels of access."

Information on LLINs is also delivered through community advocates, such as 
role model caregivers and net champions. In Paiko, Niger state, role model 
caregiver, Ramatu Jibrin, explains: "When I visit houses to give malaria drugs 
or check on a child who is sick with malaria, I also speak to people about the 
benefits of LLINs. I show them how to hang the nets correctly, care for and 
maintain them and tell them where they can get more."

But even if levels of use improve, the three-year lifespan of LLINs presents a 
further challenge to sustaining the gains of mass distribution. In Abuja, 
Amajoh says: "Repeated mass campaigns to replace expired LLINs every three 
years are not a viable option as they rely on huge levels of donor support and 
co-ordination. We want to create longer-term, sustainable systems of access so 
people can replace expired LLINs and protect themselves long after the donors 
have gone."

Many believe the long-term answer lies with building a stronger commercial 
sector, so people can eventually buy their own nets when the free ones expire 
and there is an additional need in the household. But in a country where some 
70% of the 155 million population lives below the poverty line, Mercy Dawaba, 
programme manager of the State Malaria Control Programme (SMCP) in Niger state, 
warns: "The danger is if people are having to go to the open market to buy 
nets, and they can't afford them, they are likely to go back to old habits and 
stop sleeping under an LLIN after their free one has expired."

In response to this concern, the Nigerian ministry of health has opted for a 
"mixed model" approach. While strengthening the commercial market, through 
logistical support and subsidies to drive down LLIN prices, states are 
providing routine free distributions through existing public health systems – 
such as antenatal and child immunisation clinics – to ensure those who are most 
vulnerable to malaria – women and children under five – have continued access 
to free nets.

Dr Kolawole Maxwell, programme director of SuNMaP in Abuja, says: "No single 
strategy will achieve the goal of sustained universal coverage of LLINs in 
Nigeria. But, with mass distribution rapidly driving up net ownership, 
supported by BCC and continuous information to promote use, a strong commercial 
sector that provides nets affordably and routine distribution for the most 
vulnerable, we have the most realistic chance yet of achieving that goal."

Back in Badume, Abubakar and her son are a testament to the benefits of 
getting it right. With a smiling Youssef balanced on her hip, Abubakar beams: 
"Using the net has changed things for us. I will teach my son to always sleep 
under the LLIN so his family too can be free from malaria."
 