
New Year resolutions are intensely personal. Only you know what’s manageable, 
attainable and what you need to have a better year than the last.

But as you could probably expect, based on the subject of this column, I have 
a few humble suggestions. If you haven’t yet decided on your resolution, 
consider one of mine.

And because I know checking your bank balance after the holidays can induce a 
mild panic attack, I’ve also included rough estimates of how much the average 
person will save by making each change.

If do-gooding alone doesn’t motivate you, saving money certainly will! 

Make your own cleaning products

Use these recipes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
 to create your own non-toxic tub cleaners, all-purpose sprays, and window 
cleaners. You’ll simplify your cleaning cupboard, fill your home with natural 
scents and ingredients, and be able to avoid throwing out tons of wasteful 
packaging.

I also believe that there’s something intensely powerful involved in the 
process of creating things, even when what you’re creating is as simple as a 
cleaning spray.
Amount saved: $50 to $70/year 

Start shopping for clothing secondhand

I know that for some this suggestion conjures up memories of rifling through 
racks of worn clothing in a charity shop that stinks of sweat and cigarettes – 
but if you do some quick Googling you’ll likely be able to track down a few 
decent consignment stores in your area. Consignment stores tend to be pickier 
about what they accept, and the items are often more up-to-date and in better 
condition.

I used to be averse to the idea of wearing a stranger’s old clothing, but I 
eventually decided to try it for the environmental reasons. A quick run through 
the washing machine erased any uneasy feelings.

It’s far easier to pinpoint whether a piece of clothing is well made when 
you’ve washed it a few times – cheap stuff loses shape and fades, whereas 
classic pieces often still look new years after purchase. Resolve to try 
secondhand shopping atleast once and see what you think. I promise you won’t be 
disappointed!

Amount saved: $300 to $1,000/year depending on how much of a shopaholic you are


Start selling

A study in the UK found that the average home contains clutter worth between £
275 <http://www.prfire.com/submission/typical-british-home-has-275-of-clutter/> 
and £3,500 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/bills/article-2118662/Can-make-money-junk-The-average-household-3-500-worth-clutter.html>
 , and the average American home contains more than300,000 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2014/mar/21/health/la-he-keeping-stuff-20140322> 
items. That’s alot of stuff just sitting there in your attic, basement and 
garage that could be money in your pocket, paying off debt or bolstering your 
savings account.

Surely it wouldn’t be too hard to let go of even a tiny fraction of these 
items. Resolve to begin a twice-yearly purge to reclaim this space, pass 
unwanted items on to those who need them, and earn some cash in the process.

Designate a specific corner of your home for items destined for a garage sale 
or sale on social media sites and gradually collect items as the year goes on. 
This approach allows for an easier and more thorough decluttering than if you 
attempted to do it in one fell swoop.
As you come across items you no longer wear, use, or particularly like, just 
pop them in the pile and then eventually divest yourself of their presence.

Amount saved: $400 to $5,000/year

In this column, when I talk about choosing to deliberately live with less, 
many of you may be imagining austerity or deprivation. Far from it. Choosing 
less ends up ushering in a strange feeling of expansiveness, liberation and 
weightlessness. Imagine an empty shelf, a calm mind, a fuller savings account – 
it’s freeing.
The first time you stand in front of a pile of meaningless stuff destined for 
sale or donation, you’ll feel it too. Letting go can be an incredibly powerful 
thing. So above all in 2016, let’s resolve to loosen the white-knuckled grip on
havingand shift our attention to doing or being instead.


(And if in your wanders around secondhand shops you happen to come across the 
perfect pair of black heels, size 7.5, drop me a line, would you?)
 