
The fifth tranche of the federal government’s national security laws will 
create the offence of inciting genocide as well as thelower the age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/age-limit-control-orders-terrorism-suspects-reduced-14>
, from 16 to 14, at which a minor can be subject to control orders, the federal 
government has announced.

The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, made the 
announcement on Monday night and on Tuesday offered more detail on the laws, 
which will be introduced during the November parliamentary sitting period.

Age limit for control orders on terrorism suspects will be reduced to 14
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/age-limit-control-orders-terrorism-suspects-reduced-14>
The laws will allow for greater electronic tracking of individuals on control 
orders, and will give judges the ability to rely on sensitive information in 
forming a detention decision without disclosing that information to the 
affected person.

“Among other things, the bill will lower the age for a control order from 16 
to 14 years, subject to appropriate safeguards; facilitate the monitoring of 
individuals subject to control orders through enhanced search, 
telecommunications interception and surveillance device regimes; provide 
greater protection to sensitive information in control order proceedings; and 
introduce a new offence of incitement of genocide,” Brandis told the Senate 
during question time.


Only six control orders have been issued since 2005, four in the past two 
years.

Brandis flagged the fifth tranche of the laws in June, and sent out a draft 
provision to the states and territories in September. The draft legislation has 
not yet been made public, and is expected to be finalised by the end of this 
week.

The announcement comes after a recent shooting in Sydney’s west in which a 
radicalised teen, Farhad Jabar, shot and killed a police civilian staff member, 
Curtis Cheng, before being shot and killed by police.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, stressed that 
the national security changes had been in play since well before the shooting.

“You may think it has some relevance to the events in Parramatta, but it is 
something that has been in the works between the attorneys general and justice 
ministers in every jurisdiction for some considerable time,” he said on Tuesday.

Four detained people may 'have some knowledge' of a terrorism offence, police 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/07/four-detained-but-not-charged-over-fatal-parramatta-shooting-say-police>
The Victorian attorney general, Martin Pakula, has denied ever having 
one-on-one discussions with Brandis over the anti-terrorism laws.

“The federal attorney general has not raised these proposals with me and I 
look forward to receiving further information from the commonwealth government 
about their bill,” Pakula told Guardian Australia. “There have been preliminary 
discussions at officer level but no agreement has been reached.”


The premier of New South Wales, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, has put forward a 
number of national security measures he would like to see adopted by the 
federal government, including holding suspects for longer without charge and 
lowering the age for control orders to 14.


Responsibility for detaining suspects, and their subsequent punishment if they 
are found guilty of a crime, lies with the states and territories, although the 
commonwealth had instigated harmonising disparate laws during the Howard era.

NSW allows law enforcement authorities to detain a suspect for eight hours 
without charge, with the possibility to extend that to four days with the 
approval of a judge. A suspect can be held for 14 days if police believe a 
terrorist attack is imminent, or if an attack has occurred within 48 hours.

Baird wants the benchmark increased to four days minimum, with the option to 
extend that to 28 days with judicial oversight.

He has warned that NSW will press on with reforms of its own detention and 
tracking laws if agreement cannot be reached with the other jurisdictions.

Turnbull told the House of Representatives during question time that NSW’s 
concerns have been well canvassed.

“In August the NSW premier, Mr Baird, wrote to the former prime minister, Mr 
Abbott, proposing further changes and draft provisions were circulated to 
states and territories in early September,” he said.

Pakula said Baird has not raised the reforms with him.

“The NSW government hasn’t provided the other states and territories with 
detail of their proposal,” he said. “Clearly this requires further discussion 
between all states and territories.”

Nor has NSW raised the issues with the Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory>.

The ACT attorney general, Simon Corbell, told Guardian Australia there had 
been a “significant level of harmonisation” in police power and detention laws, 
and NSW’s threat to break away would represent a “very significant departure” 
in that harmonisation.

Corbell has not spoken to Brandis directly about the fifth tranche of 
anti-terrorism laws, but said his department had raised concerns about lowering 
the age of control orders to 14.

The ACT would not support the measure.

“It is very difficult to see justification in extending control orders to 
people of this age,” Corbell said, adding that children of that age could not 
independently form the intent required for political and religious extremism.

Prominent members of Australia’s Islamic community have warned against 
neglecting the root cause of extremism.

“It seems like it’s more driven around the whole policing issue, and it 
continues to focus on that issue,” the president of the Lebanese Muslim 
Association, Samier Dandan, said in Canberra. “We need to refocus on the major 
concerns. It has a huge social impact, and what are we doing as a nation to 
address those issues from a social perspective?

“If [policing is] the only type of process that they want to put in place to 
address these issues, then we will have a major concern with it, because that 
will not … address the issues and we will be in the same predicament a month 
from now or a year from now,” Dandan said.
 