
 Author: John Wyndham (1903-1969) spent his childhood in Birmingham before 
attending Bedales boarding school. He started writing stories in 1925, but only 
got into print in 1929. His work appeared in American pulp magazines under his 
real name, John Beynon Harris, in the early 1930s, and his first novel, The 
Secret People (1935), was serialised in the British magazine Passing Show .

Wyndham saw war service in the signals corps before beginning a string of 
"disaster" novels with The Day of the Triffids (1951). A classic cold war 
parable, Triffids was immediately successful, and Wyndham followed up with 
melting polar ice in The Kraken Wakes (1953), post-nuclear societies in The 
Chrysalids (1955) and alien infiltration in The Midwich Cuckoos (1957). The 
last novel published in Wyndham's lifetime was Chocky (1968), but a decade 
after his death saw the publication of Web (1979), featuring killer spiders. In 
1998 a collection of his private papers was unearthed, among which was an 
incomplete sequel to The Midwich Cuckoos .

 Story: The tiny English village of Midwich is the centre of a mysterious 
24-hour shutdown that renders all its inhabitants unconscious. It soon becomes 
apparent that every one of the women in the village has become pregnant. The 61 
children subsequently born are able to exert unseen mental control over the 
villagers, preventing anyone from leaving the area or harming them.

Government officials take over the care of the "cuckoos"; they live together, 
absorb knowledge fast and appear to share a single unitary intelligence. 
Reports from other parts of the world indicate similar arrivals elsewhere, all 
mercilessly destroyed by the locals. Eventually, British tolerance is also 
strained too far, and the Midwich group are incinerated by local intellectual 
Gordon Zellaby.

Film-makers: Hollywood studio MGM owned the rights to the book and planned to 
make it in America. Moral objections to the mass-impregnation storyline forced 
relocation to England, and German-born emigre Wolf Rilla (b1920), veteran of a 
string of low-budget postwar thrillers, was handed the job, along with MGM 
contract actor George Sanders. Rilla opted to film in the Hertfordshire village 
of Letchmore.

How book and film compare:

While keeping to the essentials of Wyndham's plot, the film overhauls the 
characters, slimming down the number and focusing the action more tightly on 
Zellaby. He no longer has a daughter - it's his wife who gives birth. The 
number of children is reduced, and the film gives them memorable glowing eyes 
as evidence of their telekinetic powers. Arguably, the film script's most 
significant innovation is the notion of the "brick wall" that Zellaby uses to 
disguise his thoughts from the children under his tutelage, and which is seen 
disintegrating as a mental image in the finale.

 Inspirations and influences:

Changing perspectives on children's behaviour was a much-discussed theme in 
the postwar years, with film adaptations of Lord of the Flies (1954) and Lolita 
(1955). With the war a recent memory, the film explicitly evokes the Hitler 
Youth, presenting the children as a blond, precociously self-disciplined troop. 
But Village of the Damned has most in common with the wave of domestic-threat 
science fiction - in particular Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1956), that 
became a favourite of the cold war era.
 