
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> once 
described her movement on clay as like "a cow on ice", and after her victory in 
the Australian Open, one that was never in doubt, the French Open now remains 
the one grand slam she has not won. "It's one of the biggest challenges to win 
it but as you all know I love a challenge," she said after defeating Ana 
Ivanovic of Serbia 7-5, 6-3. "It's what drives me. I'm getting better and 
feeling stronger. I'm holding my ground on the clay, my body is developing, and 
I think I have a great chance."

Her record at Roland Garros is far from bad, with two quarter-finals and her 
first semi-final last year, although in that instance she was comfortably 
defeated 6-2, 6-1 by Ivanovic who went on to reach her first slam final, and 
mark down her name as an up-and-coming star of the women's game. She took 
another large step forward here, but as yet lacks the confidence and, more 
particularly, the experience to secure a major title. Too many things went 
wrong when she played Justine Henin in the French Open final last year, and the 
same applied to Saturday's match against Sharapova, though not quite so 
catastrophically.

Ivanovic is the new world No2 behind Henin although there is no doubt that 
Sharapova, currently ranked No5 after her injury-plagued season last year, will 
soon be looking to split them, and perhaps regain the No1 position she last 
held in March 2007. It had always seemed, since she won the Wimbledon title as 
a 17-year-old in 2004, that Sharapova would dominate the women's game yet 
women's tennis has remained unpredictable, mainly because of the long periods 
all the top players have missed through injury.

Sharapova sees it as a question of her body maturing, referring to herself as 
a "piece of spaghetti" when she won the Wimbledon title. "I've watched the 
tapes many times because I'm still intrigued as to how I beat Serena Williams. 
I didn't even seem nervous. I took it to her basically and that's what amazed 
me the most."

That is what convinced everyone that here was a young woman destined to win a 
multiplicity of slams, but it was another two years before Sharapova took the 
US Open title. TheAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, her third slam, has 
arrived a little more quickly, a success bolstered by the fact that she now 
feels altogether stronger physically.

"If I take care of my business I can beat anyone. I have that confidence. This 
was one of the toughest draws I have had, and I'm more pleased that I now know 
realistically it's possible to keep a high level and play amazing tennis 
through seven matches and to believe in myself. I knew I played Justine at a 
very high level and that that intensity was bound to drop in the next match and 
it was important to be conscious of that and to handle it," Sharapova explained.

She is not always an easy personality with whom to empathise, though she made 
a touching post-final speech, underlying her closeness with her longtime 
hitting partner, Michael Joyce, and her often controversial father. "I need to 
feel they are close and I can trust and believe and they will help, whatever it 
is. They keep me on my feet. I think that by winning here I've proved I can 
come back from having setbacks, negative thoughts and doubts."

Ana Ivanovic has now to prove that she can do something similar. "I already 
feel much better in today's final than I felt in the French Open final," she 
said afterwards. "It hurts a bit now, but I'm sure I can learn from it. 
Obviously, I was emotional out there and I was really disappointed I couldn't 
take the chances I had. But I'm still young and I still think I have a lot of 
grand slam finals in front of me."

Her rivalry with Sharapova is one that may evolve into something quite special.
 