

"Rock music is really just the finish line for everything that has been 
possessed by terrible afflictions. All sorts of aesthetic and moral 
irresponsibilities accumulated over the centuries. And I think my contribution, 
if I have any, is to make it more terrible." That'sAriel Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> giving a droll but faintly proud 
assessment of his own music in The Wire magazine last year. Over the course of 
hundreds of songs in the last decade, he and his band Haunted Graffiti have 
been making scratchy, warped, ramshackle ditties that come into the world 
sounding like they've already spent a lifetime on a cassette in the glove 
compartment.

This aesthetic has proved inspirational for a recent generation of US bedroom 
artists, who tap into a spiritual plane where 80s AM radio plays forever. The 
lo-fi production of these records and Pink's earlier work is eerie and 
evocative, but raises questions: can lo-fi become unnecessarily obscuring, and 
isn't sheen just as musically valid? On his new album Before Today, Pink gets 
out the Brasso and buffs his songs up to a (relative) shine; the burst of 
angelic multitracked harmonies on Bright Lit Blue Skies will curl the lips of 
hardcore lo-fi fans, and delight everyone else.

He still trawls through cultural detritus, but with a bigger net than before. 
The cheap Italo synths and scatterbrained guitar lines are still there, but 
added into the mix are Miami Vice saxes, cock-rock riffs, floral hippy 
meanderings, bump'n'grind basslines; an orgy of all the most sensual and 
decadent parts of the 70s and 80s. Special mentions must go to soft-rock cop 
show theme Beverly Kills, in which you suspect Tom Selleck might start intoning 
over the middle eight. The single Round and Round mooches about, piecing 
fragments of melody together before suddenly joining them up in a chorus for 
the Age of Aquarius.

With Before Today, Ariel Pink's Haunted Graffiti have taken a Los Angeleno 
wedding band from 1986 and dropped them into 2010. Glorious and sincere, with 
cheesiness intact, but their frilled polyester suits endearingly scuffed around 
the edges.
 