
Out with the old and in with the new. We've slammed the door on 2010 – a year 
of quantitative easing, cuts, oil slicks and eurozone crises. As austerity 
tightens its thorny grip, it promises to be a tough 12 months. So here are a 
few suggestions to the movers and shakers in the business world for new year 
resolutions to make 2011 a little happier, more harmonious and more prosperous.

Bankers

Halt your threats and turn on the charm. We've heard enough dire warnings that 
JP Morgan, HSBC and hordes of hedge funds will quit the square mile in favour 
of Hong Kong or Geneva if higher taxes and bonus restrictions come into play. 
The public, for the most part, doesn't care – in fact, there are plenty of 
volunteers who would pay bankers' taxi fares to Heathrow in the hope of seeing 
the back of them.

If you want an end to "banker bashing", change tactics. Make the case 
persuasively for the contribution that finance makes to Britain's economy. 
Explain how you're helping business to grow. Teach us about how you can put our 
savings to work. Give us lessons that you've learned from the credit crunch. 
Tell us why we should love bankers. Nicely.

British Airways cabin crew

Yet another strike ballot is under way at BA. But it's time for Unite to 
settle with the national flag carrier. The public long ago lost sympathy with 
the union's epic dispute atBritish Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways>. The airline showed this 
year that it could operate a tolerable service even on a strike day. Reductions 
in staffing levels on aircraft aren't going to be reversed. During an age of 
austerity, it's difficult to sympathise with workers who are protesting that 
they no longer get as many cheap staff travel allowances as they used to. 
Unite's leadership should be pragmatic and sue for peace. And BA's management 
should tone down its rhetoric to allow the union to withdraw from the 
battlefield with dignity.

UK Uncut

Keep up the good work. Your non-violent protests outside high-street chains 
have shoved tax avoidance on to the political agenda. Sir Philip Green is under 
pressure to explain why Topshop is registered in the name of his wife, 
Cristina, who is a tax resident in Monte Carlo. Boots is struggling to justify 
its domicile in an obscure canton of Switzerland. UK Uncut's adoption of David 
Cameron-style language is a masterstroke – the group's members call themselves 
"Big Society Revenue & Customs". The business world is facing a long overdue 
question – aren't elaborate tax-avoidance gymnastics just as morally repugnant 
as tax evasion?

Warren Buffett

Go back to Cherry Coke and Y-fronts. The so-called Sage of Omaha is revered by 
small investors around the globe for his homespun wisdom and razor-sharp 
stockpicking sense. Traditionally, he specialised in straightforward, everyday 
investments – Fruit of the Loom underwear, Coca-Cola, Dairy Queen cafes, car 
insurance. But the 80-year-old has veered alarmingly towards Wall Street. He's 
a staunch backer ofGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs>, for all its ethical 
failings. He's a top shareholder in the flawed credit ratings agency Moody's. 
And he's lobbied Congress to water down regulation of derivatives. Buffett is 
in danger of losing his reputation as the working man's billionaire.

BP

Remember you're British. In nine days' time, a US presidential commission will 
deliver its findings on BP's catastrophic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. This 
will go some way to determining whether BP will be deemed "grossly negligent", 
which would vastly increase its fines for the disaster. BP has already ponied 
up $20bn to cover clean-up and compensation costs. And, bowing to the demands 
of the American public, the company has replaced its British chief executive 
with an American,Bob Dudley <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-dudley>, 
who grew up near the coast of Mississippi. BP has gone a good way towards 
eradicating the mess in the gulf, which was partly the fault of its contractors 
Transocean and Halliburton. While listening, apologising and learning, the 
company shouldn't compromise any further on its independence.

Angela Merkel

Enough nostalgia about the deutschmark. In the spirit of European unity, 
concentrate on making the euro work. A collapse of the single currency would 
cause financial chaos and could tip chunks of the continent into a depression. 
Resist the temptation to make caustic remarks about Irish profligacy or Greek 
recklessness. Like it or not, Germany is the strongest economy in the eurozone. 
Just occasionally, you may have to dig your neighbours out of holes of their 
own making. That's part of what you bought into when Germany joined the euro.

Visa, Mastercard

Grow a pair. Stop boycotting WikiLeaks. You're happy to process payments for 
dubious top-shelf soft porn publishers. So why have you stopped handling 
donations for Julian Assange's iconoclastic organisation? It's depressing to 
see two international companies bow so timidly to the wishes of the US state 
department.

Goldman Sachs

Improve your quality control. Goldman sponsored two of the biggest stock 
market flotations of the year – Ocado and Betfair. Both turned out to be dogs. 
Betfair is languishing at little more than 950p, a sharp drop from its placing 
price of £13. The online supermarket Ocado, initially slated for a price of 
200p to 275p a share, ended up joining the market at 180p, then slumped by an 
immediate 10%. Given how much your big-brained executives get paid, we expect 
better.

Marc Bolland

Take continental Europe by storm. The Marks & Spencer boss wants Britain's 
best-known retailer to return to the continent by buying back shops offloaded a 
decade ago in France, Germany and Spain. A store on the Champs Elysées is said 
to be under examination. It's good to see M&S back on ambitious form after a 
turbulent few years. Here's hoping Europe will fall in love with Autograph 
cardigans.

And the rest

Some more that can be summed up in a few words. BAA's boss, Colin Matthews: 
buy some snowploughs. Conrad Black: you're out of prison – now say you're 
sorry. George Osborne: stop smirking while you're cutting. Mervyn King: stay 
out of politics and be discreet when talking to American diplomats.
 