
The New Jersey Devils extended their winning streak to four games by beating 
thePittsburgh Penguins 3-1 on Saturday, ending the Penguins' own five-game 
streak.

Adam Henrique and Bobby Butler scored power-play goals 2:12 apart in the third 
period for the Devils, who celebrated ageless goaltender Martin Brodeur's 
1,200thNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> game. New Jersey's Ilya 
Kovalchuk assisted on the late goals, and defenseman Andy Greene had two 
assists. Penguins captain Sidney Crosby had a six-game point streak snapped; 
his longest since 2010.

The Anaheim Ducks' Viktor Fasth stopped three of six attempts in the shootout 
as the Ducks downed theSt Louis Blues 6-5. Bobby Ryan had two goals and two 
assists for Anaheim, while David Backes had a goal and an assist for the Blues, 
who have dropped four straight.

The Phoenix Coyotes goalie Mike Smith made 33 saves through overtime and then 
turned aside two more shots in the shootout to carry the Coyotes past theSan 
Jose Sharks 1-0. Mikkel Boedker and Radium Vrbata both netted shootout goals 
for Phoenix.

The Toronto Maple Leafs made the most of their chances to win 6-0 despite 
being outshot 37-28 by theMontreal Canadiens. James Reimer made 37 saves while 
Phil Kessel had a goal and two assists for Toronto, which has a 6-1 home record 
in road games this season.

Al Montoya made 33 saves and Alex Ponikarovsky scored the only goal in the 
Winnipeg Jets' 1-0 win at the Ottawa Senators. Ponikarovsky broke the scoreless 
deadlock 5:57 into the third period and gave Winnipeg its first road win in 
four attempts.

The Minnesota Wild ended a three-game losing skid with a 2-1 overtime win over 
theNashville Predators. Devin Setoguchi's power-play goal at 4:21 of overtime 
sealed the win, and gave him his first goal of the season. Nashville had a 
four-game winning streak broken.

Niklas Kronwall broke a third-period tie and Pavel Datsyuk had a goal and an 
assist as theDetroit Red Wings edged the Edmonton Oilers 2-1.

The rookie Jordan Schroeder scored his first two NHL goals and Cory Schneider 
stopped 33 shots as theVancouver Canucks rallied to defeat the Calgary Flames 
5-1 and notch a fifth consecutive victory. ThePhiladelphia Flyers' Danny Briere 
scored 1:47 into overtime to lift the Flyers to a 4-3 win over theCarolina 
Hurricanes.

The Buffalo Sabres had a 3-2 win at the New York Islanders despite being 
outshot 43-15, theWashington Capitals earned a much-needed win by beating the 
Florida Panthers 5-0, while the game between the Boston Bruins and Tampa Bay 
Lightning was postponed because of a blizzard in the Boston area.
 