
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> is planning to lead one of 
the first trade missions to Cuba since the Obama administration loosened travel 
and trade restrictions on the Communist-ruled Caribbean island, the Wall Street 
Journal reported on Saturday.

Quoting a person familiar with his plans, the paper said the Democratic 
governor, who will be among the first high-profile US politicians to visitCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> since last month’s policy shift, would 
announce his plan on Wednesday and take the trip in coming months. It gave no 
further details.

Cuomo’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. 

The report came as Vermont Democratic senator Patrick Leahy set off on the 
first congressional mission to Cuba following President Barack Obama’s 
announcement on 17 December that Washington would start normalising ties with 
its old Cold War foe.

US airlines eager to return to Cuba but is island nation ready for influx of 
tourists?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/17/us-airlines-cuba-travel-tourism> 
Leahy is heading a group of four Democratic senators and two Democratic 
representatives, all of whom have visited Cuba in the past and who strongly 
support Obama’s policy, a statement from his office said. Their three-day trip 
aims to get an idea from Cuban government officials how they see they 
normalisation process, and convey a sense of what Americans expect.

Separately, the US and Cuba are holding high-level talks in Havana next week 
on normalising ties.

A package of new rules came into effect on Friday implementing Obama’s policy 
shift by opening up the island to expanded US travel, trade and financial 
activities.

The US embargo on Cuba, in place for 54 years, remains in place, however, as 
only Congress can lift it.

While Cuban president Raul Castro has welcomed last month’s deal, he has made 
clear that Havana does not intend to abandon single-party rule or the 
state-controlled economy. Congressional critics of Obama’s shift say that 
Washington should not be rewarding Cuba.
 