
The job of England's first children's commissioner is so new and untested that 
Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, who took 
up his post last July, is still operating out of a temporary office in 
Whitehall and has yet to hire his full quota of staff.

There is, however, one issue on which he already feels so passionately that he 
has decided to use his inaugural public appearance next Monday to commit 
himself to its eradication.

'I have had hundreds of in-depth conversations with children since accepting 
this post and I can tell you that the one thing every child I have met has been 
affected by, with virtually no exceptions, is bullying,' he told The Observer 
in the first one-on-one interview he has given in his new role.

'Bullying has an enormous impact on its victims ... both mentally and 
physically, and I was taken aback to find that almost every child I met chose 
to bring up the issue ... citing examples of how it had affected their lives,' 
he said.

Aynsley-Green's decision to declare his dedication to the issue has fallen in 
a tragically apposite week: last Wednesday, Tommy Kimpton, 19, who had been 
bullied since he was five, was found guilty of manslaughter after admitting 
battering Ben Williams, one of his tormentors, to death with a pool cue.

Kimpton, who was cleared by a jury of murdering his 17-year-old victim, told 
the court he was teased because he 'was fat, had thick glasses, big ears and 
goofy teeth'. A classmate who also gave evidence, admitted that Kimpton had 
been subjected to a relentless campaign of bullying: 'If we were bored and 
there was nothing to do we would make fun of Tommy,' said 19-year-old Charlotte 
Parton.

Then last Thursday, the day after Kimpton was sentenced to two years, 
15-year-old Natashia Jackman was stabbed five times with a pair of scissors by 
a gang of bullies while she waited in the school lunch queue, suffering wounds 
to her eye, chest and back, and narrowly avoiding sustaining lasting damage to 
her sight.

The attack, her father claimed, was the third serious incidence of bullying 
his daughter had suffered at the hands of pupils at Collingwood College in 
Surrey, although he insisted that the violence had re-occurred despite the 
school's best efforts to fulfil its anti- bullying policy.

Although there have been extreme examples of bullying at the college in the 
past - in 1994, a 13-year-old girl was knifed by an older student after being 
lured into a school toilet - the local MP came forward yesterday to blame the 
attack on an endemic problem of bullying throughout society.

'It is not right to single out specific schools,' said Michael Gove, the 
Conservative MP for Surrey Heath. 'There is bullying across the country.'

This is the very point which Aynsley-Green passionately believes needs to be 
recognised and tackled. 'I have no doubt that children are being bought up in a 
society where violence is the norm,' he said.

'I include in this the violence on television, in the workplace and in the 
home. Violence is part of our contemporary culture, where it is so prevalent 
that it largely goes unremarked,' he added. 'My first plea in my new post is 
for adults to look in the mirror before they start castigating children for 
bullying behaviour.'

A report by the TUC last week supports his claims. The study called for 
tougher laws to protect staff from intimidation and punish bullies, with the 
union claiming that two million people were bullied at work over the past six 
months, often by managers.

Bullying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying>, the report found, 
accounted for the loss of about 18 million working days each year, with 
employees going sick or changing jobs to escape humiliation. About 75 per cent 
of the bullying was perpetrated, researchers found, by managers or supervisors.

'The long-term pain for victims is incalculable, said Aynsley-Green. 'I want 
to see the treatment of bullying mainstreamed in schools so by the time 
children become adults, they know how to cope with it and defeat it.'

But Aynsley-Green, a former national clinical director for children and 
chairman of the Department of Health's children's task force, who has also been 
professor of child health at Great Ormond Street Hospital forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and the Institute of Child 
Health, University College London, has a long road to travel to achieve his 
ambition, according to the children's charity Childline.

Bullying in schools is getting worse, the charity revealed last month, 
claiming it had received thousands more calls about the issue in the year to 
October than in the whole of 2004.

According to Childline, the fact that seven out of 10 bullying incidents take 
place on school premises, a level that has stayed constant in recent years, is 
proof that government campaigns have failed.

While refusing to criticise the policymakers with whom he will be working 
closely, Aynsley-Green is circumspect in his opinion of their successes.

'There is much that I admire in the way of government policy and I want to pay 
tribute to a lot of extremely good work going on in schools,' he says 
carefully. 'But from what children are telling me, there is still a lot of 
denial about the existence, severity and effect of bullying in schools.

'It is not going too far to say many schools and teachers are still in a state 
of denial about this issue. There simply isn't enough genuine awareness of the 
problem in the minds of adults,' he said.

When Amy Hewitt, a 16-year-old student in Leicester who was bullied from the 
age of nine to 12, found the courage to tell her teachers she was being 
bullied, she was devastated to realise she was not believed.

'The bullying was emotional, verbal and very subtle, which meant it didn't 
happen in the manner or in the places where teachers could have seen it,' said 
Hewitt, who won a Diana Award last year for her work on the development of an 
anti-bullying support scheme that has been credited with reducing incidents 
across schools and colleges in Leicester by 10 per cent.

'But it was devastating none the less,' she added. 'I was desperate. I 
eventually believed the awful, personal things that were being said to me and 
couldn't imagine a time in my life when I would have friends and live a happy 
life.'

Hewitt eventually moved schools and found new friends, but for other victims 
the impact of bullying has had permanent impacts.

As part of the launch of Anti-Bullying Week on 21 November, Aynsley-Green has 
collated eight accounts of bullying from children to whom he has spoken. These 
stories have been put into a booklet containing information and advice for 
teachers that will be distributed to every school in England.

'I am 11 years old and a carer,' said one young girl. 'A girl had been 
bullying me for months. She shouted and swore at teachers, and when they talked 
to her about the bullying she denied it. She ruled the whole year.

'They punished her and threatened to exclude her but it made no difference, 
then the bullying spread to our street because she started spreading rumours 
that got all my friends to gang up on me. I used to rollerskate or swim but now 
I just want to stay home. I don't do any after-school activities. It all got 
too much. I just wanted it to stop. I felt like I was screaming for help for 
years but that no one could hear me,' she added.

Even when schools take incidents seriously, Aynsley-Green found that children 
said their anti-bullying policies often made things worse. 'From talking to 
teachers, I have found that they are often very unhappy about what they are 
expected to do about bullying,' he said. 'There is often a lot of theory about 
what they should do but not much reality in how to implement it.'

One young boy told Aynsley-Green how, when he eventually reported his bullies 
to his teachers, their response was to move him to a new form group.

'But because I was the only one changing my group, everyone wanted to know why 
and then a couple of kids from the old form spoke to kids in my new form, and 
it all started again,' he said.

'The bullying happened everywhere. At swimming they'd hold me under the water 
until I thought I was going to drown, then let me go as I was going limp. The 
PE teachers didn't seem to care. At break I'd sit in front of the security 
camera and pray they were watching [but] the school was on two sites and the 
path between the sites was dark, dingy and overgrown, and I was constantly 
pushed into the ditch, muddy, wet and upset.'

In the end, the young teenager moved to a school with a successful 
anti-bullying policy. 'When I first got there I was weak and feeble and felt 
completely washed out after what had happened to me for years,' he said.

'The hardest part was getting my confidence back around my home but, finally, 
I am not scared any more.'

Aynsley-Green accepts there is not a 'one-size-fits-all' answer to the issue 
but among the ideas he is considering is making schools give a termly 
questionnaire on bullying to every child from the first year of primary 
education upwards, then asking Ofsted to judge schools on the responses.

'I will expose this problem relentlessly and fearlessly, and confront the 
adult world with the views of young people,' he pledged. 'I will influence 
public, parental and political opinion and engage with the government in 
scrutiny of their decisions.

'By the new year, I will be up to speed and will be focusing on exposing 
schools and pupils' experiences of bullying when they are under their care,' he 
added. 'I am going to engage seriously with the issues that children tell me 
impact on them and I am going to make the adult world listen.'

amelia.hill@observer.co.uk <mailto:amelia.hill@observer.co.uk>

www.childrenscommissioner.org <http://www.childrenscommissioner.org> Explains 
Children's Commissioner's role. Policy and information links.

www.childline.org.uk <http://www.childline.org.uk> Free helpline for children 
and young people who can also call 0800 1111 night or day.
 