
Tracy Parkyn, 46, shop worker 

The teenage invasion is a terrible problem for this town. I'm constantly being 
verbally abused, and they're kids, and not from round here. They get drunk, 
they make noise and it stops other people from coming to Newquay.

But where do they get their alcohol from? And how do they have the money to 
stay in those bunkhouses, some of which charge £40 a night? It must be that 
parents are giving them alcohol, and money to come here.

They are dangerous, too. Last year my son, who's 21, was jumped on by a crowd 
of teenagers and ended up in hospital with concussion. That's how they behave, 
just for a laugh.

Andy Weir, 36, Fistral beach bunkhouse owner
 Andy Weir: things have to change 
We'd had plenty of stag and hen parties, but I was unprepared for 16-year-olds 
on my doorstep. We had one group who made a big nuisance of themselves, made a 
lot of noise, and disturbed the neighbours. Things had to change – now we 
insist that where it's a group of under-18s, the parents have to make the 
booking. We make sure they understand that we're not a babysitting service, and 
we ask them to sign a form saying they are fully aware of that. It also means 
that if we need someone to come down and collect them, we know who to go to.

I do sympathise with parents, and with the kids: at some point between 16 and 
18 you probably should go on your first holiday alone. But the messages have 
got to be strong ones from home about what is, and isn't, acceptable.

Monjur Choudhury, 36, restaurant owner

I'm opening a new restaurant in Newquay next week. My target customer is 
40-something, and I'm aiming at the family market. So I really want this 
clampdown on teenagers to work. It matters to businesses like mine that things 
improve here.

But it's not a new problem. Groups of drinkers – whether they're hen or stag 
parties or teenagers – have been coming to Newquay for decades, and our town 
needs their custom for the businesses to survive. Come here in the winter, and 
you'll find a ghost town. The pubs and clubs here have to make all their money 
in a short period during the summer.

But most of us here feel now that the teenage thing has gone way over the top. 
This area of Cornwall is quite laid-back, and the behaviour these young people 
bring is alien to us. At heart we're a family-orientated town, and we need a 
real change in the culture and how our town is seen. We also need parents to 
realise that this isn't the place to send unaccompanied young people.

Sarah Almond, 29, shop worker

The teenage invasion is a pain. You come to work in the morning not knowing 
whether you'll find vomit or urine in your shop doorway – it's a horrible way 
to live.

I used to work in a pub here, so I know that it's not just teenagers – Newquay 
gets hen parties and stag parties too. But the teenagers are in many ways 
worse, because they're so young and they have no experience of drinking, or 
when to stop. It's frightening for local people, and for families who visit, 
and especially for elderly people – it stops them going out.

I'm sure the kids are bringing their alcohol with them into Newquay, because 
it's very difficult to get served here if you're underage. I'm often asked for 
my ID in off-licences, pubs and supermarkets, and I'm almost 30!

The thing that annoys me is that parents are allowing their teenagers to come 
here, and then the people of Newquay are expected to pick up the pieces when it 
all goes wrong. I'm pleased the police are doing more this year – I hope their 
measures work.
 