
The first few weeks of the new year, when programme planners are still trying 
to clear their heads from Christmas, is a good time to go online and sample
KCRW's Eclectic 24. This, apparently machine-generated melange of the favourite 
tunes of the key DJs of the Santa Monica-based station is, wouldn't you know, 
one of the more satisfying listening experiences available on the digital dial. 
Presumably, the fact that the selection is untouched by human hand and has been 
programmed for the easier kind of listen explains the fact that anything you 
don't like doesn't hang around long enough to irritate you; it's possible to 
listen round anything you don't care for and be pleasantly surprised to look up 
and note the name of anything that catches your fancy. It's a pleasant antidote 
to British music radio, which tends to enthuse about a record before playing 
it, thereby often prejudicing you against it. In the last half-hour on KCRW 
Eclectic 24 I've heard Arcade Fire, LCD Soundsystem, Emiliana Torrini, Mr 
Scruff, Fat Freddy's Drop and a Donny Hathaway track from his 1973 album 
Extension Of A Man. This sound supply is available all over the world all round 
the clock. You'd have thought the BBC could have found room in their digital 
spectrum to do something similar.

Anthony Trollope <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope> hired a 
manservant whose duties involved waking the novelist long before dawn so that 
he could put in a few hours with the quill before going off to his day job. 
This job, please note, was running the Post Office and this at a time when that 
meant being in charge of all aspects of human communication in the wealthiest, 
most advanced country in the world. InTrollope (Thursday, 11.30am, R4) poet 
Michael Symmons Roberts looks at the man who penned more than 50 books, many of 
which were popular then and are still popular today, while at the same time 
holding down the day job to beat all day jobs.

The same Roberts is one of the voices introducing Jeremy Irons reading TS 
Eliot's Four Quartets, in theSaturday Drama slot (Saturday, 2.30pm, R4). You 
can just imagine these mordant ruminations seeping into your living room on a 
darkening winter's afternoon. Pray to God that your team hasn't lost in a 
lunchtime kick-off. As Eliot says, "humankind cannot bear very much reality".

The Essay: The Book That Changed Me (Weeknights, 10.45pm, R3) starts with 
former home secretary Alan Johnson talking about how David Copperfield said 
something to him about his life as he was growing up in poverty in west London 
in the 60s. Will he prove to be the last cabinet minister to take moral lessons 
from a 19th-century novel? Subsequent contributors in this slot later in the 
week are Tracey Thorn, Simon McBurney, Malorie Blackman and Luke Johnson.

The action of the Fifteen Minute Drama: November Dead List (Weekdays, 10.45am, 
R4) begins just below this newspaper's office windows, in the cold Stygian 
gloom of the Regents Canal, where people other than wobbly cyclists are sadly 
found from time to time. DI Flood is beginning her investigations into the fate 
of a minicab driver who ended up there when she is visited by the local Roman 
Catholic priest. He points out that the dead man was one of the names on the 
November Dead List, in which the parishioners commend the souls of their dear 
departed. At that point he was not yet departed. The plot, as you'd expect, 
thickens.
 