
So swiftly did the LA Kings and the Phoenix Coyotes finish off their 
semi-final opponents, that they will this weekend start off the Western 
Conference final, bidding for a place in the Stanley Cup, while the eastern 
conference is still concluding its semi-finals. The New York Rangers and the
Washington Capitals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-capitals> 
have gone to Game 7 in both the quarters and the semis. The winner will face 
the New Jersey Devils in the Eastern Conference final. Here's how this 
weekend's playoffs matchup:

Playoff scores and schedule <http://www.nhl.com/ice/schedulebymonth.htm>

Kings vs. Coyotes: The space between

So can we all agree that nobody saw this coming? A matchup between these two 
teams for the conference championship was never on any serious radar until at 
least the end of the first round, and even then both the Blues and Predators 
seemed to be rolling at such a pace that dreams in California and Arizona were 
bound to be crushed. Not so. And what we're left with is the possibility of a 
very close conference final series – one to likely be dominated tight defensive 
play and few goals. Which is interesting, given we are well into the 
post-lockout phase of the NHL and deep into the time period when we were 
supposed to see the game open up and when defensive contests were a thing of 
some long-agoNew Jersey Devils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-jersey-devils> trap phase of life. But 
here we are.

Obvious also to anybody who's been watching so far is that this will probably 
be the most epic of goaltending matchups that we've certainly seen all playoffs 
and likely for quite some time. The Luongo-versus-Thomas bill of last spring 
was definitely a sight to behold, but both the Bruins and Canucks were known as 
much for their offensive style and goalscoring as anything going on between the 
pipes. As well, we were at that point watching two goalies that had been around 
for some time, and while Thomas' age didn't seem to match his performance, when 
neither seemed able to replicate their feats this year, the age factor was – 
perhaps -– an acceptable excuse.

Now, we get to see two young goalies (Jonathan Quick was born in 1986; Mike 
Smith in 1982) at very much the prime of their careers. Both have been stellar 
this postseason, backstopping their teams consistently and often making those 
highlight saves that keep everyone together long enough either to eek out a 
close win or simply just give their team enough time to get that go-ahead goal. 
Some quick stats: Smith is 8-3, has a 1.70 GAA with a.948 save percentage. 
Huge. Quick is sitting at 8-1, boasting a 1.55 GAA and .949 save percentage. 
Huger. It's just too close to call on that alone.

Whether both will be able to replicate their performances in the coming days 
and weeks? We might actually have to look at the rest of their teams to 
determine the likelihood of that.

This is where we find the goal-scoring potential – and, given what I've just 
gone over, I really do mean only potential. But the Kings are winning on this 
front. They have already dismantled two all star goalies on the way to this 
point (Luongo and Elliott) and against the Canucks, were able to out-score a 
high-powered offence. They're also getting scoring from everywhere. As of their 
last game, 14 different players on the Kings had scored during the playoffs, 
which means that, yes, all their lines are rolling.

And this is where the Coyotes could have some trouble. They've been winning 
close games, many in overtime, and most really by virtue of Smith. They have to 
start scoring more, and earlier.

So if you take the goalies at a wash, you're really left with two teams up 
front that look very similar except perhaps where it might matter most: goals. 
For the Kings, the key will be staying out of the box, being physical (they're 
a bigger team), making better use of their power play (which stinks), and 
getting those big bodies in front of Smith (who's no slouch himself). As for 
the 'Yotes... well, they need to score, especially if they're given the chance 
with the man advantage. And if they can frustrate the Kings enough, they could 
have those opportunities.

Prediction: All that being said, I'll take the underdog for once. Coyotes in 7.

Another Game 7 in New York City

A familiar scenario. The Rangers are back at home in a Game 7 facing the task 
of having to do away with yet another upstart team from a national capital. 
Last time, they managed to fight off Ottawa. Can they do the same to 
Washington, a team that has become surprisingly tight and organized as the 
playoffs have gone on? It's worth remembering it was the Caps that replaced 
their head coach only a few months into the regular season, and were 
desperately trying to get any kind of consistent production out of its 
multi-million dollar captain. No matter what happens Saturday, this season has 
been a success.

Because now here they are, on the cusp of the Eastern conference final, 
pushing the first-placed team to the brink. Overat the National Post, Bruce 
Arthur notes 
<http://sports.nationalpost.com/2012/05/10/dale-hunter-making-believers-out-of-capitals/>
 some of the things that Caps' coach Dale Hunter has managed to do since he 
arrived from London.

"He reduced the ice time of the team's stars, created less puck possession for 
his team, and produced more time in Washington's defensive end. He has carved 
out increased roles for of a posse of grinding pros like Jay Beagle, Joel Ward, 
Jason Chimera, Troy Brouwer, Mike Knuble, and especially in Game 6 in 
Washington, Matt Hendricks."

Hunter is also one half of the reason this series has become as much a contest 
of blocking shots as it has one of scoring goals – the other being, of course, 
John Tortorella, over in the other bench. There's been a lot of talk in the 
last week about how shot blocking might be the newest demise of the game, 
mostly thanks toa column David Brooks wrote at the New York Post 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/sports/rangers/rangers_out_to_score_big_win_P9WINDcZdhiui3tv0Qpz3M#ixzz1uZVB764Z>
, where he posited this:

"The blocked shot and coaches' obsession with it as a means toward ending an 
opponents' season have become hockey's version of baseball's pitch count, an 
art that might lead to victory but has made the game less entertaining and has 
perverted the framers' original intent."

But as Harrison Mooney at Yahoo's Puck Daddy points out 
<http://ca.sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nhl-puck-daddy/capitals-rangers-shot-blocking-troubling-sign-nhl-playoffs-213322746.html>
, with the help of some historical figures from the 2006 finals, "you're not 
watching the future of hockey. You're just watching two excellent shot-blocking 
teams go head to head."

So far, blocking has kept things even closer than they might have been if the 
goalies had actually been forced to save the majority of those shots (which 
would quite possibly have given this series a different look, given it would 
have pitted Lundqvist against Holtby more directly). And whatever you think of 
it, there's bound to be more Saturday, given a conference title spot is on the 
line.

As for Game 7, it might be easy to speculate that given how close these games 
have been, that the first goal will be critical. That's been true so far in 
this series, but it hasn't meant that the team to score first runs away with 
it. As we all know, we especially have to watch for the Rangers late in the 
game. Twice now in consecutive games, the Rangers have been able to put one 
away very late – a little too late in Game 6, but nevertheless, with a guy like 
Brad Richards circling around, it's never out of the realm of possibility.

For the Rangers, the key for Saturday is to stay composed, and knowing that 
the Caps will be throwing themselves to the ice, the primary word for them to 
remember will be 'patience'. If at all possible, the Rangers need to keep calm, 
wait, and open up new shooting lanes at every opportunity by staying mobile and 
using the width of the ice to stretch the Caps' defence, offering up more ice. 
And for goodness sake, get some people in front of Holtby.

For the Caps, much the same applies, but certainly they need to keep the 
physical pressure on the Rangers, and use the dump-and-chase as much as 
possible. They've proved already they can hold off sustained Rangers pressure 
for long periods, which has been frustrating for New York. Washington needs 
more of that. Also, the Rangers like to come out strong, so if the Caps can 
pull off a rope-a-dope style of game, they might grab a goal late in the period.

This one is such a tough call, so I won't predict anything apart from saying 
it will be a good one.
 