
Something unique could have happened Wednesday night. Two top-ranked teams, 
Vancouver and Pittsburgh – the two teams, in fact, thatsome predicted 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1136947-2012-stanley-cup-playoffs-complete-breakdown-of-the-postseason-bracket/page/16>
 could face each other for the Stanley Cup – faced elimination. It was, as they 
say, crunch time. But neither the Canucks nor the Penguins had looked very good 
going into Wednesday, having been out-played, out-scored, and in Pittsburgh's 
case,out-punched 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/apr/18/penguins-flyers-hossa-torres-nhl-fights>
, by teams that on the face of it should not have caused them so much trouble. 
Wednesday night was critical. Here's how it went down:

Penguins versus Flyers

There was a point in Wednesday's Penguins-Flyers game when even Twitter had a 
tough time keeping up with the goals. They started early and basically didn't 
stop until most of the way into the last period, when it was clear everyone 
just sort of wanted to go home. In fact, by that time, a lot of the Flyers fans 
had. Because by the middle of the third, it was 10-3 for Pittsburgh and the 
series we all hoped would be incredible once again proved that it is, and that 
it even had more surprises for us.

The going assumption was that Pittsburgh would succumb to the Flyers as they 
had in the previous three games and make a dramatic exit from the first round – 
in a sweep, no less. Aside from all the punching, the highlight of the series 
had so far been the goals, and that there were just so many of them. Still, 
with the physical play distracting so much from the actual game, it was only 
Penguins' goalie Marc-André Fleury who'd come under scrutiny as being sub-par 
by virtue only of having been on the losing side. The truth was, at the other 
end, Ilya Brzygalov wasn't looking too much better.

Wednesday night's game seemed destined from very early on to be as much about 
whether the Penguins would survive as about which team might have better luck 
with a potted plant between the pipes than the goalie they outfitted. The first 
period scoresheet reads like this:

Goal: 01:16 -- Claude Giroux, Philadelphia
Goal: 03:37 -- Evgeni Malkin, Pittsburgh
Goal: 08:05 -- Matt Niskanen, Pittsburgh
Goal: 15:06 -- Kimmo Timonen, Philadelphia
Goal: 15:52 -- Jakub Voracek, Philadelphia
Goal: 16:19 -- Sidney Crosby, Pittsburgh
Goal: 17:39 -- Jordan Staal, Pittsburgh

You get the idea.

Here, for the record, is the Vorcek's goal, <http://youtu.be/qvZb_R5IC6o> the 
last one the Flyers would manage Wednesday, and – as you can see – one that at 
the time looked pretty pivotal.

Anyway, in case the first period wasn't enough, it got sillier after that. 
Pittsburgh notched another five goals in the second period, and one final tally 
in the third, in front a mostly empty stadium and past Bryzgalov's replacement, 
Sergei Bobrovzki who was no better at being able to handle the Penguins. Not 
that he had any help. For example, here's Malkin's second goal, the last one of 
the night, and well after it seemed the Flyers were even bothering with 
defence, let alone much else.

.
It all amounts to a most glorious scenario: That the shift in momentum (if 
such a thing can carry over game-to-game – though, we might have just seen that 
is not the case) could continue, and we might have to seriously consider that 
the Penguins have a chance at coming back in this thing. It's not unheard of. 
Three teams have come back from three down to win a series, including the 
Flyers in 2010.

But in order for that to happen, Fleury will have delete from his internal 
memory everything that came between the end of the regular season and some 
random moment in time Wednesday night when he remembered how to stop the puck. 
Going into Wednesday's game, he had an appalling .798 save percentage, having 
only managed to stop 67 of 84 shots. Despite the win, Wednesday's game won't 
have helped that. He has to have a few career games to help his team back into 
this. As for the rest of the Penguins, clearly scoring is not an issue. On 
defence, however, two words come to mind: Maginot Line.

The same can be said for Bryzgalov, as it has been for Fleury this series, 
though maybe to a lesser degree. Still, he's looked wobbly at the best of 
times, and had five go past him Wednesday before being removed. Now coach 
Laviolette has an uncomfortable question: Two goalies took a beating, so which 
one will back the team next in Pittsburgh?

Most of all, though, all this means we get yet another chapter in a matchup 
that has truly lived up to its billing. Bring on Friday and game 5. And 6, 
should it happen.

Canucks versus Kings

Across the continent, in LA, it happened differently, but the result was 
essentially the same.

Though they grabbed this year's President's trophy, the Canucks were also 
facing elimination – against the eighth-seed LA Kings, who'd solved Vancouver 
completely in the first three games. Wednesday was a different story. The Kings 
looked sluggish, out of place and had little hustle compared to the Canucks. 
Where earlier they'd found solutions to every barrier, they were faced with 
fresh problems with no answers Wednesday. There were two, specifically.

First, was Vancouver second-string goalie Cory Schneider. Schneider started 
Game 3, too, which ended in a loss, but he looked more solid than Vancouver's 
mainstay, Roberto Luongo, who is showing off his Don Draper dependability in 
the playoffs. So, he got the call again, and delivered in full. Schneider was 
everywhere he needed to be immediately, square to the shooter and making key 
saves when the Kings finally did get bodies in front of him (which they didn't 
do very often, particularly on the power play). He also made a huge goal-line 
stand with just over a minute left in the game to keep things where they were, 
even when he couldn't see the puck at all.

The second was Daniel Sedin, who missed the first part of the series with a 
head injury sustained at the end of the regular season. Sedin's presence was 
notable. The Canucks looked much more like the team everyone got to know so 
well for the last seven months, particularly on the man advantage, where 
Vancouver was able to move the puck and, eventually, score.

Conversely, Kings' goalie Jonathan Quick, who'd been stellar (and still had 
good moments Wednesday) finally showed a human side and was sluggish, and not 
as – sorry – quick as he normally is to get to loose pucks and recover from 
saves. He wasn't helped much by the Kings' offence, which struggled to make 
things happen (including hitting the post twice). And despite earning a number 
of power plays, the Kings failed to capitalize thanks to both the Canucks' 
penalty kill unit, but also to the basic fact that there was just never, ever 
anyone in front of Schneider – he saw everything. And so he stopped most of it. 
As one does.

The knife to the throat, though, probably came when Kings captain Dustin Brown 
had a chance to even things up with a penalty shot and instead didn't, and 
moments later watched as the Canucks went ahead by two. Poor Dustin Brown. Let's
relive it <http://youtu.be/Anch9l35ykw>, shall we?

I mean, it was no Dennis Wideman hurdy-gurdy, mid-air fail 
<http://youtu.be/ny8vwvm0fEc> – it was a respectable enough attempt – but it 
was a key moment, one that ended up being a turning point anyway, just for the 
other team.

So, back to Vancouver we'll go to see what kind of surprises this series still 
holds. This, at least, we know: Schneider starting in goal will not be one of 
them.

Looking ahead

Four games are set for Thursday night, each one sitting has one team up two 
games to one on the other. Florida has surprised a few people (including me) by 
proving more effective against New Jersey than expected. They'll look to win 
again tonight in New Jersey to have the chance to win the series at home. 
Boston hasn't quite looked like the defending champions against Washington, but 
could take a 3-1 series lead tonight. The physical play that ended Game 3 might 
carry over to Thursday's meeting, but like the game in Philadelphia, expect the 
referees to be on high alert and call a tight game.

In the West, Phoenix has to play one more game in Chicago before going back 
home. They're up 2-1 in the series, but expect the Blackhawks to come out 
strong, looking to avenge the loss of Marian Hossa tothat ugly Raffi Torres hit 
 <http://youtu.be/W2mX7LqBGo4>two nights ago. Again, officials will probably be 
watching things pretty closely (or they should be), but I'm sure it will 
surprise nobody if things get a little heated. St. Louis can equally take 
command of their series against San Jose to give themselves a shot at winning 
it back home in a few nights. They've looked much better since their first game 
against the Sharks. Don't expect the same kind of scoring as the 
PIttsburgh-Philadelphia game, though.

NHL playoff scores and schedule <http://www.nhl.com/ice/stanleycup.htm>

Thursday update

Phoenix Coyotes 3, Chicago Blackhawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-blackhawks> 2 (OT)
Fourth straight game between the pair goes to overtime. For the third time in 
four games, the Chicago forced OT by scoring the tying goal after pulling 
goaltender Corey Crawford for an extra attacker. But Phoenix now lead the 
series 3-1.

New Jersey Devils 4, Florida Panthers 0
Series tied 2-2

Washington Capitals 2, Boston Bruins 1
Series tied 2-2.

 