
We could go on about how unexpected each of these match-ups are, and nobody 
would have called them midway through the season, but I'd have to copy and 
paste that a few times, so we'll leave it as just an assumed thing. Cool? Cool.

WEST

LA Kings vs St Louis Blues

Like the other Western series, this one will be a battle of the goaltenders. 
Both Jonathan Quick and the Brian Elliot/Yaroslav Halak team have had 
outstanding seasons and, in Elliott's case, came up big for their respective 
teams in the first round, when asked. St. Louis polished off the Sharks in the 
first round in five games, making short work of what's left of the confidence 
that used to leak out of San Jose for a while. The Kings took care of the 
Canucks in equally decisive fashion, which could, if you want to believe the 
worst of it, mark the beginning of a similar gradual confidence leak there.

So the goalie-vs-goalie thing will happen, and that'll be great. There's every 
chance we'll see some highlight saves, and be grudgingly agreed by the end of 
it that, no matter who wins, either one (or any of the three, depending on how 
things go) probably deserved it.

If we're willing to call the goalie thing a wash, then it will come down to 
scoring. We saw how Quick held up against top level scorers in the first round, 
making short work of a one-Sedin Vancouver and all but silencing its other 
go-to guys. As for the Halak/Elliott duo, there was less of a test against the 
Sharks – and then, mostly for Elliott – but even still, neither can be 
discounted to put up a serious performance if asked. And even though the Blues 
can score, they might have a tough time doing it in round two. On the other 
hand, the Kings are notoriously incapable of scoring, and may have to do more 
of it than they did against the Canucks... or anyone else all year.

All of which means we expect a tight race with low scoring. Maybe some 2-1 
overtime games in this one. Maybe a lot of them. Maybe all of them.

Prediction: The Kings took the season series three games to one, but... St. 
Louis in 6.

Nashville Predators vs Phoenix Coyotes

Ok, so we can't assume that a team that went to overtime so many times in the 
first round against Chicago, and only then barely won the thing, can really 
expect to have the same luck against a team that is, in many respects, markedly 
superior to the Blackhawks, both in the regular season and so far in the 
playoffs. The truth is Phoenix is riding a stellar goalie, Mike Smith, and have 
held it together out front. Sure, they scored when they needed to, but they 
were helped along by the fact that Corey Crawford let in some real wobblers at 
exactly the wrong time. Twice, at least. And even with all that, the first 
round win for Phoenix was still a hell of a close one.

Facing them across the ice will be the Predators, who... well, they beat 
Detroit. And OK, the Wings aren't quite what they used to be, but the Preds did 
away with them handily, looking like a fine-tuned machine in just about every 
area of the ice. They don't just have a good goalie – though Pekka Rinne is 
that in spades – but a top defensive pairing in Weber and Suter who were part 
of the reason the Wings looked confused and scattered.

Again, here, taking the goalies at just about even (though Rinne has an edge), 
you might still have to side with Nashville to come out on top. They're a 
solid, physical, shut-down team, and there's a chance they'll outwork the 
Coyotes.

Having said all of that, we can hardly discount the 'Yotes immediately. They 
have been a genuine surprise so far, and in a lot of ways, look a lot like the 
Predators in terms of the physical, defensive game style. They're not 
necessarily winning games by leaps and bounds, but they're still winning them – 
that's what matters. Like any good Western playoff match-up, this one will be 
tough and probably long, and like the Kings-Blues, could be a series where the 
points are tough to come by, which will make them all the more important.

Prediction: Nashville in a safe 6.

EAST

Washington Capitals vs New York Rangers

Before the Rangers played their first game against the Ottawa Senators, a deal 
was struck between Hillary Clinton and John Baird, the respective foreign 
ministers for the U.S. and Canada. Thanks to the Sens loss Thursday night, 
Baird will now be forced to wear a Rangers jersey, and Clinton will move on to 
make another bet against... uh, herself?

Anyway, the Capitals might actually have the momentum going into this one, 
even though they were forced to a Game 7 against Boston when they could have 
finished it off at home in six. Still, they took down the Stanley Cup 
champions, and seemed to hit a stride they'd been searching for all year in the 
process. They have a new, hot – and perhaps above all – well-rested goalie 
who's come out of seemingly nowhere with no pressure on him to do any more than 
he already has. That will help. Secondly, the Caps are finally getting key 
performances from the guys they were begging to show up halfway through the 
year. Niklas Backstrom's return did really seem to have a positive effect, and 
with guys like Brooks Laich and Jay Beagle fired up, there's a good chance the 
Caps will put up a fight. AsDeep94 noted yesterday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/apr/25/senators-rangers-bruins-capitals-devils-panthers?commentpage=1#comment-15844161>
 in the comments, coach Dale Hunter seems to have balanced this team.

The Rangers, on the other hand, are still a question mark, even though they 
too pushed their series to seven games. But beating the Sens was never supposed 
to be a problem. They were the eighth seed, after all. But the Rangers simply 
couldn't gather themselves together, couldn't score, and looked a little dozy 
up until about the second half of Game 6, when they suddenly seemed to realize 
what was going on. Game 7 was a much more familiar Rangers team, and Henrik 
Lundqvist, while having played a lot, looked fresh and on his game. If they can 
start getting some more goals more consistently, they could have a good chance.

Prediction: Clinton in 7. Er, I mean... Rangers in 7.

Philadelphia Flyers vs New Jersey Devils

The Devils pulled off a double-overtime win in Game 7 Thursday night in what 
turned out to be a very good game down in Florida. That it went that long was, 
like just about everything else this postseason, a surprise. Brodeur looked 
much better in Game 7 than he had in the rest of the series, which will be 
heartening for New Jersey as they enter the hellish place that is the 
Philadelphia offence. Worse, they might have to do it without Ilya Kovalchuk, 
who spent the last part of the Devils' Game 7 looking very much like the injury 
rumours that were circulating earlier in the week might have been true -- he 
was moving slowly, when he did.

But about that Philly offence: If the Penguins-Flyers series was some kind of 
glimpse into the apocalyptic future of hockey where all is a dry, sandy 
moonscape dotted with arenas here and there, Claude Giroux would probably 
emerge the shining archetype hero who would remind us all what we'd lost and 
suddenly right the world again. OK, maybe that's a bit much. Sorry -- Peter 
Laviolette was whispering in my ear. Anyway, if Giroux keeps up the pace, and 
if Jagr or Briere are given room much room on the ice, or start firing on all 
cylinders, it could be a major problem for the Devils. What I mean is that the 
Flyers are looking very good. But you knew that.

The question mark for Philly remains its netminder, Ilya Bryzgalov, who looked 
better in the final game against the Penguins, but otherwise was less than 
impressive. When your team has to score eight goals to win things, because 
you're letting in four or five (a period, in one case), it's probably not good. 
Still, the Flyers have to like their odds at a spot in the East final, and 
expect them to come out fast and physical against a Devils team that won't be 
nearly as rested.

Prediction: Flyers in 5.
 