
No longer do we have to concentrate on the finer points of labour negotiations 
and contract possibilities for the next decade 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/10/nhl-lockout-peace-deal-explained-bettman>
, but instead we can focus on actual hockey. Finally. And while the shortened 
season means we're denied a complete look at the teams of 2012-13, long 
suffering fans could be in store for an exciting few months. Trades in the 
off-season have changed some teams dramatically and by extension shifted the 
possible outcomes in entire divisions – that is, if everyone stays healthy. 
Here are the top ten things to look forward to this (short) year.

Injuries

With a shortened (read: barely any) training camp season and not every player 
necessarily in game-ready condition, watch out for a lot of injuries. In fact, 
some players are already injured – like L.A. Kings main man Anze Kopitar, who 
is apparently suffering form a knee sprain. In Vancouver, Ryan Kessler is 
looking like a no-go for the start of the season, thanks to a 
post-surgery-state shoulder and wrist. The shortened schedule will compel teams 
to have a fully-suited top squad right from the start, and the pressure will be 
on to perform. Guys might be liable to play through things they might otherwise 
take time off to heal before making a dash for the playoffs. Well, this is the 
dash. Look out.

Divisional rivalries

For anyone still lamenting that the re-shuffle of the conferences died out 
quickly last year, there'll at least be a slightly different format to things 
this time around. As the schedule lays out, each team will play 18 games 
against divisional rivals: Four each against two of the other teams in the 
division and then five each against the other two. Then, each team will play 
three games against each of the 10 remaining non-divisional opponents from 
within the conference. So, get ready for some serious rivalries to either 
start, or heat up again. It might be a short sprint, but it'll be an intense 
one (possibly contributing more to the first item on this list), and one that, 
in the West, anyway, might be a low-point total affair.

Pittsburgh vs. Philadelphia

Speaking of rivalries, the Pens and Flyers are set to rekindle their 
relationship the first night of the season. We last left them all scattered 
somewhere outside the blast radius ofthat insane first round last spring, 
complete with its goals, hits and general mayhem 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/apr/18/penguins-flyers-hossa-torres-nhl-fights>
. Sidney Crosby will be back at (presumably) some kind of full strength, as 
will Evgeny Malkin and, on the other side (one assumes), their collective 
superstar nemesis, Claude Giroux. Oh, and Ilya Brzygalov, who Philly can only 
hope has figured out the secrets of the universe during his extended break from 
the NHL and can concentrate on getting them a bit further into the playoffs.

The Minnesota Wild

Do two major signings a full team make? Ryan Suter and Zach Parise signed with 
the Wild in the off-season, and are now essentially in charge of taking that 
team all the way to the promised land. Can they do it? They're both wildly 
talented, for sure, but the Wild still need a few things to click, namely in 
the back end. We'll see if the defensive core can, with Suter's help, gel into 
what this team needs to carry them to (and past) the first round. And can Mike 
Yeo, only in his second year as a head coach (formerly assistant in Pittsburgh) 
wrangle that talent into a workable system? Also, in an unexpected turn of 
events,goalie Josh Harding was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis in October 
<http://www.twincities.com/sports/ci_22362435/minnesota-wild-goalie-josh-harding-his-multiple-sclerois>
. He plans to start the season.

The KHL issue

Wither the Russians? Or some of them, anyway. Last week, at the Globe and Mail 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/sports/hockey/khl-declares-war-on-nhl-contracts/article7082832/>
, James Mirtle pointed out the KHL's apparent intention to push back at the 
contract recognition agreement it has with the NHL, and allow some players to 
stay in Russia for a bit. Reportedly, Alexander Ovechkin said "a handful of 
Russian stars had met and discussed possibly staying in the KHL" if they didn't 
like the NHL's collective bargaining agreement. There might have even been some 
bribes on the table. Scandal! If the tiff continues, Ilya Kovalchuk might not 
be back in New Jersey to help the Devils make another run at the finals. It may 
come to nothing, but worth keeping an eye on.

Will the L.A. Kings keep their crown?

I'm not totally sold on the potential for a repeat, but I have to admit a bit 
of a bias for the Kings these days. This is a team to be reckoned with, as we 
all saw last year as they quickly disposed of one top-seeded team after 
another. Can Jonathan Quick continue his incredible streak as the 
unsung-goalie-come-to-prominence? Can the Jolly Rancher, coach Darryl Sutter, 
manage another win with his focus on that physical defensive style? Of all the 
teams probably designed for a rough-and-tumble short charge to a championship, 
it's the Kings of spring 2012. Whether that's the same team that shows up this 
time around (and in the West against the potentially deadly Minnesota Wild) is 
anyone's guess. I'm not great at making predictions... but the Kings' success I 
feel is a good bet.

Rick Nash in New York

If there was ever a time for the Rangers to make it to the Cup, it was last 
year. So, now that they've added sniper Rick Nash to the lineup, they really 
have no excuses left. And for Nash, it's pretty much the same story. For years, 
he's been holed up in Columbus with all the potential in the world, but always 
having a fallback excuse that the rest of the team wasn't up to par. There's no 
room for that kind of thinking now. If Henrik Lundqvist is healthy and sharp, 
if Brad Richards is still a playmaker, if Ryan Callahan is still a leader, if 
Marian Gaborik still has a bit of magic left, if Mike Rupp can still make the 
fourth line a threat, and if Ryan McDonagh is still a burgeoning defensive 
star... I mean, come on. It's really now or never on Broadway. No pressure, 
Rick.

Will anything finally happen in Edmonton?

The Oilers are probably due. Ryan Nugent-Hopkins, Taylor Hall and Jordan 
Eberle didn't quite make the magic happen in Edmonton in 2011-12, but there 
were flashes of brilliance. They were by far the most fun team to watch lose. 
They've since added a bit of steadiness in the defence, picking up Mark Fistric 
from Dallas in the off-season, along with a new head coach, Ralph Krueger, 
whose main job might turn out to be less keeping the goals coming than it will 
be finding a way to keep them out. Goaltending remains an issue for the Oilers: 
Devan Dubnyk has proven a bit shaky. And Nickolai Khabibulin is not a young man 
anymore, so the question is how much he can be relied upon if he's not getting 
regular ice time. Still, as always, there's promise. Maybe this is finally the 
year it all pays off.

Roberto Luongo

A lot of people still care about Roberto Luongo's future, and most of them 
live in the Greater Toronto Area 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/sports/hockey/globe-on-hockey/how-does-burkes-firing-impact-a-trade-for-roberto-luongo/article7129967/>
. It only took a day or so after Brian Burke was turfed as the general manager 
in Toronto for the Luongo rumours to start swiring. Did Burke inaction on 
Luongo cost him his job? Possibly,says ESPN's Pierre LeBrun 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/nhl/post/_/id/21244/did-luongo-reluctance-cost-burke-his-job>
, via the feelings of "several NHL team execs." Maybe that's true, but who 
really knows. Still, whether Luongo stays or goes, it probably shouldn't worry 
many people in Vancouver. The Canucks have a good starter either way in Cory 
Schneider – they have for a while. It just took a trouncing from the Kings to 
really make everyone realize it. Toronto, you can worry about your goalie 
situation. Vancouver? You're fine. A young goalie like Schneider will benefit 
from a short campaign, and he'll be even more energized if he knows he's got 
the number one job.

The playoffs

The playoffs will transpire with the same format they did last year – the 
difference being everything that came before them. For all the reasons listed 
above (apart from the possibility of injuries), this could be one of the better 
playoff seasons we've seen recently. If everyone's health holds out, the simple 
fact that we're starting at what would normally be that crucial half-way, 
post-Christmas turning point just dials everything up a notch. And not to 
mention that since everyone will be only playing intra-conference, the final 
will be the first chance the East will meet the West in the shortened season. 
Don't forget also the divisional rivalries will make the first round of the 
playoffs potentially more explosive than last year, and that's saying 
something. Watch for big hits, tight games, and, yes: a Stanley Cup 
presentation for 2013, which in light of all that's come prior to this, is 
probably the nicest thought of all.

NHL 2013 SCHEDULE 
<http://www.nhl.com/ice/schedulebyweek.htm#?navid=nav-sch-main>
 