
Reaction to Lord Darzi's NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> plan, 
unveiled today.

Richard Horton, editor of the Lancet

Darzi has wisely thrown out regulation as the organising principle of the NHS. 
He has replaced it with quality, by which he means clinical effectiveness, 
patient safety, and the patient experience ... This cultural shift is a radical 
re-visioning of purpose for the NHS - away from the political command and 
control of processes and towards professional responsibility for clinical 
outcomes.

Gordon Lishman, director general of Age Concern England

Treating patients, especially older people with compassion should be basic 
practice for all NHS staff. To deliver this, the planned NHS constitution needs 
to be explicitly based on promoting human rights and stamping out ageism in the 
NHS. The fact that your postcode determines what care you receive when 
accessing NHS treatment is scandalous. Every household in the country should 
know what standard of care they have the right to expect from the NHS, 
regardless of where they live.

Paul Farmer, chief executive of the mental health charity Mind

Mental health has finally been given the priority it deserves in this review. 
The commitment to bring mental health into the mainstream and out of the 
margins is welcome but it won't be easy while mental health and physical health 
are still segregated in the eyes of the NHS and wider society. We have a 
two-track system in the NHS where one part looks after your mental health, 
another your physical health. This does not reflect the complexities of most 
people's health needs.

Hamish Meldrum, chairman of BMA council

There is much here that could bring about improvement – if it can be 
delivered. That will depend on the details, and on the true engagement of NHS 
staff in implementing change. If they are sidelined, these are little more than 
fine words and we won't see the improvements the NHS desperately needs. In some 
areas there was insufficient consultation with the public or staff on changes 
to local NHS services during the review process and we don't want to see that 
repeated in the future.

Sir Ian Kennedy, chairman of the Healthcare Commission

This has a real chance of helping to improve the quality of care that patients 
receive. The proposals should be given a fair wind; they deserve one. While we 
welcome the objectives of this review, it is essential to have an independent 
assessment of progress. The document is somewhat short on how this will come 
about and the role of regulation. We will be raising this with the government.

 Lord Adebowale, chief executive of Turning Point

Lord Darzi's timely review of the NHS is to be welcomed, particularly the 
focus on quality. However, real improvement depends on the NHS providing a 
health service, not a "sickness" service, and to do this primary-care services 
need to include, not marginalise, social care. For instance, people with mental 
health problems shouldn't just be given drugs, but they should also get support 
with accessing therapy, getting a job and securing stable housing. This would 
save taxpayers money by preventing people spiralling into crisis. To deliver 
real reform and care closer to home the government will need to have the 
courage to do things differently, and this may mean cuts to services that 
aren't working for local people, in order to reinvest in new ones.

David Cameron, Conservative leader

The NHS has suffered from wave upon wave of top-down government 
reorganisations. One minute saying community hospitals have got to shut, and 
then the next saying "Let's open them." The latest idea, polyclinics, shutting 
a lot of GPs surgeries and imposing polyclinics on communities, is just the 
latest fad that the NHS does not need. It needs the money, and it needs 
sensible reform which ensures the professionals are making judgements rather 
than the politicians. The constitution for the NHS was our idea, and it is a 
good one. People should know their rights and what they are entitled to – but 
it will only work if we put the professionals in charge and get the politicians 
out of the way, and I don't think Labour are planning that.

Dr Neil Bentley, CBI director of public services

Planned changes to the GP service will help cut the burden of millions of 
working hours lost to time spent in the doctor's surgery, and will mean 
patients will have access to a wider range of treatments at times far more 
convenient to them. But the government must continue to press on with plans to 
make greater use of the expertise of the private and voluntary sectors in the 
NHS through fairer competition. It is only by the health service embracing 
choice that patients will get the NHS they want and need. We are all paying for 
a world-class NHS through our taxes and it is time we made real progress 
towards delivering one.

Paul Cann, director of Policy at Help the Aged

It's vital that any reform of the NHS takes into account the needs of its 
largest and growing population of users - older people. It is all very well for 
the government to promise legal rights and new constitutional arrangements for 
the NHS - but the real question is whether an older person engaging with the 
healthcare system can be confident that they will be treated with dignity and 
respect. Achieving this goal will require much more than paper promises. It 
will require concerted effort and a determined drive to change the deep-rooted 
ageist attitudes which underlie the indignity so many older people face.

Niall Dickson, chief executive of healthcare thinktank the King's Fund

The report is a sensible set of measures to improve quality and equity, and a 
clear signal that responsibility for shaping and leading health services lies 
with staff at local level. For the first time in a systematic way hospitals and 
GPs will have to account for the outcomes from the care they provide. This will 
be a new era in which patients will be able to check on the quality of the 
services they are being offered from infection levels to success rates 
following operations. All this should help us all make more informed choices 
and put pressure on those providing the care to do better. So far there are two 
significant omissions: there are no estimates of how much all this will cost 
and no indication of just how different the government expects the quality of 
health services to be in five or 10 years time.

James Crabtree, head of public services at the Institute of Public Policy 
Research

Lord Darzi's report shows the government has moved beyond patient choice 
solely as a driver for competition, and towards a vision of empowered patients, 
having greater control over their care. But the hard work starts now. Similar 
rhetoric on personalisation has been a feature of umpteen previous reviews - 
but patient surveys suggest that few think the health service is actually 
delivering personal care. Equally, the vision of more preventative, primary 
care-focused health services cannot be delivered without significant 
reconfiguration of primary care and hospitals. The government must hold its 
nerve, support necessary and sometimes unpopular changes to the NHS locally, 
and stand up to those who oppose it in the professions and elsewhere.

Simon Gillespie, chief executive of the Multiple Sclerosis Society

The emphasis on personal budgets and patient empowerment means this report 
represents a great opportunity to give people with MS access to the care they 
need when they need it and in the most appropriate way. MS is a fluctuating and 
complex condition and people's needs change from week to week. Putting people 
at the heart of planning and delivery of their own healthcare should lead to a 
better quality of life overall and encourage greater independence, as we have 
seen when personalised social care has worked.

Karen Reay, national officer for heath at union Unite

We welcome the general tenor of Lord Darzi's report that the future emphasis 
should be on the whole patient/client experience in the NHS - from the quality 
of the consultants' care to the standard of the food - rather than the crude 
managerial targets of recent times.

Steve Barnett, acting chief executive of the NHS Confederation

We think the combination of three powerful ideas running through the report 
could make a major difference: patients being aware of their rights, choices 
and information; industrial scale feedback and measurement of quality and 
patient experience; and, capitalising on the motivation of NHS professionals to 
provide the best possible care with peer review and competitiveness. Together 
this should provide an additional powerful motor for change in the NHS. The 
service will be glad the review didn't set any new national targets and will 
want this to continue to be the case.

Norman Lamb, Liberal Democrat health spokesman

This statement smacks of a motherhood and apple pie prescription for the NHS, 
filled with inevitable New Labour jargon such as the "clinical dashboard". When 
the dust settles people will see that little has changed and that the system of 
command and control diktat by Whitehall lives on. This statement says nothing 
about the scandalous discrimination suffered by those with mental health 
problems or the health inequalities that continue to scar our country.
 