
A draft NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> constitution giving 
patients a new legal right to select a GP practice and choose between different 
types of treatment was unveiled by the government today after a year-long 
review of the health service in England by the surgeon-minister Lord Darzi.

He said the NHS will expand the family doctor service to give patients a 
genuine choice between GP practices, providing more information about the range 
and quality of care on offer.

The constitution will guarantee patients' rights to choose a hospital and 
stipulate the type of treatment they want - such as a preference for keyhole 
surgery or avoidance of certain medications.

But patients will not be allowed to choose between individual surgeons in an 
NHS team. And their rights will be balanced by responsibilities.

The draft says: "You should keep appointments, or cancel within reasonable 
time. Receiving treatment within the maximum waiting times may be compromised 
unless you do."

Proposals for a harsher set of restrictions on patients - such as withdrawal 
of treatment from smokers and obese people - were rejected by ministers.

Darzi said that the NHS had made great strides over the past 10 years in 
expanding the quantity of healthcare available, including dramatic reductions 
in waiting times.

His "next-stage" review put the emphasis on improving quality. He said: "By 
measuring this quality across the service and publishing that information for 
the first time, both staff and patients can work together to make 
better-informed choices about their care."

Hospitals will be required to publish a range of quality indicators ranging 
from surgeons' patient death rates to the relative satisfaction of patients 
during and after a course of treatment.

An average district general hospital with an annual turnover of £250m will be 
able to gain up to £9m extra by demonstrating the highest quality of care. But 
there will be no individual bonuses for the best surgeons and their nursing 
teams.

Darzi said: "Today, with the NHS budget approaching £2bn a week, more staff 
and improvements in the quality and availability of information, quality can be 
at the heart of everything we do in the NHS. It means moving from high quality 
in some aspects to high quality care in all."

His report set no new national targets and it included no master plan for the 
reorganisation of services.

A year ago, before becoming health minister, Darzi produced a report for the 
NHS in London that suggested that the days of the traditional district general 
hospital were numbered.

It said that heart attacks, strokes and the most serious accidents ought to be 
handled in specialist hospitals. Many outpatient clinics, diagnostic tests and 
minor surgery could shift to a network of super-surgeries or "polyclinics", 
closer to people's homes.

Similar proposals have emerged over the past two months in regional reports 
from strategic health authorities.

But Darzi's national report said that there would be no national requirement 
to implement any of these ideas.

The constitution will require parliamentary approval, and the document 
promised tough new enforcement powers to tackle MRSA and other hospital 
superbugs. But most of its proposals can be implemented under existing statute.

Alan Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson>, the health 
secretary, said: "The government will be obliged by law to renew the NHS 
constitution every 10 years so that any changes are the result of a full and 
transparent debate and cannot be changed by stealth. We will place a legal duty 
on all NHS organisations to take account of the constitution in decisions that 
are made.

"I think it strikes the right balance between the need for clarity and 
avoiding undue litigation."

In a Commons statement this afternoon, Johnson, flanked by Gordon Brown, said 
that the NHS constitution would "empower patients by clearly articulating their 
many rights, bringing transparency to decision-making, and securing its 
founding principles for generations to come."

But the shadow health secretary, Andrew Lansley, said that the proposals 
lacked leadership and vision.

"In place of vision we get another list of initiatives - some old, some new, 
some borrowed, quite a lot of them blue."

He accused ministers of continuing to pursue a "bureaucratic, top-down system".

Darzi also proposed a tentative experiment in giving patients personal health 
budgets to spend as they wished on treatment. It will apply to people with 
long-term medical conditions such as diabetes and asthma. In the first instance 
this will be limited to a pilot scheme for 5,000 patients.

Darzi said the NHS ought to concentrate on six key goals: tackling obesity, 
reducing alcohol harm, treating drug addiction, reducing smoking rates, 
improving sexual health and improving mental health.
 