
Introduction

The NHS Next Stage Review, High Quality Care for All – to give it its full 
title – sets out the government's plans to reform theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England over the next 10 years.

The review, led by the health minister and cancer surgeon, Lord Darzi, intends 
to shift the emphasis of the health service from increasing the quantity of 
care to improving its clinical quality. Hospitals and GPs will be given 
financial incentives to improve their quality of care. Meanwhile patients' 
rights and responsibilities are set out in a new NHS constitution. A workforce 
strategy is also intended to improve the skills and career progress of NHS 
staff.

Quality of care

The income of hospitals and GPs will in future depend on how much they improve 
their patients' health. NHS trusts will be paid according to the outcome of 
treatment, using a new set of indicators ranging from surgeons' death rates to 
surveys of how well patients feel after treatment. GP practices will be 
rewarded for improving access for patients. Patients' views about the quality 
of service and the compassion of staff will be regarded as just as important as 
the medical outcomes. From 2010, there will be financial bonuses for NHS 
organisations that provide high quality care. A new National Quality Board will 
be set up to advise the government and publish annual reports – starting next 
year - on the state of standards of care in England.

Better regulation

The remit of the new Care Quality Commission, which will regulate adult social 
care and hospitals, will be extended to cover GP and dental practices.

Greater competition

To establish a more thrusting marketplace within the NHS, patients will be 
given enough information to be able to choose the nearest GP practice and 
hospital that can demonstrate superior medical care. All NHS bodies will be 
required by law to publish "quality accounts", just as they publish financial 
accounts, which set out the quality of care they are providing.

Patients' rights

A new NHS constitution sets out what patients have a right to expect from the 
NHS. This includes rights to dignity, privacy, confidentiality and the 
opportunity to get a second opinion from another doctor. It also explains who 
is accountable if mistakes are made and how patients can make complaints. The 
document also lists patients' responsibilities. For example, they will be 
expected to keep GP and hospital appointments and take steps to improve their 
health. But patients' access to treatment will not be denied if they do not 
meet their responsibilities.

Patient choice

The constitution claims to enshrine a patient's right to choose where they 
want to be treated. But this will simply raise awareness of patients' treatment 
preferences with doctors rather than guaranteeing which hospital or surgeon an 
individual will see. Patients will have a right to register with the GP of 
their choice.

Ending postcode lotteries

The NHS constitution will also enshrine in law a universal right to approved 
treatments if they are clinically appropriate for individual patients. Primary 
care trusts, which run local NHS services, will no longer be able to deny 
patients potentially life-saving treatments just because they think it is 
unaffordable. This is intended to end the so-called "postcode lottery" of drug 
treatments, which has seen patients in some areas denied funding for drugs that 
are freely prescribed elsewhere.

Approving new drugs

The National Institute for Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
and Clinical Excellence (Nice), which decides what drugs should be available on 
the NHS, will no longer wait until a drug has been licensed as safe before 
starting its assessments, which could reduce delays to a maximum of six months.

Preventing ill-health

Every health authority and council will jointly commission services to improve 
the wellbeing of the local population and prevent ill health. These will focus 
on tackling obesity, reducing the harmful effects of alcohol, treating drug 
addiction, cutting smoking, reducing sexually transmitted infection and 
improving mental health. There will be a national campaign to educate people 
about how to reduce their risk of suffering from heart disease. A new Fit for 
Work service will also help people with ill health return to work faster.

Personalised care

Fifteen million people with a long-term health condition, such as asthma or 
diabetes, will be given a personalised care plan. Under a pilot scheme, 5,000 
individuals and families will also be given personal health budgets to give 
them greater control over the care they receive.

GP services

Darzi's interim report set out plans for polyclinics in London and 
super-surgeries throughout the rest of England, which would bring together GP, 
nurses and services traditionally only provided in hospital. Today's report 
made no mention of these plans, which will be set out in another report on 
primary care on Thursday.

Improving the workforce

A separate report, A High Quality Workforce, sets out plans to improve 
workforce planning, education and training. This includes setting up NHS 
Medical Education England - a new body to oversee workforce planning for 
doctors and dentists.
 