
The final countdown has begun. Like it or not, there is less than one year to 
go until the NHS undergoes the largest restructure in its history. Yet there 
are concerns that NHS managers lack the necessary skills to implement the 
reforms, following years of inadequate or absent training and development.

Without the necessary skills, managers will not be able to lead and run their 
organisations successfully and this could lead to a complete failure to 
implement the NHS reforms. Ultimately, patients will pay the price.

While the Kings Fund recently made a call for "engaging leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/may/29/nhs-leadership-managment-summit?INTCMP=SRCH>
", more concrete action is needed to address the skills gap and to empower 
managers with the range of skills needed to take on the structural reform.

Latest research from the Institute of Healthcare Management (IHM) 
<http://www.ihm.org.uk> has found that nine out of 10 managers do not feel 
confident due to lack of proper training and development, while a quarter do 
not have access to the support needed to develop their leadership and 
management skills.

There are a range of skills needed to lead teams and manage resources 
effectively as they face unprecedented complex challenges, which include:

• Providing contextual leadership and empowering teams to work across sectors, 
needs and organisations in order to improve patient care.

• Communicating, influencing and building effective relationships with 
partners, patients, staff and all internal, external or political stakeholders.

• Seeing the bigger picture and interpreting and sharing complex information

• Embracing and creating a culture where innovation, learning and creativity 
flourish

• Reflecting on performance, best practice and learning from successes

To address the skills gap, the IHM has developed the Accredited Manager 
Programme (AMP) to bring managers up to speed with these required skills.

Deborah Murphy, directorate manager of specialist palliative care at the Royal 
Liverpool & Broadgreen University Hospitals NHS trust and associate director of 
the Marie Curie Palliative Care Institute in Liverpool, has just completed the 
programme. She believes that it is key to spend time looking analytically at 
how you interact, enable and influence others, particularly at a time when the 
NHS is going through such extensive change.

She says: "I see the restructure as a tremendous opportunity for managers to 
take a proactive role in influencing the development of the NHS.

"These are exciting times but in order for these opportunities to be maximised 
and for managers to really make a difference, they need to have at their 
disposal, the leadership skills and abilities to influence, innovate, inspire 
and adapt."

Jacqui Pennington, head of hotel services at the trust, responsible for 
managing in-house teams and outsourced cleaning, catering, portering and linen 
services contracts, worth £12m, has also just completed the AMP. Having worked 
for more than 27 years in the NHS, she had not embarked on any formal 
management qualifications since completing an HND aged 21. Now 50, she decided 
it was time to both test and develop her managerial and leadership skills and 
the AMP created that opportunity.

"I've always wanted to move with the times and embrace innovation," Pennington 
explains. "I have particularly appreciated the opportunity to take time out to 
reflect on what we are doing as a department and identify what we could do 
better.

"It's not just about dwelling on where things have gone wrong, but recognising 
what we do well and reinforcing the positives."

Susan Hodgetts is chief executive of the Institute of Healthcare Management 
(IHM).

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian 
Healthcare Network 
<http://http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/healthcare/start.php> to 
receive regular emails and exclusive offers.
 