
The leader of Britain's doctors today urged the government to scrap market 
reforms and stop theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> being run 
"like a shoddy supermarket".

The British Medical Association (BMA) chairman, Dr Hamish Meldrum, said 
introducing the private sector and competition was damaging and there was no 
evidence it improved efficiency.

He urged the government to look to Scotland, where there is no competitive 
market between healthcare providers.

"The BMA wants to see a NHS untarnished by a market economy, true to its 
beginnings, giving the public a fair, caring, equitable and cost-effective 
health service. Not a service run like a shoddy supermarket war," he told the 
BMA's annual conference in Edinburgh.

"Let's stop pretending that healing the sick is like trading a commodity. 

"Instead we get competition not collaboration; fragmentation not continuity; 
inefficiency not efficiency. Not good for doctors, not good for patients, not 
good for the NHS."

While the government has tried to create an NHS market in England by using 
private companies and encouraging hospitals to compete for patients, 
administrations in Scotland use the private sector only as a last resort.

Progress in cutting waiting lists has been quicker in England but Meldrum said 
in Scotland there was a shared agenda and a greater "willingness to pull 
together".

"Let's stop diverting doctors' energies into unholy bidding wars for jobs and 
contracts that they already do. Let's follow the Celtic lead and get rid of the 
market in healthcare once and for all," he said.

Lord Darzi's NHS review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/jun/30/health.health> had missed a 
golden opportunity, he added, to follow Scotland lead and get rid of the market 
in healthcare.

Doctors at the conference backed a call for the NHS to use private firms only 
as a last resort.

Speaking in favour of the motion, Kate Adams, a GP from Hackney, east London, 
said: "As a practising GP I have been stunned by the level of hostility, 
pressure and spin from this government."

She said health minister Ben Bradshaw's comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/jul/03/nhs.policy> last week that GPs 
operated gentleman's agreements to not take on each others' patients were 
"nasty and unnecessary".

Doctors hit out at the government's "continued attacks" on the medical 
profession and its use of "gunboat diplomacy". They accused ministers of 
systematically undermining general practice, saying their negative attitude 
worked against the interests of patients.

They voted overwhelmingly in favour of a motion saying they were opposed to 
plans for polyclinics across England.

Meldrum said doctors had collected signatures of 1.25 million patients 
supporting the current model of general practice and opposing private companies 
moving into primary care.

"The message to the government couldn't be clearer, listen to the doctors, 
listen to the BMA, above all, listen to the patients of England," he said.
 