
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> hospitals will be eligible for 
bonuses worth billions of pounds if they can demonstrate top quality clinical 
performance, the government said yesterday after a year-long review of the 
health service in England by the surgeon-minister Lord Darzi. He said hospitals 
would be required to publish "quality accounts" alongside the financial balance 
sheet. They will reveal information ranging from the death rates of surgeons to 
the relative satisfaction of patients during and after a course of treatment.

An average district general hospital with an annual turnover of £250m could 
gain up to £9m by achieving a high quality of care. A poor performer would lose 
patients to rival establishments with better clinical outcomes and higher 
satisfaction scores. Darzi said: "For the first time, patients' own assessments 
of the success of their treatment and the quality of their experiences will 
have a direct impact on the way hospitals are funded."

He also proposed a tentative experiment in giving patients personal health 
budgets to spend as they wish on treatment. The scheme will apply to people 
with long-term medical conditions such as diabetes and asthma. It will be 
tested on 5,000 volunteers.

The report set no new national targets and included no master plan for the 
reorganisation of services. A year ago Darzi produced a report for the NHS in 
London calling for a network of community polyclinics in which GPs and other 
staff would provide much of the care that has hitherto been available in 
hospitals. Similar proposals have emerged over the past two months in regional 
reports from strategic health authorities in other parts of England. But 
Darzi's national report said there would be no national requirement to 
implement this approach.

The review was accompanied by a draft constitution for the NHS, setting out 
rights and responsibilities of patients and staff. For the first time patients 
will have a legal right to choose where they are treated.

Darzi said the NHS will expand the family doctor service to give patients a 
genuine choice between GP practices, providing more information about the range 
and quality of care on offer. The constitution will also guarantee patients' 
rights to choose a hospital and stipulate the type of treatment they want.

The health secretary, Alan Johnson, said there would be public consultation on 
the draft NHS constitution. A final version will be published before the end of 
the year. Patients' rights would be balanced by responsibilities. The draft 
said: "You should keep appointments, or cancel within reasonable time. 
Receiving treatment within the maximum waiting times may be compromised unless 
you do."

Johnson said: "The government will be obliged by law to renew the NHS 
constitution every 10 years so that any changes are the result of a full and 
transparent debate and cannot be changed by stealth. We will place a legal duty 
on all NHS organisations to take account of the constitution in decisions that 
are made ... I think it strikes the right balance between the need for clarity 
and avoiding undue litigation."

Gordon Brown said the Darzi review was a "once-in-a-generation opportunity" to 
make the NHS one of the world's best healthcare systems.

The shadow health secretary, Andrew Lansley, said the opportunity had been 
missed. "It's no good talking about focusing more on health outcomes if doctors 
and nurses continue to be micro-managed by bureaucrats in Whitehall and their 
local strategic health authorities," he said.

Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrat health spokesman, said: "When the dust 
settles people will see little has changed and that the system of command and 
control diktat by Whitehall lives on."

Dr Hamish Meldrum, chairman of the BMA, said: "There is much here that could 
bring about improvement - if it can be delivered. That will depend on the 
details, and on the true engagement of NHS staff in implementing change. If 
they are sidelined, these are little more than fine words and we won't see the 
improvements the NHS desperately needs."

Peter Carter, general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, said: "The 
overwhelming majority of NHS care is safe, but we believe the ambition now must 
be to drive up patients' experience from 'safe' to 'high quality'. Fully 
implemented, these recommendations have the potential to achieve this ambition."

Sir Ian Kennedy, chairman of the Healthcare Commission, said: "This has a real 
chance of helping to improve the quality of care that patients receive. The 
proposals should be given a fair wind - they deserve one."

Niall Dickson, chief executive of the King's Fund health thinktank, said: 
"This will be a new era in which patients will be able to check on the quality 
of the services they are being offered from infection levels to success rates 
following operations."

But he added: "So far there are two significant omissions - there are no 
estimates of how much all this will cost and no indication of just how 
different the government expects the quality of health services to be in five 
or 10 years' time."

Katherine Murphy, of the Patients Association, said: "Patients have waited too 
long for these changes. The postcode lottery is the opposite of what the NHS 
should be about. Lord Darzi's judgment on many of these matters is to be 
applauded."
 