 Lord Darzi's interim report, Our NHS, Our Future, published last week, has 
some hard specifics behind its uncontentious aims of wanting fair, 
personalised, safe, effective and accountable care. For example: 100 new GP 
practices targeted in the areas of poorest provision; 150 new GP-led health 
centres providing easy access to care with extended opening hours; at least 
half of GP practices to open at weekends or one or more evenings per week; a 
new Health Innovation Council; and routine screening for MRSA for all people 
due to have non-urgent surgery.
The proposals are drawn in part from an exercise that is increasingly common 
in the NHS: market research by the state (usually led by a politician) on a 
national scale - in this case, involving more than 1,500 staff, and meetings 
with 1,000 members of the public, staff and patients in nine cities and towns. 
The exercise has been perhaps a genuine attempt at a dialogue to craft policies 
that reflect priorities "out there", but no doubt the report includes some 
"crowd pleasers", given what was felt to be its proximity to a general election.

But gathering ideas is the easy bit, more difficult is implementing them, or 
creating incentives to improve services locally. Why does it take a minister to 
draw attention to basic problems and generate action? Some time around 2000, a 
previous set of ministers and advisers concluded that central directives (and 
their sisters, targets and strong-arm performance management) were highly 
effective but in a limited number of areas. Too many risked stifling local 
innovation, demoralising staff, getting things wrong and trampling on local 
priorities. New levers were needed, in particular competition and choice, as 
well as better regulation, more local accountability, and strengthened 
professionalism.

The idea was that this would allow Whitehall to reduce its controlling 
tendencies, and would encourage more local innovations of the type proposed in 
Darzi's interim report.

Officials began to build these levers, described in the trade as "system 
reform". The result was a suite of policies such as Payment by Results (a new 
way of paying hospitals); Foundation Trusts (NHS hospitals freed from central 
direction from the Department of Health but instead guided by a new regulator, 
Monitor); encouraging new providers by paying them to care for NHS funded 
patients; encouraging choice of hospital for patients having elective surgery; 
and setting up better regulation of the quality of care in NHS and non-NHS 
hospitals.

Despite the heated debate over some reforms, their implementation is still at 
an early stage, their evaluation has only just begun, and the "system reform" 
architecture is in need of much further development.

But since the summer, the trail seems to have gone cold. The central and most 
contentious Blairite narrative on the NHS, that the most potent lever for 
innovation was more competition and choice, is not being articulated at all in 
Whitehall. Instead the mood music is about local democratic accountability, 
personalisation and safety. The fact that this is echoed by the Conservatives 
and Liberal Democrats may mean that when it seemed we were so close to an 
election there was understandable reluctance among all parties to raise 
contentious issues that may not excite key voters.

Alternatively, it may mean that in the post-Blair government, the key 
narrative on public sector reform - what levers have the best chance of 
improving performance and why - has not yet been resolved. This would be 
worrying, since important questions on system reform, in particular on the 
shape and role of regulation in healthcare, and the future development of 
Payment by Results, demand a government view this autumn.

This gap is evident in Our NHS Our Future, which is stronger on the what than 
the how. It may be that a coherent narrative on how performance can be improved 
will be articulated in the final report, due in summer 2008. But so far there 
is a mixed set of clues. While choice is mentioned, central directive seems to 
be the zeitgeist.

Perhaps for now system reform really is in ministers' "too difficult" tray, 
and the default position of "benign direction", will prevail. Those tempted by 
the quiet life might reflect on Our Future Health Secured?, Sir Derek Wanless's 
recent King's Fund review of health service performance. It highlights our slow 
progress towards an effective, efficient, and affordable NHS, and the 
implications of this for the future.

· Jennifer Dixon is director of health policy at the King's Fund thinktank. 
The NHS Employers annual conference and exhibition, Leading Workforce Thinking, 
supported by Society Guardian, takes place in Birmingham this week. Details at
nhsemployers.org <http://www.nhsemployers.org>

· Email your comments to society@theguardian.com 
<mailto:society@theguardian.com>. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication"
 