
Former New South Wales deputy police commissioner Nick Kaldas has lost an 
11th-hour bid to stop a report into apolice bugging scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/30/nsw-police-bugging-inquiry-nick-kaldas-launches-attack-on-ombudsman>
 from going public.

Kaldas launched legal action earlier this month to block the release of the 
NSW ombudsman’s report on its Operation Prospect investigation.

Kaldas’s legal team sought a temporary injunction to prevent the report’s 
release pending outcomes of the court hearing, citing fears of adverse findings 
against Kaldas and the potential for irreversible harm to his reputation.

NSW supreme court justice Peter Garling on Tuesday found Kaldas had raised 
serious questions to be tried but that the balance of convenience was in favour 
of the report being published, meaning the report could be released in several 
hours.

He said numerous parties were interested in the report, including 36 
complainants and the general public.

“In my view this public interest alone is sufficient to outweigh the 
plaintiff’s [Kaldas’] interest,” he said.

The acting ombudsman, John McMillan, has given himself a deadline of Tuesday 
to hand the report to parliament.

A spokeswoman for the ombudsman has indicated the report is likely to be 
published on Tuesday afternoon.

The four-year, $6m operation looked into allegations Kaldas and 113 other 
officers were illegally bugged during an internal police probe between 1999 and 
2001.

Lawyers for Kaldas have argued in the supreme court that then-ombudsman Bruce 
Barbour’s investigation lacked procedural fairness and that Kaldas was denied 
natural justice.

They have accused Barbour of displaying an apprehension of bias against 
Kaldas, after discussing his situation with Commissioner Andrew Scipione in a 
private meeting without giving Kaldas the same or even lesser contact.

They have also questioned if the ombudsman has the power to make a finding on 
whether or not Kaldas gave false evidence during a hearing.

Justice Garling told the court he had considered restraining the acting 
ombudsman from recommending the report be made public but in that case it could 
be leaked without parliamentary privileges applying.

A leak would not be in the interest of “good public administration”, he said.

Kaldas has long raised concerns about the procedural fairness of Operation 
Prospect.

The investigation was set up in October 2012 after the state government 
granted now-departed ombudsman Bruce Barbour special powers to look into the 
surveillance of police officers between 1999 and 2001 as part of a joint 
investigation called Operation Mascot/Florida.

That surveillance was carried out under an investigation involving Deputy 
Commissioner Catherine Burn and headed by Commissioner Andrew Scipione.
 