
Bath, Sale and Harlequins opened their LV Cup campaigns with wins last night. 
Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> got off to a 
tremendous start with a richly deserved success at Welford Road, where they 
beat the home side Leicester 34-25.

The visitors fielded a strong side and outscored a disappointing Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> side by three tries to one. 
Nick Evans proved the star turn, controlling play and scoring 19 points.

Apart from a strong scrummaging effort the Tigers were largely lifeless until 
the last 10 minutes and managed only six penalties from Billy Twelvetrees and a 
late penalty try.

The Leicester coach, Richard Cockerill, was honest in his assessment of his 
side's performance, admitting some players had let themselves down. "I have no 
complaints," he said. "I thought the side I selected was good enough to win 
tonight. I have no regrets but I learnt a lot about certain people tonight. 
Some boys put their hands up for future selection but some guys let themselves 
down."

Olly Barkley kicked 19 points from fly-half, converting tries by Matt Banahan 
and Tom Biggs, as Bath enjoyed a comfortable 29-19 win overCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues>.

Nearly 12,000 spectators crammed into a rain-soaked Recreation Ground even 
though the visitors were without 10 players on international duty andBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> were resting a number of battle-weary 
first-teamers.

However, it allowed both sides to blood up-and-coming products of their 
academies and the US Eagles captain, John van der Geissen, made his debut in 
the home second row.

Sale gained a modicum of revenge for their defeat at the Madejski Stadium last 
weekend by kicking off their LV Cup campaign with a 39-14 bonus-point victory 
overLondon Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish>.

The London Irish head coach, Toby Booth, pointed an accusing finger at his 
players, saying: "From a youngsters' point of view, you get some very stark 
feedback of where they are in their progression after a performance like that.

"We've come off second-best and rightfully so. There have been some other 
performances tonight from some more established players who we would have 
expected better from and we cannot dress over that.

"When you pull on that jersey with a London Irish badge on it, there is a 
level of performance that is acceptable and unacceptable. Some of that tonight 
was not up to the required standard and we will be taking that up with the 
right people after the weekend. To concede like we did – so easily at times – 
is very disappointing and we'll be making sure we address that."

The Sharks lost 39-26 in Sunday's Aviva Premiership clash between the sides 
but this time it was the Exiles on the receiving end as the home side scored 
six tries.

In the Magners League the Glasgow captain, Al Kellock, celebrated his return 
to action by leading his team to a comfortable 33-8 win over Aironi. The 
second-row forward Kellock was making his first appearance of the season after 
undergoing knee surgery in the summer and played his part in a performance in 
which the pressure and territory Glasgow enjoyed should have seen them pick up 
more than four tries.
 