
Sometimes I make my own duck confit, slowly cooking the legs in deep white fat 
with a couple of bay leaves and a twig or two of thyme, and sometimes I buy it 
in jars or tins. This is not a cheap dinner by any means, but the plump pieces 
of duck on the bone and in their own fat are incredibly useful, the skin 
crisping deliciously in the oven, the flesh beneath rich and sweet. Not every 
meal can be a frugal feast.

A leg will feed one person and you can pad it out with sautéed potatoes or a 
pile of creamy, buttery mash. You can pull the flesh from the bones with two 
forks, toss it with steamed or fried cabbage and serve it with mustard. You can 
serve it with slow-cooked beans that have been simmered with onions, garlic and 
tomato.

Or you could do as I did this week, roasting the confit duck until it was 
thoroughly crisp, dropping in a few dark plums, a handful of grapes and some 
whole almonds, then using the warm duck fat and a splash of cider vinegar as a 
dressing. With the flesh and salted skin pulled from the bones and tucked among 
bitter salad leaves, this was autumn on a plate, albeit something of a swan 
song for the plums. The grapes – sweet muscat – were refreshing against the 
dark meat.

As this meal was something of an autumn celebration, there had to be a pudding 
– and a fruit-based one at that. I tossed peaches and autumn raspberries 
together with a little sugar and baked them under a hazelnut crust. A sort of 
nutty cobbler. My problem with the traditional cobbler crusts is 
their thickness, which sometimes feels like gnawing your way through a scone to 
get at the filling, so I rolled the dough a little thinner than is usual and 
added ground nuts to the butter, sugar and flour to form a soft and crumbly 
dough.

A pudding that smells distinctly of the time of the year.

Duck with plums and radicchio salad

Any of the bitter-leaved lettuces will work here, and I have used watercress 
among the leaves before now. Serves 2

duck confit 2 legs
plums 6
almonds 50g, whole skinned 
radicchio or other bitter salad leaves a handful 
grapes 200g
cider vinegar 2 tbsp

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6, put the confit pieces snugly into a baking 
dish and cook for 20 minutes or so, until the skin has crisped. Remove the 
stones from the plums. Pour half of the fat from the roasting dish into a 
heatproof jar or bowl and reserve (it is wonderful for cooking roast potatoes), 
then add the stoned plums and the skinned almonds to the dish and return it to 
the oven to continue baking for a further 10 minutes.

Wash the radicchio leaves, tearing them into manageable pieces, and put them 
in a mixing bowl. Halve and seed the grapes. Once the plums have softened and 
the almonds are lightly browned, remove the dish from the oven and transfer the 
pieces of duck to a chopping board.

Pour most of the fat from the dish, leaving 2 or 3 tbsp in place, and reserve 
it for another time. Place the dish over a moderate heat and add the grapes, 
allowing them to briefly warm through before adding the cider vinegar. Stir to 
dissolve any tasty bits in the pan into the dressing, then remove it from the 
heat.

Pull the pieces of duck from their bones (they should slip away easily) and 
add them to the salad leaves. Spoon over the warm dressing, grapes, nuts and 
plums, toss gently, and serve.

Hazelnut fruit cobbler
 Nigel Slater's hazelnut fruit cobbler recipe. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin 
for the Observer 
I have used raspberries and peaches in this recipe, but plums will work well 
here, too, as will blueberries and blackberries instead of the raspberries. You 
can use almonds instead of the hazelnuts if you prefer.
Serves 6

butter 125g
icing sugar 50g
plain flour 125g
hazelnuts 75g, ground
vanilla extract
peaches 4
raspberries 250g
caster sugar 4 tbsp
elderflower cordial 3 tbsp
butter 30g

Make the hazelnut topping. Put the butter and icing sugar into the bowl of an 
electric mixer and beat the mixture until it is light, smooth and creamy. 
Mixing on a slow speed, add the flour and the ground hazelnuts, then a few 
drops of vanilla extract. Stop the machine, bring the dough together into a 
soft ball with your hands and place it on a work surface. Dust lightly with 
flour, roll it into a thick sausage shape, wrap it in clingfilm and rest the 
dough in the fridge for about 15 minutes.

Set the oven at 180C/gas mark 4. Stone and roughly chop the peaches, peeling 
them if you wish, then put them into a shallow baking dish. Tip in the 
raspberries, then add the sugar and the elderflower cordial. Dot over the 
butter in small pieces.

Remove the rested dough from the fridge, cut into thick slices and place 
these, cut-side down, on top of the fruit, leaving, here and there, a little of 
the fruit poking through. Bake for 45 minutes to an hour, until the fruit is 
soft and juicy and the cobbler topping is biscuit coloured. Leave to calm 
down before serving, with cream if you wish.

Email Nigel Slater at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 