
23 September

You could measure my life in summer puddings, those bulging, gloriously juicy 
globes of raspberries and currants held prisoner by slices of bread.

I used to make them daily at a cafe a hundred years ago and can't get out of 
the habit. The first one of the year is always a traditional raspberry and 
redcurrant, but then I get into a more contemporary mood and swap the fruits 
around.

In the past it has appeared in my kitchen made with gooseberries (Tender 
Volume II <http://Tender Volume II>, and so good with thick, yellow 
unpasteurised cream), or with lots of blackcurrants in with the raspberries 
(serve with vanilla ice cream) but I have always wondered if damsons – as you 
probably know, a favourite fruit of mine – would be a worthy addition for when 
the currant season has finished. With the exception of the slightly fiddly task 
of removing their stones (and we must), it is a pudding of serious pleasure and 
inky sour-sweet juice.

A pudding for autumn

Enough for 6
damsons 750g
caster sugar 100g, or more to taste
water 250ml
raspberries 250g
blackberries 250g
blueberries 250g
sloe gin 100ml
white bread 10 or so slices

You will need a 1.5 litre pudding basin or 6 individual ones.

Put the damsons in a stainless steel or enamelled pan with the sugar and water 
and bring to the boil. You can add more sugar if you wish, depending on how 
sour your fruit is. As soon as the fruit is thoroughly soft, about 15 minutes, 
remove from the heat and leave till it is cool enough to handle. Squeeze the 
stones from the fruit and discard. This is messy but shouldn't take longer than 
10 minutes. It is certainly quicker than trying to stone the damsons before 
cooking. If you skip the stoning process you will, I promise, regret it later. 
Place the pan back on the heat and tip in the raspberries, blackberries and 
blueberries. Add the sloe gin and continue cooking, but now at a low simmer, 
till the fruit has started to burst and the juice in the pan is a good rich 
colour. About 10 minutes.

Cut a disc of bread to fit the bottom and top of the dish, or of each 
individual dish, then cut the rest into thick, crust-free fingers. The exact 
measurements will depend on whether you are making one large or six smaller 
ones. Dipping them briefly into the warm juice as you go, tuck the smaller of 
the discs in the bottom of the pudding basin. Press the fingers of bread, again 
briefly dipping them into the juice, all round the sides of the dish, carefully 
butting them up together so there are no gaps where the juice can leak out. 
When the basins are lined on the base and sides, fill them with the fruit, 
spooning the juice right to the top. Place the second disc of bread on top, 
then cover tightly with cling film. Place on a plate (to catch any stray juice) 
in the fridge with a heavy weight on top to compress the fruit and bread. Leave 
overnight.

To serve, turn out on to a serving dish or individual dishes. Running a 
palette knife around the sides, between bread and basin, then turning it upside 
down on to a plate and giving it a good hard shake will make it easier to turn 
the pudding out complete.

• This is an extract from The Kitchen Diaries II by Nigel Slater (4th Estate, 
£30).Order a copy for the special price of £19.99 from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007256037>
 