
The former al-Qaida chief who was believed to have been killed after taking 
hundreds of oil workers hostage in Algeria, is behind the latestsuicide 
bombings in Niger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/23/suicide-bombs-attack-niger>, 
according to reports.

Statements attributed to Mokhtar Belmokhtar and his spokesperson have 
allegedly claimed responsibility for the blasts at a military barracks in 
Agadez and a French nuclear plant in Arlit, and threaten further attacks on 
France,Niger <https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger> and other African 
countries involved in the military intervention in Mali.

"We will make them taste the taste of death," said a statement, reportedly 
signed by Khalid Abu al-Abbas – one of Belmokhtar's aliases – and obtained by 
news agency AFP. "Columns of jihadists and would-be martyrs stand ready and 
waiting for an order to crush their targets."

Thursday's co-ordinated suicide bombings, the first of their kind in Niger, 
shocked the country and fuelled concern about the cross-border terrorism in the 
west African Sahara and bordering Sahel region. In aseparate statement 
<http://fr.alakhbar.info/6808-0-Les-attentats-au-Niger-ont-ete-supervises-par-Moctar-Bel-Moctar-Les-signataires-par-le-Sang.html>
 quoted by Mauritanian news agency Alakhbar, a spokesman for Belmokhtar's 
organisation al-Mua'qi'oon Biddam (the Signed in Blood Brigade) claimed the 
attacks on Niger were a joint operation between it and jihadist group Movement 
for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, principally active in northern Mali. The 
spokesman claimed Belmokhtar, who gained notoriety in January for conducting the
In Amenas hostage siege in Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/25/in-amenas-timeline-siege-algeria>
, had a supervisory role in dual bomb blasts that killed 20 soldiers and 
injured dozens of workers.

The statements are the latest suggestion that Belmokhtar is alive, after the 
Chadian armyclaimed in March it had killed him <http://gu.com/p/3e7x6/tw> in a 
raid in the Ifoghas mountains in northern Mali, where it was fighting as part 
of a UN-backed French and African military intervention. Signed in Blood also 
described the Niger bombings as a revenge attack for the death of Abdelhamid 
Abou Zeid, an al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) commander who was killed 
in Mali by French and Chadian forces in March.

And in an apparent confirmation of the transnational support for jihadist 
groups inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, the group says the 
attackers were from Mali, Western Sahara and Sudan. The Nigerien government has 
said it cannot rule out the possibility that Nigeriens were also involved.

"The problem we have is that there is clearly complicity from people in Niger 
with these groups," said Moussa Akfar, a security expert in Niamey, the 
Nigerien capital. "There is evidence from the vehicles that the attackers were 
using and the way that they were able to plan and co-ordinate these attacks 
that they had inside help."

If Belmokhtar was involved in the attack it would be his first action since 
dozens of jihadist insurgents raided the internationally run gas plant at In 
Amenas inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, killing 37 oil 
and gas workers.

Belmokhtar – who formed the Signed in Blood Brigade last year after 
splintering from AQIM – is notorious as a jihadist leader in Sahel, first 
attracting attention in Tessalit in northern Mali in 1996.

Confusion surrounds Thursday's attacks in Niger, with conflicting claims about 
the number of attackers captured and number of deaths and injuries in the bomb 
blasts. French defence minister Jean-Yves Le Drian confirmed on Friday that
French special forces had intervened in the aftermath of the attack at Agadez 
<http://ow.ly/lma2G>, killing two of the attackers.

French special forces are believed to have been stationed in the area since 
2010, when an attack by AQIM-linked militants resulted in seven workers, 
including five French nationals, being taken hostage at Arlit. Four French 
hostages remain in captivity, and are believed to be being held in northern 
Mali.

But the attack is the bloodiest since France intervened in Mali's conflict 
last year, prompting threats by jihadists that French interests around the 
world would become a further target for attacks. France has been on high alert 
since intervening in Mali, and in March, Areva – the world's second largest 
uranium producer – announced an extra €35m would be spent protecting its plant 
at Arlit.

UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon condemned the attacks and called on the 
international community to strengthen security in the region.

"The secretary general reiterates the support of the UN to the efforts of the 
government of Niger and other countries in the Sahel region to combat the 
scourge of terrorism and transnational crime, in close collaboration with the 
African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and the Economic 
Community of Central African States," said a statement issued Ban's 
spokesperson.

"He stresses the need for the international community to continue to 
strengthen its co-operation to address these serious threats to the stability 
of the sub-region and beyond," it added.

The attacks draw further attention to the troubled Sahel, where the war in 
Mali and the events in Libya have compounded a decade of growing jihadist 
activity and drug trafficking.

"The problem is Niger is a large country, with instability on three fronts – 
we have rebels in Libya, the war in Mali and Boko Haram in Nigeria," said 
Akfar. "The borders are completely porous and these groups have made it clear 
they plan to carry out further attacks."
 