
It is now, in deepest autumn, that the markets, allotments and food shops are 
at their most tempting. Everything from the last tomatoes and soft fruits to 
the first of the crisp winter roots is available, a delicious crossover of 
seasons. And it is now, rather than high summer, when there is a true abundance 
of good things. Walk round a market at this time of year and you can't help but 
be struck by the sheer beauty of the fruit and vegetables. Last week I came 
back from shopping with everything from a weighty marrow and freshly dug golden 
beetroot to fat heads of corn and ripe pears. There was fresh horseradish too, 
which I don't see often enough, even though it grows so easily.

With each passing year my cooking becomes vegetable-based. When I am thinking 
about what to cook for the week, it is the fruit and vegetables that come first 
and the rest of the meal, be it meat, fish or grains, falls into place around 
them. It is invariably the greens, roots and fruits that I tend to buy first, 
often before I have had a look at the meat and fish, which many regard as the 
hub of their meal.

I start on the vegetable stall and work out the rest later. If there are great 
greens then I know the next stop is for pork or bacon; if I come across 
beautiful carrots, swedes or turnips then I will start looking for a suitable 
cut of meat or fish to cook with them. They are the stars of my week's eating 
rather than the supporting actors. It might sound a radical way to plan a meal, 
but it makes sense, as the supply of fruit and vegetables is more variable and 
seasonal and is, at least to this cook, a better place to start.

Grilled sardines, beetroot and horseradish mash

Golden beetroot seem less sweet to me than the more common red varieties, but 
it could just be my imagination. Either is suitable for mashing. The heat of 
the fresh horseradish is pleasing with the sweet earthiness of the beets. Ready 
grated root is a possible alternative.

Serves 2
beetroot, golden or red 4
butter 50g
grated fresh horseradish 2 tbsp
sardines, boned and butterflied 4

Scrub, but do not peel the beetroot, then boil them whole in deep, lightly 
salted water for 30 minutes or so, depending on their size. They must be truly 
tender. Skin them, you should be able to slide it off with your thumb, then 
trim neatly before returning them to the pan and crushing with a potato masher. 
Beat in the butter with a wooden spoon, seasoning with salt and the grated 
horseradish.

While the beets are cooking, get a grill or griddle pan hot, then lightly oil 
the fish and cook for a few minutes on both sides till cooked – about 3 or 4 
minutes on each side. Serve alongside the horseradish mash.

Tomatoes, charred onions and steak
 Tomatoes, charred onions and steak. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin 
Another use for the last of the tomatoes and a way of making a single steak go 
a long way. I sometimes serve this with a baked potato.

Serves 2-3
butter 60g 
rump steak 450g
thick spring onions or salad onions 3
tomatoes, assorted sizes and varieties, 650g

Melt the butter in a shallow pan and season the steak with salt and black 
pepper. When the butter is sizzling, brown the meat on both sides, remove and 
set aside. Cut the onions in half lengthways and add them to the pan.

Halve the larger tomatoes, then add them all to the pan, covering them with a 
lid and letting them cook for 10 minutes or so till soft and lightly browned 
here and there. Season them generously, pressing them lightly with a spoon so 
their juices run into the pan.

Slice the steak thickly, then tuck the pieces among the softening tomatoes. 
Continue cooking briefly, then serve.

Marrow with tomatoes and basil
 Marrow with tomatoes and basil. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin 
There was a temptation to include garlic in this, there often is when tomatoes 
and basil are involved, but on reflection I am not sure you need it. The 
flavours are fresher and more gentle without it. If you do decide to take the 
garlic route, then add a finely crushed clove to the mixture.

Serves 4
marrow 750g (unpeeled and seeded weight)
tomatoes 400g
olive oil 4 tbsp
basil leaves 12g
white vermouth or white wine 8 tbsp

Set the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Cut four pieces of baking parchment 
approximately 30cm x 30cm.

Peel the marrow, halve it and discard the spongy core and seeds. Cut the flesh 
into cubes roughly 2cm square and put them in a large mixing bowl.

Roughly chop the tomatoes and add them to the marrow with the olive oil, 
lightly torn basil leaves and a grinding of salt and a little black pepper.

Divide the mixture between the sheets of baking parchment, then pull the side 
edges in to form a parcel, pouring a little of the vermouth into each before 
sealing. You can use a paperclip, clothes peg or simply fold and scrunch the 
edges together to seal, placing the parcels on to a baking sheet.

Bake for 30 minutes until the marrow is soft and translucent.

Sweetcorn, bacon and parsley salad
 Sweetcorn, bacon and parsley salad. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin 
Raw sweetcorn, which I have used here, is less sugary than cooked and has a 
more satisfying crunch.

Serves 2
olive oil 3 tbsp 
smoked streaky bacon 4 rashers
salted, roasted almonds 50g
sweetcorn a large head
parsley a handful

Warm the oil in a shallow pan, slice the bacon into long thin strips and fry 
in the oil till almost crisp. Add the almonds and cook for a minute or two.

Slice the kernels from the corn cob and stir them into the bacon. Mix briefly 
so the raw corn is coated with the bacon fat then toss with torn parsley leaves 
and serve immediately.

Baked pears with butterscotch sauce
 Baked pears with butterscotch sauce. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin 
Lots of butterscotch sauce here. I poured the extra I had left over some 
vanilla ice cream the following day.

Serves 6
pears, medium to large 6
lemon juice a little
double cream 500ml
light muscovado sugar 100g
vanilla extract 1 tsp

Set oven at 180C/gas mark 4. Peel the pears, keeping them whole, brushing them 
with lemon juice to stop them browning, then stand in a baking dish.

Put the cream and sugar in a non-stick milk pan, stir in the vanilla and bring 
to the boil; remove from heat. Pour over the pears then bake for about 40 
minutes till tender. Serve one per person with butterscotch sauce.

nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <http://nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 