
Shortly before 10.30 yesterday morning, as their Turkish Airlines Boeing 
737-800 plummeted towards the ground, Yurdanur Kaya kissed her daughter and 
told herself she was going to die.

Cradling four-year-old Maya on her knee, she said a prayer as the twin-engine 
plane hurtled through low cloud and blind panic broke out among the passengers.

"I was thinking, This is it. I am dead; bye bye, life," she told the Guardian 
last night. "I was crying; Maya was crying; everyone was in tears and saying 
their prayers. Then the lights went out. I heard a crash."

Nine people were killed and 84 injured when Turkish Airlines flight 1951 came 
to an abrupt and terrifying end yesterday in a ploughed field less than half a 
mile short of Amsterdam's Schiphol airport. Some of those on board were 
critically injured and the death toll is likely to rise.

The aircraft's tail snapped off and the fuselage cracked in two as it gouged 
across the meadow at 10.31am local time. One engine ended up 50 metres from the 
wing.

The soft ground may have absorbed some of the impact. Fire did not break out 
and within a minute those capable of walking began staggering out of the 
ruptured plane, stepping over debris and burst suitcases. The plane had been 
carrying 128 passengers and seven crew.

"There was blood everywhere - people's bodies," said Kaya, who managed to 
stumble out of the aircraft with her daughter and husband, Orhan. "We are so, 
so lucky to be alive."

There was no immediate official explanation for the crash. Below a low cloud 
base at 800 feet, there had been good visibility. Speculation about birds being 
sucked into the plane's engines or the aircraft running out of fuel appear 
unsubstantiated.

"We cannot say anything about the cause at the moment," the acting local 
mayor, Michel Bezuijen, told reporters. "The priority is providing help and 
care."

The pilot, a former Turkish air force officer, was highly experienced. 
Investigators said last night that all three pilots were among the dead and 
confirmed that the flight data recorders had been found.

"There are still three crew members in the cabin," said Bob Steensma of the 
Dutch justice department. "I'm sorry to say they are dead. We leave them there 
because we have to investigate the cockpit before we take it apart."

TK1951 left Istanbul at 6.22am British time (8.22am local time) yesterday on 
its scheduled flight to the Dutch capital - and for the first three hours there 
were no reports of anything unusual. Only as it began its final approach to the 
Polderbaan runway, the newest at Schiphol, did problems begin. One passenger 
told Turkey's NTV television that the plane lost height suddenly as it came in 
to land, striking the ground tail first.

"We were at an altitude of 600 metres when we heard the announcement that we 
were landing," Kerem Uzel said. "We suddenly descended a great distance, as if 
the plane fell into turbulence. The plane's tail hit the ground."

Orhan Koc, sitting with his family on the left-hand side of the plane, said 
the flight had been "perfectly calm" until moments beforehand. "We suddenly 
felt the plane lurch downwards and we started to see smoke coming through into 
the cabin. Then there was a big bang. People were panicking and then we hit the 
ground."

"We are in the middle of a field now," one survivor, Mustafa Bahcecioglu, told 
the Turkish broadcaster Channel 24. "The majority of the passengers are 
injured, but there are people who are not injured. Around 30 ambulances have 
come here."

Turkish Airlines initially reported that there had been no deaths, but TV 
showed a short line of body bags beside the crumpled fuselage. Candan 
Karlitekin, head of the airlines's board of directors, confirmed visibility was 
good at the time. "Visibility was 5,000 yards [4,500 metres]. We've checked the 
plane's documents, and there is no problem concerning maintenance."

The debris was strewn across a relatively small section of the field. Of those 
on board, 72 were Turks and 32 Dutch. The nationalities of other passengers 
were not known.

About 750 emergency workers were sent to the scene and a fleet of 60 
ambulances were used to ferry the injured to hospitals around the city. Some 
were taken to the ambulances on farm carts towed by tractors. Relatives of 
passengers were taken to a sports hall at a nearby village. Last night more 
family members of the deceased and injured arrived at Schiphol on a flight from 
Istanbul.

Thomas Freidhoff, a student who had been cycling nearby the crash, told BBC 
News: "The plane was nose up and the tail section at a 45-degree angle. The 
section broke broke off ... Seconds after the crash people started exiting 
through the tail section ... I saw dozens make it out very quickly."

Last night survivor Orhan Koc embraced his brother, who had driven all the way 
from Germany to pick up the family after hearing the news. "I came directly," 
said Yurdaer Koc. "I couldn't believe they could have gone through something 
like that and come out OK."
 