
Donkey Kong wields a barrel that he lobs at enemies, Bowser spawns koopas to 
create his own mini army – it sounds like classicNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> gameplay, but this new outing 
for the much-loved characters is very different.

In a deal announced today, the duo are to appear as collectible figures in 
Skylanders Superchargers, the latest title in Activision’s “toys to life” 
franchise. Arriving with their own vehicles, the new Skylanders will also 
function as Amiibos, making them compatible with a range of Nintendo’s ownWii U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> titles.

Bowser and Donkey Kong will be available exclusively as a starter pack for the 
Wii U, Wii and Nintendo 3DS versions of the game. Both have been re-imagined 
for Skylanders in conjunction with Nintendo’s development team, with abilities 
that reference their previous adventures. Hammer Slam Bowser has his hammer as 
a primary weapon but is also able to spawn groups of koopas that can be thrown 
at enemies. Turbo Charge Donkey Kong, dressed in a flaming stuntman outfit, 
lobs barrel, but can also play the bongos to incapacitate groups of foes – a 
reference to the Donkey Konga game.

As Superchargers introduces vehicles to Skylanders for the first time, both 
characters also get a themed ride. The Donkey Kong Barrel Blaster is a car that 
shoots spiked barrels that provide a hazard for enemies; the Clown Cruiser is 
an airship that references Bowser’s craft in Super Mario 3, and allows players 
to fire Bullet Bills, the familiar projectile characters from the Super Mario 
universe.

“Nintendo and Activision have a decades-long relationship,” said Activision 
Publishing chief executive Eric Hirshberg. “They were one of the first 
companies we showed the original Skylanders to because we knew their console 
platform would be key to the game’s success. By the end of that first meeting 
everyone felt there was an instinctive connection between the world of 
Skylanders and the worlds Nintendo has created along the years.”

On the base of each item there’s a switch allowing players to swap 
functionality from Skylander to Amiibo. The figures work in the same games as 
their current Amiibo incarnations, making them compatible with Nintendo’s own 
“toys to life” titles.

“There was a real affinity in how Activision and Nintendo think,” said Reggie, 
Fils-Aimé, chief executive of Nintendo America. “This is a real collaboration, 
we did not simply lend our IP. The teams working on this had very close 
communication. If you look at the figures, of course, Donkey Kong has to have 
the red tie, but the jumpsuit was a collaborative idea from the two teams 
working together. The team at Vicarious Visions would come and show some of the 
move sets and our developers would say, ‘that’s just what we would do’.”

The character abilities within Skylanders make multiple references to Nintendo 
history. As a third attack, Bowser is able to transform into Magma Bowser 
providing him with a flame attack familiar to fans of the Super Mario series. 
Donkey Kong’s special attack has barrels and steel girders falling from the 
sky, referencing the character’s original arcade game. Plus, as with all 
Skylanders in the Supercharger game, if the correct character is paired with 
their own vehicles, the duo is super charged with more powerful abilities. With 
Donkey Kong’s vehicle, the super charge effect sees Diddy Kong appearing in a 
side car.

“It had to feel like they belonged in a Skylanders game,” said Hirschberg. 
“But at the same time it had to feel like an appropriate execution of these 
characters in any game. In every meeting we’ve had with Nintendo, there seems 
to be a lot of fanboy energy. There’s a creative chemistry.”

Skylanders Superchargers is the first in the series of action adventure titles 
to feature vehicular gameplay. Among the 20 new vehicles there are boats, cars 
and aircraft, all with moving parts for play use outside of the game – there 
are also 20 new action figures, although all 300 current figures will also be 
compatible. According to Activision, there are no plans to bring further 
Nintendo characters into the game.


Speaking about the toys to life genre Fils-Aimé said it was important for both 
companies to keep innovating on the genre to stop the concept from becoming 
staid. “Compelling gameplay is what’s going to keep kids and their parents 
excited about this category. How the genre continues to evolve is a 
conversation for the future, but as long as gamers say this is a lot of fun, we 
believe there will be lots of these figures in the household.”

In fact, there already are. Over 240m Skylanders figures have been sold so far 
since the original Skylanders was released in 2011.
 