 Doctors investigating the sudden death of Anna Nicole Smith said last night 
that prescription drugs had been found in the model's hotel room, but that no 
pills had been found in her stomach.
Smith, 39, died after collapsing in a Florida hotel room on Thursday; she was 
a former Playboy playmate of the year who had endured well-publicised battles 
with drugs and alcohol. Speaking after the post mortem examination, the Broward 
county medical examiner, Joshua Perper, said her death remained a "medical 
puzzle" that would not be solved for at least three weeks.

There was no immediate indication of a drug overdose, he said, before adding: 
"[We] do not exclude any kind of contribution of medication to the death". Dr 
Perper also said an autopsy had found no signs of physical injury on the body.

Charlie Tiger, the police chief of Seminole county, said nothing unusual was 
seen on hotel surveillance tapes, and there was no evidence to suggest a crime.

Friends said yesterday that the actor had sunk into depression after her son 
Daniel, 20, died last September, and had tried to kill herself at least once.

Mark Steines, a reporter with the TV show Entertainment Tonight and an 
acquaintance of Smith and her partner Howard K Stern, said her depression had 
worsened recently. "After the death of Daniel, she did jump in her pool and 
attempt suicide," he said.

Smith has left behind a paternity battle over her daughter Dannielynn, aged 
five months. Mr Stern is listed on the birth certificate as the father but 
lawyers for Larry Birkett, a photographer, went to court in Los Angeles 
yesterday to ask a judge to order a DNA test and award him custody.

The battle took a further twist last night when Prince Frederick von Anhalt, 
the husband of the actor Zsa Zsa Gabor, said he might be Dannielynn's father. 
Von Anhalt, who has been married to Gabor for more than 20 years, said he and 
Smith had been having an affair since the 1990s and threatened to sue for 
custody of the girl.
 