
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Monday February 14 2005 

 In the article below we may give the impression that director John Boorman 
was responsible for the screenplay of Point Blank. The credited screenwriters 
are Alex Jacobs with David and Rafe Newhouse.




The author: Donald Westlake (b1933) started selling mystery stories to pulp 
magazines in the early 1950s, and continued to write them prolifically before 
publishing his first full-length novel, The Mercenaries, in 1960. Westlake 
specialised in crime and police stories and The Hunter, on which Point Blank 
was based, was the first in a series featuring a hardened career criminal, 
Parker, written by Westlake under the pseudonym Richard Stark. Much of 
Westlake's fiction has ended up in movie form, including The Outfit, The Hot 
Rock and Slayground, while Westlake himself was commissioned to write directly 
for the screen. His films include The Stepfather (1986) and the Jim Thompson 
adaptation The Grifters (1990). In 1998, Westlake returned to the Parker 
character after a 23-year break with Comeback.

The story: Doublecrossed by his partner Resnick, and shot by his wife Lynne, 
Parker embarks on a mission to retrieve his share of a robbery from the 
Syndicate, a corporate-style crime organisation. He tracks down Resnick, who 
has holed up in a Syndicate-protected hotel, and kills him. Parker hunts down 
each member of the Syndicate's ascending hierarchy, until he manages to collect 
the money after evading a squad of Syndicate gunmen.

The film-makers: After making his name at the BBC and with the Dave Clark Five 
film Catch Us If You Can (1965), John Boorman (b1933) joined the 1960s British 
film-making exodus to Hollywood. An independent producer, Judd Bernard, had 
gained control of The Hunter's screen rights, and Boorman agreed to take it on. 
Lee Marvin, who had just won an Oscar for Cat Ballou (1965), was persuaded to 
take the lead role, and lent his considerable support to Boorman in battles 
with financing studio MGM. Marvin and Boorman subsequently collaborated on the 
second world war film Hell in the Pacific (1968).

How book and film compare: Westlake's original is a stripped-down genre piece, 
as taciturn and single-minded as its protagonist, but Boorman introduced 
numerous radical elements culled from the European new waves, from colour-coded 
art direction to convoluted flashback jump-cutting. Boorman's purpose was to 
reinvigorate what he considered pulp noir cliches by emphasising the 
pyschological aspects of Parker, renamed Walker for the film - for example, the 
key scene where Walker shoots an empty bed, having experienced a momentary 
vision of his wife asleep there. Much of Boorman's script is his own invention, 
from creating new characters to utilising what he called the "arid" Californian 
architecture to set off the sparseness of the narrative. Boorman later 
described the film as a "documentary" of Marvin's state of mind - he was drunk 
a good deal during the shoot.

Inspirations and influences: Coming at a turning point in Hollywood history as 
the studio system was breaking down, Point Blank is generally credited with 
kicking off the entire American neo-noir movement, taking its cue from the 
French new wave's interest in the genre, notably Godard's Alphaville (1965). 
Along with films like Bonnie and Clyde (1967) and Bullitt (1968), Point Blank 
also echoed a new mood in US cinema for fetishising blood and violence. Its 
vision of organised crime as a shadowy corporate operation was, however, 
swiftly eclipsed by The Godfather (1972) and the idea of hoodlum as "family".
 