
Northern Ireland's manager Michael O'Neill believes several of his players 
will have matured as international footballers after their 1–1 draw in Portugal.

O'Neill's team defied the odds to claim a famous point in World Cup qualifying 
against a star-studded team led by Cristiano Ronaldo in Porto last month, a 
huge morale boost after the side were held at home by Luxembourg in September.

Azerbaijan are next up in Group F on 14 November and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> are desperate to 
register a first win of the campaign.

Where the likes of Steven Davis and Aaron Hughes were involved in the famous 
wins over England and Spain during the Lawrie Sanchez years, the Portugal 
result marked the first great underdog result for many of the starting XI.

Niall McGinn, who scored their goal, Ryan McGivern, Corry Evans, Oliver 
Norwood and Craig Cathcart all impressed at Estádio do Dragão but have 
previously been uncertain of their places.

O'Neill is now confident they have taken a big step in their development. "I 
think it feels like we have some more established players now, and you always 
hope for that," he said. "Players need time and opportunities to grow at 
international level and being involved in nights like Portugal help to do that.

"Look at the experiences gained by players like Niall, Corry, Ollie and Ryan – 
that was probably their first big experience of that kind of game and coming 
away from an arena like that with a result."

O'Neill has named a 24-man squad for the Windsor Park game against Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan>, with the likes of Chris 
Brunt, Gareth McAuley, Grant McCann, Shane Ferguson and Andy Little all back 
after missing the Portugal match.

That means the stand-ins who performed so admirably face stiff competition for 
their places – with the likes of Brunt, McAuley and Ferguson likely to push 
particularly hard. "There are always going to be decisions to make about who 
starts and who doesn't start," admitted O'Neill.

"Sometimes players are left out of a team not because of their last 
performance but because of the approach we might take on the night. This is a 
game we intend to win, to play really positively on the front foot. We'll be 
positive from the off and that will be a factor in the team we start with 
against Azerbaijan."

Although O'Neill was able to call on a strong squad, one notable absentee was 
Burnley's striker Martin Paterson, who withdrew from O'Neill's previous squad 
due to "ongoing fitness issues" and has remained unavailable despite playing, 
and scoring, for his club at the weekend.

Paterson has a poor injury record and a new manager to impress at club level, 
Sean Dyche. Although O'Neill understands the reasoning behind his absence, he 
regrets not being able to call on him. "The conversation we had with Martin 
last time was that he was not available and that he would come back to me when 
he was," said O'Neill. "I would like Martin to be available and I've selected 
him every time he has been.

"I still think he could be a very important player for us but he is wary 
because of his injury problems and I understand his reasons. I appreciate it 
from a professional point of view – he had a difficult decision to make and he 
made that decision. I have to respect that but I want this squad as strong as 
possible and I would like to have him [in it]."

Hull's defender Alex Bruce is also named in the party. The 28-year-old won two 
caps for the Republic of Ireland in 2007 and 2008 friendlies but never featured 
in a competitive fixture. He was also named in the initial squad for Portugal 
but withdrew injured after attending a training camp with his new team-mates. 
He will provide cover at right-back.

Northern Ireland squad: R Carroll (Olympiakos), A Mannus (St Johnstone), M 
McGovern (Falkirk), A Hughes (Fulham), R McGivern (Man City, on loan at 
Hibernian), J Evans (Man Utd), C Cathcart (Blackpool), G McAuley ( West Brom), 
A Bruce (Hull); C Baird (Fulham), S Davis (capt, Southampton), O Norwood 
(Huddersfield), C Evans (Hull), N McGinn (Aberdeen), P McCourt (Celtic), C 
Brunt (West Bromwich), S Ferguson (Newcastle), G McCann (Peterborough); D Healy 
(Bury), D Shiels (Rangers), K Lafferty (Sion), W Grigg (Walsall), J Ward 
(Derby), A Little (Rangers).
 