
Six years ago, Gordon and I took our family on our first remote river trip to 
help bring attention to western Canada's beleaguered Taku river, a magnificent 
wilderness at risk from mining and roadworks. Since then, we've rafted through 
the rapids and ranges of five more Canadian and Alaskan refuges, all in the 
capable company of The River League. Moose, mountain goats and caribou have 
been delivered copiously. Bears have been the bounteous bonus - and by far, the 
most beguiling.

This trip was down the Tatshenshini, which is born in Canada's northern Yukon 
Territory and on its 132-mile sluice to the sea spills south-west through upper 
British Columbia and slices completely through south-east Alaska. It snakes 
through boreal spruce lands, is squeezed by canyons and carves through the 
highest ranges of the continent's coast. Along its way, you see waterfalls, 
beaver pond outflows, and the incessant melt of countless glaciers.

On our first day, we gathered at the high-lapping headstreams, where three 
yellow rafts were already hand-inflated and mostly loaded. But we were carrying 
a lot of our own comfort for almost a fortnight of self-sustenance, so the 
loading and strapping took another couple of hours. By the time we were 
onboard, with paddles in hand, each vessel weighed about a tonne and a half of 
flesh and rubber, sunscreen and wool hats, swimsuits and wellies, shorts and 
thermals, cameras, guitars, an emergency satellite phone, rescue rope, a 
natural history library, and enough first aid to support any injury that didn't 
warrant a four-hour medi-evacuation by helicopter. Plus: 18 dozen eggs, 1,000lb 
of lamb and romaine, shrimp and tofu, feta and melons, brandy and chocolate. 
And, for this group in particular, a vault of single malts.

By day two, we were already getting into a routine and, after an early 
breakfast of scrambled eggs, we dismantled our tents and delivered our 
watertight barrel-sized riverbags of worldly possessions to the crew for 
loading. By 9.30am, we were on board for a six-hour float. Unlike the first 
day's serious roller coaster of grade III/IV rapids, this was the serene side 
of remote wilderness: intimate forest walls going tight to the water's edge; 
poplar trees thatching the banks like chopsticks where beavers had chewed 
through their massive trunks.

The rafts were in a rotisserie of sunshine in slow spins that let us take in 
full 360-degree panoramas. Icy swallows dropped out of condo-holes. Higher 
still were rock ledges whitewashed with the telltale signs of golden eagles' 
nests. A mother moose, with shoulder hairs raised defensively, kept watch on 
her gangly calf.

We cheered at the announcement that we would stay two nights at our second 
camp. The layover meant we could ditch the wellies and don the hiking boots for 
a full day's walk. Below us, valleys spread green, with aprons of rock washes, 
and a backdrop of never-ending mountain peaks. Thighs burned, but spirits were 
positively on fire.

On the fourth day, we began to spot the bears: the first was on a scree slope 
beside the river, posing placidly for us as we drifted quietly by. A much 
larger grizzly romped on the beach just upstream from what was to become our 
camp; this hefty one prompted self-reminders to remove the afternoon snack 
wrappers from pockets.

After breakfast, five of the lads sallied forth for an exploration with a back 
up of pepper spray and bear crackers. Nothing was guaranteed, but a posse this 
size is apparently large enough to deter encounters too close with bears.

We tuned into the hunting zone of a big grizzly crossing the wash of the far 
shore. Lots of eagles resting on the sandbars. And then we came upon a big 
grizzly with a new cub just four months out of its first hibernation den 
grazing away on soap berries and scratching out edible roots. We snooped to 
within a couple of hundred yards and watched her for 30 minutes. She could have 
reach us in a 15-second gallop.

Gordon said this was the greatest show on earth. Retired US ambassador Dick 
Viets added, "I cannot impress upon you enough what a profound impact it has on 
me to be watching such wildlife against a backdrop that has never been 
modified, destroyed, altered by man."

At its widest, the main river bows to nearly 3km across, and at times it felt 
more like we were paddling on a flowing sea. It was not hard to feel humbled 
here. We have been on a nomadic float for nine days, and have seen no other 
soul beyond our own roster.

Back on the beach, veteran rafters pitched in to help gather an abundance of 
driftwood, while the guides created the frame of a waterside sauna. Several 
hours later, after a feast of roast lamb and Greek salad, we hunkered ourselves 
into the blue cast of the tarp'd hovel. The guides shovelled in a nest of 
granitic heat, and with a wetted broom of wild sage, washes of water became a 
sudden swath of steamy decadence to soak our soiled and muscle-sore bodies. A 
second round, after a mad, mass plunge into the icy lake, felt even better. 
Thrushes were chorusing from the dense wall of alders. It was after midnight, 
and still they sang.

The Tatshenshini-Alsek ultimately poured its massive bulk into the Gulf of 
Alaska - and us with it. We pitched our last camp on the beach. The Pacific 
coiled in to greet us in banded waves of turquoise and white. Orange-billed 
Caspian terns wheeled overhead, mingled in flocks of hundreds of gulls. Our 
final feast was fresh salmon - one each of baked, teriyaki, curried, and 
straight fire-stoked. One of our number returned the fish heads to the washed 
sand shores; in a grand display of grace, a majestic bald eagle swooped down 
and snatched them away.

We had flowed to our most western limits, and had fallen with the river 
1,950ft since our put-in. Our way back could only be by air. I took a supersize 
inhalation of salt and seagrass, spruce and sage scented air. A waft of 
woodsmoke. A perfume more sensual than a city candle shop.

Way to go

Getting there

Air Canada (0871 2201111, aircanada.com <http://www.aircanada.com>) flies 
London-Whitehorse via Vancouver for £522.40 rtn inc tax.

Rafting

The River League (+604 987 8667, riverleague.ca <http://www.riverleague.ca>) 
has 11-day Tatshenshini trips for US$4,497pp including transfers to/from 
Whitehorse, food, equipment and guiding. Maximum 12 participants. Next trips 
depart June 20 and August 24.

Further information

Tourism British Columbia, hellobc.com <http://www.hellobc.com>; Visit Canada 
0906 8715000.

Country code: 00 1

Flight time: London-Vancouver 10hrs.

Time difference: -8hrs.

£1 = C$1.99.
 