 It is one of the great traditions of watching sport that when you buy a ticket 
to watch the game you also acquire the right to abuse the opposition with no 
comeback. But yesterday, in the most devastating attack on a crowd since Eric 
Cantona's two-footed lunge into the stands at Crystal Palace in 1994, the 
Australian batsman Justin Langer turned his wrath towards the Barmy Army, 
England's legendary horde of travelling supporters.
Not content with pummelling the beleaguered England cricket team with a 
personal best innings of 250, to virtually single-handedly condemn Nasser 
Hussain's side to another Test match defeat, Langer walked into a press 
conference at the MelbourneCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Ground and fired off a volley of abuse at England's fans equal in power to any 
of the cover drives he had dispatched to the boundary earlier in the day.

The opening batsman, who rarely drinks and is dedicated to a Zen lifestyle, 
had taken umbrage at the continual barracking of his team mate Brett Lee during 
the second day of the fourth Ashes test, and he did not hold back.

"I thought they were a disgrace," was Langer's response to the Barmy Army's 
shouts of "no ball" every time Lee reached the crease, a reference to 
accusations that he generates his astounding pace by throwing - or in 
cricketing parlance "chucking" - the ball down the wicket.

Overweight


"These people stand behind a fence drinking beer with most of them 50 kilos 
overweight making ridiculous comments," Langer said. "It's easy for someone to 
say that from behind a fence, they're within their rights because they've paid 
their money, but there's still some integrity in life, I think."

The one thing Langer guaranteed himself was a less than warm welcome from the 
Barmies when he took the field with the rest of the Australian team for the 
start of third day's play last night.

In the Exeter pub in Melbourne's Chinatown on Friday night, many of the Barmy 
Army had gathered to plot their revenge on the Western Australian. As the beer 
continued to flow the talk was of special banners and even a brand-new song to 
greet their assailant.

Not many of the Barmies who packed out the pub would have cut a pretty figure 
on the beaches near Langer's Perth home, and the football shirt has never been 
a great aid for covering up a beer gut. But they were determined to defend 
themselves against what they considered to be Langer's unjustified assault 
anyway.

"He will get loads of stick for sure," said Dax Oliver, 23, from Torquay. "We 
will make sure he gets a lot of grief for having a go at the England fans as we 
were only really having a bit of fun at Brett Lee's expense."

"There will be a lot of people really pissed off because calling us a disgrace 
for simply having a laugh is a massive overreaction," was the response of 
glazier Guy Waterman from Wigan. "How has he got the right to slag off the 
people who stood on their feet and clapped him off the park for scoring a 
double hundred?

"It's just another sportsman who doesn't live in the real world and hasn't got 
a clue about the things that crowds get up to. Shouting no-ball at Brett Lee is 
hardly the stuff of football hooliganism."

Langer's comments sent both the English and Australian media into a frenzy. "I 
know how that will look in the Sun," Langer said to the English writers as he 
left the room.

It could be said that the outburst was a remarkable display of chutzpah from a 
member of a team commonly regarded to be the masters of verbal sledging.

"I'll bowl you a fucking piano, ya Pommie pooftah. Let's see if you can play 
that," is one of the more polite asides attributed to Merv Hughes, the former 
Australian fast bowler.

But some, including many England fans, might argue that Langer was perfectly 
justified in what he said and that the Barmies are a blot on the cricketing 
landscape.

Of the estimated 10,000 supporters who have travelled halfway round the world 
to watch one of the most one-sided Ashes contests in history, only a small 
proportion can truly be said to make up the Barmy Army. But what they lack in 
size they make up for in noise and colour, inside and outside the ground.

They are easy to spot - most wear either England cricket shirts or those of a 
football team, and they adorn the stands with the flag of St George. But most 
of all they sing. Constantly.

One of the current favourites on their hymn sheet, sung to the tune of He's 
Got the Whole World in His Hands, celebrates the imbalance in the exchange rate 
between the two countries, climaxing with the line: "For every pound, we've got 
three dollars in our hands."

Another, to the tune of Yellow Submarine, employs the chorus: "You all live in 
a convict colony." Many end with the Barmy Army standing en masse, pointing at 
the Australian team and shouting: "You're the convicts!"

But while they might be more raucous than most Australian cricket fans - and 
they are certainly proud of the amount of alcohol they can consume - any 
comparison with English football hooligans is entirely false. Not one member of 
the Barmy Army has been arrested since the tour began.

But that might change if Justin Langer finds himself sent to field anywhere 
near a boundary where the Barmy Army might be sitting.
 