
'In every city, thousands of women live by themselves," intones the ominous 
voiceover in the trailer for The Resident. Oh look, here comes Hilary Swank, 
and she's renting a swish Brooklyn apartment for a suspiciously low sum. I 
haven't seen it yet, and I don't suppose you have either, but I think we can 
guess what happens: there will be running, and screaming, and disposable 
supporting characters will duly be disposed of in a rehash of 
Crawlspace-meets-Sliver. But I'm sure at some point Swank will strip down to 
her vest, like Bruce Willis, and fight back feistily.

Yes, The Resident is a film about a woman being terrorised. BOF: This is such 
old hat. I'd rather see a film about a woman terrorising the people trying to 
terrorise her. Someone recently suggested to me that the history of the horror 
genre has been the very opposite of feminist, and she had a point. Dario 
Argento once said of beautiful women, "If they have a good face or figure I 
would much prefer to watch them being murdered than an ugly girl or man."

Horror <https://www.theguardian.com/film/horror> movies like to place their 
characters in peril, and their almost exclusively male directors invariably 
view women as more vulnerable, more easily terrorised than their male 
counterparts, fair game. "You fear more for her than you would for a husky 
man," said Brian De Palma.

But, as far as the slasher movie goes, Jason or Michael or Leatherface seem to 
me to be equal-opportunity psychokillers, happy to eviscerate victims of either 
gender, and while it's the women who do most of the screaming – and as far back 
asPeeping Tom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/peeping-tom>, the subjective 
camera has preferred to stalk the female of the species – I don't think the 
slasher subgenre is misogynist per se. Indeed, Carol J Clover famously made a 
case for the opposite in Men, Women and Chainsaws, suggesting male viewers 
identify with the female victims rather than with the sadistic killers, and 
defining the convention of "the final girl", the Jamie Lee Curtis character who 
ultimately defeats the bogeyman.

I would go further, and contend that horror, at its best, really is a feminist 
genre, having the capacity to express more about the female condition than all 
the romcoms and family dramas commonly referred to as "chick-flicks". Carrie 
and Ginger Snaps, for example, deal with the onset of menstruation with a 
directness few mainstream movies dare emulate, while Black Swan is a virtual 
treatise on female body image. This is not to say films like Martyrs, Captivity 
or the forthcoming I Saw the Devil don't make me uncomfortable in the way they 
seem to revel in female suffering, but in my favourite kind of horror movies – 
dark fairytales such as A Nightmare on Elm Street or Pan's Labyrinth or 
The Orphanage – heroines embark on quests as protagonists, rather than passive 
victims.

The films of Wes Craven, George Romero, even David Cronenberg, are rich in 
strong, resourceful female characters who aren't simply butt-kicking male 
surrogates like (terrific though she is) Sigourney Weaver in the first Alien 
movie. And while Argento may get his kicks out of killing beautiful women, 
Suspiria and Phenomena feature heroines as plucky as they come; even The Bird 
with the Crystal Plumage, Profondo Rosso or The Stendhal Syndrome subvert 
traditional female roles. Unlike some feminists, I don't require all my horror 
heroines to be positive role models, so I'm not discombobulated when the 
protagonists of Repulsion or The Others display neurosis or psychosis and turn 
to the dark side. I even enjoy psycho-thrillers in which the ostensible heroine 
is unmasked as the assassin, though the only example of that I'm prepared to 
cite here is Halle Berry in Perfect Stranger, a movie too stupid to spoil.

But perhaps I'm being unfair, and The Resident will turn my preconceptions on 
their head. I hope so. Perhaps Swank's character will turn out to be a man in 
drag, or a former boxer who fells her tormentor with a left-hook, or a techie 
who's spying on her own voyeur. Anything other than just another terrorised 
female, please.
 