
Novak Djokovic has been beaten 3-6, 6-3, 6-3 by another Serbian, Janko 
Tipsarevic, at theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> in London. In order 
to stay in the tournament, which is being held at the O2 Arena, the world No1 
needs the fifth seed, David Ferrer, to beat Tomas Berdych on Friday evening.

The world No2, Rafael Nadal, went out of the tournament on Thursday after he 
was beaten 7-6, 4-6, 6-3 by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. Andy Murray, the world No3, 
withdrew earlier in the week with a groin injury after one match, which leaves 
Roger Federer as the only member of the world top four to have reached the 
semi-finals so far.

Tipsarevic, who replaced Murray in the tournament, hit 22 winners and four 
aces against Djokovic. He was not in contention for a semi-final spot.

Djokovic played better than in his thrashing by Ferrer two days ago, but he 
faded badly after winning the first set. He took control of the first set with 
a break in the fourth game. He was moving well and hitting the ball much more 
crisply than on Wednesday, and Tipsarevic had to fight off two set points at 
5-2 when the net twice came to his opponent's aid. That earned Tipsarevic, one 
of the ATP Tour's most engaging figures, the support of the crowd and there was 
a loud cheer when he managed to hold, but Djokovic had no trouble serving it 
out.

The errors began to creep in at the start of the second set, however, and 
Tipsarevic capitalised in the sixth game when a Djokovic drop shot failed to 
clear the net. The world No9 was trading blow for blow with his countryman but 
he could not cement the break as some amazing defence from Djokovic eventually 
drew a mistake.

Djokovic suddenly looked very weary and this time he made no mistake, 
clinching the set at the second opportunity when the top seed sent a return 
well long.

Djokovic was broken again at the start of the decider. The zip of the first 
set had gone out of the 24-year-old's shots and he quickly slipped three match 
points down on his own serve. He saved two but dumped a forehand into the net 
on the third to give Tipsarevic a first win at the finals.

The 27-year-old, who is going on holiday with Djokovic after the tournament, 
said: "I started the year ranked 49 and if anyone told me I would have finished 
it like this then I would have taken it in a heartbeat."
 