
Rafael Nadal ran out of passion, and hit the road for Mallorca. Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> ran out of legs, and is on 
his way home to Belgrade. If more proof were needed that the leading players 
are exhausted by their excellent endeavours, the last tournament of the year 
has provided it on an almost daily basis.

When Djokovic suffered his second straight defeat on Friday, he at least had 
the consolation of congratulating a good friend when he embraced his compatriot 
Janko Tipsarevic at the net. When Tomas Berdych beat David Ferrer in the night 
match – 3-6, 7-5, 6-1, to grab the last semi-final spot in the World Tour 
Finals – he did the world No1 a favour.

Djokovic, hurting in body and soul, would not now have to come back to play 
Roger Federer in the semi-final. (Weirdly, both matches lasted exactly two 
hours and seven minutes.)

He clearly had no stomach for it. After he had lost to Tipsarevic, he took 
defeat with remarkable calm. It was as if he were resigned to his fate, not a 
sentiment that sprang to mind when he was carving his way through the finest 
collection of elite players ever to grace the game at the same time.

When Nadal left the tournament on the previous night, a dispirited loser to 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, he shocked the gathering afterwards when he admitted he had 
a "little bit less passion for the game".

But Djokovic, too, had an air of disenchantment. Tipsarevic, who entered the 
field only as a substitute for the injured Andy Murray after the first round, 
beat Djokovic more convincingly than the 3-6, 6-3, 6-3 scoreline suggests, and 
any attempt to dismiss it as an aberration ought to be dismissed, because 
Tipsarevic is a player of high pedigree.

Still, as Tipsarevic, the world No9, pointed out, this was not the Djokovic 
who won Wimbledon to become No1 in the world in what might have been the most 
dominant year by any player in the history of the game.

So, what was missing? "Freshness," Djokovic said. Anything else?

"Well, I think you have those days where you don't feel like playing, you 
don't feel like practising. There are tournaments, especially the ones towards 
the end of the year, where you don't feel as 100% fresh mentally, physically, 
emotionally. Obviously, that's why [Nadal] felt that way. I understand him, 
because I can say we are more or less in a similar situation."

But he added: "I had an unbelievable year. Nothing can really ruin that. I 
will always remember this year as the best of my life. I just want to prepare 
well for 2012."

In the first set, Djokovic looked a different beast from the wounded one who 
stumbled to defeat in straight sets to Ferrer earlier in the round robin. His 
serve functioned well, he moved with verve and there was muscle in his shots. 
But the energy and bounce dissipated in the second set and, at the finish, 
there was a listlessness in his play that was at odds with the magnificence of 
his cv.

Tipsarevic, the tour's philosopher-in-residence, eloquently summarised a 
strange day, keen not to downplay his own achievement. Did he feel Djokovic was 
running on an empty tank?

"Even though I wasn't 100% fit for this tournament," Tipsarevic said, "I have 
to say also that I was running on an empty tank after Paris. After Rafael 
Nadal, I don't think there is a guy on tour who played more matches than me 
this year. This is a fact which people should know.

"You have all these guys saying that they're playing on their empty tanks but 
I think, even counting Davis Cup, I'm the guy who probably played the most 
matches this season on tour. I managed to play well because this is all new for 
me. This is something amazing. I hope that I will be here next year and in 
years to come.

"Every time we played, I managed to win a set and then lose in the end. So I 
am really happy that I managed to win today in the end and, strangely, finish 
the season with a victory. I'm not really used to do that." He laughed. We 
laughed. He is the most engaging of individuals.

It was, as William Blake had it, Songs of Innocence and of Experience. It was 
a wide-eyed appreciation of the special place in which he found himself after 
years on the outside looking in. He was not jaded. He was not Djokovic.

Behind his space-age shades and stroking his Bohemian beard, Tipsarevic was in 
every respect a bright, fresh presence in a scene that, for all its great 
tennis lately, can occasionally have an overload of familiarity.

Some time next week, Novak and Janko will be lying on a beach in the Maldives. 
They will look back on their respective seasons, two Serbian friends remarkable 
in their different ways, and wonder if the next 12 months could be any better 
for either of them.

Friday, however, was special for only one of them.
 