
There is only so much kidding a player can do on a tennis court (or off it, 
for that matter). And in Paris on Wednesday,Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, one of the game's great 
jokers, pulled off a passable impression of a fit professional athlete who has 
terrorised his peers for a year, when he beat Ivan Dodig without discomfort or 
drama in two routine sets.

Later, he shrugged and joked his way through a light inquisition about his 
suspect right shoulder, dodging the issue of whether or not the BNP Paribas 
Masters is getting the best of him this week.

Does a 6-4, 6-3 win in an hour and a half settle the conundrum of the world 
No1's fitness? Not at all. While Djokovic started stiffly, especially on his 
serve, and was moving freely at the end, Dodig did not stretch him sufficiently 
to tell us much about the quality of Djokovic's tennis under sustained pressure.

If Djokovic wins in Paris, he will probably start favourite for the World Tour 
Finals, which start in Greenwich on 20 November, but he is a way short of the 
trophy yet. He meets Viktor Troicki in the third round on Thursday, and, 
although his old friend should provide a stiffer examination than Dodig did, 
Djokovic is still playing cat-and-mouse with the media about his injuries.

"I feel good," he told Sky from courtside. "I didn't know what to expect. I 
finished in Basel and wasn't really confident I would compete this week. I had 
a couple of days off and then arrived here yesterday, had a short hit.

"I know I didn't play at the top of my game but the pain is not so strong, so 
I can compete. My dedication to the sport hasn't changed."

When complimented on picking up a $1.6m (£1m) bonus for fulfilling his 
obligation to play in the seventh of the eight Masters, Djokovic smiled, nodded 
and uttered a gnomic "hmm".

Djokovic has clearly thought this through. Had he played in the Shanghai 
Masters as well as this final Masters tournament of the season, he would have 
automatically collected $2m. Had he played in only six of them, there would not 
have been an extra cent. So, when he withdrew from Shanghai and struggled in 
Basel, the dilemma was obvious. He had to play in Paris, injured or not.

Djokovic came to Paris for the money, of that there can be little doubt. After 
all, if he had been blown away by Dodig he would still pick up his money. Yet 
last week, he said his priority was Greenwich. It is inconceivable he would 
risk aggravating problems he has had with his shoulder, at least since August, 
and latterly his back, unless he had to.

So we might safely assume he will retire at the first hint of a recurrence – 
which he did in Cincinnati against Andy Murray.

All of a sudden, Djokovic looks less like the man who flirted with 
invincibility for most of the year and more like a cynic prepared to milk a 
flawed system.

Bonus is such a benign term for the free money rewarded to the world's best 
players for merely turning up. Some may call it bribery. Certainly it has 
influenced Djokovic's strategy towards the end of a long season, one in which 
the leading players have complained about overload.

Parisian fans could not complain, though. Sandwiched between Andy Murray and 
Roger Federer, Djokovic provided a quality main course at the Bercy, a 
cavernous venue that feels more suited to housing getaway vans than a major 
tennis tournament.

Dodig has played some good tennis this year – he took a set off Djokovic in 
the Australian Open, beat Robin Soderling before losing to Rafael Nadal in the 
semi-finals of Barcelona, then beat the Spaniard in Montreal – but he is not 
known for his consistency. At 26, he has been around long enough to sense a 
wounded foe, yet he did not have the wit, composure or armoury to pull off an 
upset. Rarely did he go after Djokovic's pop-gun second serve early in the 
first set; only occasionally did he test his running forehand, the shot that 
has given the Serb's shoulder most grief in 2011.

"I'm here to win," Federer said after his quick victory over the Frenchman 
Adrian Mannarino. "If you use a tournament as a stepping stone to another 
tournament, that's wrong."

Did Djokovic put his foot on a stepping stone? We should know soon enough.
 