
Australian cricket's period of world domination probably began in Calcutta's 
giant Eden Gardens stadium late one November afternoon in 1987 when Allan 
Border's side beat England by seven runs and so became one-day champions of the 
world.

That it should be Mike Gatting's ill-timed reverse sweep that handed them the 
match at a time when England should have won was merely apposite, for it was 
the England captain who earlier in that year had gone to Australia and retained 
the Ashes. The biter bit, in fact, like Shane Warne dropping Kevin Pietersen at 
slip.

Up until that point, the game in Australia was in a trough; meandering, not 
knowing quite whether to be amateur or professional, its play reflecting that. 
Border had been captain since 1984, after Kim Hughes resigned amid many tears, 
and in the ensuing three years had led his side into seven series, winning none 
and losing twice each to England and New Zealand, the double whammy of 
nightmares for all Australians.

So a decision was taken. Draw up a new blueprint, pick the players with 
bottle, get rid of the wasters even if they have more natural talent. Get on 
board those who would leave nothing to chance in pursuit of excellence.

The standard had to be raised and that would come from the academy, 
professionalism and the knock-on effect of success. And target the World Cup. 
Winning anything meaningful is infectious, but the prestige of taking the 
premier one-day title was incalculable.

Since that day, until last Monday evening, Australian cricket has scarcely 
taken a backward step. They have contested 55 Test match series of varying 
lengths, won 38 and losing just 10.

Of the 27 they have played at home, only that of 1991-2, when they were beaten 
by West Indies, was lost and they came within one run of taking that as well. 
They notched up a record 16 straight Test match victories and set new exalted 
standards for fast scoring and pugnacious play.

A nucleus of that side - Border, Geoff Marsh, Dean Jones, David Boon, Waugh, 
and Craig McDermott- went on to play a total of 438 more Tests between them. By 
1999, Australia had become the undisputed brand leaders in both forms of the 
game. All that in a dozen years.

It is into this context that this week's fitting finale to a memorable summer 
can be placed. For in taking the Ashes back from Australia, there might be a 
spin-off in the shape of a revival in England's one-day fortunes; the 
Australian principle of the 80s, only the other way around.

It was only a couple of months after Waugh had lifted the World Cup at Lord's 
that Nasser Hussain, England's novice skipper, was booed on the balcony at the 
Oval, his team beaten by New Zealand and ranked, unofficially anyway, as the 
worst Test side on the planet. That same World Cup saw them, as hosts, not even 
invited to the second round party.

Since then the focus of the England management, while paying due service to 
one-day internationals, has had as its priority the success of the Test team 
with the specific aim of recovering the Ashes. The side has grown gradually in 
stature, coinciding directly with Duncan Fletcher's time as coach.

Many players, 54 in all, have been tried and only 22 of them got to play more 
than nine matches, as the coach looked beyond mere statistics and instead into 
the soul of his players to see whether the desire was there. England's one-day 
form remains sketchy - but maybe something is happening here.

The win in the Twenty20 match at the Rose Bowl, when Australia got its first 
taste of the aggression that would come their way, manifested itself throughout 
both the triangular one-day NatWest series, which was shared, and the 
three-match Trophy, which went to Australia only in the final match. At least 
the glint of competition was starting to return.

Now though Vaughan's side know what is possible. He has a group of players 
that will still be relatively young by the time of the next World Cup in the 
Caribbean in March of 2007, and the bulk of that side - Trescothick, Vaughan, 
Strauss, Pietersen, Flintoff, Harmison, Collingwood, Simon Jones and probably 
Ashley Giles - will almost certainly be involved.

That crew know what it is like to take on the best and win. It is a feeling 
that will never leave them; other sides now will be afraid and that is what 
Fletcher and Vaughan can take into that competition.

If it comes on the back of a solid defence of the Ashes in Australia either 
side of the New Year before that, then so much the better.

Even a year ago, the prospect of England winning a World Cup in the 
foreseeable future looked fanciful at best and there remain a couple of pieces 
to slot into the jigsaw. But from the hullaballoo of this week comes the 
expectation. Standards have been set and only the best will do.
 