
One of the most distinctive things about England's relentless frogmarch 
towards Ashes victory in Australia has been the sense that they have their eyes 
set on some broader horizon. Greater glories have always been the goal, 
specifically the desire to be, in cricket's Don King-ish new world of rankings 
and contenders, indisputably and indubitably The No1 Team In The World. This is 
a fairly routine kind of ambition. It might be more interesting for England to 
set their eyes instead on another Everest: getting people to like them.

There isn't any real sign this is about to happen just yet. "Alastair Cook is 
precisely the type of English cricketer that Australians dislike … He's so 
proper. So English," Sydney's Daily Telegraph opined this week, launching not 
so much a backlash as the continuation of an ongoing and perennial front-lash. 
We shouldn't be surprised at this. For a start it's true: Cook is proper and 
English. In his resplendent indolence he resembles a groovily skinny-jeaned 
minor royal cousin. But mainly it isn't surprising because of one inescapable 
fact: there has never been an England team in any sport that has managed to be 
both successful and popular. Why is this? And is it ever going to stop?

"The English are pricks to lose to," the All black fly-half Andrew Mehrtens 
famously said a few years back, but it is important to remember that 
Anglo‑victor hate isn't necessarily personal. It is instead systemic. Ours is a 
structural prickishness. The real problem is the manner in which England teams 
are good. Other nations know how to win and still be winning. But England teams 
are only ever good in a faceless, annihilating kind of way. In victory they're 
always Darth Vader, never Han Solo, always piloting their sporting death star 
with the shiny metal fist of crushing robot efficiency.

There have of course been popular England teams. The nearly-men of 1990s 
Gazza-era England football were laced with a likeable sense of giddy 
self-expression. The 2005 Ashes winning team mixed mono-format brilliance with 
an endearing fragility, seeming to disappear from view even as they reached 
their highest point. Other England teams have become popular through extreme 
ineptitude, for example the 1994-95 Ashes tourists, a team that boasted among 
their fielding unit the aged, barrel-like Graham Gooch, almost immobile in the 
outfield but still somehow both sad and noble, a Berlin bank manager in 
watch-chained battled dress gamely attempting to repel single‑handed the 
Russian advance in spring 1945.

When it comes to England teams that have actually won something it's a 
different story. Alf Ramsey's 1966 World Cup winners were brilliantly 
streamlined, a machine designed for winning. The stories about Ramsey himself 
are legend. He once had a player arrested for tittering. On tour in South 
America he punched Gordon Banks in the stomach for patting a dog. The team 
itself were forbidden by FA dictat from containing more than one sublimely 
gifted attacker at any given time, and even then only if the player concerned 
was both bald and glum-looking.

The 2003 rugby world champions were similarly monolithic, a rumbling, 
suffocating entity that resembled in outline a single, vast, frighteningly 
muscular neck. So too England's World Twenty20 winners, who managed to become 
champions in a format based around extravagant acts of instinctive bravado in a 
way that featured pretty much no extravagance or instinct or bravado. England's 
Twenty20 innovation was instead the strangling wide full toss, no doubt still 
being mimicked in the world's cricketing favelas by joyful barefoot boys 
dreaming of the perfect slower ball bouncer.

It is England's destiny to be good in this way, each success infused with an 
indelible sense of somehow slightly ruining it for everyone else. This perhaps 
has something to do with attitudes towards flair, a quality the English 
innately distrust, equating it with disorder, emotional abandon, and a kind of 
humid, foreign-accented excitability. England teams have often tried to move on 
from this, but with limited success. Instead the process of trying to be good 
at sport has retained a faint but unshakable nostalgic tint, as though on one 
level this will always be a business of reclaiming what once was, of crushing 
some ongoing insurrection, and generally turning off the music and making 
everybody sit down properly. You invent these sports. You send them out into 
the world. And the buggers only go and change the rules on you. So we sit like 
global sport's great harrumphing, cobwebbed mother-in-law, glowering with 
assumed entitlement, craving only a sense of triumphant, spoiling vindication.

Perhaps things might yet be different for this England cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team>. They are still short 
of being successful enough to make the world properly cross with them. All 
they're guilty of now is a certain relentlessness and an air of fierce central 
governance. Perhaps Cook could still be successfully de-poshed, taught to say 
the word "serviette" and to look a bit less like a Back to the Future-style 
preview of Prince William and Kate Middleton's louche ski-holidaying middle 
son. We can at least promise one thing. Anglo-victor hate may be irreversible. 
But all the indications are that it is still a problem that's unlikely to crop 
up too often.
 