
The number of British servicemen who have lost limbs after being wounded in 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is rising sharply, 
according to official statistics seen by the Guardian.

Fifty-four men lost at least one limb while serving in armed forces in the 
country last year – more than the total figure for the previous three years.

The proportion of those who have become multiple amputees is also increasing, 
with almost half of last year's casualties suffering what is described as 
"traumatic or surgical amputation" of more than one limb.

The statistics, compiled by the Defence Analytical Services And Advice centre, 
a division of the Ministry of Defence (MoD), appear to reflect both the 
Taliban's increased use of sophisticated roadside bombs to target Nato-led 
forces, and the developing skill of military medics in treating injuries that 
might have proved fatal in the past.

However, they do not include casualties this year, during the build-up to the 
launch of Operation Moshtarak, the drive by Afghan, US and 4,000 British forces 
against the Taliban in central Helmand.

Last month there were warnings from the National Audit Office (NAO) that 
hospitals treating the wounded from Afghanistan were close to capacity and 
under mounting pressure. The main field hospital in Afghanistan at Camp Bastion 
was said to be coping with casualty levels, but operating close to capacity.

The NAO warned that Selly Oak hospital in Birmingham, where the MoD has a 
contract to treat seriously wounded troops, might have to displace civilians to 
make way for extra military patients.

The number of servicemen being treated at the military rehabilitation centre 
at Headley Court in Surrey has also grown rapidly.

According to the NAO, in 2008 there were 573 patients (254 with battle 
injuries) treated at either Selly Oak or Headley Court, or at both centres.

Last year, there were 912 patients, 490 with battle injuries. The NAO 
concluded that treatment for wounded troops was "highly effective", a fact that 
was underlined by the increase in patients medically known as "unexpected 
survivors".

The audit office's report was followed by warnings from MPs on the Commons 
public accounts committee last week that although the care of seriously injured 
servicemen is of a high standard, the MoD "does not have sufficiently detailed 
and robust contingency plans" should Selly Oak become full.

The MPs added: "Given the UK's long term commitment to Afghanistan, patients 
will continue to arrive at Headley Court and its facilities are likely to come 
under increasing pressure."

The statistics show that 103 British servicemen suffered amputations after 
being wounded in Afghanistan between April 2006 and the end of last year. Of 
the 54 who had amputations last year, 26 lost two or more limbs.

There have been complaints in the past that the MoD was not disclosing to the 
public the number of troops who have lost limbs in the conflict.

Although the ministry is now making more detailed casualty statistics 
available, there remains enormous sensitivity over the large number of troops 
who are suffering life-changing injuries.

Journalists are effectively barred from Selly Oak, and one army officer has 
been quoted as saying that many of the injuries suffered by service personnel 
are so severe that they are "politically explosive".

The MoD statistics also show that 327 servicemen and women were seriously or 
very seriously injured in Afghanistan between the beginning of 2002 and the end 
of last year. Of these, 158 were wounded in 2009. A further 12 suffered 
similarly serious injuries in January this year.

As of today, when a soldier from 3rd Battalion The Rifles was killed in a 
blast in the Kajaki area of Helmand province, a total of 280 British soldiers 
had lost their lives in Afghanistan. Some 108 died last year alone.

An unhappy tradition

"If one thing dominated my early years, it was the legacy of the Great War," 
wrote consultant Bob Ellis in Fen Tiger, his memoir of growing up in the 1920s 
in rural Cambridgeshire. "You could not go far in Cottenham then without seeing 
somebody with a scarred face, a missing eye, a limp or a missing limb."

At the tailor's, there was Bert Peters who had lost half his jaw at the Somme, 
often to be found in conversation with village postman Jim Eke who had suffered 
exactly the same injury at Ypres.

Both were well aware that the guileless children tried to make them chat 
because they "talked funny". Their neighbour Tom Savidge was stone deaf from 
shell fire.

Today's unhappy reminders of the fighting in Afghanistan are in just this 
tradition, which stretches back through British history to the "sturdy beggars" 
– injured veterans of French wars – who prompted the country's first version of 
social service legislation in Tudor times.

To keep these men from causing trouble, Elizabeth I passed the 1597 Act for 
the Relief of the Poor which introduced taxes to pay for compulsory, 
parish-based labour schemes.

Neglect persisted, however, and campaigners for better treatment of today's 
injured soldiers regularly draw on callous arrangements for Napoleonic veterans 
and particularly the national disgrace of the treatment of the injured from the 
first world war.

Poet Wilfred Owen, who died in the last week of the conflict, foresaw what 
might have happened to him had the bullet which killed him simply taken off his 
leg or wrecked his face.

He wrote in Disabled (1917): He sat in a wheeled chair, waiting for dark, / 
And shivered in his ghastly suit of grey, / Legless, sleeves sewn short at 
elbow …

Owen described how the amputee would never again feel the slim waists of girls 
whose eyes "touched him like some queer disease" and "passed from him to the 
strong men that were whole".

The second world war saw fewer amputations and huge advances in plastic 
surgery by doctors such asArchibald McIndoe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archibald_McIndoe>. His skilful reconstruction 
and realistic prostheses ended much of the self-isolation of earlier victims. 
But visitors to the US today will still encounter maimed Vietnam veterans 
begging in the streets; and Simon Weston has devoted his life since his cruel 
burns suffered during the Falklands conflict to reminding us that the toll of 
injury does not stop on discharge from hospital.

Martin Wainwright
 