
The head of the government's independent tax and spending watchdog has warned 
chancellor George Osborne that it would be a mistake to rely on forecasts 
showing public borrowing coming down this year.

Robert Chote, the director of the Office for Budget Responsibility, said he 
would not stake his reputation on the predictions his organisation made forlast 
week's autumn statement <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/autumn-statement-2012>.

The chancellor wrongfooted his Labour shadow, Ed Balls, in last week's Commons 
exchanges by announcing OBR figures showing that the UK's budget deficit would 
fall from £121.4bn to £119.9bn this year once a number of special factors were 
taken into account. These include receipts from the Bank of England's 
quantitative easing programme and future income from the sale of the 4G mobile 
phone spectrum.

But giving evidence to the Treasury select committee, Chote said: "Putting a 
lot of weight on a forecast that borrowing is going to fall or indeed rise by 
£1bn between one year and the next is ignoring the uncertainty.

"The average forecasting error for the budget deficit one year ahead is about 
£15bn to £16bn, so I think the best conclusion is that borrowing is expected on 
an underlying basis to be broadly the same this year as it was last year."

Andy Love, a Labour MP on the committee, said the trend in borrowing had 
become a political issue, adding that it was important for the government's 
reputation that borrowing came down in the 2012-13 financial year.

Chote replied: "Let's put it this way: I certainly wouldn't be staking my 
reputation on a £1bn shift in the budget deficit from one year to the next."

Borrowing in the first seven months of the financial year has been higher than 
in the same months of 2011-12, but Osborne expects to raise £4bn from the 4G 
sale, due to take place in January. An indication of whether the OBR's autumn 
statement forecasts were accurate will be available on budget day, which the 
Treasury announced would take place on Wednesday 20 March.

Chote downplayed the possible consequences of the UK being stripped of its 
prized AAA credit rating as a result of the OBR's forecasts of slower growth 
and higher borrowing in the five years ahead.

"It's not entirely clear that would be providing any new information to the 
markets they had not already managed to deduce from the information on which 
presumably the credit ratings agencies would have drawn their conclusion," he 
said. "I think we've seen other countries suffer that and it's not had an 
obviously noticeable impact on market views."
 