
I have a small blackboard in my study. On it, I carefully chalk all of the 
writing-related tasks I have not yet completed: essays, scripts, treatments, 
rewrites, short stories, letters, novel-planning, crying in a corner, talking 
to my kettle ... There are days when I love this blackboard and its 
anal-retentive attention to detail: its tiny chalk-holding flange, its even 
tinier rubbing-out cloth: and there are also days when it feels like having a 
debt-collector in the room with me, smelling of broken legs and hardened hearts.

Having pretty much lost two months to illness, I am currently ignoring the 
board completely. I haven't allowed myself to approach it closely, never mind 
study its listed assignments, or consider how many others I am hiding from 
myself by simply keeping them in my head. Off the board and in my brain, I know 
they will come adrift from their deadlines and end up getting tangled in each 
other, but I don't care – a visible inventory would simply drive me back to the 
kitchen where I would end up giving the kettle abuse. And actually my kettle's 
very nice.

Why do I have such a deep and intimate relationship with my kettle? Because 
for 25 years, give or take, I have been a person who knows they have something 
to write. I have written when nobody wanted to hear from me, I have written 
when I could earn as much as £30 in year by my writing, I have written when I 
was tired from my day job, when I was filled with the terrifying elation of a 
new idea, when I was starting my first novel, when I was starting my sixth 
novel, when I was rewriting something apparently insoluble, when I was trying 
to prove myself employable and when I was just fooling about until I could see 
what might happen. In all of these circumstances and more, what was the common 
factor? The kettle. As soon it's inevitable that a writer must begin their 
first word, it becomes (almost) equally and conflictingly inevitable that the 
writer must do something else really quickly before scribbling breaks out. 
Hence the kettle. Tell you what, I'll just go and make a fresh beverage, then 
I'll get down to things properly. Absolutely. Of course I will.

Writers can generate industrial quantities of procrastination before their 
first sonnet is rejected, or their first novel-outline-plus-sample-chapter is 
exorcised, burned and its ashes buried at sea. Are my pens facing north? Or 
magnetic north? What's that funny noise? Oh look, it's raining outside. My 
fingernails need cutting. I think my computer is going to break, better get it 
checked. Do I have toothache? Will I have toothache? The possibilities lend new 
meaning to the words eternity and purgatory.

When I began writing, distractions were all low-tech. I had to worry about 
typewriter ribbons and correction fluid, for God's sake. There was no 
possibility of spending an apparently productive day making backup files, 
defragmenting already tidy hard drives, emailing,watching grainy online movies 
of cats falling over <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEtcTEKZj6g>, or playing 
virtual patience. (I once tried a more sophisticated computer game and, after 
many months, managed to advance my character by one level and put him into a 
loop of crouching, rocking and saying, "Oh, no.") Nevertheless, I could still 
burn away whole pre-Amstrad weekends in keeping busy, rather than writing. Ever 
re-hung and filed your clothing along a colour gradient, or cleaned all your 
grouting with a toothbrush? I have.

Robert Louis Stevenson once said that he didn't like writing, he liked having 
written. And I think I know how he felt. The act of writing is delightful, once 
you've entered into the proceedings, it's simply that - like many other 
intimate, involving and tiring activities – writing creates nervousness, 
fumbling and an intense desire to run away before it can really take a hold.

I do love to write and I worked out relatively quickly that I should preempt 
as much of my delay and dismay as possible by removing sources of distraction 
and rendering myself as comfy as a Calvinist can be, prior to embarking on my 
opening sentence for the day. I then reached the point where I had to earn my 
living by writing, rather than the less-profitable avoidingwriting option. This 
means that, over the years, I have developed, abandoned and refined various 
preparatory manoeuvres to ease things along – the typist's equivalent of dinner 
and a tastefully naked European movie. Before I could afford a comfy chair, I 
propped myself up with pillows and cushions. I made myself a cuppa, all ready 
in advance. I eliminated noise with nice music. I conditioned myself to 
associate pieces of music with having already started to write and went through 
– as time passed – more and less complicated routines of exercise, or 
meditation, or horrified staring. And there are, naturally, the time-honoured 
favourite forms of self-deception – I'm not really starting, I'm just mucking 
about for a bit. I'm going to write this, even though it's not what I'm really 
meant to be doing and therefore a bit of fun. If I finish another page I can 
have a treat.

Now, perhaps because I am old and tired, I may kick off by doing a bit of 
voice work to wake myself up, I may embark on a new project by having a 
thorough wash and brush-up, or I may just tell myself – Here we go, then.

I am aware that there are writers who successfully avoid ever having to write 
at all. Whatever creative energies they may possess have been completely 
absorbed by displacement activities. These activities often include dressing, 
sounding and standing (if not drinking – in fact, usually drinking) like an 
author and so these individuals can seem far more convincing as artists of the 
well-turned phrase than many people who actually have been published. When I 
was starting to write, I found this type very confusing. Indoors, I was 
bewildered by both writing and not writing. I didn't know how to say what I 
wanted to, or if I really wanted me to, or if anyone else wanted me to. Out in 
the world, here were these amazing excuses to never bother about such things 
again. They were a temptation. But I did realise that they were also a 
horrible, horrible dead end.

I have, in my professional life, met numberless writers who seemed paralysed 
by their own desire to write, who had intelligent and reasonable excuses for 
not starting, not committing, not getting on with it, who could trump any 
arguments or suggestions I might make towards putting anything on paper. It is 
nice to win arguments, but not if it means you deny yourself the chance to do 
something beautiful and intensely alive. Win or lose, you have to be in the 
game to play it and writing is a game which can deepen and enrich any player's 
experience, moment by moment. We can all feel we're not really up to it on any 
given day – and sometimes we're right, we should take a break. But not writing 
– that would be like not speaking, not touching, not kissing. Pauses are 
probably unavoidable, but perhaps use yours, enjoy them, shorten them until you 
can find their edge. We might look at it like this – kissing is good, but 
kissing after five or 10 seconds of well-informed waiting – that can be better. 
Onwards.
 