
Deep in the heart of Oklahoma, something is stirring in the sleepy prairie 
town of Cushing. A modest settlement of about 8,300 people, Cushing is the oil 
hub of north America. A handful of shops, barbecue restaurants and the Buckhorn 
Bar are dwarfed by hundreds of vast storage tanks capable of holding 45m 
barrels of oil.

Cushing, heavily defended by the US authorities as potential national security 
target, is the official delivery point for oil orders placed on Nymex, the 
commodities exchange. It is the junction at which pipelines running south from 
Canada's oil sands meet oil coming north from the Gulf of Mexico. And just at 
the moment, the town's oil tanks are 90% full – stocks stand at more than 40m 
barrels, a quantity of oil worth $4.6bn (£2.9bn).

High oil prices mean furious activity in speculation, hedging – and storage in 
Cushing. The town enjoys a renaissance each time the price soars. But for the 
rest of the developed world, oil inflation means misery. Petrol prices in 
Britain hit £6 a gallon, or 132p a litre, last week, which, according to the 
AA's Edmund King, marks "the point at which the wheels start to come off 
mobility in 21st century Britain". Filling up a family car costs about £80 – a 
substantial chunk of the average gross weekly wage of £499. Supermarket chain 
Morrisons became the latest British business to squeal with pain last week, 
declaring that the fuel price has sapped consumers' spending power by £400m in 
a year.

The uprising in Libya, with fighting around the refinery in Ras Lanuf, has all 
but eliminated output from a nation with the world's ninth biggest oil 
reserves. With unrest rippling across the Middle East, Friday's "day of rage" in
Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> unnerved traders. 
Elections are looming in Nigeria which, historically, have meant violent 
disruptions to that nation's oil output. And militants bombed a major oil 
pipeline in Iraq on Thursday.

As western economies stagger haphazardly towards a fragile recovery, this oil 
spike has come at a dismal moment. Nouriel Roubini, the endearingly pessimistic 
economist dubbed "Dr Doom", has suggested that a sustained oil price of $140 
could push the US and European economies into a double-dip recession. In a more 
extreme scenario, a price of $200 could mean global economic growth grinding to 
a complete halt.

With take-home pay barely rising and inflation running at 4%, Britons were 
already facing their worst squeeze in disposable income for a generation. Doug 
McWilliams, chief executive of the Centre for Economic and Business Research, 
says that oil has knocked the coalition's strategy for six: "With 20/20 
hindsight, the government's VAT rise was at best mistimed and, at worst, a 
serious error."

Environmentalists see a silver lining in our economic predicament. This 
reminder of our reliance on black gold from unstable parts of the world could 
help to push governments towards policies friendlier to renewable fuel – and 
inject a bit of vim into still-tepid demand for electric vehicles.

But our short-term fragility is alarming. Howard Archer, chief UK economist at 
IHS Global Insight, worries that rocketing oil could lead to a fresh sovereign 
debt crisis in Europe: "Sustained high oil prices could lead to weak growth in 
the eurozone, which could contribute to a further flaring up of European debt 
problems."

Let's not panic yet. This isn't a repetition of the oil shock of the 1970s – 
the worst of which was sparked when Arab nations deliberately held back supply 
to protest at western support forIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in the 1973 Yom Kippur war. This 
time around, there isn't that deliberate dislocation. Many of the Arab nations 
themselves would prefer a stabler global economic picture. Saudi Arabia claims 
it favours a price of between $70 and $80 per barrel and is increasing output – 
although the kingdom is much faster to act when the price falls than when it 
soars.

One prominent US energy analyst, Stephen Schork, detects one sign of hope that 
the price may peak – airlines, which have an epic history of bad calls on fuel, 
are getting into the market to hedge themselves against a further increase: 
"They didn't see the need to hedge at below $40 a barrel. Now they do. Once you 
get these fools into the market buying, as a contrarian, your eyes begin to 
light up and you look for a peak."

Back in Cushing, these are exciting times, akin to the summer of 2008 when oil 
shot up to $140 a barrel. Will the price go higher this time? No economist 
seems able to say. So much lies in the hands of Colonel Gaddafi, the rebels of 
Ras Lanuf and Saudi Arabia's quietly restless agitators for change.

Take the subway?

Perhaps I'm being a tad optimistic but I found it rather cheering that Subway 
has overtaken McDonald's to become the world's largest restaurant chain. Surely 
sandwiches on fresh bread containing recognisable meats and salads are an 
improvement on fries and ground beef patties?

Subway now has 33,749 outlets globally, a nose ahead of the 32,737 McD 
eateries. The sandwich chain, founded as Pete's Super Submarines in Connecticut 
in 1965, is a relatively new entrant to these shores – its first British outlet 
was in Brighton in 1996 and it now has just over 1,500.

Admittedly, a Subway Mega Breakfast roll won't do you much good (bacon, 
sausage, egg, cheese – 24 grams of fat and 513 calories). But at least Subway 
sponsors television weight-loss showThe Biggest Loser. And it doesn't use a 
sinister red and yellow clown as bait to lure hungry children.
 