
I don't know about you, but when I get home after a hard day's work, the first 
thing I do – after putting on the kettle, obviously – is look in the fridge to 
see what there is to eat. Problem is, there's often very little in my fridge at 
all; and even if there is, it's usually in such a state that it would be better 
off in the compost bin than in the cooking pot.

It's at times such as these that the store cupboard comes into its own, 
especially when you're looking for something tasty but quick. I don't mean 
beans-on-toast quick (though they have their place); I mean pasta. Well, of 
course I do: I'm half Italian.

The first two recipes this week are two of my go-to quick pasta mainstays, and 
neither requires a sauce that's had to bubble away on the stove-top for hours. 
The first uses ingredients I've almost always got at home; the second involves 
a little pre-planning, because it stars that great bitter veg cime di rapa (the 
dish also works with sprouting broccoli or kale instead, by the way) – even so, 
it, too, takes very little time to cook, and the other ingredients are store 
cupboard staples (well, they are in my house, anyway). This week's final 
recipe, meanwhile, is the sort of easy fish supper I'd make on those rare 
evenings when I do remember to stop off at the shops on the way home.

Tagliatelle with walnut pesto

Serves two hungry mouths as a main meal. As a general rule, I serve 75-100g of 
dried pasta per person for a first course and 150-190g for a main. But then, 
I'm greedy – if the amount of pasta here seems too much to you, just reduce it 
to suit your appetite.

Salt and pepper
370g dried tagliatelle
2 cloves garlic, peeled 
100g shelled walnuts
25g pine nuts
200g grated parmesan 
Olive oil
6 picked mint leaves
1 handful picked flat-leaf parsley
Salt and freshly ground black pepper

Bring a large pot of well-salted water to a boil, add the tagliatelle and 
cook as per the instructions on the packet. This could be anywhere from six to 
nine minutes, but err on the side of caution: there is nothing worse than 
soggy, overcooked pasta.

While the pasta is cooking, put the garlic, walnuts and pine nuts in a food 
processor and pulse until blended, but not too much – you want the sauce to 
have a nutty bite to it. Tip the nut mix into a large serving bowl, then stir 
in the parmesan and enough olive oil to bring it all together into a paste. 
Season to taste – you won't need much salt, because the cheese is pretty salty 
– and set aside.

When the pasta is cooked, drain, tip into the bowl and toss to coat with the 
sauce. Chop the herbs (don't do this any earlier, or the mint will go a nasty 
shade of black), scatter on the top, and serve immediately, with a dusting of 
parmesan, if you like that kind of thing.

Penne with cime di rapa

Serves two (again, if need be, reduce the amount of pasta to suit your 
appetite). If you can't get cime di rapa, kale and sprouting broccoli make good 
substitutes, though the kale leaves will need to be torn off their tough stalks 
and a longer blanching time.

Salt and pepper
300g cime di rapa
370g dried penne
Olive oil
3 cloves garlic, peeled and very finely chopped 
1 pinch dried chilli flakes
2 tbsp creme fraiche
Pecorino, grated, to serve

Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. Drop in the cime di rapa, blanch 
for 30 seconds, then use tongs to transfer from the pot to a sieve, to drain. 
Keep the boiling water, because you're going to use it to cook the pasta.

Add the penne to the boiling water and cook as per the instructions on the 
packet – about 10-13 minutes, usually, though again err on the side of caution.

In a large, heavy-based saute pan or similar, heat two tablespoons of olive 
oil over a medium flame. When hot, add the garlic and chilli, and fry gently 
until the garlic has softened but not taken on any colour. Stir in the cime di 
rapa, saute for a minute more, then remove from the heat.

When the pasta is ready, drain and add to the pan with the cime di rapa. Stir 
in the creme fraiche, add a little grated pecorino and toss to coat the pasta. 
Serve at once with a bowl of grated pecorino alongside, to add to taste.

Bream with sprouting broccoli and anchovy
 Angela Hartnett's bream with sprouting broccoli and anchovy: The sort of easy 
fish supper to make when you remember to pop by the shops on the way home. 
Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian. Food styling: Claire Ptak 
The broccoli here acts as a kind of warm side salad. Serves two.

Olive oil
2 sea bream, descaled and cleaned 
2 lemons, cut into slices
1 whole head of garlic, cloves separated and slightly bashed
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 small sprigs fresh thyme
4 small sprigs fresh rosemary
600g sprouting broccoli
1 tin salted anchovies, rinsed

Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Pour a glug of olive oil into a large 
ovenproof dish. Cut three or four deep diagonal slashes in both sides of each 
fish, and stuff the cavities with all but two slices of lemon, a few garlic 
cloves and a couple of sprigs each of thyme and rosemary. Lay the fish in the 
prepared dish and drizzle all over with olive oil. Season and roast for about 
15 minutes, until cooked through – it's worth checking if the fish is done 
after about 12 minutes, just to be on the safe side.

A few minutes before the fish is done, blanch the broccoli in a pot of salted 
boiling water for a minute or so, then drain and toss in a bowl with the 
chopped anchovies. Squeeze over the lemon and set aside while you plate up.

Remove the fish from the oven, transfer to plates and serve with the sprouting 
broccoli and some crusty country bread.

• Angela Hartnett is chef/patron of Murano <http://muranolondon.com>, Cafe 
Murano <http://www.cafemurano.co.uk> and Merchants Tavern 
<http://www.merchantstavern.co.uk>, all in London, and Hartnett Holder & Co 
<http://www.limewoodhotel.co.uk/hartnett-holder-and-co/> at Lime Wood in 
Hampshire.
 