
Thursday evening and Karaiskakis is virtually empty. It's quiet here now and 
it will be quiet too after Olympiakos's Champions League opponentsManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> took the 
decision not to hold their pre-match training session in the stadium. "But on 
Tuesday," Míchel González says from high in the main stand, gesturing towards 
the arena and picturing the scene, "it will be unbelievable".

"We had 34,000 here in the cup the other night and they're so noisy and this 
place acts as such a soundboard that it feels like 90,000. When you're down 
there, it really moves you," Olympiakos's Spanish coach continues, pointing at 
the bench. "You don't know what this city is like waiting for United. It was 
even a disappointment for them that United won't train here the day before.

Since 1997 Olympiakos have failed to win the league only twice, in 2004 and 
2010. There have been seven doubles too. In theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> era, they have reached 
the knockout phase three times, facing Juventus, Bordeaux and Chelsea, but have 
never gone through. That's where the challenge lies. Routine and cost saw 
domestic attendances drop but Europe is different and if supporters are 
excited, so is he: Míchel played for Real Madrid for 14 years and was fourth in 
the 1987 Ballon d'Or but has never faced United. English football's European 
ban hurt him too.

"At the start of the season I said that winning the league and the cup was a 
challenge, competing in Europe was anilusión, a hope, something to be enthused 
by. Benfica, Anderlecht, PSG, now United, here and at Old Trafford. I've never 
been. I told the players: 'This is special'. This isn't a profession, it's a 
vocation. Think back to your neighbourhood: how many kids grow up playing at 
being lawyers? None. Who plays at being a footballer? Almost everyone."

This is a message that runs through his coaching. Vocation, vocation, 
vocation. It's working: results and play have been good, and Míchel's 
popularity is growing. "When I was a player I said I didn't want to be a coach 
but I was lying to myself. I already was a coach," he admits. "And I transmit 
to the players that football's a vocation based on theirilusión. I don't want 
obligations; I want them to do it for real, with their hearts, with commitment, 
because theywant to. I'm close to the players, I want to engage them. I never 
demand anything – I ask."

"People forget about enjoyment. An 'obliged' player can feel pressured; it's 
fundamental he has a clear mind. Managing the human resources on a personal and 
emotional level is more important than picking a starting XI. We have an idea, 
which is to protect and respect the ball as the best way to defend and attack, 
and we want to be aggressive. People associate aggressiveness with defending. 
Bravery, too. No, no. Aggressive means going for goal, sharing a belief, a 
hope, that we can compete. That's why we think that, even if it makes us mad, 
we have a chance against United."

Mad? These are difficult times for United; might Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> even be favourites? Míchel 
laughs. "No, never. We're talking about an immense club. But nobody can tell us 
we can't try.

"It's normal for things to be difficult after Alex Ferguson. I remember him at 
Aberdeen in the Cup Winners' Cup against Madrid in 1983. That was the first 
time I cursed him! He made winning normal: 'Oh, they've won the league again.' 
Yeah, you win it. The European Cup. You win it. The Cup Winners' Cup. You win 
it. Before Ferguson, United was a historic club but modernity arrived with him. 
Twenty-five years and people still see him as an innovator, the precursor of 
everything.

"It shows tremendous stability that [David] Moyes has signed a six-year 
contract. At other clubs that doesn't happen. There's a style, an idea. You 
have to protect that. If you look at big clubs, including United, their best 
moments come when there's continuity and also a nucleus of homegrown players: 
Giggs, the Neville brothers, Scholes, Beckham, Butt. I say to the president 
here: Greek players have to be important."

"I've been watching United's games," Míchel says. "Not that the recent ones 
will help much because they're without [Juan] Mata. It's a pity: I'd have liked 
Mata to enjoy Karaiskakis. I'd have liked to have ruined his day a bit." It is 
said fondly: Míchel was coach of Real Madrid's youth team, Castilla. Mata, 
Roberto Soldado, Álvaro Negredo and Javi García were among his players. There's 
pride in his voice. "Absolutely," he says. "It's a nice feeling that gets nicer 
with time."

Míchel says that Negredo, whom he also coached at Rayo Vallecano and Sevilla, 
has benefited from having real competition for a place at last and that if 
Soldado is looked after, protected and encouraged, he will "never let you 
down". As for Mata, he admits: "Perhaps the Chelsea [José] Mourinho wants is 
nothing like the Chelsea [André] Villas-Boas wanted.

"Mata always had great quality and discipline. He also has a real mental 
toughness. Making it at Chelsea, Valencia or United depends not just on talent 
but also the decisions of the coaches, their needs. He arrived at United when 
they needed to make an impact." He was lucky, then? "Lucky doesn't exist. 
United didn't come for me: I'm 50. They went for him. Mata is where he deserves 
to be and to say 'where he deserves to be' when that 'where he deserves to be' 
is United is a big thing to say."

The next question is whether Mata can fit in with Wayne Rooney, Adnan Januzaj 
and Robin van Persie. "Well," says Míchel, grinning, "if they've got one spare 
… We're very hospitable people, so if they want to let one go … Good players 
always have a place. It's a blessing for United. I like Rooney a lot, Januzaj 
too, and Van Persie especially. I'd never put him in one position: he's best 
when he has freedom. He understands the game and his limitations. The proof is 
that he's come back before being fully recovered and that hasn't stopped him 
being a leader, scoring important goals."

"It's also important to have a goalkeeper who gives you the stability David de 
Gea provides. He's been strong enough to take the criticism and I think he's 
irreplaceable and will be for a long time. If you look at the physical profile 
of goalkeepers in England, it's very different to Spain. They're more dynamic, 
better with their feet. In England, there's more contact, it's more direct. De 
Gea has adapted and to adapt takes talent."

What weaknesses does Míchel see? "More than seeing weaknesses I imagine them, 
I get my hopes up with the possibility that they exist," he smiles. "We don't 
have a laser-sighted weapon to blow away their defence, but we do have our 
ideas. We wanted to enjoy Europe and we're doing that but who says we have to 
stop now? To be able to compete with United is wonderful.

"And I mean 'compete'. Our respect and admiration will be expressed in trying 
to beat them. They'll understand that. In fact, they'll appreciate that. We're 
not going to roll out the red carpet, we're going to go for them."
 