
OLYMPIC VISIT

Open to the public at last, now is the time to enjoy the Olympic Park and 
experience what was part of the planning for the London 2012 Games from the 
beginning - its legacy. And it's well worth it. Part of the success of the 
Games was the well-designed, ergonomically efficient, but also striking – and, 
in many cases, quite beautiful – aspects of the park itself. Now landscaped, it 
is a public space of parkland and waterways, surrounding venues that are back 
in operation – including the Copper Box and the Aquatics Centre, both worth a 
visit on architectural terms alone – as well as the stadium and the velodrome. 
There is also the obvious attraction of visiting Britain's largest sculpture, 
the ArcelorMittal Orbit – made famous as the background to almost all of the 
outside broadcasts from the Games – and also art events, aimed across the 
family, throughout the year. Details at:queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/>.

WIGGO ONE-DAYERS

Added to Team Sky's lineup somewhat at the last minute, as a replacement for 
the injured Ian Stannard,Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> will race the Tour of 
Flanders on Sunday(British Eurosport,11.30am), the first time he has done so 
since 2006. It will be a busy week for the modfather. He will also race the 
Scheldeprijs Classic in Flanders on Wednesday, building to the Paris-Roubaix, 
on Sunday 13 April, a race that he has targeted for a win this year. The Tour 
of Flanders is not only an additional race in Wiggins's buildup, but – as with 
the Paris-Roubaix – it features a treacherous cobblestone section.

BATTLE REJOINED

A new season, but an old rivalry begins afresh on Sunday when the first round 
of the World Triathlon Series takes place in Auckland, New Zealand, with 
defending world champion Javier Gómez again going head-to-head with Alistair 
and Jonny Brownlee. Gómez split the brothers at the 2012 Olympic Games, at 
which Alistair won gold, but, the same year, younger brother Jonny took the 
World Series. The Spaniard won the title back in a thrilling encounter in Hyde 
Park last year (pre-registration for this year's race is now open at:
worldtrilondon.com/tickets <http://worldtrilondon.com/tickets>) and the trio – 
pursued by Mario Mola – are going to be hard to separate again. Last year's 
women's world champion, Non Stanford, has opted out of the season opener, but 
Britain will be well represented by Jodie Stimpson, who was runner-up to 
Stanford last year, and the two-times world champion Helen Jenkins, who missed 
last season because of injury. Live streaming at:wts.triathlon.org 
<http://wts.triathlon.org/>, highlights BBC2, Monday, 3pm.

MARATHON PREVIEW

Before next Sunday's London Marathon, where all eyes will be on Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>, there's a chance to take a peak 
inside the Mobot and see what makes him tick (let's hope it's not scary wires 
and servos) as he talks about his preparations and his transition from track to 
marathon running (Five Live, Thursday, 7.30pm).

SWIM MEET

Time for some crucial performances in the water as places at the Commonwealth 
Games are up for grabs at the British Swimming Championships that run from 
Thursday 10 April to the following Tuesday 14 April. (Sky Sports 2, from Sunday 
13 April, Five Live Extra from Saturday 12 April). A good chance to see many of 
the Games' hopefuls, such as double Commonwealth champion and 50m world-record 
holder, Liam Tancock, in the 100m backstroke, and Fran Halsall looking to 
defend the 50m butterfly gold she won in Delhi in 2010.
 