
50 DANGER MOUSE The Grey Album

deleted, 2004

The idea of mashing up Jay-Z's Black Album with the Beatles' White Album was 
irresistible; those surprised by the brilliant results included the former's 
lawyers.

49 DESTINY'S CHILD Survivor

Columbia, 2001

Destiny's Child's multi-platinum bootylicious third album spawned four huge 
singles and sent the trio into the stratosphere, making Beyoncé a superstar.

48 RACHEL UNTHANK AND THE WINTERSET The Bairns

EMI, 2007

In keeping with folk tradition, the Tyneside sisters' narratives were bleakly 
candid. But sparse arrangements lent this set a rare elegance.

47 THE WHITE STRIPES White Blood Cells

Sympathy For the Record Industry, 2001

The Detroit odd couple's third album stuck to a blues-rock formula but extra 
pop clout, in the form of Hotel Yorba et al, made them household names.

46 THE LIBERTINES Up the Bracket

Rough Trade, 2002

Who'd want to do anything as tedious as fulfil one's promise? There were 
enough ramshackle thrills here to ensare a generation. Not to mention Kate 
Moss...

45 OUTKAST Stankonia

LaFace, 2000

A masterclass in psychedelic strangeness with knockout singles – including Ms 
Jackson – that took them from the underground to stardom.

44 ANDY PALACIO & THE GARIFUNA COLLECTIVE Wátina

Cumbancha, 2007

Conceived as a tribute to the threatened culture of the Garifuna people of the 
Caribbean, the late Palacio's masterpiece beguiled everyone who came across it.

43  THE STREETS A Grand Don't Come for Free

679, 2004

Embedded him in the public consciousness. Plus its best single not only 
reached No 1 it also yielded a catchphrase – dry your eyes, mate.

42 BADLY DRAWN BOY The Hour of Bewilderbeast

Twisted Nerve, 2000

Damon Gough's Mercury-winning debut deftly married his lo-fi sensibilities 
with undeniably catchy hooks and melodies. He was followed by a raft of beardy 
imitators.

41 SIGUR ROS ( )

Fat Cat, 2002

Known as "Brackets" to fans, with lyrics sung in the meaningless "language" of 
"Hopelandic", this was always bound to soundtrack Skins; gorgeous nonetheless.

40 PJ HARVEY

Stories From the City, Stories From the Sea Island, 2000

Polly Jean's six-month fling with New York saw her briefly "dabble in the 
positive" to make the most uplifting LP of her career. She got the Mercury 
prize for her troubles.

39 AMADOU AND MARIAM

Dimanche à Bamako Because, 2005

Amadou Bagayoko and Mariam Doumbia's fifth album was the one that catapulted 
them to fame – and introduced a new set of fans to the joys of Afro-pop.

38 KONONO NO 1

Congotronics Crammed, 2004

One of the most pleasing aspects of the Noughties? That such a strange record 
of traditional Congolese music should be so embraced by the hipster likes of 
Björk.

37 BON IVER For Emma, Forever Ago

4AD, 2008

Justin Vernon's recorded-this-in-a-log cabin backstory seemed too perfect but 
it was hard to argue with the result even in a world overrun by beardy folk 
singers.

36 JAY-Z The Blueprint

Def Jam, 2001

Rugged but accessible, this was his first step on the road to becoming an 
international ambassador for hip-hop. On soulful production duties: Kanye West.

35 ELBOW The Seldom Seen Kid

Fiction, 2008

Eighteen years into their career, the all-conquering, multi-award-winning The 
Seldom Seen Kid finally secured Elbow the wider acclaim they deserved.

34 SYSTEM OF A DOWN Toxicity

American, 2001

The Armenian-American quartet's lurid blend of folk-metal was an extraordinary 
and colossal two-fingered salute to American imperialism.

33 FRANZ FERDINAND Franz Ferdinand

Domino, 2004

Stylish, clever and boldly idiosyncratic, the adopted Glaswegians revived a 
moribund genre with pop-savvy art rock that got girls dancing.

32 EST Seven Days of Falling

RCA, 2003

Pianist Esbjörn Svensson was in the vanguard of those jazz acts who showed the 
Americans how it should be done; his death was a shock that still reverberates.

31 MIA Kala

XL, 2007

Paper Planes broke her in the US, and this collision of street-level sounds 
from around the planet made her the poster girl for a world shrunk by 
globalisation.

30 THE GOOD, THE BAD & THE QUEEN The Good, the Bad & the Queen

Parlophone, 2007

Damon Albarn's "supergroup" captured the melancholy mood of post-Iraq London, 
with what OMM called its "Waterloo Sunset-in-dub sound".

29 EMINEM The Marshall Mathers LP

Interscope, 2000

His peak, selling more than 1.7m albums in one week in America alone, with 
Stan absolute proof that he was more than a foul-mouthed Bart Simpson.

28 SUFJAN STEVENS Come on Feel the Illinoise

Rough Trade, 005

The folkie pin-up pulled a baroque masterpiece out of the bag with his 
conceptual offering, heavy on melodrama, history and haunting melodies.

27 GOTAN PROJECTLa Revancha del Tango

XL, 2001

The Paris-based pair's delicious debut combined tango with laid-back post-acid 
house beats, evoking a more widely travelled Massive Attack.

26 ANTONY AND THE JOHNSONS I Am a Bird Now

Secretly Canadian, 2005

If anything can be said of Antony Hegarty it's that he sounds like no one else 
(no, not like Tiny Tim, thank you); and here he announced himself in 
devastating style.

25 TOM WAITS Orphans: Brawlers, Bawlers & Bastards

Anti-, 2006

A 56-song set of new songs, discards and the odd cover showed that while Waits 
can vary styles widely and weirdly, the quality remains unwaveringly high.

24 TV ON THE RADIO Dear Science

4AD, 2008

Angry, melancholic and fun, the Brooklyn crew have never been short of ideas. 
On their fourth album, however, they were stapled to whistle-friendly tunes.

23 BOB DYLAN Love and Theft

Columbia, 2001 Dylan shook off his melancholy for an album that revisited his 
core influences: most emphatically, the rural and urban blues traditions. 
Standout track is Mississippi, on which he sings, "Everybody's moving, if they 
ain't already there". On Love and Theft, he was right there, and still moving 
faster than most.

22 RADIOHEAD In Rainbows

XL, 2007

It didn't need to cost you a penny; but once the hype over this album 
subsided, the record that stood revealed was the band's most human. What price 
that?

21 KINGS OF LEON Aha Shake Heartbreak

HandMeDown, 2004

"Everyone's gathered to idolise me," sang the "balding" Caleb Followill 
disgustedly; less comfy in their rock skins back then, the quartet were better 
for it.

20 LILY ALLEN Alright, Still

Regal, 2006

For a record that tasted of fags, spilt drinks and smudged lipstick, this was 
a breath of fresh air; unashamedly pop, it introduced quite the star, too.

19 KANYE WEST Late Registration

Def Jam, 2005

Inspired by Portishead, with production assistance from composer Jon Brion, 
West's ambition was clear: he was bigger than hip-hop. He was right, too.

18 ALI FARKA TOURE Savane

World Circuit, 2006

Recorded in a temporary studio in Bamako when the great Malian bluesman knew 
he was dying, this posthumously released set is probably his masterpiece.

17 PRIMAL SCREAM Xtrmntr

Creation, 2000

Kill All Hippies was the opening exhortation while Swastika Eyes took no 
prisoners either; forget Screamadelica, this was the band at their baddest best.

16 QUEENS OF THE STONE AGE Songs for the Deaf

Interscope, 2002

A shot in the arm for heavy rock, Josh Homme's best record quaked with 
attitude, tunes and locomotive piston drumming, courtesy of Dave Grohl.

15 LCD SOUNDSYSTEM Sound of Silver

DFA, 2007

The second album from James Murphy's outfit distilled 30 years of dance music 
– from disco to post-punk to acid house – into dancefloor hits like All My 
Friends.

14 DIZZEE RASCAL Boy in Da Corner

XL, 2003

A product of the grime scene, the then 17-year-old was the first rapper to win 
the Mercury prize. His debut was much darker than his recent crossover hits.

13 JAMIE T Panic Prevention

Virgin, 2007

It started with the exclamation "fucking croissant!", sampled Betjeman and 
ended up as the most vivid portrait of London this decade, thanks to 
Wimbledon's finest.

12 JOHNNY CASH American III: Solitary Man

American, 2000

American IV included Hurt, but this was the peak of Cash's recording sessions 
with producer Rick Rubin, the go-to guy for legends wishing to age with grace.

11 GORILLAZ Demon Days

Parlophone, 2005

Damon Albarn played pop visionary as his magpie approach to music bore fruit, 
with assistance from a stellar cast, including Dennis Hopper.

For the Top 10 click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/albums-of-the-decade>
 