
It is barely 3 weeks since Brett Lee splattered Steve Harmison's stumps to 
wrap up the third Test and the Ashes, yet it seems an eternity.

Much has happened since then. England players have come, gone and been 
forgotten - were Chris Silverwood, Ashley Giles and Andy Flintoff really here? 
- and those in the one-day squad have played in five different time zones while 
the remainder of the touring party indulged in "active rest", the oxymoronic 
equivalent of a temperance party.

In that time, too, Harmison has been reacquainted with the run-up that went 
missing, and Shane Warne has had his series ended by a shoulder dislocation. 
Through all this Nasser Hussain, as far as one can tell, has retained his 
sanity.

The recent interval between Tests to incorporate the opening exchanges in the 
one-day series has taken yet more heat out of this Ashes series. Ticket sales 
remain exceptional - and why would people not want to watch one of the finest 
sides of all time? - but the fourth and fifth contests have taken on an 
irrelevance. A five-set tennis match would be over by now; in golf matchplay, 
Australia would have won 3 & 2 and been back in the clubhouse.

Relieved of the burden of Ashes expectation, though, England have always had a 
tendency to perform better in the dead matches. Four years ago they came to the 
MCG with the Ashes lost but the series still alive, and against the odds won 
memorably. Australia have never since been beaten at home.

This time around, though, life may not be so sweet for the tourists, for much 
as Steve Waugh puts energy into charity work it does not extend to England. 
Besides which he has his own agenda, for if, as seems increasingly likely, this 
series is to be the Australia captain's last hurrah, then he would like to go 
out with a whitewash, something not achieved by the 1948 Invincibles and which 
has happened only once before in a five-match Ashes series, back in 1920-21 
when Warwick Armstrong's Australians beat Johnny Douglas's England.

On Boxing Day those numerous England supporters who have been to the MCG 
before will find a different ground from the imposing arena they remember. Gone 
is the Ponsford Stand, part of a massive rebuilding project, leaving the ground 
gap-toothed much as it was 12 years ago when the Great Southern Stand was under 
construction.

Surface-wise, demands made on the venue by other sports have meant the 
introduction of portable drop-in pitches, although the characteristics of the 
half-dozen used here are different from, for example, the soggy creation 
encountered by England in Christchurch last winter.

These Melbourne pitches have been in place for three months and prepared in 
normal fashion since. So the Test pitch, rather than starting damp and 
improving, is sure to show normal characteristics of wear as the match goes on.

In this respect England will be wary of the inclusion in the home squad of the 
New South Wales leg-spinner Stuart MacGill, who played the first four Tests 
against them four years ago while Warne was recovering from his shoulder 
surgery, taking 27 wickets for spit including seven in the Boxing Day Test.

MacGill does not carry the mystique of Warne but is no less dangerous for 
that, particularly because he has a point to prove in not having been viewed as 
Warne's possible replacement for the World Cup. He spins his leg break hugely 
and is sufficiently fiery to have been censured after his 12-wicket haul in 
Sydney last time for taunting England with his own version of Midnight Oil's 
Beds Are Burning: "Poms are ------ when the decks are turning."

Less so this time around, as it happens. England's batsmen have played Warne 
better than ever they have done, losing out instead to the relentlessness of 
Glenn McGrath's Chinese torture, Jason Gillespie's incisiveness and Brett Lee's 
posturing at the tail. At the top of the order Marcus Trescothick's batting has 
been exposed as lumpen - here he must make the ball come to him rather than go 
looking for it outside off - but the return of Michael Vaughan, recuperating 
not so much from his knee injury as the blow he took to his shoul der from 
Gillespie in his Adelaide epic - will be a tonic.

England have a choice now between Robert Key and John Crawley, who is also fit 
again. Key deserves to continue.

In Perth England employed seamers, with Richard Dawson included in the side 
and then largely ignored. That will not be the case in Melbourne, where two 
changes can be expected from the Perth side.

Andy Caddick has, once again, driven Hussain to frustration. His energetic 
bowling against Sri Lanka last Friday, coming after he was dropped for the 
previous one-day match, merely reinforced the captain in his view. With 
Hussain's patience exhausted, this may be Caddick's last Test but he must 
surely replace Silverwood in the line-up here.

Alex Tudor, unimpressive in Perth even before his eye injury, ought to make 
way for Matthew Hoggard, who, if appearances are any guide, has regained 
confidence from the coaching he has had while sidelined for the past month. 
Matthew Hayden and Ricky Ponting will test that to the full.

 England (from): Hussain, Trescothick, Vaughan, Butcher, Crawley, Stewart 
(wkt), White, Caddick, Hoggard, Key, Tudor, Harmison, Dawson, Silverwood, 
Collingwood.

 Australia (from): Waugh (capt), Langer, Hayden, Ponting, Martyn, Lehmann, 
Gilchrist (wkt), MacGill, Gillespie, McGrath, Bichel, Lee.

 Umpires: D L Orchard (SA) & R B Tiffin (Zim). 

 TV: live on Sky Sports 2 from 11.30pm tomorrow

 