
As things stand at the moment, I can’t tell you what the re-elected Turnbull 
government is about. I don’t think anyone would be able to tell you. As some 
pundits would put it, there is no narrative. As I would put it, there is no 
coherent agenda.


But what there is, in abundance, is problem solving.

Over the past few weeks, the government has moved with alacrity to clean up 
various messes: the backpacker tax, the deeply troubled VET Fee-Help scheme, 
the dangerously internally contested superannuation policy, and even the 
marriage equality plebiscite – which, on current indications, will finally hit 
the fence next week when parliament resumes.

There are two ways of looking at this bout of problem solving. The first way 
could be that this represents, for the government, a strategic lowering of 
ambition – don’t try to set some grand agenda, just do what the voters say they 
want, which is to find practical solutions for practical problems, and use that 
as a basis for post-election recovery.

The second way is to see a prime minister trying to remain one step ahead of 
people who would do him harm. Putting runs on the board is a practical method 
of staying a step ahead ofTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, who is like a mini 
typhoon, building up ground speed on his Quadrant reunion world tour, throwing 
bones to the base from the European capitals.

‘Ignorant rubbish’: Daniel Andrews slams Malcolm Turnbull over SA blackout 
comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/30/ignorant-rubbish-daniel-andrews-slams-malcolm-turnbull-over-sa-blackout-comments>
So laser-like has the focus become on problem solving that the government has 
ticked over and gone one step further in the past week, dusting off the old 
Howard-era trick ofcreating a problem to solve.

John Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> was the 
master of the pea-and-thimble trick, the barbecue stopper, the sudden pull on 
the handbrake to move the government minibus in another direction to try to 
deliver some kind of short-term fillip. The deeply inglorious fight about 
renewable energy that has broken out since the South Australian blackouts has 
some of the hallmarks of the ageing magician.

Look. Over. There. Tabloid shitstorm. It’s pretty unbecoming.

So let’s not look over there. Let’s look at what has actually happened.

During the Abbott era, the government repealed Labor’s carbon pricing scheme 
and waged an ideological attack on renewable energy, a protracted bout of 
warfare that damaged not only the aural sensibilities of ordinary Australians 
but also, much more pertinently, clubbed an important growth industry for this 
country at a time when good growth industries can be hard to find.

The absence of federal leadership created a vacuum that various state 
governments stepped into with their renewable energy targets.

When Turnbull returned to the leadership of the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>, asserting any 
ambition on climate policy would clearly be incendiary behaviour. So he didn’t 
express ambition. In fact, he was at pains not to.

He just calmed things down, with similar tactics to those he deployed to calm 
down the febrile and cartoonish national security debate – it wasn’t an 
apocalypse, people, it was just a windfarm.

With the apocalypse consigned to the past, Greg Hunt, the then environment 
minister, fresh from signing Australia up to climate commitments in Paris,gave 
state governments clear encouragement to develop their own renewable energy 
schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/renewable-energy-get-your-story-straight-act-tells-coalition>
. “I have encouraged the states that if they want to do something extra, [they 
should] apply reverse auctions to the renewable energy target in the way the 
Australian Capital Territory has done,” Hunt said last December in Paris.

That was 10 months ago.

Hunt was then replaced by Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>. Frydenberg was 
Turnbull’s most interesting ministerial appointment for a couple of reasons: 
the prime minister combined the portfolios of energy and environment, creating 
a long-overdue synthesis, and Frydenberg is someone Coalition conservatives are 
eyeing off as a future leadership contender, so long as he makes the right 
gestures.

Frydenberg’s opening signal in his new portfolio was always going to be 
important, and it was typically well thought throughwhen I spoke to him in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/josh-frydenberg-australias-use-of-coal-is-falling-and-that-is-not-a-bad-thing>
.

Just for the record, on my count, July is three months ago.

The new minister said several things. He said coal was on the way out. He said 
he was interested in gas as a transitional fuel to safeguard base-load power 
during the transition. He said a key focus in his work with the states would be 
“how to ensure we get a greater integration of renewables into the electricity 
market, and a greater focus on new technologies”. Clear signal: renewables OK.

He was keen to play down a nascent narrative from conservative commentators 
that power outages recorded in South Australia in 2015 were attributable tothat 
state’s high proportion of wind energy 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/wind-energy-not-to-blame-for-south-australia-power-outage-31520>
. Frydenberg said there were several factors involved in the blackouts, only 
one of which was the intermittency of wind. Again, a clear signal. Renewables 
OK. Chill.

Frydenberg certainly did raise in his opening gambit an issue he had with the 
inconsistency of the state renewable energy targets. He clearly didn’t care for 
the patchwork of schemes – but he raised it in neutral terms.

He noted that all the states had different targets and they were at different 
points of diversification in their respective energy mixes. Tasmania, for 
example, had more than 90% renewables. South Australia was about 41%, Victoria 
about 12% and New South Wales about 8% – and then there was the federal 
renewable energy target.

Renewable energy: get your story straight, ACT tells Coalition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/renewable-energy-get-your-story-straight-act-tells-coalition>
“The question is how do I integrate the state and the federal policies,” he 
said – which is obviously a quantifiably different question to how do I get the 
states to dump their targets.

So the intention three months ago, broadly defined, at the political level, 
was to calm things down. The government gave the clear impression it was 
resolved on trying to thread a needle on climate and energy policy. Various 
stakeholders breathed a sigh of relief.

Roll forward to the past week, and the South Australian storm that has reset 
the political debate.

Now we’ve entered a period of asserting the inalienable rights of Australians 
to watch cricket with the lights on at the MCG. The lights must remain on has 
been the political refrain of the past week, like some kind of primal bringing 
of the fire moment.

If you were a deeply cynical person, you’d say that maximising a problem, 
setting off a mini culture war, gives the Australian something to write about 
on page one other than Tony’s Quadrant tour.

If that was the objective, it has worked a treat.

But of course short-term politics isn’t the only consideration. So let’s take 
a minute to sort the reasonable from the cynical.

Australia’s energy sector is facing a big transition. We obviously do have to 
keep the lights on while that happens.

The intermittency issues from technologies such as wind are utterly reasonable 
for regulators and governments to consider, as are other equally pertinent 
matters, such as the state of the infrastructure, the sufficiency of 
interconnectors and the obvious trend towards decentralisation.

It’s utterly reasonable for voters to want power to be affordable, but it’s 
also reasonable to expect that any debate about affordability will reference 
the fact that wind and solar costs are falling much faster than forecasters 
have predicted, and battery costs are also heading lower – and the combination 
of those two facts spells opportunity. These are just facts, not utopian 
fantasies from lentil-eating leftists.

Josh Frydenberg: Australia's use of coal is falling 'and that is not a bad 
thing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/josh-frydenberg-australias-use-of-coal-is-falling-and-that-is-not-a-bad-thing>
We also have to recognise Australia has an obligation to decarbonise, and 
rapidly, for the health of the planet, and because of specific commitments the 
Turnbull government has signed Australia up to.

There’s now no credible pathway for the kind of emissions reductions Australia 
will require to meet its Paris commitments. That’s just a fact, and one that 
the Turnbull government, thus far, seems very reluctant to face up to, given 
that doing so will generate another war within its own ranks.

To put this simply: lecturing the state governments about their emissions 
reduction policies tends to work better if you have a clear medium-term pathway 
of your own.

On the logic of what Frydenberg has been saying since he took the portfolio, 
the policy pathway for the government is clear. If the minister wants gas as 
the transitional fuel to deliver base load, and a nationally harmonised policy 
structure to help bolt new technologies into the electricity grid, he should 
lead the discussion about an energy intensity scheme for the power industry, 
because such a scheme would deliver those eventualities.

He could also put the states back in their box by setting a more ambitious 
federal renewable energy target, legislated over a longer time horizon, to give 
certainty to investors, who are again fretting about having to endure another 
toxic cycle of finger pointing about climate change.

That’s the test of political bona fides.

The rest is really so much theatre.
 