
Once again, I have devoted this column to answering your queries.

• I see Eric Pickles <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles> has 
been answering questions on local government. He looks bigger than ever. What's 
the reason? He gave an interview in which he said that he only had to "rub 
against" Shropshire Blue cheese and he piled on the pounds. A doctor writes: 
"This is known technically as food frotteurism. If Mr Pickles wants to lose 
weight, he should stop rubbing up against cheese. He should try rubbing against 
a lettuce leaf, or a Ryvita biscuit. If this fails to do the trick, he should 
rub up against two aspirin and call me in the morning."

• Labour MP Seema Malhotra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/seema-malhotra> said at the same question 
session that rates were a "shot in the foot" for small businesses. Why is a 
shot in the foot very damaging, but a shot in the arm a good thing?

Dunno. Search me.

• That Chris Huhne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrishuhne>, he's a 
bit of a rum 'un if you ask me. What else do you know about him?

Well, there was the strange way that when he ran for the leadership of his 
party twice, against Ming Campbell and later Nick Clegg, his odds shortened 
suddenly and vertiginously, making it look as if he had a much better chance of 
winning. Since few people bet on politics, it's easy to manipulate the market. 
People were wondering where the money was coming from. Also, astute reader Dave 
Garner points out that he "took responsibility for something that happened" 
rather than for "something I did".

• Hmmm. Do you think he will ever be leader of the Liberal Democrats now?

Are you mad? Would you want to be Nick Clegg? With his expertise in making 
vast sums of money, and his firsthand knowledge of the way government works, 
once Mr Huhne has paid his debt to society he will be in huge and highly 
profitable demand among the kind of people who would regard evading a speeding 
charge as slightly less criminal than dropping an ice cream wrapper in the 
street.

• But at least he won't be pushing for hundreds more wind farms.

Makes no difference. Wwe learned that 400 more wind turbines may be installed 
in the area around the Lake District national park. Huhne and his successor, Ed 
Davey, are fanatics – they believe that the environment must be destroyed in 
order to be saved.

• I see that Keith Vaz <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/keithvaz> is the 
MP for Leicester East, not far from where the bones of Richard III were dug up. 
Clearly he has nothing to do with the discovery, or the scientific work which 
followed. Well, that didn't stop him trying to horn in on the historic 
announcement. However, no one was interested.

• So a whole day went by in which Vaz didn't appear once on television?

Don't be silly. He was on the box talking about the Guardian story on police 
identity theft instead.

• I notice there was no sign of Adam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie>, the Tory MP for Windsor, 
in the chamber. What is he doing with his time these days?

Apparently plotting to bash David Cameron on the head, shove a knife in his 
backside and an arrow through his ribs, before burying him under a car park in 
Leicester. Or anywhere, really.
 