
Hi, Anne! Watchdog is back and so are you. Are you excited?

Very excited.

How excited?

Almost as excited as I am at meeting you. I wouldn't have a career without the 
Guardian. Alan Rusbridger(1) stood in as the Guardian's television critic one 
day in 1986 when I stood in for Barry Took on Points Of View. He said I was a 
star in the making.

Wahey! You owe us.

I owe you big time.

Does Watchdog get many complaints from actual dogs disappointed Watchdog isn't 
more like Crufts?

Yes. We have a special dog desk headed by my dog Elly. She's a working cocker. 
She's fast, good-looking and very stroppy.

What was your most memorable letter not from a dog?

A company wrote, "We've been watching you, we feel you are suffering from 
Bell's palsy. We have a new machine out, and in six to eight weeks your face 
could be straightened." Brilliant!

When a wine connoisseur described you as "a full bodied red" on The Weakest 
Link, you offered to let him feel your breasts. What do we get for a bunch of 
flowers?

What would be your biggest desire? Now I've silenced you! Ha ha! Somebody said 
to Lucian Freud(2), "Why are you having an exhibition at the other end of the 
M6?" He said, "'Cos they asked."

If more men asked to feel my breasts I'd say yes. I'm a desperate woman of 65!

Sixty-five? Surely not? What's your secret? The Holy Grail (3)

Thank you. Er, face lift, running every other day, training three times a 
week, haven't had a drink for 30 years and I don't smoke or eat rubbish food.

Paul Gascoigne also says he fancies a bit of you. Would you?

Only a bit of me? Would I? No. I don't want to be a Wag. I don't think I could 
sit and have drinks in Stringfellows with Danielle Lloyd. I wouldn't know what 
to say.

Is it true what they say about redheads?

It's assisted now [her hair] ... Do you want to ask when I last cried? When I 
had a Brazilian on Monday.

Yowser! Do you and Jeremy Clarkson get together and wager who can say the most 
outrageous things on telly?

He lives near me in the country. We're mates, we do get together. He's one of 
the most courteous people I know. I said, "The Welsh? What are they for?"(4) 
Now when I say, "What do you do?", and they say, "I'm a teacher from Wales", I 
say, "Are you part of the escape committee?"

Ever thought of publishing The Anne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson> Big Book Of Insults: 
An Insult For Every Occasion?

Um, I haven't. But I could. We could do that together!

You did a Weakest Link transvestite special (5). What's next?

They weren't transvestites. They were men in drag. I'd like a rich-people 
special. I'd have Alan Sugar, Simon Cowell, Madonna, the Duke of Edinburgh and 
both my ex-husbands. Ha!

You were once voted the second most terrifying celebrity on TV (6). But you're 
not scary at all.

I can be. If you look in my loo you will see the letter they sent when they 
asked me to do Weakest Link. They thought it looked like I knew the answers and 
I could ease the contestant's disappointment when they left the podium. Ha!

Thanks, Anne! Every worry the wind might change and you'll get stuck winking 
like that?

I worry every night!

• Watchdog, 8pm, Thu, BBC1

1 Guardian editor 1995 - present. 2 Important British painter. 3 From Indiana 
Jones and the Last Crusade.4 On Room 101. 5 The first of three drag specials. 6 
Behind Gordon Ramsay – but ahead of John McCririck, Jeremy Paxman, Fanny 
Craddock and Derren Brown.
 