
Tributes to Anita Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> 
have rightly emphasised her originality, as an early pioneer of ethical 
business, a ground-breaking planet-saver, debt-canceller, foot-balm inventor. 
In which departments there are, happily, now scores more virtuous business 
people ready to carry on where she left off. It is unclear, however, who will 
take over one of her less celebrated personal crusades: to save women from the 
beauty industry.

For years, after she became successful enough to shout, Roddick reminded 
women: "The most effective anti-ageing product is a sun hat." No matter how 
absurd, or actively rebarbative were many of her own products - one thinks, in 
particular, of the White Musk range, and a sugary hair-removing substance she 
discovered in some benighted corner of the Immac-free world - Roddick never 
claimed they would turn back the clock. Industry promises of rejuvenation were, 
she once said, "complete pap": "They have a 30-year-old airbrushed model 
selling you the product. It is a lie that anti-ageing creams will get rid of 
wrinkles. They won't."

If the regularity with which she stated the obvious was considered, by some, 
monotonous, the undiminished sales of unproven, insanely overpriced anti-ageing 
creams indicate that it was also necessary. Moreover, no one else - or no one 
as prominent as Roddick - was saying it. Women who never noticed when dreary 
dermatologists advised sticking to sunblock and moisturiser paid attention to 
Roddick when she urged them to recognise her own industry's phoniness and fibs. 
"There is nothing on God's planet, not one thing, that will take away 30 years 
of arguing with your husband and 40 years of environmental abuse," she said. 
"You'd be better off spending the money on a good bottle of Pinot Noir."

Now that she's gone, it is hard to think of anyone, least of all anyone in the 
beauty business, who will alert women to the lab-coated frauds who continue to 
exploit their horror of looking old. Earlier this year, it seemed that 
Professor Lesley Regan, a doctor, might usefully reinforce Roddick's message, 
but her conclusion, for the BBC's Horizon programme, that one cream might, 
indiscernibly to the viewer, have worked on one side of her face, merely led to 
a mass female stampede for Boots's No7 Protect & Perfect Beauty Serum. With her 
headstart at perfecting and protecting, Professor Regan must be looking almost 
unrecognisably dewy.

There are objections, of course; people point out that Roddick was herself 
inconsistent, selling her business to L'Oréal, a company currently offering 
salvation to "the new seniors". But the only truly compromising discovery 
would, surely, be that this handsome 64-year-old used an anti-ageing treatment 
on herself. If so, we must hope it was the Pinot Noir.

· The response of Nigel Farage, leader of Ukip, to the EU's latest 
pronouncement on metrication (allowing Britain her imperial measurements), 
suggests there may be an unexpected side to life inside that dismal, 
single-issue snakepit. "Why on earth," said Mr Farage, "should we be thankful 
to [Günter] Verheugen for allowing us to continue to use the language of 
Shakespeare?"

While it is pleasant to think of Mr Farage entering his office with a cheery 
"goodmorrow" for his Ukip colleague Jeffrey Titford, and a "well met" to 
Godfrey Bloom, his reason for opposing metrication must raise questions as to 
how far Ukip would like to go, in harmonising our national measurements with 
our literature. Does Ukip hope to revive cubits, to facilitate understanding of 
The Tempest? Ditto leagues? Ells? Scruples? If not, is the EU to blame for 
their obsolescence? And what of the groats, which cause such confusion in 
Squirrel Nutkin? Shouldn't we also preserve the language of Beatrix Potter?

Ukip's own literature has little to offer on the party's affection for 
pre-metric language, that is, language up to around 1790, when the British 
parliament and French assembly first considered simultaneous adoption of the 
metric system. According to a paper by Jim Humble, OBE, the last director of 
the UK Metrication Board, "there were many positive debates" on the metric 
system in the second half of the 19th century, although it was not until 1969 
(three years before Britain joined the EEC) that Tony Benn created the board, 
with a target date for completion of 1972. Even if this proved impossible, the 
metric system was taught in British schools from 1973.

For patriots who have sarcastically thanked the EU for "graciously allowing" 
us to keep the arithmetic of Shakespeare, it is simpler, presumably, to blame 
Europe for allowing modern schoolchildren the jammy option of measuring in 10s, 
than to wonder what merit earlier British governments ever saw in the system. 
Why dwell on the errors of the 18th and 19th century, when they can be so 
easily rectified? Writing in the Daily Telegraph, Simon Heffer seems to 
anticipate the revival of a more Vitruvian scheme, with "quantities that we all 
instinctively understand". Where "all" is equal to Simon Heffer, Ukip, British 
market traders and - outside these shores - America, Liberia and Myanmar, the 
only remaining countries where enthusiasm for imperial measurement is likewise, 
undimmed.

· Children were saying yesterday that it is "a tragedy" that Prince Charles 
has grown up never knowing where money comes from. "That's worrying," said one 
of his 10-year-old subjects, "so I think it would help tremendously if the 
prince could have this connection by getting a job." Research showed that the 
prince has never visited a supermarket. His wife is thought to have done so, 
"once or twice".

· This week Catherine watched Nigella, "weirdly mesmerising, and Jamie Oliver, 
who was looking cross and diminished, possibly on account of being hated by 
every child in the land". She read, shamingly,Gerry's Blog, on findmadeleine.com
 <http://www.findmadeleine.com>: "If only someone would tell him to stop using 
exclamation marks. Or, better still, to just stop."
 