
Rescuers have recovered the body of one mountain guide after an ice avalanche 
swept the lower slopes of Everest killing at least 13 in the deadliest accident 
on the world's highest mountain.

The avalanche struck a perilous passage called the Khumbu Icefall, which is 
riddled with crevasses and piled with serac – huge chunks of ice – that can 
break free without warning.

"We were tied on a rope and carrying gas to camp when there was a sudden hrrrr 
sound," said Ang Kami Sherpa, 25, one of at least three survivors flown by 
helicopter to Kathmandu. "We knew it was an avalanche, but we couldn't run away 
or do anything.

"There was a big chunk of snow that fell over us and swept us away. It looked 
like clouds, all white," he said, speaking in a hospital intensive care unit 
where he was being treated for a blood clot on his leg and facial injuries.

Climbers declared a four-day halt to efforts to scale the summit. All of the 
victims were Sherpa mountain guides.

"Everyone is shaken here at Base Camp. Some climbers are packing up and 
calling it quits. They want nothing to do with this," wrote Tim Rippel of Peak 
Freaks Expeditions in a blog.

Shocked relatives wondered how they would cope without the men who take huge 
risks to earn up to $5,000 for a two-month expedition – around 10 times the 
average annual pay inNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>. "He was 
the only breadwinner in the family," said 17-year-old Phinjum Sherpa as she 
waited for the body of her uncle, Tenji Sherpa, at a Buddhist monastery in 
Kathmandu. "We have no one to take care of us."

Although relatively low on the mountain, climbers say the icefall was one of 
the most dangerous places on Everest. There are, however, no safer paths along 
the famous South Col route scaled by Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 
1953.

Around 100 climbers and guides had already passed beyond the Khumbu Icefall to 
prepare for an assault on the summit. They are safe, but a new path will have 
to be made to make it possible to continue the expeditions.

Rippel's sherpas had lucky escapes - two returned to base camp five minutes 
before the avalanche hit, while two were briefly trapped above the avalanche 
but managed to make their way down, he wrote.

Three Sherpas were still missing after Saturday's rescue effort.

• The picture caption with this article was amended on 22 April 2014. An 
earlier version said the picture showed the avalanche that killed at least 13 
people on 18 April. In fact it was taken in 2012. The picture has also been 
removed for copyright reasons.
 