
London Sinfonietta/LamenTate  Tate Modern, London, SE1 

Grieg Trio/Voyage to Fair Isle Wigmore Hall, London W1 

London Symphony Orchestra/Penumbra, Shadowlines Barbican, London EC2 

Never has a grand piano seemed so small. Dwarfed by the gigantic sweep of 
Anish Kapoor's Marsyas sculpture in Tate Modern's cavernous turbine hall, the 
Steinway looked an insignificant black speck, surrounded by an orchestra of 
Lilliputian proportions. This was going to be an evening heavy with symbolism: 
here was an attempt to bring together sculpture, theatre and music to make some 
powerful statements as the threat of war with Iraq draws closer.

The Marsyas of the title is the satyr of Greek mythology who is flayed alive 
by Apollo. Director Peter Sellars - never far from controversy - chose to 
respond to the 450ft spread of red PVC ('a Guernica for the twenty- first 
century') by staging an hour-and-a-half-long rant against American imperialism, 
presented in the form of a Pentagon press conference and held directly under 
the central 'mouth' of Marsyas.

Judging by the restless audience around me, this was preaching to the 
converted anyway, and there was an audible sigh of relief when we were invited 
to move down to the floor of the hall to hear the world premiere of Arvo Pärt's 
rather banally titledLamenTate. 

A low growl from the timpani introduces a trademark angular theme from the 
brass before the piano, rising from the depths of its register, swiftly drives 
the piece towards a majestic declamation. But, as if suddenly remembering that 
this is a lament, the mood quickly softens to a lyrical tranquillity from which 
it will only briefly stir again.

Horn and trumpet players move silently from their places to take up positions 
around the vast hall, from where they engage in a conversation with more 
chant-like themes. Pauses between the statements allow the cathedral acoustic 
of the huge space to become part of the performance, the music revelling in a 
sound world of concrete and brick.

In typical Pärt style the brass themes are repeated, inverted and embellished 
by first the piano, then flutes and percussion. Alexander Briger conducted 
musicians from the London Sinfonietta and the Royal Academy of Music with a 
sensitive awareness of the vast acoustic, and pianist Hélène Grimaud played 
with an exquisite lightness of touch, taking up a single-note repetition which 
lay under the strings' final theme to turn it into a tolling bell of lament and 
bringing to a close this instantly accessible, moving, lyrical music.

Rather more challenging in this week of four world premieres was Voyage to 
Fair Isle, a new piano trio by Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies> given its first outing 
by the splendid Grieg Trio at the Wigmore Hall. This extraordi narily prolific 
composer is currently concentrating on chamber music (his cycle of 10 Naxos 
quartets, commissioned by the record label of the same name, began at the 
Wigmore last autumn) and this trio represents 'a present to myself', as he had 
started it on his birthday, 8 September, last year.

That date also happens to be the Feast of the Birth of the Virgin Mary, so the 
plainsong proper for that day is his starting point for a piece which reflects 
a trip he took to a music festival on Fair Isle - which, on a clear day, 
incidentally, he can see from his home on Orkney.

A quiet, introspective opening, with overtones of late Shostakovich, quickly 
gives way to a wild, dance-like section where jagged-edged themes rise and 
subside in restless profusion. The plainsong reasserts itself before - 
completely unannounced - a raw, jaunty Shetland fiddle tune of great vivacity 
springs out and demands attention.

The atmosphere changes again when the fiddle tune flies off into the 
stratosphere and the cello picks up a double-stopped folk-like melody. 
Interesting sonorities are explored (teetering violin harmonics against the 
lowest cello register) before the piano writing becomes more urgent, 
establishing a frantic pace which cannot be sustained, and the whole wild dance 
quietly subsides into a shimmering sea.

This idea of decaying into silence was taken up in Jonathan Cole's new piece 
Penumbra, given in the latest of George Benjamin's musical encounters at the 
Barbican. We are in an imaginary medieval city at midnight. The air is silent. 
Muffled footsteps escape from the darkness. Sounds resonate and decay; bells 
toll in the shadows; chords like shards of glittering glass scatter their 
brilliance and fall silent. A central scherzo gives way to a lament which 
slides away to silence, but not before offering a tempting glimpse of what is 
to come, for Cole has taken the end of this piece as the starting point for his 
next.

Shadowlines, George Benjamin's new piece for piano, is in six, short canonic 
movements, where the imitative secondary voice often enlarges, transposes and 
transforms the primary. This is a work serious in intent, with monolithic 
statements in the inner movements, majestically realised by French pianist 
Pierre-Laurent Aimard in an electrifying performance, which, in common with the 
other new works last week, came to a serene and expressive close.

Three to see


The Elixir of Love, New Theatre, Cardiff, Wed to 7 Mar, then Birmingham, 
Southampton, Milton Keynes, and Liverpool New WNO production, originally from 
Opera North.

Madam Butterfly, Albert Hall, London SW7, Thurs to 9 Mar Raymond Gubbay's 
spectacular Puccini returns, complete with Butterfly's home perched over a 
water garden.

Falstaff, Covent Garden, London WC2, to 26 Feb Bryn Terfel in terrific form in 
second revival of Graham Vick's picture-book, primary-coloured Verdi.
 