
If you are one of the growing number of consumers who prefer to buy computers, 
software and electronic goods online then you should get a fairer deal from 
this month after an intervention from the Office of Fair Trading (OFT).

Following action from the OFT,  dabs.com <http://www.dabs.com/homepage.aspx> 
was among a number of firms who agreed to change their terms and conditions, 
which previously misled consumers about their right to return goods and get a 
refund.

The amended contract is set to serve as a model for the online IT market - it 
is unthinkable other suppliers would carry on using the offending terms.

The amended terms and conditions include those that made the consumer pay the 
cost of carriage when returning faulty goods, imposed time limits for reporting 
defects, and refunds being conditional on the return of cancelled goods. A 
further condition excluded the company's liability for errors in the 
descriptions of goods.

Ray Hall, director of the  OFT <http://www.oft.gov.uk/>, said: "The office 
welcomes the changes made by Dabs - consumers now have fairer and clearer terms 
and conditions.

"IT suppliers that sell to consumers online, by mail order, or telephone must 
make sure their consumer contracts do not limit consumers' rights."

Know your rights
 Online shoppers have stronger rights than those buying from a high street 
retailer due to the Distance Selling Regulations 
<http://www.oft.gov.uk/advice_and_resources/resource_base/legal/distance-selling-regulations/>
 (DSRs), which came into force in October 2000.

These state that consumers must be given clear information before they buy, 
including details of the goods or services offered, delivery and payment 
arrangements, the name and address of a supplier - crucial information if 
you're buying a PC and might need to contact a firm if a problem arises - and 
information about your right to cancel.

Online shoppers have the unconditional right to cancel an order within a seven 
day cooling-off period starting the day after delivery. You do not have this 
right if you buy from a shop. The right to cancel is in addition to your 
statutory right to reject faulty or misdescribed goods under the Sale of Goods 
Act 
<http://www.dti.gov.uk/consumers/buying-selling/sale-supply/sale-of-good-act/page8600.html>
.

If you do cancel an order the trader must refund your money, as soon as 
possible and within 30 days at the latest.

You may be required to send back the goods and pay the costs of doing so, but 
only if you were told about this in writing before making the contract. If you 
fail to return the goods and your contract requires it, the trader can charge 
you for the cost of recovering them. But the refund can never be made 
conditional on you returning the goods - your right to a refund is absolute 
whether you return the goods or not.

Bear in mind also that you can never be made responsible for the cost of 
returning faulty goods or substitute goods, which have been supplied where the 
ordered goods are not available. In these cases the cost of returning the items 
and arrangements for their collection must be borne by the trader.

In all cases, however, you are under a duty of care to look after the goods 
while they are in your possession. You must also make them available for 
collection on receiving written notice from the trader. If you send them back 
you should package them carefully, ensure they are correctly addressed and use 
a reliable delivery service.

Exceptions to the rules
 If the goods are made to your own specification or clearly personalised the 
agreement is not covered by the rules. This also means the cooling off period 
might not apply if you order a computer manufactured to a unique design. 
Importantly, though, a relatively standard product such as a PC assembled from 
a standard range of components is not exempt, so don't let the trader use this 
as an excuse for denying your right to cancel.

Most computer software is sealed and needs to be unsealed before use. If you 
break the seal on any software you buy you lose the right to cancel and the 
DSRs no longer apply. However, you should be told about this in writing before 
you enter into the contract. You should also be informed about the main 
characteristics of the software, including the hardware requirements and any 
limitations to the software's functionality.

If you opt for a separate add-on service contract for installing your computer 
or for support and repairs, you must be told in writing about your right to 
cancel this contract as well as the goods contract. But the cancellation period 
for goods and services might not always be the same. If you consent to a 
service starting before the end of the usual seven working day cancellation 
period, your right to cancel is terminated once the work starts.

Don't forget you have the legal right to claim a refund plus the cost of 
returning the goods from the trader if they are faulty or misdescribed. 
Whatever a contract says, these rights can never be taken away from you. You 
are entitled to insist on financial compensation and do not have to accept a 
credit note. Also, the trader cannot avoid giving a refund by blaming the 
manufacturer - responsibility always rests with the trader.

Don't delay your complaint for too long as you might be judged to have 
accepted the goods if you leave it more than a few weeks after delivery. In 
these circumstances the right to a refund might be lost, but you can ask for a 
repair or replacement instead. However, if you agree to let the trader try to 
fix faulty goods this would not affect your rights. If the repair fails you can 
still reject the goods and claim a refund. When buying online it is important 
to get the geographical address of the trader - you will need it if you want to 
complain, and your rights can vary depending on where the trade is based.

You cannot assume an internet trader is based in the UK simply because the web 
address has ".co.uk" in it. Although EU countries have similar legislation to 
the UK the law is very different in the USA. Generally, you will find it 
difficult to solve consumer problems outside the EU so it's not a good idea to 
buy computer equipment from traders based on the other side of the globe.
 