
Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> remains in 
denial of her nerves. After losing her fourth grand slam final and third 
running against her fellow Belgian Justine Henin-Hardenne, she blamed the 
shortcomings of her serve and the excellence of her opponent for the 6-3, 4-6, 
6-3 defeat. Henin, on the other hand, was totally explicit about the pressure.

"We are all nervous. It is impossible to play big matches and not to be. In 
certain situations both before and during a final it's just not possible to be 
calm," she said after adding the Australian Open title to the French and US 
Opens she won last year. "It is better to accept this and try to think about 
other things. I have managed to find the solution within myself."

It has not been easy for her, particularly during the last two weeks when the 
weight of being the world No1 and top seed for the first time in a grand slam 
event weighed on her heavily. So much was obvious when she crumpled to her 
knees at the end of the final in a rare and intense display of public emotion.

Henin is a natural introvert. Her marriage to Pierre-Yves Hardenne in November 
2002, together with the two grand slam titles she won last year, have led to a 
greater self-assurance but she has been fighting an internal battle all 
fortnight. "I was feeling under pressure all the time and this was my toughest 
ever match." It was also the most competitive of the three finals the Belgians 
have contested.

Perhaps the path ahead will become a little less onerous for Henin now. It 
will never be her style to court publicity in the way of the Williams sisters; 
she is far too private a person for that. But, as with all things in her life, 
including the death of her mother and estrangement from her father, Henin will 
find a way of coping.

For someone of her relatively diminutive stature, tennis will always be a 
battle against the really big hitters. The next challenge will be to win 
Wimbledon. She lost the final to Venus Williams in 2001, and recognises the 
surface is the least advantageous for her game. "Sure I would like to win there 
but I won't get obsessed by it."

Clijsters, 20, is a year younger than Henin and still has plenty of time to 
win her first grand slam title, although she reiterated on Saturday: "I really 
don't plan to have a very long career because one day I would like a family." 
Her engagement to Lleyton Hewitt ensured the crowd were behind her but after 
the emotional high of winning the second set, when she bounded to her chair, 
Clijsters went 4-0 down in the third.

Henin appeared home and dry. Then the nerves really kicked in and Clijsters 
might have squared matters, only for an over-rule by the French umpire, Sandra 
de Jenken, which allowed Henin to serve out the match.

The computer-generated image, tennis' Hawk-Eye, showed the Clijsters forehand 
to have been in, although the system is far from full proof. More pertinently, 
as Martina Hingis underlined, Clijsters had the whole court in which to place 
the ball and what was she doing playing such a risky shot so close to the line? 
It was by no means the only occasion when Clijsters's judgment was badly at 
fault.

At its best the Clijsters game is a compulsive mix of heavy-hitting attack and 
athletic - sometimes gymnastic - defence. However, for the moment at least, 
Henin remains the better player, with a better quality serve and considerably 
more variation of shot, notably her superbly natural one-handed backhand.
 