
Robert Earnshaw could have been forgiven for fearing he would be making the 
numbers up when he was recalled to the Wales squad after initially being 
dropped, but last night John Toshack made it clear that would not be the case 
when the manager completed a remarkable turnaround and announced the Nottingham 
Forest striker would lead the attack againstAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> today. It is an opportunity 
Toshack hopes Earnshaw will grasp, with the Wales manager insisting the 
27-year-old's best years in international football should be in the future, not 
the past.

It was six years ago when Earnshaw made a spectacular goalscoring debut for 
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> against Germany and, while 
Toshack would not admit as much yesterday, there is a feeling the forward has 
underachieved ever since. Four clubs in as many seasons have hardly helped, 
with the chastening 12 months Earnshaw spent at Derby County last term leading 
to Toshack voicing his concern at the player's failure to hold down a regular 
place. That has all changed at Forest, however, prompting Toshack's volte face 
after Freddy Eastwood and Craig Bellamy both pulled out through injury.

"The most important thing for me is that he has been getting 90 minutes," said 
Toshack. "The last time we were together I remember saying, 'Earnie, you have 
got to get yourself a run of 10 or a dozen games'. He's had three games in six 
days and hopefully he'll be better for that. Match sharpness, particularly when 
it comes to scoring goals, is very important. Like a lot of strikers, Earnie 
goes on streaks. He might go half a dozen games without a goal and then all of 
sudden he'll get eight or nine. But this is an opportunity for him. He knows 
he'll be starting and he knows the onus will be on him to look for goals."

Toshack, who had been expected to start with either Ched Evans or Sam Vokes up 
front, admitted he has been left with little option but to leave Earnshaw out 
in the past. "When we get together, clubs have usually had three games in a 
week and when that has happened and Earnie hasn't played at all, it makes it 
very difficult to consider him. I would love to see him get 45 or 50 games in 
for Nottingham Forest this season because, like four or five players we have 
got here, Earnie is reaching an age where his best international football 
should be in front of him."

With a trip to Russia to come on Wednesday, Toshack acknowledged it is 
imperative Wales start the 2010 qualifying campaign with a victory against 
Azerbaijan, who are now managed by the former Germany and Scotland coach, Berti 
Vogts. Little has gone to plan for Toshack so far, with five playersruled out - 
the defensive trio of Lewin Nyatanga, Danny Gabbidon and James Collins are also 
sidelined - and the squad unable to train on the pitch because it was only 
relaid on Thursday following a Madonna concert last month. With fewer than 
10,000 tickets sold, there is also likely to be little atmosphere.

Wales (probable, 4-4-1-1): Hennessey; Gunter, Morgan, Williams, Bale; Davies, 
Fletcher, Robinson, Ledley; Koumas; Evans
Substitutes from: Parry, Tudor-Jones, Ricketts, Ramsey, Williams, Fletcher, 
Crofts, Stock, Cotterill, Vokes, Myhill

Azerbaijan (probable, 4-5-1): Valiyev; Malikov, Levin, Nduka, Sadigov, N 
Mammadov; Gurbanov, E Mammadov, Bakhshiyev, Huseynov; Subasic.
Substitutes from: Ramim, Javadov, Shukurov, Guliyev, Zeynalo, Abbasov, Gomesh, 
K Mammadov, Mehdiyev

Referee A Stavrev (Macedonia).
 