
The simplest, clearest explanation of the benefits of open-book finance is 
probably the one offered by entrepreneur Ari Weinzweig, one of its earliest 
proponents. "When people know what the game is, they play better," the 
co-founder of Michigan food companyZingerman's <http://www.zingermans.com/> 
says.

Open-book finance is often interpreted as simply showing every employee the 
books and balance sheets, but those who have embedded the practice in their 
businesses know that it runs much deeper. As Weinzweig hints, it's about 
teaching everyone in a company how the business works and how their job plays a 
part in its success. "It's not just showing them the numbers for the sake of 
it,” he explains. “People pay attention in different ways when they understand 
how the business works and why, and when they feel like they're part of a team 
that helps that work."


While the methods and challenges of integrating open book finance vary from 
company to company, it essentially works like this: management translates its 
balance sheets into current numbers (rather than historic data) in order to 
gauge the company's progress toward its goals in a way that employees can 
easily understand. They then draw a line between each employee and an item in 
the financials, making it clear how every worker feeds into a particular 
number. They then teach employees about all the variables that affect their 
numbers. In this way, every employee gains an understanding of how his or her 
work directly impacts the company's bottom line.

Opening the books is a complex transition, and most companies use a graduated 
approach, beginning with the leadership team, then moving on to the rest of the 
staff. Once everyone knows what's going on, different groups run their own 
meetings to check how they're doing, discuss any issues and plan out how to hit 
their targets. When there's a big issue facing the company, it's there for 
everyone to see and, the theory goes, everyone feels some sort of ownership for 
it.

An idea whose time has come

Open book isn't exactly a new idea. The term was coined in 1982 by Jack Stack 
<https://www.greatgame.com/>, founder and CEO of Springfield Remanufacturing 
<https://srcreman.com/>. But Wayne Baker, who teaches open-book finance 
<http://www.bus.umich.edu/NewsRoom/ArticleDisplay.asp?news_id=20738> at the 
University of Michigan's Ross School of Business, says he's seen an increased 
interest in the practice over the past couple of years. This has been driven, 
in part, by a broader trend towards improving employee engagement as a means to 
increase productivity and profits.

Baker says that, in the past, multiple factors have conspired to keep the 
practice from gaining popularity. First, there's the general misunderstanding 
that open book simply means showing employees all the bank statements. Then 
there is the idea that open book could never work for a publicly traded 
company, and that even in a privately held company there are things that 
management might want to keep to itself.

"I had one executive say to me that he was worried if employees knew how much 
profit he was making, they'd all want a raise," Baker says.

But he explains that business owners don't have to implement every single 
tenet of open book in order for it to work. In some situations, simply setting 
targets and understanding why they're generally important to the company's 
success can be beneficial.


Baker thinks it's an idea whose time has come. "It's a big change, but 
companies that do it achieve efficiencies and engagement at such a high level 
that it's really worth it," he says.

Weinzweig sees open book as a way to realize a company's full potential. "Why 
not tap into the intellectual and work abilities of your whole staff rather 
than just 5%?” he asks. “That would be like only the coach and manager knowing 
the rules of the game, and every once in a while the players get yelled at or 
praised but they have no idea why."

In Zingerman's case, open book's impact has been stunning. When the company 
adopted the practice in the early 1980s, it only had two employees and was 
struggling to stay in business. Today, it has 625 employees and is on track to 
turn over $50m in annual sales in 2014.

Taking the blinders off

Weinzweig is not the only open book convert. When John Kohl became CEO of 
Atlas Wholesale Food <http://www.atlaswholesalefood.com/> in 2012, his family's 
company was losing $25,000 a month. Kohl had learned about open book at the 
University of Michigan's Ross School of Business and thought it could help turn 
his business around, so he began training the leadership team in the practice.

"Previously, we would really not know whether we were doing well or not until 
we'd get our tax statements at the end of the year," Kohl says. "It was like 
driving with our eyes closed — there's no way to know in that scenario whether 
anything you're doing is working or not, whether you should invest in growth or 
trim costs."

Kohl tasked his executive team with keeping on top of the company's critical 
numbers on a daily basis. It took some time before management saw it as 
anything more than another batch of numbers on the whiteboard in their regular 
morning meeting, he recalls. But before long, the company began seeing results: 
Managers were able to catch problems early and interact with staff to find 
creative solutions to persistent issues, and everyone was able observe the 
direct results of their actions. Within five months, Atlas had its first 
profitable month in years. Kohl brought in champagne to celebrate, then started 
rolling out open book to the rest of the company.

Kohl says that the warehouse drivers were excited to be included on 
conversations about far-ranging aspects of the business. The sales team, on the 
other hand, initially saw it as yet another meeting in a day full of them. 
However, the company's bonus plan, which ties quarterly bonuses to specific 
financial targets for each group within the business, has helped to keep the 
staff motivated.

It's been two years since Atlas launched its open book initiative, and Kohl 
gets a tangible daily reminder of how it's working. "We have a large warehouse 
with skylights,” he says. “We used to just leave the lights on all the time 
anyway. I know that open book is working because when I go in there during the 
day now, all the lights are off because the warehouse crew has realized that 
it's a way for them to help the company save money."

Kohl has plenty more examples just like that one: the warehouse manager who 
asked how a truck they had purchased would affect their monthly target and how 
that asset would depreciate over time; the truck driver who solved an inventory 
overstock issue and brought some old business back just by remembering an old 
customer who used to buy a particular product; another driver who was out doing 
deliveries, saw a sales opportunity and helped bring in a new customer.

And then there are all the traditional metrics. The company is more profitable 
than it has been in a decade, and its 2014 sales are up 20% over 2013 sales.

"We don't want everyone who works for us to be CPAs or anything, but people 
like to know what's going on," Kohl says. "People support what they help to 
create."

"We had a little bit of an us-versus-them situation between management and 
staff before, but now it's all about 'Let's talk about it, let's open things 
up, break down walls, get employees engaged,'" he continues. "It's really been 
a priceless tool."


The finance hub <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/finance> is 
funded by EY. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 