
A long awaited overhaul of NHS dentistry charges is launched this month. So 
you should see posters explaining the three new bands for charges in your 
surgery waiting room. The top band covers complicated treatments like bridge 
fillings, all of which cost £189. The middle band covers treatments such as 
fillings, and is priced at £42.50. And the bottom band covering simple 
procedures such as check-ups, scale and polishes costs just £15.50.

Although the charges in the top band seem a bit steep and could be offputting 
for people on low incomes, this is great news for NHS patients who will be 
provided with simpler and clearer charges. But for those of us who find it 
impossible to find an NHS dentist it will make no difference whatsoever. We 
will continue to be confused over dental charges, never quite sure whether we 
have been conned when the bill is presented for hundreds or even thousands of 
pounds.

Finding an NHS dentist is unlikely to get any easier as new administrative 
rules are set to make NHS dentists defect to the private sector in droves. 
Currently, less than half of all UK adults are registered with an NHS dentist. 
Research shows that only a third of dental practices are taking on any new NHS 
patients, and in some parts of the country the figure is even lower. One of the 
worst hit areas is the north-west where only 13% of dental practices take on 
new NHS patients.

Going private and your rights
 So if you are one of the growing number of people who is forced to go to a 
private dentist because you can't get NHS treatment, or even if you simply 
choose to go private because of the extra choices that are available such as 
white fillings, what can you do to safeguard your rights? According to the 
Office of Fair Trading it pays to shop around and ask the right questions 
before deciding.

Choosing the right dentist is key to not being ripped off. So it is well worth 
doing some research, because services and prices will vary. You must find out 
as much as you can from the practices in your area about what they offer and 
ask family and friends for recommendations. Ask how the practice keeps up to 
date with the latest treatments and technology. Try to find out if they 
participate in a quality assurance programme, such as a dental accreditation 
scheme, and ask how this benefits patients.

When it comes to charges, get as much upfront information as you can so you 
are able to compare prices and decide on the best deal. Find out if the 
practice charges a registration fee - this is not the same as the initial 
examination fee. Ideally, you should get a price for the work in the shape of a 
written and costed treatment plan. But if this is not possible (some dentists 
won't commit to this) as a minimum you should find out the amount of the 
initial consultation fee together with a guide price on the treatment you are 
getting. Don't make any snap decisions on expensive treatment whilst you are in 
the dentist's chair. Ask for time to go away and think about it, and if you are 
in any doubt get a second opinion from another dentist.

Reasonable charges
 If you do not agree a price with your dentist beforehand, then by law the 
charges must be reasonable. What is reasonable is a question of fact in each 
case and depends on a number of factors including what other dentists in the 
area would have charged for the same work. You should ask for a fully itemised 
bill so you can see what you are being charged for. If you think the bill is 
too steep, ask three other dentists in your area to give you their sample price 
lists and ask what they would have charged for the treatment you received. If 
there is a huge discrepancy between what you have been charged and the quotes 
you receive from the other dentists, pay only what you think is a reasonable 
amount using the quotes from other dentists as a guide.

All dentists owe you a duty of care. And though this does not mean they must 
get everything right, they must exercise the degree of skill expected of a 
competent member of their profession. So if the incorrect tooth is extracted, 
or cosmetic dentistry goes wrong leaving you with unsightly teeth, or dentures 
are not fitted properly, you may be able to claim compensation from your 
dentist based on professional negligence. Moreover, the materials used must be 
of satisfactory quality - so if white filling solution or porcelain veneers are 
not up to scratch the dentist is responsible.

Righting wrongs
 You should normally give the dentist a chance to put matters right if 
something routine goes wrong. But if your complaint is very serious or the 
treatment was unusually painful, this isn't necessary because you can rightly 
argue you have lost confidence in the original dentist. If you can show your 
dentist was negligent you can claim for the cost of putting the matter right 
together with an amount to cover your pain, suffering and discomfort. You may 
also be able to recover out-of-pocket expenses and loss or earnings if you had 
to take time off work to get the problem resolved.

Complaints about private dental services can now be referred to the Dental 
Complaints Service (DCS)www.dentalcomplaints.org.uk 
<http://www.dentalcomplaints.org.uk> which can investigate your case. If they 
find your complaint is justified they can ask the dentist to put matters right 
and pay you compensation. But you must have already complained to the dental 
practice before the DCS will get involved. If you are dissatisfied with the 
findings of the DCS you are free to pursue your claim in the courts but you 
would need to ask a solicitor for help as professional negligence cases can be 
quite complex.
 