
Cynthia Ozick <https://www.theguardian.com/books/cynthia-ozick> celebrated her 
84th birthday on Tuesday and news that her seventh novel, Foreign Bodies, has 
been shortlisted for the 17th Orange prize for excellence in fiction written by 
women.

She admitted, however, that she would rather people did not dwell on the 
former. Asked if she minded her age being mentioned, Ozick said: "Yes, is the 
direct answer, yes. Because I think that writers are judged on their work and 
not on their age, and that seems to me a very simple axiom. I suppose if a 
writer publishes a novel at the age of 10 it is worth mentioning, but if one is 
mature it seems rather irrelevant."

However, Ozick added: "I understand journalism, I do, and journalists latch on 
to things that seem remarkable. To me, it does not seem remarkable, although 
when I look at the number it seems dreadfully old. But I don't relate to it."

She joins a list including her fellow Americans Ann Patchett and Madeline 
Miller, Esi Edugyan from Canada, the Irish writerAnne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-enright> and the sole British 
contender, Georgina Harding.

The six novels explore subjects as diverse as modern-day adultery, ancient 
Greek love and wartime atrocities in Romania. The £30,000 winner will be 
announced on 30 May at a the Royal Festival Hall in London.

The novelist Joanna Trollope, chair of this year's judges, said: "I think this 
is one of the strongest lists I've seen for a literary prize and I'm quite an 
old hand at them now. It is a list of international standing."

Trollope highlighted "the diversity of voice, the diversity of subject matter, 
the strength and accessibility". She added: "They are all so readable. I know 
Stella Rimington got shot down last year for using that word, but what is the 
point of a book if it isn't?

"Anyone who reads any of them will be left with so much to think about 
afterwards. They can be read by academics, they can be read by people in local 
book clubs. There is so much meat in them."

Ozick was installed as 2/1 favourite by the bookmaker William Hill. Her novel 
loosely uses Henry James's The Ambassadors as a platform from which to explore 
big themes such as anti-semitism and the postwar divergence in fortunes of 
Europe and America.

Patchett, who won the prize 10 years ago for Bel Canto, is shortlisted for 
State of Wonder, a gripping Amazonian adventure story about the search for a 
drug that could change women's lives.

Another literary heavyweight on the list is Enright, who won the Man Booker 
prize in 2007 for The Gathering. She is shortlisted for The Forgotten Waltz, 
which explores adultery and the power of children in a family.

Enright said: "I am so proud to be on the shortlist for the Orange. It is the 
friendliest and most forward-looking of all the prizes, constantly bringing new 
names to our attention and casting older ones in a new light. It gives the bag 
a shake."

Harding is nominated for her third novel, Painter of Silence, set in postwar 
Romania, telling the story of Augustin, an artistically gifted deaf and mute 
man who turns up nearly dead on the steps of a hospital.

Edugyan is shortlisted for Half Blood Blues, which was also on last year's Man 
Booker shortlist. It tells the story of black jazz musicians in Nazi-occupied 
Paris.

The sixth book on the list is Miller's debut novel, The Song of Achilles, set 
in Greece in the age of heroes, telling the story of the love between Achilles 
and Patroclus.

Other judges on the panel were the writer Lisa Appignanesi, the broadcasters 
Victoria Derbyshire and Natasha Kaplinsky, and the writer and broadcaster 
Natalie Haynes.

• This article was amended on 20 April 2012. The original said Georgina 
Harding's novel, Painter of Silence, tells the story of Iasi. This has been 
corrected.
 