
In the annals of British postwar history, the 1970s have always had a special 
place as the awful decade, a time of economic stagnation, industrial unrest and 
a squeeze on real incomes. It was the decade the postwar boom ended, and the 
arrival of a hit squad from the International Monetary Fund symbolised that the 
party was well and truly over.

The analysis on Wednesday of George Osborne's autumn statement by the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) suggested it will soon be time to rewrite 
the record books, because what Britain is living through now is worse than the 
decade that gave us the three-day week and winter of discontent.

Until now, the worst 10-year period for living standards in postwar Britain 
was the period bookended by the David Bowie albums Aladdin Sane in 1973 and 
Let's Dance in 1983. It covered two recessions – in 1974-75 and 1980-81 – and 
by the end of it the unemployment figure had reached a postwar high of just 
over three million. Family incomes grew at what was then considered a snail's 
pace, rising by 14.4% in real terms over the decade.

That, though, looks like positively explosive growth compared with the decade 
Britain is living through at the moment. The IFS says that in 2016 real 
household disposable incomes will be lower than they were in 2006.

It is impossible to say if such a dismal performance has ever occurred before 
because records don't go back that far.

Spending squeeze

The IFS also looks at the squeeze on incomes in another way. It examines what 
is happening to the real spending power, after inflation, of a household smack 
in the middle of the UK's income distribution. Here the position looks even 
worse: real median household incomes will be no higher in 2015-16 than they 
were in 2002-03, a 13-year period of stagnation.

In today's prices, a couple with no children would have had real disposable 
income of £437.35 a week in 2002-03, and if the economy pans out as the 
independent Office forBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> 
Responsibility (OBR) expects, such a couple will have £432.99 a week to play 
with in 2015-16.

There have been periods in Britain's history – the famine of the 1340s, 
followed by the Black Death – when there were colossal falls in living 
standards, but what the IFS has described has no precedent in modern times.

Even in the period leading up to the financial crash of 2007, real incomes 
were growing at a sluggish rate. They had been buoyant in Tony Blair's first 
term as prime minister, between 1997 and 2001, when growth was robust and the 
strong pound made imported goods cheaper, but in his second term the pace of 
income growth moderated, and in his last two years in Downing Street, up to 
2007, it petered out almost entirely.

Families were able to consume more, but only by using their homes as cash 
machines. In the five years from 2002 to 2007, equity withdrawal from UK real 
estate exceeded £300bn, which kept spending and the wider economy going but 
only through borrowing growth "from the future".

When the recession broke in 2008 real incomes then fell sharply. Many workers 
accepted pay freezes, even pay cuts, to avoid losing their jobs, and pay awards 
failed to keep pace with rising prices. Taxes also went up as first Alistair 
Darling and then Osborne announced plans to right the damage to the public 
finances caused by the recession.

Real median household income for a couple with two children is on course to be 
almost £50 a week lower in 2012 than it was in 2009.

Deep slump

The reason the squeeze has lasted for longer than expected is that inflation 
has been a lot higher than forecast over the past 18 months. The 25% drop in 
the pound's value has made imports dearer at a time when global commodity 
prices have surged, pushing up the cost of energy and food, and when VAT has 
been raised in two successive years, first to 17.5%, then last January to 20%.

Inflation has been running at 5%-plus since the summer at a time when average 
earnings have grown at barely 2%.

And consumers can no longer compensate for the hit to their real incomes by 
using their homes for cash, since house prices are no longer rising. So 
household consumption, falling in 2011, will barely grow in 2012.

The expectation is that real incomes will pick up again in subsequent years, 
partly because the weakness of the economy will lead to a sharply lower 
inflation rate.

But even assuming the economy performs no worse than the OBR expects, the 
recovery will be slow and it is likely to be well into the next parliament 
before the average household finds itself better off than it was shortly after 
the turn of the millennium.

Nor does there seem to be an immediate prospect of real income growth at the 
high levels seen in previous periods of UK economic recovery, such as the 
1980s, unless the credit bubble is reinflated.

The OBR assumes now that the economy has suffered greater permanent damage in 
the recession than was previously thought.

That has two consequences. It means that Britain's trend growth (the rate at 
which output can expand without inflation picking up) is now considered to be 
lower than it was before the crash, at 2.3% a year. And it means that Osborne, 
or the next chancellor, after the election, will have to carry on cutting to 
sort out the budget deficit.

The IFS has pulled no punches, confessing it had little good news to impart. 
Indeed, news that recovery from a deep slump will be slower than imagined, of a 
lost decade of real income growth, and austerity as far as the eye could see, 
could make you quite nostalgic for the 1970s. When at least there were Fawlty 
Towers and the Clash.
 