
Endearingly combustible as ever, former Amstrad boss Lord Sugar has worked 
himself up into a right old lather over George Osborne's budget. His beef? The 
chancellor's new tax on passengers carried in private jets. A "window-dressing 
publicity stunt," splutters Sugar, who says the proceeds will barely add up to 
a row of beans.

"An owner of a private jet has paid for it themselves out of tax-paid income," 
says theApprentice star. "They also employ staff like pilots and engineers to 
maintain their aircraft; again out of tax-paid income."

Musing over what injustice could be levied by the Treasury next, Sugar wonders 
whether Osborne could go an extra mile by creating a tax paid by Rolls-Royce or 
Range Rover owners on every passenger that they carry in their cars.

Sugar's point is not entirely unreasonable – imposing air passenger duty on 
private planes will amount to peanuts and is totemistic, rather than 
revenue-raising. It won't serve any particular green purpose because the people 
involved are generally too wealthy to be deterred from VIP journeys by a few 
quid in tax. But the Amstrad man is onto a loser. Nobody is going to go on a 
march to support private jet owners. The same goes for all of the other victims 
cunningly singled out by Osborne in a surprisingly populist budget.

Let's have a quick roll call of the losers. There were non-doms, who will face 
a slightly higher annual fee for the privilege of being resident in the UK 
while paying tax abroad. Banks, deep in the mire of public opinion, are being 
clobbered (very gently) with a higher levy so that they don't benefit from a 
cut in broader corporation tax. And then there are oil companies, hardly the 
cuddliest of enterprises, which are being milked for a £2bn windfall tax to pay 
for a 1p-a-litre drop in petrol duty. Exploration firms active in the North Sea 
aren't happy.

"This was an absolute shock – it was announced so suddenly, with absolutely no 
consultation," said one oil industry source, who argues that 440,000 jobs are 
supported by North Sea oil, which still has plenty of mileage to go; some 40bn 
barrels of oil have been extracted from the ocean over the last four decades 
but 24bn barrels are thought to remain up for grabs. Frankly, though, they can 
afford it.

To round off this curious club of Osborne's enemies, the Channel Islands are 
furious, in a very polite way, about plans to close a loophole allowing 
shoppers to avoid VAT by purchasing CDs and DVDs through offshore warehouses. 
Alan Maclean, Jersey's minister for economic development, complains that 1,000 
people on his island work in e-commerce and that they're in a totally legit 
business: "These are Jersey companies employing Jersey people with their stock 
owned here in Jersey."

You've got to hand it to Osborne. He's succeeded in isolating targets in the 
budget who will command next to nothing in terms of popular support. Let's hear 
it for non-doms, oil industry executives, bankers, private jet owners and 
Channel Islanders! Silence? What a surprise.

It's an oddly un-Conservative strategy – you wouldn't have caught Nigel Lawson 
taxing the owners of private jets. They're rich and they're highly likely to 
vote Tory. Plus, a classic Thatcherite would have applauded the "freedom" of 
individuals who jet themselves around the nation rather than putting untoward 
strain on roads and railways.

But it's clever politics and rather impressive opportunism. Because with the 
exception of the windfall levy on oil companies, none of these groups of 
"victims" will contribute enough through Osborne's various crackdowns to create 
an even modest wrinkle in the public finances' bottom line. They're in there to 
divert attention from an otherwise low-action budget, which risked being 
memorable only for the miserable growth figures Osborne was obliged to read out 
from the Office for Budget Responsibility: an anaemic 1.7% rise in GDP this 
year, then 2.5% in 2012 – revised downwards from 2.1% and 2.6% respectively.

For all the government's blather about entrepreneurship, enterprise and 
philanthropy, the truth is that we're in for a long, slow slog before Osborne's 
promised "march of the makers" hoves into sight to manufacture us back to a 
generation of prosperity. And a half-hearted swipe at private pilots, bankers 
and non-doms isn't going to make the slightest difference.
 