
I commend the chancellor for the wholehearted way he is pursuing the 
Conservative party's pro-capitalist agenda in his autumn statement (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/29/public-sector-george-osborne-growth>
, 30 November). Are there any better ways to improve profits and business 
optimism than by reducing benefits, reducing the money that goes to the public 
sector, increasing unemployment with inflation thus reducing the real wage, and 
then diverting some of the public money to subsidise transport costs for 
business rather than wasting it on education? He is lucky that the Labour party 
still thinks that being anti-capitalist and pro-strike is not a "good way" to 
demonstrate their own pro-capitalist credentials and that it cannot defend any 
of the deserving losers. It is without doubt a truism that those with "loads of 
money" are best placed to create more, and should be helped to do so.
David Reams
Beckenham, Kent

• Robert Skidelsky (The cutting fantasy is over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/cutting-fantasy-over>, 
30 November) notes the incoherence of the coalition's plans for credit 
expansion. In fact, their policies are incoherent across the board, from the 
NHS to the environment, and none more so than plans to keep people working 
longer while the young suffer. Unemployment is, and always has been, the most 
serious of all economic issues. Labour's efforts to switch the debate from 
deficit reduction to job creation must succeed, and soon.
Bob Nicholson
Frodsham, Cheshire

• The thing that struck me most about the autumn statement, or "dog's 
breakfast" as Larry Elliott called it (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/29/george-osborne-autumn-statement>, 
30 November), was just how helpless the government appeared to have been and 
continue to be in the wake of the economic storm that is gripping the world.

We live in a globalised economy where Britain is nothing more than a reed 
being buffered by forces it has little control over, no matter how many 
"growth" and "job" plans clever Treasury officials dream up. The debt incurred 
as a result of the collapse of the financial system is now coupled with 
stagnant growth, mainly as a result of the feebleness and economic incompetence 
of Europe's political elite, so that we now face the much feared "lost decade". 
The answer must surely be to have stronger global leadership, for countries 
such as China to use their reserves to inject demand into the European and 
North American economies so as to ensure world recovery. Unfortunately, there 
appears no inclination on the part of the world's leaders for greater political 
integration to mirror the economic integration that has been so apparent for 
many years.
Alec Burt
York

• With crucial talks on climate change currently taking place in South Africa, 
George Osborne's plans to boost the economy by investing in roads and helping 
energy-intensive industries is as outrageous as it is short-sighted (Osborne's 
£5bn gamble to stave off recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/27/george-osborne-gamble-autumn-statement>
, 28 November). The self-styled "greenest government ever" should be building a 
low-carbon economy, not making us more dependent on gas, coal and oil.

Tens of thousands of jobs in the solar industry are under threat from plans to 
slash solar subsidies. Just a fraction of the billions available to Osborne 
would safeguard this thriving industry – and help households generate their own 
energy.

And the UK's cash-strapped green investment bank is in desperate need of a 
financial boost too. It's ironic that much of the money to fund the 
chancellor's carbon-intensive investment drive will apparently come from 
commercial pension funds. Surely this money should be used to safeguard 
people's long-term wellbeing, not to build a riskier and more expensive future 
for us all.
Andy Atkins
Executive director, Friends of the Earth

• Futile campaign in Afghanistan – £5bn this year. Unusable Trident weapon 
system – £20bn. Subsidies to some of the wealthiest aristocrats in the country 
through the CAP – £25m annually. Why do these all appear to escape scrutiny in 
the debate over fairly distributed savings? And why not throw into the mix a 
one-off windfall-for-the-nation tax on, say, the 1% wealthiest, who inhabit 
some stratosphere untouched by austerity?
Raphael Altman
Oxford

• I followed the chancellor's autumn statement with interest and was pleased 
to see the government's plans to support SMEs – both the national loan 
guarantee scheme and business finance partnership will be welcome to our 
members.

However, to be successful in helping companies to develop it is vital that 
support is straightforward and non-bureaucratic. Similarly, while the 
government is right to focus on supporting manufacturing through capital 
allowances in enterprise zones and encouraging the export ambitions of SMEs, it 
must recognise the important role that different sectors play.

The UK leisure marine industry employs 32,500 people and generates sales of 
£2.9bn per year, including around £1.15bn in exports. Our industry is a 
manufacturing success story, with many of our members investing in new 
high-tech equipment and expanding their manufacturing sites to meet the 
increase in demand.

Focusing on industries like ours, with many small, innovative and 
high-growth-potential companies, and continuing to ease access to finance for 
such companies, will be the key to success.
Rob Stevens
Chief executive officer, British Marine Federation

• The autumn statement was about expenditure plans and not taxation. Tax 
issues are dealt with in the spring budget. But this government needs to start 
thinking outside the box on tax as well as spending to help reduce the deficit 
and boost growth. Perhaps there is scope for the government to consider levying 
VAT on food. With average household spending on food in 2009 at £52.20 per 
week, a 5% VAT levy on food could raise around £3.6bn. Indirect taxes are 
regressive, but those on benefits are seeing increases in their incomes of 
around 5% from next April, which should help to mitigate the effects of 
increased food prices on the poorest families. And increasing the cost of food 
for consumers should reduce waste and perhaps encourage more people to grow 
their own fruit and veg. Eating out would also become more attractive as the 
difference between buying food from supermarkets and eating in cafes and 
restaurants narrows. What's more, taxing food is not a complete anathema. 
Within the EU, Sweden imposes a 12% VAT rate on food. And in Norway VAT on 
foodstuffs is 14%.
Roger Jarman
London

• The government's youth contract is welcome (Bank tax to rise as Osborne set 
to deliver grim news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/25/george-osborne-raise-bank-taxes>
, 26 November). Their central proposal, of a targeted jobs subsidy delivered 
through the Work Programme, is what we called for last week in our report,Youth 
unemployment: A million reasons to act 
<http://www.cesi.org.uk/publications/youth-unemployment-million-reasons-act>. 
However there's a tension with subsidies: between paying for recruitment that 
would have happened anyway, and paying for "new" jobs that then end when the 
money runs out. One way to square this is through so called "transitional jobs" 
that pay for new, temporary jobs alongside intensive support to move into 
long-term employment. Evidence from the UK and US has shown that these can 
deliver impressive results. The government has a unique opportunity to learn 
from this and to do something better than the usual "golden hellos" and job 
creation schemes. With long-term youth unemployment rising faster than at any 
time since the 1980s, it's never been more urgent.
Tony Wilson
Director of policy, Centre for Economic and Social Inclusion
 