
The fashion designer Oscar de la Renta arrived in New York in 1963 with 
letters of introduction to the editor-in-chief of Vogue, Diana Vreeland, the 
Condé Nast magazines supremoAlex Liberman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/dec/07/guardianobituaries1>, and John 
Fairchild, whose family owned Women’s Wear Daily. Within a day, he was offered 
a job designing couture for Elizabeth Arden’s boutique on Fifth Avenue – she 
asked his price and he answered, preposterously, $700 a week.

He got it, earned it, and charmed his employer out of ill-humour by letting 
her win at cards. He stuck to the same approach until his death, from cancer, 
at the age of 82: talent, daily application, perfect timing, and a suavity that 
took the anxious edge off big-occasion dressing. In his last 15 years, he 
became the safest pair of hands for women exposed to the eyes of the world on 
red carpets or bridal aisles. Amal Alamuddin married George Clooney in a 
fussless, timeless Oscar de la Renta gown in September.

Born in Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominicanrepublic>, he was the youngest 
child of a well-off family; his six sisters backed him when he pleaded with his 
mother to study art in Madrid rather than join his father’s insurance business. 
He was given his wish after his mother’s death, and sailed for Spain, aged 19; 
the sisters secretly supplemented his allowance from his father, and he spent 
most of the money on a wardrobe of suits by the tailor Luis Lopez (whose firm 
he ever after patronised). He understood the disciplined ease of fine 
tailoring, and that clothes could defend him from prejudice – he always wore a 
tie, because “I have this complex that if I walk into a place wearing a 
colourful shirt, someone will stop me and say ‘I’m sorry, but the Latin band 
comes through the other door.’”

He earned extra money by sketching clothes for newspapers or couture clients; 
some sketches were seen by the wife of the US ambassador in Spain,Francesca 
Lodge 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/08/nyregion/francesca-lodge-95-a-patron-of-the-arts.html>
. She asked him to design a debutante dress for her daughter in 1956, which 
made a cover story in Life magazine. He was given a job – more sketches for 
clients – in Cristóbal Balenciaga’s Madrid branch. Balenciaga refused to move 
him to Paris without more experience, so he went to the city freelance and was 
offered work by Balenciaga’s rival, Christian Dior.

But Antonio del Castillo, who designed for Lanvin, hired De la Renta as an 
assistant for better pay; he tried to master an entire year’s fashion-school 
curriculum in the fortnight before he joined the firm. Castillo later 
encouraged the crucial move to New York; he knew the young man’s considerable 
nerve. The ready-to-wear garment trade was changing in Manhattan even as he 
arrived. Manufacturers and department stores had long sewn their own brand 
labels on garments from freelances – as De la Renta said: “The designer was the 
little guy in the back.”

He credited Fairchild and Women’s Wear Daily with promoting the identity of 
the creator, though it was also the philosophy of the 1960s, in which 
creativity, and image, mattered as much as money or class. “We were all mostly 
good-looking guys who brought something to social life once we were no longer 
hidden in the workrooms,” De la Renta said. His own company developed, from 
1965, out of a partnership with an old-style Seventh Avenue firm, and that 
development depended both on the new professional women buying their own 
clothes with their own earned money, and De la Renta’s agreeableNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> social life.

In 1967, he became the third husband of a former editor of French Vogue, 
Françoise de Langlade, and, as he observed, it was cheap enough then in 
Manhattan for those on a creatives’ income to live an enviable kind of life, 
mixing at art and charity events, and in their own homes, with people with 
serious inherited wealth. Jackie Kennedy, Babe Paley and Gloria Guinness liked 
him and his clothes equally.

As Cathy Horyn of the New York Times shrewdly noted, the De la Rentas were the 
subject of a famous 1980 article in the paper’s magazine that marked the 
precise moment at which the people who created garments in New York were 
visibly seen to be part of a social elite – a long way to have climbed from the 
back rooms of the garment district in barely 20 years.

He then got to dine with, and dress, the US first ladies Nancy Reagan, Laura 
Bush and Hillary Clinton – the unlikely venue for his recent first 
retrospective was the Clinton Presidential Library in Little Rock, Arkansas (De 
la Renta was a staunch Democratic supporter). After much sharp teasing from him 
over her un-American choices for state events, Michelle Obama finally wore one 
of his designs earlier this month. He even, belatedly, had his chance at 
couture in Paris – the first American designer there since 1940 – in 1993, 
where he made a collection to revive the house of Pierre Balmain.

From the mid-90s, red carpet appearances displaced the old show catwalk as the 
place where couture fashion was displayed. De la Renta had a good understanding 
of the demands through half a century of partygoing, and was unusually 
thoughtful towards the women he dressed, back views, side views and all. No 
woman was ever embarrassed by wearing Oscar de la Renta to the Oscars, and 
among those who did were Amy Adams, Penélope Cruz and Sarah Jessica Parker. His 
business benefited, more than doubling in the last decade of his life to $150m 
in sales, with an affordable diffusion line and other quotidian garments 
filling in behind the special event gowns.

He was given Coty American Fashion Critics’ awards, was inducted into the Coty 
Hall of Fame, and collected several other prizes (including the Council of 
Fashion Designers’ designer of the year 2000); the French, Spanish and 
Dominican industries also bestowed honours on him.

De la Renta retained dual US/Dominican nationality – he was given a Dominican 
Republic diplomatic passport, and had two sunny, and usually celebrity-filled, 
homes there.

Françoise died in 1983. In 1989 he married Annette Engelhard. She, and 
stepchildren from both marriages, survive him.

• Oscar de la Renta, designer, born 22 July 1932; died 20 October 2014
 