
Long after the Californian sun rose, the Oscar winners and losers were waking 
up after a night of loud applause and louder frocks, hilarious acceptance 
speeches and dire jokes.

As universally predicted, Daniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis> took the Oscar for best actor 
for his towering performance in Lincoln, and also enters the record books as 
the first male actor to be a third-time victor, after winning for My Left Foot 
in 1990 and There Will Be Blood in 2008.

Day-Lewis is sometimes seen as a remote and slightly chilly figure, renowned 
for his obsessive preparation and for remaining in character throughout the 
filming – hard on his wife, the actor and director Rebecca Miller, given that 
the 16th president of the United States had a notoriously difficult 
relationship with his wife, who spent time in a mental hospital after his death.

"Since we got married 16 years ago, my wife Rebecca has lived with some very 
strange men," he told the audience. "Luckily she's the versatile one of the 
family and she's been the perfect companion to all of them."

Day-Lewis also won the audience accolade for the best joke when he insisted 
that Meryl Streep, presenter of his Oscar, had been Steven Spielberg's first 
choice to play AbrahamLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lincoln>, and 
in return he himself had been destined to play Margaret Thatcher.

Backstage after his win, he said he could not think of anyone else he urgently 
wants to play. "I need to lie down for a couple of years. It's really hard to 
imagine doing anything after this." He dismissed any attempt to label him the 
greatest actor of all time as "daft".

Ben Affleck's Argo, with an improbable but roughly real life plot about a CIA 
agent parachuted into Tehran to rescue six US embassy staff, under cover of 
making a fake movie, took the best film gong.

And the award was introduced by the starriest presentation team – a joint 
effort by Jack Nicholson, and Michelle Obama by live link from the White House. 
Although the film has not been shown in Iran, predictably news of the award has 
not gone down well there. Iranian state TV described it as "the most political 
Oscar ever".

There were surprises when the best director Oscar went to Ang Lee for The Life 
of Pi and when the best actress award, tipped to go to the oldest winner ever, 
86-year-oldEmmanuelle Riva, star of Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/10/emmanuelle-riva-actress-amour-oscars>
, went instead Jennifer Lawrence, 22, for her part in David O Russell's Silver 
Linings Playbook.

The young actor's ability to make fun of herself has come in useful in a 
series of wardrobe malfunctions: her multilayer Dior gown slipped alarmingly at 
the Screen Actor's Guild awards in January, and she soaked the hem of her 
Baftas gown on a London night of torrential rain.

At the Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> she tripped over her 
flouncy hem climbing the steps to accept her prize, but said merrily: "You guys 
are only standing up because I fell and you feel bad. That was embarrassing."

The singer Adele, again as predicted, won the best original song – with 
co-writer Paul Epworth – for her title track for Skyfall, the first Bond theme 
to win. Asked about her plans to celebrate,Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele>, who has a four-month-old son, said: 
"One glass of champagne and I'm gone."

Tom Hooper's film of Les Misérables was nominated for eight but took three 
awards, two technical, and a best supporting actress Oscar for Anne Hathaway as 
Fantine.

Les Misérables producer Eric Fellner expressed his satisfaction with the 
result, saying he was "thrilled" – especially as the company of which he is 
co-chair, Working Title, racked up four Oscars: the three for Les Misérables 
plus a best costume design for Anna Karenina.

"As a producer, it's particularly wonderful when the technicians and crew get 
recognition: for example, the Les Mis sound guys were given such a tough gig, 
so it's so great when they win an Oscar."

Down among the technical awards, when most of the stars had moved on to drink 
champagne and pretend to eat, the British designer Jacqueline Durran took the 
Oscar for Achievement in Costume for her ravishing designs for Anna Karenina, 
starring Keira Knightley.

Durran, who is based in London, has been nominated for Oscars twice before – 
for Pride and Prejudice in 2006 and Atonement in 2008, both also starring 
Knightley and directed by Joe Wright.

On Twitter Durran described Knightley as "a dream to dress", and her own 
reaction to her Oscar as "totally overwhelmed but absolutely delighted".

British producer Simon Chinn's Searching for Sugar Man about lost Detroit 
musician Sixto Rodriguez won the best documentary award. Chinn described the 
evening as a "surreal experience", adding: "It helps so much when you go to the 
money men if they have some faint idea who you are."

Worst jokes, by general agreement, were most of those made by the much 
heralded new host for the ceremony, Seth MacFarlane, creator of the cartoon 
Family Guy. He began with a song – We Saw Your Boobs – and continued with a 
spiel which theAtlantic magazine called  
<http://http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2013/02/the-banality-of-seth-macfarlanes-sexism-and-racism-at-the-oscars/273460/>
"stupid, boring and empty … patently sexist, racist and homophobic".

Rare opposing views came on Twitter from Crystal Harris, aka the third Mrs 
Hugh Hefner – "Loving the #oscars. @sethmacfarlane is a great host!" – and from 
the actor Russell Crowe, who tweeted: "Congratulations @sethmacfarlane, you did 
great mate, handled it all with grace, #topjob".
 