
Q I work for an organisation that has a contract with a large international 
catering firm which provides a restaurant service for staff. Unfortunately, as 
I was eating one of their salads at my desk, I bit down on a hard foreign 
object and it broke my tooth. I did not recover the foreign object - but I 
immediately emailed my boss to tell him that I had just broken a tooth and 
would need to go to the dentist. I then raised the matter with the catering 
staff after the weekend.

It turns out that the treatment will cost approximately £600 and less than 
half of that will be covered by my health insurance. I could be facing a fee of 
about £400 from my own pocket. I therefore raised this with the catering 
manager because I do not feel I should pay this. She filled in a form for the 
"technical investigation team" but the company has refused to even consider the 
case.

I have now requested to make a formal complaint - but my calls have been 
ignored or I have been told that as far as they are concerned the matter is 
done and dusted. I feel they are being deliberately obstructive and difficult.

Can they do this? Are they just making things difficult in the hope that I 
will give up? Surely an organisation their size has certain obligations?

JW

Q Your employer's catering firm will be insured for claims like yours and they 
should refer the matter to their insurers as soon as possible. The basis of 
your claim would be that the catering firm was negligent.

You would have to prove that the caterers had not exercised reasonable care in 
the preparation of your salad. The fact that you did not recover the foreign 
object weakens your case slightly. However, if any of your colleagues witnessed 
your experience this would be enough to prove it actually happened. And the 
fact you emailed your boss immediately strengthens your case.

You are entitled to compensation for the cost of the dental work together with 
an amount to cover your pain and suffering. Since there are safety issues here 
your employer should be doing more to help you especially as you ate the salad 
at your desk.

Take up your complaint with your human resources department and see if they 
will help. Failing that take the complaint to your local environmental health 
department at your local authority offices since they have powers to 
investigate the incident and the caterers could be fined and forced to 
compensate you.
 