
Children’s social care is about changing lives. It has the ability not just to 
improve the circumstances of vulnerable children but to transform them 
completely. That’s why as a government we’re determined that every child in the 
country, whatever their background, should have the opportunity to fulfil their 
potential. And children’s social care services have an essential role to play – 
whether that be by keeping children safe from harm, finding the best possible 
care when children cannot live at home, or creating the conditions that enable 
children to thrive and achieve.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who come into contact 
with the social care system have often had more to deal with in their short 
lives than many adults. I know from my own family’s experience – having grown 
up with 80 foster brothers and sisters, and two adopted brothers – the 
intrinsic value of secure, trusted relationships and the importance of having a 
stable family home. And that without the right support, too many children find 
themselves on the wrong track, denied the opportunity to become the person they 
could be.

So we are taking the next step to giving these children the chance of a better 
life, with the introduction of our children and social work bill. This builds 
on the foundations we have laid over the last six years. Over that time, we 
have changed the law so children in care can stay with their foster families 
after they turn 18; we have made radical strides in delivering a world-class 
adoption system; we have rolled out a £100m innovation programme to drive 
excellence in children’s social care practice, with a further £200m committed 
over the next four years; and we have supported the high-quality training and 
development of social workers through programmes likeFrontline 
<http://www.thefrontline.org.uk/> and Step Up 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/step-up-to-social-work-information-for-applicants> 
– so we can raise the status and standard of this crucial profession.


A new children and social work bill: views from the social care sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/18/children-social-work-bill-queens-speech>
But now is the time to go further. There is a real opportunity over the next 
four years to truly transform the quality of children’s social care services in 
England.

Although many children in and leaving care achieve fantastic things, we know 
that too many get left behind. The children and social work bill enshrines in 
law for the first time the responsibilities we have as a country towards these 
children, who often have no one to speak out on their behalf, to act as their 
“corporate parent”.

Being a good parent means having your child’s hopes, fears and aspirations in 
mind. That is what our new principles – and our “local offer for care leavers” 
– require. The care leaver covenant will reflect society’s collective 
responsibility towards all care leavers, and I’ll be asking businesses, 
charities and the rest of the public sector to set out how they will support 
young people coming out of care. Parental responsibilities don’t end at 18 or 
21, just as a young person starts to make their way in the world. That is why 
this bill provides all care leavers up to age 25 with access to a personal 
adviser, who will guide and support them on anything from applying for jobs to 
finding a first place to live.


The bill also represents the next important step in our plans to transform the 
adoption system. Over the last two years, the number of decisions for adoption 
have almost halved. We know that up and down the country, grandparents, 
relatives and foster parents do a fantastic job caring for children – and we 
will continue to support them in doing so. But we also know that some children 
are being put in unsuitable placements with relatives whom authorities are not 
confident will be able to look after the child for the long term. This isn’t 
right. So the bill will improve the way decisions about placements and 
adoptions are taken, making sure they are always in the best interests of the 
child and take account of the impact of the abuse and neglect they may have 
experienced, as well as providing adopted children with the additional support 
they need to thrive in school.

Another important part of our reforms to children’s social care is learning 
and innovation. We want leading local authorities to trial new ways of working 
so they can truly drive innovation in the best interests of children – even 
where this means stepping outside the existing statutory framework.

Ayeeshia Jane Smith's murder must not be used to score points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/19/ayeesha-jane-smith-murder-blame-politics>
The bill also introduces a new, centralised system for reviewing serious 
incidents, which will be overseen by an independent panel. All too often we see 
the same mistakes repeated across serious case reviews. These new arrangements 
mark a new approach, which will be better able to extract genuine, high-impact 
national learning and clear proposals for doing things better.


Finally, but perhaps most importantly, this bill represents a step change for 
the social work profession. Excellent social workers can truly transform 
children’s lives for the better: they are the crucial ingredient of a 
successful children’s social care system. None of the other measures in the 
bill will have the impact we need them to without the skill, hard work and 
commitment of social workers.


As a government we want to raise the status of the profession, embedding the 
highest standards and supporting our workforce to achieve them. The bill will 
set the framework for a new regulator with a relentless focus on raising the 
quality of social work education, training and practice in both children’s and 
adults’ services and overseeing the delivery of child and family social worker 
accreditation.


We will build on that progress by helping to attract the most capable people 
into social work. We won’t rest until we have created a world-leading 
profession with the confidence and backing to make the right decisions for 
children.


This is not about reform for reform’s sake – and it will not undo all the 
changes already underway. This bill is about continuing on our commitment right 
across government to make sure every child can fulfil their potential 
regardless of their background.


Our commitment to protecting the most vulnerable in our society is matched by 
our ambition to ensure the most disadvantaged children have the brightest 
possible future. I am not prepared to accept anything other than the best for 
all these children and will continue to stand firmly in their corner.


 * Edward Timpson is the children and families minister 
Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 