
This year's Aventis Prizes for Science Books general prize has gone to an 
outsider. Favourite Robert Winston was pipped at the post by journalist Philip 
Ball, whose book, Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another, was given odds 
of 8/1 - the longest on the shortlist - by bookmakers William Hill.

Ball's book, published by Heinemann, invites us first to examine our own 
behaviour - how we vote, what we buy, where we live - then goes on to 
demonstrate the extent to which we can comprehend human actions when we cease 
to analyse the behaviour of individuals and look rather to the impact of 
hundreds, thousands or millions of human decisions. The award, worth £10,000, 
was presented at a ceremony at the Royal Society this evening by the Society's 
president, Lord May of Oxford, and Dr Dirk Oldenburg, chairman of the board of 
management of the Aventis Foundation.

The judges selected Ball's book from a strong shortlist of six, including The 
Human Mind by Robert Winston and Richard Dawkins' study of evolutionary 
biology, The Ancestor's Tale. The chairman of this year's judges, Bill Bryson, 
who won the 2004 general prize for A Short History of Nearly Everything, was 
joined on the panel by forecaster and presenter Lisa Burke; Sian Ede, UK 
authority on art and science interactions; broadcaster and neurophysiologist 
Mark Lythgoe; and Ruth Padel, chair of the UK Poetry Society. "This is a 
wide-ranging and dazzlingly informed book about the science of interactions," 
said Bryson of Critical Mass. "I can promise you'll be amazed."

Lord May of Oxford was also full of praise for Ball's book. "Aventis winners 
excel at bringing complex issues to broad audiences in an exciting and engaging 
manner," he said. "Critical Mass reflects the high calibre of writing with 
which the Aventis Prizes have become synonymous." Previous general prize 
winners include Stephen Hawking, Robert Kunzig, Stephen Jay Gould and Chris 
McManus.

Despite his disappointment in the general prize category, Robert Winston did 
not leave the ceremony empty handed. He took the junior prize, also worth 
£10.000, for his debut book for children, What Makes Me, Me? (Dorling 
Kindersley), an exploration of human biology and genetics that debates 
questions such as "Why do we have hairy fingers?" and "Which of my parents is 
to blame for my fear of spiders?"

A judging panel, chaired by Dr Tanya Byron, chose a shortlist of six titles 
before handing over the final judging decision to 800 young people in 75 groups 
across the UK. Dr Byron described What Makes Me, Me? As "exceptional", and 
offered her "congratulations on a fantastic book", while one of the judges, 
12-year-old Melis, said simply, "I didn't close the book until it was done."
 