
There are footballers who respond to a foul night in the way that other men 
bask in the sun. As the winter wind scoured the pitch and the mercury cowered 
in the thermometer, it was victory as usual forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> but not in the customary manner. 
Sven-Goran Eriksson's team, protecting Michael Owen's goal, could only be as 
neat as unpredictable conditions and frozen feet permitted.

This, particularly in a second half where Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> pushed gamely downfield, put 
the emphasis on men who would detest football if it ever became a summer sport. 
Nicky Butt, for instance, was instrumental in ensuring that Carlos Alberto's 
side scarcely had a chance in the game. Azeri moves cracked like thin ice.

With a second win on foreign soil to follow the defeat of Poland, England have 
developed their control of Group Six by moving on to 10 points. In addition to 
having talents denied to the other contenders, Eriksson has a broader squad. 
They could play in a variety of ways and were well equipped to tough it out in 
Baku.

If the margin was slender, this was a much firmer display than those given 
when, say, England scrambled to 2-1 wins over Slovakia and Macedonia en route 
to Euro 2004. Jermaine Jenas fitted in as if he had been designed for the 
responsibilities on the right of the minimalist three-man midfield.

This, however, was not only his first start with England but also his debut in 
international competition. For 71 minutes, he showed athleticism and was 
prudent on the ball. It seems likely that Jenas found it easier to embrace a 
downbeat night such as this than the suspended David Beckham would have done.

With Frank Lampard as intent as ever on imposing himself, Eriksson's trust in 
a reduced midfield was vindicated even though Azerbaijan had believed they 
could put a numerical advantage in that area to good use. If the Swede felt a 
twinge of disappointment it will have arisen from the shortage of chances 
despite the abundance of forwards.

The Tofik Bakhramov Stadium may well get a plaque as the place where the 
normally brazen Wayne Rooney first appeared subdued. There would be no 
difficulty in picking out an incident here or there that highlighted his 
technique, but there was hardly any exuberance.

Just before the interval, a pass back to the goalkeeper saw Azerbaijan concede 
a free-kick to the left of the goalmouth. On this occasion Rooney could do no 
more than slam it into a pack of players. When he did hit a 30-yard shot from 
another set piece, with nine minutes remaining, Jahangir Hasanzade dived to 
push it away comfortably.

These were not failings by Rooney, merely instances of ordinary experience in 
an already spectacular career. It will be healthy for the Manchester United 
signing to encounter them and useful, too, for England to realise that they 
will not always be treated as Rooney's retinue.

Owen, of course, can claim the evening as his own. It is premature to declare 
that he has come back to his best, but his worth was not to be questioned here 
or against Wales last Saturday. That should be considered a starting point for 
a man who now goes back to prove himself in Madrid.

In the 22nd minute, England moved the ball well from Gary Neville on the right 
to his fellow full-back Ashley Cole on the other flank. The cross was deep and 
put Owen at an advantage as he rose to meet it with a header which found the 
net after clipping the body of Hasanzade.

Earlier the goalkeeper had leapt to his right to push wide an attempt by 
Lampard which had deflected off Owen. It was like a parody of the incident that 
ended, after long and sober consideration, with the Chelsea midfielder being 
credited with the opening goal against Wales.

Owen, though, was to give everyone something else to focus on. With Rooney 
staying fairly deep and Jermain Defoe, after a sprightly start, dropping from 
sight, there was a reminder that the Real Madrid man is England's senior 
striker. He now has 28 goals from 65 international appearances.

Azerbaijan, by contrast, posed little threat at all even if Anatoly Ponomaryov 
had an appealingly old-fashioned 70s aspect as a long-haired mid fielder who 
likes to go on rangy runs. He did not get far enough with them, usually checked 
before he could slice open the back four.

Rio Ferdinand attended well to any stirrings by the mediocre forwards and Paul 
Robinson had only one significant contribution to make. The goalkeeper was 
decisive, blocking with his feet, when Samir Aliyev challenged for a loose ball 
at a 51st-minute free-kick.

England took a second consecutive clean sheet, doing so with little 
difficulty, even if Sol Campbell was far from his best. He has served Eriksson 
so well that the sort of lapse here that led to a booking for Nicky Butt will 
not be held against him.

All the same, Campbell himself realises that, with John Terry and Ledley King 
around, he will have to be at his best to retain his status in the years ahead. 
If that makes him pensive, Eriksson can reflect contentedly that England may be 
bound for a higher level in world football.
 