
Inside the house his father's clocks were striking the hour. Faintly, the 
chimes carried to where he stood in the garden, a lank young man in a summer 
sweater and shapeless blue trousers, wiping the lenses of his glasses with the 
corner of a crumpled handkerchief. He had spent the last hour with the hose 
watering the flower-beds and giving the ground around the younger trees a good 
soaking, as he had been instructed to. Now, having carefully coiled the hose, 
he made his way back towards the house, his progress shadowed by a cat that 
pushed through the stems of delphiniums and peonies and oriental poppies. At 
the top of the house, the light in Alice's room shone dully from between 
half-open curtains.

It was the dusk of his third day back at Brooklands, the house in the West 
Country with its grey stone walls, brown-tiled roof and rotting summerhouse, 
where he had spent the first eighteen years of his life. His own small flat in 
London was shut and locked, and his neighbour, Mr Bequa, whose clothes carried 
their own atmosphere of black tobacco and failed cooking, had agreed to forward 
the mail, though there would not be much. Bequa had even come down into the 
street to wave him off, and knowing where he was going and why, had done so 
with gestures of extravagant melancholy, -'Goodbye, Alec friend! Good heart! 
Goodbye!'

Wandsworth Bridge, Parsons Green, Hammersmith. Then west along the M4 past 
out-of-town superstores and fields of rape. A journey he had made so many times 
since Alice was first diagnosed he often completed the entire trip in a daze of 
inattention, startled to find himself rounding the last corner by the poultry 
farm, the sky ahead of him falling in luminous sheets towards the estuary and 
Wales. But this time, as each familiar landmark had dwindled in the rear-view 
mirror, then passed out of sight, it had seemed irretrievable, and carrying his 
suitcase into the hallway at Brooklands he had known with utter certainty that 
it was his last true homecoming, and that one half of his life was about to 
slough off like tons of earth in a landslide. For fifteen minutes he stood 
there surrounded by the soft weight of coats and hats, old boots, old tennis 
pumps, staring at the over-vivid snap on the wall by the door into the house - 
himself, Larry and Alice; Stephen must have taken it - arm in arm in the snowy 
orchard twenty years ago. And he had bowed his head, hearing from upstairs the 
chatter of his mother's radio and the rasping of her cough, and had wondered to 
himself what could possibly comfort him. Where on earth he might look for 
consolation or ease.

Coming from the garden, the house was entered by descending a short flight of 
mossy steps from the lawn to the terrace, and opening the glass doors into the 
kitchen. Here, by the worn mat, Alec slipped off his shoes and went through the 
house to the stairs, hoping that Alice would already have fallen asleep and 
would not need him. She had refused to have a room made up for her on the 
ground floor, despite everyone - Dr Brando, the visiting nurse Una O'Connell, 
and even Mrs Samson, the woman who for as long as Alec could remember had come 
in one morning a week to clean the house - saying how much better it would be, 
how much easier on good days to get into the garden. Wasn't there a perfectly 
suitable room downstairs, undisturbed for years other than by the daily swipe 
of sunlight across the mirror? But Alice had smiled at them all like a child 
made special and irreproachable by illness, and said that she was too used to 
the view, to the potato field, the church, the line of hills in the distance 
(like a boy, she once said, lying on his belly in the grass). And anyway, her 
bedroom had always been upstairs. It was too late to start 'rearranging the 
entire house'. So the subject was dropped, though for an angry moment Alec had 
wanted to tell her what it was like to watch her, that twenty-minute ordeal, 
hauling herself a step at a time towards the landing, her fingers clutching at 
the banister like talons.

Some measures she had agreed to. She took sit-down showers instead of baths, 
had a raised plastic seat on the toilet, and on Alec's last visit he had rigged 
up a bell, running the wire down the stairs from the bedroom and screwing the 
bell-housing to a beam by the kitchen door. There had even been some laughter 
when they tested it, Alice pressing the white knob by her bed (complaining that 
it sounded like the dive klaxon on a submarine) while Alec moved around the 
house to check the bell's range, and then went out to the garden, giving the 
thumbs-up to Una, who leaned dashingly from the bedroom window. But by evening, 
Alice had decided that the bell was 'a silly thing', and 'quite unnecessary', 
and she had looked at Alec as if its installation had been tactless, yet 
another item among the paraphernalia of her sickness. More inescapable proof of 
her inescapable condition.

She was not asleep when he went in. She lay propped against the pillows in her 
nightgown and quilted robe, reading a book. The room was very warm. The heat of 
the sun was in the timbers of the roof, and the radiator was on high, so that 
everything sweated its particular smell, a stuffiness half intimate, half 
medical, that hung in the air like a sediment. Vases of cut flowers, some from 
the garden, some from friends, added a note of hothouse sweetness, and there 
was a perfume she sprayed as a kind of luxurious air-freshener, which masked 
very little, but which Alec could always taste in his mouth for an hour after 
leaving the room.

Cleanliness - even the illusion of it - was an obsession with her now, as 
though the sickness were something, some lapse in hygiene, that might be hidden 
behind veils of scent. For an hour each morning and evening she washed herself 
with catlike attention in the en-suite bathroom, the only real physical work 
she still did. But no soaps or night creams or lavender shower gel could 
entirely hide what filtered out from the disasters inside of her, though 
nothing would ever be quite as disturbing as that first course of chemotherapy 
the winter of two years ago, when she had sat wrapped in picnic rugs on the 
sofa in the living room, alien and wretched and smelling like a child's 
chemistry set. When her hair had grown again, it had sprouted brilliant white, 
and was now a weight of frost-coloured locks that reached to the mid-point of 
her back. This, she said - the one thing remaining to her she could still be 
vain about - was the reason she had refused more treatment when she came out of 
remission, and of all the people who attended on her now, it was her long-time 
hairdresser, Toni Cuskic, who had the greatest power to soothe. They had a new 
arrangement: there was no question of Alice making the twenty-minute trip into 
Nailsea, so once a week Toni drove out from the salon to pull her heavy brush 
the length of Alice's hair, while Alice tilted her face to the light, eyes 
shut, smiling as she listened to the gossip from the shop. Sometimes Toni 
brought her poodle, Miss Sissy, a show bitch with tight black curls, and Alice 
would stroke the animal's narrow skull and let it lick her wrists, until it 
grew bored of her and wondered off to sniff at some stain or savoury relic 
around the fringes of the bed.

'Everything all right, Mum?' He was standing just inside the door, hands in 
pockets, very slightly rocking on the balls of his feet.

'Fine, dear.'

'Need anything?'

She shook her head. 

'Sure?'

'Thank you, dear.'

'Cup of tea?'

'No, thank you.'

'I've done the garden.'

'Good.'

'How about some hot milk?' 

'No, thank you.'

'You haven't forgotten your Zopiclone?'

'No, dear, I haven't. Do try not to fuss.'

She frowned at him, the old headmistress again, bothered by some wittering 
pupil. A go-away look.

'I'll let you read,' he said. 'Look in later.'

She nodded, the movement triggering off a fit of coughing, but as he moved 
towards her (what was he going to do?) she waved him away and he went out, 
listening, from the landing until she was quiet, then going slowly down the 
stairs, blushing from an emotion he could not quite identify.

On the wall at the bottom of the stairs, where it could not be avoided, hung 
the Perspex-framed double-page profile of Larry, from the US celebrity magazine 
PLEASE! Made up mostly of photographs, the feature was entitled 'America's 
Favorite Valentine' (heart-shaped point over the final i), and showed, on the 
first page, an old Press Association shot of the nineteen-year-old Larry 
holding up his racquet to the stands after beating world number seven Eric 
Moberg at the French Open in 1980. Below appeared a heavier, browner Larry, 
leaning against a. silver jaguar in front of the Manhattan Flatiron building, 
dressed in the type of clothes a 'successful young bonds dealer might wear to 
the golf club, this from the time he worked for Nathan Slater's advertising 
circus in New York. Then there was the inevitable still from an episode of Sun 
Valley, in which Larry, white-coated and waxy-faced, was plunging 
defibrillators on to the chest of an attractive cardiac victim. But the largest 
of the photographs - filling the greater part of the right-hand page - was a 
family portrait of Larry and Kirsty and the three-year-old Ella gathered on a 
couch in their 'beautiful home in San Francisco's North Beach district'. Larry 
has his arm around Kirsty, who looks cute and excited, the lucky girl who 
landed Sun Valley's 'perfect gentleman', while Ella is wedged between them, 
though with an expression so determinedly mournful it was not difficult to hear 
the pleas of the photographer (bylined as Bob Medici) - 'Can we get the little 
lady to smile too? How about it, huh?' But even at three, Ella had been a tough 
child to plead with, and ever since the picture had gone up, Mrs Samson, 
adjusting the angle of the frame or wiping the Perspex with her yellow duster, 
could not keep herself from muttering, 'Bless . . .' or 'Shame . . .', and 
furrowing her brow, as though the child's displeasure somehow 'amounted to a 
judgment on them all.

In the kitchen Alec took from his back pocket the piece of folded paper with 
columns in Una's handwriting that detailed the drugs Alice was to take, 
together with the times and the dosages. Antidepressants, anti-emetics, 
analgesics, laxatives, steroids. She had a plastic box beside the bed, its 
inside divided into segments - blue for the morning, orange for the afternoon 
and evening - but illness, fatigue, the pills themselves perhaps, had begun to 
create lapses, lacunae in her concentration, and on Alec's first day down, Una, 
sitting beside him on the not-quite-even bench outside the summerhouse, had 
suggested that he discreetly oversee the filling and emptying of the box, and 
he had agreed immediately, eager for a chore that would not make him feel 
incompetent. Now he made a small tick on the list, picked up his leather 
satchel from the kitchen table, and went on to the terrace.

A pale half-moon hung in the blue of the twilight, and in some quarter of the 
sky the comet Hale-Bop, that vast event of ice and dust, was making its passage 
back towards the celestial equator. In the early spring he had often watched it 
from among the TV aerials on the roof of his flat, and had found it hard to 
believe that its great ellipse would not provoke some happening in the world, 
or many happenings - countless individual fates falling in an astral rain from 
the comet's wake - but for the moment at least the sky was unexceptional, the 
usual faultless machine with nothing extraordinary or dangerous happening in it.

He lit the storm lantern and looped the wire handle over a metal bracket 
beside the kitchen doors, for though it would not be quite dark for another 
hour, he liked the tang of the paraffin and the companionable hiss of the 
filament. He intended to work. Alcohol did not agree with him and he had never 
learned how to smoke. Work was his refuge, and sitting in one of the old canvas 
chairs he tugged the manuscript, dictionaries and marker pens from the satchel 
and began to read, holding the script close to his glasses, struggling at first 
to concentrate, his mind still snared in the room above his head where his 
mother lay. But at last the work drew him down into the orderly double-spaced 
world of the text, and under his breath he sounded the words of a language he 
had made half his own.
 