
Asus, a Taiwanese technology company with big ambitions in the mobile device 
market, has advanced what was already an innovative notion: a combination phone 
and tablet in which a smartphone slides into a slot in the tablet and serves as 
its mobile data connection. The upcoming hybrid system, called thePadfone 2 
<http://www.asus.com/Mobile/PadFone2/>, is an updated version of an earlier 
model, and is much lighter.

Still, it's sizeable. The phone and tablet boast 4.7-inch and 10.1-inch 
screens respectively, though together they are said to weigh about the same as 
aniPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>. A key value proposition 
for many users will be using one data plan for both devices – a genuine 
advantage given the mobile carriers' tendency to gouge their customers for 
every spare dollar.

I can imagine why a serious road warrior might find the Padfone 2 a compelling 
product, especially when it's coupled with a keyboard. As theAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> operating system advances, 
there's more potential to use these devices for a variety of computing chores, 
though it's not fully ready yet.

For my part, though I love the idea, I'm not likely to buy a Padfone. My 
current gear includes a large-screen phone and a 7-inch tablet, which I find to 
be a better size for daily activities (in Asian cities I've visited recently, 
I've noticed lots of people using 5-inch mini-tablets; we all have different 
ideas about what works best once we have a device larger than a phone).

Even though combining devices is a fine one, especially to avoid paying greedy 
carriers twice for essentially the same service, there's an even more logical 
way to do it than whatAsus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus> 
offers. The phone should be tiny, with two functions only: voice and data 
(which will soon be combined in any case on advanced networks). Then use the 
phone as a tether or wi-fi hotspot, and do pretty much everything else on a 
tablet, small or large.

My Nexus 7 is wi-fi only, and I often run it using my phone as the connection 
to the Internet. Mymobile carrier <http://ting.com>, unlike most, believes that 
data is data – period. And I pay for data on an overall plan; I'm not required 
to make additional payments just to use the phone as a hotspot or tethering 
device. Most American mobile carriers, especially the major ones, hate this 
idea, of course, and they insist on separate tethering plans unless customers 
pay extortionate rates that "allow" them to do the logical thing.

I'm encouraging my current carrier – and would encourage all carriers – to 
push manufacturers to create small, limited-function Android handsets for such 
purposes, and then to sell bundled packages that include small phones with 
tablets (large and small as users prefer), with software tweaks – such as 
automatically switching the phone's hotspot function on when the tablet tries 
to connect to a digital network – to ensure that they work well together. I 
suspect there would be a non-trivial customer base for this setup.

One useful aspect to doing things this way is that it can be more secure. When 
I connect my tablet to any wi-fi network, I immediately then connect to a 
virtual private network (VPN) that encrypts all traffic over the air, including 
email, browsing and other connections (a well-managed combination system like 
the one I'm describing should include VPN connections by default, in my view).

The drawback, of course, is that lots of people would rather just do 
everything in one device. And there are occasions when I'd prefer to just 
glance at email or check my Twitter feeds on the phone rather that pull out a 
tablet. But as a frequent traveler, one of my main goals is reducing weight and 
bulk in what I carry.

Sooner than later, we'll be separating radios from screens in any case. Using 
the phone's radio as a frequent on-the-move connection to the Internet is only 
going to make more sense in the future. Screens on small slabs are not going to 
be the way we see the cyber-world for much longer. Google'sGlass project 
<https://plus.google.com/+projectglass> – heads-up displays inside eyeglasses – 
and other systems like it are going to win adherents quickly as the technology 
gets more robust and easy to use.

The notion that everything has to be part of a single device is a vestige of a 
technology past that is quickly coming to a close. I'd like to get started now, 
and hope the mobile industry will accommodate me.
 