
I have a T-shirt that was given to me on the day England won the Ashes in 
2005. An enterprising chap had rush-printed a load with dates of the games and 
the celebratory slogan "I can now die happy". It captured the mood at the 
ground perfectly, but now sits in my chest of drawers like a cotton-mix Greek 
chorus. Sport will never let you die happy. Its ability to cause pain mutates 
endlessly, like that Hydra that Hercules fought, where he chopped off one head 
only for two to grow back in its place.

Which is why, only 23 days and eight hours after hitting the greatest high of 
my spectating career (Ashes euphoria, 24 years, yada yada), I could be found 
curled foetus-like on my sofa, cursing a world that created tennis. The first 
brutal set of Andy Murray vNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> had left me punch-drunk, and 
somewhere in the second I'd forgotten how to breathe. Other people manage the 
tension of oncoming defeat by ranting and raving at the screen; me, I prefer to 
internalise all that emotion until the suppressed screams are coursing around 
my bloodstream, the adrenaline in my mouth tastes of almonds, and I'm clutching 
at my chest like someone in the throes of the Five Pointed Palm Exploding Heart 
Technique.

It was almost inevitable that at this point, when I was little more than a 
sheaf of exposed nerve endings, a cheery friend would breeze into the room and 
want to watch alongside me, and even – spot the mistake – talk about the game. 
To describe the mortal agonies I believed myself to be suffering every time she 
drew attention to Murray's first-serve stats, exclaimed at a mis-hit, or passed 
comment on the greenness of his shirt, would embarrass both of us; suffice it 
to say, I retreated into an irascible, miserly silence that channelled the 
Grinch, Silas Marner and Ebenezer Scrooge into one flawless and potentially 
infinite sulk.

This isn't a justification of thoroughly shame-making behaviour, but I confess 
it hoping that I'm not alone. Whether it's the eye-rolling irritation of 
watching a footie match with your well-meaning but clueless auntie, or the mute 
outrage of being stuck in a pub full of rival fans, we've all been forced to 
sit through games in situations that have driven us mad, often with people who 
have no idea that they're behind the steering wheel. Some of them may even be 
our best friends. There are people who I would happily give a kidney to 
tomorrow but I couldn't trust myself to watch 10 minutes of an England v 
Andorra friendly with them.

Ask yourself who is the worst person you've had to watch sport with, and they 
will quite naturally align into one of two types: the know-nothing and the 
know-all. Of the former, one story that struck an empathic chord is that of a 
cricket fan who took his brother to the last day of the 2005 Edgbaston Test, 
which, as he points out, was one of the most thrilling sporting climaxes of his 
lifetime. As Australia's 10th-wicket stand got closer and closer to snatching 
an excruciating, last-minute victory, and every person in the ground held their 
breath, his brother peppered him with questions about rules, tactics and 
terminology, and developed the phenomenally irritating habit of shouting 
"Goal!" whenever there was a wicket shout. "I was a broken man when Geraint 
Jones took the final catch," sighed my friend, "but probably not in the same 
way as everyone else."

More charitable sorts than me would enjoy the opportunity to educate a 
know-nothing. In my experience charity's the last thing on your mind when 
you're missing the crucial action at the other end while your companion directs 
your attention to a physio walking round the pitch and asks if he's someone 
famous. Some admirable people have wells of patience for this kind of thing: 
these are the sporting world's natural pastors, happy to welcome anyone into 
the flock, always on hand to demonstrate the offside rule with an upturned 
chopping board and a Jamie Oliver Flavour Shaker. Still, even they can't 
legislate for the know-nothing's caprice. In one family I know, father and son 
are passionate Man United fans driven to distraction by Mum's 
tenderheartedness, which demands that the moment their team score, she prays 
for the other side.

There's not much you can do about the know-all, however, a far more 
frustrating prospect. These are people for whom television commentary is a mere 
foil for their own, infinitely more enlightening thoughts, and for whom 
referees and umpires are all one-eyed bogeymen. My mum was in her 40s when she 
bought her first season ticket – to watch Bath at The Rec – and in her first 
game she found herself seated in front of an older woman who yelled a tireless 
stream of advice at the players and officials. Unfortunately, as Mum discovered 
next game, this woman also had a season ticket. Not to mention a pair of 
wardrobe-size lungs, an unimaginative vocabulary, and the staying power of a 
second-row. Mum lasted out the year, but only just, and woe betide anyone who 
offers her criticism from just behind her right shoulder.
 