
The Devil and Miss Prym
Paulo Coelho 
HarperCollins £7.99, pp201 

Miss Prym has been left behind. She is stuck in a dead-end job in a dead-end 
village. Her friends have married and moved away, and she is left picking up 
strangers at the village's only hotel's only bar, in the vain hope that one of 
them will take them with her.

Until, that is, a stranger comes to visit with a bag full of gold bars and a 
more intriguing proposition. Nobody in the village really knows who he is or 
where he is from, but his challenge will change them for ever. The Devil and 
Miss Prym is a more complex narrative than The Alchemist , Paulo Coelho's most 
celebrated novel, yet once again his apparently simple parable - the story of 
Miss Prym's fight with the Devil, herself, and her neighbours - reveals a wider 
quandary: are human beings inherently good or evil?

 Pobby And Dingan/ Specks In The Sky
Ben Rice
Vintage £6.99, pp147 

Pobby and Dingan , Ben Rice's debut novel, first appeared in Granta , and 
Specks in the Sky in the New Yorker . Here they appear back to back (turn the 
book upside down and back to front, and voilà! you have another one).

Rarely have second helpings been so welcome. Pobby and Dingan , set in the 
opal capital of Australia, is the story of the disappearance of two invisible 
friends; Specks in the Sky , set in a camel safari centre in America, involves 
a mother and her two daughters who find themselves visited by a team of crack 
parachutists.

Rice's characters are simply and vividly drawn, and his narratives, both 
related through the eyes of a child, are brilliantly paced. By turns, quirky, 
shocking, moving, funny, fantastical and all too real, these are beautifully 
crafted stories from an almost astonishingly gifted writer.

Bel Canto 
Ann Patchett
Fourth Estate £6.99, pp318 

 Mr Hokosawa, chairman of Nansei, the largest electronics corporation in 
Japan, agreed to cross the world for a party for the President of an 
insignificant Latin American country - on his birthday, no less - for one 
reason only: to hear his favourite soprano sing. How was he to know that the 
event would be singled out by terrorists attempting to kidnap the President? 
How were the terrorists to know that the man himself wasn't there, due to the 
party clashing with his favourite soap opera?

In the President's absence, the terrorists settle for the guests instead, and 
the bungled kidnap attempt turns into a siege, creating an unlikely social 
gathering with equally unlikely results.

Ann Patchett's novel is filled with suspense and romance, wit and quietly 
poignant observation. A great read.
 