
 Once Upon The River Love
Andrei Makine
Penguin, £6.99

Three boys live and dream in a Siberian village so remote that the magical 
West is any place on the other side of Lake Baikal. Muffled in the seemingly 
endless winter snows, stifled by their history and shadows of a bright 
communist future they fumble for an escape. Their way out is provided by a 
daily eight-hour crossing of the taiga on snowshoes to watch Jean-Paul Belmondo 
films at the Red October cinema. On one level Makine writes coming-of-age novel 
which sings with the poetry of an unfamiliar world, but through the images 
which fill Dmitri's mind he has created a wondrous, personal explanation of how 
the illusions of Soviet ideology were broken.

Buy Once Upon The River Love at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502323111,00.html>

 The Book of Saladin
Tariq Ali
Verso, £10

 Salah-al-Din has had a bad press in the western historical narrative - a true 
"barbarian" who had the temerity to seize Jerusalem back from the Christian 
crusaders. But as Ali demonstrates in this second part of his quartet of Islam 
novels, there is always another perspective on history. Saladin's life, the 
ways of his court and the intrigues among his people are told through the eyes 
of his Jewish scribe. Episodic, redolent of Middle Eastern epic story cycles, 
The Book of Saladin rearranges the Euro-centric geographical and historical 
world view. Ali's revisionist aim is clear enough, but he tells a story rich 
with human passion and poetry to be above all entertaining as well as 
illuminating.

Buy The Book of Saladin at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501210639,00.html>

 The Right Man
Nigel Planer
Arrow, £5.99

 Does anyone want to read another bad relationship novel? Nigel Planer enters 
a crowded market with a story about a niceish bloke who gets dumped on by all 
the women in his life. Guy Mullin's whole world is about nurturing until one 
summer his dependents break free leaving him to a camp-bed and a heavy dose of 
self-pity in his Soho offices. Planer is not an accomplished novelist as yet - 
he clutters up the plot with too much detail about Soho clubs and Beeb execs - 
but his descriptions of daughter-less afternoons in parks and a therapeutic 
visit to a prostitute have surprising pathos which make this a well-timed reply 
to the all-men-are-bastards crowd.

Buy The Right Man at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501008268,00.html>

 The Lady Tree
Christie Dickason
HarperCollins, £6.99

Tulip fever returns in this historical romance which combines country living, 
garden design and good housekeeping. John Nightingale has spent 11 years 
husbanding his uncle's Hampshire estate and keeping the peasants content, but 
when his cousin inherits, Nightingale's past looks likely to scupper him. Much 
adventure on the bulbs' futures market in Amsterdam, a baddie by the name of 
Malise, the love of women both good and wicked and a wonderful illustration of 
how carrying your wealth in coinage impedes a quick getaway follows until our 
hero comes right. Dickason knows her bulbs in this diverting historical 
flummery.

Buy The Lady Tree at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,502307409,00.html>
 