
As Boris Johnson finally digressed on Friday from a lengthy dissection of the 
Latin derivation of the wordagitos – the three symbols that represents the 
Paralympic movement – he caught the mood of all those involved in the Games.

Thousands of athletes, support staff, media and officials pouring into London 
have described their excitement at the Games "coming home" to the place where 
they were born, the thrill of anticipation of 11 days of elite sport and 
varying degrees of hope that they will lead to a lasting shift in perceptions.

More than anything, they share a belief that the fever which gripped the 
country during the Olympics and the warmth felt for London by the rest of the 
world will be sustained through theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> that follow.

"The Paralympic Games will be something that captures people's imaginations 
this year in a way that four years ago the Beijing Games didn't quite," the 
London mayor tells theObserver. "For some people it will be even more exciting 
and some people will be switched on in a way they weren't to the Olympic 
Games," says Johnson, who is particularly looking forward to the "aggro" of 
wheelchair basketball.

Ade Adepitan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ade-adepitan>, the Paralympian 
who won a bronze medal in that sport in Athens and will front Channel 4's 
prime-time coverage alongside Clare Balding, says the organisers are in a 
better position than even an evangelist like him could have dreamed.

Even before the giddy success of Team GB at the Olympics turbocharged demand, 
organisers had sold more Paralympic tickets than for any Games in history. Over 
2.3m tickets have been sold, with around 200,000 more due to be drip-fed on to 
the website as venue configurations are finalised. Around half of those tickets 
will have been sold by the time 116 teams travel through the night to deliver 
the Paralympic flame from Stoke Mandeville to Stratford for Wednesday's opening 
ceremony.

Locog have driven demand by offering good value tickets and encouraging 
families and large groups – the London Games organisers will raise just £25m 
from Paralympic ticket sales compared with over £500m from the Olympics – but 
the very fact that everyone who is there has paid to get in is a first for the 
Paralympics.

Lord Coe, the chairman, has long argued that the British public "get" 
Paralympic sport, feeling that an umbilical connection with the birth of the 
movement in Stoke Mandeville in 1948, as dramatised recently by the BBC, would 
mean people turning out in their droves. He has been proved right.

Adepitan says: "We're in a better position than even I could ever have 
imagined. If you'd have told me in 2005 that we'd have almost sold out the 
tickets, that there'd be billboards featuring Paralympians all over the country 
and such a buzz about the Games, I'd have been pretty sceptical."

The 4,200 athletes competing at the Games will, believe those at the sharp 
end, not only enchant the hundreds of thousands in the venues and the millions 
more that Channel 4 hopes will tune into 150-plus hours of coverage but 
challenge perceptions of disability more widely.

There are hopes that the sheer volume of coverage will mean the long-running 
debate about whether the focus should be purely on the elite sporting action on 
show or dwell also on the "backstories" of those involved will become null and 
void, just as the acres of coverage devoted to Mo Farah dealt with the minutae 
of his tactics and training as well as his background and life story.

"I think this is going to be the first really big mass-market Paralympics," 
says the sports minister, Hugh Robertson. "If you look at the number of tickets 
sold, if you look at the way people here relate to the Paralympics for 
historical reasons and because of the success of the British team, I think this 
will be the Games that really catapult it forward."

Philip Craven, the Bolton-born five-times Paralympian who is president of the 
International Paralympic Committee, says: "Thinking back to my economics 
A-levels, Adam Smith talked about the take-off into sustained growth and I 
think that is what London is going to provide for the Paralympic movement. It 
is a wonderful moment to live through."

Robertson said that funding for Paralympic sport was already guaranteed to Rio 
and argued the impetus from the London Games had already led to greater 
integration at elite level and in schools, as well as dedicated funding for the 
grassroots for the first time.

"There is no one killer bullet in that. But if you look at it as a package, it 
is a significant step forward for disability sport. If you're a young aspiring 
Paralympian watching at home, I'm absolutely confident you'll have a much, much 
better chance of succeeding in your sport than any of your predecessors would 
have done."

Tim Hollingsworth, the British Paralympic Association chief executive, says 
the "L-word" has been banned at its offices. "Legacy means you have reached a 
point that you are looking to sustain. We certainly don't think we've reached a 
point we want to sustain. This is something we see as a launchpad, so the word 
that works for us is momentum."

The first priority would be maintaining the level of elite performance that 
has seen the British team finish in the top two in the medal table at the last 
three Games in the face of ever increasing competition from around the world.

In return for the £49m in Lottery and exchequer funding invested in Paralympic 
sport over the past four years,ParalympicsGB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympicsgb> has promised to deliver 103 
medals from at least 12 sports and maintain second place in the medal table.

"A real aim for us in 2016 and 2020 is to remain a world force in Paralympic 
sport. It is undoubtedly getting tougher. The threat from other parts of the 
world is growing," says Hollingsworth.

But he adds that there is also a wider goal, both in enabling more disabled 
people to take up sport and in encouraging a shift in perceptions in society at 
large.

"I would always defend the athletes' right to compete in and of itself. But 
more than any other area of sport, Paralympic sport can be inspirational. It 
not only inspires in the wonder of excellence and the achievement of 
brilliance, but in the nature of the individuals and the recognition of the 
impairment they have and what they have managed to overcome to reach that 
pinnacle."

Part of that inspiration needed to be translated into a belief among other 
disabled people that sport was for them, says Hollingsworth, quoting Tanni 
Grey-Thompson's aim to "defend the right for disabled people to be rubbish at 
sport".

Those watching needed to believe it could be "a pastime and a leisure activity 
and not only done by a minority with ambition to be Paralympians", 
Hollingsworth stresses. Just as the avalanche of medals for Team GB sparked 
issues around school sport and brought the grassroots to the fore, so the 
achievements of ParalympicsGB are likely to do the same.

Paul Deighton, Locog's chief executive, says the stage is set: the Olympic 
rings have been replaced with the Paralympic Agitos (whatever their 
derivation), a brand new venue has been opened at Eton Manor to host wheelchair 
tennis, the village has been adapted for 4,200 Paralympians and Ottobock has 
set up a workshop at the Park containing four and a half tonnes of wheelchair 
equipment.

When "Blade Runner" Oscar Pistorius, his big US rival Jerome Singleton and the 
British world record holder Jonnie Peacock line up to contest a T44 100m that 
promises to be as tense and tightly fought as its Olympic counterpart, they are 
unlikely to be thinking of much more than hitting the line. But Hollingsworth 
says he expects their achievements – and those of Paralympians across 20 sports 
– to resonate far beyond London E20.

"There is a much bigger point around the attitude of non-disabled people and 
their perception of disability. How can we challenge the way people generally 
think, behave and feel towards disability? Can you challenge the sense that 
people are defined by what they're unable to do? What Paralympic sport brings 
to life very clearly is a demonstration of what they are able to do."
 