
The parents of April Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones>, the 
five-year-old girl who was snatched close to her home and murdered, have called 
for more help to be given to potential paedophiles.

On the day Coral and Paul Jones published a book about their ordeal, the 
couple said people who feared they were going to commit crimes against children 
should be given assistance if they asked for it.
steven morris (@stevenmorris20) 
Writing about the book written by April Jones' parents Coral and Paul. Here's 
the cover.pic.twitter.com/MeGwqOI96v <http://t.co/MeGwqOI96v>
 <https://twitter.com/stevenmorris20/status/586067302212329472> April 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/stevenmorris20/status/586067302212329472> 
The couple also said they hoped their book would raise questions about how 
easy it is to access images of child abuse. April’s killer, Mark Bridger, 
viewed explicit images of children being sexually abused hours before he 
abducted April from a street in the quiet mid-Wales town of Machynlleth.

Paul Jones said it had been a relief to write the book, which is simply titled 
April. He said: “It was a great release to let people know what we went 
through, what we suffered. Secondly, it will raise questions if people read the 
book why these sort of things are still happening. The government and internet 
don’t seem to be doing enough to prevent it. I’m hoping it will open people’s 
eyes and start asking questions why things aren’t being done.”

Bridger, a former abattoir worker, did not ask for help and denied during his 
trial that he was a paedophile. But speaking to the BBC, Paul Jones said: “If 
you are thinking that way and you haven’t committed any crime, if you call out 
for help, that can only be a good thing.

“If you don’t call out for help you might eventually turn into a Mark Bridger 
yourself. Someone calling out for help deserves a chance. If you do carry on 
and you become a paedophile, the law should be thrown hard at you.”

Coral Jones said she hoped the book could at least “save one child, one 
family”. She added: “If someone says to the doctor: ‘I have these feelings, can 
I have help?’, it would be better to try to help them before they ruin someone 
else’s family.”

The book describes in awful detail the moment the parents realised April had 
been taken, the agonising search, and the trial of Bridger, who continues to 
refuse to reveal how he disposed of the girl’s body.

It emerges that the pair visited Bridger’s house, Mount Pleasant, in the 
nearby village of Ceinws, where April is thought to have been killed, after the 
killer was jailed for life.

Paul Jones said that when they went into the house, “all I could focus on was 
the fireplace” – where Bridger is thought to have burned April’s body.

He said: “The carpet had been ripped out and there was a big piece of Perspex 
on the hearth, covering the spot where April’s blood had been found. I found 
myself walking towards it but Coral seemed frozen to the spot.

“I put my hands on the cold, black fireplace and started to weep. My tears 
weren’t the gasping, throaty sobs I often cried while walking in the hills. 
Instead they were respectful and almost silent.”

Coral Jones said she wanted to look upstairs, even though there was no 
forensic evidence that April had ever been there. She said: “I felt the need to 
comb every corner just in case there was some cryptic clue as to what had 
really happened to my little girl. After all, I was her mum. If I couldn’t find 
the answers, who could?”

But she said she got no closure from the visit, adding: “Bridger hadn’t just 
snatched our precious girl from the street and murdered her in cold blood; he’d 
flatly refused to tell us what had really happened, or what he had done with 
her, and that was a whole different crime in itself.”

Despite the largest search in British police history, all that was found of 
April were a few pieces of bone and ash recovered from the fireplace.

Coral Jones said that when she received the urn with the scant remains she 
took it to bed. “Tears rolled down my face as I lay there, cuddling all that 
was left of my little girl in my arms,” she said.

She revealed she decided to contact Bridger in prison asking for him to tell 
her what had happened to April’s remains. She wrote: “We buried what we have of 
April but the rest of her is out there somewhere. I will not be able to rest 
until we can bury all of her, so find it in yourself to tell me what you did 
with her.” But in the end she decided not to send the letters.

April vanished on 1 October 2012. Bridger, a 47-year-old former abattoir 
worker who was vaguely known to April’s family, wasjailed for life in May 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/30/mark-bridger-guilty-april-jones-murder>
 and was told he would never be released. His former home has since been 
demolished.

• April, a mother and father’s heartbreaking story of the daughter they loved 
and lost, is published by Simon and Schuster
 