
The latest PISA results 
<http://www.oecd.org/publications/pisa-2015-results-volume-i-9789264266490-en.htm>
 confirm a long-term decline in Australia’s performance, along with a slight 
worsening of our already lower-than-average equity levels. Disparities in 
results between schools and sectors sharpened, and disadvantaged schools 
reported significantly fewer resources than advantaged schools.

We need to address these disparities front-on by articulating a positive 
project for democratic schooling that demands, as a minimum, schools and a 
curriculum that are accessible to all students.

We come closest to this ideal at primary level, with many socially integrated 
learning environments, where collaborative learning and creativity are 
encouraged. The ideal is furthest from reality in the senior years of secondary 
schooling, where competitive examination preparation yields radically uneven 
results in socially segregated settings. This is one reason the transition from 
primary to secondary school is often experienced as a shock by both children 
and parents.

International maths and science rankings: keep calm but change direction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/international-maths-and-science-rankings-keep-calm-but-change-direction>
But Australia needs socially and ethnically integrated schools at all levels. 
The US experience of desegregating schools in the 1970s and 1980s showed that it
dramatically decreased the achievement gap between Black and white students. 
<https://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/562/the-problem-we-all-live-with>
 In part, this was because the most disadvantaged students began attending 
schools with superior resources, including more experienced teachers. Just as 
in the US, the best resourced schools in Australia are those that cater almost 
entirely to the most privileged student groups – that is to say, they are 
segregated schools. It is impossible to hold such schools up as models of 
quality education when their results are gained under conditions of exclusion.

None of the so-called “top” schools in examination league tables are able to 
tolerate more than about 5% of students drawn from the most disadvantaged 
socioeconomic status group.

The creation of a market in secondary schooling and uneven distribution of 
resources between sectors has led to intense parental anxiety, including 
heightened fears about schools with migrant, refugee and working class 
components. In Australia, as globally, these market policies have increased 
ethnic, social and academic segregation –deepening achievement gaps and moving 
away from a democratic vision of universal quality. 
<http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/education/school-choice-and-equity_5k9fq23507vc-en>

Access to well-resourced sites is connected to access to the curriculum, which 
consistently rewards students from socially privileged backgrounds, while 
failing those from disadvantaged homes. Despite abundant pedagogical 
innovation, the competitive senior school curriculum remains effective and 
appealing to only part of the student population.

The curriculum is so attuned to the interests, strategies and needs of 
socially privileged families that academic selection has virtually the same 
effect as economic exclusion in producing segregation.

In short, academically selective and high-fee schools share socially 
segregated profiles that are uniquely well-catered to by existing subject 
offerings and teaching methods.

The result of a curriculum that is unequally attuned to diverse student 
populations is that schools, and families, and even teachers, seek out those 
privileged students who are most likely to be easy to teach and achieve high 
grades. At its most perverse, schools with curriculum offerings that appeal to 
weaker and working-class students (such as vocational streams)have been known 
to drop these <http://www.palgrave.com/us/book/9781137483522> in order to 
become less appealing to such students, and attract an “academically” minded 
clientele only. Middle-class families with high-achieving children thus have 
more educational options available to them than those without economic power or 
academically brilliant offspring.

So, what needs to change? First, the normative model for learning and 
teaching, as well as curriculum and assessment development, must be socially 
integrated schools. Curriculum and assessment authorities are often a 
reflection of the most socially segregated educational settings – partly due to 
the concentration in exclusive schools of the most highly qualified and 
experienced staff, and partly due to the historical dominance of the high-fee 
private school sector, hand in glove with the sandstone universities.

Second, there must be direct efforts made to desegregate schools. A school 
that enrols no students from the bottom quarter of the socio-economic 
distribution, and just 3% from the bottom half, is not a “top” school, but a 
candidate for deregistration.

Pisa results don’t look good, but let’s look at what we can learn before we 
panic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/pisa-results-dont-look-good-but-lets-look-at-what-we-can-learn-before-we-panic>
Australia has a great history of diversified and challenging, school-based and 
“bottom-up” curriculum reforms, particularly throughout the 1970s and 1980s. 
But these were not brought to fruition and were cut-short by the increased 
focus on standardised testing. Fortunately, there is still much to be learned 
at the system level from amazing work going on in schools.

Primary schools, in particular, stand as an example of what is possible when 
learning is undertaken under a different set of conditions, and with more 
progressive objectives.

The positive attitudes parents have towards culturally and socially diverse 
local primary schools show that there is no inherent desire for segregated 
schooling – it is the product of the way we have structured our school system.
 