
Age: Arrested 20 years ago at 45.

Appearance: Strenuously maintained.

I know her. She used to present Points of View and wink at the end. She did. 
But she has become so much more than that over the years. Although the 
winking's become a bit more tricky, thanks to her commitment to surgically 
holding back the years.

Pot me her CV, why don't you? Very well. Began her journalistic life in 1968 
at the Daily Mail. Moved to the Sunday Times after marrying her Mail boss, 
became an alcoholic, dried out, returned to Fleet Street to become the first 
female assistant editor of the Mirror and an increasingly famous and vitriolic 
columnist at various other newspapers, then broke into television.  

I've got it from here then – PoV, Watchdog and The Weakest Link where, thanks 
to the British public's limitless willingness to mistake snarky putdowns for 
barbed wit she became a cult figure and known as The Queen of Mean. That's it. 
Although she had done sterling work in the preceding years offending and 
alienating everyone.

The sign of a good editor and columnist, surely? And women are always unjustly 
pilloried for showing spirit. Yes. Although sometimes they are also justly 
pilloried for being . . . well, anyway, never mind, let's move on.  

I gather she's celebrating 10 years of presenting The Weakest Link. Does the 
avalanche of accompanying interviews tell us anything about the realAnne 
Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson>? Well, 
apparently she has lost two stone since it began and become a divorcee, 
grandmother and aficionado of brazilian waxes. I'm not sure in what order. And 
she still found time to voice her robot-self in Doctor Who, host Test the 
Nation, appear on the Sunday Times Rich List (worth £60m in 2006) and insult 
the Welsh repeatedly.

Oh yes, she wants them all banished and replaced with her fellow 
Liverpudlians, doesn't she? Yes. Presumably because there's nothing to steal in 
Wales. She can take it, I presume, as well as dish it out.

Do say: "Let me save you the trouble – I am the weakest link, goodbye."

Don't say: "I'm frightened. Please don't hurt me."
 