
The Chicago Blackhawks remained the only NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> team without a loss in regulation time 
as they beat thePhoenix Coyotes 6-2 on Thursday, with Patrick Kane having two 
goals and an assist.

The Blackhawks opened a seven-point lead in the Central Division – a 
pronounced advantage given the shortened season – while Phoenix missed a chance 
to move up to third in the Pacific.

Chicago's Viktor Stalberg, Jonathan Toews and Bryan Bickell each had a goal 
and an assist as the Blackhawks improved to 9-0-2. Dave Bolland also scored for 
Chicago. Martin Hanzal and Raffi Torres scored for the Coyotes.

The New Jersey Devils' Ilya Kovalchuk broke a tie with a short-handed goal 
late in the second period and the Devils went on to a 4-2 win over theTampa Bay 
Lightning. Andy Greene and Patrik Elias sealed the result with power-play goals 
14 seconds apart with less than five minutes to play as the Devils sent the 
Lightning to their third consecutive loss.

Cam Ward made 45 saves and Jay Harrison scored 2:19 into overtime to rally the 
Carolina Hurricanes to a 3-2 win at the Ottawa Senators. Harrison's winner came 
off a scramble in front as he banged a loose puck past Senators goalie Craig 
Anderson.

Cory Schneider made 22 saves and Mason Raymond had a power-play goal and an 
assist in the second period to lead theVancouver Canucks to a 4-1 win over a 
sputteringMinnesota Wild. Goalie Niklas Backstrom gave up two scores in each of 
the first two periods for the Wild, and was pulled for replacement Josh Harding 
for the final frame.

Petr Mrazek made 26 saves in his NHL debut as the Detroit Red Wings beat the 
St Louis Blues 5-1. The Blues have lost three successive games in regulation 
for the first time since the 2010-11 season.

Thomas Vanek scored twice in regulation including the tying goal with two 
seconds left and then again in the shootout as theBuffalo Sabres edged the 
Montreal Canadiens 5-4. Jason Pominville also scored in the shootout and Ryan 
Miller clinched the victory by making a left pad save to stop Brian Gionta on 
Montreal's final opportunity.

Sidney Crosby extended his points streak to six games with a goal and two 
assists as thePittsburgh Penguins pounded the lifeless Washington Capitals 5-2. 
Evgeni Malkin also added a goal and two assists while Pascal Dupuis, James Neal 
and Matt Cooke scored for the Penguins, who have won five straight, while the 
Capitals have lost five of six.

The Nashville Predators notched their fourth straight win, defeating the Los 
Angeles Kings 3-0, as Pekka Rinne made 32 saves in his first shutout of the 
season and Colin Wilson scored twice. Gabriel Bourque opened the scoring 2:54 
into the opening period and Wilson added his goals in the second period.

Phil Kessel scored his first goal of the season late in the last period to 
lift theToronto Maple Leafs to a 3-2 win over the Winnipeg Jets. Tyler Bozak 
scored short-handed and Matt Frattin added a goal for the Leafs.

The New York Rangers beat the New York Islanders 4-1, with teenage rookie JT 
Miller scoring twice in just his second game. Miller gave the Rangers a 1-0 
lead just 1:29 in and then pushed their advantage to 3-1 in the second period 
with a rare power-play goal for the club.

The Florida Panthers prevailed after a shootout, downing the Philadelphia 
Flyers 3-2, with Jonathon Huberdeau and Peter Mueller both scoring in the 
decider. Florida's Stephen Weiss had tied the game 2-2 midway through the third 
period with his first goal of the season while Jack Skille also scored for the 
Panthers.

Alex Tanguay scored on a one-timer in overtime to lead the Calgary Flames to a 
4-3 victory over theColumbus Blue Jackets in a meeting of Western Conference 
cellar-dwellers.
 