
Paul Collingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-collingwood> will 
join Ashley Giles in a new England coaching team for the six-match trip to the 
West Indies this month followed by the World Twenty20 in Bangladesh. It gives 
the former Ashes team-mates the chance to establish themselves as an effective 
double act to succeed Andy Flower in the long term.

Collingwood will effectively replace Richard Halsall as the assistant coach 
with specific responsibilities for fielding, another major decision that has 
been taken by Paul Downton in the early stages of his role as the managing 
director of the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board.

Downton also announced on Wednesday that Angus Fraser has been appointed to 
the national selection panel, filling the vacancy left by the chairman Geoff 
Miller's retirement and meaning that Flower will now also step down, as 
expected.

With the thorny issue of Kevin Pietersen's international future resolved, that 
leaves only the question of Flower's successor as team director from the 
high-profile issues Downton inherited from Hugh Morris. The role is expected to 
be advertised in the next week but no appointment is expected until after 
England return from the World T20 in April.

By then, Giles will hope to have strengthened his credentials, which are in 
need of touching up after the poor performances of the one-day teams under his 
stewardship in Australia. He welcomed the appointment of a new assistant, 
saying: "Colly will add great energy and a winning T20 pedigree to the tour 
party. We are really looking forward to his involvement."

The 37-year-old lifted the World T20 trophy in the Caribbean in 2010, and 
since his retirement from international cricket has captained Durham to the 
County Championship title, then dipped his toe into international coaching with 
Scotland this winter, when they qualified for the 50-over World Cup in 2015.

He will join England initially on "a short-term secondment from Durham", which 
will leave the champions needing a new captain for the start of the county 
season in April.

Collingwood will join England's limited-overs batting coach, Graham Thorpe, 
and the bowling coach in all forms, David Saker, as Giles's support staff when 
the squad leave for the Caribbean next week.He later took to Twitter and made 
it clear he can hardly wait to be reunited with Giles. "I'm as excited as a kid 
at Christmas," he tweeted, adding a reference to the nickname Giles came by in 
his playing days. "Looking forward to working with the 'King of Spain' and the 
lads."

Fraser will combine his selector's role with his position as director of 
cricket at Middlesex, just as Giles did when he was coaching Warwickshire 
before his promotion to the England set-up. That means he will be working on a 
day-to-day basis with England contenders such as Steven Finn, Sam Robson and 
Eoin Morgan. The ECB believes that, rather than presenting a conflict of 
interests, it will be beneficial to have input from an active county coach.
 