
My former husband, Paul Coates, who has died aged 68 after suffering from the 
brain disease cerebral amyloid angiopathy, was senior lecturer in architecture 
at theUniversity of East London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofeastlondon> (UEL). He made a 
major contribution to the early development of computer systems for architects 
and was responsible for introducing computing into architectural education, 
first at Liverpool Polytechnic and later at UEL.

He was born in Ambleside, Cumbria, where his parents had been evacuated with 
the Royal College of Art during the second world war. His father, Fred, was a 
sculptor who died of cancer when Paul was two; his mother, Rosemary, was an 
artist and teacher. Paul had a rather peripatetic childhood, moving from 
primary school to primary school, and then went to Colston's school in Bristol. 
At 16 he won a place at the Architectural Association, where he studied from 
1962 to 1969.

After a brief period working as a planner for Monmouthshire county council, he 
became a lecturer in the department of architecture at Liverpool Polytechnic. 
As a student at the AA he had discovered the architectural potential of 
cellular automata (a computational technique used by John von Neumann for the 
mathematical simulation of biological processes) and he developed this concept 
further at Liverpool for housing design.

As one of the founders of the Autographics software development company (with 
John and Julia Frazer <http://www.johnfrazer.com/about.html>) he created, wrote 
and marketed the world's first computer-aided design systems that could run on 
a desktop machine. Over nearly 20 years, Autographics products won many major 
awards for innovation and interface design including a British Design award in 
1988 presented by the Duke of Edinburgh.

Paul went on to lead the master's course in computing and design in 
architecture at UEL, inspiring many generations of students. He further 
developed techniques that automatically generate multiple design solutions and 
wrote a book, entitledProgramming.Architecture  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Programming-Architecture-Paul-Coates/dp/0415451884>
(2011), explaining his methods. In 2009 he won an Acadia award for 
computer-aided design in architecture.

Paul and I married in 1966 and had three children, Simon, Emily and William. 
After we separated in 1982 he lived with Tara Tierney until her death in 2003.

He is survived by his children, five grandchildren, Tara's sons, Jason and 
Jamie, and me.
 