
The virtue of going gracefully has seldom been so clearly demonstrated. Peter 
Moores <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores>, presented on Saturday 
at Lord's as the latest England coach, has been given a second bite of the 
cherry, a rare luxury. Indeed, in football, rugby or cricket has any England 
coach ever been asked back for a second go? Answers welcome on what need only 
be a very small postcard. Don Revie, Glenn Hoddle? No. Martin Johnson, Sir 
Clive Woodward? Not yet. A Fletcher, whether Keith or Duncan? I don't think so.

If Moores had flounced off in an outspoken huff when he was sacked quite 
spectacularly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/17/andrew-flintoff-england-cricket-peter-moores-kevin-pietersen-andrew-strauss-westindies>
 alongside Kevin Pietersen in January 2009, then he would not be the England 
coach today. Instead he departed with lips sealed and dignity intact before 
taking up his post at Old Trafford. That was in character, but now it also 
seems a very sound career move.

Moores, who had 20 months at the helm in 2007-08, has been preferred to the 
long-time favourite, Ashley Giles, who has just experienced the pitfalls of 
being associated with a recent, failing regime. It is preposterous, but the 
outcome of the England and Wales Cricket Board's deliberations might well have 
been heading in a different direction if England had calmly knocked off the 134 
runs required to beat the Netherlands at the end of their World T20 campaign. 
The players had all said how much they were enjoying Giles's interim regime, 
but they could not deliver for him on astrange afternoon in Chittagong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/31/england-humiliation-holland-world-twenty20>
. Now while Giles is looking for a job, the players may well be singing the 
praises of Moores.

Moores's first match in charge will be in Aberdeen on 9 May when England play 
Scotland. So there is not much time to start forging important working 
relationships with the captain(s), the coaching staff and the players. Alastair 
Cook, currently the Test and ODI captain, could have worked happily with either 
Moores or Giles. He has done so in the past.

Such unanimity was absent in Moores's first crack at the job seven years ago. 
He inherited Michael Vaughan as captain and their relationship was uneasy, 
their outlook often at variance. After the sudden resignation of Vaughan in 
2008 the captain-coach rapport did not improve greatly. The man who replaced 
Vaughan was Pietersen.

Not only was Moores involved in that appointment, which was driven by the 
desperately misguided determination to have an England captain for all three 
forms of the game, he must have had the capacity to veto it if convinced that 
this was the wrong way to go. That decision, promoted by Hugh Morris and Geoff 
Miller, may well constitute one of the "regrets" Moores has expressed about how 
he went about the job last time around.

There were more productive legacies of the brief Moores regime in the 
acquisition of a most effective backroom staff. He enlisted Andy Flower, 
Richard Halsall and Mushtaq Ahmed, all of whom survived him before assisting 
one of England's most successful sides. No doubt Flower would have been one of 
those advocating Moores's reinstatement over recent weeks.

This time Moores may well have Paul Farbrace alongside him in what would be an 
unusual union of south-coast wicketkeepers. Paul Downton, a keeper first of 
Kent and then of Middlesex, has enlisted Moores, once the Sussex gloveman and – 
in all probability – Farbrace, who also stood behind the stumps for Kent. Once 
the dust has settled – and that may take a while – this trio might indulge in 
talk of webbing and inner gloves as old wicketkeepers often do. Quite where the 
current keeping coach, the highly regarded Bruce French, fits into all this we 
wait to see.

Farbrace has had an unusual few months. He was persuaded from Yorkshire where 
he was running the second XI, by Sri Lanka four months ago. Since then Sri 
Lanka have carried all before them – except they weredefeated by England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/27/alex-hales-england-sri-lanka-world-t20>
 in the World T20, a hiccup that did not prevent them going on towin that 
tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/06/cricket-t20-sri-lanka-india-final>
 in fine style. They also carried off the Asia Cup just before their T20 
success. Farbrace was in good odour in Sri Lanka.

Now the temptation of a swift return to England may be irresistible even 
though Farbrace might feel a little sheepish when meeting the Sri Lankans again 
in May after briefing his new players about the strengths and weaknesses of 
England's first Test opponents this summer.

Doors are currently opening and shutting rapidly. The appointment of Moores 
may, for example, stall Paul Collingwood's England coaching career. Collingwood 
was seconded by Giles for the recent trips to the Caribbean and to Bangladesh 
for the World T20, but he was not Moores's most obvious fan back in 2007-08. At 
least Collingwood has a considerable diversion leading Durham. Giles is 
currently without a job unless theECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> 
conjure something up for him as they have done in the recent past in order to 
keep David Graveney, Mike Gatting and Flower reasonably happy.

Managing the players should not be so difficult this time for Moores. In 2007 
he inherited some old men set in their ways and accustomed to Duncan Fletcher. 
Moores, with his relatively modest pedigree, was overly concerned to impose 
himself; he was constantly challenging the players, which is essential on the 
relentless grind of the county circuit but is sometimes less appropriate at 
international level when the coach often has to find a way to minimise the 
pressure on his team.

Some of the players with "egos" have moved on. There will be no Pietersen and 
no Graeme Swann, whose career Moores resuscitated, in the England dressing room 
in 2014. Nor will there be Jonathan Trott, an equally major player over the 
past five years, if not so conspicuous, now that he haswithdrawn from cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/18/jonathan-trott-england-warwickshire-withdraw-comeback>
 after a solitary competitive appearance for Warwickshire this spring.

The scope for friction will be diminished in a young and eager side. The 
majority will be open-eyed and eared and dear old Ian Bell is hardly likely to 
stir the pot. This new team, devoid of too many gnarled old pros, is unlikely 
to be insubordinate. As Giles was keen to stress in Bangladesh there is an 
absence of "egos". In that sense it is not a bad time to take over.

But there is a caveat here. Throughout history the best players have often had 
the biggest egos. So while the incoming coach may find it easy to manage his 
new charges, he may discover that it is much trickier to ensure that they win.
 