
Police investigating nine nighttime drive-by shootings in Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/phoenix> have confirmed they recovered 
bullet casings from at least three of the crime scenes and received detailed 
vehicle descriptions from witnesses.


The shootings, which occurred from mid-March to mid-July, are believed to be 
the work of a serial killer described by witnesses as a lanky man in his early 
20s.

Investigators are leaving open the possibility that someone else may have 
participated in the attacks. Documents released last week showed that shell 
casings were found at each of the three crime scenes.

In all, seven people have been killed and two others wounded. Witnesses have 
described hearing anywhere between five and 10 shots, but no one has seen any 
of the bullets actually being fired.

Police had initially believed that the string of attacks had ended in mid-June 
when the assailant fatally shot two women and a 12-year-old girl in their 
driveway.

But police have since added a ninth shooting to the pattern – an 11 July 
incident in which the gunman fired at a man and a four-year-old boy sitting in 
a car. Neither was struck.

But the addition of the new incident suggests the shooter, or shooters, were 
still active even after Phoenix law enforcement stepped up their efforts and 
issued a city wide alert.


Earlier this month, Phoenix Police sergeant Jonathan Howard warned: “The 
threat is still alive.”

“We don’t want to see anybody else get hurt. We want to make an arrest and 
stop this,” he added. “We’re fortunate in this new incident that nobody was 
injured.”

Based on witness statements to police, detectives believe the suspect has 
access to several cars: one appears to be a white Cadillac or Lincoln, another 
a late 90s brown Nissan, and a third may be an early 2000s black BMW. Police 
confirmed that they’ve looked into whether the killer could have access to a 
used car lot.

In each incident, the victims have been attacked in the working-class Maryvale 
section of Phoenix, near their car or home and in the evening or very early 
morning hours.

The victims include a 16-year-old boy wounded while walking in the street at 
11.30pm on 17 March; a 21-year-old male shot standing near his car on the 
street at 11.30pm a day later; 21-year-old Diego Verdugo-Sanchez, killed 1 
April while visiting his pregnant fiancée’s family; 55-year-old Krystal Annette 
White, found dead of a gunshot on 19 April; 32-year-old Horacio Pena, fatally 
shot 3 June after returning home from work; and 19-year-old Manuel Castro 
Garcia, murdered outside his home on 10 June.

In the final fatal incident, on 12 June, 33-year-old Stefanie Ellis, her 
12-year-old daughter Maleah and Ellis’ 31-year-old friend, Angela Linner, were 
killed outside their home. In that incident, a witness told police she saw a 
man wearing a white shirt and red shorts as he stood beside a dark-colored 
sedan. A witness also told police that it wasn’t unusual for the victims to sit 
in a parked car listening to music.

Investigators are checking whether neighbors have security camera and pursuing 
hundreds of leads, and have composed a sketch of teh suspect.

Police later found shell casings inside the victim’s vehicle, indicating the 
women were all shot at close range. Police also found nearly $3,000 cash inside 
the victim’s vehicle, indicating that robbery was not a motive. That same 
night, the killer targeted an empty pick-up truck.

“This guy shot and killed a 12-year-old girl,” Howard told local WRAL news 
<http://www.wral.com/phoenix-neighborhood-on-edge-as-serial-killer-prowls/15923671/>
. “We hope someone else’s conscience catches up with them.”
 