
A former top policeman has complained of the "lynch mob mentality" of MPs who 
grilled him over his handling of the phone-hacking investigation, saying they 
treated him "like a bit of dirt".

Andy Hayman, the former Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> assistant commissioner who 
was in charge of the original hacking investigation in 2006, hit out at the MPs 
on the home affairs select committee for an "appalling display".

Hayman – who provoked laughter from the public gallery on Tuesday in response 
to his claims that he dined with News International during the police 
investigation because to refuse would have looked even "more suspicious" – also 
singled out Labour MPChris Bryant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chris-bryant>, who was sitting in the 
audience, for laughing loudly while he gave evidence.

Hayman was told by MPs that his oversight of the investigation had the 
hallmarks of "Clouseau rather than Columbo" – a reference to the blundering 
French detective of the Pink Panther film series.

Hayman – who now writes a column for the Times, part of the News International 
stable – was called a "dodgy geezer" by one MP on the committee. He told 
London's LBC radio station that he believed this phrase was used because of his 
accent, and was a "poor show".

Speaking to LBC presenter Nick Ferrari, Hayman said he had never been treated 
so badly before.

"I've been through the mill several times in court, in journalistic 
interviews. I've never been treated like yesterday," he said .

"There was cat-calling, there was loud laughter from the wings, of Chris 
Bryant. It was an appalling display from them.

"The irony, really, is that they don't like being treated in this way … and 
yet they're prepared to put us through that."

He added: "And to be accused, as I was, of being a dodgy geezer, which is 
probably on the basis on my accent, I think that's a really poor show."

Hayman faced tough questions from the panel of MPs on the Commons home affairs 
select committee ashe was asked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/12/thousands-phone-hacking-victims-contacted-met-sue-akers>
 whether he had done a deal to curb the News of the World hacking inquiry over 
fears that the tabloid would expose details of his personal life – a suggestion 
he flatly denied.

Hayman also reacted with outrage after being asked whether he had accepted 
payments from journalists for information, saying: "Good God, absolutely not. I 
can't believe you suggested that."

The former senior officer said the MPs' level of questioning was below that of 
a junior detective constable and said it was time for a formal public inquiry 
into the scandal to be launched.

He said: "Despite trying to actually be helpful to them, all they want to do 
is score points and most of that is political, and with this sort of lynch mob 
mentality. Bring on the formal inquiry with a respectable judge, when we can 
actually get some sense out of this.

"But what we've actually got here is a very, very senior, I guess you could 
call it a court. It's non-negotiable to be able to go there and when you go 
along there, you're treated like a bit of dirt.

"I'm not asking for special treatment, I just ask for a little bit of respect 
and not to be [treated] basically as a product because of the way in which you 
speak."

Hayman's decision to dine with senior figures at News International while 
overseeing a police investigation into alleged criminal wrongdoing at News of 
the World, was earlier describedas "unwise" by Sir Hugh Orde, president of the 
Association of Chief Police Officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/13/andy-hayman-unwise-dine-news-international-executives>
.

Hayman told MPs that the dinners were "business-like" rather than "candlelit 
affairs where state secrets were discussed".

But Orde said that accepting hospitality under those circumstances was not 
seemly.

• If you wish to comment on the phone-hacking scandal please go to our live 
blog <https://www.theguardian.com/media/series/phone-hacking-live>
 