
Photographs of dead Iraqis taken by a British army officer after a battle in 
the south-east of the country may be the key to establishing whether they were 
killed during that encounter or murdered after being taken prisoner, a public 
inquiry heard on Tuesday.

The inquiry was established following allegations that British troops murdered 
up to 20 prisoners after a fierce battle in May 2004 and tortured five other 
captives.

There is a "stark dispute" between the relatives of the dead men and the 
Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> over 
the way the deaths occurred, Jonathan Acton Davis QC, counsel to the inquiry 
has explained.

He said that it was accepted that Captain James Rands of the Princess of Wales 
Royal Regiment took pictures of the corpses at a British military base known as 
Camp Abu Naji, near the town of Majar al-Kabir.

An order had been issued that bodies were to be taken to the camp to establish 
whether one was a leading local insurgent being sought by British forces, and 
Rands says he took the pictures shortly after 20 corpses arrived from the 
battlefield in two armoured vehicles.

Lawyers representing relatives of the dead will argue this cannot be correct, 
as some of the men he photographed were alive when they were captured.

"If they were taken as Rands says they were ... then the allegation of 
unlawful killing within the camp will not be made out," Acton Davis said. "If, 
on the other hand, they were not taken then, that would tend to undermine the 
military account of the handling of the dead, and may – and probably would – 
lend support to the suggestion that live Iraqis arrived at Camp Abu Naji and 
were subsequently killed unlawfully."

Acton Davis said that Rands would be giving evidence to the inquiry about the 
circumstances in which the photographs were taken. He cautioned, however: "It 
must be added that anyone who has read the transcript of Rands giving evidence 
in the administrative court will recall that there are a number of questions 
about his evidence."

The al-Sweady inquiry <> is named after Hamid al-Sweady, a 19-year-old alleged 
victim. There is conflicting evidence as to whether or not he was seen being 
captured alive the day before his body was returned to his family. The inquiry 
will hear evidence from up to 200 military witnesses and will not report until 
the end of next year.

The inquiry will also hear from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and 
Beirut, including former prisoners. Acton Davis said some have given statements 
in which they say they were beaten on capture, deprived of sleep and threatened 
by interrogators. Others, while hooded, said they could hear other prisoners 
screaming in pain while at Camp Abu Naji, and the sounds of shots being fired 
within the base.

Acton Davis said the first responsibility of the inquiry would be to attempt 
to establish whether 20 Iraqi men were killed during the battle in May 2004 and 
their corpses taken Camp Abu Naji – as the Ministry of Defence insists was the 
case – or whether they were captured alive and then unlawfully killed during 14 
and 15 May 2004.

In addition, the inquiry will examine allegations that five men taken prisoner 
following the same battle were mistreated at a second British base at Shaibah, 
near Basra, four months later.

The inquiry was established after a number of former prisoners and relatives 
of the dead men brought proceedings in the high court in London, demanding an 
independent inquiry in line with the requirements of the European convention on 
human rights.

It was ordered in November 2009 by then defence secretary, Bob Ainsworth, 
after high court judges accused the MoD of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious 
breaches" of its duty of candour during the court proceedings.
 