 Ken Loach is a prolific film director who is prepared to put in a lot of time 
and effort when it comes to practising his craft. But the rest he finds more 
difficult, to judge from his flat voice and weary expression when we met late 
on a hot summer afternoon after he had spent the whole day being interviewed 
about his new film, Ae Fond Kiss (just released in France).
"Promoting a film requires as much energy as making one, so I have to be 
careful not to use it all up, particularly as I always like to move straight on 
to the next movie," he explained. "And then making a film is a pragmatic 
pro-cess. The decisions you take are chiefly material - and risky. They largely 
depend on circumstances. It's something I'm wary of talking about, as I 
wouldn't want to think up rational justifications for my instincts."

From the start of his career, Loach's instincts have been to demand a better 
world. His oeuvre is, above all, concerned with social change. "I've been 
influenced as much by Zola and Dickens as by Italian Neorealism. I love the 
cinema because it enables one to get closer to people and watch them live. It's 
also a good way of sparking debate."

Loach was born in the Midlands in 1936, the year that Popular Front 
governments came to power in both France and Spain. He read law at Oxford. His 
already keen political awareness led him to work in the theatre and move in 
leftwing activist circles. The television producer Tony Garnett got him to make 
films for the BBC, and his low-budget "Wednesday Play" docudramas caused a 
sensation with their screenplays based on a clinical observation of real life.

One of the films in that series, Cathy Come Home (1966), described how a 
couple crippled by debts are evicted from their home. It provoked controversy 
at national level. Loach later said of his team on the film: "We were social 
democrats when we made that film and would-be Marxists when we finished it. We 
realised the inability of social democrats to do anything constructive."

 Cathy Come Home directly contributed to political change. It played a key 
role in the setting up of Shelter, a movement that aimed to provide a roof for 
homeless families, and influenced a political debate that resulted in a change 
in the law in 1977.

After an experience like that, it would have been understandable if the young 
Loach had come to believe he could improve society. Yet he insists: "I never 
said to myself that my films could change things. With Cathy Come Home, 
something exceptional happened that was impossible to predict or reproduce. 
After that I simply went on doing my job. A movie isn't a political movement, a 
party or even an article. It's just a film. At best it can add its voice to 
public outrage."

Margaret Thatcher's years as prime minister (1979-90) were a bad time for 
Loach: he had difficulty in getting his films distributed or shown on 
television. But since the beginning of the 90s he has been making movie after 
movie and can rely on a bedrock of "faithful spectators". "I'm aware that 
without the support of European filmgoers I'd have ceased to come up with 
funding for my movies a long time ago."

It is "instinct" again that, in his view, explains his special relationship 
with the public. When he turns his attention away from the fate of the B-ritish 
working class to focus on disillusioned revolutionaries ( Carla's Song , 1996) 
or the Spanish Civil War ( Land and Freedom , 1995), audiences continue to be 
interested - probably because "those films simply talk about real people".

Loach's working methods leave room for the unexpected, for "intrusions of 
reality". "To my mind the worst thing of all is the storyboard," he says with a 
shudder. "I find it cramps my style to determine in advance what's going to 
take place before the camera. Anything that sets in stone is bad. What counts 
is exploration."

While Loach was shooting My Name Is Joe (1998) - "A film about an alcoholic 
who doesn't drink", he says with a grin - he realised that he had not fully 
explored one of the characters: "There was a lad in the football team who 
interested me. He became Liam in Sweet Sixteen [2002]."

After that grim chronicle about a solitary teenager, Ae Fond Kiss comes across 
as a more light-hearted movie. It is a very complicated love story between a 
Muslim Scot of Pakistani origin and a Catholic Irishwoman. "Paul Laverty, who 
works with me, writes very precise screenplays. Subsequently there has to be 
some room for manoeuvre for the actors, so they can reveal themselves and the 
characters they play. InAe Fond Kiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ae-fond-kiss> the actors took over the movie. 
They gave it a degree of optimism, and I was delighted: they weren't just 
marionettes."

Very few filmmakers have such a modest notion of their own role as Loach. In 
fact it was only when he started talking to me about politics, not the cinema, 
that he forgot how tired he was after all those hours of promoting the movie 
and holding forth on "communities that don't know each other well enough".

He described how he joined the club of politically committed filmmakers, such 
as the Italian Nanni Moretti: "I was asked if I'd like to be on a leftwing list 
for the European elections [in June]. I couldn't refuse. We got almost 5% in 
London, which isn't bad. But an anti-European, xenophobic section of the right 
also did very well at those elections. Those people would like to make the 
Channel wider if they could. That's not really surprising when you look at the 
Sun or the Daily Mail, which are filled day after day with racist remarks and 
innuendo about how Europe is too bureaucratic to be honest."

Loach likes Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 9/11 , which won the top Cannes award 
this year: "It was a political prize, whatever Tarantino's claims to the 
contrary, and that could prove very useful." In 2002, in his contribution to 
the collective movie, 11"09'01 , Loach gave his own view of September 11. He 
has not returned to the subject since, but deals indirectly with its 
repercussions as they affect the Muslim male lead in Ae Fond Kiss .

"Laverty was struck by the upsurge in racist violence in the United States 
just after September 11, and in particular by the death of a young Sikh in 
Arizona. The way our western societies look at Muslims is problematic."

Loach shares Moore's view of President George Bush, but Ae Fond Kiss does not 
focus on his British ally, Tony Blair, whose policies fill Loach with 
indignation: "Britain is in an extraordinary situation: a supposedly 
centre-left party has been implementing a hardline neoliberal policy involving 
privatisations. Blair supports America's policy and a war based on lies. And 
who are the Labour party's main allies? [The Italian prime minister Silvio] 
Berlusconi and Bush. That has left a vacuum on the left, which is tragic."

Loach became convinced of one thing when canvassing at the European elections: 
"The left has to do some hard thinking if it is to take advantage of the 
present hostility towards the Labour party." Meanwhile Loach is off to shoot a 
new film in Rome: "It is, after all, my job."

 Ae Fond Kiss will be released in Britain on September 3
 