
A brand of the contraceptive pill which is commonly prescribed to treat acne 
is under review by the UK's regulatory body amid concerns about the 
side-effects it has on young women.

The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority (MHRA) which 
licenses drugs is reviewing Dianette following the submission of a dossier from 
the charity April (Adverse Psychiatric Reactions Information Link). It has sent 
reports from more than 100 women who say they have plunged into serious 
depression while on the drug. Some of them have been on the drug for years, 
even though Dianette is only supposed to be prescribed for a short period.

Dianette is licensed as a hormone treatment for severe acne. It is an 
effective contraceptive, but doctors have been warned that they should not 
prescribe it solely for that purpose because it has a higher risk of blood 
clots than other similar combination pills. Women who take it are supposed to 
stop within three or four months of their skin problems clearing up.

Many who have contacted April claim the drug has severely affected their 
lives. Some say they have been prescribed antidepressants by their doctors, who 
have not suggested there could be any problem with Dianette, even though the 
manufacturer's information leaflet says one possible side-effect is "mild 
depression".

One who took Dianette for eight years said: "My depression was very bad and I 
have been deeply suicidal ... I can't tell you the difference in my depression 
almost within one week of coming off the tablets. I had gone from someone 
barely able to function because of my depression to actually looking forward to 
a new day."

Another said she had not been warned of potential side-effects. "I was put on 
Dianette when I was 15 as I had problems with acne," she wrote. "I am now 27 
and continued to use Dianette as a contraceptive as my doctor told me that it 
was ok to do so. When I went to the doctor with severe panic attacks, I was 
prescribed beta blockers and Prozac which I took for two and a half years. I 
never linked Dianette with anxiety until I had a break from the tablets for 
three months. I noticed that my anxiety had dramatically subsided."

Millie Kieve, who runs the charity, says that labelling depression as "mild" 
sends the wrong signal. "It is not mild - it is serious," she said. "The doctor 
should warn these girls that if they are depressed, it could be Dianette, 
instead of putting them on antidepressants."

Young women were being labelled mentally ill when they were suffering 
side-effects from a medicine, she said. "We need a climate where people are 
looking at possible adverse drug reactions instead of possible disease. They 
are only treating the symptoms - not looking for the cause."

The MHRA is particularly concerned by evidence that doctors are prescribing 
the drug as a contraceptive in spite of warnings. In an email to Ms Kieve, Jane 
Woolley of the pharmacovigilance risk assessment group said: "The MHRA shares 
your concerns over the prescribing of Dianette solely for contraception and has 
taken several steps in recent years to try to minimise this."

Information about the drug in the British National Formulary, the prescribers' 
bible, reminds doctors that it is only for severe acne in cases where oral 
antibiotics do not work. It also points to the increased risk over other pills 
of blood clots.

But Ms Kieve says the reports from women who have contacted her suggest that 
"there are doctors who do not read the warnings". She urged any women who had 
suffered from depression which they felt could be linked to Dianette to report 
the suspected side-effect through the MHRA's "yellow card" scheme (
www.yellowcard.gov.uk <http://www.yellowcard.gov.uk>).

The MHRA confirmed that its review was looking at the reports submitted by 
April on depression and also at data from the manufacturer. It said it hoped 
the findings would go to its expert advisory group on medicines for women's 
health at the end of May.

In March, after the review began, the MHRA granted a licence to an identical 
pill called Clairette. The authority says, however, that since Dianette had not 
been removed from the market, there was no reason not to grant the licence.

"Depression is a known adverse reaction of Dianette," it said in a statement. 
"The fact that the current wording in the patient information leaflet of the 
brand leader is being reconsidered on the basis of patient reports submitted by 
Ms Kieve and data from the MHRA was not felt to impact sufficiently on the 
balance of risks and benefits of the product to stop the licensing of a similar 
generic product. Any changes to the brand leader will be reflected in the 
generic products."

A spokeswoman for Schering Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Care, which manufactures Dianette, said: "We have not been informed by the MHRA 
of any review of Dianette. We do of course liaise closely and cooperate fully 
with the MHRA on all matters of patient safety."
 