
Even BBC lovers get hiccups. How on Earth do you defend Mark Thompson spending 
£86,000 on "legal costs" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/01/bbc-nao-report-management-payoffs>
 in order to tell the Pollard inquiry that he, the departed DG, doesn't 
remember much about anything? Why on Earth has the trust embarked on a series 
of lugubrious "fairness and balance" reports that wonders (inter alia) whether 
John Humphrys isn't too penetrating and practised an interviewer to unleash on 
an untutored world? There are many profoundly irritating ways of wasting money. 
But the one that has made all the noise these past few days, drawing grovelling 
apologies from every corporation orifice, isn't really one of them.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> fought long and hard to keep 
the National Audit Office out of its files and board papers. Scottish chartered 
accountants and MoD procurement specialists (that's Amyas Morse, now head of 
the NAO) aren't naturally sympathetic monitors of the biggest broadcaster in 
the land. Perhaps they like the attention their delvings command from MPs and 
newspapers with a reason for bashing the Beeb. It's more exciting than tracking 
defence contracts or organising PricewaterhouseCoopers affairs. But that 
doesn't mean the auditors are right or useful: especially in this case.

Core NAO statement. "It is essential that the way the BBC rewards its 
employees, in both its public services and the corporation's commercial 
subsidiaries, is coherent, understandable and defensible to staff and above all 
to licence payers." Oh no it isn't, at least not in the way the accountants 
believe. The BBC is a hybrid organisation, one foot in the mire of Whitehall, 
one foot on the Palladium stage. Constantly under attack, it feels beleaguered. 
That's what needs to be understood.

Where do top BBC executives come from? Mostly (Janice Hadlow at BBC2, Danny 
Cohen when at BBC1 and Mark Thompson) from Channel 4.David Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-abraham>, the boss of Channel 4, 
earned £744,000 in 2013: Tony Hall, the new director general, gets £450,000 
basic. Jay Hunt, who went from running BBC1 to running C4's programming, is in 
the £542,000 bracket. Her successor at BBC1, Charlotte Moore, receives just 
£262,000. As for ITV, try Adam Crozier, its boss on £3.7m, or Archie Norman, 
its chairman, on £720,000. And, in a more purely financial world the NAO may 
understand better, when Anne Bulford, boss of C4 finances, left for the BBC and 
an extended version of the same role, her salary dropped by £94,000 (from 
£489,000 to £395,000).

Now there won't be much public sympathy for any packages in this region. But, 
while it's easy to sneer at supposed largesse, it's also necessary to register 
reality. Controlling vast organisations with a budget well over £3bn needs a 
particular skillset. Paul Dacre'sDaily Mail fans would say he's well worth his 
£1.8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/10/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-earns>
 a year: why should Tony Hall languish so far behind? Why can't we set the BBC 
in a proper showbiz context, competing for talent and bright ideas? Do we just 
pretend it's some Aunt Sally of bureaucratic existence, there to be scorned on 
cue?

The NAO charge that got most traction was all about payouts to those on their 
way out:George Entwistle <https://www.theguardian.com/media/george-entwistle>, 
Mark Byford, Caroline Thomson and dozens more. Some got more than their 
contractual due. Lords Hall and Patten are fixing all that. But what they can't 
– and shouldn't attempt – to fix is a BBC culture that sees the organisation as 
a community, wearing a badge of honour not shame. You can lose your job at the 
BBC just as easily as you can lose it at ITV. The ratings game will always get 
you. But if there's no extra humanity available around Broadcasting House, no 
compassion for careers turned suddenly barren, then the NAO approach rules OK. 
And viewer or listener who would like the board of PricewaterhouseCoopers to 
run the BBC is welcome to join the big switch-off fast.
 