
David Cameron's lineage is as varied as it is impressive. He's a descendant of 
King William IV, which makes him the Queen's fifth cousin. His uncle is Sir 
William Stratford Dugdale, a former chairman of Aston Villa. He's Boris 
Johnson's eighth cousin. He's related to historian Adam Hart-Davis, fellow 
politician Harriet Harman and a former presenter of the Radio 4 panel show My 
Word. And now, as genealogy websitefindmypast.co.uk 
<http://www.findmypast.co.uk/?gclid=CKGwyYzwo7wCFVDLtAodzTIA5A> has discovered, 
he's also the sixth cousin of comedian Al Murray 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/al-murray-david-cameron-cousins-3087340>.

Obviously, my initial reaction to this latest piece of news was one of 
uncontrolled panic. If Cameron can be related to someone as unlikely as Murray, 
then does that mean he's related to me? Somewhere down the line, possibly after 
an afternoon of alcohol-fuelled low self-esteem and before a lifetime of mutual 
regret, did one of David Cameron's ancestors get one of my ancestors pregnant? 
Am I part-Cameron? I checked my reflection in a mirror. That forehead looks 
suspiciously familiar, I thought. My face goes quite red when I'm angry. I've 
got crap hair, too. Could it really be? Am I the black sheep of David Cameron's 
family? Is he the black sheep of mine?

Fortunately, one of my aunts has spent decades fastidiously tracing the 
capillaries of my ancestry, so it was possible to trace it back and find out. 
It turns out that the Heritages weren't an especially adventurous bunch. Even 
400 years ago, the branches of my family tree didn't extend much further than 
walking distance from the pocket of Kent where my mum and dad still live. If a 
Cameron ever wanted to make a Heritage booty call, they would have to do all 
the legwork.

We also didn't exactly move in the same circles as Dave's clan. My lot don't 
seem to have been overly troubled by ambition. There was a landowner early on, 
but he apparently lost a great swathe of Folkestone in a drunken bet. The rest 
are shopkeepers and privates, servants and skivvies and low-level crooks. The 
chance of any of them happening upon the Cameron's wealthy, predominantly 
Scottish clan of stockbrokers and dignitaries – much less the chances of them 
finding their confusingly potatoish faces attractive enough to have children 
with – seem incredibly slim.

And yet, the further back you go, the likelier it becomes. With every 
generation, the number of ancestors that we all have decreases exponentially. 
Go back 30, according to Graham Coop of the University of California, and 
everyone of European descent becomes related. Indeed, you only need to trace 
back 100 generations to find the most recent common ancestor of every single 
human alive today. Which means that resistance is futile. I am probably related 
toDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>. And so are 
you. We really are all in this together. Rubbish, isn't it?

• This article was amended on 31 January 2014. The earlier version said David 
Cameron was the first cousin five times removed of comedianAl Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/al-murray>.
 