
Political parties and their representatives are positioning themselves in 
anticipation of a fresh Senate election inWestern Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> after the 
Australian Electoral Commission said the disputed result was now bound for the 
high court.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> on Monday 
attempted to frame any fresh Senate race in WA as a new political referendum on 
Labor's clean energy package in the wake of the shadow cabinet's decision last 
week to stick with the election policy on climate change.

"It will be another opportunity to have a referendum on the carbon tax, which 
is hurting families and hurting the economy," the federal finance minister, 
Mathias Cormann, told reporters in Canberra.

But Labor has brushed that off as political rhetoric from a government 
intending to implement a policy that will not actually address climate change.

The shadow climate change minister, Mark Butler, said the opposition did not 
intend to wave through a policy that removed the legal cap on pollution. The 
Coalition's "direct action" plan was a "dog" of a policy, he said. "You can't 
just throw the baby out with the bathwater," Butler said on Monday.

Candidates in Western Australia are also positioning themselves ahead of a 
process which could throw open nominations for a fresh Senate contest.

Labor's Louise Pratt, who lost out in the contested recount in part because 
the WA left-winger was Labor's number two Senate candidate in the September 
election, hinted her party may want to adjust the order of the senate ticket in 
a new pre-selection.

"It will be a question for the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> to resolve, but it is 
clearly a different race with a lot more focus," Pratt said on Monday. Former 
union official Joe Bullock was elected in WA in the number one spot for the ALP.

Wikileaks founder Julian Assange is also likely to be a contender in any new 
contest, according to the party's former lead candidate in WA, Gerry Georgatos.

The jostling on Monday occurred even though it was not yet clear whether the 
high court, sitting as the court of disputed returns, would actually order a 
fresh election.

The special minister of state, Michael Ronaldson, issued a stern rebuke 
against "hypotheticals", including, presumably, to colleagues on his own side 
of politics who are out framing the parameters of the next contest.

"It is purely hypothetical for people to assume there will be a fresh 
election. There are clearly a range of options, of which a fresh election could 
be one," Ronaldson told the ABC on Monday afternoon. Ronaldson said it was 
"premature" for anyone to be speculating about future courses of action.

The fracas has been prompted by the loss of 1,375 ballot papers during a 
recent recount in the WA Senate race. The Australian Electoral Commissioner, Ed 
Killesteyn, said on Monday that the loss of the ballots created "a nagging and 
almost irreconcilable doubt about the outcome of the West Australian senate 
election".

Killesteyn did a round of media interviews on Monday in which he issued 
another unreserved apology for an incident that has inflicted substantial 
reputational damage on the AEC.

The commission is leaving open the option of petitioning the court of disputed 
returns itself in a gesture that would be intended to restore confidence to the 
electoral system. The AEC has also called on the services of the former federal 
police commissioner, Mick Keelty, to investigate the incident.

The WA Senate result was declared on Monday afternoon despite the lost 
ballots, triggering the 40-day process for petitions to the High Court. The 
recount awarded the final two places to the Greens and to the Sports party. The 
original result gave the Senate spots to a Palmer United party candidate and to 
the ALP.

The PUP has already flagged its intention to challenge the result.

Greens senator Scott Ludlam spoke at the declaration on Monday, remarking that 
it was appropriate the WA result be challenged in the court of disputed returns.

Louise Pratt also spoke, saying it was important to secure "a proper 
democratic outcome for the voters of WA". She said the onus was on the AEC to 
petition the court.

A number of players, including the Greens and the South Australian independent 
Nick Xenophon, have used the uncertainty about the WA ballots process to argue 
the case for broader reforms to the Senate voting system to stop micro-parties 
gaming the system.

Xenophon is proposing to bring forward a private members bill when the new 
federal parliament resumes next week to implement optional preferential voting. 
The Greens support that change as well.

Ronaldson said on Monday he would be giving the parliamentary committee on 
electoral matters a reference to examine the 2013 poll, but he would not be 
rushing to any other conclusion.

"I've had an enormous amount of advice over the last six weeks – some of it 
constructive, some of it less so," the special minister of state said.

Liberal campaign director Brian Loughnane has publicly called for an inquiry 
into the senate voting process after the strong result for micro-parties in the 
2013 poll – a call which has in-principle support from the ALP.
 