
The pint. As an icon of these fair islands go, I'd say it's second only to the 
Spitfire, or a red phone box with its tiny windows kicked in.

So it's little wonder politicians are so keen to get their grubby hands on 
them. So addled are our modern-day politicians they think clutching a pint 
makes them look normal, and worse still, relevant.

Remember: Churchill was no stranger to drink, but he never had his picture 
taken with a pint of soapy lager. 

And anyway: what muppet would listen to some bloke mouthing off about the 
state of the nation while waggling a pint? Behold this parade of deluded pint 
wagglers.
 Nick Clegg pulls a pint at the Queens Head in Soho. Photograph: Ben 
Gurr/Getty Images 
Nick Clegg: "He has a nerve" 


Such is the shame surrounding the deputy PM that the pint in question refused 
to be pictured with him. Note the barman preparing to stab him in the back 
while wearing a Vince Cable Grin. Also: he has a nerve pouring this pint with a 
smile on his face when everyone knows it costs nine grand to drink in a student 
union bar. VERDICT: 0/5
 Nigel Farage at the Hoy and Helmet in South Benfleet, Essex. Photograph: 
Simon Ford/Rex 
Nigel Farage: "Busted" 


Nigel Farwich likes to trade on the notion that he's not like other 
politicians, he's different etc, and we are often treated to pictures of him 
actually drinking beer (I know, it's incredible, isn't it?) yet here we see 
that Nige is just like all the others – he's gleefully helping himself. Busted, 
you grim old leather-faced buzzard. However: Farwich at least looks familiar 
with pint pouring dynamics. He'd make for reasonable Thursday afternoon cover 
at best. Though Thursday is the afternoon when all those nice Romanian lads 
come in and drink their benefits money. Probably a bad idea. VERDICT: 3/5
 Barack Obama watches Michelle draw a pint at Ollie Hayes' Pub in Moneygall, 
Ireland. Photograph: Rex 
The Obamas: "A pint of bubonic plague"

He's holding that stout like it's a pint of bubonic plague. And fair enough, 
it's horrible. Also: the Secret Service have drunk half of it, to see whether 
it's poison. It is. Respect to Mr O for getting the missus to pour one, though. 
Michelle has that look on her face that says she'll be demanding a drone strike 
on the place in the car on the way home. VERDICT: 3/5
 David Cameron at the reopening of the Maytime Inn, in Asthall, Burford, 
Oxfordshire. Photograph: David Hartley/Rex 
David Cameron: "He's got the angle all wrong" 

The prime minister has seen his butler doing this, but not in a long while, so 
he's doing his best to remember how to pour this infernal stuff those voter 
chappies drink. He's got the angle all wrong, though – shocking stuff. Expect 
him to pour a half and blame it on Labour. VERDICT: 2/5
 William Hague visits Fuller's brewery in London. Photograph: Julian Makey/Rex 
William Hague: "Here he is on pint 15" 


The foreign secretary once really impressed everyone I know, at least, when he 
famously boasted that he used to drink 15 pints a day when he was a lad. Here 
he is on pint 15, just before all his hair fell out as a result of 
hop-poisoning. Please drink responsibly, kids. VERDICT: 15/5
 Michael Portillo behind the bar. Photograph: Today/Rex 
Michael Portillo: "What can I say? Hired" 


Classic Portillo. It might look like he's poured that pint, but there's no way 
of being sure he actually has. The fact he seems to still be pouring it while 
waving around an unsettled pint somewhat undermines his apparent bar skills. 
However: what Portillo does bring to this is a ruddy faced cheer that's missing 
from all these other pictures. What can I say? How busy is he? Hired. VERDICT: 
4/5
 Margaret Thatcher admires the beer. Photograph: Allen/Daily Mail/Rex 
Margaret Thatcher: "How much is that in deprived children's tears?"


Always the pioneer, here is Mrs Thatcher pouring a pint and trying to look 
normal before everyone else, back in the days of black and white. Just look at 
her, eyeing up that pint and imagining exactly how much that is in school milk 
and how much it is in deprived children's tears. She's never been so happy. 
However, of all the pints poured, this is the most generous measure, which is a 
surprise. Imagine for a moment a parallel universe where she stayed behind that 
bar – no Thatcher era wine bars, and tossers drinking champagne and eating 
olives to the sound of Sade: you can always dream. VERDICT: 5/5 for barskills 
0/5 for failing to heed her true destiny
 Boris Johnson serves a pint at the King's Arms in Tooley Street, south 
London. Photograph: Geoff Caddick/PA 
Boris Johnson: "Get a haircut you plonker"


The thing about posh gap year bar staff is that for a while they're 
entertaining with their boundless energy and quotes from Cicero and all that 
bollocks, but then they become the very height of tedium and/or the recipient 
of a much-needed nut-pummelling. Get a haircut you plonker. Unhygienic.  
VERDICT: 1/5
 George Osborne at the Red Lion in Westminster. Photograph: Kirsty 
Wigglesworth/WPA Pool/Getty Images 
George Osborne: "He's pulling the wrong lever" 


Typical stuff from Osborne. He's pulling the wrong lever and expecting 
results. That pint is nothing to do with him, it would have happened anyway, 
and in fact, if it wasn't for him, that pint would have happened two or three 
years ago.Also: if he wants to look normal, he really must try to act like he's 
seen a pint of bitter before. VERDICT: 12/5 (Hang on, my numbers don't add up 
either.)

• The Pub Landlord will be performing at London's Southbank on the 14, 21 and 
28 June and 5 July and is on tour this autumn. Seethepublandlord.com 
<http://thepublandlord.com/> for details.
 