
Detectives will continue to explore the possibility that Mark Bridger 
committed offences against other children before he abducted and murderedApril 
Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones>, it has emerged.

Over the eight months since he was arrested following April's disappearance 
detectives have probed the background of the father of six to try to see if he 
carried out any previous offences against youngsters.

He has been close not only to his own children but to the sons and daughters 
of a string of partners. He also came into contact with children when he worked 
as a lifeguard at the leisure centre in April's home town of Machynlleth, mid
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, and at an outdoor activity centre 
in the area. Dyfed-Powys police even spoke to colleagues in Australia because 
Bridger spent some time travelling there to find out what he was doing and who 
he was close to.

DS Andy John, who led the investigation, said: "We have considered all the 
children he potentially had access to. We've considered the safeguarding 
issues."

John said so far no allegations had been made but Dyfed-Powys police is 
conscious that other victims may come forward now that Bridger has been 
convicted. "It's something we will continue to monitor," said John.

Privately detectives are surprised that Bridger leapt from being a man with no 
history of any sort of child abuse to a child killer.

Bridger, 47, is being held in isolation because of concerns that he will be 
attacked by other prisoners as he begins a full-life term for April's murder. 
The police have no right now to go to him to ask him again what he did with 
April's body.

April's grandfather, Dai Smith, conceded the family did not believe her body 
would ever be found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/video/2013/may/31/april-jones-grandparents-loss-video>
. "We miss her every day, think about her every day. She'll always be in our 
lives," he told the Welsh language broadcaster S4C.

"I think when a child dies in an accident it's a terrible thing, but I think 
this is worse – the fact that we don't have her body. I don't think anyone will 
ever know for sure what happened to her – only him."

April's family will continue to be looked after by the police and a network of 
professional and volunteer helpers.

DS Hayley Heard, a family liaison officer, said: "We will always be there, 
family liaison officers, but we have sourced a group of volunteers and 
professional people who can support them following on from the trial.

"They have got a good support network of family and friends but sometimes I 
think you always need other help. But we will always be there to support them."

A "recovery group" involving agencies including social services and children's 
services has been set up by Powys county council to help others touched by the 
case. Among those who have been offered help are some of the 29 child witnesses 
the police interviewed, former schoolmates of April, members of Bridger's 
family and other residents of Machynlleth.

Susan Dale, who set up the Listening Point 
<http://www.susandale.counselling.co.uk/?pageId=2384> counselling and drop-in 
centre on the Bryn-Y-Gog estate where April lived, said it would be years 
before the town began to recover.

She said the number of clients, young and old, using the centre had increased 
hugely during Bridger's trial. "The last couple of days we have been reeling," 
said Dale. "But this is a resilient community. There's so much good will. We 
will stay together and we will build a safe place for our children."

Geoff Sherlock, interim head of adult services at Powys county council and the 
chair of the Machynlleth recovery group, said the authority had instigated the 
sort of emergency plan they use for a natural disaster like a flood to help 
residents cope. Sherlock said the recovery group would continue to be in place 
for as long as it was needed.
 