
Poland’s president has signed into law a bill handing the conservative 
government control of state media, despite concern elsewhere in the EU and 
condemnation from rights watchdogs.

Andrzej Duda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrzej-duda> signed the 
legislation because he wants state media to be “impartial, objective and 
credible”, his aide Małgorzata Sadurska said. She added that the president did 
not believe broadcasters guaranteed objective information in their current form.

Under the new law, senior figures in public radio and television will be 
appointed – and sacked – by the treasury minister, and will no longer be hired 
by the National Broadcasting Council.

Under the legislation current managers and supervisory board members of 
Poland’s public broadcasters will be fired with immediate effect.

The ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party had earlier said it planned to turn the 
PAP news agency and public television and radio – all currently state-owned 
businesses – into national cultural institutions like the opera or the national 
museum.


The media measure is the latest controversial legislation introduced by the 
PiS, led by the former premier Jarosław Kaczyński, since it won a general 
election in October after eight years in opposition.

Late last year Duda passed into law a reform of the constitutional court 
despite mass protests and claims by the opposition that the changes threatened 
judicial independence.

The Council of Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the 
continent’s top human rights watchdog, had urged Duda against signing the media 
law. On Tuesday the body’s human rights commissioner, Nils Muižnieks, appealed 
to Duda not to sign it.

The Polish government’s moves have prompted escalating warnings from the 
European commission that it could intervene, including two letters from its 
vice-president, Frans Timmermans, asking Warsaw for information.

In an unprecedented move, on 13 January the commission will debate the state 
of the rule of law in Poland, which could theoretically result inPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> losing its EU voting rights on 
matters that concern the entire 28-nation bloc.

However, Jean-Claude Juncker, head of the commission, said on Thursday that 
that option, contained in article 7 of the treaty of the European Union, was 
unlikely.

“Now we are in discussions with Poland and I don’t want to speculate about 
further consequences, which could be entailed by the application of article 7. 
We are not there, I don’t think we will get to that point,” he said.

“Let’s not overdramatise … We have to have friendly and good relations with 
Poland so our approach is very constructive. We are not bashing Poland.”
 