 Britain's chief anti-terrorism officer, Andy Hayman, announced his resignation 
today, saying "unfounded accusations" against him had taken a personal toll.
The third most senior police officer in Britain, who worked as head of 
specialist operations at Scotland Yard, said he felt it was the "right time" to 
retire from the force.

In recent weeks he has been dogged by controversy over claims he ran up credit 
card expenses of more than £15,000 and took his female staff officer on foreign 
trips.

He was also criticised over the Met's handling of the shooting dead of Jean 
Charles de Menezes at Stockwell tube station in 2005.

A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said: "Following discussions with the 
Metropolitan Police Authority and the commissioner, assistant commissionerAndy 
Hayman <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/andy-hayman> has decided to retire from 
the Metropolitan police service."

Hayman has headed the specialist operations directorate, including the 
counter-terrorist command, since February 2005.

Deputy assistant commissioner Peter Clarke, the national counter-terrorism 
coordinator, is postponing his own retirement to fill Hayman's shoes until a 
replacement is found.

Hayman said: "It has been a great honour and privilege to lead specialist 
operations in its challenging work protecting this country from the palpable 
terrorist threat we face. This role requires total commitment in both time and 
effort and has a considerable impact on your personal life, your family and 
friends. It also puts you in the spotlight, often in ways that are very hurtful.

"Recent weeks have seen a series of leaks and unfounded accusations about me, 
which I have and will continue to refute strongly. However, these events take 
their toll on you personally and I feel now is the right time for me to step 
aside."

Hayman's responsibilities included the security of London, protecting the 
royal family, and liaising with MI5 and other agencies on all national security 
and espionage cases, as well as briefing the prime minister.

He was also the main point of liaison for the media on terror issues.

He was criticised in an Independent Police Complaints Commission report for 
"choosing to mislead" the public, the Met commissioner, Sir Ian Blair, and 
other senior officers over the De Menezes shooting.

Hayman failed to tell them after the shooting that the Brazilian was not a 
wanted terrorist.

He is currently under investigation over separate allegations that he ran up 
excessive expenses on his credit card, which he denies.

An audit of Metropolitan police credit cards found he had spent more than 
£15,000 over a couple of years - considerably more than other senior officers.

Hayman was questioned in particular over why he had claimed expenses for 
staying at a hotel at Heathrow when he had a publicly funded "grace and favour" 
apartment in central London.

The married father of two has also been questioned about his relationship with 
his former staff officer Sergeant Heidi Tubby. She is said to have accompanied 
him on foreign business trips at public expense.

Hayman, 48, a former chief constable of Norfolk police, was one of only five 
assistant commissioners in the Met, and a close ally of Blair.

After the announcement today, Blair led tributes to Hayman's time in the job.

He said: "Andy Hayman can be very proud of the achievements and successes 
during his time in charge of specialist operations. In this year alone, 37 
people have been convicted in terrorist-related cases following investigation 
by the Met.

"He has also made a significant contribution to the development of policing 
and the service during his career. I fully understand his decision to leave at 
this time and wish him well for the future."

The home secretary, Jacqui Smith, said: "Andy Hayman has been at the forefront 
of the police's work to protect our country from the terrorist threat. I am 
very grateful for his immense contribution to counter-terrorism and to British 
policing."

Ken Jones, the president of the Association of Chief Police Officers, said: 
"Andy's drive and leadership has resulted in the creation of a national 
counter-terrorism force that is second to none.

"We are in no doubt that many people were brought to justice and lives saved 
through his contribution."

The chairman of the Metropolitan Police Authority, Len Duvall, said: "He has 
achieved this during an extremely demanding and difficult period and we all 
have a lot to thank him for."
 