
One of the few pluses for England this summer is that Ricky Ponting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> has been out of form in the 
Tests. As they discovered on Thursday, he isn't any more.

Ricky wouldn't have been too worried about being in a bit of a slump before 
this Test because he was seeing it like a beach ball. In the one-day series he 
was dominating and his form in the county games has been good. He just wasn't 
converting in the Tests. He will have worked hard and backed his ability and 
the great thing about him is he doesn't complicate things.

I first came across Ricky when he was playing for Tasmania as a 17-year-old. 
He came out to bat against Western Australia as a fresh-faced schoolboy and 
with anyone like that you test them out. We had Jo Angel, Brendon Julian and 
Bruce Reid in our side so we decided to intimidate him. Ricky was on 60 in no 
time at all.

As Alex Tudor and Andy Caddick found out, if you bowl anything halfway down 
it's like feeding strawberries to pigs. Ricky picks up length that split second 
quicker than most and he had that ability straight out of school, which is the 
sign of a great player. Even on a quick track like the Waca in Perth he is 
totally comfortable with the short stuff.

Ricky came out of the academy with a great reputation. Rodney Marsh positively 
raved about him and he wasn't fazed at all with the baggage that came with his 
reputation. On his Test debut in 1995 he made his way out to the middle wearing 
his baggy green and not a helmet. OK, we were playing Sri Lanka at the time so 
he wasn't going to be facing Walsh and Ambrose, but they still had guys who 
were quick enough to bump a man on the head. Ricky was on 40 before you could 
blink and finished up on 96.

He has a bit of a reputation for being a wild lad because he's had the odd 
altercation over his career, but who doesn't? Ricky is a terrific guy and a 
good team man who is very highly regarded in the Australian side. An example of 
this is that he leads the Australians in their team song, The Southern Cross .

This is a tradition that has been handed down since the days of Rod Marsh. 
After every Test win or one-day series victory the team sing the song as a 
celebration and Ian Healy handed the responsibility of leading the singing on 
to Ricky. The song is usually tweaked up a bit to accommodate half a dozen 
beers and is one of the great traditions of Australian cricket.

The team normally do their singing shortly after the game has ended and before 
anybody has showered and changed. After we won the World Cup in 1999 things 
were different. The game ended at about four in the afternoon but we didn't get 
to do The Southern Cross until 11 at night and decided to do it out in the 
middle at Lord's.

Ricky isn't a giant among all that tall timber and asked if he could sit on my 
shoulders to lead the song. It was one of the most memorable moments I've had 
but I didn't play much cricket for the next six months due to a herniated disc. 
I'm sure there was a problem there before but I still tell Ricky he was to 
blame.
 