
The world must harness the power of love rather than might and wealth to bring 
peace to areas blighted by conflict,Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has said in his Christmas Day 
message. In the UK, Christian leaders focused on uncertainty, anxiety and fear 
at the end of a tumultuous year on the global stage.

In his Christmas Day homily delivered in front of thousands of people from the 
balcony of St Peter’s Basilica in Rome, the leader of the world’s 1.2 billion 
Roman Catholics appealed for the message of peace to go out “to the ends of the 
Earth to reach all peoples, especially those scarred by war and harsh conflicts 
that seem stronger than the yearning for peace”.

At the close of a year that has seen repeated acts of terrorism – and amid 
tight security around the Vatican – Francis wished peace “to those who have 
lost a person dear to them as a result of brutal acts of terrorism, and to 
those who have sown fear and death into the hearts of so many countries and 
cities”.

Syria topped the pope’s long checklist of countries that have been plagued by 
war and suffering over the past year. “Far too much blood has been spilled,” he 
said.

The pontiff added: “Above all, in the city of Aleppo, site of the most awful 
battles in recent weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
, it is most urgent that assistance and support be guaranteed to the exhausted 
civil populace, with respect for humanitarian law. It is time for weapons to be 
stilled forever, and the international community to actively seek a negotiated 
solution so that civil coexistence can be restored in the country.”

'I couldn't take anything except dignity': stories of the leaving of Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
He called on Israelis and Palestinians to “have the courage and the 
determination to write a new page of history, where hate and revenge give way 
to the will to build together a future of mutual understanding and harmony”.

The pope called for peace, unity and dialogue in Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Nigeria, 
South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There was an “urgent need 
to put into practice commitments” made in eastern Ukraine, he added.

He urged harmony in Colombia, “which seeks to embark on a new and courageous 
path of dialogue and reconciliation”, and courage for Venezuela “to undertake 
the necessary steps to put an end to current tensions”.

Turning to Asia, he spoke of the need for protection and humanitarian 
assistance in Myanmar, and the need for “a renewed spirit of cooperation” to 
overcome tensions on the Korean peninsula.

The pope also sent a message of peace to “our abandoned and excluded brothers 
and sisters, to those that suffer hunger and to all the victims of violence. 
Peace to exiles, migrants and refugees, to all those who in our day are subject 
to human trafficking.

Pope Francis: Christmas has been ‘taken hostage’ by materialism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/pope-francis-christmas-eve-vatican>
“Peace to the people who suffer because of the economic ambitions of the few, 
because of the sheer greed and the idolatry of money, which leads to slavery. 
Peace to those affected by social and economic unrest, and to those who endure 
the consequences of earthquakes or other natural catastrophes.”

Children got a special mention, “above all those deprived of the joys of 
childhood because of hunger, wars or the selfishness of adults”.

Earlier, in his Christmas Eve homily, Francis said that Christmas had been 
“taken hostage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/pope-francis-christmas-eve-vatican>
 by a dazzling materialism that blinded many to the needs of the hungry, the 
migrants and the war-weary.

A world often obsessed with gifts, feasting and self-centredness needed more 
humility. “If we want to celebrate Christmas authentically, we need to 
contemplate this sign: the fragile simplicity of a small newborn, the meekness 
of where he lies, the tender affection of the swaddling clothes. God is there,” 
the pontiff said.

Many in the wealthy world had to be reminded that the message of Christmas was 
humility, simplicity and mystery.


“Jesus was born rejected by some and regarded by many others with 
indifference,” he said. “Today, also the same indifference can exist, when 
Christmas becomes a feast where the protagonists are ourselves, rather than 
Jesus; when the lights of commerce cast the light of God into the shadows; when 
we are concerned for gifts, but cold toward those who are marginalised.”


He then added in unscripted remarks: “This worldliness has taken Christmas 
hostage. It needs to be freed.”


At Canterbury Cathedral, Justin Welby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/justin-welby>, the head of the Church of 
England, spoke of uncertainty, anxiety and fear in the world, and warned 
against putting trust in the wrong things and values in the wrong place.

“The end of 2016 finds us all in a different kind of world, one less 
predictable and certain, which feels more awash with fear and division,” said 
the archbishop of Canterbury and leader of the worldwide Anglican communion.


He told worshippers: “Uncertainty in the midst of so much, but far from 
universal, prosperity is a sign of our trust being in the wrong things. It 
tells us that our values are in the wrong place …


“Economic progress, technological progress, communication progress hasn’t 
resulted in economic justice. It hasn’t delivered glory for us.”


Nigel Farage, the former Ukip leader, attracted criticism after attacking 
Welby’s Christmas message on Twitter. He wrote: “Merry Christmas. Ignore all 
negative messages from the Archbishop of Canterbury and have a great day!”

Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of Westminster and leader of the 
Catholic church in England and Wales, also addressed the challenges of the past 
year in his midnight mass homily at Westminster Cathedral.


He quoted WB Yeats’s 1919 poem, The Second Coming: “Things fall apart, the 
centre cannot hold / Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.”


These words, Nichols told the congregation, “reflect the deep and widening 
sense of uncertainty many feel today. This is not the time or place to reflect 
on reasons or causes, but it is right to recognise these anxieties and fears.”


Referring to the lowly shepherds who found a place by Jesus’s crib in 
Bethlehem, the cardinal said: “In our thoughts, prayers and actions, there has 
to be room for the poor of our time so that they too may know this respect and 
concern. The list of those seeking our welcome is long: the homeless, the 
refugee, the victim of violence and human trafficking. Their voices call out 
for our compassion.”


Nichols also highlighted the needs and uncertainties facing those caring for 
elderly parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/raising-council-tax-will-increase-postcode-lottery-in-social-care>
 and relatives. “They are so frightened that resources to meet the basic needs 
of their loved ones are being withdrawn as care services are reviewed and 
reduced. For many elderly and needy people not only are these basic needs 
sometimes left unmet, but human contact disappears and the darkness of 
loneliness closes in.


“Meeting this challenge requires a recognition that good care for the elderly 
and vulnerable is not only important but nothing less than a defining 
characteristic of our society,” he said.

 In the face of anxiety about the “current instability in economic prospects 
and in the effectiveness of political structures”, people should “strive for 
truth, respect, compassion and forgiveness”, he said.

Earlier this week, the Prince of Wales also warned about disturbing trends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
 in 2016. “We are now seeing the rise of many populist groups across the world 
that are increasingly aggressive to those who adhere to a minority faith. All 
of this has deeply disturbing echoes of the dark days of the 1930s,” Prince 
Charles said on the Radio 4 Today programme’s Thought for the Day slot.


“That nearly 70 years later we should still be seeing such evil persecution is 
to me beyond all belief,” he said. “We owe it to those who suffered and died so 
horribly not to repeat the horrors of the past.”

 