
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> wants 
his Socceroos to prove they’re no longer the underdogs of world football in 
Friday night’s friendly against England. The sold-out game in Sunderland is a 
rare opportunity for Australia to square off against a top-10 opponent instead 
of another Asian foe like lowly-ranked World Cup qualifying opponents 
Tajikistan or Bangladesh.

Up to 8,000 travelling Australians are expected to descend on the Stadium Of 
Light on Friday evening (4.45am Saturday morning AEST) hoping to watch the 
Asian Cup champions produce a repeat of the last fixture between these sides, a 
3-1 Socceroos win in 2003.

And while the fans will be brimming with nostalgia come kickoff, that famous 
victory hasn’t been part of Postecoglou’s message to his players this week. The 
Socceroos coach is more determined to showcase Australia’s brand of football to 
the wider world.

England v Socceroos, Upton Park, 2003 – retro football liveblog | Richard 
Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/27/england-v-socceroos-upton-park-2003-retro-football-liveblog>
“I don’t want to play this underdog crap, I’ve been over that for a while,” 
Postecoglou said. “I don’t really care what other people think, I’ve always 
said that. At the end of the day it’s really about us and we want to play our 
football against a good opponent - whether other people like it or don’t like 
it is pretty irrelevant to be honest.”

“Hopefully we get into the space as a national team and as a nation where we 
don’t really care what other people and other nations think of us. Hopefully 
they don’t want to play us in the future.”

Postecoglou will use the game to tinker with his squad and formation ahead of 
a two-game friendly series with Greece back inAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> next month. But his eyes are 
looking further down the barrel, with Australia’s 2018 World Cup qualifying 
campaign to resume in September.

“It’s a great opportunity tomorrow night to test ourselves and our football 
and the last thing you want is to get to the end of the 90 minutes and you 
haven’t done that,” Postecoglou said on Thursday. “We want to come off the 
pitch at the end of the game knowing we’ve played our brand of football against 
a quality opponent and tested ourselves, and inched just a little bit further 
forward in the way we want to play.”

“We don’t get many windows now where we can play opposition outside our 
federation. The most important thing is we get ready for what’s coming ahead in 
September, October. We’ve got a tough World Cup qualifying campaign coming up 
and these games are valuable for us to be ready for that.”

His side is set to face a vastly under-strength England after injuries forced 
Roy Hodgson to drastically alter his team. Manchester United young gun Marcus 
Rashford will debut, likely in the starting 11 in place of Daniel Sturridge who 
hasn’t trained for the last two days with a calf injury.England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> will make a game day decision on 
whether or not the Liverpool striker plays.

Defender Gary Cahill has been ruled out entirely after requiring an injection 
to his hip, but should be fit next week ahead of England’s last friendly 
against Portugal. And midfielder Fabian Delph didn’t even travel with his 
England teammates on Thursday, left behind in Manchester to nurse a groin 
strain which will likely cost him a spot in Hodgson’s final 23-man Euro squad 
to be named this weekend.

“If Sturridge isn’t fit tomorrow then I think you’ll all work out that he 
[Rashford] is going to start the game,” Hodgson said in England’s pre-match 
press conference. “I’m happy with that, I’m more than content he can handle the 
situation. It doesn’t take a lot of detective work to work out that, with me 
wanting to rest [Jamie] Vardy and [Harry] Kane,” Hodgson said. “There was no 
doubt that my original intention was to choose between Sturridge, Rashford and 
possibly one other.”

Hodgson had been toying with the idea of a front three against Australia 
featuring captain Wayne Rooney on the left, Adam Lallana on the right and 
either Sturridge or Rashford in the middle. But his formation looks set to 
change now to accommodate his depleted forward stocks, with Rooney likely to 
now start from the bench.

With Cahill out, Liverpool midfielder Jordan Henderson looks the man to take 
the captain’s armband. Fellow Liverpool man Nathaniel Clyne should line up at 
right back with Ryan Bertrand on the left, and Fraser Forster will replace Joe 
Hart in goal.

Postecoglou refused to give any hints into the make-up of his starting 11, but 
A-League sharpshooter Jamie Maclaren is expected to debut up forward. Milos 
Degenek, Stefan Mauk and Brad Inman also look set to make their international 
debuts.
 