
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> was 
disappointed the Socceroos couldn’t get one over England on Friday night but 
pleased he could expose plenty of youngsters to top-level opposition with World 
Cup qualifiers looming. Australia were beaten 2-1 thanks to goals from England 
debutant Marcus Rashford and captain Wayne Rooney, but the home side certainly 
didn’t have everything their own way at a sold-out Stadium of Light in 
Sunderland.

Australia controlled the midfield for large parts of the game and set up a 
tense final 15 minutes after Eric Dier headed a sizzling Milos Degenek cross 
into his own goal. The performance was made even more impressive by the fact
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> were missing three 
front-liners in Tim Cahill, Trent Sainsbury and Matthew Spiranovic.

“It could’ve been very easy for us to go out there today and just try and 
snatch a result, sit back, try and absorb some pressure and try and get them on 
the break,” Postecoglou said. “We kind of flipped it and went the other way. 
From that perspective I think everyone contributed. We just lacked that 
clinical edge in the end.”

Looking ahead to two friendlies next month against Greece and then World Cup 
qualifiers from September, Postecoglou was pleased with the outing. “Our style 
of game I know will hold up for the challenges ahead, it held up against a very 
good opponent who are on the eve of a major tournament,” Postecoglou said. 
“They’re in great physical condition, we’re kind of at the other end of the 
scale. We didn’t win the game and that’s disappointing but if we had have won 
the game and not played like that then I wouldn’t be any more satisfied.”

Postecoglou won't let Socceroos talk 'underdog crap' as they face England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/27/postecoglou-wont-let-socceroos-talk-underdog-crap-as-they-face-england>
Brisbane Roar striker Jamie Maclaren and Germany-based defender Degenek were 
handed debuts while Chris Ikonomidis, Matt McKay, Tomi Juric, Craig Goodwin and 
Jackson Irvine got exposure off the bench.

“From our perspective we had some objectives coming into the game, we really 
wanted to expose some of our players to a high level of football,” said 
Postecoglou. “We wanted to test out our brand of football against a quality 
opponent, we ticked all of those boxes and in many respects we came out on the 
positive side of the ledger.”

“We’re in a results business but that’s not what drives me, what drives me is 
that we continue to improve our football and play a type of game that’s going 
to be effective when the meaningful games come along.”

Hodgson was happy with the hit-out ahead of naming his 23-man European 
Championships squad. “I thought we were correct in choosing Turkey and 
Australia as opponents because the quality of their play is of Euro 2016 
standard,” Hodgson said.



 