
Florence Ingram (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/why-computers-cant-create-constituencies>
, 21 September) is quite wrong to blame proportional representation for the 
rise of Hitler. The unfairness of the treaty of Versailles and what it 
inflicted on the German population created a backlash of resentment in which 
extremism was able to breed and the German president made a terrible mistake in 
making Hitler chancellor. After the war, the allies were right to insist that 
the new West Germany was governed with elections conducted by PR and in a 
federal structure. This curbed the potential of extremes taking power, forced 
sensible politicians to work together and provided the stability that allowed 
Germany to grow so successfully. The mistake that we made was not to give 
ourselves the benefit of such a system when we gave it to the Germans.
Lord Rennard
Liberal Democrat, House of Lords

• Florence Ingram ignores some core issues. We currently enjoy stable 
government delivered by approximately 28% of the electorate, but continually 
exploiting the mask of a majority democratic mandate.

All governments make deals behind the closed doors of the cabinet or inner 
cabinet, perhaps swayed by the influence of a small number of press barons or 
the excessively wealthy. Is that democratic? It would surely be better to 
utilise a fair system that works towards representative consensus. Or do we 
just accept that might is right?
Graham Marsden 
Sheffield

• The Weimar Republic had many problems, not least an immature democracy, 
economic woes and national bitterness about its treatment after 1918. To blame 
PR for the takeover of government by the Nazi party is simplistic. Many 
countries have a form of PR – among themGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and Italy – and stable government. 
The problem in Britain is not inter-party strife but arguments within parties 
that are unable to reflect the plurality of views held by the population.
Moira Sykes
Manchester 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 