
'Hey, Freddie," Gary Pratt's county colleague Jimmy Maher shouts from the 
pavilion balcony. He evidently thinks the jest highly amusing, as he repeats it 
a dozen times while Durham wait for the skies to clear and the rain-soaked 
cricket ground to dry.

Maher is a rugged Australian who doesn't understand why the Guardian has 
travelled several hundred miles north to do an in-depth interview with Pratt, a 
batsman not currently considered good enough to be in the Durham championship 
XI. Maher, if I might say so, has missed the point.

Pratt, in case you missed it, was the 23-year-old substitute fielder who ran 
out Australian captain Ricky Ponting in the crucial fourth Test at Trent 
Bridge. A direct hit from cover that sent Ponting from the field mouthing 
imprecations at the umpire, the England fielders, coach Duncan Fletcher, a 
rulebook that allowed on this ace fielder, and perhaps God. The moment turned 
the match - Ponting was on 48 and batting easily; the match turned the series. 
The real Freddie, of course, played a big part. But Pratt, the modest, smiling 
young man sitting beside me, brought the Ashes home. Pratt's Ashes - it has a 
certain ring to it.

G2's interest in Pratt, this belief that his was the hand that wrested the 
Ashes from Australia's grasp, has also been encouraged by one other factor - 
money. Flintoff, Michael Vaughan and Kevin Pietersen have all been given epic 
advances for their side of the story, while the rest of the team were signed 
for an official Ashes diary. Pratt is all we have left, and frankly all G2 - 
modest size, modest means - can afford. But we're happy, because, however much 
Maher might lampoon us from his pavilion eyrie, Pratt has a great story to 
tell. At least I hope he has.

First Test - Lord's
 Our hero was not able to act as a substitute at Lord's because of his 
commitments at Durham, so we have to accept that these memoirs of an 
unforgettable summer get off to a slow start. But this is not a wholly bad 
thing. The Aussies annihilated us in this game and it's best forgotten.

Second Test - Edgbaston
 The role of a substitute fielder can be a complicated one. His job is to 
replace a member of the team who has been forced to leave the field, usually to 
answer a call of nature. When the call is answered the substitute duly comes 
off the field again. Pratt had subbed several times before for England, but was 
electrified when the call came to join the squad in Birmingham, where England 
launched a remarkable fightback, scoring more than 400 on the first day. "The 
atmosphere was amazing," he says. "My job was to ferry out drinks and bananas, 
that sort of thing. I was doing it with Graham Swann. [Not yet under contract. 
One for the Independent to follow up, perhaps.] Then, when Australia were 
batting, we made sure we kept the doors of the dressing rooms open, so all the 
atmosphere and noise would come inside." A brilliant ploy!

Pratt was also quickly into action. "It was absolutely fantastic to go out 
there, the situation that the game was in. Just great. I did little short 
stints - two overs here, four overs there."

Any great pieces of fielding, half-chances at run-outs, crucial runs saved? 
"No, not really," says Pratt honestly (if mildly irritatingly). "I hardly 
touched the ball. It was pretty amazing considering the amount of time I was 
out there."

But Sunday, what about that extraordinary Sunday when England, having looked 
as if they were strolling to victory, scraped home by two runs? How did that 
feel in the dressing room? "I wasn't in the dressing room. I'd had to go back 
to Durham to play a game against Bangladesh."

Third Test - Old Trafford
 Pratt was not called upon. His moment of destiny was still on hold.

Fourth Test - Trent Bridge
 See it like a symphony. This is the fourth movement and it's about to reach 
the most staggering climax.

"I hadn't been on the field much before Saturday. Just the odd couple of overs 
here and there. Then when I heard that Simon [Jones] had gone to hospital and I 
was going to be on for three and a half hours, that was a pretty good feeling. 
When I got on I just wanted the ball to come to me every single time. I knew 
this was going to be a career highlight."

Describe it, Gary, describe it. That career-defining moment. "I was fielding 
at cover and Damien Martyn's just dropped the ball in front of him and shouted 
'Yes', but the ball had a bit more pace on it than he expected. I thought, 
'Right, this is my chance here', ran round the ball, clean pick-up in two 
hands, looked up, saw maybe one and a half stumps and as soon as I've let go of 
the ball I've thought 'That's hit.' I wasn't sure immediately that Ponting was 
out, but all the guys knew he was. I was thinking, 'Please be out'. Then it 
came up on the big screen - OUT! - and it was just the best feeling in the 
world. Awesome. All the guys jumped on me and Freddie picked me up.

"After that, I ran back to my position. The crowd were on their feet giving me 
an ovation, singing songs - 'There's only one Gary Pratt'. They sang that again 
at the victory celebrations in Trafalgar Square, well, a couple of people did, 
which was pretty moving to be honest."

I am a little tearful: this delightful young man, plucked from obscurity to 
make a crucial intervention in the greatest Test series of all time. A 
magnificent win for England and a world exclusive for G2. I am now certain we 
will do a book together as a result of this piece - The Hand That WonThe Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes>. ("Don't be silly," says Pratt when I 
mention this possibility. "There'd only be one page in it." He evidently 
doesn't understand what spirited - and handsomely remunerated - ghostwriters 
can achieve.)

Ponting threw a major wobbly after the run-out incident, but Pratt didn't see 
or hear anything, and no words passed between them. Pity, advance-wise.

Pratt again had to return to Durham for the final day of the Test, to play for 
his county against Scotland, except that he wasn't picked. England won the Test 
by three wickets after a moderately exciting run chase.

Fifth Test - The Oval
 Pratt subbed for four days of the final Test - he again had to miss the 
Sunday (he was playing a one-day game for Durham) but was back in time for the 
monster celebrations, thank God. Do you ever get bored as a sub? "Not at all," 
he says. "Just to be watching Test cricket is great. I'm like a fan who's got 
the opportunity to go on the field and do something special."

By now, this supersub was a celebrity. There really was only one Gary Pratt. 
"Whenever I got on the field, there was always a huge cheer," he says. "I think 
it was just to wind the Aussies up. I ran out on the second day and did a good 
bit of fielding which got a big cheer."

He was also now seen as an integral member of the side by the England 
regulars. When the Test was drawn and the Ashes safely won, there was Pratt in 
the celebratory team picture, arms around Hoggy and Harmy.

Pratt also played his full part in the unforgettable (at least to 
non-participants) post-match bender. "The feeling in the dressing room was 
fantastic, everybody in a circle singing. We stayed at the ground until about 
10.30pm having a drink with their guys. Then we went out for a few drinks and 
then back to the hotel - nothing too drastic. By the end it was just me and 
Freddie in the bar.

"You were the last to leave?" I ask with mounting excitement. "We didn't 
really leave. We just stayed down there for breakfast." Then on to meet the 
cricket-loving Tony Blair, though the generous Pratt gives him the benefit of 
the doubt. "I think he understood what Michael [Vaughan] meant when he told him 
I had run out Ricky, which I was quite surprised about because I can imagine 
quite a few things go on in his life."

Naturally, Pratt was also atop the victory bus. "We hadn't been expecting the 
scale of the event," he says. "We went around the first corner and it was like 
'Oh my Lord'. There were thousands and when we got to Trafalgar Square, it was 
like ..."

Words fail him, but I have left the best till last. During the end-of-series 
drink shared by the two sides after their historic encounter, with darkness 
descending on the Oval, Ponting, his anger over substitutes forgotten, the 
great spirit in which the matches had been played welling up within him, gave 
Gary his boots

"We were in there having a drink and he was sat in his seat, just looking at 
his boots, and he said, 'Do you want them?' I said, 'That'd be great', and he 
said, 'Yeah, you can have them.' He stood up, we shook hands, and he said, 
'Good luck' to me. I said, 'Thanks very much'. Then he signed a picture of 
Freddie holding me up, which all the England guys signed as well."

You probably won't believe me, but the boots story really is a G2 world 
exclusive. So stop your mocking: Gary Pratt is a great guy and, still young, he 
believes that one day he will play for England as a batsman, and not just as an 
expert fielder. The Hand That Won the Ashes might just be chapter one. And 
beware the curse of Pratt: the rain did eventually relent, the sun came out, 
and Jimmy Maher - the Aussie batsman who had enjoyed ribbing our youthful 
champion - was lbw for 0.
 