
As the Australian Open reaches the sharp end, Kim Clijsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> finds herself carrying the 
weight of a nation's expectation. After her engagement to Lleyton Hewitt and 
his defeat, along with that of Mark Philippoussis, the 20-year-old Belgian is, 
in effect, the last Australian left. If she is to win, she will need to show 
more resolution than she has in previous grand slam finals.

Three times she has come up short. When she was runner-up to Jennifer Capriati 
in the 2001 French Open, the achievement was regarded as remarkable and the 
precursor of major titles. There was little or no suggestion that she suffered 
from big-match nerves and on the WTA Tour she rarely has, win ning nine 
tournaments last year and reaching the No1 ranking in August.

Yet in the two finals that mattered most, the French Open again and the US 
Open, her powerfully athletic game was bleached of all colour. Her fellow 
Belgian Justine Henin-Hardenne proved the more versatile and imaginative on 
both occasions and the best of Clijsters had been consumed by nerves.

Some players absorb pressure, others thrive on it and yet others attempt to 
deflect it. An ankle injury in Perth this month threatened to cost Clijsters 
her place in the draw here, yet in a perverse way it has been a small blessing, 
enabling her to move through into the second week with that crushing weight of 
expectation all but lifted.

Yesterday she defeated Italy's Silvia Farina Elia 6-3, 6-3 and next plays 
Russia's Anastasia Myskina, the No6 seed, for a place in the semi-finals 
against Lisa Raymond or Switzerland's Patty Schnyder. There was no sign of a 
limp or a twinge but, when asked if the ankle was now completely sound, she 
rebutted the suggestion: "I just don't know what will happen. I could do 
something wrong in practice and I might not even be able to play my next match. 
I have to be very, very careful."

Clijsters hinted that she might need further treatment when she returns to 
Belgium but, whatever the extent of the injury, it has not prevented her from 
winning four matches in straight sets here, dropping only 14 games. At the same 
time the uncertainty has enabled her to deflect a huge build-up from the 
Australian media, although that will now grow again.

Myskina, who beat Chanda Rubin of the United States 6-7, 6-2, 6-2, is a 
mercurial player, prone to blowing as hot and cold as a Melbourne summer. Her 
second serve is feeble and eminently attackable, yet she compensates with 
quickness around the court, coupled with flat, strong ground strokes. But the 
power of Clijsters should be decisive.

Raymond might easily have suffered meltdown after her startling third-round 
victory over Venus Williams on Saturday but she was far too strong for the 
Russian-born French player Tatiana Golovin, who turned 16 on Sunday and was 
presented with flowers and cuddly toys.

By reaching the fourth round Golovin became the first women's wild card to 
reach this far in the Australian Open. She came to France when she was eight 
months and is being compared with another 16-year-old, Maria Sharapova of 
Russia, who last year reached the fourth round of Wimbledon as a wild card and 
was knocked out here in the third by Myskina.

A huge amount of money and publicity has been invested in both these girls, 
with the WTA amending its rules to allow them to play a greater number of games 
on the senior tour this year. As yet it is impossible to say which one will 
become the bigger star. Starlets they already are.
 