
John Harris's robust challenge to the idea of selecting our parliamentary 
candidates by primary elections began by criticising those who caricature and 
misrepresent the NHS in the United States (This anti-politics merely opens the 
door to millionaires and careerists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/aug/16/electoral-reform-totnes-primary-tory>
, 17 August). Yet Harris himself caricatures the debate we are having about the 
kind of political parties we want, and what we can learn from the American 
system.

Harris's main criticism of open primaries is that parliamentary selection will 
fall into the hands of "donation-heavy incumbents" or "lobbyist-funded war 
chests". But while he is right to open up the broader question of party 
funding, his view is fundamentally conservative, in defence of the status quo: 
party finances dominated by individual rich donors, tax exiles and trade unions 
alone. Is this the response that the expenses crisis deserves?

We will not – and must not – end up with the American-style, mega-money 
primaries that Harris describes, but some simple safeguards would allay these 
fears. The Electoral Commission could fund these primaries, as a benefit to 
wider electoral politics. And spending by candidates could be capped, to keep 
the contests equitable.

Harris is also mistaken in his suggestion that this debate will "actually 
leave the essential features of the political class unchanged". It is the 
current closed system that has produced a small unrepresentative elite in 
Westminster, not the openness that reformers argue for. The average localLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party now has fewer than 300 
members, or less than 0.5% of the local electorate.

Harris says: "Among Labour people, those who have advocated primaries in the 
past ... are speaking out again." The reason I first called for changing to a 
system of primaries over a year ago is that I often speak to talented young 
people of all ethnic and social backgrounds who are put off by the apparently 
closed shop of party elections. Many women say they find the process macho and 
unwelcoming. Labour should begin with a borough-by-borough primary to select 
our candidate for London mayor, to try out this idea in the most diverse 
political testing ground there is.

Most readers of this newspaper have voted Labour in the past. But many do not 
want to be a member of any political party. But surely they'd want a say in who 
their Labour candidate is, and for that candidate to be drawn from the widest 
possible pool of talent?

I absolutely recognise that there must be a clear role for party members in 
our policy debate. Indeed, Labour members could choose the shortlists of 
candidates, as the Tories did in Totnes this month.

This is not – and cannot be characterised as – a battle between factions on 
the left and right, either within or between parties. It is between an open, 
inclusive politics and a model of political participation that is dying.

Primaries are not the only answer. They must be part of a much wider package 
of reform which no longer takes people for granted. But opening up political 
parties and ensuring they have a future are parts of the same mission.

David Lammy is the Labour MP for Tottenham

lammyd@parliament.uk <mailto:lammyd@parliament.uk>
 