
A prisoner serving a life sentence has admitted attacking the child killer 
Mark Bridger in one of Britain's most secure jails.

Juvinai Ferreira, 22, pleaded guilty to the offence when he appeared at Leeds 
crown court via videolink.

Ferreira attacked the 47-year-old in Wakefield prison just months after 
Bridger was sentenced to life in jail for abducting and murdering five-year-old 
April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/30/mark-bridger-jailed-life-april-jones>
 in Machynlleth, Wales, last year.

No details of the attack were given in court on Wednesday, and Ferreira will 
be sentenced on 2 October.

According to reports at the time of the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/09/mark-bridger-attacked-prison-april-jones>
, which happened on 7 July, Bridger needed hospital treatment to a face wound 
after he was slashed with a makeshift knife.

He was returned to Wakefield after his injury was stitched.

On screen in court on Wednesday, Ferreira, who is a convicted murderer, looked 
bored and propped his head up with his hand for most of the proceedings as he 
sat at a desk in prison clothes.

At one point in the 20-minute hearing he asked one of his guards: "I thought 
this was going to be quick?"

After Judge Christopher Batty told him the case was going to be adjourned, 
Ferreira said to him: "Can you just not sentence me? I can't keep coming back.

"Just give me anything and move on."

Batty told him he needed a pre-sentence report to assess his level of 
dangerousness and decide whether a second life term was appropriate.

Ferreira was found guilty at Norwich crown court in 2009 of murdering Elaine 
Walpole in Dereham, Norfolk, in April 2008.

At the time police said Ferreira – who is originally from the Gambia – moved 
to Dereham in 2007 with a relative after escaping civil war in Africa. He 
befriended 47-year-old Walpole, who lived alone, after they met at a shop and 
she bought him cigarettes.

Prosecutors at the time suggested that Ferreira was "sex-crazed".

Postmortem tests showed that Walpole, a former hotel worker who had three 
children, had been stabbed three times and bitten.

Detectives and forensic experts spent nearly a year carrying out checks to 
show Ferreira was an adult as he said he was 16. Once it was proved he was an 
adult, Ferreira was given a life sentence and told he must serve at least 22 
years before being considered for parole.

Bridger, a father of six, snatched April near her home in Machynlleth. He was 
given a whole-life tariff by a judge in May at Mold crown court. The 
five-year-old's body has never been found.
 