
Your right to privacy is very important to us and we recognize that when you 
choose to provide us with information about yourself, you trust us to act in a 
responsible manner. We believe this information should only be used to help us 
provide you with better service. That's why we have put a policy in place to 
protect your personal information. In general, when you visit our websites and 
access information you remain anonymous.

We will not provide any of your personal information obtained via the web to 
other companies or individuals without giving you the opportunity to opt out. 
However, we may need to provide your name and delivery address to third parties 
that Kable uses for the purposes of delivering specific services to you (e.g. 
customer support, or a shipping company if you have asked us to send something 
to you.)

Some of our sites are only available to subscribers. Also, Kable provides free 
email newsletter services. Typically all that's requested is an e-mail address 
and some basic information about you, such as job function. There are occasions 
where we will ask for additional information and we do this to be able to 
better understand your needs, and provide you with services that we believe may 
be valuable to you. Some examples of information our websites collect are name, 
address and phone number.

Whenever you provide sensitive information (for example, a credit card number 
to make a purchase), we will take reasonable steps to protect it, such as 
encrypting your card number. We will also take reasonable security measures to 
protect your personal information in storage. Credit card numbers are used only 
for payment processing and are not retained for marketing purposes.

Our websites may provide links to third party sites. Since we do not control 
those websites, we encourage you to review the privacy policies of these third 
party sites.

Some Kable websites use cookies in order to improve the services which we 
offer. For example the KableDIRECT website uses cookies to enable users to set 
their home page. You can of course choose to disable cookies in your browser.

Information collected by Kable websites will be stored and processed in 
databases in the United Kingdom.

You can help Kable to maintain the accuracy of your information by notifying 
Kable of any changes to your address, title, phone number or e-mail address. 
You can do this by e-mail to info@kable.co.uk, by phone to +44 (0) 20 3353 
2462, or by mail to: General Marketing Manager, Kable, 3-7 Herbal Hill, London, 
EC1R 5EJ, UK.

If at any time you wish to stop receiving an electronic newsletter from Kable 
you can unsubscribe as explained in the newsletter or contact us at the above 
addresses. Please include your name, address, and e-mail address, and a 
description or example of any communication that you no longer wish to receive.

Copyright

Copyright in the data and materials on all Kable websites and e-mail services 
is owned by GNM Ltd. The data and materials are provided by GNM Ltd as services 
to its users and customers and may be used for internal informational purposes 
only. All rights reserved.

Disclaimer

Whilst every care is taken to ensure the accuracy of the information contained 
on all Kable websites, the opinions, analysis and facts stated are based on 
information and sources which, while we believe them to be reliable, are not 
guaranteed. In particular, it should not be relied upon as the sole source of 
reference in relation to the subject matter.

No liability can be accepted by GNM Ltd, its directors or employees for any 
loss occasioned to any person or entity acting or failing to act as a result of 
anything contained in or omitted from the content of this web site, or our 
conclusions as stated.

The materials are provided "as is" without any express or implied warranty of 
any kind including warranties of merchantability, non infringement of Kable 
intellectual property, or fitness for any particular purpose. In no event shall 
Kable or its suppliers be liable for any damages whatsoever (including, without 
limitation, damages for loss of profits, business interruption, loss of 
information) arising out of the use of or inability to use the materials, even 
if Kable has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

Because some jurisdictions prohibit the exclusion or limitation of liability 
for consequential or incidental damages, the above limitation may not apply to 
you.

Kable and its suppliers further do not warrant the accuracy or completeness of 
the information, text, graphics, links or other items contained within these 
materials. Kable may make changes to these materials, or to the products 
described therein, at any time without notice. Kable makes no commitment to 
update the materials.

Kable also disclaims liability for digital damage both direct and indirect, 
any consequential loss arising as well as specific exclusion of liability for 
loss of data, revenues and business contracts. The viewer is warned before 
downloading any code or data that, although the code has been checked, the 
viewer is at risk from digital damage and its consequences, unless the code is 
first checked to ensure no viruses exist.

Kable excludes any warranty as to the quality of any software downloaded on 
request or automatically by executable code and excludes warranty for its 
fitness for purpose. Also, the web-site controller is not liable for any damage 
caused by software on code attached to its software.

Revisions

Kable may revise these Terms at any time by updating this posting. You should 
visit this page from time to time to review the then-current Terms because they 
are binding on you. Certain provisions of these Terms may be superseded by 
expressly designated legal notices or terms located on particular pages on 
Kable websites.
 