
US school budget cuts have hit sales at whiteboard maker Promethean World, 
knocking nearly 20% off the value of its shares.

The company said first quarter revenues were down 14.4% year on year to 
£35.9m, with north American sales down 40%. This was "a greater decline than 
anticipated." And with US demand being volatile, the company said it was too 
early to tell whether the first quarter fall was indicative of the full year 
result:
 It is the key buying season from June to September in the US that will better 
inform our outlook for the year, and the third quarter will be a more important 
period in the north America sales cycle for 2012. We therefore remain cautious 
in our outlook. 
Promethean's shares are down 14.25p to 59p. Peel Hunt cut its price target 
from 100p to 70p, and analyst Alex Jarvis said:
 A very weak start to the year comes as a surprise after a fourth quarter beat 
and against weak first quarter 2011 comparisons. US sales were down 40%, 
partially offset by International sales (+22%). The second and third quarter 
are the key trading periods for Promethean, but the volatility in the first 
quarter leads us to downgrade our 2012 earnings per share forecast by 9%. We 
had hoped that 2012 forecasts were positioned for upgrades, and the shift in 
risk is reflected in a larger percentage downgrade to our target price and a 
move to hold (from buy). 
Meanwhile Liberum Capital has repeated its sell recommendation on publisher 
and educational specialistPearson, down 1p at £11.32, following the Promethean 
news. Analyst Ian Whittaker said:
 [There is a] negative read across from the interim management statement from 
Promethean World, which is a global education interactive learning technology 
company that works with a number of the educational publishers. Promethean's 
comments seem to provide further evidence that the US education market may be 
seeing increasing - not decreasing - problems. 
Elsewhere one of the day's biggest risers is equipment hire group Ashtead. Its 
shares have climbed 13p to 255.2p on positive news from US peers United Rentals 
and RSC, as well as an upbeat Architects Billing Index. Seymour Pierce said:
 Yesterday's results from peers United Rentals and RSC show that the secular 
shift away from ownership of equipment towards renting remains strong. We stick 
with our buy recommendation on Ashtead as we believe it is well placed to 
benefit from this.  