
I was last in the queue for the BCG jab at school and am not the sort of 
person who generally embraces needles. So it's with considerable surprise that 
I have had to admit that acupuncture works for me. Over the four years I have 
received treatment, I have discovered its efficacy in all manner of areas, none 
more so than in boosting fertility.

Fertility treatment is big business in the UK, where it's estimated that one 
in six couples experience problems conceiving, so it's not surprising that 
scientists are sceptical of a growing fringe industry of "miracle" remedies. 
However, a growing body of evidence suggests that the ancient Chinese practice 
of acupuncture really can enhance a woman's chance of conception. Two weeks ago 
Eric Manheimer from the University of Maryland published an
authoritative review of acupuncture's effect on IVF treatment in the British 
Medical Journal. The report was based on seven studies published in English 
since 2002 (involving women variously treated with real acupuncture, sham 
acupuncture or no acupuncture) and found that genuine acupuncture could 
increase a woman's chance of pregnancy by 65%.

I first became aware of the link between fertility and needles when a friend 
sent me to her acupuncturist, Gerad Kite, at a particularly low ebb in my life. 
I had just had my first pregnancy terminated after the foetus was diagnosed 
with a terminal condition and I had also learned that my mother had only months 
to live. Ostensibly I was being treated for paralysing grief, but after the 
first treatment, when I felt currents of energy move across my body, something 
very strange happened. I not only felt as if a portcullis somewhere inside had 
lifted, but I ovulated for a second time that month, just as my regular period 
was due, and I fell pregnant with my first son as a result.

It was only after these events that I learned Kite had a considerable 
reputation in the field of fertility treatment (although he is also highly 
regarded for his work with insomnia, depression and immune system disorders). 
After my son was born I started to cautiously recommend his clinic to friends. 
I say "cautiously" because the subject of what doctors now call "unexplained 
infertility syndrome" is delicate terrain. No treatment, from whatever side of 
the medical fence, guarantees a happy outcome and most involve a fair bit of 
expenditure. IVF has an average 15% success rate. If you don't have any 
children already, the NHS will provide up to three cycles of IVF for suitable 
couples, but there can be long waiting lists and one private IVF cycle costs 
around £2,500. Also, many people view acupuncture as some wacky alternative 
therapy.

There are two schools of acupuncture and, confusingly, the older-sounding 
Traditional Chinese Medicine (or TCM) developed out of the Maoist Cultural 
Revolution. TCM tends to focus on identifying symptoms and treats them via set 
acupuncture points. The needles are left in the patient for a period of time 
and treatment often involves the prescription of herbal remedies - although 
some doctors worry that such herbs can interfere with conventional medicine, 
including IVF drugs.

The Kite Clinic is one of the foremost exponents of the more ancient school of 
Five ElementAcupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture>. 
This operates on a more holistic basis than TCM and doesn't generally involve 
the prescription of herbs or any extras. If you need to test your sperm or 
hormone levels, Kite will send you to your GP and patients will be sensitively 
quizzed on their emotional and mental state, diet and exercise, and full 
medical background. Following diagnosis (which focuses on uncovering root 
causes of disorders), practitioners aim to restore patients to their most 
harmonious state of health. The acupuncturist will use needles to manipulate 
energy round the body. They are inserted just beneath the skin in a swift 
in-and-out manoeuvre that provokes a strange, dull, spreading ache or something 
akin to tiny electric shocks. The underlying principle is that the body's major 
organs use energy pathways to communicate and that malaise occurs whenever 
communication breaks down.

I tell Kite that doctors hate this type of language. "I know," he sighs, "but 
research increasingly demonstrates that the mind can have the most profound 
influence on the body's health." The trials in the BMJ report were carried out 
by TCM acupuncturists, but Five Element practitioners believe it has an even 
more dramatic effect upon fertility.

However, it is harder to run tests as Five Element acupuncture doesn't use set 
points, and treats every patient differently, according to their own individual 
diagnosis.

When it comes to acupuncture in conjunction with IVF, Kite says that ideally 
women (and men wanting to improve their sperm health) should start seeing a 
practitioner at least three months before the treatment begins.

Marie Wren, a consultant at London's Lister hospital, and the controversial 
but highly successful IVF specialist Dr Mohamed Taranissi of the Assisted 
Reproduction and Gynaecology Centre, both refer patients to Kite. Dr Adrian 
Williams, an NHS consultant at St Thomas' Hospital, London, agrees that the 
Five Element approach to "the whole person can only be beneficial to assisted 
conception". One friend of mine, a clinical psychologist who lost her first 
child at birth due to hospital malpractice, says she does not believe she would 
have been able to cope with the grief and subsequent stress of IVF without 
Kite's support. She is now the proud mother of twins.

According to Kite, the inability to conceive sometimes springs from something 
so simple that it has been overlooked. He cites busy, urban couples who simply 
don't have enough sex and stressed, dehydrated women whose bodies mimic 
menopausal symptoms. Most cases of infertility, however, pose bigger 
challenges, including polycystic ovary syndrome (POS), endometriosis, repeat 
miscarriages and men with poor sperm counts or quality.

Kite believes many patients would benefit from trying acupuncture before 
embarking on IVF. He treated one infertile woman for a BBC documentary on 
assisted fertility, but she fell pregnant after just three sessions and without 
the need for IVF.

Many practitioners don't like acupuncture success stories to appear too 
miraculous. In my experience, though, acupuncture anecdotes are frequently 
startling. I am acquainted with the case histories of 10 women aged 36-43 who 
sought acupuncture to help with conception. Only one had IVF in tandem with it. 
One had had a string of unexplained miscarriages. Another had been trying to 
conceive a second child for eight years without success. Two had lost babies at 
birth and their grief was, unsurprisingly, counterproductive to conception. The 
rest, myself included, had been trying for a while and felt that nature needed 
a boost. Eight of us fell pregnant, including the miscarrying woman and the 
eight-year-gapper (who did so in weeks) the bereaved mothers and the IVF 
patient. My second son is due on March 9. One gave up after five sessions and 
the last is still four months into treatment. Kite says 72% of women who have 
visited his clinic over the past 18 months to boost fertility (whether in 
combination with IVF or without) have become pregnant and carried a baby beyond 
the first trimester. The majority are 37 or older.

Cynics cite the placebo effect, but Kite queries why this is viewed as a 
negative thing: "If you pop a pill from a doctor you like and respect, it will 
be far more effective than taking medication from one you mistrust. Quality of 
care is vital when it comes to fertility."

The Kite Clinic has just received a grant from the King's Fund (an independent 
charitable foundation working to improve healthcare) to finance a study in 
conjunction with Exeter University into the effect of acupuncture on people 
with MUPS (medically unexplained physical symptoms) including unexplained 
infertility. Kite hopes the results will help persuade sceptics of 
acupuncture's measurable efficacy. But in conversations with his patients, I 
sense most don't require a scientific reason why acupuncture aids fertility - 
as long as it does.

· The British Acupuncture Council lists all professionally qualified 
acupuncturists in Britain, including both TCM and Five Element practitioners: 
020-8735 0404,acupuncture.org.uk <http://www.acupuncture.org.uk>
 