
A renewed pay crackdown on public sector workers will have "negative" 
consequences for talks over pension reform, the head of theTUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> has warned, as discussions between 
the government and trade union leaders resumed in the wake of Wednesday's mass 
strikes.

Brendan Barber <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/brendan-barber>, the lead 
negotiator in talks with ministers, said the announcement of a further pay 
squeeze on public sector workers in the autumn statement had thrown up a new 
barrier to progress. "The landscape has been changed in a negative way by these 
arbitrary announcements in the autumn statement. In particular, the prospect of 
another period of rigid pay restraint means that real-terms pay cuts will 
continue. That is the worst possible background for considering these issues."

On Tuesday, George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>
 capped public sector pay rises at 1% a year during 2013 and 2014, following on 
from a two-year pay freeze. A major sticking point in pension negotiations is 
the plan for an increase in contributions – taken from employee pay packets – 
of £2.8bn by 2014/2015, which unions argue is an unacceptable burden for staff 
now facing four years of pay restraint.

Trade unions <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tradeunions> are in dispute 
with the government over changes to pension schemes for four groups of 
employees: health, education, the civil service and local government.

The government retained its hardline stance on the pensions dispute, saying 
improved terms offered last month will be removed by the end of the year unless 
a deal is reached by then. Number 10 said the government remained hopeful a 
deal could be reached, but insisted the threat of a withdrawal of the offer 
remained.

In the wake of claims and counter-claims over the scale of the walkouts, David 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> conceded that the 
24-hour walkout by public sector workers was "obviously a big strike", just a 
day after telling MPs that the day of action on Wednesday was a "damp squib".

The TUC had expected up to 2 million workers to go on strike and, with the 
number of teachers still unknown, unions are confident that the final tally 
will top 1 million, making Wednesday the biggest day of strike action since the 
late 1970s. Barber branded Cameron's "damp squib" jibe as "unworthy and 
condescending".

Ministers are hopeful some teaching unions will be willing to settle, and have 
adopted a more conciliatory tone to win them over. As teaching unions resumed 
talks over their pension schemes, one union leader said there was a greater 
urgency in talks between the teaching unions and government following the mass 
walkout. Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head 
Teachers, said a meeting betweenMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, the education secretary, 
civil servants and teaching unions on Thursday had been "fairly positive".

"The rhetoric had stepped right up because of Wednesday's action and I sensed 
more urgency from government," he said.

Union leaders, Gove and officials discussed how sustainable the Teachers' 
Pension Scheme was and will meet again next week.

Gove described the discussions as "cordial and constructive". Senior union 
sources stressed it was much more likely that deals would emerge at around the 
same time, because to do otherwise would diminish their collective negotiating 
strength.

Health unions hold talks with officials on Friday , amid a hardening of 
opinions among members. Doctors, midwives and nurses at the Royal College of 
Nursing, British Medical Association and Royal College of Midwives have warned 
this week they may ballot members on industrial action – joining members of 
Unison and Unite who joined this week's walkouts – if pension talks failed to 
yield progress. National-level talks, led by Barber, with Francis Maude, the 
cabinet secretary, and Danny Alexander, chief secretary to the Treasury, have 
yet to be scheduled.
 