
Tony Abbott risks breaking his promise to the Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> by 
flagging further job cuts in the public service, the ACT chief minister, Andrew 
Barr, said.

On Monday the finance minister announced that eight public service departments 
would join the departments of health and education in undertaking “functional 
reviews” to identify efficiency savings.

Mathias Cormann side-stepped the question of how many jobs would be lost  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/11/mathias-cormann-refuses-to-put-figure-on-public-service-job-cuts-in-budget>
by the measures, which are expected to be announced in Tuesday’s federal budget.

More than 16,500 jobs have been shed since the Coalition came to power, 8,500 
of them fromCanberra <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>.

In March, when asked about whether the worst of the job cuts was over, Abbott 
said: “I don’t think anyone should expect major changes, because there have 
been some significant downsizings already.”

Barr sought an assurance from Abbott at the Council of Australian Governments 
(Coag) meeting last month that no more public sector jobs would go.

“Like every Australian, I expect the prime minister to keep his word,” Barr 
said. “Canberra has been through enough. Thousands and thousands of jobs have 
been lost or transferred elsewhere. The city has done more than our fair share.”

The Community and Public Sector union (CPSU) said that the public sector had 
suffered its third straight year of funding cuts, and negotiations over wages 
and conditions had caused workers to take industrial action at an unprecedented 
level.

“The Abbott government’s position is more draconian than any major private 
sector employer in Australia,” said the secretary of the CPSU, Nadine Flood. 
“They are gutting the public service and the community will pay the price.”

The Labor member for Canberra, Gai Brodtmann, said Monday’s announcement 
amounted to a broken promise.

“Coalition governments have a shameful track record of using the public 
service as political pawns,” Brodtmann said in a statement with fellow ACT MP 
Andrew Leigh and ACT senator Katy Gallagher.

“The Abbott government has complete contempt for the public service and 
Canberra.”


The new Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, said his party 
was “hugely concerned” to hear reports that more cuts would be made to the 
sector.

“We actually have a very efficient public service in this country and there’s 
hardly any fat left in the system,” he said.
 