
Too high a proportion of public funding is still going to London-based arts 
organisations and museums, which are in a far better position to increase 
revenue from other sources, a group of MPs has said.

A report published on Thursday by the DCMS (Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport) select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/culture-media-and-sport-committee/>
 examines support for the arts outside the capital and while it welcomes signs 
of a shift towards the regions, it says more could be done.

Arts Council England (ACE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>) is distributing a 
lower proportion of lottery money to the capital – 40% in 2014 and due to be 
25% in 2018 – and it announced spending plans for 2018-22 that include an 
additional £37m to increase the proportion of spending outside the capital. But 
it still gives nearly half of its current £1bn grant in aid to London.

The report says: “While we welcome the fact that lottery funding is 
increasingly spent outside London, we remain concerned that 42% grant in aid 
currently goes to London.”

MPs do not set a figure, but say the current spending is disproportionate and 
call for a “better regional balance”, particularly because cultural 
organisations in London have more opportunities to increase alternative revenue 
streams – with sponsorship and philanthropy – than those in the regions.

The call comes against a backdrop of falling local authority spending on arts 
and museums, with a survey last year estimating that one in five regional 
museums has either closed or will close.

The report gives examples of spending cuts:


• In Lancashire five museums have been threatened with closure after council 
funding went from £1.3m to £98,000 a year. In West Yorkshire Dewsbury Museum 
closed recently, even though it was renovated in 2010

• In Derby there is nowhere for orchestras to perform because funding for the 
concert hall was withdrawn

• In the West Midlands there has been a 51% cut in spending on local 
authority-owned historic buildings and a 32% cut to conservation planning policy

• The Independent Street Arts Network told the committee that local 
authority-funded festivals, such asChelmsford City Diversions 
<https://www.facebook.com/CITYdiversions/>, were disappearing

There should be a greater appreciation of the cultural treasures and creative 
innovation to be found across the UK
Damian Collins 
Evidence suggests that the biggest impact of cuts is likely to fall “where the 
cultural offering is already weak, with the result that those with most to gain 
from cultural investment will lose out.”

Damian Collins, the chair of the committee, said “innovation, partnerships and 
increased financial incentives” were vital to promoting arts and culture 
outside London and the trend for spending more in the regions needed to 
continue.

He added: “There should be a greater appreciation of the cultural treasures 
and creative innovation to be found across the UK, and especially outside of 
London.


“Strong local leadership and innovation from regional arts and cultural 
organisations has produced some remarkable successes, but more needs to be done 
to avoid further closures of small museums and galleries, as funding from local 
authorities declines.”


The report recommends action from a number of bodies. The government, it says, 
should consider how to incentivise greater corporate sponsorship and regional 
philanthropy, and also consider expanding existing tax breaks for the cultural 
sector and simplifying Gift Aid.


Grants to all institutions funded by the DCMS as well as important partner 
museums and the 663 National Portfolio Organisations funded by ACE should come 
with a condition – that they have to share with local organisations best 
practice around raising money.

Collins said all national and big organisations should have partnership 
programmes. “It should be a normal thing as part of receiving grant funding.”

Many local authorities have and are considering cutting the arts. But the 
report says some are not, and gives examples of good practice.

There are examples of smaller organisations being impressively ambitious. For 
example, Bury Art Museum coordinated a tour of British art in China, generating 
revenue of about £100,000.

An example of innovative fundraising includes a “pay what you think it is 
worth” scheme atGlossop music festival <http://www.glossopmusicfestival.org.uk/>
.

Some organisations make sure they are aligned with wider economic strategies. 
For example, a big exhibition of contemporary Chinese art at the Whitworth in 
Manchester was staged to coincide with the launch of direct flights between 
Manchester and China.

Investing in arts brings tangible benefits, the report says, highlighting 
Turner Contemporary in Margate, which opened in 2011 and has led to an extra 2m 
visits to the town, 48% of them specifically to visit the gallery.

The Countries of Culture report also calls for greater national coordination 
of lending and touring and says there is a strong case for a new national body 
to take charge of it.


The committee’s report, which involved six evidence sessions and more than 100 
submissions, isa follow-up to one in the last parliament that also highlighted 
an imbalance in London versus regions arts spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/nov/05/arts-spending-london-bias>.


The report was welcomed by ACE’s chief executive, Darren Henley, who said it 
recognised “the progress we are making in shifting investment outside London, 
on diversifying income streams, and ensuring more people benefit from our 
investment”.

He added: “The coming year will see continued pressure on local authority 
funding for culture and it is good to see these challenges acknowledged. We 
will continue to work closely with local partners to forge new relationships 
and ways of delivering arts and culture across the country.”
 