
 Author:  Jim Thompson (1906-1977), the son of a small-town Oklahoma sheriff, 
moved to LA in 1940 to try to break into the movies. His first novel, Now and 
on Earth (1942), was a "proletarian" account of a transplanted Oklahoma factory 
struggling in wartime California. It failed to sell, and Thompson turned to 
journalism. He continued to write fiction, churning out 12 novels in 18 months 
- starting with The Killer Inside Me (1952). Towards the end of the 1950s, the 
pulp market began to dry up, and the heavy-drinking Thompson was rescued by a 
young Stanley Kubrick, who hired him to script his third film, The Killing 
(1956). Arguments over credits, which repeated themselves on their next 
collaboration, Paths of Glory (1957), disillusioned him with Hollywood. Hard 
living caught up with Thompson and by the time The Grifters was published in 
1963, he was seriously ill and making most of his money from film projects that 
never materialised. He died in 1979 after a series of strokes.

 Story:  Twenty-three-year-old con artist Roy Dillon is badly hurt when a 
potential mark turns violent. His estranged mother, Lilly, visits him, and 
takes him to hospital when she realises the seriousness of his injuries. Roy's 
"mistress" Moira sees Lilly's interest as a threat, as Lilly conspires to 
dislodge her in favour of Carol, a more easily manipulable nurse (and 
concentration camp survivor). Roy recovers, and Moira reveals herself to be a 
grifter too. Roy refuses her offer to go into partnership; then he hears that 
his mother has been murdered in a motel. On viewing the body, however, he 
realises it is Moira who is dead - killed by Lilly who then assumes her 
identity. Roy surprises his mother as she tries to steal his hidden money; they 
fight and he is accidentally killed.

 Film-makers: Stephen Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears> 
(b1941) emerged from the 1970s generation of TV directors, having worked as an 
assistant director for Karel Reisz. My Beautiful Laundrette (1985) proved a 
breakthrough hit, taking Frears to Hollywood where Dangerous Liaisons (1988) 
enhanced his reputation further. Martin Scorsese invited him to make The 
Grifters , and Donald Westlake (aka Richard Stark, of Point Blank fame) was 
hired to write the screenplay.

 How book and film compare:  Westlake, himself a notable pulp novelist, opted 
to remain faithful to the highly dramatic ending, but brought the action into 
the present day. The fourth member of Thompson's emotional maelstrom, nurse 
Carol Roberg, is largely sacrificed in Westlake's treatment, which focuses more 
directly on the three-way sexual tension between the central characters. Roy 
and Lilly's Oedipal relationship is made more explicit, culminating in their 
kiss shortly before Roy's death.

 Inspirations and influences:  Thompson received little recognition in his 
lifetime, but within a few years of his death interest in his work quickly 
gathered speed, led by Bertrand Tavernier's Coup de Torchon (1981), adapted 
from Pop. 1280 (1964). The Grifters was part of Scorsese's ongoing interest in 
pulp American film and literature (he almost immediately embarked on a remake 
of the 1962 noir Cape Fear ), but the film-makers avoided the temptation of 
applying too-obvious noir visuals. In this, The Grifters was a precursor to the 
pulp revival of the early 1990s, most obviously with the sunglasses-and-suits 
style of Reservoir Dogs (1992).
 