
Growing up, I thought a lot of things my family did were normal, but with 
hindsight I realise they were not. For years I was blind to the strangeness of 
my dad’s daily headstands, the loud, appreciative belches my grandfather 
uttered after dinner and my mother’s nighttime trips to steal mustard leaves 
from the local farms.

You could buy other local vegetables at the greengrocer, but never mustard 
leaves. Aside from in the local fields where they were a fallow crop, they were 
only rarely available in Asian supermarkets. They are the key ingredient in an 
ancient dish calledsarson ka saag, a rich stew of mustard leaves and cornmeal 
that originates from Punjab, but became a regular ritual in our Lincolnshire 
home. It’s a basic, rustic dish, but with a striking personality. Ordinary 
ingredients turned into something extraordinary, traditionally eaten by Indian 
farmers alongsidemakkai ki roti (charred corn roti) and plenty of freshly 
churned butter.

In England, to make the dish of her childhood, Mum would bundle my dad, sister 
and I into the car late at night along with a few bags and a knife. During the 
day it was always too dangerous – not for the fear or shame of getting caught 
but for the intermittent gunfire liberally dispersed by the farmers, intended 
for game birds.

Chamin: a recipe for a homely sabbath treat | A taste of home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/26/chamin-recipe-jewish-sabbath-food-tomer-amedi-a-taste-of-home>
As the land is so flat in Lincolnshire, when the moon comes out you can see 
for miles, but Dad would still put the car lights on full beam while Mum ran 
into the fields, the large bun coiled atop her head bobbing up and down as she 
quickly harvested. Every atom in my body vibrated with the tension of doing 
something naughty as we waited as her accomplices and getaway car.

Back home, the greens were washed, then gently boiled. Steam rose to fill the 
windows, providing a discreet veil to hide our illicit deed, while the taste 
and smell of the fresh leaves transformed from pungent, hot and fresh to 
creamy, mild and earthy. We brightened the dish with fresh ginger and mellowed 
it with butter before eating it, like the farmers of Punjab, using our fingers 
and pieces of homemade hot corn rotis.

Years after moving away from home, when I was writing my first cookbook, I 
quit my job and left to travel around India by train, elbowing my way into 
people’s kitchens along the way. In Amritsar, I was invited to dinner by a 
local guide, Manjeet Singh and his wife, Simi. As I walked into their home, I 
knew just by the smell she was makingsarson ka saag. But it transported me 
thousands of miles back home, to our little village in Lincolnshire. Back to 
the cold tense night trips, our steamy, fragrant kitchen, and the soft buttery 
taste of my mum’ssarson ka saag, to take the edge off the passing of time.

Mustard greens with fresh butter and charred corn rotis

Serves 4
250g double cream
1kg mustard leaves, cut into 5cm strips
Rapeseed oil, for frying
2 large onions, finely chopped
5cm ginger, peeled, 4cm cut into cubes and 1cm into matchsticks
6 garlic cloves, crushed
2 green finger chillies, finely sliced
3 tbsp cornmeal
1 ½ tsp salt
20g homemade butter (see below)

For the rotis
200g fine cornmeal
100g plain flour
½ tsp salt
Rapeseed oil
2 green finger chillies, finely sliced
1cm ginger, peeled and grated
140ml hand-hot water

1 To make the butter: blitz the cream for 6 minutes or so,At first the cream 
will transform into whipped cream then stiff peaks. You might need to stop it 
and push the cream mixture back towards the blades. Keep blending until the 
butter comes together and resembles soft crumbs and the buttermilk can be 
poured out. (Keep it for another recipe). Transfer the butter to a bowl of ice 
water. Knead it underwater to remove any lingering buttermilk. Pour away the 
cloudy water. Repeat until the water is almost clear.

2 Add the greens and 500ml water to a saucepan, cover and bring to the boil. 
Reduce to a simmer for 15 minutes, or until they are tender. Blitz with 4 tbsp 
water to form a thick paste.

3 Meanwhile, add the onions to a hot, oiled pan over a medium heat, then cook 
until translucent. Add the cubed ginger, garlic, chillies and cornmeal to the 
pan, then cook for 5 minutes.

4 Add the greens, salt and butter to the pan, turn the heat to low and cook 
for 8 minutes. Adjust with water until it has the consistency of hummus. Set 
aside and keep warm.

5 Now make the rotis. Combine the cornmeal, flour and salt with 1 tbsp oil. 
Rub with your fingers until it resembles fine breadcrumbs. Stir in the chillies 
and ginger. Add the water a little at a time and knead for 5 minutes or so, 
into a pliable dough. On a floured surface, roll it out until 5mm thick, then 
cut into 10cm discs.

6 Fry 2-3 rotis at a time in a hot, oiled pan over a high heat for 3 minutes 
or so. Turn every 1-2 minutes, until there are no dark, doughy spots.

7 Serve the hot greens scattered with the remaining ginger and alongside the 
corn roti, slathered with butter.

 * Meera Sodha is a food writer and author. Her new book, Fresh India: 130 
Quick, Easy and Delicious Vegetarian Recipes for Every Day (Fig Tree, £20) is 
out now.  