
Happy New Year to you all. 2011 has gone away at last and I can now solemnly 
reflect that it didn't actually kill me. Beyond that, I have nothing good to 
say about it. Last year began with my being ill, kept on with my being iller, 
then I was unwell, followed by being poorly with a tiny interlude of infirmity. 
Only in December did my bone marrow perk up, my ulcer heal and the H.Pylori 
admit defeat. I finally had both the energy to cook a large curry and the 
ability to eat it. Despite having been advised by a friend to "Maybe go easy on 
the curry…" I made up for 18 spice-free months by downing nothing but curry for 
the best part of a week. Because I'm like that.

Of course, my health troubles could have been much worse and much more 
permanent. Any of you out there facing long-term or serious medical 
difficulties have my fullest sympathy. I am aware that offering sympathy is 
cheap, largely unhelpful and often irritating. I am aware that the NHS is 
increasingly unable to assist the sick, so sympathy may be all you're getting. 
And I am aware that my own situation was not assisted by – as mentioned above – 
my personality, because I'm like that. As a properly guilty Scot, I am more 
than willing to accept responsibility for the inadequacies of the Versailles 
Treaty, the burning of the library at Alexandria and Ed Miliband's suits – 
well, maybe not the suits – so it's hardly surprising that I would feel my 
imperfect health was entirely my fault. It wasn't. But my nature did play its 
part.

At some point during 1986, I made the decision to be a writer and to do so 
absolutely. Rather than having a go, or trying, or tiptoeing forward, I decided 
to write as well as I could. This was, in a way, an extreme decision and an 
open invitation to risk, because if I really threw everything I had into 
writing and got nowhere, then I would be definitively No Good At It. I hadn't 
worked out that going halfway into writing (or any art, or anything else 
worthwhile) wouldn't be safe, it would be a guarantee of failure. The joy and 
fear and work involved in writing have to be real and full to have meaning and 
to achieve anything. I didn't know that, I was simply feeling useless in the 
midst of Margaret Thatcher's recession with no proper job I could go to. So I 
wrote. I really wrote. And I was lucky. I got published – and therefore found a 
way of life and a profession and a love I could never have anticipated. The 
same drive that leads me into foolishness with curry, means that I committed to 
an art and craft and that it could commit to me.

It also means that – for better or worse – I can't let a sentence rest. I'll 
batter at words and syllables until they're at least not offensive to me. The 
drive is what makes me do my best. My best may not be great and certainly isn't 
to everyone's taste, but it is still my best and why would I want to waste so 
much of my time over anything else? The artists I truly admire and am inspired 
by all harness the healthier aspects of perfectionism to keep learning and 
growing and to do good work. I know a pianist who will unashamedly obsess over 
a single moment in a two-hour concert. He's a relatively young man, but he 
already hears in a way that I can't. He has made himself somebody different, 
somebody more than he was. Because he's like that.

I know a painter who has spent decades producing extraordinary work and who is 
still attentive to every hair, hungry for light, colour, exposure to new work, 
to photography, to the seen world and its suggestions of the unseen. He has 
made himself a master craftsman and is still learning, still looking at the 
world more than I can. Because he's like that.

I know an actor who never fails to move me and who, I am happy to say, once 
consented to perform something I had written. He inserted an um where there had 
been no um and that's the kind of thing I notice and usually – silently – 
deplore. But this was a good um. Because he understands timing and music – 
among other things – his um decision was perfect, was inevitable, was lovely. 
Again, he's a person who never stops paying attention, is helplessly committed 
to staying interested and improving in his profession. He can generate levels 
of focus I cannot. Because he's like that. In short, all these people have 
positively harnessed their drive.

Which is great for art, but may be difficult to balance with other 
considerations. I can get hung up on a syllable, but completely miss the early 
symptoms of illness. I can forget to follow up on doctors after they've taken 
tests, or to check the side effects of medications. I self-maintain very badly, 
while travelling and working beyond what is reasonable, skipping meals, 
skipping sleep and generally ignoring things that just don't seem as 
interesting as my work. I slap down advice in this column about tending 
yourself sensibly as a writer, feeding your inspirations, taking time out to 
have fun. I can look at newer writers and see that they need encouragement and 
kindness as well as discipline and interior fury. And yet I am often 
discourteous, if not threatening, as I continue to be a dreadful self-employer. 
Because I'm like that.

But this isn't a bad thing. Although I learn very slowly and change more 
slowly still, I have one very beautiful thing in my favour – I write, I do 
something creative. This means that when all is darkness, it isn't. It can't 
be. The way of life I have chosen allows me to take – sometimes quickly, 
sometimes not – any negative element and use it, change it at some level. I 
don't at all subscribe to the idea that the ardent typist should dress in 
mourning and cultivate fake doom – that's a form of self-harm and a waste of 
energy. Life will inevitably have its bleak spots without our help. Meanwhile, 
it can be cheering to consider that, if we survive, we'll maybe get a sonnet on 
divorce, or a character with toothache, a novel which can be properly lyrical 
about grief, or a joke about colitis. There may be times when we end up just 
sticking our tongues out at reality and times when we can connect with the 
human condition as we never have before, maybe both. We may even have the 
unlooked-for pleasure of being useful to someone else who draws strength from 
what we've built. Above all, the pure act of writing – the truth that it is 
still there for you and you for it – is a wonder. And it need have nothing to 
do with the details of your life. Within it, you can be away from everything 
and saying out new dreams, just because you can, because human beings do sing 
for other human beings and make unnecessary beauties. Onwards.
 