
There are a lot of arguments about what the biggest prize in sport is, but 
when it comes to the smallest you need search no further than the Ashes. While 
other athletes compete for gold plates the size of dustbin lids and cups so big 
even Prince Naseem could stick his head inside them without fear of getting it 
wedged, England and Australia battle for ownership of a couple of ounces of 
charred remains stuffed inside something that looks like a piece of a dolls' 
house kitchenware made at a beginners' pottery class by Captain Hook.

Why anyone would want to take such an unseemly object home with them is 
unfathomable as Owen Hargreaves' accent. But as Mark Twain observed, all it 
takes to make a man covet a thing is to make it difficult to attain. The MCC 
says the little terracotta urn cannot leave Lord's and so Australian appeals 
for the right to carry it off, put it on the mantelpiece and stick the unpaid 
bills behind it grow stronger by the day. It is becoming sport's equivalent of 
the Elgin marbles.

Adam Gilchrist and Glenn McGrath have had their say and Australia's PM John 
Howard has supported them adding, with just a hint of condescension, that 
returning the Ashes to Australia might provide extra motivation for the England 
team. But, if Nasser Hussain's men cannot get worked up about a few thousand 
pounds apiece in prize money, it is hard to see that the prospect of winning an 
old eggcup full of cinders is going to give them an added incentive.

At the centre of the clamour is Steve Waugh. "You are playing for a trophy, so 
why not get it?" the Australian captain said recently. "It is not much of a 
prize if you cannot see it or touch it."

The reality, of course, is that the Ashes is not much of a prize, even if you 
can see or touch it. Waugh is determined, however, so much so that he is now 
proposing to make his own Ashes by setting light to the bails after the Oval 
Test. "If someone supplied the appropriate vessel," Waugh said at the weekend, 
"we would go ahead and do it."

Called in to comment on this proposal the Australian Cricket Board's media 
relations manager, Brian Murgatroyd, sounded like a weary schoolmaster. "We 
cannot stop the players doing their own thing," he said. Some may feel that it 
is a poor state of affairs when cricket's authorities are happy to let the 
players carry out arson attacks on other people's property, but there are other 
concerns.

The first is that Waugh is showing the sort of lack of understanding of 
English conditions that once did such damage to the batting average of his 
compatriot Doug Walters. While a barbecue may burst to life at the flick of a 
match in Sydney or Perth, in England even setting light to something that is 
designed to be burned - charcoal, hickory sticks, the CDs of Michael Bolton - 
is a task not lightly undertaken.

Unless Waugh has brought some napalm and a flamethrower with him - and such is 
the thoroughness of Tugga's approach to the game it should not be ruled out - 
his attempt to set fire to two pieces of timber on a late-summer afternoon in 
Kennington is likely to take a good deal longer than beating England and may 
well result in the kind of frustration that ends with over- liberal use of the 
petrol can and smouldering eyebrows.

The validity of what Waugh is proposing to do is also in doubt, because the 
exact contents of the famous little urn are the cause of some debate. The 
original story - the one that Waugh seems to be following - was that it 
contained a bail from the Oval Test of 1882, but a few years ago Rosemary, 
Dowager Countess of Darnley, claimed that the ashes were not in fact a bail but 
a veil.

Apparently her mother-in-law, Florence Murphy, had been keen to attract the 
attention of the dashing England skipper Ivo Bligh, later Lord Darnley. The 
women of those days being a spirited and imaginative breed, Miss Murphy 
rejected the donning of make-up or skimpy clothing, electing instead to catch 
Bligh's eye by setting light to her hat and then handing him the sooty debris.

This is surely something Waugh should be told. A stickler for detail, he would 
no doubt prefer to return to Australia with something that is as close to the 
original Ashes as possible. He may, of course, find it difficult to reproduce 
the romance of the original act, but no doubt the irrepressible Jordan would be 
prepared to set fire to some of her undergarments on Australia's behalf in 
return for a photo-spread.
 