
Acne <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne>, scourge of teenagers 
everywhere, came out of the shadows and into the business spotlight last week.

It was Boots the Chemists' biggest acquisition since it disastrously overpaid 
for Halfords, Payless and Fads 10 years ago. The UK's most powerful pharmacy 
chain splashed out £233 million for the Clearasil and Biactol spot remedy 
brands from US Pringles-to-Pampers giant, Procter & Gamble.

For Boots, the deal gives it vital US penetration. Clearasil, invented in the 
late Forties by American Ivan Combe - the man behind Odor-Eaters and the 
Grecian men's hair formula - is a market leader in the States. The product will 
act as a bridgehead for Boots' other big-name, over-the-counter health 
products, which include Nurofen and Strepsils. It will also bolster its other 
teenage skincare products.

Over the last four years, Boots has bought teenage skincare products in both 
France and Germany to tap into a worldwide acne consumer market worth £1.5 
billion and growing by 5 per cent each year. The prescribed acne-related drug 
market is worth another £1bn.

But more importantly Boots sees this acquisition as a way of enticing more 
customers on a long-term basis. The theory is that if Boots can be the 
teenagers' friend in their darkest hour, they will stay with the trusted health 
care group throughout their lives.

Analysts, who have mostly been bearish on Boots as its shares have slid from a 
high of £10.70 in mid-1998 to £5.40 this weekend, praised the deal, despite the 
Nottingham-based firm paying a high price for the brand - 2.5 times its annual 
£94m worldwide sales.

'It's a clearly defined strategy,' said one. 'Boots knows its future lies in 
healthcare and related services. Its pharmacy division is under attack as 
margins are reduced thanks to the aggressive pricing strategies of Wal-Mart and 
Tesco. Healthcare is a growing market and it is how it can become a world 
player and create shareholder value. This deal gives it more than a foothold 
into global markets. It makes sense.'

Barry Clare, Boots Healthcare International's managing director, explained why 
he thinks acne is a market worth tapping. 'Central heating, less time spent on 
outdoor activity, less time spent on healthy pursuits and worsening diets are 
driving up the problem.'

Clare, who confirmed that similar consumer healthcare product acquisitions 
were on the cards, is intent on a massive Clearasil marketing push. The brands, 
he believes, stagnated under the ownership of Procter & Gamble, which instead 
concentrated on its Olay beauty products.

But in the week in which Body Shop boss Anita Roddick slammed anti-ageing 
creams as 'pap', there are many who fear that companies such as Boots and 
SmithKline Beecham, which makes the rival Oxy product, are making unrealistic 
claims for their brands.

'There are no overnight cures for acne,' said Acne Support Group chief 
executive, Alison Dudley. 'The old Clearasil ads showed the amount of dirt that 
comes off cotton wool thanks to Clearasil. The inference is that acne is caused 
by dirt. This is totally inaccurate. You cannot wash away spots. The blame 
doesn't lie with the products. It lies with the hazy, misleading messages.

'Kids are more likely to have less self-worth as increasingly people are aware 
of beauty and skin care. Airbrushed images in the media tell us we could and 
should have perfect skin and this is what these products are preying on.'

Boots is adamant that it will take a responsible attitude to its advertising. 

It needs to. 'Pus Daddy' is the latest jibe meted out to those with acne by 
school kids increasingly obsessed with personal appearance.

According to the British Association of Dermatologists, 85 per cent of the 
population suffer from acne at some point in their youth and 15 per cent have 
severe problems.

The London-based Acne Support Group says that 15 per cent of those questioned 
in a recent survey felt suicidal as a result of the condition.

But those with acne are often too embarrassed to talk to a doctor. And if they 
do, they are usually fobbed off with a pat 'it'll pass' response. By the age of 
25, it usually does. But the disease, for which there are no cures - just 
treatments - is regarded as trivial. 'The market has been talking down to the 
customer,' admitted Clare.

However, in the reclusive world of spot sufferers there are more pressing 
fears. Last month the US Food and Drug Administration met to discuss whether to 
restrict the use of the anti-acne drug Roaccutane, produced by Swiss-firm Roche 
Products. The drug has been 'associated' with depression and even suicide.

America's FDA decided against restricting it, but demanded that Roche compile 
a register of all those prescribed the drug, which is taken by mouth and can 
cause birth defects in the offspring of women pregnant while taking the drug.

The FDA continues to monitor the situation and a spokeswoman said: 'There's 
enough evidence to indicate an association [with psychiatric disorders] but not 
enough to suggest a causal link.'

There is no doubt that Roaccutane has changed many acne sufferers' lives for 
the better. But the drug - a vitamin A derivative known as a retenoid - is 
facing legal actions worldwide from patients who claim to have suffered severe 
depression or attempted suicide while on it. Claims are being prepared in 
Britain and Ireland. The European Union is also 'aware there are problems'.

Britain's leading dermatol ogist, Dr Tony Chu, is concerned that the drug, 
which since 1982 has been administered to about 11 million people worldwide and 
last year took sales of more than £300m, is 'over-prescribed'.

'My feeling is it's overused. It's like zap therapy but the relapse rate is 
about 50 percent.'

Roche maintains that a suicide rate of 1.7 patients on Roaccutane per 100,000 
is 10 times lower than the average suicide rate according to research by the 
Samaritans.

'Psychiatric events reported in association with Roaccutane therapy reflect 
the multiple risk factors in the population of adolescent and young adults 
afflicted with the disfiguring disease of acne,' the company said.

It added: 'Roche takes issues of safety very seriously and is diligent in 
monitoring the safety of all its medicines.'

But for those who take Roaccutane, the 'associated' psychiatric risks of the 
drug, which are now spelt out in a special warning when it is prescribed, is 
all they need.

What is acne?

ACNE is an inflammatory skin disease. It affects the tiny pores which cover 
the face, arms, back and chest and the oil glands attached to them.

It is caused by an excessive response by grease glands under the skin to sex 
hormones which partially blocks pores, restricts the flow of oil on to the skin 
and results in solidification of the oil which causes blackheads.

If the blockage becomes complete, oil builds up around the hair. 

The hair root then becomes infected with the bacteria normally present on 
skin. This bacteria breaks down the oil to inflammatory chemicals which causes 
redness and pus - the zit.

The disease is normally self-limiting which is why, by the time the sufferer 
reaches 25, it has normally abated.

The skin game 

Total UK acne spend: £64m 

Clean & Clear (J&J) 20% 
Oxy (SmithKline Beecham) 19% 
Clearasil (Boots) 15% 
Biactol (Boots) 7%

Source: Information Resources
 