
What is the NHS review? 

The NHS Next Stage Review – to give it its full title – will set out the 
government's plans to reform the NHS in England over the next 10 years. The 
report follows a year-long consultation with patients and staff led by the 
health minister and cancer surgeon, Lord Darzi. It will be accompanied by a new
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> constitution and a workforce 
strategy.

What is the aim of the review? 

Darzi wants the government to shift the emphasis of the health service from 
increasing the quantity of care to improving its clinical quality.

How will this be achieved? 

The income of hospitals and GPs will in future depend on how much they improve 
their patients' health. NHS trusts will be paid according to the outcome of 
treatment, using a new set of indicators ranging from surgeons' death rates to 
surveys of how well patients feel after treatment. Patients' views about the 
quality of service and the compassion of staff will be regarded as just as 
important as the medical outcomes.

Will there be greater competition between services? 

Yes. It is expected that nurses will be encouraged to set up their own 
not-for-profit companies, which could compete with GP practices. Teams of 
doctors and nurses will compete with rivals at other NHS establishments. To 
establish a more thrusting marketplace, Darzi wants patients to be given enough 
information to be able to choose the nearest hospital that can demonstrate 
superior medical results.

What about patient choice? 

The patient's right to choose where he or she wants to be treated will be 
enshrined in a new NHS constitution. This is expected to assert patients' 
rights to dignity, privacy, confidentiality and the opportunity to get a second 
opinion from another doctor. The health secretary, Alan Johnson, would also 
enshrine in law a universal right to approved treatments if they were 
clinically appropriate for individual patients.

Will this mean better access to new drugs?

The government says it intends to end the so-called "postcode lottery" of drug 
treatments, which has seen patients in some areas denied funding for drugs that 
are freely prescribed elsewhere. Under the NHS constitution, primary care 
trusts, which run local NHS services, will no longer be able to deny patients 
potentially life-saving treatments just because they think it is unaffordable.

Will new drugs be approved more quickly?

Yes. The National Institute for Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Clinical Excellence (Nice), 
which decides what drugs should be available on the NHS, will no longer wait 
until a drug has been licensed as safe before starting its assessments, which 
could reduce delays to a maximum of six months.

What does the review mean for GPs?

The report will support health authorities that want to move services out of 
hospital into GP-led polyclinics or super-surgeries, but it will not require 
this. An interim report by Darzi in October outlined plans for these GP-led 
health centres to open from 8am till 8pm seven days a week, to be used by 
anyone - whether or not they are registered there.

What do doctors make of these plans?

The British Medical Association says the plans will be too big to offer 
patients continuity of care, and is concerned that they will not provide value 
for money. It has accused the government of foisting the new health centres on 
areas where they are not needed - putting existing GP services under threat. 
The BMA recently delivered a petition to Downing Street opposing the plans, 
signed by a million patients.

What do patients' groups make of the plans?

The Patients' Association fears that polyclinics would leave patients, 
particularly in rural areas, having to travel much greater distances to see a 
doctor. They are also concerned that the potential demise of the traditional GP 
practice will undermine continuity of care and an individual patient's 
relationship with their family doctor.
 