
Anne Robinson, 65, was born in Lancashire. She began her career as a newspaper 
journalist. As assistant editor of the Mirror in the early 80s, she became the 
first woman to regularly edit a national newspaper. Between 1993 and 2001, she 
presented the TV consumer programmeWatchdog <http://www.bbc.co.uk/watchdog/>. 
Since then she has hostedThe Weakest Link 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mgvw>, the BBC quiz show that has topped 
the ratings on both sides of the Atlantic. In 2009, she began hosting a new 
version of Watchdog for BBC1.

What is your greatest fear?
Losing my brain.

What is your earliest memory?
Being capsized in a boating pond in Lytham St Anne's. I was with my dad and 
probably two and a half.

Which living person do you most admire, and why?
Any mother with young children who is also doing a full-time job.

What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?
Impatience.

What is the trait you most deplore in others?
Meanness and dishonesty.

Property aside, what's the most expensive thing you've bought?
A divorce.

What is your most treasured possession?
My grandson, Hudson.

What would your super power be?
To be able to fast-forward people who take too long to explain things.

What makes you unhappy?
The scales if I go over 8st 10lb.

What do you most dislike about your appearance?
My ankles.

Who would play you in the film of your life?
Angelina Jolie.

What is your most unappealing habit?
I interrupt.

What would you most like to wear to a fancy dress party?
Brad Pitt.

Cat or dog?
Dog. I've never been without a dog.

What is your guiltiest pleasure?
Staff – I have five.

What does love feel like?
Expensive.

What was the best kiss of your life?
My first kiss. He was called Martin Fox, and I was five.

Which living person do you most despise, and why?
I don't despise, because no one should live rent free in your head.

What has been your biggest disappointment?
That I don't have thin ankles.

When did you last cry, and why?
When I had a Brazilian on Monday.

How often do you have sex?
Are you offering?

What is the closest you've come to death?
Driving with Michael Winner.

What do you consider your greatest achievement?
That my two ex-husbands are my best friends.

What keeps you awake at night?
Almost nothing.

What song would you like played at your funeral?
An Irish ballad.

How would you like to be remembered?
Thin (a size eight).

What is the most important lesson life has taught you?
There are no victims, only volunteers.

Where would you most like to be right now?
In my house in the Cotswolds.

Tell us a secret.
The Tories once asked me to consider being the mayor of London. They then 
moved on to Jeremy Clarkson and, quite rightly, arrived at Boris.
 