
I'm going to a conference in Porto Allegre, Brazil, and will be travelling to 
Rio de Janeiro with a friend afterwards. I will be there at the end of April 
and should have about one week in Rio. As two women travelling alone, we've 
been hearing that Brazil can be unsafe. Do you have ideas of what area in Rio 
would be a reasonable place to stay (that is still relatively central and not 
excessively expensive?)
Leanne Taylor, by email

This is neither a specifically Brazilian problem, nor a Latin American 
problem, but it is a problem nonetheless. The unfortunate truth is that Rio, 
like a lot of cities popular with tourists, does have problems with theft and 
violence, and tourists are sometimes targeted. The advice is the same no matter 
where you are in the world. Would-be thieves will be looking for valuables and 
easy targets, so minimise what you take out with you. Only keep enough money on 
you for the day and leave behind any valuables which may mark you out as being 
well-off. You should also avoid favelas (shanty towns) unless with a guide and 
take taxis after dark. The beachside suburbs of Ipanema and Leblon are arguably 
the best places to stay in the city, with Copacabana the next best choice with 
more affordable options.Lonely Planet's Hotels & Hostels service 
<http://hotels.lonelyplanet.com> has listings of author-reviewed properties.

We hope to travel in a "green" way - by train - to Florence and back later 
this year. Can you tell us exactly what our rights are if, for example, our 
Eurostar train from London to Paris arrived late and we missed our onward 
connection to Florence? We have allowed adequate time, three hours, for 
connections in Paris. Would our (SNCF) Paris to Florence tickets, booked 
through TGV Europe, entitle us to travel on the next available train to Rome? 
Or would we have to book new tickets (probably at much higher prices) and claim 
refunds on the redundant tickets? If the latter situation is the case and we 
have to buy new tickets is there any way in which we can avoid having to pay a 
lot of extra money.
Michael Cashman, by email

If any of your connections is late, you'll be put on the next available train. 
In the event of this happening to you, seek out the train manager on the train 
that is running late and ask him to stamp or otherwise endorse your ticket. 
Then, when you get off the train, go to a ticket counter – the relevant one for 
your journey, if there is a dedicated sleeper desk, for example – and explain 
the situation. You'll be given new tickets for an onward journey, but won't 
have to pay for these. They'll simply replace the ones that you have.

You won't necessarily be able to go on the next train, if that one is full, 
but you can usually squeeze on. Alternatively, you'll be allocated space on the 
next available train. This is more an informal system running across European 
rail services than an agreed charter of passengers' rights. In the event of the 
delay causing you to have to fork out for a night's accommodation, you'll 
usually have to claim this back under your travel insurance in all but the most 
extreme cases.

My wife and I booked a cruise with easyCruise <http://www.easycruise.com> for 
April, leaving and returning to Pireus. Having booked return British Airways 
flights to Athens and a night's stay in an Athens hotel, easyCruise informed us 
that the cruise was cancelled. They have promised to refund our cruise costs, 
but now we're left with BA tickets that we don't want. BA would not refund us. 
Our annual Direct Travel insurance say we're not covered for such a 
cancellation. So is anyone responsible for our losses? We have now changed our 
week in the Greek Islands for a week in Dubrovnik and paid BA an extra hefty 
dollop of cash for the privelege. We haven't seen much publicity about 
easyCruise cancelling.
Mr & Mrs Sammut, by email

EasyCruise has had a varied history since its maiden cruises along the French 
Riviera in 2007, shifting to offer low-budget cruises around the Greek Islands, 
offering three-day loops out of Piraeus before being sold in 2009 to Hellenic 
Seaways. Along the way it also had a brief dalliance with river cruises between 
Brussels and Amsterdam. The line's only vessel, easyCruise Life, was sold as 
part of the deal. 2010 itineraries have been cancelled, and, as you have found, 
bookings have been refunded. Unfortunately. the issues you have had with your 
insurance is a consequence of making entirely unconnected arrangements. As far 
as Hellenic Seaways are concerned, they have paid you back for the bookings you 
made, and as far as British Airways are concerned you need to change your plans 
for a reason that is nothing to do with them. There is an exclusion with Direct 
Line, and many other policies, covering "the actions or failure of any 
transport or accommodation provider or their agent, or any person acting as 
your agent or your conference organiser'', which seems to cover this. Hellenic 
Seaways then would seem to be the last recourse that you have for getting any 
of this money back. It is a long shot, but you may wish to give it a try. 
easyCruise fans will find an interesting discussion about the service and 
possible reasons for it not continuing atboards.cruisecritic.com 
<http://boards.cruisecritic.com/showthread.php?t=1142119>

FEEDBACK: Re Shirley Cooklin's e-mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/jan/31/ask-tom-travel-tips?page=all> 
(Observer, 31 Januray 2010), I was also unaware of the validity of the UK 
Senior railcard in France. Last summer my partner, who has a Senior Railcard, 
used Eurostar and TGV via Lille to Lyon and back to London. I think my partner 
may have had an over-60 reduction on the TGV leg of the journey, but I have no 
recollection of websites mentioning the use of Senior Railcards - but maybe I 
missed it. Where do you suggest I find out what the correct information is on 
this?
Mark Bloomfield, by email

Amanda Monroe from Rail Europe <http://www.raileurope.co.uk> took note of the 
ongoing correspondence on the Carte Senior, and European rail fares for 
over-60s more generally, and has attempted to come up with a definitive answer.

"An SNCF senior card allows you to access the SNCF senior card fares on any 
French train (including TGV services). These can be up to 50% off the standard 
fare. This is not to be confused with Discovery Senior fares, for which you do 
not need a card, and which allows about a 25% discount but are only available 
on slower and local services like TER or Corail Intercities types of train.

You can also get discounts of 25% on some cross-border services from France 
with aCarte Senior <http://www.senior-sncf.com/accueil/> as they participate in 
the RailPlus scheme, a programme recognised by several European rail companies. 
UK senior railcards cards don't carry the RailPlus symbol, so officially these 
aren't valid for the discounts that Shirley Cooklin wrote about. Rail Europe 
used to offer a RailPlus add-on to the Senior Railcard but haven't done this 
for a few years. UK train operating companies may offer this so enquire when 
purchasing. However, brandishing a UK Senior Railcard and asking for a discount 
clearly does get results on occasion, so if you have one, bring it with you.

If you're still not sure about getting the right fare Rail Europe advise 
passengers to contact them in advance so that they can check if they will be 
able to claim the discounted fares on their planned routes routes. You can get 
a Carte Senior from them too.
 