
Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, 61, the 
leader of Malaysia's resurgent opposition, was due to appear in court today to 
answer charges of sodomy against a 23-year-old male aide. The case was 
postponed after the prosecution sought to move it to a higher court. Anwar, who 
was re-elected as an MP two weeks ago, says the charges are fabricated by the 
government to derail his political comeback.

Hasn't this happened to him before?

Yes. The sodomy charges against Anwar echo allegations laid against him in 
1998. Then, when he was deputy prime minister and vying for the leadershop held 
by his patron, the Malaysian strongman Mahathir Mohamad, he was accused of 
sodomising his wife's driver.

Did he do it?

Anwar was convicted in 2000 on the sodomy charge and sentenced to nine years' 
jail. The court in the conservative Muslim country was treated to the spectacle 
of the mattress, on which the allegedly offending acts occurred, being wheeled 
in and out. Anwar's DNA from his semen was found on the mattress. But in 2004 
Malaysia's supreme court overturned the verdict. However, another charge of 
corruption that earned him six years' imprisonment stood.

Did it end his political career?

That appeared to be the idea. Mahathir, who was prime minister for 22 years 
until 2003, took the unusual step of going on national television several times 
to denounce his former deputy for sodomy even while the trial continued. Anwar 
appeared in court with a black eye given by the police chief while he was 
handcuffed and hooded in custody, causing international outrage.

How did Anwar come back?

He was released on the corruption charges in 2004, but the sentence barred him 
from contesting office until April 2008. Mahathir's successor, Abdullah Badawi, 
unsurprisingly chose to call a general election a month before that. But still 
his United Malays National Organisation (Umno), which has run the country for 
51 years, had its worst showing at the polls. With Anwar playing a role behind 
the scenes, the opposition parties stripped Umno of its two-thirds majority. 
The opposition won 82 seats in the 222-member parliament, up from 19.

What will he do now?

He signalled his intention to run for office as soon as the ban ended. On 
August 26 he convincingly won a seat that he had previously held for 17 years. 
In the interim, the charismatic leader stitched together the disparate 
opposition and worked feverishly to tempt coalition members across the floor of 
the house with the ultimate aim of bringing down the government.

Then, to no one's surprise, he was hit with fresh allegations when a 
23-year-old aide, Saiful Bukhari Azlan, accused him of sodomy. Anwar was 
arrested in a dramatic swoop by police commandos an hour before he had agreed 
to surrender to the charge.

Aren't these clearly trumped-up charges, again?

That's what Anwar says. He maintains the government is trying to stop his 
comeback in its tracks. Most of the mainstream Malaysian media is 
government-controlled and sodomy carries a 20-year jail term even between 
consenting adults, so fighting the charges will keep him occupied.

It might slow Anwar's efforts to tempt disgruntled MPs across the floor. He 
had declared September 16, Malaysia's national day, as the date on which he 
would seize power, though Badawi dismisses this. This week, 50 government MPs 
went on a trip to Taiwan due to last more than a week, making it all the more 
difficult for Anwar to lobby tempt them to defect.
 