
What do children's commissioners do?
 The role of the commissioners is to promote and protect the rights and 
welfare of children and young people.

How many commissioners are there? 
 There are now commissioners in 31 countries, including Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland. The first was appointed in Norway 23 years ago.

Who are the UK commissioners? 
 The first was Peter Clarke, former director of the charity Childline Cymru, 
who was appointed as children's commissioner for Wales in 2001. The 
commissioner for Northern Ireland, Nigel Williams, started work in October 2003 
after leaving his job as chief executive of the charity Childnet International, 
which campaigns to protect children from paedophiles on the internet. Last 
year, Professor Kathleen Marshall was appointed as the Scottish children's 
commissioner. Previously, she was director of the Scottish child law centre and 
remains a visiting professor at the Glasgow Centre for the Child and Society, 
University of Glasgow. ProfessorAl Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen> was appointed as the 
commissioner for England last month. He is currently the government's child 
health tsar and the Nuffield professor of child health at the Institute of 
Child Health, University College London and Great Ormond Street hospital for 
Children NHS trust.

What sort of funding do they have? 
 The annual budget of the Welsh commissioner's office is £1.2m and his salary 
is £70,000-75,000. The Northern Ireland commissioner's budget is £1.9m per 
year, while his salary is £75,000. The Scottish commissioner has a budget of 
£1.5m this year and £1.2m thereafter. She earns £72,000. The English 
commissioner's budget is £3m. He earns £130,000.

What impact have they had?
 Only the Welsh commissioner has been in office long enough for his 
effectiveness to be judged. The children's minister, Margaret Hodge, has 
criticised his record, claiming he has paid too much attention to individual 
cases and not enough to policy. Mr Clarke hit back, accusing her of taking a 
"narrow and bureaucratic" view of his role. His achievements to date include 
winning £700,000 in funding for mental health services for children after he 
said that the service was in crisis. He also influenced the Welsh assembly in 
its decision to develop a strategy for child poverty.

How do the UK commissioners' powers vary?
 The remit and powers of the commissioners in Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland differ only slightly. They are all responsible for reviewing new laws 
and policy if they affect or potentially affect children. They can hold public 
inquiries and subpoena witnesses and must adhere to the United Nations' 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC).

However, the English commissioner has a more limited remit. Unlike the other 
UK commissioners, his role is to promote the views and interests of children 
and young people, rather than to safeguard their rights - although he too must 
adhere to the UNCRC. He is also less independent of government, as he will only 
be able to carry out formal investigations with the approval of the relevant 
secretary of state. In contrast, the other UK commissioners can initiate 
inquiries, although the Scottish commissioner cannot focus on a case involving 
an individual child. The English commissioner will only have the power to set 
up an inquiry which focuses on an individual child if the secretary of state 
decides it has wider implications for children generally. All the commissioners 
must also produce an annual report.

Why is there concern about the England commissioner?
 The Children's Rights Alliance and children's charities fear that the English 
commissioner could undermine the autonomy and authority of his counterparts in 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. In particular, they object to the 
commissioner for England having responsibility for all non-devolved powers 
within the UK despite his weaker powers. In other words, Prof Aynsley Green 
will be responsible for criminal justice, social security, and refugee issues. 
Critics argue this will be confusing for children in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland, as it will not be clear to them which commissioner they 
should turn to for help.

How do the commissioners plan to work together?
 The commissioners plan to meet regularly to coordinate their work. All four 
are determined their different remits will not lead to conflict.
 