
Queensland’s Palaszczuk government will move to scrap legal barriers to 
same-sex couples adopting children, a form of discrimination in Australia that 
remains only inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> and the Northern 
Territory.

The communities minister, Shannon Fentiman, said on Saturday the government 
would table a bill later this month to “remove this archaic chapter from our 
adoption laws”.

Fentiman said proposed changes to the Adoption Act 
<https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/LEGISLTN/ACTS/2009/09AC029.pdf>, which 
would also allow single people and couples undergoing fertility treatments to 
adopt, might be passed by the end of the year.

She said she was “very excited” that a review of the act underpinning the 
reforms “saw an overwhelming response from the Queensland community supporting 
same sex adoption”.

The move was warmly received by advocates after years of lobbying, including 
Sunshine Coast couple Lea Sanson and Julie Carrington, who said they had waited 
six years to adopt a girl they had cared for as foster parents.

“This is a monumental moment,” Sanson said.

Election shows majority support same-sex marriage, LGBTI groups claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/election-shows-majority-support-same-sex-marriage-lgbti-groups-claim>
Carrington said: “It’s a very emotional time for us. We actually get to be 
finally her mummies and we’re very proud and very excited.”

She said the pair had been the girl’s legal guardians for almost all her six 
years “but six years ago we should really have been able to adopt her 
ourselves”.

Family lawyer Stephen Page said the government’s move was a “wonderful 
achievement” after a “job half done” by the former Bligh Labor government, 
which preserved the discrimination against same-sex couples in its adoption law 
reforms.

“You don’t have to be in family law very long to realise that sexuality is not 
the important thing, it’s the quality of parenting,” Page said.

“We’ve signed up to the international convention on the rights of the child 
and if we’re serious about that, the best interests of the child, we have to 
assess for each child who are the best carers and it shouldn’t be based on 
sexuality.”

 Shelley Argent, the national spokeswoman for Parents and Friend of Lesbians 
and Gays (PFLAG), said it was a profoundly important development also for 
extended family of gay couples who would now also enjoy official recognition of 
family ties.

“What happens so often, people who are opposed to same-sex couples having 
children, they forget it’s not just the parents and the child, it’s 
grandparents and extended family,” Argent said.

How Britain's same-sex marriage laws awoke South Australia to its own 
injustices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/30/how-britains-same-sex-marriage-laws-awoke-south-australia-to-its-own-injustices>
“For us, that’s extremely important to know that we now will officially have 
these children in our life.”

It also meant “if something happens to the birth parent, [the child] will not 
be taken away from the parent who has adopted them”, Argent said.

The bill would also allow more information to be given to adoptees, make it 
easier for step-parents to adopt, and remove the offence and penalty for 
breaches of “no contact” provisions for adoptions before 1991.

Under those provisions a person faces up to two years jail if he or she seeks 
contact with an adoptee, or birth parent of an adoptee, who has told the 
department of communities they don’t want to be contacted.

Fentiman said it was “about time that Queensland caught up with Australian 
states and territories”.

She said she had not spoken to the Liberal National opposition but hoped they 
would support the reforms “especially given the overwhelming support we’ve had 
from the Queensland community during a review of the act”.

She said the review had given an “opportunity to ensure that our laws reflect 
community standards and expectations as well as meet the needs of children who 
still require adoption here in Queensland now and into the future”.

The Palaszczuk government is yet to move long-awaited draft laws to scrap 
other discriminatory aspects of the state’s justice system, which are expected 
to be addressed in coming months.

This includes the expunging of offences and convictions for people prosecuted 
when homosexuality was illegal, as well as the so-called “gay panic defence”, 
which can still be invoked in murder cases.

Fentiman said: “I have to say I’m very pleased the Palaszczuk government is 
acting on this and other concerns of the LGBTI community in addressing some of 
those historical convictions and other issues.”
 