
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> could be 
the first Australian jurisdiction to enable victims of child sex abuse to 
revive previously settled claims against churches and schools under a state 
opposition proposal to broaden their legal rights.

With the Palaszczuk government tabling its bill scrapping age limits on abuse 
claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
 on Tuesday, the Liberal National party announced it would move amendments to 
allow victims to have a court strike down settlements made lower because they 
fell outside the statute of limitations.

Lawyers and advocates for victims have argued the ability to revive such claims
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/05/queensland-opts-not-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
 is the key to fair redress and in line with recommendations by the ongoing 
royal commission.

Queensland child sex abuse victims lose chance to challenge past compensation 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/05/queensland-opts-not-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
The Queensland government, like the New South Wales and Victorian governments 
when they previously scrapped age limits on civil claims, declined to include 
scope for setting aside past settlements in its bill.

While the government announced it would not oppose the revival of previous 
claims against the state, the attorney general, Yvette D’Ath, has cited the 
“unintended consequences” of removing what are also known as “past deeds” 
struck between victims and private institutions.

However, the leader of the state opposition, Tim Nicholls, said on Tuesday 
that while Labor’s bill was “a step in the right direction, it failed to 
recognise and empower all survivors of child sexual abuse”.

“In some cases, survivors were pressured into accepting inadequate settlements 
for physical or psychological injuries sustained from the abuse, because of 
previous time limitations,” he said.

“We will put forward amendments that provide the opportunity for settlement 
agreements to be voided by the court, where appropriate, to allow survivors to 
have their proper day in court.”

The LNP proposal, which also broadens the scope of claims to include victims 
of child sex abuse outside institutions, mirrors a separate private member’s 
bill to be tabled in parliament on Wednesday by the independent MP Rob Pyne.

Pyne’s bill, which, like the government’s, proposes scrapping the need for 
victims to file civil claims by age 21, was drafted with input from a key 
victim and advocate and has the backing of groups including Bravehearts and the 
Indigenous Lawyers Association.

If the MP swung his support behind the LNP’s proposed amendments to the 
government bill, the opposition would then need only the support of the two 
Katter party crossbenchers to ensure their passage.

The government planned to put off legislating the removal of past deeds by 
including it as an item in a discussion paper with a view to future amendments.

Under the government’s current bill, age limits would still apply to victims 
of child sex abuse outside institutional settings.

Nicholls said this meant that “those who suffered at the hands of family 
members or strangers would still be powerless due to existing limitations”.

Queensland to scrap age limits on child sex abuse victims' lawsuits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
“By dictating who can and can’t have their day in court, Labor is effectively 
creating two classes of victims, which is plainly unfair,” he said.

Hetty Johnston, the head of child protection group Bravehearts, said Pyne’s 
was a stronger and fairer bill for victims than the government’s, and the LNP’s 
proposed amendments were a welcome development.

“What we hope is that the premier will look at the Pyne bill, adopt it and 
take it to the parliament herself and bring it into law,” she said.

Johnston said this appeared more likely to happen in view of the LNP proposal.

“What I pray is that we don’t finish up with a political football here and 
that it is just simply a bipartisan approach by [members of parliament] who all 
want what’s best for victims,” she said.

“These are children who have been assaulted and harmed and to give to them 
fair, just and equitable access to the law. That’s it.

“I can’t imagine there would be any argy-bargy around that. The premier is 
well known for her consideration and concern for the wellbeing of children.

“I feel we’ll have the premier on board, we’ll have the opposition on board 
and the crossbenchers as well, and it just is a beautiful thing.”
 