
Details of the Queen's diamond jubilee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen-diamond-jubilee> concert outside 
Buckingham Palace in June have been announced and the lineup – 60% finalised, 
apparently – already looks stellar. Sir Elton will be there, and Sir Paul 
McCartney, Sir Cliff of course and Sir Tom Jones, Madness, Annie Lennox, JLS 
and Jessie J.

The Take That singer Gary Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gary-barlow>, who is one of the 
organisers, said: "It is going to be an amazing lineup of world-class artists 
coming together to play at one of the biggest and most exciting live music 
shows in recent years. I love the monarchy and love the Queen. I am just very 
excited about the whole event."

A ballot opened on Tuesday morning for British residents to apply for 10,000 
free tickets for the show. Each successful applicant will be allowed to 
nominate a guest aged 13 or over, and the ballot will not be on a 
first-come-first-served basis. "There is as much chance of being selected if 
the application is made on 7 February as by the closing time on 2 March," the 
organisers said. Those who are successful will be notified by the end of March 
and tickets will be sent out at the end of May.

There was no word yet on whether MIA would be invited after her gesture at the 
Super Bowl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/feb/06/did-mia-shock-super-bowl>
 on Sunday – possibly not – but American stars are being lined up and the 
betting is that Kylie will represent Australia – and if not, Rolf will probably 
be available. The aim is to invite stars from every decade of the Queen's 
60-year reign.

If the Queen, who will be 86 by the time of the concert, recognises some of 
the names, it may be because many of them performed at her golden jubilee 
concert in the palace grounds 10 years ago, when the Queen guitarist Brian May 
kicked things off with a rock version of the national anthem from the roof.

This time the concert will take place in front of the palace, with the stage 
around the Victoria Monument and raised seating for up to 20,000 people – many 
of the rest from charities – covering the flowerbeds around the roundabout. The 
organisers hope that up to another 500,000 people may throng St James's and 
Green Parks and the Mall in the remote chance of catching a glimpse of the show 
or to watch on giant screens. Those who opt to stay at home can see it live on 
BBC1 or listen on Radio 2. It will be broadcast live in the US on the ABC 
network.

Among others scheduled to appear are the casts of West End shows, the 
classical pianistLang Lang <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lang-lang> and 
the National Ballet. The whole two-and-a-half-hour show is likely to be rounded 
off with a firework display. It will take place on Monday 4 June, the first 
bank holiday of the long jubilee weekend, after a river pageant on the Thames 
the previous day and before a more sober service of thanksgiving at St Paul's 
Cathedral the following morning.

Princes William and Harry have apparently made suggestions about performers 
they would like to see, and the Queen herself was said to be "entirely content 
and happy" with the lineup. She may not, however, attend the whole concert: 
"She'll probably head out when I start to sing and may be heading back for 
Cliff," said Barlow.

Ticket applicants can apply online at bbc.co.uk/diamondjubilee 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/diamondjubilee>, or on a postcard to The Royal Diamond 
Jubilee Concert 2012, PO Box 798, Manchester, M60 1WU, between now and 2 March. 
Applicants must be over 18 and living at a British (or British forces) postal 
address, and can apply only once, not multiple times.
 