
The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
government has dashed the hopes of child sex abuse victims that its bill to 
remove age limits on compensation claims would clear the way for fresh lawsuits 
against churches and schools.

The government revealed it would not table laws to “remove past deeds” struck 
by institutions in lesser settlements based on the 21-year age limit on victims 
bringing civil actions.

It cited potential “far-reaching and unintended consequences” of legislating 
to override legal barriers preventing repeat claims, saying a national redress 
scheme may be “more appropriate”.

It follows the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, saying on 
Tuesday that the government would not use past deeds to block fresh claims by 
victims who had previously settled with state-run institutions.

Queensland to scrap age limits on child sex abuse victims' lawsuits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
Advocates were also assured by Palaszczuk and the attorney general, Yvette 
D’Ath, that the bill to be tabled on 18 August would comply with key 
recommendations around the removal of time limits by the royal commission into 
institutional child sex abuse.

They were that state and territory governments remove limits “with 
retrospective effect and regardless of whether or not a claim was subject to a 
limitation period in the past”.

The Indigenous Lawyers Association of Queensland, in a letter to Palaszczuk 
noting that the Indigenous community in particular bore the scars of 
institutional abuse, said a failure to strike down past settlements meant “you 
will not have complied with the recommendations of the royal commission”.

“The royal commission recommendations have clearly intended not to just remove 
time limits, but to remove all barriers which confront abuse survivors as they 
attempt to access justice through the Queensland courts system,” it said.

“We draw your attention to the urgency expressly legislating to revoke past 
deeds of release as until that is the case you will not have removed time 
limits for any of these victims.”

Indigenous lawyers encountered “recurring examples of the long-term damage 
inflicted upon individuals, families and communities as a result of child and 
sexual abuse”.


“[The Indigenous Lawyers Association of Queensland] wish to clearly emphasise 
the contribution child sexual abuse and abuse generally have on the 
unacceptable levels of Indigenous incarceration in this country, which have 
been noted to have increased exponentially over the past 25 years,” it said.

The association’s view on past deeds is reflected in a private member’s bill, 
drafted by the independent MP Rob Pyne with one abuse survivor and victims 
advocate.

The survivor called on Palaszczuk to “stop playing politics with people’s 
lives” and adopt this measure of Pyne’s bill, whatever their political 
disagreements.


He said the government had sought to “gazump” Pyne’s bill after getting wind 
of it, a bill he said was drafted only after “the apparent lack of action 
coming from the government on this important issue”.

New South Wales and Victoria have both removed age limits on civil child sex 
abuse claims but excluded victims who had previously settled.

The abuse survivor said this created “the bizarre scenario” where one abuse 
victim could “sue for full true damages” while another victim of the same abuse 
who was “brave enough to already try holding the institution to account is 
locked into his meagre and unjust settlement for life”.

A statement from D’Ath’s office said: “For deeds where time limits were a 
factor that may have affected the quantum of damages, the options available 
under a national redress scheme may provide a more appropriate mechanism for 
survivors to seek just compensation from institutions than would be found 
through legislative means.

Brisbane Grammar changes building's name in apology to child abuse victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/11/brisbane-grammar-changes-buildings-name-in-apology-to-child-abuse-victims>
“Any legislative attempt to remove past deeds entered into with private 
institutions has the potential to have far-reaching and unintended 
consequences.”

This week the Palaszczuk government called for a national redress scheme, 
which hinges on the support of a federal government that has resisted the idea.

Tens of millions of dollars in possible future civil payouts to victims of 
child sexual abuse willhinge on legal moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-to-scrap-age-limits-on-child-sex-abuse-victims-lawsuits>
 byQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
institutions, including the state’s most prestigious school, Brisbane Grammar.

The abuse survivor said the Queensland government’s explanation of its stance 
on past deeds was “rubbish” and a “defensive policy that protects guilty 
institutions at the expense of the needs of victims of abuse”.

“It is not for the government – who is a perpetrator of state institutional 
abuse – to decide what is in the best interests of a victim of their abuse,” he 
said.

“It is up to the survivor of abuse to decide if it is in their own best 
interest to pursue redress under a redress scheme or to pursue full quantum of 
damages by direct litigation.”

The abuse survivor said Palaszczuk had already done “the hard work of 
convincing bureaucrats to expose the government to further financial liability 
for their abuses they have perpetrated in the past”.

“The premier stated the government would choose to not use deeds as a barrier 
to relitigating as a policy,” he said.

 “If it’s good enough for policy, make it law. Legislate so that every 
institution is bound by the same principles.”
 