Sue Townsend's hero was a prolific teenage poet. Which of these is authentic 
Mole?  Pandora! / I adore ya. / I implore ye /Don’t ignore me  Pandora/ You're 
not Laura / Nor any sort of Nora / Though I wish for more o' / You  I may be 
adolescent / I may be teenage / But I'm quite pleasant / And I won't be caged  
Man hands on misery to man. / It deepens like a coastal shelf. / Get out as 
early as you can,/ And don’t have any kids yourself. Adrian's family have a pet 
dog. But what is it called?  Max  Tebbit  The dog  Benton Adrian has held a 
variety of jobs down the years. Which of the following has he NOT been?  A 
writer  A TV chef  A bookseller  A property developer Adrian spends years 
working on a novel. What is its title?  Lo! The Flat Hills of My Homeland  Who 
Would Fardels Bear?  An Ashby Lad  Peppermint Afternoons How old was Adrian 
when he made his first appearance?  13 1/4  13 1/2  13 3/4  13 7/8 Sue Townsend 
did not initially try to get book published. It first reached a publisher after 
…  Her daughter entered it in a competition under her own name, but confessed 
after it won  An actor going up for the role of Huckleberry Finn asked her if 
she had anything suitable he could use  Her husband gave a lift to a literary 
agent whose car had broken down, and fell into conversation  She adapted it 
into a screenplay, in which a very young Tom Cruise expressed early interest 
Adrian has an American penpal. Can you name him?  Hamish Mancini  Brad Morricone
 Scott Hermann  Jock Bacharach In The Cappuccino Years, Adrian's three-year-old 
son is revealed to idolise …  George Orwell  Jeremy Clarkson  Tony Blair?  
Lionel Blair? The Mole book set during the Iraq War is called …  Adrian Mole: 
The Shock and Awe Years  Adrian Mole's Secret Dossier  Adrian Mole and the 
Weapons of Mass Destruction  Saturday Sue Townsend's poor health meant that she 
initially intended The Iraq war era Mole book to be his final outing. But it 
was followed in 2010 with another volume, this time entitled …  The Prostrate 
Years  The Defeat  Life Begins  Repetitive Strain Injuries  You got…  Very good 
indeed. Though we would encourage you to venture out of your bedroom a little 
more often  A little mediocre: No wonder you're such a fan of Adrian  Oh my. 
Either you're very young, very old or simply too busy writing your own diary  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  