
One of the British National party's first MEPs' attempts to play down his past 
links to the extreme right as "silly" teenage posturing are today exposed as a 
sham after it emerged that for many years he played a crucial role in shaping 
the National Front's most overtly racist policies.

In 1983, when he was in his late twenties, Andrew Brons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-brons> edited the National Front's 
general election manifesto that called for a global apartheid to prevent the 
"extinction" of whites everywhere.

The Let Britain Live! manifesto was prepared by the party's policy department, 
chaired by Brons. It outlined a series of hugely controversial positions, 
crystallised in one of its opening statements: "The National Front rejects the 
whole concept of multiracialism. We recognise inherent racial differences in 
Man. The races of Man are profoundly unequal in their characteristics, 
potential and abilities."

The manifesto claimed the UK had been "swamped" by "racially incompatible 
Afro-Asians" and that "Black muggings of White people, especially elderly 
ladies, occurs regularly".

It continued: "The eruptions in Bristol in 1980 and Brixton in 1981 were just 
two examples of the 'cultural enrichment' promised to us by the 
multiracialists." And it claimed: "We believe the gradual dismantlement of the 
Apartheid system over the last 17 years to be retrograde ... The alternative to 
Apartheid, multiracialism, envisages an extinction of the White man."

Brons was also an enthusiastic contributor in the 1970s and 1980s to 
Spearhead, a far-right magazine considered so extreme even theBNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp> tried to distance itself from it. In 
two lengthy polemics for the magazine, Brons outlined the supposed importance 
of nationalism and interpreted genetic studies to suggest Europeans had a 
"greater cognitive ability" than non-whites. He attacked the influence of 
"people of Jewish ethnic origin" and peddled the myth that a number of 
predominantly Zionist organisations were controlling the world.

The now retired college lecturer wrote: "One ethnic, national and religious 
group whose power and influence has undoubtedly increased has been the Jews. It 
can be no mere coincidence that the number of people of Jewish ethnic origin to 
be found in internationalist and multiracialist schools of thought and 
organisations of action is out of all proportion to their numbers in the 
population."

Brons, who was elected as the BNP MEP for Yorkshire and the Humber this month, 
has tried to distance himself from his National Front days. "People do silly 
things when they are 17," he said recently. "Peter Mandelson was once a member 
of the Young Communist League but we don't continue to call him a communist."

But his critics say his relationship with the National Front was more than a 
youthful dalliance and question the extent to which he has left his past 
behind. A 1980 edition of National Front News, the party newspaper, carried an 
article about Brons saying he was prepared to go to jail for his beliefs. It 
noted that Brons refused a "Negro reporter permission to attend two National 
Front ticket-only meetings" and explains that Brons, then 29, has "campaigned 
against Coloured Immigration since he was a teenager" - suggesting his 
extremist views have been a feature as much of his adult as his teenage life.

Brons seized the NF chairmanship in 1980 when John Tyndall quit to form the 
BNP. In 1984 Brons was convicted of using insulting behaviour towards an 
ethnic-minority police officer and left the party, citing family problems.

At the National Front, Brons was a close ally of Richard Verrall, the author 
of the Holocaust-denial tract Did Six Million Really Die?, who was 
vice-chairman. In 1981, while Brons was chairman, the NF endorsed We are 
National Front, a pamphlet carrying an introduction from Verrall. It had 
photographs of Brons and Verrall as well as a picture of a gorilla and a black 
man stating: "These two creatures look the same, don't they?"

Anti-racism and Jewish support groups yesterday described Brons's failure to 
condemn his past activities as disturbing. "From a young man until well into 
his middle age, Andrew Brons was very much involved in a series of viciously 
antisemitic and racist far-right movements," said a spokesman for the Community 
Security Trust, which monitors attacks on the UK's Jewish community. "It's hard 
to believe he has undergone a serious conversion since then."

Searchlight, the anti-fascist organisation, said Brons was influential in 
shaping the NF and it was important that those voting for him should be aware 
of his past views. "The fact that Brons is an intellectual fascist and bigot 
rather than an ignorant fascist and bigot cuts little ice," a spokesman said. 
"We are unimpressed by his claims that his prejudice was a result of youthful 
exuberance."

Attempts to contact Brons through the BNP were unsuccessful.
 