
There are two images that best illustrate Rafael Nadal's animal will to win. 
One is of the strained sinews on his neck and face after he has hit a shot only 
Nuyerev or Superman would contemplate. The other is the anguish painted on the 
same passionate visage when a subsequent effort has left him vanquished. Last 
night in Greenwich, the latter picture most vividly framed the Spaniard's 
dilemma.

When he departed the Caribbean-blue court a drained loser, he left a palpable 
sense of emptiness at the end of a season in which he has not so much hit the 
heights as caressed them, with six losses in six finals against the world No1, 
Novak Djokovic, and a string of disheartening anti-climaxes elsewhere. The 
disappointment was leavened by success on his beloved clay and the consolation 
prize of being ranked No2 in the world.

It is his latest conqueror, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, who goes into the semi-finals 
of the Barclay'sATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>, the last hurrah of 
the season.

There were so many wondrous strokes rifled across the net that the entrapped 
audience of 17,500 were often reduced to dumbstruck wonder but those that 
mattered arrived in the moment of the Spaniard's greatest grief.

The Frenchman won — more convincingly in the end than earlier exchanges hinted 
at — 7-6, 4-6, 6-3 in two hours and 42 minutes. If he has anything left, the 
force of it will be felt in the semi-finals. If David Ferrer beats Tomas 
Berdych he plays Tsonga.

A drawn and resigned Nadal said: "Probably I [had a] little bit less passion 
for the game probably I was a little bit more tired than usual. The end of the 
year wasn't easy for me. That's hard to accept."

Those are tough words for a champion . Alongside the happy declaration of 
Tsonga that he had played "amazing tennis", they describe a sharp divide in 
fortunes.

Tsonga, a bulky unit, hit thrillingly down the lines but also chipped and 
dinked with delicacy at the net. When it mattered, he dipped into his armoury, 
rounding out the first set with the third of his 11 aces.

Nadal was roused in the second and, for a little while, looked to have 
Tsonga's measure but the third set was beyond him, not through any lack of will 
or muscle, but because the Frenchman had marginally more fire in his belly.

Djokovic should start only a marginal favourite against his compatriot Janko 
Tipsarevic on Friday, his straight-sets loss to Ferrer on Wednesday night 
having etched doubt in bookmakers' minds; Ferrer plays Berdych, and that is 
very much an even-money proposition.

This has been a tournament dominated by mounting issues of workload and 
ill-health. Perhaps only Tsonga, Berdych and Roger Federer, along with Andy 
Murray's injury replacement Janko Tipsarevic, have felt confident to stretch 
without risking aggravation to chronic complaints.

That is modern tennis. If they all suffer, they are all, pretty much, starting 
from the same grid. Only Federer challenged that view.
 