
If ever there was a reason to believe class conquers all in sport, it surely 
arrived at the O2 Arena in Greenwich when Rafa Nadal came back from nowhere to 
beat Andy Roddick in their first-round match of theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>.

The American was all over the Spaniard in the first set last night, 6-3, and 
looked to be in a good place to close him down in the second but lost it 7-6 on 
a tie-break. The closing chapter, 6-4 for Nadal, left Roddick spent and 
disillusioned. There are no certainties.

For most of the year, Nadal has been the ruler of his universe; lately, his 
strong left shoulder had collapsed, maybe in keeping with his dodgy knees, a 
king of the court visibly disintegrating in front of us.

Roddick had slipped in the rankings. It was his time to KO the champ, perhaps. 
But he had him on the ropes and blew it.

Nadal goes through to the second round comforted that he can resist the 
impertinent challenges of mortals. And a sane gambler would be hard-pressed to 
bet against his winning this tournament.

It has been a good week for icons. From Craven Cottage to the O2 Arena, the 
shambling, magical presence of a bearded and plump Diego Maradona hangs over 
London's sporting landscape, and nobody is feeling the buzz quite so much as 
Novak Djokovic. They have become firm friends down the years, swapping shirts 
from their respective sports, but met for the first time at the tennis. 
Djokovic could hardly contain his delight.

Maradona, a tennis fan so committed he travelled to Moscow three years ago to 
support Argentina in the Davis Cup, might even inspire him to win this 
tournament, the Serbian said after spotting the great man in the crowd on his 
way to seeing off Tomas Berdych in straight sets.

"It made me nervous," Djokovic said. "But just to have him as a supporter is 
an incredible honour and pleasure. Hopefully he can be my lucky charm."

Support comes not just from the stars. Roger Federer will be in the odd yet 
familiar position today of having a disproportionate number of the 17,500 fans 
cheering him on against Andy Murray. The Swiss was recently voted the most 
popular player on the circuit for the eighth year in a row.

Britain's No1, though, is not bothered. "It's one of those things," he said of 
Federer's enduring love affair with tennis fans.

They are in prime form for what should be a fascinating rematch of their 
Shanghai Masters final, which Murray won in probably the best of his eight 
victories over Federer. If the crowd go with Federer, it will do no more than 
concentrate the Scot's mind on the task.

"All the players would like to have all the support on their side," Murray 
said, "but our job, as professional athletes, is to try to put the crowd out of 
our minds if things aren't going well."

Focus is something Berdych seems to have lost since beating Djokovic in the 
semi-finals at Wimbledon this year. That victory and other impressive 
performances marked the Czech as one of the most dangerous opponents on the 
circuit.

Djokovic lost in straight sets at Wimbledon, then rattled up 26 wins to three 
losses before their rematch yesterday, and this time he was brutally in control 
of his adversary in winning 6-3, 6-3 in just under an hour-and-a-half. "I'd be 
lying if I said [the pressure] didn't get to me," Berdych said of his losing 
debut in the end-of-season tournament. And he's got Nadal and Roddick to come.
 