
The Italian high court judges who will determine the fate of Amanda Knox and 
Raffaele Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito> have 
begun their deliberations in the case, following a passionate last-ditch plea 
by Sollecito’s lawyer for the conviction against the 31-year-old – whom she 
compared to Forrest Gump – to be dropped.

Knox and Sollecito have faced justice together since they were arrested in 
2007 on suspicion of murderingMeredith Kercher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher>, a British university 
student who lived with Knox in Perugia while both were studying abroad.

In a rousing closing argument that lasted nearly two hours – they are supposed 
to be limited to 20 minutes in the court of cassation in Rome – Giulia 
Bongiorno, Sollecito’s lawyer, said her client had always tried to cooperate 
with investigators and had not been in the room where the crime was committed.

“During the violence he was watching cartoons [at home],” she argued. “He is 
an innocent who got wrapped up in spectacular and gigantic events that, like 
Forrest Gump, he did not fully realise. Absolve him.”

Sollecito, who attended with his girlfriend, father and sister, was escorted 
out of the grand courthouse in Rome surrounded by a mob of photographers. He 
ducked into a waiting car and drove off.

He faces immediate imprisonment and a 25-year sentence if the high court 
decides to uphold his earlier murder conviction. Knox faces a jail sentence of 
28-and-a-half years. Both deny any wrongdoing.

It would be considered unorthodox for the judges to annul the earlier 
convictions in either Knox or Sollecito’s case, but one or both cases could be 
sent back to a lower court for retrial.

Bongiorno did not point the finger at Knox, but said that if the court 
believed that a statement the American made to police – and later retracted – 
was true, it meant her client was exonerated. Knox told police that she was in 
the house when Kercher was killed but that Sollecito was not.

The lawyer also criticised the DNA evidence in the case. Prosecutors have 
claimed that Sollecito’s DNA was found on a hook on Kercher’s bra, but 
Bongiorno said the evidence was improperly tested.

Knox’s lawyers also sought an annulment of her murder conviction during their 
arguments on Wednesday, the first day of the hearing.

“There is not one trace of Amanda in the scene of the crime,” Carlo Dalla 
Vedova, her lawyer said, adding that it was rife with “grave judicial errors 
that must be set right”.

Knox has vigorously defended herself, and said in previous interviews that she 
would have to be dragged “kicking and screaming” back toItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> if her conviction were upheld.

Italy is expected to seek the extradition of Knox, who is currently living in 
Seattle, if her conviction is upheld. The US and Italy agreed an extradition 
treaty in the 1980s under which both countries are supposed to comply with such 
requests, with few allowable exceptions.

The decision to seek the extradition would be made by Italy’s justice 
minister, Andrea Orlando.

The Kercher family is not in Rome to hear the verdict, according to their 
lawyer. A third assailant, Rudy Guede, was convicted of murder in a separate 
fast-track trial in 2008. He is nearly halfway through his 16-year sentence.
 