
Greg Rusedski had only one thought in his mind once the draw had been made for 
the Australian Open and that was to make it through to the second round, where 
he could expect to face the world No2 Andy Roddick. After an early wobble he 
made it. Tim Henman's ambitions were rather loftier and the strain showed all 
too painfully as he stuttered through the latter stages of his first-round 
match against the Frenchman Cyril Saulnier.

Henman won 6-1, 6-2, 4-6, 6-3 and tomorrow faces the towering Victor Hanescu. 
It should not be a match to trouble him unduly, for the Romanian is not the 
swiftest of movers. Yet after an encouragingly positive start against Saulnier 
the indecision and negativity that have so often plagued his game on this 
continent returned to bring pallor to his cheeks and dark shadows around his 
eyes.

Henman has given up playing tennis for Great Britain in the Davis Cup because 
he and his coach Paul Annacone have come to the conclusion that team tennis 
must be sacrificed on the altar of individual ambition and the holy grail of 
winning a grand slam title. Henman, unlike Rusedski, has not reached a slam 
final in 38 attempts and on last night's evidence there is no reason to suppose 
he ever will.

He should have killed Saulnier off, having taken the first two sets in under 
an hour. Instead he allowed the Frenchman, who nearly beat Henman in the first 
round of the French Open last year, to raise his game and garner fresh 
confidence. Champions do not allow this to happen and Henman will need to pull 
himself together rapidly if he is to get beyond the last 16, something he has 
failed to achieve in eight journeys here.

A year ago Rusedski was in the vaulted depths and preparing for a protracted 
fight to absolve himself of a failed drugs test, vigorously pursuing his case 
to a personally satisfactory conclusion through an independent tribunal. Few 
have ever doubted his tenacity in times of stress; he received marginal help 
from the Association ofTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Professionals as he attempted to resurrect his career, and his achievement in 
hauling himself back into the top 50 by the end of last year was outstanding.

"Now I want to enjoy my last few years of tennis. Every match I win I feel 
really good about it, especially at a major championship," he said. "Having 
gone through what I had to last year, and the year before when I had two 
operations, you are either going to get weaker and fall off the planet or come 
back stronger. I think that mentally I am stronger than I have ever been."

With Jonas Bjorkman approaching his 33rd birthday and with Rusedski 32 in 
September, there was a feeling of All Our Yesterdays about their match, which 
Rusedski won 2-6, 6-4, 6-0, 7-6. Here were flashes of high quality, recalling 
past suc cesses, intermingled with many moments when their legs were no longer 
quick enough to meet the urgent prompting of their brains.

In the first set Bjorkman returned with consummate skill and volleyed with 
sharpness and depth; thereafter Rusedski's serve improved, as did his own 
returns. It was never less than intriguing, spiced by the lusty vocal support 
of the Swedes, countered by the British with their "I'd rather be a pommie than 
a Swede" retorts.

Bjorkman, who these days concentrates his energies on a successful and 
lucrative doubles career, appeared spent after the third set but raised enough 
fire to break Rusedski for a 5-3 lead in the fourth. Rusedski's response was 
immediate and decisive, the break-back nailed by a brilliantly acute 
cross-court backhand.

Roddick holds a 3-1 advantage over Rusedski and admitted, after his opening 
7-5, 6-2, 6-1 victory over Irakli Labadze of Georgia, a left-hander like 
Rusedski: "Greg's an uncomfortable match on any surface. He took me apart in 
2002 at Wimbledon."

But a year later it was Rusedski who blew up spectacularly, losing in three 
sets to the American on Centre Court and treating tea-time BBC television 
viewers to a stream of expletives usually reserved for the Big Brother 
household.

"It will be great to play him on a different surface," said Rusedski. "He's 
one of the danger players. You don't finish No1 or No2 in the world for two 
straight years without being a very good player."

Dangerous is not a word much used when Henman's name crops up. The top players 
recognise his talent and many, from Pete Sampras to Roger Federer, have said 
that he will win a slam title one day. But the truth is that Henman, for all 
his gifts, has never been good enough. Not playing Davis Cup tennis is unlikely 
to change matters.
 