
Sarah Pierce became an aid worker because she wanted to help eradicate disease 
in Africa. While working in a remote field office inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, she was raped in her tent by a 
fellow aid worker.

Three months later, her contract was terminated. Pierce, 27, says her 
employer, the Carter Center, a major American NGO, told her she was not 
suitable for work in the field. Pierce says she was fired because she was 
openly critical about her employer’s failure to support her properly or help 
her seek justice.

Aid agencies accused of hiding scale of sexual assaults on employees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/aid-agencies-accused-of-hiding-scale-of-sexual-assaults-on-employees>
It was in December last year, while Pierce was working on a project in a 
remote area of South Sudan, that she says she was attacked. She was living in a 
tented compound with other men and women from local charities. On her last 
night before a contract break she says a colleague “came into my tent while I 
was asleep and climbed into my bed naked and raped me”.

Pierce reported the attack to a superior in a phone call the following day. “I 
was exhausted in pain and probably in shock,” said Pierce (not her real name). 
“The first thing she asked me was why no one had heard me scream. I was 
questioned as to why I hadn’t reported it directly to the staff of the local 
non profit – all men, some of whom reported to the man who raped me – or why I 
hadn’t told my driver or programme officers – all male.

“She wanted to know why my tent hadn’t been locked, why had I been in the 
compound and why I didn’t call and report it immediately as it happened? Why I 
didn’t fight back more?”

Pierce said the response exacerbated the trauma she felt. “It wasn’t ‘Are you 
OK, do you need medical attention?’”

The aid worker said she was not offered any immediate medical care or legal 
options by the superior. “She asked if I had led him on. As soon as she asked 
the question I automatically did not want to disclose anything else.”

I felt like I was fired because I was raped

When Pierce went back to work after her contract break, she spoke openly about 
the incident with other international staff, partly to help her deal with the 
trauma but also to warn colleagues of the risk. “I was told very clearly not to 
talk about it,” she said, adding that one of her managers made it clear that it 
was up to the organisation to decide how openly the incident should be 
discussed.

Three months after the attack she was called to the capital, Juba, for a 
meeting.

“I went down thinking it was an opportunity to discuss how to make a better 
policy,” said Pierce. “But (her superior) was so defensive and said that the 
procedures we had were appropriate. I just needed to learn how to handle it, 
and if I continued to speak out about it, Carter Center would not be 
comfortable having me in the field.”

The following day the superior called Pierce to say the organisation had 
decided not to honour her contract. “I felt like I was fired because I was 
raped,” she said. “I felt so disappointed and betrayed. I didn’t expect them to 
protect me from everything, but I expected that if something happened they 
would treat me decently and with respect.”

A Carter Center spokeswoman said the assault was a “personal tragedy and an 
affront to all aid workers”. “Actions we took were driven by concern for her 
welfare. She was provided medical treatment and encouraged and supported to 
seek counselling, including flights for that help to Nairobi. She is the victim 
of a tragedy, and the Carter Center does not wish to add any further or 
unnecessary suffering through a public medium, even if she gave you permission 
to contact us.”

The spokeswoman said the Carter Center’s protocols for field operations were 
informed by nearly 30 years of experience working in or near areas of conflict 
or with unstable governments. The Center did not comment on the reasons for 
Pierce’s dismissal, nor on her claim that she was instructed not to talk about 
the rape to other colleagues, citing the need to maintain confidentiality.

Pierce’s experience is at the extreme end of the spectrum of sexual harassment 
and violence within the humanitarian world, an issue specialist psychologists 
and those working within the sector say is hugely underreported.

Most of those who have come forward to the Guardian are women, but men are 
also victims. Many say they are afraid to speak out because they fear being 
ignored, treated as troublemakers or causing damage to their professional 
reputation.

Julia Hernandez, 28, a Brazilian aid worker has worked for several UN agencies 
and non-governmental organisations inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. She said: “I have seen senior men 
in a senior UN meeting taking a picture of the breasts of some young consultant 
across the table. I have had colleagues call me on my office phone to tell me 
they like the dress I’m wearing. I’ve seen so much of it. I feel harassed 
either by colleagues in my office or out in the field. It becomes tiring.”

Hernandez, whose name has been changed because she fears repercussions for her 
career, said the culture made it difficult for women to do their jobs. “We ask, 
why don’t we have more women in the office? But no young women will ever feel 
comfortable working in such an environment.”

Many women who have experienced sexual abuse say the failure of the agencies 
and charities to take the issue seriously makes the experience worse.

In Kabul, Josie Tillford – not her real name – was working for a US Aid 
contractor and felt like “one of the boys” with her mostly male colleagues 
until she was sexually assaulted in June at a work event. Colleagues were 
supportive initially. But she said they wanted her back at work at full 
capacity and would not allow her talk about the attack.

“My boss said, let’s keep it among us. He didn’t want gossip,” she said. “Not 
being able to talk about it made dealing with it difficult. I started having a 
stress reaction: had a hard time sleeping and nightmares. I tried to say to my 
colleagues that I was having a difficult time. It was suggested that I reach 
out and find counselling on my own. But what I was really trying to say was, ‘I 
need a break. I’m emotional. I’m sad because of this.’ It was misunderstood. 
There was a lot of tension and maybe some hostility.”



We have to be quite careful with applying what we see as universal values that 
are very western-centric

Zehra Rizvi, a humanitarian consultant who has worked in the sector for 10 
years, said culture was never an excuse for ignoring sexual abuse and 
intimidation. “You have to respect people. It might be part of your cultural 
normality but that doesn’t mean that it’s OK. I think there are universal 
values and maybe we hide behind the cultural aspect.”

Katy Harris, another female security expert, experienced difficulties with men 
on her team while working for German development agency GIZ in Asia. “It 
started with spreading rumours about my personal life,” said Harris, who asked 
for her real name to be withheld for fear of repercussions.

Then the three men came to her house at 10pm on a Monday with a cake. “My 
litmus test was would they behave this way with a local woman and I knew the 
answer was no, they knew I lived alone, so I didn’t let them in.”

Harris says she raised the issue with her GIZ manager but claims he dismissed 
her concerns, she said. “He made me feel like I was imagining things.”

In the end Harris tackled the men herself. “I lost my rag because it had been 
going on for so long. It wasn’t the best way to respond to it but my boss 
hadn’t done anything.” Addressing the men’s behaviour directly, however, just 
made it worse. “It was the worst two years of my life … I didn’t trust those 
colleagues and when you’re working in insecure environments, you need to feel 
that people have your back.”

A GIZ spokesperson said the organisation had a policy banning sexual 
harassment in its offices in Germany and abroad. It insisted “staff members 
treat and communicate with each other with respect, regardless of their 
contractual status or position in the hierarchy”.

The spokesperson added: “GIZ takes all incidents of sexual harassment 
extremely seriously. Appropriate disciplinary action will be taken in verified 
cases of sexual harassment … Managers are responsible for maintaining a working 
environment free of offensive behaviour.”

Pierce is working in another country for a different organisation now, but the 
rape still haunts her. “I honestly don’t know how much longer I will be able to 
do this kind of work.

“This is the career I’ve been working towards for the last 10 years. But It’s 
a real challenge to figure out what I can live with.”

 * This article was amended on 19 October 2015. A claim by an agency worker 
was removed because a response from the organisation concerned had not been 
sought regarding the allegation. 
Guardian Global Development Professionals Network is running a series on this 
and other issues affecting aid workers. Emailglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> to share your story

 