
A biological mechanism explaining part of the mystery of acupuncture has been 
pinpointed by scientists studying rats.

Stimulation with electroacupuncture – a form of the therapy in which a small 
electric current is passed between a pair of needles – blunted activity in a 
key hormonal pathway linked to stress, chronic pain and mood, the researchers 
found.

The findings provide the strongest evidence yet that the ancient Chinese 
therapy has more than a placebo effect when used to treat chronic stress, it is 
claimed.

Rats had needles inserted at an especially powerful acupuncture point known as 
stomach meridian point 36 (St36). Although linked to digestive problems and 
multiple other ailments, St36 is on the shin.

Traditionally, acupuncture involves unblocking energy paths known as meridians 
that flow around the body, keeping it in balance.

The research showed that applying electroacupuncture to the St36 point 
affected a complex interaction between hormones known as the hypothalamus 
pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis. In stressed rats exposed to unpleasant cold 
stimulation, HPA activity was reduced.

Lead investigator Dr Ladan Eshkevari, from Georgetown University medical 
centre in Washington DC, said: “The benefits of acupuncture are well known by 
those who use it, but such proof is anecdotal.

“This research, the culmination of a number of studies, demonstrates how 
acupuncture might work in the human body to reduce stress and pain, and 
potentially depression. We have now found a potential mechanism, and at this 
point in our research, we need to test human participants in a blinded, 
placebo-controlled clinical study – the same technique we used to study the 
behavioural effects of acupuncture in rats.

“Some antidepressants and anti-anxiety drugs exert their therapeutic effects 
on these same mechanisms.”

The study, reported in the journal Endocrinology, compared stressed rats given 
electroacupuncture, a sham therapy in which needles were not inserted in a 
meridian point, or no treatment. A fourth group of rats were not exposed to 
stress and did not receive acupuncture.

Electroacupuncture delivered at St36 minutes after cold stimulation, or as a 
pre-treatment, was found to be effective at preventing rising levels of stress 
hormones. Behaviour linked to depression and anxiety was reduced in the treated 
rats.

“This is the first report linking the effects of electroacupuncture at St36 to 
chronic stress-induced depressive and anxious behaviour in animals,” Eshkevari 
added. “This work provides a framework for future clinical studies on the 
benefit of acupuncture, both before or during chronic stressful events.”
 