
My plan for this instalment of the Alan Garner-themed Reading Group was to 
talk about the enduring legacy of The Weirdstone of Brisingamen and Moon of 
Gomrath – and to canvas final opinions now we've read through them together. 
But we've already had plenty of interesting discussion on that theme and I 
think reached a consensus. Briefly, that they're pretty damn good.

This opinion wasn't held universally. Sarah von Himmelheim initially had a few 
doubts:
 "My main issue is that the characters of Susan and Colin remain so empty and 
lifeless. Halfway through the book I still have no idea about who they are, how 
they roll, what's going on inside them, how they look like, how their 
personalities are. My initial reaction was: 'Wow, this is some piece of badly 
written fiction!'"

But she eventually seemed just as "intrigued with the Old Magic" as everyone 
else. The most persistent negative opinion actually came fromAlan Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alangarner> himself in a quote from his 
(also wonderful) book The Voice That Thunders:
 "My first attempt, The Weirdstone of Brisingamen is a fairly bad book, but 
there had to be a start somewhere, and consolation rests in the even worse 
first drafts of the opening chapter, which I pin up when things seem to be 
going well."

Anyway, that's all by the by. We've done that bit (although of course, further 
opinions are very welcome) and, more to the point, we have something new and 
exciting and intriguingly difficult to discuss: Boneland.

Ursula K Le Guin has just reviewed the book for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/29/boneland-alan-garner-review>, 
and like just about everything she writes, her review is compulsory reading. 
She points out why the book is difficult:
 "It treads on risky ground. Readers looking for more than mere adventure 
expect characters whose behaviour and reactions are humanly comprehensible.

"The child twins Colin and Susan were semi-characterless actors in a fantasy 
tale. Colin is both severely disturbed radio-astronomer and the man chosen from 
his generation to "look after the Edge" – and how to reconcile these roles in a 
character in a modern novel? How are the pyschic sufferings of a man so 
anachronistically fated and so emotionally crippled to be made comprehensible?" 
And brilliant:
 "You figure out what it's all about gradually; as with poetry, learning 
another language, learning to see and think differently, the demands and 
rewards are intense and real. It is this element of the book, in which the 
obsessions come into focus and a true balance is glimpsed, that will bring me 
back to Boneland, knowing I'll find there what no other novelist has ever given 
us." 
I shan't add to Le Guin's review (who would dare?) except to note my personal 
feelings. I found the book emotionally hard – in the best possible sense of the 
latter word. It hits you in the gut. Colin's situation is troubling and sad. As 
an account of mental trauma, it's highly effective – and correspondingly bleak, 
even though shot through with wonderful moments of light. It wasn't necessarily 
easy to read – but it was cathartic. It's a book I imagine I'll return to again 
and again. And not only because I still want to figure out what's going on in 
so much of it.

But enough of me. I want to hear from you. Have you started Boneland yet? How 
are you finding it? And do you have ideas about interpretation? All opinions, 
interpretations and reactions will be gratefully received. Since Boneland has 
only just come out we're going to leave this thread open for a few weeks so it 
can (hopefully!) slowly build as a resource as more people start to uncover its 
mysteries.

Enjoy!
 