


A rebel Tory plot to force David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to hold an EU referendum 
next year backfired on Sunday, after it was pilloried by most Conservatives but 
cheered by senior Labour figures.

Adam Afriyie, the Conservative MP for Windsor, called for a vote on Britain's 
membership of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> on 23 
October next year, rather than the official Conservative promise to hold a poll 
before the end of 2017.

Afriyie, who was rumoured to be behind a plan to oust the prime minister 
earlier this year, said he would not be able to sleep at night if the public 
were not given a say on the issue before the election. To achieve an early 
vote, he is planning to table an amendment to the EU referendum bill, which is 
supported by the Tory leadership.

Within hours of Afriyie's challenge, it became clear he had hit the wrong 
note, as some of the most eurosceptic MPs in the Conservative party pleaded 
with him to reconsider his position for the sake of party unity. The only vocal 
supporter of the idea wasTom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, the prominent Labour 
backbencher who said he would probably vote with Afriyie. "I think there are a 
lot of people who think we need clarity on this now," he said.

The Labour party also refused to rule out officially backing the amendment, 
despite Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, saying the party does not 
agree with the official Tory plan for a referendum on the basis of a 
renegotiation on Britain's relationship with the EU that has not yet happened. 
Labour has so far refused to set out its thinking on whether an EU referendum 
is necessary but it is possible Ed Miliband could use Afriyie's amendment to 
derail the bill or sow discontent among theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

Asked how Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> will vote, a 
senior party source said: "We will respond to the amendment after it is 
published."

Some Labour figures believe backing an early vote could cause bitter divisions 
on the Tory benches before the election as well as settling the issue once and 
for all. One of the party's MPs also pointed out any parliamentary time spent 
on Afriyie's amendment increases the chance the Conservative-backed EU 
referendum bill will be "talked out". This is the technical term for when 
legislation proposed by a backbencher is killed off because it has run out of 
its allotted time for discussion.

Afriyie's challenge, laid out in an article for the Mail on Sunday, also gave 
Labour another chance to accuse the Conservatives of dithering overEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> when they should be addressing 
the economy and living standards.

Michael Dugher MP, a shadow cabinet minister and Labour vice-chairman, said it 
was a sign "the Tories are back to obsessing about the European Union".

"We need a prime minister and a government that will make dealing with the 
cost of living the number one priority," he said. "Instead David Cameron is too 
weak and out of touch to stop this latest outbreak of Tory infighting."

Afriyie's amendment provoked a furious reaction from the Conservative 
leadership, with Downing Street saying a referendum would not be allowed to 
take place next year "under any circumstances".

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, the home 
secretary, also slapped down the plan, telling the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, 
"Adam's got it wrong" and could "possibly jeopardise the bill".

Dozens of Tory MPs lined up to criticise Afriyie for disrupting the 
short-lived Conservative consensus on Europe, after Cameron managed to win 
round most of his party earlier this year.

Cheryl Gillan, a former Conservative cabinet minister, warned Afriyie's move 
would play into Labour's hands.

"I do take issue with him taking this up at this particular time," she told 
the Murnaghan programme on Sky News. "I think he's jumping the gun too quickly 
here. I think Labour would be very happy for this referendum to take place next 
year because they wouldn't have to make a decision on the matter."

Chris Heaton-Harris, MP for Daventry, said he had only been in parliament 
three years, but already knew the Afriyie amendment would "make a referendum 
less likely", while Nick de Bois, MP for Enfield North, who wants to leave the 
EU as things stand, said the timing was wrong.

"No government can hope to influence and reach agreement with EU members on a 
renegotiated, less intrusive but more pro-single market European Union within a 
year," he wrote on theConservativeHome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservativehome> website. "Neither can 
we hope to stimulate public engagement on the issues that will help to decide 
if we leave or remain.

Meanwhile, Sarah Wollaston, MP for Totnes, said she thought it would "scupper 
opportunity for meaningful renegotiation".

Simon Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/simonhughes>, the Liberal 
Democrat deputy chairman, said the whole concept of a referendum next year was 
"barmy". "This will completely distract everything we're trying to do about 
growth, completely distract our building relations with the new German 
government, completely distract us from saying that in Europe is the place 
where we get the most jobs, and the most investment and the most trade," he 
said.

However, Afriyie stuck to his argument that a referendum before the election 
is needed because the British public is "suspicious" about whether it will 
actually happen.

"This is about every single MP searching their conscience and searching their 
soul and asking: do they want to agree with 80% of the population who want a 
referendum in the bag," he told Sky News. "I'm not playing party politics. This 
is nothing to do with me and David Cameron. It is to do with me and my 
conscience, making sure that I, as a backbench MP, make sure that parliament 
has the option to decide whether to have a referendum in 2014."

He strongly denied wanting the prime minister's job, saying rumours of his 
ambition to be leader were "media tittle-tattle". He also insisted he was a 
"loyalist" to Cameron and merely disagrees on the timetable for a referendum.

One Conservative MP, Andrew Griffiths, joked about Afriyie's ambitions as he 
tweeted: "DearAdam Afriyie <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie> 
on behalf of Tory MPs in marginal seats everywhere, we know how much you want 
to be leader. But please! Just stop!"
 