
A record number of courses with vacancies at Britain’s top universities, 
including Bristol, Exeter and King’s College London, have been thrown open to 
students as part of theclearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/find-a-course-through-clearing-and-say-the-right-things-on-the-phone>
 process following A-level results.

There were 41,000 courses with vacancies listed on the Ucas clearing website 
on Thursday afternoon – up from 37,000 at the same time last year. Empty spaces 
were listed at almost every institution, including nearly all the leading 
Russell Group universities.

Find a course through Clearing – and say the right things on the phone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/find-a-course-through-clearing-and-say-the-right-things-on-the-phone>
With the cap on higher education numbers lifted, universities are battling to 
attract the brightest and best students from a diminishing pool of 
18-year-olds, with unfilled places on prestigious courses from medicine to 
mathematics.

The university clearing service has transformed in recent years from the “last 
chance saloon” of university admissions for students who have failed to achieve 
their predicted grades, to a respected route into university, offering 
competitive courses with the highest entry requirements.

St George’s <http://www.sgul.ac.uk/study/undergraduate/clearing>, a specialist 
medical and health sciences college that is part of the University of London, 
had received more than 3,500 calls by lunchtime on Thursday after it advertised 
vacancies for medicine via clearing.

Elsewhere, thousands of places were up for grabs in almost every possible 
subject, with theUcas website 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/results/clearing-service-2016>
 listing vacancies in 54 courses at Bristol, from geophysics to geography; at 
Exeter there were 40 courses with vacancies, including history and politics and 
international relations, while at King’s College London there were vacancies on 
30 courses, including physics and geography.

The University of Leeds listed vacancies on more than 1,000 courses, Liverpool 
University had vacancies on 855 different courses; there were 455 at the 
University of Essex, 306 at Coventry and 179 at York. Exact numbers of 
vacancies on each course were not available.

As Thursday wore on, the number of courses with vacancies began to decrease as 
universities successfully filled empty places.

“The days of clearing being the bargain basement of university admissions are 
long gone,” said Helen Thorne, Ucas’s director of external relations.

Last year a record 64,300 students found university places through clearing – 
one in eight.


A-level results day 2016: UK students get their grades – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/live/2016/aug/18/a-level-results-day-2016-uk-students-get-their-grades-live>
A growing number of students are choosing to apply directly through clearing 
rather than through the traditional admissions route, with the advantage that 
they apply knowing their results, rather than dealing with the uncertainty of 
lining up a firm offer and an insurance offer from different universities while 
they await results day.

According to Ucas 15,000 students entered higher education by applying 
directly to clearing last year. Others are choosing to “trade up” if they get 
better results than expected.

By 4.30pm on Thursday here had been almost 236,000 course searches on the UCAS 
website with economics, law, psychology, business and nursing the most 
searched-for courses.

In addition there were 12,000 calls taken at Ucas – as well as tens of 
thousands more to individual universities – plus 1.2 million log-ins to the 
Ucas tracking site where students check to see if their place has been 
confirmed.


Helen Bower, assistant director for undergraduate recruitment at Northumbria 
University, said: “It’s been a really busy day so far at Northumbria and we’ve 
got more than 120 people manning the phones to help students picking up their 
results today.


“The clearing process has changed significantly in recent years and the option 
to ‘trade up’ now gives students the opportunity to reconsider their original 
choice if they have done better than expected in their exams.”

Half of those using clearing will be placed in universities by the Monday 
after A-level results day, according to Ucas. “The system works efficiently – 
with no cap on numbers in the majority of HE courses in England, and a falling 
population of young people, universities are very keen to recruit suitably 
qualified students,” a spokesperson said.

Greenwich University received more than 1,300 calls from potential applicants 
in the first four hours after opening at 6am on Thursday, as well as talking to 
300 students on the university website’s live chat service and 200 more on 
Twitter.


Recruitment co-ordinator Sophi Marten said: “It has been a great start to 
clearing. I am delighted that we have been able to offer places to many of our 
early callers.”


London South Bank University (LSBU) launched a 36-hour round-the-clock 
clearing marathon, staffed by 120 phone operators and academics, to capture the 
maximum number of potential students.

Sarah Gordon, LSBU’s head of recruitment and admissions, said: “Clearing isn’t 
just for students receiving their A-level results, it’s for anyone considering 
starting university this autumn who has not yet secured a place.

“It’s also vital that we dispel the myth that those entering university 
through clearing are somehow disadvantaged,” she added. “At LSBU the proportion 
of students who achieve a 2:1 or above is actually marginally higher for those 
who applied through clearing compared with those who did not.”
 