 It was a joke. To the Labour party's media monitoring unit, to bloggers 
everywhere, to Guardian readers across the globe - it was a joke. This 
newspaper'sstory <https://www.theguardian.com/uk_news/story/0,,1744447,00.html> 
on Saturday that Coldplay's lead singer, Chris Martin, was backing the 
Conservatives and releasing a new version of hit song Talk, calledTalk to David 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-audio/Guardian/audio/2006/03/31/talk_to_david.mp3>
, was an April fool. The revelation that Martin's wife, Gwyneth Paltrow, met 
David Cameron's wife, Samantha, at yoga, was a fantasy. Talk to David being 
available at the Guardian's website - including lines such as "It was the 
Converse trainers that did it for me/ I got them in orange, wait till you see" 
- was part of the trick.
A spokesman for the band, anxious that the Guardian put the record straight, 
said he had received calls asking if it was true: "Chris is in America at the 
moment but I'm sure he would have found it funny. He's got a good sense of 
humour."

Also taken in was the Labour party's media monitoring unit, which faithfully 
disseminated the story to most of the government on Saturday morning without a 
hint of irony.

Despite the fact that the story was bylined Olaf Priol (Pia Rollof was 
unavailable), bloggers were soon on to the news. "This is no April fool's 
joke," said Andrew Kaza, a former Democratic Congressional candidate, on his 
website Kazablog. He continued: "My question: is there a band or artist in the 
US that could be drawn towards the 'political download' as a means of 
supporting their candidate/ issue?"

He thinks it unlikely at the moment. "But then, I couldn't have predicted that 
Cameron (who has all the charm of a British used car salesman, in my book) 
might have gotten the backing of Martin, a guy whose ideals and music I 
respect," he said.

"Yes, once again, that old maxim rings true: politics does make for strange 
bedfellows."

Other April fool stories included Radio 4's Today programme announcing that 
the axed UK Theme was to be replaced by Euro Theme; the Daily Mail on Tony 
Blair ordering the No 10 doors to be painted red; The Sun spotting a penguin by 
the river Thames and the Daily Express reporting that the French authorities 
were hiding secrets over the death of Diana.

Actually, the last one was not an April fool.
 