
Nelson Piquet Jr may have been granted immunity in the Singapore Crashgate 
case, which opens before the World Motor Sport Council hearing in Paris 
tomorrow, but the young Brazilian has a lot to answer for. Apart from blowing 
the whistle for full time on the lengthyFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> careers of Flavio Briatore and 
Pat Symonds, Piquet's crude use of the throttle pedal in Singapore last year 
propelled the sport as well as his Renault into the proverbial gutter.

That does not lessen the serious charge against Briatore and Symonds, that 
they conspired with the Brazilian to crash deliberately, but, by making a hash 
of what should have been a simple tap against the wall, Piquet appears to have 
missed the planned point of contact on the right of the corner and spun with 
far greater force into the concrete on the left side of the track.

The subsequent eruption of suspension parts and fibreglass not only showed the 
folly of planning such a risky manoeuvre in the first place but it also, 
according to one writer last seen at a race more than a decade ago, indicted F1 
with playing out the worst act of cheating ever seen in sport.

Such an emotional statement is prefaced on the lethal possibilities associated 
with a poorly executed manoeuvre by an average F1 driver. But it is no 
different toAyrton Senna <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> 
driving into the back of Alain Prost as the field swept into the first corner 
of the 1990 Japanese Grand Prix. The rear wing of Prost's Ferrari was flung 
into the air as 24 cars bore down at 175mph. The McLaren and the Ferrari 
finished in the gravel trap at the end of a deliberate act that gave Senna the 
championship on the spot. It was an act as premeditated as Renault's appears to 
have been in Singapore, but one where the consequences could have been far more 
severe.

There are other examples: Senna trying to squeeze Prost against the pit wall 
at 180mph in Portugal and Michael Schumacher pushing Fernando Alonso on to the 
grass at a similar speed during the 2003 British Grand Prix. No one was hurt in 
either instance, but they could have been during incidents involving open-wheel 
racing cars. A similar argument applies to Singapore although, in this case, 
the accident occurred at 100mph slower. The point is, however, that in each 
case the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile did not so much as hold an 
investigation, never mind hand out a punishment. That is but one of many 
dilemmas facing the WMSC.

If the FIA are to be consistent in their apparent disregard for potentially 
dangerous actions, the emphasis tomorrow should be onRenault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> appearing to fix the outcome of the 
race in a blatant move that smacks of the arrogance associated with F1 and 
participants who have been made wealthy beyond their dreams. The level of 
punishment has been determined by the $100m fine levied on McLaren in 2007 for 
purloining Ferrari paperwork. That now seems even more outrageous in the light 
of Renault's infinitely more serious misdemeanour.

The FIA will doubtless sidestep the question by saying that McLaren were hit 
hard for lying during the first WMSC hearing. Renault, by dismissing Briatore 
and Symonds and saying they will not contest the charges, have come clean and 
given reasonable grounds to avoid being kicked out of the sport.

Neither F1 nor Renault can afford such a penalty. If banned from F1, Renault 
might stay away for good since their future is already shaky thanks to 
languishing in eighth place in the constructors' championship, having no title 
sponsor for next year and, possibly, no decent driver if Alonso moves to 
Ferrari. And F1, having lost Honda and, for the moment, BMW, can ill afford to 
usher the departure of a team that, until Singapore 2008, had brought a great 
deal to the sport.

As newspapers across the world delivered their verdicts on Thursday, 
Singapore'sStraits Times hastily pointed out that the scandal would not affect 
their race next weekend. And neither will it affect this extraordinary 
championship, still headed by Jenson Button, as it races on to the final leg 
through Singapore, Japan, Brazil and Abu Dhabi. But even in a world where 
rule-bending is as common as it is in other sports, F1 will be conscious of the 
craven image created by Renault's outrageous and blatant manipulation of last 
year's race.

The final irony is that Renault were lucky – if that's the right word – 
because had Felipe Massa and Ferrari not screwed up their refuelling stop, 
Alonso would never have made it to the top step of the podium. It could be 
argued that by initiating the safety car and the rash of pit stops that 
followed, Renault pressured Massa into leaving the pits prematurely and 
dragging the fuel hose with him. That cost him the race and, arguably, the 
championship.

Massa, making a steady recovery in Brazil from head injuries sustained in 
Hungary, must have mixed emotions over his countryman exposing totally 
unacceptable antics that changed the course of history but hardly constituted 
the worst act of cheating in the sporting universe.
 