
As urban populations swell 
<http://www.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/GRHS2011/P1HotCities.pdf>, cities face 
the challenge of meeting their residents' growing needs sustainably. Urban 
centers – which together occupy just 2% of the world's land andcontain 51% of 
the human population <http://kff.org/global-indicator/urban-population/> – 
produce up to 70% of global greenhouse-gas emissions 
<http://www.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/GRHS2011/P1HotCities.pdf>, and have 
become the main climate-change battleground, according to a UN report.

Across the world, cities are working to meet that challenge. Officials are 
partnering with engineers and corporate R&D teams to improve access to 
essential resources like water, energy and sunlight, and to boost social and 
environmental wellbeing. They are reimagining the potential of resources – the 
existing structures and systems – and they've already come up with innovative 
solutions to meet changing urban needs. Together, they are reprogramming the 
city.

Take Lima. For those living on the edges of Peru's capital, access to clean 
drinking water is a problem. Small wells supply most of the water, which one 
resident describes as "unpleasant and polluted", and in the summer "there isn't 
much available".

Engineers at the local University of Engineering and Technology (UTEC) decided 
to tackle the issue by making better use of two of the city's more abundant 
resources: the costal air (which can reach 98% humidity), and the billboards 
that stretch into it. They installed a humidity collector and water purifier 
into the top of one advertising structure in the village of Bujama, creating the
UTEC Water Billboard <>. It can produce 96 litres of clean drinking water a day 
for local residents, which flows down a pipe to a tap at the base of the 
structure.

Resident Francisco Quilca says the billboard has provided him and his 
neighbors with a new, pure water source, one he wishes could exist "on the door 
of every house, in every village".

Funded through the college's Ingenuity in Action initiative, the project aims 
to inspire children in the area to pursue engineering studies at the college, 
exploring alternative approaches to urban infrastructure. Nader Tubbeh, digital 
marketing coordinator at UTEC, says he hopes – through perfecting such 
innovations – young engineers can "help undermine the water crisis currently 
affecting the world".

Seven thousand miles away, the residents of Umea, a city 300 miles north of 
Stockholm in Sweden, spend six months each year with little access to another 
precious natural resource: sunlight. This can take its toll on the population's 
mental and physical health. What the city lacks in sunlight, however, it makes 
up for in busses and bus stops – popular among people seeking shelter from the 
elements in winter.

Local energy company, Umea Energi, saw an opportunity in the intersection of 
the need for sunlight and for shelter. It replaced the lights in the shells of 
30 bus stops around the city with UV-light-therapy tubes powered by solar 
energy. This transformed thebus stops into therapy saloons 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-11386_3-57556042-76/swedish-town-introduces-light-therapy-to-bus-shelters/>
 "to give the people of Umea an extra energy boost when they needed it the 
most", as the company explains in a video about the project.

While waiting for their bus, residents are invited to face the lights for a 
few minutes to soak up artificial sunlight rays before continuing on their 
journey. After the installation of the light therapy bulbs, the use of public 
buses in Umea increased by 50%.
 Stephen Glassman, creator of Urban Air, a project that aims to replace 
advertisements over crowded roadways with miniature bamboo forests, explains 
that it "recontextualizes what we've seen to this point as a blight of 
advertising". Photograph courtesy of Urban Air 
The motorways in and around Los Angeles may not seem like the most fertile 
ground for this kind of urban repurposing, but for artist Stephen Glassman, 
they hold a unique potential. Glassman is the creator ofUrban Air 
<http://stephenglassmanstudio.net/index.php?/project/urban-air/>, a project 
that aims to replace the advertisements atop the structures that line and 
extend over some of America's most polluted roadways with miniature bamboo 
forests to cool and clean the air. The project, explains Glassman, 
"recontextualizes what we've seen to this point as a blight of advertising". 
Instead, these sites become "an infrastructure for service and 
inter-connectivity".

Time is a great decider of what stays and what disappears from the urban 
landscape. As technology and social behaviour changes, so do the physical 
elements of the city. Changing media habits led to the disappearance of 
newspaper boxes. Phone booths and emergency call sites have given way to the 
mobile phone – but these skeletal structures offer a space for innovation to 
bring new social and economic value. The rise of the"Internet of Things" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_of_Things> – in which everyday objects 
are embedded with sensors and Wi-Fi-enabled – is contributing to the potential.

A partnership between New York City and two telecommunications companies, Cisco
 <http://www.cisco.com/> and City 24/7 <http://www.smartcity24x7.com/NYC.html>, 
has seen 250 phone boxes repurposed as information point touchscreens. The 
business model replaces coins with advertising: a person might tap on the 
screen to find the way to the nearest park and also be alerted to offers from 
local shops and restaurants, which can be stored on their smartphone. The 
information points can also act as communication tools during emergencies. If 
this pilot test is successful, all of the city's 12,500 payphones could be 
replaced.

Meanwhile, Telekom Austria has found another use for hundreds of its disused 
phone booths in Vienna. The company is converting them into 
electric-car-charging stations that give drivers the option of paying via SMS 
text messaging.

Parking payment machines are next on the list of "endangered" structures ripe 
for reprogramming.

These iron sentinels are rapidly being replaced by smartphone apps that allow 
GPS location-specific payments. Yet look inside a modern parking-payment 
machine and you will find a networked Wi-Fi system, a computer, printer, GPS 
locator and a payment authorization system – all powered by a solar system and 
storage battery. Those capabilities could be used for more than just issuing 
pieces of paper with bits of time.

One idea called City Tickets, by designer Mayo Nissen 
<http://www.mayonissen.com/work/citytickets/>, enables residents to report 
incidents or problems in the area – such as potholes or broken streetlights – 
and suggest improvements. Earlier this year, Nissen demonstrated a prototype in 
Boston: the parking payment machine had been reprogrammed to connect to the 
city's 311 incident reporting system, creating a street-level communication 
platform between residents and City Hall.

Residents can now pay for their parking and print out a list of all the faults 
or incidents reported in the area, as well as a report from the city 
authorities detailing how they are responding to each issue. A separate ticket, 
which allows residents to report incidents in the area or offer suggestions for 
improvements, such as perhaps benches for sitting on or a weekly local market, 
can also be printed.

Back in New York, numerous scaffolding structures, aka "sidewalk sheds", can 
be left standing for years as a result of a local law that requires regular 
inspection of building facades. The law states that the structures must be 
erected for the inspection, but it doesn't clarify when they must come down.

Brooklyn designers Bland Hoke and Howard Chambers saw an opportunity to 
rethink these structures, having been inspired by the way the city was 
rethinking its streets. In Hoke's words:

 "We recognized how New York City streetscapes were changing with the addition 
of chairs and tables, and how the city was turning streets into pedestrian 
plazas, so we took that concept and grafted it onto sidewalk sheds."

The result was Softwalks, a kit of seats, benches, counter tops and planters 
that bolt onto existing scaffolding structures to transform them into spaces 
for social gatherings or personal relaxation. The various elements that make up 
Softwalks, Hoke continues:

 "are very pragmatic additions to these otherwise mundane structures, but the 
impact they've had so far is pretty tremendous in terms of how people react to 
them. Everyone loves it, because you are transforming a eyesore into a 
community asset."

This citizen-led transformation of scaffolding structures into platforms for 
public events, street trading or pop-up dining could be a model for more public 
engagement with existing urban structures. It could even encourage the 
authorities to add a new chapter to the New York City Street Design Manual to 
nurture these interactions. At present, this fairly standard municipal 
catalogue offers few surprises in its detailing of the "policies and design 
guidelines…for the improvement of streets and sidewalks throughout the five 
boroughs".

Yet deep within the guide is a section titled "Infrastructure: Do It Yourself 
Repairs", complete with "Specifications for Residents Installing their Own 
Sidewalk", and guidelines for public "Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair".

The notion of DIY infrastructure repair begs the question: if residents are 
encouraged to install and repair their own sidewalks (within certain 
guidelines), what other pieces of urban infrastructure could be opened up by 
the city within a framework of repair and improvement?

Cities are often celebrated as terrains of infinite possibility – a 
perspective mostly applied to their human potential, but also true of the 
structures, systems and services that underpin urban lives. But cities also 
face tough challenges: from population growth and congestion, to emissions 
targets and economic competition. As existing resources come under pressure, 
innovators who can stretch their applications in new directions will be 
rewarded.

Scott Burnham has created and directed design and urban initiatives in 11 
cities worldwide, includingBoston's recent Reprogramming the City 
<http://bsaspace.org/exhibitions/reprogramming-the-city/> exhibition.

This article originally appeared in Green Futures 
<http://www.forumforthefuture.org/greenfutures/articles/existing-city-infrastructure-can-be-%E2%80%98reprogrammed%E2%80%99>
, a magazine on environmental solutions and sustainable futures published by
Forum for the Future <http://www.forumforthefuture.org/>.
 