
Fertility treatment does not increase a woman's risk of developing breast 
cancer, according to a study of more than 25,000 women in the Netherlands.

The large study will help to reassure patients concerned that the powerful 
hormone doses that are part of fertility treatment might put them at risk of 
developing the disease in the future.

At the beginning of an IVF treatment cycle, women are given hormone drugs to 
stimulate their ovaries to produce more eggs so that clinicians can produce 
fertilised embryos in vitro. These lead to large spikes in oestrogen levels 
that could promote the development of breast cancer, which is sensitive to the 
hormone.

The study, carried out by Dr Alexandra van den Belt-Dusebout at the 
Netherlands Cancer Institute in Amsterdam, compared 18,970 women who had had at 
least one cycle of IVF treatment with 7,536 women who had not received 
fertility treatment between 1980 and 1995. They matched these patients to 
records in the NationalCancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
Registry.

Of the 378 women who developed breast cancer, 266 were in the IVF group and 
112 were in the non-IVF group. After adjusting for known risk factors such as 
age, the number of children the women had and family history of breast cancer, 
the team found no statistical difference between the two groups, showing that 
IVF treatment does not increase a woman's chances of developing breast cancer.

Van den Belt-Dusebout presented her results at the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine in San Francisco.

"From 10 years after treatment, breast cancer risk was moderately increased in 
the IVF group but also in the non-IVF group, compared to the general 
population," the researchers said.

Meanwhile, two new studies have revealed that women who receive acupuncture at 
the same time as IVF treatment are no more likely to have a baby.

Both were randomised placebo-controlled trials in which the effect of 
acupuncture was compared with a sham procedure. Neither the patients nor the 
clinician evaluating their pregnancy knew who had received the true treatment.

Acupuncture <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/acupuncture> aimed at 
improving IVF success rates is widely offered by fertility clinics in the UK. 
In the first of the studies, researchers in Hong Kong split 370 women receiving 
IVF into two groups. One group received real acupuncture before and after 
having an IVF embryo implanted into their uterus. The other had the same 
procedure, except the treatment used retractable needles that did not penetrate 
the skin.

Of the 185 who received the sham treatment, 91 achieved a clinical pregnancy 
(foetal heartbeat identified using ultrasound) and 71 had a successful 
delivery. This compared with 72 clinical pregnancies in the true acupuncture 
group and 55 live births. The differences between the groups were not 
statistically significant.

Dr Ernest Ng, in the department of obstetrics and gynaecology at the 
University of Hong Kong, said that his methodology was the most powerful way of 
evaluating whether acupuncture was effective. His results are published in the 
journal HumanReproduction <https://www.theguardian.com/science/reproduction>.

In a second study, researchers in Chicago used a similar design in which 124 
women received true or sham acupuncture. The control group had their skin 
punctured by real acupuncture needles, but not at genuine "Qi-lines" on the 
body.

In the true acupuncture group, 43.9% achieved a clinical pregnancy, compared 
with 55.2% of the women given the sham treatment. The results were presented at 
the American Society for Reproductive Medicine's annual meeting in San 
Francisco yesterday.
 