 The first scientific evidence of a link between a drug for severe acne and 
depression was unveiled yesterday, following years of denials by the 
manufacturer that the prescription medicine could be in any way responsible for 
suicides.
Roaccutane has been linked to more than 100 suicides and attempted suicides 
worldwide. In April last year, an inquest heard that Jason Spiller, 16, killed 
himself after starting the drug. The coroner said, as have other coroners, that 
there was no clear evidence of a relationship between Roaccutane and 
depression. The previous year, David Roberts, a 20-year-old, killed himself 
while on the drug. Seumas Todd, 20, son of the actor Richard Todd, killed 
himself in 1997 while taking Roaccutane.

Roche, the manufacturer, maintains that the drug is not the problem, pointing 
out that the underlying condition could be to blame. The drug's information 
leaflet has, since 1998, warned patients may be at risk of becoming suicidal, 
at the request of the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority 
(MHRA).

But yesterday, scientists from Bath University, with the University of Texas, 
revealed that they have conducted experiments on mice which show that the drug 
makes them behave in a way that is recognised as the result of depression.

Sarah Bailey from the department of pharmacy and pharmacology at Bath, said 
that more research would be needed before anybody could be sure the same effect 
occurs in humans on the drug.

"Establishing a link between the active molecules within the drug and a change 
in depression-related behaviour, albeit in mice, is an important step forward 
in our understanding of the effects of this drug," she said. "To date the only 
evidence for any link with patients has come from individual case reports and 
such patient data is complicated by the psychosocial effects of having severe 
acne."

The researchers injected mice with Roaccutane for six weeks to achieve similar 
levels in the blood to those of humans taking the tablets. Then they put them 
through tests recognised as models for measuring the effects of depression in 
rodents. One was a "forced swim" test, where the animals were placed in water. 
The time they spent attempting to climb out was compared with the behaviour of 
mice that had not been given the drug.

The mice on Roaccutane spent longer immobile, without attempting to escape - a 
recognised sign of depressed behaviour - the researchers report in the journal 
Neuropsychopharmacology.

The father of Liam Grant, 19, from Dublin, is suing Roche in an attempt to 
prove Roaccutane caused his death. Mr Grant - also called Liam - has spent 
£340,000 on studies, including one published by the American Academy of 
Psychiatry, which scanned the brains of 15 people on Roaccutane and 15 on other 
acne medication. They found changes in part of the brain associated with 
depression. Mr Grant has been offered, without any admission of liability, a 
settlement of all his costs and the maximum compensation payable in the event 
of winning his case by Roche - around £800,000 - but he has refused to take it. 
Roche said it has not had time to examine the new results.

Backstory

Roaccutane is intended for patients over the age of 12 with severe acne and is 
sometimes prescribed when antibiotics have failed. It is known todamage the 
foetus,so women of an age to become pregnant can only have a month's supply at 
a time and may have to undergo apregnancy test. Concerns over links to 
depression and suicidehave been around for some years. The Medicines and 
Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority has received 1,588 reports of suspected
adverse eventsexperienced by people taking the drug between licensing in 1983 
and September this year. In 38 cases,people died and 25 of those were suicide. 
The MHRA says the safety of roaccutane is under constant scrutiny. In June last 
year an expert working group recommended patients bemonitored for signs of 
depression.
 