
Well, the antibiotics weren't exactly what I needed – should you remember them 
from the last blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2011/apr/12/a-l-kennedy-writing-first-book>
. I had/haveviral labyrinthitis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/labyrinthitis/Pages/Introduction.aspx> and the 
only response to that is lying down a lot and taking pills to counteract the 
worst of the symptoms. The worst of the symptoms being panic attacks, nausea 
and generally feeling as if you are strapped to the prow of a ship in a force 
nine gale whenever you stand up or do something reckless like turning your 
head. And then there are the muscle cramps and the immense tiredness ... this 
health bulletin seeming horribly appropriate as we reach what will be the last 
sketch of Stages in the Writer's Career, which we might entitle When You Have 
Been Doing it For Ages And Are Knackered.

And may I hope sincerely that all of you writing readers don't take my precise 
path to being knackered. It is in every way not worth it and contravenes all 
the healthy and good advice I give to other people. Of course. Imagine the 
scene: I am being tended in Warwickshire by my mother. (You know you are ill 
when you are a grown up and your mum is looking after you.) I shuffle about, 
sometimes check my email and take short strolls. I feel old. (To be fair, I am 
old.) I have forgotten many of my hobbies, and the possible strain of arranging 
any of them leaves me worrying that I will worry and feel worse. (Labyrinthitis 
both causes and can be caused or worsened by stress. This will be funny when I 
am well and perhaps a decade away from it.)

I am self-employed, but have done no work since my last blog two weeks ago. 
This doesn't exactly mean that I haven't earned anything for a fortnight, but 
it does mean that I'm further behind schedule than during the weeks building up 
to Complete Illness when I was only moving at the speed of chilled glue. I 
assumed I was simply a bit poorly and tense – which is to say, my standard self.

I forgot one of my most fundamental rules, dear readers, which is that I have 
to look after myself in order for myself to be able to do anything. Even 
writing. I forgot that I am a horrible self-employer and should be dealt with 
by the kind of harsh arbitration that only ever really happened during the 
1970s. Whole swathes of what used to be the TUC should be picketing me, even as 
I type. I also forgot that I need to arrange nice little outings, trips and 
inspirations – or just a few hours off for myself to preserve maximum 
efficiency. I have mentioned this practice of inspiration in our shared virtual 
pages at other times, when I was sane and functional. I can ignore it but I 
only ever do so at my peril.

It's not the first time this has happened. One of the issues that must be 
addressed when you're writing is the enduring conflict between other people's 
agendas and one's own. The urge to keep working while the work is there can 
quite simply steal your life. But it's hard to resist. It may be that I want to 
watch a box set of Babylon 5, but perhaps someone else is offering me a bit of 
a trial in a new medium, and although now isn't ideal, the creative 
possibilities do seem interesting ... Perhaps I have been working on some odds 
and ends for radio and more than the average number of pitches have been 
accepted, and I don't want to now refuse tasks I have essentially been humbly 
requesting the honour of undertaking (the BBC requires precisely that attitude) 
for months, so the schedule thickens ... Suddenly a novel-free year looks as if 
it may kill me before the novel that nearly killed me last year has a chance to 
come out. (This would, naturally, increase sales into the high dozens.)

And then there are the rewrites. Rewriting is as much a part of writing as 
being mugged is part of walking about in an urban environment at night looking 
happy. The right and improving kind of rewriting is a gruelling delight,as I 
feel we have established 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/dec/17/second-thought-rewriting-al-kennedy?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
. Anything of mine will have been rewritten until it squeaks before anyone else 
has to put up with it. On collaborative projects, there will then be necessary 
changes that deal with technical issues, changes of location, or cast, lack of 
funds – the possibilities are horribly variable and numerous and yet oddly fun. 
There are also the good ideas and happy nudges from people who are providing a 
healthy outside eye on a piece of work.

But then there are the other kind of rewrites – the wrong kind. Many of you 
out there may also be familiar with these and will be wincing and twitching 
already. These are never to do with the script and always to do with whoever is 
demanding them – and trust me, they will always be demanded. They will be 
required to address the demanding party's personal difficulties with their 
lives, their need to feel involved and powerful, their need to crap on other 
people's days, their need to add hours and weeks and even months to projects 
which might at one point have been pleasant and alive. Sadly, no literary 
process can ever cure any of these ills and so the demands can and will 
continue until the writer does the only thing the writer can do – he or she 
withdraws, accepts that vast effort has been wasted, that the struggle has been 
in vain and that the script, text, article, limerick is now a dog's breakfast 
that cannot be saved, and nothing anyone would wish to bear their name. At 
which point everything will always become the writer's fault and they will be, 
forever after, branded as "difficult" – even if they are already folded into a 
pretzel with the strain of accommodating increasingly self-contradictory and 
mentally peculiar instructions.

One script writing friend of mine counts it as a victory if he gets through 
the terminal conversation without crying – and he's a veteran of the Korean 
war. If nothing else, the stress and personal offence this kind of nonsense 
builds up, can remind the author that he or she really does still care about 
what ends up on the page. And it can act as an emotional reminder for future 
occasions, when work is questioned and probed by others. There's all the 
difference in the world – and it's more than palpable – between the sting of 
someone noting a weakness you missed and the pain of someone deciding to stab 
something witless into your personal sentences because they had, for example, a 
funny relationship with their dad.

As my years of writing pass, I find that the only thing I really resent, 
regret and generally deplore is the number of months – perhaps even years – 
that I have wasted on projects that could have been OK if everyone involved 
actually wanted them to happen and to be as good as they could be. Choose your 
collaborators wisely, would be my advice. And take no advice from anyone who 
can't take their own. Onwards.
 