
Anthony Quinn, in his review of Lara Feigel’s The Bitter Taste of Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/09/the-bitter-taste-of-victory-in-the-ruins-of-the-reich-lara-feigel-review>
 (9 April), cites Klaus Mann’s discredited account of a post-1945 interview 
with the octogenarian Richard Strauss to sanction calling the composer an 
“unrepentant Nazi” for moaning that Hitler hardly ever went “to hear any of my 
operas”. (One reason Hitler might have shunned them was that almost all of 
their librettos were by Hugo Von Hofmannsthal, who under Nazi law was Jewish, 
but died in 1929, just short of the shaming.) Since Mann’s slander, 60 years of 
sober scholarship into 20th-century German culture, and into the life of 
Strauss, have thoroughly aired the great composer’s self-inflated but 
profoundly un-Nazi attempts in 1933-34 to exercise a cultural sway over the new 
Nazi regime, apparently in the (retrospectively fatuous) assumption that after 
more than half a century of world fame he’d be listened to. He soon found 
otherwise, and drifted into internal exile.

Among the later operas that Hitler didn’t listen to was, of course, Strauss’s 
pacifist Friedenstag (1936), with a libretto essentially by the Jewish Stefan 
Zweig who, despite Strauss’s naive wish to credit him, used the complaisant 
Josef Gregor as a beard for the project. It’s hard to recognise an “unrepentant 
Nazi” in this and other narratives of Strauss’s responses to the nightmare he 
found himself attempting to ride.
John Clute
London

• In his review of Lara Feigel’s book, The Bitter Taste of Victory: in the 
Ruins of the Reich, Anthony Quinn writes about the debate at the end of the war 
about a much needed re-education programme, but that “the German people were 
less than receptive to the allies’ programme of denazification”. This is an 
oversimplification and also ignores the very different procedures adopted in 
the Soviet zone. With the immediate onset of the cold war, the western allies 
realised they needed the Germans on board in the new anti-communist crusade, so 
downplayed their own anti-Nazi propaganda.

The 1945 documentary German Concentration Camps Factual Survey 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_Concentration_Camps_Factual_Survey> – the 
subject of the 2014 film Night Will fall – made by Sidney Bernstein 
in collaboration with Alfred Hitchcock, depicting gruesome scenes from newly 
liberated concentration camps, languished in British archives for nearly seven 
decades.

The western allies were also very sceptical about the role of culture in any 
re-educational programme, as the arts and culture were then seen as a hot-bed 
for leftwing and communist ideas, and thus to be combatted. The 
re-establishment of old Nazis in their former positions and their refusal to 
confront the recent past would also compound the situation, seriously deforming 
the newly emerging federal republic.
John Green
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 