
In the autumn statement, it is not just the additional £445m cut in 2014-15 
and the promise of more to come that is bad news for local government. It is 
that the analysis of local government's predicament and role bears little 
relation to reality.

The document accompanying <http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/as2012_documents.htm> 
the autumn statement says that the fact councils have been spared additional 
cuts in 2013-14 "provides an opportunity for local authorities to invest in 
reform in order to deliver further savings by consolidating back-offices and 
transforming service delivery, as demonstrated by the Whole-Place Community 
Budget pilot".

This is dishonest. As the New Local Government Network has demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/mar/01/doubts-eric-pickles-council-savings>
, even if councils' "back office functions" (you know, those wasteful bits that 
have nothing to do with service delivery) cost precisely nothing, this would 
still not get local government finances out of its current hole.

"Spending on frontline services will continue to be prioritised", the autumn 
statement assures us. The truth is different.

The constant refrain about back-office functions gives the impression that 
somewhere in ministerial minds they perceive councils as more akin to their own 
departments in their function, rather than deliverers of frontline services. In 
particular, they still cannot grasp the central role for local government in 
rebuilding the economy. They are hammering the part of the public sector that 
can do most to rekindle growth.

"Transformation" is arguably the most abused word in local government after 
communities and partnership. The Treasury is right that transformation requires 
investment; that is why it was a mistake to front load the cuts. And true 
transformation is about finding new ways of thinking about and addressing old 
issues, it is not simply about cutting.

Some councils are indeed trying to do this; the recent Solace summit 
<http://solacesummit2012.wordpress.com/> for senior managers was peppered with 
inspiring examples of authorities – often the ones with some of the biggest 
problems – working with local people and businesses to promote economic growth 
while getting the poorest through the recession in the best shape they can.

But the transformation that characterises the age of austerity is by 
definition uneven, inconsistent and tough to build and sustain. There is 
neither the time nor the money for grand visions of universal access to 
first-class services. The reality is that people are going to get hurt.

There was a glimmer of good news for local enterprise partnerships, such as a 
greater strategic planning role and the promise of a single funding pot 
covering housing, skills and transport, although we have to wait for the 
details next year. This is in line with the recommendations of Lord Heseltine's
recent report <http://www.bis.gov.uk/heseltine-review> on stimulating the 
economy. But it still smacks of tinkering.

Among the capital projects there is money for academies and free schools. The 
statement promises this investment will be focused on areas where there is the 
greatest pressure for school places. But since free schools pop up at the whim 
of their backers, often in conflict with planning around school places, it 
remains to be seen if this commitment will be honoured.

There's been widespread comment on how the impact of cuts and tax rises is 
distributed across the population. When the tally of pain is being calculated, 
it is striking how often the disproportionate impact of local government cuts 
on the poorest is ignored.

Overall there is a depressing mediocrity in the quality of thinking about the 
role of councils in keeping the nation wealthy and keeping the poor from 
hopelessness. An understanding of the true impact of each pound spent or each 
pound cut, and the long term consequences that follow, seems strangely absent 
from government policy-making.

The omens regarding yet more sustained local government cuts after the 2015 
general election, on top of those already flagged, are pretty awful. It appears 
likely that at the beginning of the next parliament, after five years of cuts 
and tax rises, Britain will still haveone of the largest structural deficits 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9725582/UKs-credit-rating-at-risk-after-George-Osbornes-debt-failure.html>
 in the developed world.

And that is before the credit agencies have trampled over the hallowed turf of 
our triple-A rating. However bad the forecasts in the autumn statement, the 
reality could be much worse.

Richard Vize is a commentator on public policy and management. Follow him on 
Twitter@RichardVize <https://twitter.com/RichardVize>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local 
government network <https://register.theguardian.com/local-government/> for 
comment, analysis and best practice direct to you
 