
Four years ago at Edgbaston Ricky Ponting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> made the biggest mistake of 
his career. Learning at the last minute he would not have the services of Glenn 
McGrath, who had stepped on a stray ball before the game started, he had to go 
in with an under-strength attack yet curiously put England in to bat – and lost 
the Test. And then the Ashes.

Naturally he described the decision as "backing yourself". Last week he said 
he had heeded the pre-match warning of the groundsman, Steve Rouse, who said 
the pitch would be a "minefield". Others saw it as a classic case of 
over-confidence, sustained by the long-held belief that England would crack 
again in an Ashes series.

Rouse has predicted the pitch this week will be like "jelly". Ponting says he 
will wait until he sees it this time – but will he make another gaffe with his 
latest fast-bowling ace on Thursday? I doubt it. If Australia pick Mitchell 
Johnson for a match they have to win, to drag themselves back into Ashes 
contention they will be taking the sort of gamble Ponting would think twice 
about at the racetrack, then reject. Gamblers are cold beasts and Punter is as 
cold as most. The good ones learn from their mistakes.

I think his recommendation to the tour selectors will be to leave Johnson out 
and go with Stuart Clark. If they lose in Birmingham, then they will gamble, 
bringing back Johnson for the fourth Test, along with Brett Lee and maybe even 
Shane Watson. That is when you go for broke, when you are coming from way back 
in the field. For now, though the team management cannot say it, Ponting knows 
Johnson is "shot", physically and mentally. Anyone who saw him bowl like a 
nervous kid at Northampton at the weekend would hardly recognise the bowler who 
was being hailed as the best in the world a few months ago in South Africa.

He has lost all rhythm and confidence. For long times in the field he stood at 
mid-off with his hands behind his back, distracted and confused. When the ball 
was thrown to him for a final fling at the end of a nothing game, it was as if 
he were being asked to bowl for the Earth against Mars, with the future of 
mankind at stake.

And, when he winkled out a tail-ender, his only wicket in nearly 36 overs 
stretching back to the first innings at Lord's, his team-mates embraced him 
like a wounded little brother, which was touching.

Johnson has other problems to deal with at the moment. Back home in Australia, 
his mother, Vikki Harber, continues to complain to reporters that his fiancée, 
the karate champion Jessica Bratich, has "stolen" her son away from her.Shane 
Warne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, who knows a thing or two 
about emotional turmoil, reckons mum is wrecking Mitch's Ashes tour.

While writing off Australia when they are down has to be the dumbest call in 
punditry, there are clear signs they are confused and angry on this tour. The 
confusion arises from events in the first two Tests. They could not bowl out 
Monty Panesar to win in Cardiff and they could not keep out a one-legged Andrew 
Flintoff at Lord's. These things were not supposed to happen.

They have played some very good cricket but not enough of it at the right time 
– and they are still trying to work out why because, with the talent in the 
team, they figure they should not be 1-0 down in the series.

The anger, poorly disguised, came from a surprising quarter, the coach Tim 
Nielsen. His response to legitimate inquiries about Johnson revealed more than 
he was trying to hide. The gist of it was, if we wanted to write the bowler 
off, fine; what did we know? If they did not believe in Johnson, they might as 
well just open the newspapers the next morning and pick the team from that. It 
was a poor response.

"I've never seen him that prickly before," an Australian writer said.

If they lose at Edgbaston, or draw, even, this might turn into the unhappiest 
Australian tour since 1977, which was horrendous.

Forget the cynics, the Olympics will be great

It's not fashionable to say so, but the London Olympics might just be a 
roaring success. Yesterday was the start of the three‑year countdown to 2012. 
There was a lot that was predictably vainglorious about the way the organisers 
kept slapping themselves on the back, revelling in the praise of the IOC 
president, Jacques Rogge, and generally carrying on as if they'd won the pie of 
pies.

And there will be plenty of cynics, much better trained in economics than your 
humble reporter, who will continue to wonder how solid that £9.3bn costing 
remains during a recession and who will sniff at the declaration by the 
Olympics Minister Tessa Jowell that: "We're on budget, we're on track and we 
have an ambition to deliver a great Games."

But it's happening. The stadium is six months ahead of schedule. A lot of the 
other arenas are too. There will be loads of Great Britain medals won, many of 
them gold. The country will be as one, for a change. What's wrong with that? I 
just have a good feeling about these Games. It is what the country needs in 
times few of us have ever experienced before.

Terry just knows how to play the game

John Terry is not the first footballer to deny he ever wanted to leave his 
club – even while being courted by another.It is natural then, that Mr Chelsea 
would be described as two-faced after buttering up Manchester City and then 
declaring, "I am totally committed to Chelsea and always have been." Don't cry 
for Mark Hughes and his Arab backers, though. They knew Terry was doing exactly 
what they were doing: working the marketplace. "From day one it's never been 
about a new deal for John Terry," says ... John Terry. Terry might be a 
third-person celeb-twit. But he is no fool.

Sport is a sacred thing, so leave God out of it

Unless I trip over a free one on a plane, I don't usually read the Daily 
Telegraph, which is why I don't read as often as I like the musings of Michael 
Henderson, once of this parish, a writer of many talents and newspapers. He 
wrote in the DT that my criticism of Stewart Cink's God-embroidered acceptance 
speech at Turnberry contradicted my approval of Mohammad Yousuf's kissing the 
Lord's pitch after scoring a century in 2006, and the warm response it 
engendered. I was not, as Hendo claims, saying, "Muslims good, Christians bad". 
In 2006, I was hailing tolerance of a faith suffering dreadful prejudice; last 
week I was having a pop at the tiresome American practice of using God as a 
personal mentor.
 