
I agree with the points raised in Simon Tisdall’s article (Azerbaijan-Armenia 
conflict is a reminder of Europe’s instability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/azerbaijan-armenia-conflict-europe-instability-nagorno-karabakh>
, 4 April) and very much appreciate the author’s insight into the history of 
Karabakh and the region.

It is long overdue that the international community comes up with a plan to 
produce a peaceful and full solution to the conflict. However, the continuing 
presence of Armenian armed forces in the internationally recognised territories 
ofAzerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> remains a key 
hurdle on the way to the peace. What makes the situation even more complicated 
is that international mediation, in the format of OSCE Minsk Group, has turned 
into an ineffective mechanism, leading to a stalemate.

As a gesture of goodwill, and heeding the calls from the international 
community, Azerbaijan has acted responsibly and declared a unilateral halt to 
military operations. However, the refusal of Armenia to abide by this ceasefire 
is a clear reminder of the need for the heightened international pressure on
Armenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>.

The break-up of the ceasefire in place since 1994 risks turning into 
full-blown military operations in the region, threatening Europe’s stability. 
As you have rightly highlighted, this is happening against the backdrop of many 
other challenges facing Europe. It is therefore in the best interests of both
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the wider 
international community to put pressure on Armenia to withdraw its armed forces 
from the territories of Azerbaijan, getting us closer to the eventual long 
overdue peace.
Tahir Taghizadeh
Azerbaijan ambassador, London

• Simon Tisdall’s article makes some very important points concerning the 
cross-border violence currently being suffered by the inhabitants of 
Nagorno-Karabakh and the well documented evidence of aggression from Azerbaijan 
that has the potential to ignite a conflagration in the south Caucasus.

I feel that it is important to state that neither Armenia nor Nagorno-Karabakh 
have any territorial ambitions in respect of Azerbaijan and that anyone who has 
visited the area will see indisputable evidence of an Armenian presence in the 
region from at least the third century.

By breaching the 1994 ceasefire, President Ilham Aliyev may achieve his aim of 
distracting attention from the profound problems that exist in Azerbaijan, but 
he risks the creation of yet another war zone in a region that has already seen 
far too much bloodshed.
Stephen Pound MP
Labour, Ealing North

• The unravelling of multinational entities is usually messy. Wasn’t Northern 
Ireland, for instance, less a land grab by London and more an instance of a 
young Irish state not commanding the allegiance of the Protestant north? A 
similar situation applies to some of the states that emerged from the break-up 
of the Soviet Union. Azerbaijan is no exception, in that the Christian 
Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave object to Azeri rule.

Other examples abound. The Slavs of Transnistria, which abuts Ukraine, don’t 
feel any affinity with the Romanian-speaking Moldovan authorities and they 
furthermore fear that Romania will eventually absorb Moldova. Then there are 
the Abkhazians and South Ossetians of Georgia who distrust Tbilisi rule. 
Ukraine also springs to mind with its Russian-speaking east pitted against the 
Ukrainian-speaking west.

The west should resist the temptation to use these disputes as an opportunity 
to bait the Russian bear. Nor should it treat communist-drawn administrative 
lines as sacrosanct. Remember Sykes-Picot. The west needs to tread carefully. 
Don’t make a bad situation worse.
Yugo Kovach
Winterborne Houghton, Dorset 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 