
The Home Office minister Norman Baker is to amend the government's new 
antisocial behaviour powers amid fears they could be used to ban carol singers, 
charity collectors and protesters .

Critics say the way the bill is currently drafted mean its powers could be 
used to stifle many forms of protest on the grounds that they might cause 
annoyance or a nuisance to somebody else.

Baker tabled government amendments on Thursday to the anti-social behaviour, 
crime and policing bill reinforcing the right to peaceful protest.

The government amendments will also ensure that new injunctions to prevent 
nuisance and annoyance, known as Ipnas – which are to replace antisocial 
behaviour orders (asbos) – include an extra "reasonableness test" to ensure 
that the courts cannot grant them for no reason. This is to extend an existing 
test in the legislation which requires the court to consider the injunctions 
"just and convenient" before they are granted.

The extra civil liberty safeguards are to be included following meetings 
involving the Liberal Democrat minister and critics of the bill, who have 
included the former director of public prosecutions, Lord Macdonald, and Lord 
Faulks, who, coincidentally, was appointed a justice minister on Thursday.

Macdonald has said that the bill in its current form potentially empowers 
state interference against political demonstrations, street performers and 
street corner preachers in the face of shockingly low safeguards.

A campaign, Reform Clause 1 – Feel Free to Annoy Me, supported by the former 
Tory shadow home secretary, David Davis, human rights activist Peter Tatchell, 
and the former chief constable of the West Midlands, Lord Dear, was set up to 
highlight concerns over the new style asbos.

Baker said: "I do not believe that the bill as previously framed would lead to 
major intrusions into civil liberties. But nevertheless it is right that we 
apply belt and braces because nobody, least of all me, wants to limit proper 
civil liberties. Therefore these amendments will, I hope, reassure people that 
basic liberties will not be affected."

The Home Office move comes in advance of a House of Lords debate on a raft of 
critical amendments to the bill due to take place on 8 January, just after the 
Christmas recess.
 