
In many respects, you cannot win when you face Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra>, even if the scoreline shows 
that, invariably, you do. The Republic of Ireland's fans had turned up to see 
the first competitive fixture at their gleaming new stadium marked by a glut of 
goals and exciting football. Yet they departed largely unfulfilled, despite 
Giovanni Trapattoni's team scoring three excellent goals – the pick of them 
from Kevin Doyle – and making it six points from six at the start of the long 
road to the Euro 2012 finals in Poland and Ukraine.

A footnote was that this was the biggest victory under Trapattoni in a 
competitive fixture but when you are playing against one of the lowest ranks 
sides in world football, who had lost their previous 25 fixtures, you always 
tend to want more.

Andorra contributed a stunning goal of their own but little else and the 
spotlight was on Ireland. Unfortunately, it picked out a performance that was 
laboured for long spells, with the age-old creative failings under Trapattoni, 
particularly in central midfield, causing disquiet. It was difficult to 
remember the Andorra goalkeeper Josep Antoni Gomes making a save although, 
clearly, there were three that he wished he had made.

Still, as Trapattoni will attest, a result is a result and Ireland will take 
momentum into the next round of fixtures against Russia and Slovakia. The boys 
in green seem to prefer the bigger challenges.

The timing of the first goal always felt as though it would be significant. 
Restlessness can creep into a home crowd that is here for a show if they are 
forced to wait for the entertainment. Happily for Ireland, they broke the 
deadlock in the early running and the goal was the epitome of simplicity. Kevin 
Kilbane evaded his marker and leapt majestically to glance a header home from 
Liam Lawrence's corner. Trapattoni's team have made the habit of profiting from 
set-pieces.

Ireland had flickered at the outset, with Aiden McGeady, in particular, keen 
to showcase his trickery and direct running. He thrilled with some of his 
footwork while Robbie Keane, too, looked dangerous. The gulf in class was 
evident but it was incumbent on Ireland to use it to prise their aggressive and 
defensive-minded opponents apart.

Lawrence went close on the half hour but the game was drifting until Kevin 
Doyle won possession and unleashed not only his technique but his frustration 
on a right-footed rocket from 30 yards. The ball curled beautifully into the 
far top corner.

Yet incredibly, Andorra, with their first serious forward thrust, conjured 
their own moment of magic. After Marc Pujol had challenged Richard Dunne, the 
ball broke inside and Christian Martínez ran onto a right-footed drive that he 
fizzed into the top corner from outside the area.

Ireland needed to reassert themselves. Theirfirst-half efforts had been 
generally pedestrian and Martinez's bolt from the blue was not part of any 
script. But the supporters were commendably patient and they were rewarded when 
McGeady played the killer through ball after slick Irish build-up. Keane's 
clipped finish was of the highest order while the fervour of his celebrations 
told their own story.Ireland huffed and puffed as they attempted to add to 
their advantage. Only the points will be remembered in the years to come.
 