
Anita Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick>, the 
campaigning businesswoman behind the Body Shop, made £130m yesterday when she 
agreed to sell the high street cosmetics chain to L'Oréal, the French beauty 
group.

The sale was a surprising turn for Ms Roddick, who founded the Body Shop from 
a single store in Brighton in 1976 and built a global brand by banging the drum 
for a more ethical approach to business, including using recycled packaging and 
natural ingredients not tested on animals. She has often railed against the 
mores of big corporations and what she sees as the frustrating demands of the 
beauty industry on women.

A couple of years ago she attacked L'Oréal for employing only "sexy" women on 
its sales counters.

Any differences appeared to have been ironed out yesterday. "Let me tell you 
how the French seduce you," she told a press conference. "They are the most 
bloody seductive people on earth. They are charming, they are well-mannered and 
they praise and flatter you."

The company is being sold to L'Oréal for £652m. She praised the French 
business for wanting to be an "advocate and supporter of our values" and said 
it would be business as usual at the Body Shop.

"The campaigning, the being maverick, changing the rules of business - it's 
all there, protected," she said. "And it's not going to change. That's part of 
our DNA. But having L'Oréal come in and say we like you, we like your ethics, 
we want to be part of you, we want you to teach us things, it's a gift. I'm 
ecstatic about it. So I don't see it as selling out."

The sale immediately drew fire. L'Oréal, which makes Maybelline mascara, 
Lancôme skin cream and Armani and Ralph Lauren fragrances, claims to have 
stopped testing finished products on animals since 1989, but activists argue 
that ingredients are still not monitored.

Ruth Rosselson, at Ethical Consumer Magazine, said: "I for one will certainly 
not be shopping at Body Shop again. L'Oréal has yet to show its commitment to 
any ethical issues at all." Other animal protection groups called for a boycott.

Ms Roddick stepped back from the day-to-day running of the Body Shop in 2002 
but she remains arguably Britain's most famous businesswoman. She will keep her 
consultancy at the Body Shop and work 50 days a year at L'Oréal, particularly 
on the issue of fair trade with the developing world. L'Oréal said the Body 
Shop would continue to be run out of Britain and retain its independence.

Ms Roddick's windfall will be shared with her husband and co-founder of the 
company, Gordon Roddick. She has said in the past that she ultimately intends 
to give all of her money away.

Ms Roddick said she had an issue with L'Oréal over animal testing but that the 
firm had "a great statement about what they're doing on animal testing or what 
they are trying to do". She said the assumption that L'Oréal was the "enemy" 
was "quite wrong".

L'Oréal's chief, Sir Lindsay Owen-Jones, said: "I can't overnight use the Body 
Shop approach in all of the L'Oréal companies, but our long-term commitment is 
to join Body Shop on this issue. I cannot be clearer than that."

L'Oréal is paying 300p a share for the Body Shop. Iain McGlinn, a family 
friend who invested £4,000 in the company when it was founded, will make £150m 
from his 23% stake. Today, the Body Shop has 2,000 stores in 54 countries. Last 
year it made £27m on sales of £419m.
 