
Andy Roddick, top seed for the Australian Open, was beaten by Argentina's 
David Nalbandian yesterday in the Kooyong International semi-finals but the 
American made light of the setback before starting his grand slam campaign next 
week. "It's not a crisis, I'm not over-worried," he shrugged.

Roddick fought back from 5-1 down in the final set to force a tie-break only 
for Nalbandian, his impressive backhand again in full flow, to finish off the 
American 3-6, 7-6, 7-6.

So Nalbandian, Wimbedon runner-up in 2002, ruined the promoters' hopes of a 
dream final at the Melbourne warm-up event. The Argentinian, not the world No1, 
meets Andre Agassi, reigning Australian Open champion, for the Kooyong title.

Nalbandian's victory also sent out a long-distance warning to Tim Henman, who 
could meet him in the fourth round at the Open. Although Henman beat him at 
Wimbledon last summer, that is the British No1's only success in his five 
meetings with an opponent he freely admits he fears.

Roddick's analysis of his conqueror demonstrated why. "He has a great feel for 
the game, he's tough, he exploits my weaknesses pretty well and handles my 
power," said the 21-year-old American. "He does a lot of things which, while 
not spectacular, work well. He is not No8 in the world for no reason."

As for his own game, Roddick said: "Win or lose this week, you want to get the 
feel of competitive matches again, get back in the trenches. So this has been 
good."

The jinxed women's Open event now waits on Lindsay Davenport's struggle to 
recover from a shoulder injury which prompted the American to pull out of her 
semi-final yesterday against the world No1 Justine Henin-Hardenne at the Adidas 
International in Sydney.

Davenport strained a muscle in her right shoulder during her quarter-final 
over Elena Dementieva before aggravating the problem by playing doubles.

The 27-year-old said it was too painful for her to play against Henin but that 
she was hopeful of recovering in time for the Open.

"There's a chance it will heal completely if I give it three or four days' 
rest," she said. The world No5, and only former Australian champion left in the 
draw, will ask the Open organisers to put her first-round match with Romania's 
Ruxandra Dragomir back from Monday to Tuesday.

The Californian is not downhearted, saying: "If my form is any indication, I 
still feel really confident. If I'm able to serve the way I have the last few 
weeks, I still feel very good about my chances."
 