
We live, it is said, in the golden age of tennis. The final tournament of the 
year, which reached its climax in London on Sunday night, was meant to be a 
celebration of that excellence. Why, then, did it more closely resemble a field 
hospital?

The Association of Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Professionals – that curious accommodation between management and labour that 
works almost despite itself, sport's equivalent of a post-war northern Co-op – 
brings the eight best players in the world to the banks of the Thames each 
November to fight for a prize of £1m in the one tournament that is its own 
property. It is a contract that runs until 2013 and, when the ATP sits down to 
allocate the next venue, bidding will be fierce.

The players who make it to this golden finishing line, clearly, do not lack 
for motivation. And, for millionaires, it is not just the money. They want 
bragging rights, locker-room credibility, respect. When their work is done, 
these elite athletes with temperamental bodies and minds retire to their 
warm-weather havens and prepare for the start of another season.

Again the World Tour Finals, sponsored enthusiastically by Barclays, is a 
daily sell-out, a well-run tournament in a spectacular setting lovingly 
embraced by not one British television provider but two.

What could be more perfect?

Rarely has the sport been blessed with such wonderful talent operating near 
capacity, providing fans with a rolling narrative of intense rivalry from 
January to Christmas as Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal,Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> and Andy Murray engage in a 
personal battle of wills and sinew, all the while looking out for the 
challenges of Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, Tomas Berdych, Mardy Fish and Janko 
Tipsarevic, the other players in the final act, and a swath of younger, rising 
aspirants.

Yet tennis is red-lining. There is too much of it, at least for the elite 
players, and it will not change without pain. The 2012 season has been 
shortened by two weeks but the contraction means the BNP Paribas Masters in 
Paris will now be rammed up directly against London, with barely enough time 
for the finalists to catch the Eurostar and get to the practice courts of the O2
 Arena.

Pleasing sponsors, television, tournament organisers, players and public seems 
an intractable conundrum. Next year there is the complication of the Olympics, 
when tennis returns to Wimbledon three weeks after the All-England 
Championships. There is always the Davis Cup, of course, and that unwieldy, 
nostalgic beast roams the planet eating up recuperation time virtually without 
pause. Suggestions that it be compressed into a two-week tournament have been 
rejected in the past and, until the crisis worsens to the point of revolt, will 
continue to be ignored.

It is the players who should decide. They are the entertainers. They generate 
the crowds and the revenue, not administrators and TV suits. They have it in 
their power to make a statement. What they need is the will and the leadership. 
But they suffer from greed, too. Not many of them will turn down lucrative 
invitations to exhibition tournaments, while simultaneously whingeing about the 
physical and mental loads they have to bear.

All but one of the combatants in Greenwich has limped in and out of post-match 
press conferences since last Sunday to complain, with varying degrees of 
subtlety and conviction, about chronic and fleeting aches and pains, from groin 
to brain, that have hampered their performance and commitment. Nearly all of 
them have looked shattered, none more so than Murray, who arrived with three 
recent titles and high hopes – as well as a strained groin, a sore elbow, a 
tight hamstring, a curiously sore right buttock and a frazzled spirit.

Murray gave up the fight after losing to David Ferrer in his first match – and 
his No3 world ranking to Federer. The others struggled through. They did not 
have the sheen of champions. They had the pallor of prisoners. But it is in 
their gift to escape. They are not slaves.

This is the warfare of modern tennis. For all but the winner the O2 Arena is 
their Waterloo. Only the 30-year-old Federer, the oldest player left standing 
after a week of occasionally outstanding but largely uneven tennis, seems 
capable of consistently handling the rigours of his calling.

The Swiss, a master of insouciance as well as the court, sees less cause to 
complain about the schedule than Nadal, Murray and others, who contemplated 
strike action after the US Open. Talk of insurrection appalled the essentially 
conservative and self-sufficient Federer. He says it is about sensible schedule 
management. And he is right, although he is not looking at the wider picture. 
Federer has the luxury, as a senior player, to pick and choose his fights more 
selectively.

He timed his charge here perfectly, ignoring Asia and returning after a decent 
rest to pick over the bones of his weary foes in Basel and Paris. He was short 
of his best yet irresistible, not so much a seasonal new-born king but a reborn 
one, an old-fashioned survivor in an inflexible modern playground of sport.
 