
Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> peeked over the 
hoardings in the dire second set of Roger Federer's 60th win of the season and, 
while perhaps mildly encouraged by what he saw, knew his old rival would 
rediscover his tennis when it mattered.

He did too. The defending champion beat the world No6, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, 
6-2, 2-6, 6-4 in just under 90 minutes to drag himself clear of what would have 
been an embarrassing defeat in the opening match of the BarclaysATP World Tour 
Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at the O2 
Arena, and later he did not see his performance in quite the same light as some 
disinterested parties.

"I wasn't playing that poorly," he said. "It was a good first set. Even the 
second set was fine. I ended up hitting two forehand errors, which I usually 
don't do. That's maybe due to pressure in the first match, different 
conditions, wrong shot selection."

He has a point. A subliminal safety net underpins the thinking of some players 
in a round-robin tournament, where there is a chance to come back, and 
slackness can creep in. But when Federer is at the top of his game he does not 
hit seven unforced errors on his forehand, especially of the court-clearing 
variety that surprised a packed house on Sunday afternoon.

In his pomp the Swiss was a ruthless front-runner. At 30, and without a win in 
a major for nearly two years, he comes to the banks of the Thames buoyed by 
some sublime tennis in winning back-to-back tournaments in Basel and Paris and 
is a tight favourite to win his fifth trophy in this end-of-season cashfest, 
ahead ofAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>.

However, the aura has dimmed slightly. Federer's struggle with his forehand – 
the barometer of his game – will have encouraged Nadal, who shares his group 
with Tsonga and the wounded American Mardy Fish.

He was commanding at the start, breaking Tsonga to love in the fourth game and 
relieved, no doubt, to see the Frenchman serve a double fault to hand him the 
set after 21 minutes. Levels on both sides of the net lifted appreciably in the 
second set, in keeping with Tsonga's spirits when Federer pushed a forehand 
horribly wide to drop serve at 2-1.

Tsonga won nine points in a row before Federer rallied but, after being 
dragged into a deuce fight in the seventh game, the king of the quick kill 
double-faulted and then pushed a stretched forehand long and the set was gone.

Federer rediscovered his serve in the third and, at 4-4, sensed Tsonga's 
concentration waning. He needed only one of three match points to finish it 
with a glorious backhand, Tsonga stranded in desperation at the net.

So in prospect is a meeting, beyond the opening sparring sessions, between 
Federer and Murray, who is keen to redress a perceived slight by the great man. 
Federer's unsolicited observation that the player who recently took his No3 
ranking had brought back three soft titles from Asia riled Murray; he 
nonetheless has kept his cool and wants to settle the argument where he feels 
strongest, on court.

"No3 doesn't mean a lot to me, I never said it did," Murray said on Sunday. 
"It was one of my goals for the end of the season; I did that in Asia. It has 
been my best year. Even if you just move one stop up in the rankings, that 
shows you're still making progress; when you are going backwards, that's when 
you worry. I've still got a lot of improving to do, a lot of players have had 
their best seasons at 26, 27."

He is comfortable with rivalry, too.

"I'd rather stay here," he said of occupying space in such illustrious but 
tough times. "It's the most competitive era in tennis. I've had the chance to 
compete against the two best rivals, without question. Before this year no one 
would have put [Novak] Djokovic in that bracket but he has played an incredible 
season, has tested me to get fitter and stronger and be more resilient.

"I've had a lot of tough losses but I keep working towards my ultimate goals, 
making progress. I've been able to beat all of those guys. Being able to 
compete against them is a privilege. It's made me a better player."

If Federer's words serve to take Murray to new heights, he might regret them – 
but probably not. He did not get to where he is – or was – by gilding the lily.

On Monday afternoon Murray plays the fighting Spaniard David Ferrer, himself 
distracted on Sunday by the intemperate accusations of the former French 
champion, Yannick Noah, in Le Monde. Noah, admitting he had no evidence, 
suggested there was widespread use of performance‑enhancing drugs in Spain, a 
country that has enjoyed international success across many sports, including 
tennis.

Ferrer, the world No5, responded to Noah through the German agency, DPA: "Your 
son [Joakim Noah of the Chicago Bulls] plays in the NBA, where there 
are no doping controls. This is not the best person to talk. I think it's total 
ignorance. For a person who has played tennis and knows how the sport works to 
say that is outrageous."
 