
Unlikely as it seemed only a few months ago, when Novak Djokovic was grinding 
the rest of tennis underfoot,Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> entertains realistic 
ambitions of reclaiming his place as world No1 by the summer.

He might even start a slight favourite at the Australian Open in January after 
seeing off the best players in the world in the season's closing tournament. By 
reaching the final of theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> he reclaimed third 
place from Andy Murray; by beating Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in three tough sets last 
night to win a record sixth title, he sent a firm message to Djokovic, Rafael 
Nadal, Murray and all the rest that, at 30, his hunger for success has not 
diminished.

Not even he, possibly, would have thought any of this likely on the September 
night in New York when Djokovic belted the most astonishing return past him, 
saving two match points to reach the final of the US Open. How dramatically the 
scene has changed since then. The Serb remains No1 but his body and spirit have 
collapsed and he was visibly shattered when beaten twice last week.

By managing his season the way he manages a match, with an economy of effort 
only a player in command of his emotions and talent could conjure, Federer 
saved himself for a late charge. He took six weeks off and came back to win his 
home tournament in Basel, followed by a second win in Paris, as his flailing 
rivals slowly fell to pieces.

Did he not feel like the best player in the world, regardless of the rankings?

"No … I mean, who cares?" he said. "I felt I played great the past few weeks. 
It was the strongest finish I've ever had in my career, which I'm very proud 
of. Sure, to win [more] grand slams would be nice. I've missed out on a few 
occasions this year, and last year. It might be around the corner, maybe not. 
The other players obviously have a role to play in this.

"Novak was the player of the year, which goes without saying. Andy had a very 
good season. It's just unfortunate he couldn't finish strongly here. And Rafa 
with his class, he's always going to be a threat for the throne."

Generous words but away from the microphone he will see it differently. He 
knows he has the drop on everyone right now. He knows they are all suffering. 
And he will want them to suffer a little more yet, because this is his chance 
to round out a great career with a great comeback.

He gave the game away when he drew into the discussion players from history 
that have set the bar too high for everyone but himself. "I still don't feel 
like I'm better than Pete Sampras, or [Ivan] Lendl for that matter. I still 
believe they are the all-time greats to play the game. I'm just happy to be 
compared to them."

He will be happier still if he is regarded as better than them. Federer was 
king for an unequalled 237 weeks in a row and last ruled in May, 2010. Can he 
do it again? Sampras, who reigned 11 times, was No1 for a total of 286 weeks; 
Federer stands at 285. He loves that sort of history.

After smashing a forehand into the court with uncharacteristic muscularity 
after two hours and 18 minutes to secure his 6-3, 6-7, 6-3 win, Federer threw 
his hands in the air in exultation. Those in the packed house might have 
thought he was celebrating a win and a $1.6m (£1m) cheque; no doubt, he was – 
but he knew too this was the start of his journey back to where he feels at 
home: on top of the world.

The performance here on Sunday night was probably not among his best in 100 
career finals but it was convincing enough. There was little in it for half an 
hour, then Federer upped the tempo in an astonishing burst of excellence to 
break the Frenchman in the eighth game and he closed out the set as he has done 
a thousand times.

He faltered in the face of Tsonga's fightback in the second and blew match 
point at 5-4; Tsonga hit a wicked forehand to take the tie-break and it was 
down to one last fight in the third.

The packed arena could sense the strength draining from Tsonga's massive legs 
and, 40 minutes into the set, Federer again had timed his run perfectly. He 
invariably does.
 