
It took precisely 60 minutes to stretch to near breaking point the sinews of 
genius that have connectedRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> and Rafael Nadal for seven 
memorable years at the summit of their calling.

The Swiss's lop-sided win in the round-robin stage of the ATP World Tour Finals
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> not only allowed the 
17,500 fans in the O2 Arena ample time to drain away from Greenwich in good 
time on London's unpredictable underground system but left tennis with an 
awkward question: is one of the great rivalries in the history of sport dying a 
quiet death?

Neither winner nor loser – meeting for the first time when neither has been 
ranked No1 in the world – would accept such a premise. They love their fight.

But Federer beat Nadal with embarrassing ease, 6-3, 6-0 in the quickest 
contest of the tournament, and is two wins away from a record sixth trophy 
here; Nadal, clearly out of sorts after a five-week sabbatical from the tour, 
is one defeat removed from going home to prepare for the Davis Cup final in 
Seville.

Federer, understandably, could not disguise his pleasure in reversing the 
humiliation Nadal laid on him in Paris three years ago. "We've played so many 
times [26], sometimes it just derails for you," he said. "Like it derailed Rafa 
today, it did for me at the French Open. [I was] very excited, after a tough 
loss [to Nadal] in Miami this year and a close one in Madrid, that I was able 
to turn it around again." You bet he was.

Nadal was monumentally gracious in defeat: "I try my best but it seems it 
wasn't enough tonight, huh? When he plays like that on this surface, I have to 
accept that he's a better player than me."

He revealed, after prompting, a shoulder problem prevented his practising the 
day before but said he was "perfect" on the night.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is blessed to have such an honest 
warrior.

Nevertheless, while titles pile up like Christmas sweaters for players of such 
wondrous gifts, this match might have been pivotal for both of them. Since 2004 
they shared supremacy, the Swiss first, the Spaniard latterly.

Adjusting to the rise of Novak Djokovic over the past year, they have 
struggled in different ways to reinvent themselves. Federer brought the 
coaching guru Paul Annacone on board last year – to listen rather than preach, 
perhaps – and has supplemented an already impressive bank of guile with drop 
shots, variety and muscle. Nadal worked on his serve and improved his backhand, 
especially away from the red dust of Europe.

Yet all the tinkering in the world could not disguise the gulf between them on 
the banks of the Thames on Tuesday night.

Each of these tennis gods has handed out thrashings to the other since the 
Spaniard scored the first of his 17 wins in Miami in 2004, but Federer, fives 
years older at 30, and now with nine wins against Nadal, defied the years and 
the doubters with a beating of imperious skill.

They began nervously, as they invariably do. Once Federer broke serve in the 
first set, though, it was a match to watch between the fingers. Even accounting 
for the fact that a hard court indoors is Nadal's least favourite surface and 
he bosses Federer on clay like a dog would a cat, and computing in the fact 
this was a three-setter in a round-robin, end-of-season jamboree featuring 
eight egos operating on 16 tired legs, Nadal loitered palely.

After early resistance, it was as if he were drained of all fight, an alien 
spectacle. When Andy Murray took the third set off him 6-0 to win in Tokyo 
recently, he would not countenance fatigue as an excuse. Similarly, when he 
dropped a set here against Mardy Fish, he saw no cause to question his energy 
levels. On Tuesday night he offered no excuses, even though cut down two days 
ago by a stomach bug.

Federer bullied him, like a ballet dancer might embarrass a street-corner 
shuffler. Nadal did not lack for grit but there was a deficit of imagination 
as, time and again, Federer found the angles. He hardly gave Nadal a soft ball 
in centre court to kill; many of his 28 clean winners were unanswerable, deep 
or wide near the white lines.

Perhaps Nadal suffers from our perception of him for so many years as a 
wired-up bull that any performance dipping below the levels of a nuclear 
explosion invites doubt. A clearer picture will emerge not in a few days here 
but over the next few months, and there will be ample time to examine his game 
in the fortnight's heat of the Australian Open in January. Yet his suffering at 
the hands of Djokovic – six straight losses after 16 wins in their first 23 
contests – is compounded now by his struggle against a rival he may have 
imagined was himself in a bad way (nearly two years without a major).

Nadal still leads Federer 17 matches to nine but he trails him 16 slams to 10. 
At the final reckoning, the latter score will be the defining one. As it 
stands, Nadal, still only 25 but suspicious of knees that have often let him 
down, has to rediscover his zest.
 