
The houses let by Plymouth landlord David McCabe featured plentiful filth and 
en-suite mouse-droppings and were fitted with rotting floors throughout. McCabe 
has been fined £28,000 and the council isseeking an asbo 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2246973/Slum-landlord-David-McCabe-left-tenants-Dickensian-squalor-faces-letting-ban-Britains-property-rental-ASBO.html>
 banning him from letting property to benefit claimants (presumably delighted 
non-claimants will remain free to rent his bijou apartments.)

The council lawyer speaking in court said the two houses were "in a state of 
Dickensian squalor".

But this is not the first asbo landlord: that honour goes to Camden rentier 
Catherine Boyle 
<http://www.localgovernmentlawyer.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=12273%3Aasbo-landlord-now-fined-for-breach-of-fire-regulations&catid=60%3Ahousing-articles&Itemid=28>
, who in January 2011 was issued with the controversial order for breaching her 
licence to rent out a property as an HMO, or house in multiple occupation, 
where unrelated tenants rent bedrooms. The property had many hazards including 
no proper fire alarms. Boyle has now been banned from entering rooms without 
permission or cutting off the energy supply. Ordered to rectify numerous faults 
and fined £3,600, Boyle's behaviour was arguably no worse than that of
millionaire slumlord Israr Fazal 
<http://menmedia.co.uk/manchestereveningnews/news/s/1462440_landlords-jailed-after-renting-out-death-traps-while-they-lived-in-luxury>
, jailed in Manchester last year for letting property in a similar condition, 
described as "death traps".

Camden council admitted that it could have taken over the running of Boyle's 
HMO, but chose not to. Both Camden and Plymouth City councils had tried to be 
reasonable – in fact, in both cases the errant landlords were given years to 
improve the properties. Perhaps even more radical action would have worked. In 
September this year,Sheffield landlord Jay Allen 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/home/blogs/rogue-state/6524043.blog> was 
imprisoned for illegally evicting Chris Blades, his tenant.

Tenants who have suffered such extreme failings and actions by landlords must 
be celebrating these bad-landlord asbos, but I am not cheering. There are 
already many powerful weapons to punish errant landlords, such as criminal 
prosecutions, huge fines and imprisonment, but a mystifying reluctance to use 
them. However, both councils felt they had run out options with two landlords 
seemingly hellbent on neglecting and endangering their renters.

It is also noticeable that most nightmare landlord cases involve bedsits and 
HMOs. The rough end of the renting worlds, this is where the bad stuff happens, 
and some of McCabe's tenants were vulnerable, and as the court lawyer pointed 
out they were also "on very limited means", and some of their slum rooms lacked 
even beds.

Very bad landlords (and most are fair to excellent) not only flout the law, 
they flaunt their ignorance of it. In my own experience I have been threatened, 
had landlords let themselves in without notice (one sniffed my bedsheets as, 
terrified, I hid in a cupboard). I have lived with potentially lethal 
combi-boilers and a shower that could have electrocuted me. Another landlord 
refused to repair a missing window pane through which snow fell on my pillow.

With violent and criminally negligent landlords, desperate tenants can try 
calling the police but, as I know only too well, they will find themselves 
explaining to attending community officers, who have no knowledge of property 
law, that landlords do not have the right to smash doors, enter at will and 
threaten renters (even those in arrears). But is an asbo the right way to deal 
with slum landlords?

I believe the best solution is complex. Firstly thorough and obligatory 
training. Landlords should be licensed and registered after compulsory training 
in basic law, including the fact that the property is no longer their home, 
while memorising the right way to give notice to tenants. The occasionally 
onerous duty to repair, and the necessity of having enough funds to cover these 
expenses, must be spelled out. Landlords ought not be allowed to rent without 
this training. Those who lord it over dangerous conditions must be prosecuted 
and jailed.

Like many rogue landlords, McCabe blamed his woes on "petty" tenants, who I 
suspect did what most renters do in these circumstances: they quietly moved on. 
They should have received financial compensation, funded from selling property 
confiscated from the rogue landlords who have endangered their lives. Losing 
money inspires even the most stubborn mind to change.
 