
Roman Abramovich made payments totalling several hundred million dollars to 
his former friendBoris Berezovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky>, often handing over bags 
of cash, the high court heard on Wednesday.

The Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> FC owner said he 
paid him $80m in 1996, $50m in 1997 and 1998, and $80m in 1999. Sums of up to 
$5m were delivered in cash to Berezovsky's Moscow office and club.

"Yes, he [Berezovsky] did call me and quite often. Of course, when he needed 
money he did call me," Abramovich said. He insists the payments were for 
Berezovsky's political services and his influence over then president Boris 
Yeltsin.

Berezovsky says the money represented his share of profits from his Russian 
oil giant Sibneft. Berezovsky, the Kremlin critic and London-based exile, is 
suing Abramovich for more than $5bn in what is the world's biggest private 
litigation battle.

He says that Abramovich exploited his situation after he fell out 
catastrophically with Vladimir Putin in 2000. Abramovich forced him to sell his 
interests in Sibneft at a knockdown price, he asserts.

Giving evidence for a third day, Abramovich admitted Berezovsky had played an 
"extremely important role" in Sibneft's creation in 1995.

The company was a beneficiary of Russia's infamous privatisation programme in 
which state assets were virtually given away to a small group of businessmen – 
the oligarchs — in return for political support.

At one point, Berezovsky's barrister Laurence Rabinowitz QC quoted from 
Yeltsin's autobiographical Midnight Diaries. The book describes Yeltin's 
ultimately successful battle against a resurgent communist party ahead of the 
1996 presidential elections. "I don't think this book was written by Mr 
Yeltsin," Abramovich observed wryly, speaking via a translator in Russian.

The court also heard that Abramovich used a series of opaque intermediary 
companies to reduce Sibneft's tax bill by hundreds of millions of dollars. 
After Sibneft won control of an oil company and refinery he "inserted" third 
party legal entities between the two.

These entities bought oil from Sibneft, then sold it back to Sibneft for "two 
or three times" the price, siphoning off the difference.

The court heard these intermediary companies qualified for tax exemptions 
because they employed disabled people – a common, and legal, tax avoidance ruse 
inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> at the time. "I don't 
recall why it was done," Abramovich admitted. He insisted, however: "These were 
real people. We paid them salaries."

The case continues.
 