
The oligarch Roman Abramovich admitted on Tuesday he had "an extravagant 
lifestyle" and said he had gone on cruises with his former friend and now enemy,
Boris Berezovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky>.

Giving evidence for the second day in his court battle with Berezovsky, 
Abramovich conceded he owned a string of luxury properties. They include a 
multimillion pound chateau in France, once belonging to the Duke and Duchess of 
Windsor; a 420-acre estate in West Sussex, Fyning Hill; and a "large and 
expensive central London" home, in Lowndes Square, Knightsbridge.

Berezovsky is suing Abramovich for more than $5bn. He claims the Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> FC owner betrayed him when he 
fell out with the Kremlin and Vladimir Putin in 2000. Berezovsky says he was 
forced to sell his interests in the Russian oil company Sibneft at a huge 
undervaluation. Abramovich denies the claim.

In his witness statement Abramovich – whose fortune is put at $13.4bn – says 
he was surprised at Berezovsky's "extravagant lifestyle" in the 1990s, 
asserting he was "never interested in imitating this". Berezovsky's barrister, 
Laurence Rabinowitz QC, suggested Abramovich's statement was untrue. Asked 
whether he had an extravagant lifestyle, the billionaire tycoon replied: "Well, 
yes, possibly. I agree, yes, that one could put it that way."

He implied this only become a reality after he bought the football club in 
2003, turning him into a global celebrity.

"I think that when I bought Chelsea football club, that did impact my way of 
life significantly. It was a turning point really," Abramovich, speaking in 
Russian, told the high court. He denied having an interest in any other 
football club, including CSKA Moscow, to which he has previously been linked.

Abramovich claims he and Berezovsky were never business partners. Instead, he 
says, he paid Berezovsky huge sums of money totalling $2.5bn in return for 
political and lobbying services inside then President Boris Yeltsin's 
government. On Tuesday he acknowledged he and Berezovsky had been friends – but 
not close friends.

Rabinowitz suggested that their relationship went well beyond that of 
"protector" and "protectee", and that they were intimate business partners. He 
said Abramovich's then wife Irina and Berezovsky's girlfriend Elena Gorbunova 
were good friends, and that the two families frequently spent time together.

Abramovich admitted that between 1995 and 1998 – while Berezovsky was still an 
enormously influential figure, and before he decamped to Britain – they had 
spent eight holidays together, often involving luxury yachts. There were 
cruises in Spain (twice), Sardinia and Corsica. There was also a new year break 
in 1996/1997 in the Caribbean. Rabinowitz also accused Abramovich of an 
"unjustified smear" against his client by implying that Berezovsky was involved 
with Chechen gangsters and terrorists. In his statement Abramovich says 
Berezovsky acted as a "krysha" — the word means roof in Russian – guaranteeing 
both political and "physical protection".

The QC reeled off a list of prominent Chechens active in Russian political 
life. They included Vladislav Surkov, Vladimir Putin's chief ideologue and 
powerful eminence grise, whose father is Chechen. "Do you say he is a 
gangster?" Rabinowitz asked. "No, I wouldn't call Surkov a gangster," 
Abramovich replied.

The case continues.
 