
The bad news for the rest of the field at the Arnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer> Invitational is that Rory 
McIlroy does not seem to regard himself as close to his best.

And still, during an electric run on Friday – during which he produced five 
birdies in succession for the first time in hisPGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> career – McIlroy blasted himself 
firmly into contention at Bay Hill. Now the fun starts.

There is meaningful work to be done over the last two rounds but McIlroy could 
yet depart his final event before heading for Augusta National with what would 
be a second victory of 2015. Following a second round of 66, marred only by a 
bogey on the penultimate hole, bookmakers promptly installed McIlroy as the 
favourite to do precisely that.

“I think each and every day I’m feeling a little more comfortable, especially 
on the greens,” said McIlroy before turning to that five-hole stretch. “It 
feels pretty easy at the time. You are just trying to keep it going. You can 
sort of feel the momentum building. It would have been nice to finish the round 
off a little better but that was still a good score and it sets me up well for 
the weekend.

“Overall it was a good day. It gets me back into the tournament. Hopefully I 
can creep towards the top of the leaderboard over the last couple of days.”

Perhaps McIlroy had been partly inspired by dinner on Thursday. He had that in 
the company of Palmer, a two-and-a-half hour discussion which revolved around 
matters of business rather than golf swings. That much seemed logical; the game 
has changed almost beyond recognition since Palmer was in his seven-times major 
winning prime.

“He made me have a banana split. I’ll be going to the gym this afternoon,” 
said McIlroy with a smile. “It was fantastic, it really was.

“He was telling stories of the old days and talking about a few of the things 
he has done, more from a commercial standpoint; the [branded] drinks and golf 
courses and all this sort of stuff. Things that I could potentially be getting 
into in the future. He’s had 60 years as a professional golfer and commercially 
he has done very well so we had a lot of chat about that. He was very close 
with his father just like I am. It was just great to be in his presence and 
great to be in his company.”

McIlroy encountered contrasting on-course fortunes over the opening two 
rounds. Whereas he was frustrated by a series of missed putts on the first 
round, his work on the greens improved markedly on Friday. He used his putter 
nine times fewer than the day before; 25 against 34.

“I was able to trust the lines a bit better,” he said. “I felt like I learned 
a lot about the greens on the second round, the way the ball was rolling. I 
felt like the ball was taking the grain a lot more than I thought it was.”

The 25-year-old’s play in other areas was slightly more erratic. His fairways 
and greens percentages dropped considerably during the second round. The man to 
catch remains the instantly likeable Morgan Hoffman. His 65 moved him to 13 
under par, five clear of McIlroy at the halfway point.

“I have been playing on this course since I was a kid,” Hoffman said. “So I’m 
pretty comfortable hitting a bunch of shots into the greens and going at kind 
of tucked pins because I have seen it all before.

“I’m an adrenaline junkie. It’s hard to be calm out there but the game really 
helps me focus and that’s a challenge for me. Off the course I like doing a lot 
of fast action kind of sports, I get my fix off the course.Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> is the hardest game I think to play 
and I love a challenge so this is all fun for me.”

Ian Poulter added a 70 to his first round of 67. Padraig Harrington’s 71 was a 
case of missed opportunity; the Irishman handed back three shots in as many 
holes from the 14th.
 