
It was a cause for amusement in my family that when I used to cuddle my mother 
as a little girl, I would often inhale deeply and say, “mmm, you smell like 
stew”. I meant it as a compliment. It was a comforting, savoury smell: of 
softened onions nestling in the bottom of a battered cast-iron pan, or of 
crisp-skinned roast chicken, fragrant with garden bay. It was the scent of the 
carefully cooked family meals that clung to my mother’s clothes and hair and 
pervaded our home in rural Kent.

The kitchen was the first room you entered in our old farm cottage, the white 
weatherboarded house my parents had fallen in love with and abandoned London 
for. It was a shell when they found it, falling down, with no foundations and a 
mess of a grey slate roof, but they loved its remoteness, and the wildness of 
its garden. There I spent my childhood, mud-caked and running feral.

A partition wall in the kitchen traced the outline of the stairs and on it my 
mum had hung old wooden cooking implements – a honey dipper, meat tenderiser, 
mallet and whittled spoons. Some were things that had belonged to her 
grandmother – a brilliant home cook who had run a house at the age of 12 – and 
the rest were foraged from junk shops, like most of the other things we had. 
It’s as if these objects hung in homage to the kitchen rituals that had gone 
before, while my mother made her own magic with the produce from the vegetable 
patch, her well-thumbed Robert Carrier and Delia Smith cookbooks to hand.

Seafood saganaki and stuffed squid recipes inspired by Crete | Cook residency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/28/recipes-from-crete-prawn-and-mussel-saganaki-stuffed-squid-marianna-leivaditaki-cook-residency>
Evening and weekend meals were precious as they were the occasions when we 
would be together as a family, and these were the times when I really got to 
know my father, a journalist who worked in London. Although my mum did most of 
the cooking, my father adored his food to the point of obsession, and certain 
things would occupy him feverishly when he got a taste for them. This seafood 
sizzle was one such fixation (along with homemade sausages, dressed crab, Kent 
cobnuts, broad beans and parsley sauce). He came to refer to it as his 
signature dish, because he cooked it so much. I remember the way he would 
excitedly hunch his shoulders at the kitchen counter as he prepped the spring 
onions, ginger and garlic meticulously in anticipation of how wonderfully they 
would meld together in plenty of olive oil with the caramelised prawn shells 
and sweet, supple squid.


His love of seafood was informed by our summers camping in France and Spain, 
but had its origins in childhood holidays spent on the Kent coast, eating 
prawns and whelks on the beach in Deal, the small seaside town that my parents 
would eventually move to. I think he savoured the luxury of seafood: growing up 
after the war with a single mother and two sisters meant childhood food was 
frugal.


In Deal, we enjoyed many a sizzle with seafood from the high-street fishmonger 
who uses local day boats. When my father died 11 years ago we carried his ashes 
out to sea on one of these boats; when the urn wouldn’t sink, we laughed 
through our tears.

We still eat this dish as a family when we’re together. My mum will cook it 
just as he made it, ut we each have our own way of making it now. I don’t put 
bacon in, as my father liked to (though it is a tasty addition). Instead I 
prefer the citrus notes of preserved lemon and the briny sweetness of a handful 
of clams. The key with this is to scrape all the juices from the pan and 
accompany it with some good crusty bread to mop them up.

Seafood sizzle

Serves 4
300g fresh squid, cleaned
4 garlic cloves, crushed
6 tbsp extra virgin olive or rapeseed oil
Juice of ½ a lemon
200g clams, cleaned
12 raw shell-on tiger prawns
2 slices preserved lemon, pith and flesh removed, finely chopped
3 spring onions, cut into matchsticks
1 tbsp fresh ginger, grated
2 red bird’s-eye chillies, finely sliced
Salt and black pepper
Wedges of lemon, to serve
French baguettes, to serve

1 Prep the squid by cutting the body into rectangles (about 5cm x 3cm) and 
lightly scoring in a crosshatch pattern. Cut each tentacle section in half. 
Marinate in garlic with 2 tbsp of the oil and half the lemon juice, then cover 
and refrigerate for about an hour.

2 Half an hour before cooking, take the seafood out of the fridge to let it 
come up to room temperature. Put the clams in a bowl of cold water with a tap 
dripping on it for 10 minutes to encourage them to give up their grit.

3 In a large, heavy-bottomed frying pan or skillet, heat the rest of the oil 
gently and add the preserved lemon, spring onions, ginger and chillies. Cook 
for 3-4 minutes, then add the prawns.

4 Turn the heat up. Cook for 2 minutes, shaking the pan to avoid catching. 
When the prawns are starting to colour – you want to see some deep 
caramelisation on the shells – add the squid and its marinade. Shake again, 
cooking for a further 2 minutes.

5 Add the drained clams, the rest of the lemon juice, season with salt and 
pepper and cover the pan, cooking for about 3 minutes, shaking to make sure it 
all cooks evenly, until the clam shells open. Spoon into heated bowls. Serve 
with lemon wedges and crusty bread to mop up those gorgeous juices.




Rosie Birkett <http://rosiebirkett.com/> is a food writer, stylist and author 
ofA Lot on Her Plate <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lot-on-her-plate.html> 
andEast London Food <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/east-london-food.html>, 
both out now.@rosiefoodie <https://www.instagram.com/rosiefoodie/?hl=en>
 