
1 Welcome to Hell

“My first game [for Celtic] was Clyde, away, in the third round of the 
Scottish Cup. We were beaten 2-1. It was a nightmare. I wasn’t happy with my 
own game. I did OK, but OK wasn’t good enough. After the game – the 
disappointment. As I was taking my jersey off, I noticed the Nike tag was still 
on it. When I got on the bus John Hartson, a really good guy, was already 
sitting there and he was eating a packet of crisps – with a fizzy drink. I said 
to myself: ‘Welcome to Hell.’”

2 Who’s in charge?

“It might seem strange but you find out about characters when you look to see 
who’s in charge of the music. A young lad might want to put on the latest 
sound; an older player might say: ‘I’m the senior player’ and put himself in 
charge. But I noticed none of the players [at Sunderland] were in charge of the 
music and this was a concern for me. A member of staff was in charge. I was 
looking at him thinking: ‘I hope someone nails him here.’ The last song before 
the players went on to the pitch was ‘Dancing Queen’ byAbba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba>. What really worried me was that none 
of the players – not one – said: ‘Get that shit off.’ They were going out to 
play a match, men versus men, testosterone levels were high. You’ve got to hit 
people at pace. Fuckin’ ‘Dancing Queen.’ It worried me. I didn’t have as many 
leaders as I thought.”

3 Blue is not the colour

“Our first session [at Ipswich]was open to the fans. But nobody came. My first 
day – you’d have thought a couple of school kids would have been dragged in by 
a dad or grandad. The warmth wasn’t there. Then there was the blue training 
kit. I don’t like fuckin’ blue. City were blue. Rangers were blue. My biggest 
rivals were blue. Is that childish? I couldn’t feel it – the chemistry. Me and 
the club. I get annoyed now, thinking that I should have been able to accept 
it: I was there to do a job.”

4 Lack of respect from Ferguson

Keane reveals that when he took Sunderland to Manchester United for his first 
match back at Old Trafford as a manager there was no post-match drink withSir 
Alex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/06/roy-keane-manchester-united-sir-alex-ferguson>
. “Ferguson never turned up. I thought that was out of order. He called me a 
few days later to apologise. He said he’d had to rush off after the game and 
he’d waited a long time for me. I told him he should have a drink with me, like 
he would have with any other manager, and that he hadn’t shown me or my staff 
proper respect.”

5 Voicemail turnoff

“I rang Mark Hughes. Robbie [Savage] wasn’t in the Blackburn team and I asked 
Mark if we could try to arrange a deal. Sparky said: ‘Yeah, yeah, he’s lost his 
way here but he could still do a job for you.’ Robbie’s legs were going a bit 
but I thought he might come up to us [at Sunderland], with his long hair, and 
give us a lift – the way Yorkie [Dwight Yorke] had, a big personality in the 
dressing room. Sparky gave me permission to give him a call. So I got Robbie’s 
mobile number and rang him. It went to his voicemail: ‘Hi, it’s Robbie – 
whazzup!’ like the Budweiser ad. I never called him back. I thought: ‘I can’t 
be fucking signing that.’”

6 Bottom of Ellis Short’s shoe

“The owner [Ellis Short] rang me. He said: ‘I hear you’re coming in only one 
day a week.’ I went: ‘It’s nonsense. He said he was disappointed with the 
Bolton result. His tone wasn’t good. ‘Your location – where you live. You need 
to move up with your family. I was in the third year of a three-year contract. 
The arrangement – the flat in Durham, family in Manchester – has suited 
everybody, until now. I’m not sure if I said something like: ‘Why don’t you 
move up?’ He lived in London. But I did say: ‘I’m not moving, I’m in the last 
six or seven months of my contract anyway.’ The conversation didn’t end well. 
It was a case of ‘no one should tell me where to live’ and the accusation that 
I was coming in only one day a week hung there. I thought he was talking to me; 
he spoke to me like I was something on the bottom of his shoe. And before I 
knew it was – it was over. It still saddens me. I still think I should be the 
manager of Sunderland. I really liked the club, and I liked the people. But 
Ellis Short was new – and I wasn’t his manager. It’s probably true that the 
relationship was never going to work, and not because he was some big, bad 
Texan and I was some grumpy Northsider from Cork. I don’t like being spoken 
down to.”

7 Hard on the Corkmen

Damien Delaney came in and did OK. I was hard on him, probably because I knew 
him and he was from Cork. I went over the top. I was the same with another lad, 
Colin Healy. He was from Cork, too, and I told him he was moving his feet like 
a League of Ireland player. It was wrong. Colin was new at the club; I should 
have been bending over backwards for him. I made the point about Ellis Short 
talking to me like I was something on the bottom of his shoe. I think I spoke 
like that to some people at Ipswich.”

8 Walters is a wanted man 

“Jon Walters wanted to leave. We were four or five games into the season. He’d 
heard that Stoke were interested in him. I said: ‘Jon, I haven’t had a call 
from anybody.’ He came back a few days later. ‘They’re definitely after me.’ I 
said: ‘I’ve heard nothing. If there’s a bid, I’ll tell you. I’ve nothing to 
hide from you. You can ring the owner. I don’t do the business deals.’ ‘I’m not 
having this.’ There was effing and blinding, a bit of shoving. ‘Why don’t you 
fucking believe me?’ He was sold to Stoke a week later. We’ve shook hands 
since.”

9 Couñago’s reply

“Pablo Couñago was a player I didn’t particularly like or get on with. No club 
was interested in taking him – and I was happy to tell him that. I just found 
him dead lazy. He went: ‘How are we going to win anything with you as manager?’ 
I nearly physically attacked him – but I didn’t.”

10 A class apart

“He [Paul Scholes] was a top, top player. But I still don’t fall for the 
boy-next-door image, or that he’s dead humble. He has more of an edge to him. 
Everyone thinks he lives in a council flat. The Class of ’92 – all good 
players, but their role at the club has become exaggerated. ‘Class of 92’ seems 
to have grown its own legs; it has become a brand. It’s as if they were a team 
away from the team, and they’re not shy of plugging into it. We all had the 
same aims; we all had the hunger.”
 