
Leyton Orient put up a brave fight against Steve Kean's Blackburn Rovers at 
Ewood Park but the League One strugglers were undone by late goals from Rubén 
Rochina and Simon Vukcevic.

Orient, without a win this season, had scored a 64th-minute equaliser, through 
David Mooney, after Blackburn had gone ahead a minute before the break with a 
Jason Roberts penalty. The Premier League team pressed in the second half, with 
the promising Rochina side-footing them back into the lead in the 71st minute 
and Vukcevic making it 3-1 four minutes later. Dean Cox scored a late 
consolation for the visitors.

Kean said: "I thought we made hard going of it and I wasn't too pleased 
with how we played the first half. We were a bit slow with our passing, there 
were too many backwards and square and when Orient had it we didn't show enough 
intensity to get it back so I thought we were poor.

"But reflecting on the whole game, when they came back into it we should have 
been four or five goals in front. But for poor finishing and a good goalkeeping 
performance I think the game would have been out of sight. I felt we had the 
possession but we didn't get it out wide."

Wolverhampton Wanderers scored twice in the first 10 minutes on the way to 
beating the Championship sideMillwall 5-0, with goals from David Edwards, Adam 
Hammill, George Elokobi, James Spray and Adlène Guédioura.Middlesbrough were 
undone by goals from Wilfried Zaha and Calvin Andrew in a 2-1 defeat byCrystal 
Palace. Merouane Zemmama scored for Boro at Selhurst Park.

Burnley beat the League One club MK Dons 2-1 at Turf Moor. Daniel Powell put 
the visitors ahead after six minutes before Kieran Trippier equalised and André 
Amougou scored the winner one minutes from time.Aldershot caused a minor upset 
with a 2-1 home win over League OneRochdale. Ashley Grimes put Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> ahead but second‑half strikes 
from Michael Rankine and Danny Hylton won it for the League Two club.
 