
In the age of social media we often overlook the importance of bringing people 
together offline. Putting on an event can be a very effective way to celebrate 
a charity’s supporters and raise funds, but how can you ensure your charity 
gets the most out of an event?


1. Manage your budget

First, ask yourself whether the organisation can afford to put the event on. 
Is there a ballpark figure of what you want to spend and does this cover all 
the costs? It can be easy for event budgets to spiral out of control. You 
should always have a contingency plan and ensure you have enough budget to 
cover anything that could go wrong or may change.

Five ways to strengthen your charity's brand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/21/five-ways-to-strengthen-your-charitys-brand>
2. Be organised


Events <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/events> are no 
place for unprepared people. Make sure you allow enough time to plan your 
charity event properly. Check fundamentals like the date: does it clash with a 
competitor’s event?

3. Keep track of time

Have you allowed enough time to plan the event? Have you got enough 
staff/volunteers to make sure people aren’t overworking? Tired staff can make 
mistakes.

4. Trust your staff 

You’re going to have to delegate unless you want to work 24/7. Make sure 
you’ve shared details and the correct information with your team. Always create 
a contact sheet for any emergencies.

 5. Where are your tools? 

Gaffer tape, cable ties, WD40, a multi-tool and a mallet. These are 
fundamentals in any event kit and can get you out of trouble in a lot of 
situations. Gaffer tape can be used in a myriad of situations, like making 
double-sided tape to attach last-minute signage or de-marking step edges 
(provided the colours contrast). A multi-tool means you don’t have to ask 
around to borrow a knife or screwdriver.

London Marathon 2015: fundraising tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/apr/16/london-marathon-2015-fundraising-tips>
6. Ask – don’t nod and smile

Don’t be afraid to ask questions. Sometimes people in events, marketing and 
communications can sound as if they’re talking another language. If your 
charity event is using technology, this can get even more confusing. Make sure 
you’re clear on what they’re talking about so that you don’t have any nasty 
surprises.

7. Make sure your safety documentation is up to date 

Your risk assessment and event safety management plan must be suitable and 
robust enough for your charity event. And don’t forget your suppliers, 
contractors and traders: are their risk assessment and method statements up to 
scratch? A method statement outlines how a contractor/supplier or event 
organiser will safely carry out the work required. The HSE website has some 
useful tools and templates to help youcreate your own. 
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/resources.htm> 

Have you also made sure that everyone’s insurances and certificates are up to 
date? CDM (construction, design and management)regulations 
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l153.htm> have now come into effect for the 
event industry. These rules are now being enforced where there are two or more 
suppliers working on an event and they include theatres, outdoor events and 
voluntary, charity and church events. The new regulations mean you need to 
ensure you plan safety into your event. You either need to be suitably 
qualified or experienced to do this yourself, or you should appoint someone 
suitable to do this on your behalf.

8. Double, then triple check

Everything. From spelling to directions and timings to quantities. Even check 
the formulae in your budget spreadsheet are adding up correctly. Make sure it’s 
right.

9. Evaluate your work

Have you managed to achieve your event objectives? Did you establish some aims 
and did you achieve them? If not, why not? This will really help in the 
planning of your next event.

10. Don’t assume anything

Do you need a licence or permission? For example, if your event involves a 
performance of live or recorded music to the public, you may need a premises 
licence or temporary event notice. The local authority licensing department 
will be able to help you with this. Does your venue have enough wi-fi for your 
needs? Are you having multiple devices connect at the same time? Does the 
system have the capability to allow multiple IP addresses? Are you just web 
browsing or are you live-streaming content? Assumptions can lead to the 
downfall of an otherwise well-planned event.

Getting everything organised can seem daunting but don’t be put off. A 
well-run event can help you build the loyalty of your supporters and showcase 
the work of your charity.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community – it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 