
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> has launched 
a spirited defence of putting up paywalls around his newspaper websites, while 
embracing the game-changing potential of Apple's iPad. The News Corp chairman 
hailed the new device as a possible saviour of the newspaper industry.

Murdoch renewed his attacks on search engines, such as Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, whom he accused of stealing 
journalism from traditional media outlets. He told a National Press Club event 
at George Washington University that the newspaper industry had to stand up for 
itself and charge for content while using copyright law to defend its 
journalism from being used without permission.

"We are going to stop people like Google or Microsoft or whoever from taking 
stories for nothing … there is a law of copyright and they recognise it," 
Murdoch told a packed audience of students, journalists and other media 
professionals.

He said search engines had tapped into a "river of gold" by aggregating 
content but that the days of free news had to come to an end. "They take [news 
content] for nothing. They have got this very clever business model," he said.

In June, Murdoch's British titles the Times and Sunday Times will join joining 
his business title, theWall Street Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wallstreetjournal>, behind a paywall.

However, some critics say consumers are now too used to getting online news 
for free and will not pay subscriptions in big enough numbers to form a viable 
business model for quality journalism. Murdoch dismissed this fear, saying 
consumers could be forced to change their habits. "When they have got nowhere 
else to go they will start paying. If it is reasonable. No one is going to ask 
for a lot of money," he said.

Murdoch also fired a shot at the New York Times – a bête noire of Murdoch's 
and the Journal's main rival – by saying its paywall plans were halfhearted and 
needed to be more restrictive.

"They don't seem to be able to make up their mind. They will have opposition 
internally from some of their journalists, especially their columnists," he 
said."To really make it work they have got to put a paywall up. I think most 
newspapers in [the US] have got to have a paywall."

Advocates of free newspaper websites often accuse Murdoch of being a 
technophobe, but the Australian media mogul was happy to embrace the iPad, 
launched last Saturday.

During the interview, with journalist Marvin Kalb, he picked up an iPad to 
demonstrate how to navigate the Journal's website. He said the iPad could be 
the saviour of newspaper journalism, albeit in electronic form, not print.

"I got a glimpse of the future last weekend with the Apple iPad. It is a 
wonderful thing," he said. "If you have less newspapers and more of these … it 
may well be the saving of the newspaper industry."

Murdoch was challenged in the interview – and by many in the audience – over 
the conservative bias of his Fox News cable television channel. The audience 
tittered when Murdoch said he thought the channel's news coverage had no 
political bias. "We have both sides. We have Democrats and Republicans, 
libertarians and whatever," he said.

Asked to name a single Democrat-leaning Fox commentator – alongside such 
conservative names as Glenn Beck, Sean Hannity and Bill O'Reilly – he struggled 
openly to remember one. "I wish I could tell you a couple of names. But they 
are certainly there," he said. He eventually settled on the Fox host Greta van 
Susteren, whom he said was "close" to the Democratic party.
 