
You know the liberating feeling when someone unpopular leaves the room and 
everyone breathes a sigh of relief before openly discussing how much they 
dislike them? I don't. What's it like? What do people say? I only ever catch 
the odd whisper as the door shuts behind me. I'd love to hear the full 
conversation. Fortunately, watching Britain's politicians queue up to denounce
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> has given me 
a taste of how such talk might play out.

A few weeks ago, Murdoch, or rather the more savage tendencies of the press as 
a whole, represented God. Fear of God isn't always a bad thing in itself, if it 
keeps you on the straight and narrow – but politicians behaved like medieval 
villagers who didn't just believe in Him, but quaked at the mere suggestion of 
a glimmer of a whisper of His name. You must never anger God. God wields 
immense power. God can hear everything you say. You must worship God, and 
please Him, or He will destroy you. For God controls the sun, which may shine 
upon you, or singe you to a Kinnock. Soon he will control the entire sky.

Furthermore, like all mere humans, you are weak. And God knows you have 
sinned. Chances are he even has long-lens photographs to prove it. But even as 
he chooses to smite you, God is merciful. You can do this the easy way or the 
hard way. Confess your sins in an exclusive double-page interview, or face the 
torments of hell. Have you seen what happens in hell? It isn't pretty. Rows of 
the damned having buckets of molten shit poured over their heads by someone who 
looks a bit like Kelvin MacKenzie, for eternity.

But then suddenly everything changed. The revelations over the hacking of 
grieving relatives' voicemails were the equivalent of a tornado ripping through 
an orphanage. "What kind of God would allow such a thing?" asked the villagers, 
wading through the aftermath. And they started to suspect He didn't exist.

They thought about the hours and days they'd spent in church, saying their 
prayers, rocking on their knees, whipping themselves with knotted rope, or 
flying round the world to address one of God's conferences, and they grew angry.

One by one they stood up to decry God. "He's a sod," said one. "No he's not, 
he's a monster," said another. Eventually they formed the consensus view that 
he was a sodmonster.

These protests grew so loud, God abandoned his bid to command the sky, issued 
personal apologies, and even seemed to wither – to physically wither before our 
very eyes, a bit like Gollum. (Although Gollum was never snapped in the back of 
a car in a baseball cap and running shorts, cocking his leg slightly in an 
apparent bid to stop one of his nuts dangling free, which is a crying shame.)

The danger now is that the villagers, shorn of their belief in God, might 
abandon their fear of divine retribution altogether, muzzle the churches, and 
grow hopelessly decadent. I realise as I type this that I don't fully 
understand my own metaphor any more. So here's a new one: the ceaseless parade 
of MPs openly disparaging everything they used to slavishly revere has left 
recent news coverage resembling the finale of the science-fiction movie They 
Live, in which a perception-altering alien transmitter is destroyed and 
humankind suddenly awakens from a decades-long trance. (Mind you, that's 
nothing: one day a politician will launch an open and sustained assault on the 
Daily Mail, which will probably culminate in scenes identical to the opening of 
the ark of the covenant at the end of Raiders of the Lost Ark.)

Likening the saga to an existing movie seems fitting, given the online 
speculation regarding who'll play who when it inevitably becomes a 180-minute 
Bafta-winning motion picture – Nicole Kidman as Rebekah Brooks, Nick Frost as 
Tom Watson, Hugh Grant as himself, Steve Coogan as both himselfand Paul 
McMullan etc, etc.

The trickiest role to cast is surely Andy Hayman, the former Metropolitan 
police assistant commissioner whose appalling delivery of a key line managed to 
turn the select committee hearing into an unconvincing TV movie version of 
itself while it was actually happening. "Good God! Absolutely not! I can't 
believe you asked me that! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jfI40CF9_yw>" he 
spluttered, like a man hell-bent on failing an Emmerdale audition. It was 
excruciating enough on television. Imagine having to sit there and watching it 
live. Keith Vaz probably clenched his buttcheeks so hard they tore the fabric 
off his chair seat.

How, precisely, is the actor who eventually plays Hayman supposed to convey 
the "Good God! Absolutely not!" moment with any degree of authenticity without 
destroying their career in the process? Emulate it perfectly and the entire 
audience will assume you're useless.

Perhaps it'd be better to discard the movie idea altogether and instead turn 
the saga into a video game, with Brooks as one of the end-of-level bosses. 
After all, the phone-hacking pile-on is the equivalent of the moment where the 
player discovers the conspicuous glowing nodule just under its tail and 
concentrates his fire on that weak spot. As its life gauge starts to fall, the 
embattled monster desperately sheds blameless News of the World staff in an 
attempt to draw fire away from itself, but to no avail. Two-thirds of the way 
through, the weakened beast flashes red and starts tossing fizzing bombs in 
your direction – the day the Sun printed the pugilistic BROWN WRONG front page 
roughly equates to that bit. Finally, it explodes in a shower of scarlet locks. 
Or resigns and leaves Wapping in a car.

Available: Q4 2011 on Xbox 360, PS3 and Wii. £39.99. Pre-order now to 
guarantee abject disappointment.
 