
Greg Rusedski revealed he had been suffering from a fever and severe 
gastroenteritis in the build-up to his Australian Open campaign, which was 
ended by a tame first round defeat at the hands of Spain's Albert Costa this 
morning.

The British number two, under pressure following revelations he tested 
positive for the banned steroid nandrolone, was comprehensively outclassed 6-4, 
6-3, 6-4 by the former French Open champion.

But he insisted the pressures of the February 9 ATP tribunal, which now looms 
large on the horizon and could prove the end of his professional career, were 
not what made life difficult in the heat of Melbourne Park.

"I had a heavy fever on Saturday and Sunday. I have only hit half an hour of 
tennis balls since Saturday. That is not the ideal preparation coming into a 
major," he said.

"That is what made it difficult today. A lot of players have been suffering 
with it.

"I wanted to at least go out there and give it a go. If you can get through a 
match somehow, then these things go away - it usually takes about four days to 
get rid of it.

"I have to give credit to Carlos. He played well. He came up with some good 
passing shots. I just went out there, tried to do my best, and that is all I 
could do."

All Rusedski has to look forward to now is a long, and no doubt bitter fight 
to clear his name at the ATP hearing in Montreal.

The 30-year-old faces a potential two-year ban for the positive test and 
although he has vehemently proclaimed his innocence, and attacked the ATP in 
doing so, the process could be long and ugly.

As much as he hopes the tribunal accepts his defence, Rusedski admitted it 
would be tough not to think that a first-round defeat at the Australian Open 
could be his last match.

"I think it is only human nature to think about it," he said. "I just hope the 
result comes that I desire. I am innocent in this situation. I hope that is 
seen."

As Rusedski kept a low profile during his days in Sydney immediately after 
admitting his positive test, Costa was the first man to practice with him at 
Olympic Park.

The Spaniard's public showing of sympathy towards the embattled Brit, 
declaring "something strange is happening for sure", was hugely appreciated at 
the time by Rusedski, who was under fire from all angles.

But that comradeship was placed on hold as the pair walked out onto court 
number two in temperatures which rose from 27 to 33 degrees, though Rusedski 
did have vocal support from the packed stands.

The statistics worked in his favour too, with a 3-1 record over the Spaniard, 
and he started strongly, earning a break point in the first game before 
converting one in the third to move 2-1 up.

But Costa began to find his stride, overcoming the frustrations of unlucky 
early net-cords to break back to love and from 3-3, the number 26 seed won five 
of the next six games to take the opening set 6-4 and move a break up in the 
second.

Rusedski had been struggling with his volleys and was broken to love as Costa 
moved 2-0 up - only for the Spaniard to carelessly concede his advantage.

But back in the match, on serve at 3-2, Rusedski double faulted again, Costa 
increased the pressure and broke back to take the second set 6-3.

Rusedski sat on the brink of defeat, his tennis career possibly in shreds and 
when he fell a break down in the opening game of the third it seemed Costa 
would run through to a swift victory.

To his credit, Rusedski mounted something of a challenge. He had nothing to 
lose and broke back, held his serve in confident fashion and suddenly seemed a 
much perkier proposition.

It was not to be the start of a miraculous recovery, however, as the set went 
with serve until, at 4-4 Costa broke again and then served out the match to 
leave Rusedski facing an uncertain future.
 