
Greg Rusedski was at his gutsy best as he came through a tough first-round 
match against Jonas Bjorkman at the Australian Open.

The British No2 came from a set down to complete a superb 2-6, 6-4, 6-0, 7-6 
victory against the Swedish veteran.

Rusedski suffered two early breaks of serve on court three as Bjorkman 
produced some trademark returns and passing shots to take the opening set 6-2.

The Canadian-born left-hander contributed to his own downfall with double 
faults to go 0-30 down on both occasions he was broken, and Bjorkman closed out 
the set to the delight of the noisy Swedish contingent in the crowd with a 
superb backhand return winner cross court.

The second set was an entirely different affair however, Rusedski dominating 
from start to finish.

The 31-year-old broke Bjorkman's serve in the opening game and the Swede, a 
year older, had to save three break points in each of his next two service 
games just to stay in touch.

Rusedski, who had beaten Bjorkman in both of their previous meetings in grand 
slams - most significantly in the US Open semi-final in 1997 - had few problems 
on his own serve and took the set 6-4 to level the match.

The momentum was firmly with Rusedski and he again broke Bjorkman's serve at 
the start of the third set.

The world No48, who lost in the first round here 12 months ago, then stormed 
through the rest of the set without dropping a game to move within sight of a 
second-round berth.

It looked as though Rusedski was going to be taken to a fifth set when 
Bjorkman served for the fourth set at 5-3.

But the 31-year-old broke straight back and eventually took the set to a 
tie-break which he won 9-7.

Rusedski will now meet the second seed Andy Roddick. Roddick was made to fight 
hard against Georgian Irakli Labadze before taking the first set 7-5.

But the former US Open champion then eased to victory, taking the second and 
third sets for the loss of just three more games.

The American has beaten Rusedski in their last three meetings, the Briton's 
only success coming in their first clash at Wimbledon in 2002.

"Greg is tough. He's going to be all over the net and he makes life 
uncomfortable, because you don't see many serve and volleyers any more," said 
Roddick.

"I'll have to try and hold my serve and take my chances when I get them. 

"It wasn't great tennis in the first set today, but the last couple of sets I 
felt like I started hitting the ball a little bit better. You'd rather have 
momentum going that way than backwards."

Home favourite Lleyton Hewitt lived up his billing as the man most likely to 
challenge Roger Federer's grip on the title with a straight sets win over 
Arnaud Clement.

Hewitt, facing the Frenchman for the third time in a row in the first round of 
a tournament, ran out a 6-3, 6-4, 6-1 winner in the evening match on Rod Laver 
Arena.

The last man to beat Roger Federer had earlier bowed out in the first round.

Tomas Berdych overcame Federer in three sets in the second round of the 
Olympics in Athens last August.

But the 19-year-old Czech player was no match for Argentina's Guillermo Coria 
in Melbourne today, the sixth seed recording a 6-2, 6-4, 6-0 victory.

Compatriot Guillermo Canas, who defeated Tim Henman in the third round last 
year and could face the British No1 in the fourth round this time, also moved 
into the second round.

Canas defeated home favourite Chris Guccione 6-4 6-2 7-6 and will face Spain's 
Fernando Verdasco in the last 64. Verdasco was a straight-sets winner over 
Luxembourg's Gilles Muller.

France's Sebastien Grosjean also progressed safely to the second round, the 
14th seed beating compatriot Michael Llodra 6-3 6-4 6-3.

American Vince Spadea is the only seed to fall so far on day two, the American 
losing in five sets to Radek Stepanek.

Argentina's David Nalbandian recovered from two sets to one down to eventually 
overcome Spain's David Ferrer.

Nalbandian, the ninth seed, was in danger of only his second ever first-round 
exit at a grand slam before fighting back to claim a 7-6, 4-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 
victory.
 