
A legal battle involving two of the world's richest men began at the high 
court today, whenBoris Berezovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky> brought claims worth 
around £2bn against fellow Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich.

Berezovsky is suing Abramovich, who owns Chelsea football club, over claims 
that he was forced to sell shares in Russian oil company Sibneft, aluminium 
giant Rusal and the country's central TV channel ORT at a gross undervalue 
after being put under duress and intimidated. Neither man was in court today.

Berezovsky served a writ on Abramovich last October after spotting him 
shopping in a Hermes store in Sloane Street, central London.

Andrew Popplewell QC, representing Abramovich, told Judge David Mackie QC that 
the claims were "hopeless" and he would be considering making an application to 
have the action struck out because it had no realistic chance of success.

He said: "These are very large claims running into billions of dollars. But 
the arguability of the claims depends wholly on oral conversations which are 
not documented."

Popplewell said Berezovsky was claiming there was an oral agreement that his 
client was holding in trust Sibneft shares in which Berezovsky had a beneficial 
interest.

"Secondly, [he claims] that he was intimidated into selling them at an 
undervalue by threats made by Mr Abramovich."

These threats allegedly included Abramovich implying that if the shares were 
not sold, the Kremlin would expropriate them, said Popplewell. "It is these 
slender oral allegations of intimidation and threats on which the whole of this 
claim hinges."

Similarly, on the allegations surrounding Rusal, Popplewell said Berezovsky 
was claiming that Abramovich had broken an oral agreement that he would not 
sell the shares.

"All these claims are for the most part pleaded in the most vague and 
unparticularised way," he said. "They have been pursued in a dilatory fashion 
and advanced in a constantly changing and contradictory way, which simply 
smacks of desperation."

An application for a summary judgment striking them out was being considered, 
he told the judge.

The two opponents, who were once business partners, are among the richest men 
in the world, but Berezovsky's estimated £500m fortune is dwarfed by 
Abramovich's £10.8bn.

Berezovsky fled to the UK in 2000 after falling out with the then Russian 
president, Vladimir Putin.
 