
As the green surrender buses trickled out of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> last Wednesday, Bashar al-Assad’s 
two biggest backers reacted very differently.

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, which had brokered the deal 
with Turkey to allow the refugees to leave, was urging the convoy on towards 
the countryside, where the first of the city’s final refugees were to be 
disgorged. Iran, on the other hand, was looking for ways to stop it.

To Moscow, the ceasefire was the pinnacle of Russia’s intervention in Aleppo, 
a moment when it could mount a new case as a peacemaker, after bombing 
opposition groups to capitulation for 15 months. To Tehran, allowing remaining 
civilians and rebel fighters to leave was a potential loss of leverage – at 
precisely the time that Iranian influence on the battlefield had started to 
eclipse that of Russia’s.

The divergence marked a seminal moment in the Syrian war; the mutual interest 
in securing Assad that had brought the two countries together had suddenly 
given way to a feud about who calls the shots now that the war is nearly won. 
The Russian air force matters little now. The Iranian revolutionary guards 
count for more.

Besieged populations have been bargaining chips throughout the six-year 
conflict, andIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> has played a direct 
role in turning the fate of cornered opposition communities into political 
victories that secure Assad and strengthen its own hand.

Allowing the last desperate holdouts of Aleppo to leave, without first seeking 
terms, was not in the Iranian playbook. And, within hours of Turkey and Russia 
announcing a deal, Iran had sabotaged it, demanding the lifting of a siege of 
two Shia villages north of Aleppo, Fua and Kefraya, which had been surrounded 
by the al-Qaida-inspired Jabhat Fateh al-Sham. It also wanted a trade of 
prisoners and bodies of slainHezbollah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hezbollah> and Iraqi militants under its 
tutelage.

Victory in Aleppo matters enormously for both sides, but when the dust settles 
in Aleppo, it counts for more in Iran
Martin Chulov 
Victory in Aleppo matters enormously for both sides, but when the dust finally 
settles in Aleppo, it counts for more in Iran. Securing Syria’s second city and 
industrial heart is much less to do with re-establishing state sovereignty than 
about asserting its own influence and agenda in the strategic heart of the 
region.

Aleppo is a crossroads in Iran’s project to build a land corridor to the 
Mediterranean coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/iran-iraq-syria-isis-land-corridor>
. It is also likely to be a new centre of Tehran’s geopolitical projection, 
which has been on open display elsewhere in the conflict.

Iranian officials have directly negotiated with the opposition militia, Ahrar 
al-Sham, about the fate of the battered opposition-held town of Zabadani, west 
of Damascus. Iran proposed a swap of the town’s Sunnis, who would be sent to 
Idlib province, for the residents of Fua and Kefraya, who would in turn be 
relocated to Zabadani.

“The Iranians want no Sunnis between Damascus and the Lebanese border,” said 
one senior Lebanese official yesterday. “There is a very clear plan to change 
the sectarian tapestry of the border.”

In the Damascus suburb of Darayya, where opposition communities surrendered in 
August, and accepted being flown to Idlib, 300 Shia families from Iraq have 
moved in. Further to the west, near the Zainab shrine, Iran has bought 
substantial numbers of properties, and also sponsored the arrival of Shia 
families, securing the area as a bridgehead before Zabadani.

Securing corridors of influence with Shia communities marks, potentially, 
Iran’s most assertive moment since the Islamic revolution of 1979, after which 
Tehran’s proxies have gradually projected its influence, through Hezbollah, 
through the US invasion of Iraq – which switched political power from Sunnis to 
Shias – and now through the chaos ofSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Russia’s goals have been less about ideology, and more about realpolitik. 
Vladimir Putin now has a renewed stake in the region, at the expense of the US, 
which he believes abdicated a decades-long role under Barack Obama, and which 
Donald Trump has little interest in reclaiming. Russian influence is likely 
back in the Middle East to stay. But, as America found out, it will be checked 
by the fervour of an ascendant regional heavyweight.
 