
It was the clash of the oligarchs. On one side of the courtroom was Boris 
Berezovsky, Kremlin critic, political exile, and sworn enemy of Vladimir Putin. 
On the other,Roman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, the billionaire owner of 
Chelsea football club, and a man known for his fondness for yachts.

In the middle a lot of bodyguards wearing very dark shades.

Once close friends, and alleged beneficiaries of Russia's controversial 
privatisation programme, the two men have been locked in an ugly public feud 
for more than a decade and have steadfastly avoided each other. But on Monday 
they came face to face at the high court in London in a case that could set a 
multibillion-pound record for private litigation in the UK.

The court heard that Abramovich "blackmailed and betrayed" Berezovsky, his 
former mentor, and put "wealth and influence" above "loyalty and friendship". 
Berezovsky claims Abramovich "intimidated" him into selling his shares in the 
Russian oil company Sibneft at a fraction of their true value.

Berezovsky is claiming in excess of $5bn (£3.2bn) in damages from Abramovich 
over the Sibneft deal, his barrister Laurence Rabinowitz QC said. Berezovsky, 
who fledRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in 2000 after falling 
out with Putin, who was then president, also wants at least $564m in 
compensation for another deal involving the Russian aluminium company Rusal.

The case was being heard in the gleaming new Rolls building of the commercial 
court in Fetter Lane, before Mrs Justice Gloster. Both Russians sat at opposite 
ends of the packed courtroom number 26, with Abramovich listening to the 
proceedings in Russian via headphones.

They ignored each other. Their entourages included supporters in shiny suits, 
Russian assistants dressed in black, relatives, friends, and so many lawyers 
that some were forced to sit at the back of the court.

Scheduled to last 12 weeks, the case has attracted some of the bar's biggest 
names, including Jonathan Sumption QC, acting for Abramovich. Berezovsky is 
likely to give evidence on Thursday. Abramovich will take the stand, speaking 
in Russian, in early November.

The case promises to shed light on Russia's murky privatisation programme in 
the 1990s, during which a small group of well-connected businessmen – 
subsequently dubbed oligarchs – became fantastically rich. It is also likely to 
illuminate the opaque connection between money, politics and power in Russia, 
both in the court of former president Boris Yeltsin, and in the more sinister 
era of Putin, the current prime minister who now looks set to return to the 
Kremlin next year.

Rabinowitz told the judge that both men had worked together to create Sibneft 
in 1995 and they had become good friends.

The partnership had also included the businessman Arkady "Badri" 
Patarkatsishvili, Georgia's wealthiest man. "This is a case about two men who, 
and this is common ground, worked together to acquire an asset – that is 
Sibneft – that would make them wealthy beyond the wildest dreams of most 
people," Rabinowitz said. The relationship continued until Putin, whom 
Berezovsky helped propel into the Kremlin, became Russia's leader.

In the process they became and remained good friends, said Rabinowitz, until 
"Berezovsky, who had adopted a high political profile in Russia, not least 
through his control of certain media outlets, fell out with those in the 
Kremlin and was forced to leave his home and create a new life abroad."

The barrister said Abramovich was left with the choice of remaining loyal to 
his old friend or seeking to "profit from his difficulties". He said that 
Abramovich picked the latter route, and told Berezovsky that he had to sell his 
interests in Sibneft at a knockdown price. If he refused, people in the Kremlin 
led by Putin would expropriate them, Abramovich allegedly warned. "Mr Putin had 
come to regard Mr Berezovsky as an enemy," Rabinowitz said.

Abramovich denies that Berezovsky or Patarkatsishvili were ever his business 
partners. He insists that he was the sole owner of Sibneft, plus had a sole 
share of Rusal, subsequently sold on to another Russian tycoon, Oleg Deripaska. 
He says he merely "hired" Berezovsky, a key figure in Yeltsin's entourage, to 
provide political cover – known by the Russian wordkrysha (roof) – essential to 
any businessman wishing to survive in the lawless 1990s.

Berezovsky provided services "basically criminal in nature", Abramovich's 
lawyers allege. These included "corrupt political patronage" and protection 
from "Chechen criminal gangs".

Berezovsky's barrister conceded that the case was "incredibly complex". He 
said that many of the crucial agreements had been made verbally – the preferred 
method, he said, for blackmailers. Another layer of difficulty stems from the 
fact that several of the protagonists are dead. Patarkatishvili died of a heart 
attack in 2008, prompting a bitter continuing legal battle between his 
relatives and Berezovsky.

The British lawyer Stephen Smith, meanwhile, who took notes of a crucial 
business meeting in the Georgian capital Tbilisi, died in a mysterious 
helicopter crash in 2004. There was enough material, however, to illustrate 
that Abramovich had "whitewashed" Berezovsky from the picture, the barrister 
said. He added: "The case is rather lacking in contemporanous documents. But 
some documents stand out like a beacon."
 