
Ryan Moore’s sudden departure on holiday is to help him recover from an injury 
he was carrying during last week’s Glorious Goodwood meeting, it has been 
suggested. The former champion jockey, now often referred to in Britain as the 
best Flat jockey in the world, was seen to limp on several occasions during 
Goodwood and is thought to be getting over a problem with his hip.

Minding proves her toughness in Nassau dogfight at Glorious Goodwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/minding-nassau-stakes-ryan-moore-aidan-obrien-goodwood-horse-racing>
Aidan O’Brien indicated as much on Tuesday night. “He was having trouble with 
a hip,” the Irish trainer said. “I knew that the last while and you could see 
he was lame while he was walking but I wasn’t speaking to him since.”

Michael Bell, for whom Moore rode a valuable winner in Friday’s Betfred Mile 
aboard Franklin D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/franklin-d-betfred-mile-win-bookies-pay-glorious-goodwood-horse-racing>
, said on Wednesday: “I didn’t notice a limp but he has had an issue, I was 
aware of that from talking to one of the other jockeys. It’s obviously not a 
major injury and it certainly didn’t affect his riding but he is carrying 
something and he just wants to give it time.

“There is wear and tear for jockeys and this is a dull week, racing-wise. If 
you don’t get suspensions, as he tends not to, you still need to take your foot 
off the gas from time to time. He needs some box rest, I imagine.”

Franklin D’s Betfred Mile win makes bookies pay at Glorious Goodwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/franklin-d-betfred-mile-win-bookies-pay-glorious-goodwood-horse-racing>
Other trainers for whom Moore rode last week, including Richard Fahey and 
Kevin Ryan, said they noticed nothing physically wrong with the rider. However, 
footage shown on Channel 4 Racing of jockeys arriving at the track each day 
clearly shows Moore limping. His limp appeared to become less pronounced as the 
week progressed and was not as evident once racing began each day, when he was 
moving slowly among crowds in the paddock and winner’s enclosure.

Moore is now in Portugal on holiday and has indicated he expects to return on 
Friday, though he has withdrawn from Saturday’s Shergar Cup at Ascot. O’Brien 
did not know whether Moore would take the ride on Caravaggio in the Phoenix 
Stakes at The Curragh on Sunday. It is surely a ride that Moore will be anxious 
to take if he can, as the juvenile was an impressive winner of the Coventry 
Stakes last time and is no bigger than 7-2 for next year’s2,000 Guineas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2000-guineas>.

Moore’s agent, Tony Hind, who is also on holiday, said he had not been told of 
any injury to the jockey. The two spoke on Saturday night, when the jockey 
asked Hind not to book any rides for him in Britain for the next few days, as 
he was taking a holiday.

Moore’s holiday has had an impact on the market for this year’s champion 
jockey, for which he is now a general 5-1 shot, having got down as low as 15-8 
on Tuesday. While it has been well known for years that Moore is not especially 
interested in another title and would rather keep himself fresh for the big 
races, he now sits just one winner behind the reigning champion, Silvestre de 
Sousa, at the top of the table with two months to go.

Now that punters have been newly convinced that Moore is not targetting the 
title, De Sousa is once more a strong favourite at odds of 1-4, despite having 
gone through a quiet spell in recent weeks. James Doyle is seen as the only 
other realistic contender at 5-1.

A record entry of 256 has been revealed for the races on Champions Day at 
Ascot in mid-October, an increase of 11% on last year. The Champion Stakes 
itself can boast 23 individual Group One winners among its initial draft, 
including the first three home in the Eclipse Stakes, Hawkbill, The Gurkha and 
Time Test, as well as Almanzor, the French Derby winner.
 