
Formula One has never before gone 20 years without a fatality among its 
drivers. If any good came out of the tragic death ofAyrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ayrton-senna> on 1 May 1994, the day after 
Roland Ratzenberger died at the same Imola track, it is the progress made with 
safety.

Nineteen drivers were killed between 1967 and 1982, more than one a year. 
Those included Britain's greatest driver, Jim Clark, who was killed in Germany 
in 1968, and Gilles Villeneuve, perhaps the fastest of them all, who died in 
final qualifying session for the 1982 Belgian Grand Prix.

Sir Jackie Stewart, who campaigned for greater safety during his career and 
after he retired in 1974, said: "We lost an immense number of drivers. From 
1968 to 1973, my 'big' years, if you raced continuously you would have had a 
two-in-three chance of dying. It was like a general hospital, a serial death 
programme. We lost far too many people."

The death of Senna, the best driver of his or probably any other era, was a 
reminder of the dangers that still existed. "If Senna can die, what chance have 
we got?" was the feeling in the paddock.

One of the biggest steps was the introduction of Hans –head and neck safety – 
that has led to a substantial improvement in the level of neck protection. The 
introduction of wheel tethers has curtailed lethal incidents of flying wheels. 
Seatbelts were made mandatory only in 1976 and seats could be removed along 
with the driver. The old-style metal fuel tank was replaced by a synthetic fuel 
cell, reinforced with rubber and positioned behind the driver, who was now 
wearing more protective clothing. The cockpit and the chassis were made 
stronger.

Circuits were also improved, with Tarmac run-offs replacing grass and gravel. 
Aggressive driving is now punished more punitively. Meanwhile, track marshals 
have been trained to react faster, and with more expertise.

But has the sport gone too far? Anthony Davidson, the Sky Sports analyst who 
thought he was going to die in an accident in the 2012 Le Mans 24 Hours, 
believes that the efforts to eliminate danger may have created "borderline 
reckless driving". He adds: "What is missing is the fear factor. As a driver 
you have to live with the fact you might die one day. Otherwise, you might as 
well just play computer games."

But even playing computer games would be better than the perilous racing of 
the 1960s and 1970s. And the death of Ayrton Senna was the most painful 
reminder of the dangers that still existed at the pinnacle of motorsport.
 