
"Shocking" was the word Andy Roddick used and, although he might have been 
referring to his own performance in losing 3-6, 7-6, 7-6, 6-1 to Lleyton Hewitt 
in the second of the semi-finals, he was in fact meaning the Australian's 
previous failure, in eight attempts, to get beyond the last 16 of his own grand 
slam championship.

Now Hewitt, who has won the Wimbledon and US titles, is in the final here and 
a special final at that.

This is the tournament's centenary and the first night final in the history of 
grand slam tennis. No stage could have been more perfectly set for a home hero. 
"I started preparing for this nine months ago and I've put in a lot of hard 
yards, including a Christmas Day run. I couldn't be more excited," said Hewitt.

Australia has had a long wait to hail a home winner in the men's singles. It 
is 29 years since the unseeded Mark Edmondson defeated John Newcombe in an 
all-Australian final. Since then the closest they have come to the title was 
Pat Cash, who lost the 1987 and 1988 finals. Only the British have waited 
longer for a resident champion - 69 years since Fred Perry and counting.

Standing in Hewitt's way is the Russian Marat Safin, and a huge shadow he 
casts: twice runner-up here, in 2002 and last year. Yesterday the grounds were 
still quietly reverberating, like a huge bell long since struck, from the fall 
of the reigning champion and world No1 Roger Federer in five sets to Safin on 
Thursday night.

The moment Safin converted match point Hewitt and Roddick must have felt a 
massive surge of adrenalin for, with Federer gone, their chances of winning the 
title rose one-hundred fold. He had seemed unbeatable; Safin, they knew, was 
not.

For an hour it appeared Roddick might seize the moment. He took the opening 
set with an unstoppable flurry of aces, two of them timed at 227kph (142mph), 
and won his first service game in the second set with four more. Hewitt's clear 
blues eyes stared back down the court like a man in the midst of a thunderstorm 
straining to see light on the horizon.

The Australian had dropped his own serve in the second game of the opening 
set; now he assiduously protected it in the second set with the resolve of six 
men. It was essential, at the very least, that he hung on for the tie-break 
where, despite Roddick's excellent record, Hewitt fancied his chances of 
applying optimum pressure.

And Roddick cracked, losing the tie-break 7-3. Hewitt's Fanatics, a small 
group of cheerleaders who had been mute early on, urged their man on, only to 
sink back in their paid-for seats when the first set was replicated, Hewitt 
dropping his serve and going 3-0 down.

Before this match Hewitt had already been on court for 14hr 38min, including 
successive five-setters against Rafael Nadal and David Nalbandian in the fourth 
round and quarter-final respectively. Roddick's five wins had taken him little 
more than half this time and it appeared he was about to reap the benefit.

There was one problem, Roddick himself. It has become increasingly obvious 
that of the four players who reached the semi-finals here, and the semi-finals 
of last November's Masters Cup in Houston, the American is the weakest link.

Federer, Safin and Hewitt, who by winning this match took over from Roddick as 
the world No2, are all much more talented and versatile than the American, who 
is reliant on two weapons, albeit huge ones: his serve and his forehand.

Roddick has a wrist of steel, which was good enough to pound him to his one 
and only grand slam title at Flushing Meadows two years ago. But once either of 
these shots malfunctions he is plain and his attempts at variety, notably on 
the serve and volley, are often cringingly awful.

The only time he had previously beaten Hewitt was on the grass at Queen's Club 
and, for all the Australian's criticism of the slowness of the courts here, it 
worked in his favour on this occasion.

Hewitt broke back with Roddick complaining about somebody calling out when he 
was serving. "The Fanatics are great, as were the rest of the crowd. It took 
one jackass to yell out." In truth he was more rattled by Hewitt. The second 
tie-break went the way of the first and thereafter Roddick slid to oblivion 
with unseeming haste, just as he had when losing to Hewitt in the Masters Cup 
semi-finals last year.

Frequently he splayed out his fingers in front of his face like a man fighting 
inner demons. His frustration was palpable. "I'm pissed off and mad," he said 
afterwards while remaining as engaging and honest as ever. If his career is not 
to stall or decline, he has much work ahead of him. The decision to dump Brad 
Gilbert as his coach seems at best dubious.

With Federer gone, a Safin-Hewitt final is by far the more attractive option. 
There is little to separate them on past matches. They have never met in a 
major. In their one final, on the quick court of the Paris Indoor Open in 2002, 
Safin won in straight sets.

Safin has the power to overwhelm anybody. Hewitt is buoyed with destiny. But 
that 29-year wait for a home winner may well be extended to 30 tomorrow.
 