
In the game of the Australian Open so far, Marat Safin of Russia beat the No1 
seed Andy Roddick of the USA in five sets to set up a mouth-watering semi-final 
encounter with Andre Agassi.

It didn't last as long as the Cold War, but it was just as tense. In front of 
a packed Melbourne Park crowd, an epic clash swung first one way, then the 
other, as the two giants slugged it out from the baseline.

Safin, who earlier appeared hampered by a groin injury, eventually triumphed 
2-6, 6-3, 7-5, 6-7 (0-7), 6-4, but the result was in doubt right up to the end 
as Roddick squandered two break-back points at 4-5 in the final set.

 The result means Roddick will lose his place at the top of the world rankings 
to either Roger Federer or Juan Carlos Ferrero. But within minutes of his 
gruelling defeat, Roddick was talking about regaining his No1 status.

 "I have 11 months to get it back before the year ends," he said. 

 "No one can take away from me the fact that I was there and that I did have 
it. It's going to be jumping around a little bit this year.That's what makes it 
exciting.

 "Losses actually motivate me a lot more than wins do. You can be bitter when 
you're working out. It gives you something to remember.

 "I played well every match this tournament. I showed some improvement, my 
fitness training paid off. We were out there for three hours, 23 minutes and I 
was ready to keep going.

 "There are some definite positives I can take away from this event." 

 Earlier, the defending champion Agassi progressed to the last four after his 
opponent Sebastien Grosjean became the latest player to withdraw injured from 
the tournament.

Agassi took little satisfaction from the manner of his passage, which is 
technically his 26th consecutive victory at the Australian Open.

Nor did the Melbourne crowd, who were short-changed today after Grosjean's 
retirement followed Amelie Mauresemo's decision to withdraw from her women's 
quarter-final with a back injury.

In fact their $69 bought only one match - Justine Henin-Hardenne beating 
Lindsay Davenport in straight sets - and half of another, when they saw Agassi 
move 6-2, 2-0 ahead before Grosjean threw in the towel.

The Frenchman suffered groin strain in the fourth game of the match and 
withdrew for fear of causing himself further damage.

"It's not a good way for anything to end," said Agassi. "I would have 
preferred to finish the match, no question. It's not that I feel like now I'm 
not prepared but you just don't want any match to end that way.

"He said he had pulled his groin in the fourth game of the first set and that 
it was getting worse.

"It's disappointing and unfortunate that a match would ever have to end that 
way for the sake and the health of the player, also for the spectators. It's 
not a good situation."

Agassi beat Grosjean in straight sets at this point in the tournament last 
year and appeared well on his way to repeating the feat.

The 33-year-old fourth seed hit the ground running to break the Frenchman 
twice in the opening set and move ahead in the second before Grosjean called 
time.

"I try to work hard from the first point because time on court goes by very 
quickly," said Agassi. "It was hard work early but I managed to get the upper 
hand there. Up until that point in the match I was feeling really good.
 