
First set: Safin 6-2 Sampras

Sampras starts horribly, losing his opening two service games. So much for his 
big serve. His Deputy Dawg face shows little emotion - well, there's still a 
long way to go. Valiantly he tries to come back, but four breakpoints come and 
go and the Safin serve stays strong. Soon 3-0 to Safin has become 6-2, and 
Sampras knows he's in trouble.

Second set: Safin 6-4 Sampras

There's almost a déjà vu moment in the opening game as Sampras drops to 15-40 
on his own serve. But, just in time, his serve cranks into gear and he holds 
on. Just. His Russian opponent has no such problems, though: his huge shoulders 
keep cranking in ace after ace and even the serves Sampras does get back often 
half-heartedly loop beyond the baseline.

At 2-2, Sampras goes 30-0 up on his serve but then he double-faults horribly. 
Safin, like a hungry bear, scents blood. Sampras's volleying lets him down, 
Safin hits another great backhand winner - that's six in total now - and 
suddenly he has another break.

Sampras calls for a trainer to examine his heel and the break seems to 
reinvigorate him. He shows emotion, punching the air after an ace and grimacing 
after another double fault. But he can't find a way to break back.

By now, Safin's first serve percentage in the set has dropped to 38% - 
compared to Sampras's 73% - and, trailing 5-4, Sampras decides on a new tactic: 
chipping and charging Safin's serve. A stunning whipped forehand soon changes 
his mind, and soon Safin is quickly two sets to the good.

Third set: Safin 6-7 Sampras

The third set starts like the previous two: with Sampras struggling to hold 
his serve. 30-40 down at 0-0 he pulls out three scudding rockets, reminiscent 
of his prime, to save the game. However in his next service game, the serve 
crumbles again - Safin snatching a break by somehow reaching a ball going 
behind him on his backhand side before swivelling around and - think Gordon 
Banks saving from Pele in 1970 World Cup - scrambling to his forehand to hit an 
unbelievable winner.

At this point Safin looks too strong and consistent. His hitting and speed are 
frightening and, worst still for Sampras, he is running everything down. But 
one part of the Russian's game isn't quite on song: his service. From a 
position of strength he misses eight first serves in a row, and at 4-3 down, 
Sampras takes advantage.

At 15-40 ahead, he chips and charges and Safin's backhand can only find the 
net. Soon from 4-3 down Sampras is 5-4 ahead, leaving the surly Russian to 
mutter angrily to himself.

With both men rediscovering their service strength, a tie-break and more drama 
inevitably follows. Sampras looks to be in control as he hits two consecutive 
winners off Safin's serve to move 5-2 ahead. Then he double faults. Then 
follows anger as, at 6-3 ahead, Safin's clearly long serve is called in. 
Finally Sampras is ecstatic, fist-pumping with the best of them as he smashes 
one home to take the tie break 7-5. As one the crowd rise to give Sampras the 
sort of standing ovation he never got when Grand Slam victories were a matter 
of course.

 Fourth set: Safin 7-6 (10-8) Sampras

Is the Sampras recovery short-lived? It looks that way in the opening stanzas 
of the fourth set as Safin races to a 1-0 lead then goes 40-0 in front on 
Sampras's serve.

Somehow though, the American clings on - particularly at 15-40 down when he 
produces an Exocet of a second serve which lands right on the service corner. 
Safin can only lob it back and Sampras puts away a venomous smash. The 
adrenaline now racing, he saves three more break points and levels the match at 
1-1.

The game establishes the pattern for the set. The serve is less dominant, the 
rallies longer and the chances to break even greater.

In the next game, Sampras outmanoeuvres his opponent to go 30-40 ahead. But 
Safin's serve - when it goes in - is a great equaliser and an ace down the 
middle keeps him in the game.

Both men continue to trade breakpoints like Panini stickers. At 4-3 Safin gets 
his turn but can't convert. Ditto Sampras at 5-5. Neither games won nor the 
stats can separate the two players. Points won? Sampras 44, Safin 44. First 
serve percentage? Sampras 56%, Safin 56%. First serves won? Sampras 79%, Safin 
78%. Appropriately, the fourth set goes to a tie-break.

Sampras starts like a man going places. A thumping forehand gives him a 
mini-break and he races into a 3-0 lead. But Safin retaliates, breaking back 
and hitting two monster forehands to go 5-4 ahead. Play goes with serve for the 
next eight points, during which Sampras has two break points, and Safin one 
matchpoint, before finally, after 3hrs and 30mins and with the score at 9-8, 
the Russian produces a furiously-hit forehand down the line. Sampras, at the 
net doesn't move. An extraordinary shot to end an extraordinary match.
 