
Roger Federer was on his knees when Russia's Marat Safin, the game's greatest 
enigma, hit the winning shot to knock the reigning champion out of the 
Australian Open in the Rod Laver Arena. The world No1, who lost only six 
matches last year and won three of the four slam titles, had slipped when 
desperately attempting to save a seventh match point against him in the final 
set.

It was a stupendous defensive effort by the Swiss, who has won the Wimbledon 
title for the past two years and whose psychological hold on all his rivals on 
hard courts had appeared absolute. But Safin, who was celebrating his 25th 
birthday, had loomed as the most likely danger from the moment the draw was 
made. Even so, his 5-7, 6-4, 5-7, 7-6, 9-7 victory came as an enormous shock.

The Russian, twice runner-up in this tournament and beaten by Federer in last 
year's final, is a man of immense power and prodigious ability. He won the 2000 
US Open by pulverising Pete Sampras in his own back yard, and was immediately 
hailed as the "future of tennis" by the American.

Since that equally shocking victory at Flushing Meadows, which was celebrated 
with champagne and vodka within the hour, Safin has struggled to fulfil his 
obvious potential and has remained a one-slam wonder, largely because of the 
fragility of his temperament.

This was the most mature and professional performance of his life, 
masterminded by Federer's former coach Peter Lundgren, who was ditched by the 
Swiss towards the end of 2003 and joined forces with Safin in spring last year. 
Lundgren could barely contain his delight as the match, which lasted nearly 4 
hours, reached its almost unbearable climax.

"Roger had brought tennis a level higher. Normally he toys with everybody 
because he has put the bar so high," said Safin, who struggled for words to 
describe his victory, so great were the emotions swirling through his mind and 
body. He refused to concede that he was now the favourite for the title after 
beating Federer but, like it or not, he is.

This defeat brought to an end a winning run of 26 matches for Federer, 
stretching back to his defeat by the little-known Tomas Berdych of the Czech 
Republic in last summer's Olympic Games in Athens. More remarkably, he had won 
his last 24 matches against top-10 players, stretching back to October 2003 
when he lost to the then No1, Juan Carlos Ferrero of Spain.

Discarding last year's French Open, when he lost in the third round to the 
three-times champion Gustavo Kuerten, Federer had won 26 consecutive grand slam 
matches on hard courts and grass. Small wonder that by the time of his victory 
in last year's US Open he was being spoken of as one of the future all-time 
greats.

"Roger's only adversary is history," Sampras said recently, although to date 
Federer remains 10 grand slams short of the American's all-time record of 14 
slams. The Swiss has never bragged about his achievements, but nevertheless an 
aura of invincibility had grown about him, with all the top players prepared to 
admit at the end of last year that he was head and shoulders clear of them. 
Now, thanks to Safin, he will be seen in a slightly different light.

Federer and Safin had met seven times before, the Russian's lone win coming in 
Moscow in 2002. A seventh defeat for Safin looked virtually certain when at 5-6 
in the fourth-set tie-break he somehow threw up a lob from an audacious Federer 
drop-volley. The Swiss tried to return the ball through his legs, the only shot 
he could play, but failed. It was his last clear-cut chance.

The world No1 was never at his very best, and had treatment at the end of the 
fourth set for a problem with his right arm, but rarely if ever can Safin have 
played so consistently to such a high quality. Last year he defeated both Andy 
Roddick and Andre Agassi, likewise the reigning champion, in the semi- and 
quarter-finals respectively but had nothing left for the final against Federer.

"When I played Sweden's Thomas Johansson in the 2002 final here I was too 
nervous because I was the favourite and I could not deal with the pressure. 
Last year I ran out of gas and had no chance," said Safin.

Federer had not surrendered a set in any of his previous four semi-finals. 
However, he had lost all three of his previous five-set matches in Melbourne, 
two in the Australian Open and the third, most famously, in the same Rod Laver 
Arena against Lleyton Hewitt in the 2003 Davis Cup semi-final when he had led 
by two sets. In sharp contrast, Safin now has a 6-0 five-set record in the Open 
here.

On a day that also saw the defeat of the women's Wimbledon champion Maria 
Sharapova, of Russia, Federer was understandably subdued but not disheartened. 
"Losing after having a match point always hurts, but just a point here and 
there changed the match. My whole life is pressure and this is nothing 
different."
 