
There have been some huge changes at the Crayford branch of Sainsbury's in 
south-east London.

Since the store reopened in September 2010, shoppers will, most obviously, 
have noticed that the store has more than doubled in size – growing from 30,000 
to 100,000 sq ft and making Crayford Sainsbury's biggest UK store.

There is far more space given over to clothing and a new home and lifestyle 
section, plus 55,000 sq ft dedicated to a much expanded food offer including 
new food-to-go lines.

But the most radical change remains well out of sight and may have passed many 
shoppers by. In fact, it sits about 200 metres underground.

Buried beneath the store is complex network of pipes drilled deep into the 
ground that are being used to harness the earth's natural thermal energy to 
provide the store's cooling, heating and hot water.

"This has very much put Sainsbury's on the radar" – The Guardian's judging 
panel

This is a breakthrough project – the first time a UK supermarket has used the 
so-called geo-exchange system to tap natural geo-thermal energy trapped deep 
under the ground.

At the heart of the system is an advanced ground-source heat pump that is 
linked to boreholes that capture and store waste heat from the store. This is 
released, when needed, to provide heat and hot water for the store and 
on-demand cooling for refrigeration.

Most importantly, it has allowed the supermarket group to increase the size of 
the store with no increase in either energy use or carbon emissions. The 
expanded store has exactly the same footprint as the smaller store it replaces.

As such, Crayford provides a blueprint for the UK's second biggest grocer as 
it plots its future store development. The system will be used on several new 
and redeveloped stores now being planned.

More widely it may also provide some important benefits to the supermarket 
sector as a whole, offering retailers a sustainable way to maintain their rapid 
growth of recent years.

A history of innovation

Crayford is one of Sainsbury's carbon step change stores and follows a line of 
green innovations tried and tested by the company.

In 1999, it opened the UK's first "eco-store" in Greenwich, London. In 2008 
the Dartford supermarket opened its doors, where the use of renewable energy 
has cut overall emissions by 54%.

Other eco-stores have followed at Gloucester Quays and Dursley, testing a 
range of new technologies including sun pipes, rainwater harvesting, motion 
sensors, energy-saving lighting and chillers, real-time energy tracking and 
biomass boilers.

So Crayford joins a longer history of innovation all aimed at exploring ways 
to cut operational carbon – the direct emissions created by running Sainsbury's 
stores – and the "embodied carbon" that comes from the design, manufacture and 
use of its products.

At a time of rapid expansion, Sainsbury's has just completed a two-year plan 
to increase its shop floor space by 15% and the group is gathering all this 
innovation and research together into a new standard specification. This will 
be used to guide the design, build, operation and maintenance of the stores it 
develops in future.

A technology first

The geo-exchange system has been developed with a local renewable energy 
start-up company, Greenfield Energy, which built the system in return for a 
long-term operating contract. The contract, running for at least 20 years, 
contains incentives for both sides to look for further energy savings and 
efficiencies.

Traditional systems used gas–fired boilers to heat the store while 
refrigeration systems pumped waste heat into the atmosphere but using 
technology derived and adapted from the oil and gas industry, the new system is 
allowing the supermarket chain to turn its back on old, wasteful approaches to 
heating and refrigeration.

The system, totally removes the need to use gas, captures the waste heat from 
refrigeration and stores it in the ground until it is needed.

Heat is stored in vegetable-based glycol and water fluid within coaxial pipes 
drilled into the ground, where temperatures remain constant. Acting like a huge 
thermal storage radiator, the system uses the earth's natural thermal energy 
and pumps heat back into the store when needed.

This also results in some impressive savings.

Sainsbury's estimates it will save enough energy on cooling refrigeration and 
heating to warm 200 homes. The technology could cut the store's overall energy 
consumption by some 30%, compared with a typical Sainsbury's outlet.

The use of geo-exchange has allowed Sainsbury's to add on other important 
innovations. These include the retrieval of cold air from chiller cabinets to 
cool other parts of the store such as the clothing aisles and the checkout area.

It is also using an energy monitoring and control system to make sure that 
equipment across the whole building is running at maximum efficiency and that 
equipment is only used when absolutely necessary – lights, for instance, are 
automatically turned off at night when the store is closed.

Lessons for the sector

Our judges agreed that this groundbreaking project had really "put Sainsbury's 
on the radar".

The energy category attracted a number of entrants whose activities marked 
them out as "ones to watch" in the future. There were also some exciting 
developments in stakeholder engagement around energy management, the judges 
said.

"In a highly competitive space, this success story could also provide a sector 
boost" – The Guardian judging panel

But the judges were particularly impressed by the way Sainsbury's set its 
objectives and attained its impressive results.

They praised the group for the innovative way it had harnessed "sound, safe, 
passive renewable energy technologies" to find a new solution to an ongoing 
challenge for operators in its sector.

The geo-exchange project could provide lessons to others, they concluded. "In 
a highly competitive sector, this success story could also provide a sector 
boost."

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 