
Sale's director of rugby, Kingsley Jones, accused his side of not respecting 
Newport Gwent Dragons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newportdragons> after 
their 20-9 defeat at Rodney Parade in their opening Anglo Welsh Cup match.

The Sharks were always on the back foot in Gwent after the Dragons fly-half, 
Shaun Connor, crossed for the game's opening try when he ghosted through Sale's 
flimsy defence for a converted try. Three penalties from the fly-half Charlie 
Hodgson kept the visitors in the game at 9-10 down heading into the final 
quarter but the scrum-half Danny Lee's snipe down the fringes yielded a second 
try for the hosts, with the replacement fly-half Adam Greendale adding a 
conversion and penalty

Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> were poor throughout, with 
their back-line play lacking any fluidity and accuracy, while their pack 
struggled to cope with the relentless enthusiasm of their hosts, who were 
backed by a partisan crowd.

The former Wales flanker and captain Jones said: "We did not respect the 
Dragons. We talked all week about coming down here and giving them the respect 
they deserve and to give away seven points like that in the first two minutes 
just speaks volumes.

"If you have never been to Rodney Parade, then this is a lesson for everybody. 
I know what it's like, it's a tough place to come and they have got a lot of 
confidence in the side at the moment. We kicked the ball a lot and it's a very 
disappointing day, I just wanted us to show a bit more spirit and show that we 
wanted it as much as the Dragons."

Jones also admitted the defeat had severely hit his side's chances of 
progressing to the semi-finals of the revamped Anglo-Welsh tournament.

"We have Leeds next week at home and we fancy ourselves against anyone at 
home," he said. "But you would have to say that we are not in a great position 
in this tournament."

Paul Turner, the Dragons coach, was a much happier man, although he 
acknowledged his side had made far too many mistakes of their own. "We made a 
lot of errors and normally if you make that many errors it can come back to 
haunt you," he said.

"The spirit and defence was excellent and we tried to play some good stuff. It 
is just a very good win against an almost full-strength Sale side.

"I thought the pack were outstanding, Danny Lee played well behind them and 
Shaun Connor kicked us into some good positions in the first half. There was 
only one winner there tonight and defensively we were right on the button and 
with fewer errors we could have had better field position and won by more."
 