
Sam Allardyce will consider Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> an opportunity. Alan 
Pardew did too, even if it was one he ultimately failed to grasp. But the brief 
assessment delivered by the prospective new manager as he arrived at the club’s 
Beckenham training ground on Friday was less an attempt to butter up the 
co-owners and more an expression of enthusiasm. “Fantastic, fantastic,” he said 
through the open window of his 4x4, before edging the car on towards a final 
round of talks and a signing on the dotted line.

This team have drowned in gloomy statistics of late, saddled by constant 
reminders of shoddy form through the calendar year or vulnerability at set 
pieces, and now forever fearful that a single defeat is to prove the prelude to 
another prolonged succession of them. Allardyce may not spy it on the training 
ground, where the mood among the troops has always been relatively upbeat, but 
he will quickly discover that in-game confidence is brittle. Theirs is a 
collective frustration. The team know they are better than 17th in the Premier 
League. They are not a side who should be losing eight games out of 10 or 22 
since the turn of the year. That tally suggests deep-rooted problems but, more 
than anything, they are guilty of underachievement which, in truth, is more 
infuriating than being truly out of their depth.

Sam Allardyce confirmed as new Crystal Palace manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/sam-allardyce-replaces-alan-pardew-as-crystal-palace-manager>
This is not the imbalanced, bloated mess of a squad gripped by self-doubt that 
was inherited byTony Pulis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/23/premier-league-crystal-palace-tony-pulis>
 in the autumn of 2013. It is not even the rather dissatisfied and disgruntled 
side who had been sleepwalking towards the relegation zone underNeil Warnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/27/crystal-palace-neil-warnock-manager>
 a year later. This is a team who can lean on the boundless energy and no 
little quality provided by Jason Puncheon and James McArthur in midfield or on 
the effervescence and incision of Wilfried Zaha on the flank. They have a £27m 
striker in Christian Benteke, who hadAntonio Conte drooling in admiration on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
, urging his three centre-halves not to retreat too deep after witnessing one 
chest, spin and volley, and who has scored eight goals this season. There are 
few better to lead the line in the country.

Even at the back, where Palace have been so porous, there is a centre-half in 
Scott Dann who has long been touted, not unrealistically, as a potential 
England defender and who has been consistently outstanding in previous seasons. 
His defensive partner, Damien Delaney, has become a stalwart at this club, a 
player whom some managers might find abrasive but whose whole-hearted 
commitment can rarely be doubted. That represents a more than competent spine 
even before players such as Andros Townsend or Yohan Cabaye, James Tomkins or 
Joe Ledley, are taken into account.

Allardyce will survey the names and, although he will look to add to the 
team’s defensive ranks where the chance to sign more cover was passed up over 
the summer, he may wonder quite how this opportunity has come his way at all. 
Even the training ground, revamped by Pardew, whose two white budgerigars were 
still fluttering in a cage in the canteen on Friday, is almost pristine. “We’re 
actually in quite a good place,” the coach-turned-caretaker, Keith Millen, 
said. “Obviously not in terms of our league position but certainly when it 
comes to the players, their attitude and their quality.”

Millen had nominally been Pardew’s defensive coach, charged with analysing 
players’ roles when repelling corners or free‑kicks. His neck would normally be 
on the block given just how many times Palace have wilted at set plays this 
season. One need only recall thechaos at the Liberty Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 last month, when the visitors may as well have sported blindfolds every time 
Gylfi Sigurdsson delivered a dead‑ball into the box.

But the desire to reinvent this team as a possession-based, free-flowing, 
attack-minded side, channelling the ball through Cabaye’s tidy touches in 
midfield, had long since blurred the focus on defensive duties and diminished 
the emphasis placed on the basics Millen was charged with overseeing. Steve 
Parish, the chairman had suggested as much when confirming Pardew’s departure. 
“We all bought into the decision to play a more expansive style,” he said. “Now 
we’re going to wind the dial back the other way.” They need to recall the 
skills at which they were once so competent.

Some Crystal Palace fans will be alarmed by impending arrival of Sam Allardyce 
| Ed Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/22/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-survival-fan-alarm>
There had been grumbling behind the scenes this term. Players complained 
privately about how all the detailed analysis conducted by Pardew and his staff 
was relayed to the squad, bemoaning too much information and too little 
explanation. They found it confusing at times. Some craved more focused, 
traditional work on defensive shape or basic organisation. Many in their number 
recognised it had been such constant drilling that had hoisted them to play at 
this level in the first place.

Allardyce the organiser should represent a return to normality. That, after 
all, is his great skill. Like Pulis he can implement solidity while leaning on 
the evidence gleaned from data analysis to pinpoint improvement. As even Pardew 
admitted, it is far easier to set up a team to keep goals out than plunder 
them, and it will be from a sound base that this team’s attacking talents are 
asked to create.

Some on the staff will need reassurance. Townsend has cut a forlorn figure of 
late, with Zeki Fryers, the back-up left-back, even put on in his stead at 
times. He is capable of so much more than the flashes of skill he offered in 
the autumn and Palace, even in the money-flushed modern‑day Premier League, are 
not a club who can afford £13m players to sink without trace. But the tools are 
already in place for the new man to flourish. He does not need to instigate a 
complete overhaul of the playing staff. He indicated as much in the detailed 
dossier submitted on his behalf to Palace’s American co-owners last month. 
Tweaks should suffice for now, even if a quick-fix arrival can still set one 
back eight figures.

Josh Harris and David Blitzer, their faith in analytics entrenched, will be 
comfortable working with a manager who pioneered the use of ProZone at Bolton 
more than a decade ago and whose analysis of the Palace squad had pinpointed 
apparent fitness issues – not least to explain the number of late goals 
conceded – as well as each player’s strengths and weaknesses. There may be some 
pragmatism to come but the co-owners will accept that if it protects their £50m 
investment. Allardyce will just be happy to be back in the Premier League after 
the dismal anticlimax of his67-day tenure with England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
. All sides should consider this a chance to put things right.
 