
Pete Sampras needed five sets, seven match points and nearly four hours of 
brilliant tennis to gain a place in the last 16 of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> at the expense of France's 
Nicolas Escude. It was another thrilling match in a men's championship that has 
completely overshadowed the women's in the first week of the opening Grand Slam 
of the year.

The record winner of 13 Grand Slam titles re-affirmed his appetite for the big 
time with a courageous display that contained echoes of his 1995 quarter-final 
win over Jim Courier. Then he recovered from losing tie-breaks in the first two 
sets amid the emotional backdrop of learning that his coach at the time, Tim 
Gullikson, was suffering from terminal brain cancer.

Tim's twin brother, Tom, is now coaching Sampras and was among the thousands 
enthralled by his 7-6 (7-5) 5-7 6-4 6-7 (6-8) 6-3 victory over Escude. The 
two-time champion held three match points in the fourth-set tie-break. He 
double-faulted on the first and Escude did the rest to take it into a final 
set. The Frenchman called it 'a miracle'.

But it didn't last. Clearly stung, Sampras surged into a 4-0 lead in the 
decider and, although he squandered one of the breaks, he made no mistake to 
complete the win in three hours 50 minutes at 1.40am local time with his 
thirty-third ace of the match. In the fourth round, he faces a repeat of the US 
Open semi-final he won against the Russian Marat Safin last September.

Sampras had to be at his best because Escude played inspired tennis, clearly 
relishing his first return to the Rod Laver Arena since winning the Davis Cup 
for his country in December. In the end, though, the Frenchman graciously 
admitted that he deserved to lose: 'It was a very good fight, but he was better 
than me today, that's all there was to it.'

The eventual winner was forced to fend off five break points to force a 
first-set tie-break, which the two-time champion sneaked 7-5. But Sampras's 
big-match temperament proved elusive at 5-6 a set later. He double-faulted to 
go set point down and failed to dig out a blistering Escude return aimed into 
his feet on the next. The thirtieth seed was an Australian Open semi-finalist 
in 1998 and until the seventh game of the third set he was showing similar form 
by pushing Sampras all the way.

No wonder the eighth seed, cheered on by his Hollywood actress wife Bridgette 
Wilson and Spanish golfer Sergio Garcia, emitted a yelp of 'Yess' when he 
thrillingly broke to 15 for a 4-3 lead. Sampras's twenty-first ace sealed the 
set and when he broke for 4-3 in the fourth it appeared all over. The advantage 
was short-lived as the Frenchman pluckily levelled a game later and in the 
eventual tie-break showed even more courage to keep the match alive.

Sampras said that his opponent 'is a very, very good player, he has all the 
shots'. The winner added: 'If this sends a message to the rest of the guys I 
don't know, but it was a good win to get through.'

How tame the women's game appears in comparison. The first week was a 
shock-free zone, although Jennifer Capriati almost bucked the trend by being 
taken to a deciding set. She is also depending increasingly on bandages to hold 
together her creaking body.

The world number one ended her 6-2 3-6 6-1 victory over Eleni Daniilidou 
sporting strapping on both thighs, but her physical condition is not as bad as 
it first seemed. Of more concern to the defending champion is the fact that she 
dropped the middle set to a player who stands 80 places below her in the 
rankings.

Capriati came into the tournament troubled by a hip flexor strain and began 
her match against Daniilidou with the top of her right thigh strapped. After 
three games of the second set, there was growing concern for the top seed 
around Melbourne Park as a similar strapping was applied to her left thigh.

Capriati's distress seemed to inspire her Greek opponent, who played her best 
tennis by stretching the champion from one side of the court to the other, 
adding the odd drop shot for good measure. Only when it came to closing out the 
set did the 19-year-old falter and Capriati was able to save three set points 
before putting a backhand long on the fourth.

When the British umpire Jane Harvey overruled in Daniilidou's favour to hand 
the world number 81 a break of serve in the opening game of the deciding set, a 
huge shock appeared likely.

But Capriati, who had been infuriated by the over-rule, channelled her anger 
into a ruthless demolition of her tall opponent's increasingly hesitant game.

'I'm not hurting that much at all. I feel pretty good,' Capriati announced on 
the completion of her victory. But what about the bandage on the left thigh? 
'It was more of a cosmetic thing that had to be done. Because the other side 
was rubbing against the skin, I was getting a bit of a rash there.'

Clearly Capriati had been surprised at how hard she had been forced to work in 
the searing heat of the hottest day of the championships so far. 'She played 
well. She was a tough opponent. I'd never played her before and I had no idea 
what she was going to do. It was important for me to pull through, especially 
having to fight through it.'

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia is following the 
US Open's lead by paying equal prize money, but the first week's action 
suggests the leading women are earning comparatively easy money. While the 
seeds have been succumbing to the strength in depth in the men's game, the 32 
matches played in the women's second round produced only six deciding sets.

The Belgian pair of Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin progressed to the last 16 
with embarrassing ease. Clijsters dropped just three games in beating Cindy 
Watson and her compatriot conceded just one more in her demolition of Nicole 
Pratt. The tenth seed, Meghann Shaughnessy, fell to the world number 48, 
Marlene Weingartner, 6-2 3-6 6-3, and it was hard to decide which was the 
bigger shock, the result or that the match went the distance.
 