
The recent strides made by Lawrie Sanchez's side have certainly not impressed 
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> coach Carlos 
Alberto, who described Northern Ireland's football as 'shit' after a drab draw.

Sanchez remains unbeaten in his seven away games since taking charge. But, it 
would appear, it takes more than mere statistics to impress the captain of 
Brazil's 1970 World Cup team.

'I'm sick of having to play shit football teams like Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> and Wales,' he fumed. 
'They committed over 100 fouls, but there was not one yellow card. If you think 
that is football, will you please applaud. Now I'm looking forward to playing 
England because they play much better football. They will probably beat us and 
we don't have much chance. But at least we will have the chance to show we can 
play football in the right way.'

Sanchez refused to be drawn into a spat, claiming instead his side deserved to 
win the game. 'I don't make comments about other managers or their teams. I'm 
more concerned with my own team,' he said. 'I think this was obviously two 
points dropped for us because we had far and away the better chances.

'I'm disappointed because we were the better team. We just lacked that little 
bit of quality to test the keeper more. But they always say, if you don't win, 
make sure you don't lose and we were never in any danger of losing.'

Pinned back by an enterprising Azerbaijan team during a drab first half, 
Northern Ireland fought back impressively in the second period. But they were 
unable to find the finish that would have brought three crucial points and 
dramatically improved their standing in Group 6. Sanchez's belief that his side 
can make a genuine challenge to finish in the top two had been bolstered by 
last month's battling performance in Cardiff when, depleted by the dismissals 
of David Healy and Michael Hughes, Northern Ireland clung on to claim a 
deserved point.

But deprived of Healy, Northern Ireland's threat in front of goal was always 
likely to be severely diminished. The Preston North End forward has struck 
seven of his side's eleven goals since Sanchez took charge and, starved of 
meaningful service, the new-look frontline of Hull City's Stuart Elliott and 
Willem II's James Quinn rarely looked capable of breaking the deadlock.

The home side almost immediately exposed the visitors' patched-up right flank 
and worked the first clear opening of the game when Ismayil Mammadov worked his 
way to the by-line before cutting back to Mahmud Gurbanov on the edge of the 
box. Fortunately for Sanchez's side, the midfielder failed to test keeper Maik 
Taylor with a side-footed effort that flew wastefully wide.

Azerbaijan continued to dominate possession although impressive defending by 
Northern Ireland's back three of Colin Murdock, Mark Williams and Aaron Hughes 
denied an opening of note inside Taylor's box.

A darting run and cross from Damien Johnson aside, Northern Ireland's 
principle threat was always likely to come from a set piece and Murdock's 
towering header from Gillespie's corner was the closest the visitors came to 
forcing Jahnagir Hasanzade into action in a dismal first half.

But after the break the visitors demonstrated much more purpose and, with 
Damien Johnson, Tommy Doherty and Jeff Whitley wresting control of the 
midfield, it was Northern Ireland who appeared most likely to make the 
breakthrough.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 