
Dear Reader", James Tate began his poem of the same title, "I'm trying to pry 
open your casket with this burning snowflake." Tate was writing about poetry, 
but the same sentiment might be applied to the creation of short stories. They 
are excruciatingly difficult to produce and make effective. The best provoke 
potent sensations in the reader – discomfort, arousal, exhilaration, fear. They 
are as powerful and memorable, in some cases more so, than novels.

I studied the form at St Andrews University, and at the age of 22 made a few 
dreadful attempts to write them. I knew they were dreadful. They were squibs. 
They lacked shape, concentration, and metaphysics. It's taken me 15 years to 
feel I might be able to write and publish short stories, and for the assiduous 
checks of the industry to allow some through. I can count on one hand the 
number I have written that I feel approach success – that's fewer than the 
number included in my first collection. This is not to say writers must perform 
some kind of lengthy monastic training, sitting on a mountain in silence, 
drinking thrice-filtered water and attempting to condense the world on to a 
pinhead. But apprenticeships certainly don't hurt, nor does reading masters of 
the discipline, the obvious candidates Chekhov, Maupassant, Mansfield, Salinger 
et al.

Having judged a few competitions, it's clear that novelists are often the 
laziest short story writers. The number of chapters of novels submitted for 
such prizes is staggering and, frankly, insulting. A piece of prose extracted 
from a longer piece of fiction rarely qualifies as a short story – gorgeously 
stylistic and dramatic though those passages may be. Arguments about the form 
being devalued by the industry, and even by society, are valid. There is a 
vicious circle: publishers blaming bookshops for not stocking collections, 
bookshops blaming readers for not buying collections, writers lamenting the 
fact that they can't get collections published, at least not without signing up 
for a novel first. Thankfully, there are still authors who debut with short 
story collections – Clare Wigfall and Lucy Wood among them.

But writers, too, must do their bit. They must take the form seriously, which 
is not to say don't be playful, don't innovate, as Toby Litt and John McGregor 
are and do. Writers cannot simply have a go, imagining it's easier to produce a 
story than a novel because fewer words are required. Have a go by all means, be 
intrepid, but be equipped. Poets have featured regularly on theBBC National 
Short Story award <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0079gw3> shortlists, going 
toe-to-toe with fiction writers and often besting them, which is telling. The 
short story is as much the verbose cousin of the poem as it is the reticent 
cousin of the novel. It would be a sad thing to corral writers in separate 
literary pens, and not consider them versatile. But crossing over is not always 
easy. I quickly bailed from the world of poetry, sensibly. We should admit that 
there are few experts, that few collections are uniform in quality, and that 
just as poetry has its laureate, so too short stories should have laureates.

There is a myth that the short story in the UK is ailing compared with in the 
US. There is, of course,the New Yorker <http://www.newyorker.com/books>, which 
pays handsomely for short stories, has right-of-first-refusal arrangements with 
preferred authors such as George Saunders, and is often regarded as the 
pinnacle of publishing for the form. America has made a grand tradition of the 
discipline – it's part of national literary culture, read, taught, studied and 
written by students. The US reveres the short story, or perhaps it reveres 
particular exemplary practitioners within its own borders –Ernest Hemingway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway>, Raymond Carver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondcarver>, Willa Cather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/willa-cather>, and latterly Junot Díaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/junot-diaz> – and also beyond its borders, 
such asAlice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>, recipient 
of this year's Nobel prize. But Ireland also has its modern story traditions, 
as do Russia, Japan, Brazil, Germany and Iceland – and where in the world does 
not have older, oral ones?

In the UK we have two generous awards – the BBC's, and the Sunday Times EFG 
Private Bank 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/public/stefg/article1291359.ece> award. 
Publishers still publish collections with passion and commitment. The national 
broadcasting service is fighting to keep short stories on air, and commissions 
them. And a new prize has been set up, by theCharleston Small Wonder festival 
<http://www.charleston.org.uk/whats-on/festivals/small-wonder/> and the 
University of Chichester,for a Lifetime of Excellence in the form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/10/small-wonder-festival-short-story-award>
, a clear indication that those dedicating themselves to the craft should be 
honoured. My feeling is that the short story is, if not gloriously ascendant in 
Britain, then airborne and at reasonable altitude.

But it's hard to assess what place the form has in the literary diet of 
readers. Were there to be more collections on the shelves, more e-versions and 
more single stories on the radio, would they naturally displace novels? Short 
stories are often strong meat. Reading them, even listening to them, can be 
challenging, by which I do not mean hard work, simply that a certain amount of 
nerve and maturity is required. Often the experience is exquisitely unsettling; 
one might feel like a voyeur suddenly looming at the window of an intimate 
scene. At first glance normal-seeming events are taking place, but mundanity 
gives way to the peculiar, the perilous, the capricious.Short stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/short-stories> are manifestations, their own 
literary phenomena. Mostly there is no explanatory narrative ramp or roof, 
there are no stabilisers giving support over scary subject matter – sex and 
death, classically – and there are no solvent, tonic or consoling endings. The 
reader is left to decide what everything might mean, and in this way the form 
is inordinately respectful. Some might want such a reading experience 
infrequently, some every day, many never.

The health of the short story can only be gauged by the adeptness and 
imagination of contemporary writers. This year's BBC shortlist was comprised 
entirely of women. We are still in a stage of gender awareness where such 
things are significant, rather than random: only when gender is not noteworthy 
is there really equality. The chair of judges, Mariella Frostrup, pondered 
interestingly about the form being a suitable vehicle for women writers. It is 
certainly a form that has celebrated women writers, as it has elevated men, 
perhaps because in its current incarnation it's a relatively young device; 
woman have been able to "catch up" and compete in the field. One is far more 
likely to hear a male short story writer credit both male and female 
antecedents as inspirational, than hear a male novelist do so. Tessa Hadley's 
top 10 short stories list for the Guardian is even-handed, and not forcedly.

The short story is formal and versatile, though not necessarily accommodating, 
which is something of a paradox. The guidelines, if indeed there are any – 
I flinch when I encounter prescriptions for brilliance or failure – relate to 
absence, crisis and allusion, what a physician might call "referred pain". The 
greatest short stories feel almost predestined, as if they have materialised 
effortlessly. They reverberate magnificently, beyond their own limits; they 
haunt, humour, sometimes vex and occasionally enlighten. They are a bastard to 
write – cue the burning snowflake. Consequently, there aren't many, and only a 
few writers are able to produce them consistently. It's not just conservative 
publishers that vet short stories, nor pound-conscious booksellers, nor the 
appetites of readers – in the end, the form dictates its own exclusivity.

Sarah Hall this week won the BBC National Short Story award for Mrs Fox. Her 
collection The Beautiful Indifference is published by Faber. Buy it for £6.39 at
guardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571230181>
 This year's Nobel laureate in literature … Alice Munro. Photograph: Mike 
Cassese/Reuters 
Awards for women


Earlier this year saw the Costa Book award being decided between five female 
nominees – before Hilary Mantel's Bring Up the Bodies emerged triumphant. It 
has been a good year for female authors, andnext week's Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> sees four women – Ruth Ozeki, 
Jhumpa Lahiri, NoViolet Bulawayo and Eleanor Catton – take on two men, Jim 
Crace and Colm Toíbín. And now, the Nobel prize in literature has gone to Alice 
Munro, the 82-year-old short-story writer. Munro's triumph was celebrated, 
although there were pockets of dissent, chiefly centred on the idea  that she 
was not a radical choice; her writing is rooted in realism rather than the 
avant garde, and its subjects and characters are drawn from a small pool. These 
are matters of taste and of one's understanding of what literature should be, 
and they naturally come into focus when a major prize is awarded. And when it 
is awarded to a woman, it's another chance to ask a perennially vexed question: 
if women are winning all the literary prizes, then why do we need a prize 
specifically for them?

The Guardian recently published some statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/08/gender-balancing-books> relating 
to the gender of book reviewers and authors under review, and showed that 
despite buying and reading an awful lot of the books published in this country, 
women don't feature so heavily in the discussion of them. More nebulously, but 
in a sense more significantly, women's writing is still frequently marketed in 
a stereotypical manner; even when it is not packaged in something pink and 
embossed, it comes accompanied with subtle signifiers to suggest it contains 
material of interest to women (relationships, children, loss). We have not yet 
escaped the idea that "domestic" fiction is in some way limited, trivial, 
indulgent – unless it is written by Jonathan Franzen.

These limitations – and all they do is limit us as readers, whether men or 
women – are not solved by women-only prizes. The interesting question is why 
such prizes should be regarded as so threatening to the status quo. Is the 
Bailey's women's prize for fiction so monstrously powerful that its existence 
threatens the male writers who are not in contention for it? Or is it another 
way to find out about books that might otherwise escape attention? Writing is 
not a competition between the genders; publishing, on the other hand, is yet to 
throw off its biases. The time may come when we don't need to redress the 
balance, but it has not yet.Alex Clark 
 