
Released on 16 December 1977, Saturday Night Fever was the film that broke 
disco in both senses: it popularised and developed the form at the same time as 
it froze a vibrant and creative subculture. Saturday Night Fever made disco 
ubiquitous in 1978. It became a fad – with the inevitable backlash.

The statistics tell the story. The film took more than $3m in the first 
weekend, eventually going on to gross in the region of $237m; it became the 
fourth highest grossing movie of 1977. The soundtrack album included six US No 
1s and it topped the charts for 24 weeks in the US, 18 weeks in the UK.

In fact, disco had been building for several years. In his ground-breaking 
September 1973 Rolling Stone story, Vince Aletti traced its origins in the 
underground return of the discotheque, "where the hardcore dance crowd – 
blacks, Latinos, gays – was. But in the last year they've returned, not only as 
a rapidly spreading social phenomenon ... (via juice bars, after-hours clubs, 
private lofts open on weekends to members only, floating groups of party givers 
who take over the ballrooms of old hotels from midnight to dawn), but as a 
strong influence on the music people listen to and buy."

Disco began in after-hours clubs such as the Loft and the Tenth Floor. In 
these clubs, DJs mixed an aural collage of sound effects, Latin, Motown, funk, 
European music and even English obscurities by the Glitter Band and Babe Ruth. 
By 1974, disco had already made a splash in the marketplace with two 
consecutive No 1s by the Hues Corporation (Rock the Boat) and George McCrae 
(Rock Your Baby).

During 1975 and 1976, disco grew into a major force in the US, with 
chart-toppers from Van McCoy, the Bee Gees, and KC and the Sunshine Band. But 
these were followed by genre-defining hits such as Johnnie Taylor's Disco Lady 
and novelties like Disco Duck by Rick Dees and His Cast Of Idiots. As the 
expression of a minority subculture, it also featured openly gay performers 
such as Sir Monti Rock III – the voice/MC of Disco-Tex and the Sex-O-Lettes – 
and Valentino, whose I Was Born This Way was the first record by a gay artist 
to be openly promoted as such.

During that period, disco began to feature a pronounced European influence, 
with the productions of Giorgio Moroder and Boris Midney. As Vince Aletti noted 
in his Record World column for 6 November 1976: "The disco market is not a 
throwaway, second-class market; it's probably one of the most serious and 
technically sophisticated groups of record buyers and players there is."

The following year, 1977, saw the full electronic impact of Donna Summer's I 
Feel Love and Kraftwerk's Trans-Europe Express. It also saw the emergence of 
the Village People, a band put together as a cartoon, almost, of contemporary 
gay lifestyles – an index of increasing gay confidence, if not actual militancy.

Within this context, Saturday Night Fever represents a re-heterosexualising of 
dance culture. Based on the 1975 story by Nik Cohn, Tribal Rites of the New 
Saturday Night, the film follows the adventures of the definitely macho Tony 
(John Travolta). In one scene, where he sneers threateningly at two obviously 
gay men, the film's exclusive sexual politics is made clear: the antithesis of 
the original inclusivity of disco culture.

In the short term, of course, Saturday Night Fever did not kill disco. It 
contained some great records in the soundtrack, and also popularised the form 
across the globe. Indeed, 1978 saw some fantastic records by Chic (Le Freak), 
by Karen Young (Hot Shot), and by Sylvester (You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real)). 
There was a crossover between disco and rock with the Rolling Stones' Miss You 
and eventually between disco and new wave with Blondie's genre-breaking Heart 
of Glass.

But disco had become so ubiquitous, such a catch-all marketing term – 
fostering bad records by the likes of Frank Sinatra – that it had become a 
media cliche and was ripe for a backlash. This was epitomised by the Disco 
Demolition Night that was held in July 1979 at Comiskey Park stadium in 
Chicago, where a DJ presided over the destruction of thousands of disco records.

Disco didn't die. It went underground in the early 80s, re-emerging as Chicago 
house and Detroit techno. It also went straight into the white avant garde in 
the same period. During the 21st century it has made a big comeback in the form 
of cosmic disco, nu disco et al, and has also acquired the respect that it 
should have had at the time.

Disco gave new life to the perennial human desire to dance, and turned it into 
an art form where the DJ was a new kind of high priest: as Aletti wrote, 
"there's no question that a real DJ can shape a night of music with his 
personality, style and spirit, magically turning a string of records into a 
spontaneous symphony".
 