
The amount of cash you can stash away tax-free is to increase by £120 a year 
from next April following an announcement in the chancellor's autumn statement. 
But the news comes just as banks have begun cutting interest rates for existing 
cash Isa customers.

Savings rates <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings-rates> are at an 
all-time low and have plummeted swiftly since the government launched the 
Funding for Lending scheme in July. This allows banks and building societies to 
borrow from the Bank of England for up to four years in order to improve 
lending rates to households and businesses. However, because banks are no 
longer reliant on savers' deposits for their funding, the rates on new issues 
of savings accounts and Isas have been falling ever since.

"Savers are being hammered," said Sue Hannums of savingschampion.com. "New 
customer rates have dropped off a cliff, but now it seems existing customers 
are about to be targeted."

Intelligence Finance (IF) and Newcastle building society have been contacting 
savers to tell them that their rates are to be cut. IF will drop the rate on 
its 2.5% Isa to 1.8% from 9 February next year. Newcastle building society 
customers will see the rate on their cashIsas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> drop from 2.7% to 2.5% on 1 January. 
Those on the Bank of Cyprus's 2.75% rate will also see that drop to 2% from 21 
January next year, while customers with Marks and Spencer's 3% cash Isa will 
have their rate cut to 2.75% from this Tuesday.

"We think this [cutting of existing Isa rates] is likely to be the beginning 
of a trend, which unfortunately means yet more pain for savers next year," says 
Hannums.

Anyone with money to put aside should still put it in a cash Isa, however. 
Although rates are down, cash Isa rates in the last year have been better than 
those for taxable savings accounts. From April next year, the Isa limit is 
increasing to £11,520, up from £11,280. Half – £5,760 – can be placed into a 
cash Isa.

The best rate is now 3.1% from the Coventry Building Society. This is 
variable, so could drop, and the account requires 60 days notice to access 
money. It does not accept transfers in, so those with existing Isa money cannot 
move their money across. The rate also includes a bonus of 0.6% for 12 months, 
so savers who take it out will have to reassess the deal in a year's time.

The best rate for transfers in is from M&S with its Advantage cash Isa – even 
after the rate cut to 2.75% later this week. "It's hard to believe I'm saying 
this, but that is still not a bad deal in the current climate," says Hannums.

It is hardly worth looking at a fixed-rate Isa at the moment. The best rate on 
a one-year fix is 2.75%, so savers would be better off taking a risk on one of 
the higher paying variable rates. Even on the longer-term five-year fixes, the 
best rate is 3%.

Anyone who took out, or switched to, a best-buy cash Isa in the first half of 
the year is likely to be on a better deal than the best rates currently 
available. At the beginning of the year the best-buy Isas were paying 3.5%, and 
before the Funding for Lending scheme was introduced new rates of up to 3.35% 
were still being issued.

However, those who took out a best-buy 12 months ago should check their rate 
now. Many of those deals came with a one-year bonus rate, which will now have 
expired or be about to expire. Those who took out the AA's 3.05% Isa last 
November will now be receiving just 1.70%, for example, while those who took 
out ING Direct's cash Isa at 2.96% will be getting just 1% in interest.

The Chancellor also announced an increase in the Junior Isa allowance, which 
will go up next April to £3,720 from £3,600 in the current tax year. Junior 
Isas are available to children who were born on or after 3 January 2011, or do 
not have the predecessor savings product, a child trust fund.

The best Junior Isa rate is from the Halifax at a whopping 6%, but this is 
only available where one of the parents already holds a Halifax cash Isa. 
Otherwise, Coventry and Nationwide both have Junior Isas paying 3.25%.
 