
There’s nothing like the presence of a genuine celeb in the visitors’ gallery 
to make sure everyone is on their best behaviour for prime minister’s questions.

Quite what Amal Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> was 
doing there in parliament or what she made of it all was less obvious. From 
time to time she flashed a bemused A-list smile but mostly remained A-list 
inscrutable, before dashing off suitably A-list early after 20 minutes.

The out-of-touch had come face to face but their two worlds were still a long 
way from colliding with each other. Or with the real world. Just yards away in 
the central lobby disability campaigners were protesting against benefit cuts, 
without anyone in the chamber noticing.

Amal wasn’t the only one with other things on her mind. David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was about to head off to 
the EU summit in Brussels – though not before snatching a quick selfie with 
Amal (mwah, mwah, “you were wonderful, Amal”, “who is this man?”) – where he 
was hoping to secure at least the glimmer of a concession from the French and 
the Germans. Which might also explain why the prime minister suddenly found 
himself overwhelmed with love for all things Gallic.

There’s been chaos at Calais at some point in every year for the last half 
century or so. Let’s face it, the French are a lot better at organising a 
decent strike than we Brits. Yet every time it happens politicians tend to act 
as if it is the last thing anyone could have realistically expected and use it 
to score a few cheap points on the uselessness of the French.

Except for Cameron on this one day in June – instead, he went out of his way 
to say how wonderful the French were at absolutely everything and how blaming 
the French for deliberately creating a backlog of lorries to make it easier for 
illegal immigrants to smuggle their way across the Channel was completely 
unthinkable. Or rather, unsayable. His EU negotiations must be going even worse 
than he has let on.

If only other parts of the PM’s answers had remained unsaid, this could have 
been one of his finest hours at the dispatch box. But Dave just can’t help 
letting himself down, either with the failure of his internal logic – employers 
have been gagging to get rid of tax credits so they can increase salaries – or 
by being a sucker for a bad gag.

“You don’t want FFA, full fiscal autonomy,” he sniggered at the SNP’s Angus 
Robertson, “You want FFS, full fiscal shambles.” FFS! Dave had got FFS into 
Hansard. High fives and lols all round in Downing Street. Coming next week, 
WTF. Working Tax Fraud.

Then came a near miracle. Perhaps he was ashamed of the FFS. Perhaps he was 
bewitched by the inscrutable A-list Clooney eyes. Perhaps visions of Angela 
Merkel and François Hollande passed across his mind.

Only Dave knows which, but he inexplicably not only answered a question 
directly but reversed government policy. On Monday,Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> had told the Commons 
he had no intention of complying with the information commissioner’s request 
for figures on numbers of people who have died while waiting for benefits.

Now, in answer to exactly the same question from Labour’s Marie Rimmer, Dave 
said. “Yes, of course. The government couldn’t think of anything it would like 
to do more.”

IDS wasn’t in the chamber to witness his humiliation, so there was a brief 
moment of silence as the Commons waited for the sound of a pistol shot coming 
from the work and pensions department. None came. But it’s surely only a matter 
of time.

Dave had loved the French and now he had loved the less fortunate and the 
disabled. So much so that he had to barge past their wheelchairs to get to his 
date with Amal. Their three different worlds had finally collided.
 