
 Heavy metal sound waves 
 Some materials are too hard to handle: they corrode their crucibles. So 
researchers are trying acoustic levitation. Sonic pressure waves have been used 
to float substances on thin air, according to a team at Northwestern 
Polytechnic University in Xian, China, reporting in Physical Review letters. 
The metal has to be half the wavelength of the sound supporting it, which is 
why, so far, only gram-sized chunks of iridium and mercury have ridden on a 
sonic cushion. "It's remarkable that they levitated mercury," commented Richard 
Weber of Containerless Research, based in Evanston, Illinois. "With the sound 
pressure required to do that, you'd expect to atomise it."

 Elk at home on the range 
 US scientists have used a computer model to predict that big animals will 
need a lot of room, while small ones can survive with a tinier patch of turf. 
More solemnly, it predicts why the moose needs wilderness, while mice can live 
alongside men. "What we found is that an organism's body size is a key 
determinant of how often it can be expected to encounter food in its 
environment," John Haskell of Utah State University and colleagues explained to 
the Ecological Society of America on Monday. "We thought: Wow! The model gives 
us the reason that large animals, especially carnivores, are so vulnerable to 
habitat changes."

 Swiss cheese sees off acne 
 It was really serendipity, Susan Barefoot of Clemson University, said. "We 
were looking for a bacteriocin from a close relative of the Swiss cheese 
bacteria. We found one, but it did not work as a new food preservative. We 
wondered if the bacteriocin would be effective against acne bacteria which are 
more distant relatives to the Swiss cheese bacteria." She got in touch with 
ImmuCell, a company in Portland, Maine and consulted dermatologists. "The acne 
bacteria were controlled in every single test," Dr Barefoot said. "Every 
strain, every culture, two different testing methods - all had the same 
results."
 