
I had prepared myself to experience some discomfort before I read "Settlers 
and Colonists", the essay by Alasdair Gray that appears to have loosened the 
corsetry of Scotland's delicate arts and media establishment. Gray's work is 
included in an anthology published by Word Power Books nine days ago entitled
Unstated: Writers on Scottish Independence 
<http://nationalcollective.com/2012/12/08/interview-scott-hames-author-of-unstated-writers-on-scottish-independence/>
. Such has been the apoplexy it has engendered among the nation's cultural 
Sanhedrin I imagined he must have called for some sort of anti-English 
Kristallnacht, or worse: demanded the lowering of the Union flag on all 
Scottish government buildings, save on David Beckham's birthday.

Here I must declare that Alasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray> and I have a bit of form 
between us. The shadow of his majestic 1981 novelLanark: A Life in Four Books 
hung over my utterly feckless university career and probably helped put it out 
of its misery. What was I doing drinking and empathising with other 
duffel-coated dilettantes when I ought to have been saving Glasgow from the 
tide of greed, corruption and lust that Gray had prophesied inLanark? No other 
book has unnerved me as much as this one nor conveyed such a powerful sense of 
time and place. It haunts me still and, despite several re-readings, I expect I 
will go to my grave never having unravelled all the threads of its dark magic.

The settlers and colonists referred to in the title of Gray's essay are some 
English senior administrators who have flourished in Scottish public life, 
principally in the arts, and whom he holds responsible for a failure to "help 
creativity shine at home and abroad", an epithet contained in the lofty mission 
statement ofCreative Scotland <http://www.creativescotland.com/>. Gray 
constructs a thesis that draws important distinctions between "colonists" and 
"settlers". Colonists are characterised by their refusal to engage fully with 
Scotland, accompanied by a demonstrable aversion to promoting indigenous 
Scottish art; settlers by their long-term commitment to Scotland and an 
eagerness to stimulate growth among Scottish artists.

For venturing such an opinion, Gray has been branded a "disgrace" and stands 
accused of being "anti-English" and fomenting racism. Yet how can he be branded 
"anti-English" for declaring his desire to see more of them, not less? "English 
settlers," he states, "are as much a part ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> as Asian restaurateurs and 
shopkeepers or the Italians who brought us fish and chips."

Anti-Englishness in Scotland depresses me. Whenever it occurs, I feel that our 
country is diminished by it and is made to look as though it is insecure and 
too eager to blame others for our misfortunes. I love English culture and 
English sport and, virtually without exception, I have found the English people 
I have encountered to be generous, humorous and affectionate, qualities I rate 
higher than most others. They do not take life too seriously. If Scotland is to 
become independent, it is my sincere wish that many more will choose to live 
and work here. Often, they save us from ourselves. Gray's essay is not in the 
slightest anti-English; to detect even a hint of it you would require the 
services of the Jodrell Bank telescope.

Indeed, there is very little in it that could even be construed as criticism 
of English "colonists" in the arts, the sector of which Gray has most 
experience. Instead, he reserves most of his disgust for those Scottish local 
politicians and municipal chief executives who have deemed no Scots to be 
capable of administering our most significant arts institutions. If WB Yeats 
and Lady Gregory had displayed such a high-handed dismissal of native talent 
when they established Dublin's Abbey theatre in 1904, argues Gray, it is 
doubtful if Irish art and culture would be anywhere near as vibrant as it is 
today.

Perhaps the fiercest criticism of Gray has arisen from his decision to cite 
Vicky Featherstone, the outgoing director of the National Theatre of Scotland, 
as a salient example of an English "colonist". Featherstone has been a splendid 
chief of this body during her six-year tenure, in which she has been 
responsible for staging work that has resonated globally. Yet her post makes 
her a high-profile figure and she is simply being naive if, as she revealed in 
an interview last week, she felt "embattled and defensive" at previously aired
criticism 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/news/vicky-featherstone-speaks-out-against-scottish-bullies-and-merry-zombie-christmas-8427541.html>
 of her perceived lack of enthusiasm for Scottish work. She is an admirable and 
gifted woman who will get over it.

Gray is not suggesting that all of Scotland's top administrative posts must be 
filled by Scots. Indeed, a senior appointee who has not emerged from the turbid 
waters of Scotland's cultural expanse will thus arrive bearing no malice nor be 
compromised by tribal loyalties. He is simply asking why so few Scots have 
occupied the plum positions and expressing a preference for English candidates 
who want to stay for the long haul.

When I first read Settlers and Colonists I felt a growing sense of shame, but 
not because it in any way defiled Scotland. Instead, I was reminded yet again 
how little I know of my country's artistic and cultural heritage. The most 
important ballot in which any of us will ever participate is only two years 
away. We won't be able to change its outcome back and forth every five years. 
As such, it demands of me that I increase my knowledge and understanding of 
what Scotland is, what it might become and my place in it. And it summons me to 
engage in the difficult and emotional issues that, of necessity, must be 
addressed.

Alasdair Gray's essay elegantly and succinctly introduced a crucial question 
that Scotland must debate: how important to the health and wellbeing of the 
nation is it to provide the means and the opportunity to express ourselves 
artistically and culturally?

Among those who railed against Gray last week were people I know and admire 
and I am assuming each of them read his essay in its entirety. So I would 
simply ask that they reread it with a little more care and due diligence. And I 
would entreat them this time to leave their agendas to the side.
 