
All the way through Scream 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/17/scream-4-wes-craven-scre4m>, I 
was itching for a freeze-frame of Hayden Panettiere's hairdo, so that I could 
give it an in-depth examination. What the hell was it? Some kind of 
demi-pompadour with the curlicues glued flat? I suspect that if you were to 
poke at it, it would be rock-solid, like a Ken doll coiffure. I think it's 
great they gave her short hair. But did it have to be so weird?

Then again, short hair invariably seems weird in a Hollywood where flowing 
locks are the norm. Even Demi Moore, who rocked the pixie cut in Ghost, now 
sports a poker-straight curtain. Hilary Swank goes long between androgyny trims 
for Boys Don't Cry or Amelia. Who is known for their short hair nowadays? Halle 
Berry? Shannyn Sossamon? We're edging into C-list territory here. When Emma 
Watson andCarey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan> 
chopped theirs off, it was considered news; archive photos of Jean Seberg and 
Twiggy were duly trotted out for comparison, as if to underline the novelty 
value.

For the record, I love long hair. If mine weren't so baby-fine, I would 
definitely grow it so I could have a big plait, like the damsels in a King 
Arthur book I had as a girl. But, being saddled with the wrong sort of 
piliferous gene, I'm always on the lookout for short crops similar to mine on 
screen. They are, of course, rare, because long, lustrous tresses are one of 
the major signifiers of femininity. One of the first things a girl does when 
disguising her gender is cut her hair, likeKatharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katharinehepburn> in Sylvia Scarlett (one of 
the loveliest crops in movies) or Barbra Streisand ("Forgive me, Papa!") in 
Yentl.

Short hair on female characters is rarely permitted to exist in its own right. 
It's a statement, a sign of playing men at their own game: forKeira Knightley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley>, when she swaps modelling for 
bounty hunting in Domino; for Moore, with her military buzz-cut in GI Jane. 
Getting chopped is seldom something female characters do of their own volition. 
It deprives them of a formidable weapon, and, instead of giving them masculine 
strength, only emphasises their helplessness. Even in Rosemary's Baby, when Mia 
Farrow announces, "I've been to Vidal Sassoon" (her husband's sarky reply: 
"Don't tell me you paid for that"), she's unwittingly adding the finishing 
touch to her own martyrdom.

For the close crop is a station of the coiffe en route to immolation. Maria 
Falconetti looks suitably gamine at the start of The Passion of Joan of Arc, 
but it's still not sufficiently martyrish for her inquisitors, who insist on 
further shearing. Seventy years and many Joans later, Milla Jovovich's 
experience of modelling for L'Oréal stands her in good stead in The Messenger, 
when she takes a sword to her braid yet miraculously ends up with the chicest 
of medieval pudding-bowls, with highlights.

When women have their hair cropped on screen, it's usually because they're 
under some sort of compulsion or duress. The short haircut is humiliating 
punishment, meted out to inmate Eleanor Parker in Caged, or to Monica Bellucci, 
condemned for being the village slut, in Malèna. On other occasions, it's a 
religious gesture: Audrey Hepburn has hers ritually snipped away in The Nun's 
Story (though, like the other Hepburn, she always did look cuter with short 
hair), while Julie Andrews's sensible ex-convent pageboy renders The Sound of 
Music sexless.

It's a small step from boyish crop to baldness, which may in real life signify 
Britney-style breakdown, but in the movies more often means alien (Star Trek: 
The Motion Picture), monster (Splice) or homicidal maniac (Blue Sunshine). It's 
seen as martyrdom to their art when female actors go the whole hairless hog, 
like Meryl Streep in Sophie's Choice, Samantha Morton in Minority Report or 
Natalie Portman in V for Vendetta.

But the consensus is that long hair is prettier, and prettiness is a 
prerequisite for female actors and the characters they play in all but a 
handful of movies. So however weird Panettiere's haircut, the fact that she's 
neither a nun, nor a prisoner, nor pretending to be a man, almost makes Scream 
4 worthwhile all on its own.
 