
Well, it had to happen eventually, Best Beloveds – here I am surrounded by 
washed and ironed clothing and accompanying wreaths of condensation. I am 
listening to the silvery banjo stylings of Mr Steve Martin, as relayed to me by 
my personal (heavy on the bass) CD player and reclining on my 
purchased-along-with-the-flat-because-it-is-huge-and-therefore-irremoveable 
sofa in what I am reliably informed is still my very own address with none of 
my furniture subject to governmental compulsory purchase in order to fund 
another bank bailout or repairs to the Conservative party offices. In short, I 
am home.

My novel and I did, in fact, run from room to room calling, "Honey, I'm home!" 
until we realised that at least one of us was an inanimate – and, as yet, 
unpolished – object and then got all bashful and had to have a cup of tea.

Being back home is, naturally, lovely: I had left brand new socks waiting here 
to delight me and I can lie in forever without anyone at any time yelling "Room 
service!" while barging through the bedroom door to disturb my perhaps intimate 
reverie. It is also, of course, depressing: if I'm stuck here for more than 
four days I'm going to get bored, or have to redecorate and why is no one 
barging through in the morning yelling, "Room service!" and cleaning up after 
me? Although oddly, the flat isn't that dusty, given that I have been away for 
three months. For reasons I cannot fathom there have only been massive 
accumulations of dust inside my fridge. This is a mystery I'm sure only Penn 
and Teller could explain with any kind of clarity.

Since we last spoke I have bobbed back over a strangely kind Atlantic and – 
finally – stood on the port side and watched completely healthy and alive 
gannets flinging themselves about in search of fish. (Long-term readers will 
remember thatI was scarred, perhaps forever, by a dreadful succession of 
gannet-carrying, gannet-death and gannet-burial-at-sea mishaps 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/may/29/al-kennedy-literary-festivals>
 which mightily amused the lovely town of Ullapool but which will mean I am 
never again able to look a gannet in its mad-blue eyes without flinching and, 
at the very least, offering up a herring as a belated apology.)

Meanwhile, the first requests for Book of the Year nominations are coming in 
from assorted newspapers, I am wearing a coat indoors and it must therefore be 
nearlyChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. I am not 
a great fan of the festive period – I hate the colour scheme, I hate the waste, 
I hate the mass-media implication that anyone not gathered round a glistening 
and bonhomous board with 70 of their dearest and loveliest is somehow an 
irredeemable failure, I don't want to send cards to people with whom I would 
otherwise never communicate, I don't think recycling the cards afterwards is 
really the point – why not simply not send them in the first place? – I hate 
the Celebrity Special Xmas Editions of Are You Smarter Than a Pebble? and even 
if I were a hyper-devout Christian (or perhaps especially if I were) I would be 
aware that 25 December was a fairly random date selected for a variety of 
politico-religious reasons and means we are all celebrating something deeply 
pagan, as well as our ability to shove the calorific equivalent of a fried 
rhino into our heads at every meal. One mince pie and a good sing-song and I'm 
more than done with the whole thing.

Not that I am in any way against outbreaks of peace on earth and goodwill to 
all men. I am very much in favour of both the above actually getting together 
over the Christmas period, so that we can all play the equivalent of football 
in no man's land, rather than be locked into a permanent recreation of its 
court-martial-threatening aftermath.

Meanwhile, Christmas 2010 is the Big Deadline for my novel and me. We could – 
if we absolutely must – cleave to each other until the first week of January. 
(It's a question of whether my holiday is ruined by one last rewrite or my 
editor's holiday is ruined by having to read me …) But basically when the 
mistletoe's over the Tardis things really have to be in good order with the 
magnum opus. I completed the second draft in my cabin as I came across to 
Southampton and may always associate this book with missed opportunities to 
attend scarf-tying workshops (bring your own scarf) or sit at a dinner table in 
evening dress while wanting to hang myself with my napkin. (The napkin-folding 
session may have included a special how to tie a genuine Pierrepoint hangman's 
knot section. I don't know. I missed that, too. I was busy typing.)

Picture me, Dear Readers, locked in my little cabin and scratching at the 
printout of Draft One with a violent red pen. You are all aware that pages 
which may look passable, or even charming onscreen turn into vile, vile, 
nauseating, heavingly awful sewers of rancid excrement as soon as they are 
printed off and their traumatised author can see them properly. (Which does 
lead me to wonder what nonsense we scribblers could get away with if books all 
simply made journeys from the author's screen to the readers' and never hit the 
paper pulp.) Many's the hour I have wept and snarled through, trying to get the 
soggy to become snappy, the maundering sprightly, the utterly incomprehensible 
something communicative and suave, or simply not illegally bad. And then, of 
course, there are the rude bits – which have to be sexy, rather than silly, or 
crude, or impossible, or incorrectly funny, or incorrectly disturbing – or, 
ohgawdhelpus … The jury is still out, Best Beloveds, but I am moving on to 
Draft Three in the coming week. Once again the pages will be printed off and – 
given that we are now much closer – if you go outside and listen very carefully 
at sunset with your children (or borrowed children if you have none of your 
own) you will be able to turn to them and say, with due solemnity, "There now, 
little ones, that moaning and whimpering is the sort of noise you would make if 
you decided to be a novelist." Onwards.
 