
A second inquest into the death of the youngest person to die in custody 
begins today after a high court battle.Adam Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-rickwood> was just 14 when he died in 
August 2004. He was found hanging in his cell in Hassockfield Secure Training 
Centre (STC), County Durham, hours after he was restrained by staff.

The first inquest heard evidence that Rickwood had been identified as a 
vulnerable child with a history of self-harm and suicide attempts. On the day 
of his death he had been forcibly restrained by four staff for refusing to go 
to his cell when ordered to do so. A painful restraint technique called "nose 
distraction" – which has been variously described as a squeezing, tweaking, 
flicking or karate-like chop to the nose – was used against him. Hours later he 
was found hanging. Hassockfield is a privately run institution, operated by 
Serco.

At the first hearing, in 2007, the coroner refused to allow the jury to 
consider whether the use of force was lawful. The jury returned a verdict 
saying that he intended to take his own life.

Backed by the pressure group Inquest, Adam's mother, Carol Pounder, sought a 
judicial review of the proceedings and in January 2009, Mr Justice Baker found 
that the coroner acted unlawfully, and that the physical interference with Adam 
was a breach of STC rules and an assault on him. He quashed the verdict and 
ordered a new inquest.

Adam's death attracted parliamentary and public concern and led to calls for a 
radical overhaul of the use of force on children in custody.

Before his death Adam, from Burnley, wrote two letters to his family and a 
detailed statement complaining of his treatment at Hassockfield. It was his 
first experience of custody.

The inquest is expected to examine, among other issues, the circumstances in 
which restraint can be used against children and the type of restraint that can 
be used.

Carol Pounder, who will give evidence today, said her aim was to find out the 
full truth about what happened to her son and for those with responsibility to 
be held to account. "Nothing will bring Adam back, but I want to spare other 
families the pain we have suffered," she said.

The fresh inquest will hear evidence from the officers who restrained Adam, 
and Ellie Roy, the former chief executive of the Youth Justice Board, which 
oversees the rules relating to children in custody. The hearing, at Easington, 
County Durham, is expected to last three weeks.
 