
 Dr Milind Jani: Acne <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> can be a mild 
condition - the cause of a few spots on the chin or face which come and go, or 
it can be extensive and persistent. Severe acne vulgaris causes boils, cysts or 
comedones and subsequent scarring of the face. The spots in acne are a result 
of blocked sebaceous glands in the skin, which are aggravated by high levels of 
testosterone. Interestingly, some women get acne before and during their 
periods and people under stress can develop acne. In order to control acne 
effectively, I prescribe courses of antibiotics, which kill germs, have an 
anti-inflammatory action and reduce the keratin plug in the ducts, but 
prolonged use can cause side effects. Cleaning the skin daily with iodine or 
hydrogen peroxide also helps. Retinoids, derivatives of Vitamin A, are 
effective in severe acne, but have to be monitored by dermatologists. I have 
also found the newer local retinoid creams adapalene and isotretinoin quite 
effective in severe cases.

 Asmita Jani: Acne Vulgaris is called Yuvan Pidika in Ayurveda and is a result 
of pitta imbalance (fire element) with blockage of channels with ama or toxins 
which causes spots and boils. Large cysts and comedones are formed when there 
is a combined kapha (water and earth) and pitta imbalance. It is common in 
fiery red and oily skin (pitta skin). According to Ayurveda, chronic 
constipation, unwholesome fried and sour foods, high acidity and an angry 
disposition causes acne. My first line of treatment is regular bowel cleansing 
with trifala herbal tablets or dasmool enema. I advise an easily digestible 
diet of rice, lentils and soups along with steamed green vegetables. Acne 
patients are advised to avoid sour, oily and junk food and tomatoes. 
Detoxification of the liver and blood with bhumi amla and curcumin is 
essential. Cleansing the skin regularly with lemon and tumeric paste and 
applying kum kumadi oil or rose oil is also very beneficial.
 