
Last year, aid worker Brendan McDonald highlighted how humanitarian agencies 
arefailing their staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>
 on mental health. The subsequent discussion seemed to suggest though that most 
of the stress factors affecting humanitarians’ mental health are external. But 
after close to two decades of working as an aid worker, I’d beg to differ.


Secret aid worker: your stories of mental health, PTSD and burnout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/secret-aid-worker-mental-health-ptsd-and-burnout>
Like many of my colleagues, I started my job at a large organisation in the 
sector at a very young age motivated by humanitarian ideals – namely the 
overwhelming desire to help other human beings. My job has taken me to many 
countries and as you’d expect, I have found myself in a handful of dangerous 
situations where I looked death in the eye. None of these incidents deterred me 
continuing my work though. Instead each one convinced me that this is part and 
parcel of the work, and reminded me that the insecurity we face ourselves 
sometimes is often a fraction of what civilians in conflict situations find 
themselves in every night and day.

Many years down the line I stand by this: the increasing security threats that 
we as humanitarian workers face would never lead me to quit my job. But the 
management at my organisation just might.


Despite having worked in this industry for so long I feel little has changed. 
Decisions about assignments are still very much based on who you know; how well 
you kiss up to someone and how well you “market” yourself. Some of you may say 
– this is the work environment in many other places, why would it be different 
in the humanitarian world?


In one way, the sceptics are right. However, given the altruistic purposes of 
humanitarian work, the grossly insufficient resources available, and the 
urgency of many situations we intervene in, surely particular effort should be 
made to reduce inefficiencies, bad practices and favouritism?

Part of this – though not all – is also fuelled by the fact that the 
humanitarian world is still incredibly sexist and macho. I have often been 
witness and directly experienced how women are cast in a negative light for 
displaying the same traits as men in the business. You know the ones – if a man 
is “bossy” he’s a leader, if a woman is “bossy”, she’s just bossy (and probably 
also a micromanager).

Secret aid worker: As a woman, I'm seen as a piece of meat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/29/secret-aid-worker-as-a-woman-im-seen-as-a-piece-of-meat>
At the height of my cynicism about sexism in the workplace, I often made it a 
secret hobby to observe the power dynamics in a meeting. It wasn’t just how men 
behaved towards women in management positions that baffled me, but how some 
women took other women less seriously too. Some of the more senior women 
participate, either consciously or unconsciously, in perpetuating the status 
quo and in coming down harshly on other female colleagues that are still making 
their way in the organisation and hoping to climb up the ladder. It is as if a 
woman has to pass suffer and then survive the same discriminatory practices to 
prove that she is worthy to remain and to move ahead.

However, it is only recently that I’ve realised how much all of this has 
affected me, more than I ever expected it to. And I did not like the results: 
I’ve become demotivated and disillusioned. I’ve lost interest in helping people 
that I have been dedicating my life to. I often lock myself in my room fighting 
my tears that want to spring out unannounced at any moment. I struggle with 
waking up in the mornings. I feel tired just thinking of the fact that I have 
to walk into my office and interact with supervisors and colleagues.

It is ironic. On a number of occasions, when I had been struck by how bitter 
and cynical some of my colleagues had become, I’d made a mental note to myself 
that I would never become like that. Now I know never to say never, and to 
realise that many of these people did not want to become like that either, but 
were forced to by the circumstances.

You know what is the worst thing about this situation? That you feel trapped. 
Though we pay lip service to safeguarding the mental health of our staff, in 
reality admitting that you needed time off, because of burnout or depression 
because of your relationship with your superiors or because you feel 
mistreated, often works against you. No one will say that to your face, but we 
all know this to be the case.


Secret aid worker: Is there life beyond the field?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/27/secret-aid-worker-is-there-life-beyond-the-field>
I am now contemplating the serious possibility of leaving this field 
altogether. I will go without making a fuss and without pounding any tables 
mainly for three reasons. First, these are structural problems that will 
require a great deal of genuine commitment and time to be resolved. I am not 
sure that my situation allows me to wait for either to materialise or that I 
have much faith they will. The second reasons, is that I am too tired to even 
make that point. And the third is that in the grand scheme of things these 
issues do not matter (the last point I say without any bitterness as no one is 
indispensable).

Richard Branson, is quoted as saying that organisations and bosses should 
“train people well enough so they can leave; (and) treat them well enough so 
they don’t want to”. I deeply thank my organisation for the former, but wish it 
had done better on the latter. I hope for the sake of other colleagues that it 
will in the future. 


Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 