
There is a lot written out there about the internal conflicts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
 that aid workers face – what it’s like to be constantly exposed to poverty, 
violence and injustice; how to balance professional and personal aspirations; 
and how to cope with the stress of being away from home so often. It can cause 
quite the existential crisis.


For me, though, what I have come to ask myself, especially in the often 
difficult first month of being deployed somewhere new, is: do I actually like 
being an aid worker?


Secret aid worker: can only the childless and unattached manage the work we do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/26/secret-aid-worker-can-only-the-childless-and-unattached-manage-the-workwe-do>
I think back to a field posting in south Asia a few years ago: cheap beer, 
delicious street food and the beautiful temples we would visit on weekends. In 
my memory it’s all very positive. However, this wasn’t always the case.


That job was meant to signal the start of a fulfilling career as an aid worker 
on a constant roster of emergency deployments. But within my first week, I had 
told every single one of my family members, friends, and a man I was dating 
that I wanted to go home. Not in nine months, but now.


There were nights where I was ready to call quits on my budding humanitarian 
career for sheer frustration at the job, social setting, and – let’s be honest 
– crushing disappointment of the whole ordeal. I wasn’t meeting others deployed 
in the country, trips out to project sites were few and far between, and I 
found myself working long hours every day, mostly on my own. This was by no 
means what I had imagined. Day one in that country was day one of an ongoing 
debate about how best to manage such an odd career choice.

To outsiders, the decision to become an aid worker and give up on a “normal” 
life might seem odd. You give them the speech that we all know so well – that 
this type of work is important, that this career is meaningful, and that you 
want to live a life that is intense and where you are constantly meeting new 
people and going to new places, all while supposedly saving the world. The 
speech is meant to convince this incredulous person that although you are 
making sacrifices to be an aid worker, it is worth it. You never wanted to 
settle down anyway.

I’ve noticed that even after multiple deployments, as soon as I arrive 
in-country I repeat such a speech to myself. Perhaps it’s because I’ve had a 
frustrating day of dodging red tape at the office, I haven’t made friends as 
quickly as I’d expected or I’m missing loved ones back home. I’ve found those 
days particularly numerous during my first month of any deployment, as I get my 
bearings. As a coping mechanism I use those same lines to convince myself that 
it’s all worth it.


Secret aid worker: the UK NGO sector is facing a funding crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/02/secret-aid-worker-projectitis-dfid-civil-society>
I should admit to myself that on some days this choice to be an aid worker 
(one I have studied a number of years and endured many unpaid internships for) 
doesn’t seem worth the sacrifice. I’ve willingly chosen to work in some of the 
most difficult contexts in the world. But what happens when the work doesn’t go 
as planned and you don’t feel you are having the impact you should?


In those dark times when I’m struggling I don’t admit there might be something 
wrong. Instead I play the game of rationalising. I tell myself that I’m 
learning new skills by working in difficult – or near impossible – operational 
contexts; and that I’m simply “focused on my career” on those days I wish I was 
out with friends. We all do it, but why? Perhaps it’s because surrendering to 
the unhappiness of those moments would lead us to questioning our entire 
lifestyle and choice of career – and that is too scary.

As aid workers, we don’t have any hesitation about spending hours complaining 
about X, Y, Z over one too many drinks. We commiserate together, we have deep 
philosophical conversations about whether or not humanitarian work is really 
having the impact on the world that we had hoped, but we never dare ask each 
other whether we are enjoying ourselves more than if we’d opted for a more 
traditional career path.


There is seemingly no space for such skepticism in this lifestyle. And I think 
that needs to change. Let’s face it, there are some really great aspects of 
being an aid worker – I have met some amazing people, seen places in the world 
I otherwise would not have, and, yes, the work is fascinating and meaningful. 
But there are the bad days. Each deployment will have its own mix of each, and 
we can quickly forget those more negative periods of time and be hard on 
ourselves when we are finding the first month of a new deployment miserable.

Secret aid worker: I regret not speaking out for my LGBT colleagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/03/secret-aid-worker-regret-not-speaking-out-lgbt-colleagues>
So, today, when I have one of those moments – alone in a new place, wishing I 
was back home – I try to cut myself a break. I’m allowed to not love this life 
all the time. It’s alright to question whether I want to be here, and whether 
I’ll still want to be an aid worker in 10 years. Despite the sales pitch for 
humanitarian work leading us to mistakenly believe that this job has to be 
worth it, it’s alright to wonder whether I even enjoy humanitarian work. That 
feeling eventually passes. The whole process would be a whole lot smoother if I 
could just admit to myself that, yes, overall I do enjoy being an aid worker. 
Just not all the time.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 