
Today I can't speak. My body is clearly running through the dictionary of 
annoying ailments and, having dealt with the labyrinthitis, we seem to have 
staggered on to laryngitis, or a derivative thereof. I am hoping we won't be 
exploring the whole of L, or that we can at least skip Lassa fever, which is 
often much more annoying than patients would like, even in cases where they can 
afford ribavirin.

You'll notice that I didn't write I have lost my voice – partly because, as 
long as I can write I don't feel that my voice is lost and partly because that 
is a phrase which always has a chilling edge for those of us who have spent 
decades trying to find, trap, tame and train whatever voice seemed available.

Being literally unhearable will frustrate me for a while, of course, but as 
I've spent a week watching grainy film of elderly care-home inmates occupying a 
space far beyond screaming I know I have nothing to complain about. While I was 
starting to write, I spent a little over 10 years working with various 
vulnerable groups in various facilities and watched the hard edge of Thatcher's 
reforms stealing a little more comfort and possibility from lives each day. 
It's impossible to forget the geriatric wards and homes where human beings sat 
and wept, pools of urine at their feet, robbed of all dignity simply for being 
old and not wealthy.

I was working for an arts charity and would be sent in to talk with elderly 
people and collect reminiscences. (Sometimes we might even be allowed to do 
things that didn't involve only the past.) I was, at the very least, a kind of 
company, something to do. In the good places with good staff, the ones that 
were managing in spite of it all, we would share the stories of who people used 
to be and this helped to reinforce their presence, their reality as 
individuals. In the bad places, the worn-down places, the holding cells for the 
inconveniently-not-yet-dead, no one listened. No one paid any attention when 
inmates would simply yell in despair, so why on earth would staff want to hear 
about former careers, children raised, trams driven through the blitz, losses, 
hopes? It would seem wrong to treat living members of one's own species with 
brutal indifference, so best to forget that they are members of one's own 
species – don't let them have a voice.

I specialised in working with people who were marginalised. After a while, it 
became clear that society's margins are far more extensive than its comfy 
centre. If you want to stay out of them, avoid falling ill, having a 
disability, having an accident, having an abusive partner, being young and 
poor, old and poor, or unlucky. Above all, avoid being unlucky.

On the margins, voices are muted or ignored. One gentleman talked using a 
machine, but would sometimes use it to tell jokes, so the machine was put away 
in a cupboard. How would you like it if someone prevented you from speaking, 
because you were thought to have used your voice too frivolously? But if you 
have cerebral palsy, it's OK to remove your best means of expression. Just as 
it's OK to remove the benefits you need to live. The people we don't hear from 
can suffer without troubling us – we'll never be disturbed by the details of 
their pain. Now and then there will be a documentary that provokes comment, or 
someone will murder too many people too openly. Of course, we couldn't accept 
Dr Shipman's behaviour or anything like it. Then again, we can choose not to 
consider that when elderly residents are moved from one home to another there 
is always a saving – the move kills a predictable percentage. It's interesting 
to consider that caring for fewer people allows for savings and seems cruel, 
while making those savings in advance can mean there will be fewer people to 
care for and yet seems more civilised. I only know about this because it was 
explained to me once by a senior social worker. His voice was nicely modulated, 
reasonable, clear.

Sorry, that's perhaps a little dark when the sun is shining and Prince Philip 
is still officially recognised as a man, despite having managed to be 90.

Beyond having to croak at people, all is well with me. And I have spent my 
last meetings with the Warwick University creative writing students as 
pleasantly as usual, but with a new addition. I had already spoken to the 
students –and you 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/may/05/find-inspiration-to-write>
 – about the eye of a bird of prey and this week I enlarged on my theme. We 
were joined one morning by two Harris hawks, a gyrfalcon, a barn owl and a 
white-faced scops owl. Shakespeare wrote both about the lover's eye – which 
will gaze an eagle blind – and the poet's eye. His lovers write – they no 
sooner fall for the object of their affections than they are producing letters 
and poems and words, words, words. They look from heaven to earth and earth to 
heaven – they are hugely and as-never-before alive, expressive, observant, soft 
and sensible. They celebrate themselves and their love in their voices. If we 
are young, we will in some way come to this, if we are old it will never quite 
have left us. For me, the writer's and the raptor's eye are – like the poet's 
and the lover's eyes – intimately related and it is valuable for us to consider 
them.

I had long wanted to bring writers into the same room with the reality of that 
raptor's eye, rather than the metaphor – Here is something so deeply and 
perfectly alive that it draws the eye, that it makes the observer happy – can 
you make your words do the same? Here is a gaze about life and death, an 
utterly fixed purpose – does your work have the same purpose, the same strength 
of knowing its aim completely and completely committing to it? Here is 
something shaped by its needs, made beautiful and simple by the necessities of 
its life – is your work so beautiful, so uncluttered, is it powered by the 
heart of your needs, the things it would be life for you to say and death to 
stifle ? Here is something that will meet your eye with a force you will always 
remember, that is made to reach its aim – can you meet your reader's eye with 
the same power, will you always touch them? Here is an unshakeable focus, but 
around it there is only flexibility, fluidity, the ability to deal with the 
vast variable that is the sky – can you know the nature of your piece so well 
that you cannot lose it and yet adapt to its needs and your own? In what ways 
are you the bird?

And in what ways is your writing, your voice, the bird? Here is a relatively 
small thing, a living thing that may come to your hand and be with you, but 
will also be still wild and its own. Hold it too tight, it will struggle. Hold 
it too loosely and you may lose it. If you treat it badly, it will object, it 
may leave you. If you are calm, it may stay. If you are skilled, it may even 
work with you, let you learn about each other. It is easy to love and easy to 
be afraid of. It can change you, the way you stand. It inspires respect.

Sometimes we are the falcon and sometimes we are the falconer. And sometimes 
we need beauty to feed us up and send us out into the world, to give us the 
strength to speak. And sometimes we can help others speak, too. The students 
are almost at the end of their course now, but before they graduate they'll be 
leading workshops, beginning to learn how to pass this on. And now they can 
think of birds if that would help them – we all need our inspirations. Onwards.
 