
Ms Dhu was a 22-year-old Yamatji woman who died in custody in the South 
Hedland police station in August 2014. Arrested for unpaid fines, she was 
already suffering from pneumonia and septicaemia caused by a broken rib, 
inflicted by her partner some months earlier. She became very ill overnight and 
died.

The coronial inquest into her death heard in 2015 that police officers had 
believed that Ms Dhu was “faking”. Footage was shown at the inquest, reportedly 
revealing that police treated her roughly. Her family has asked that the CCTV 
footage of Ms Dhu’s final, agonising hours of life be released. So far, the
coroner has refused this request 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-28/family-of-ms-dhu-criticise-coroners-decision-footage/7885962>
.

For her family, the grief of seeing their girl die is outweighed by the need 
to demonstrate the injustice of how she died. An internal police investigation 
into Ms Dhu’s case found that 11 police officers failed to comply with police 
procedures but none were fired or suspended.

Family re-live pain as Ms Dhu inquest searches for answers over death in 
custody
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/05/family-re-live-pain-as-ms-dhu-inquest-searches-for-answers-over-death-in-custody>
It is time that authorities listened to the Aboriginal people most closely 
concerned, and agreed to release this footage.

Ms Dhu’s family’s demand to make her treatment in prison public echoes the 
argument of many visual theorists today: if others are forced to undergo 
suffering and pain, surely the privileged observer has a moral duty to witness, 
acknowledge and respond to what they see? But even more than this obligation to 
witness injustice, today photographic evidence has come to stand as proof.

Critic Susan Sontag famously argued that “without photographs, there is no 
war” – meaning that we need to see distant events to be convinced of their 
reality. There is no doubt that such images have tremendous power, serving as 
witness to atrocity, heartbreak and injustice. Following the second world war 
in particular, the horrors of war were effectively conveyed via photography – 
with the revelation of the treatment of Jews in concentration camps such as 
Buchenwald in April 1945 shocking the world.

However, such images are not straightforward in their effects. In Australia, 
as many Aboriginal people have argued, such imagery may disempower its 
subjects, showing them as abject, distant or less-than-human. For example, one 
of the most effective critiques of Aboriginal treatment during the 1950s was a 
film,Their Darkest Hour 
<http://search.informit.com.au/documentSummary;dn=661042902941182;res=IELIND> 
(1957), made by West Australian MP William Grayden about Ngaanyatjarra people 
in the Warburton Ranges area, on the south-eastern fringe of the Gibson Desert.

This film included graphic, shocking imagery of ill and malnourished 
Aboriginal people. It successfully mobilised public concern across Australia 
and overseas well into the 1960s, contributing to a growing international 
concern about racial discrimination.

Specifically it is credited with fuelling a wave of public support for the 
Aboriginal rights movement. This eventually led to the successful 1967 
referendum to empower the commonwealth in Aboriginal affairs. Yet, today, its 
subjects and their relatives resent the film’s shameful exposure of their lives 
and question the benefits that have ensued for them personally.

Aboriginal people now demand control over their own representation, using 
photography to assert a strong identity. They demand change on the basis of 
rights, rather than pity, with its overtones of patronage and condescension.

Australia’s bicentennial was a turning point that forced the nation to 
acknowledge Indigenous dissent, as protests and marches literally demonstrated 
their demands. Visual symbols such as the 1972 Tent Embassy, a stroke of media 
genius, could not be denied.

Ms Dhu footage: coroner reserves decision on releasing video of lead-up to 
death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/ms-dhu-footage-coroner-reserves-decision-on-releasing-video-of-lead-up-to-death>
Last week, Queensland Aboriginal man Noel Pearson tapped into this history of 
imagining Aboriginal suffering, inaccusing the ABC of “racism” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/noel-pearson-lambasts-racist-abc-at-paul-keating-biography-launch-in-sydney-20161121-gsucm5.html>
. Pearson suggested that the ABC needs:

blacks to remain alienated from mothers’ bosoms, incarcerated in legions, 
leading short lives of grief and tribulation – because if it were not so, 
against whom could they direct their soft bigotry of low expectations?

But many advances in the status of Aboriginal Australians have been prompted 
by revealing atrocious conditions and ill-treatment. Most recently, the ABC’s 
Four Corners revelation of a pattern of abuse, deprivation and punishment of 
vulnerable children within the Don Dale youth detention centre aroused intense 
public sentiment, prompting an inquiry into juvenile detention in the Northern 
Territory.

While we cannot – yet – see the CCTV footage of Ms Dhu’s treatment in custody, 
her family and supporters have tried to keep her presence alive in the city of 
Perth through clever use of light graffiti. Since 2015, they have been 
projecting night-time images of her face onto skyscrapers to assert her 
continuing memory and visibility. These storeys-high portraits of Ms Dhu and 
her family disrupt the urban landscape.

We believe that authorities must listen to her family and release the footage 
of Ms Dhu’s final hours. In revealing to all the injustice she suffered, her 
family hope that this graphic proof will arouse public opinion so that finally 
some good may come from her tragic death.

• Jane Lydon <https://theconversation.com/profiles/jane-lydon-30589> is the 
Wesfarmers chair of Australian history at the University of Western Australia 
andDonna Oxenham <https://theconversation.com/profiles/donna-oxenham-318173> is 
a research assistant at the University of Western Australia. This article was
originally published on the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/seeing-ms-dhu-how-photographs-argue-for-human-rights-69044>
.
 