
Monica Seles, a fever pounding her head as her opponent clumped down serves at 
up to 120mph, happily brought a feeling of deja vu, to say nothing of deja 
grunt, to theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>
 yesterday when she defeated Venus Williams, the No2 seed, for the first time 
in seven meetings to reach tomorrow's women's semi-final against Martina Hingis.

Between them Seles and Hingis have won this title seven times, although for 
both of them the victories in Melbourne remain the last of their grand slam 
successes. Hingis, the third seed, has appeared in the past five finals, 
winning from 1997-1999. Seles, who also won on three consecutive occasions from 
1991-1993, returned from the 1993 stabbing incident, and the psychological 
scars which threatened to end her career, to win for a fourth time by defeating 
Germany's Anke Huber in the 1996 final.

At the time it seemed that the Yugoslav-born American had completed her 
recuperation, but since 1996, and despite huge efforts in the face of injury 
and the death of her father, Seles has not won another major to add to her 
total of nine, which includes three French and two US Opens.

The groundswell of public support for the 28-year-old No8 seed is growing with 
every round, although it remains to be seen how much the 6-7, 6-2, 6-3 victory 
over Williams, herself troubled by hamstring problems, took out of her.

T S Eliot claimed that much of his best poetry was written when he was ill or 
in an out-of-body state, and Seles, hitting the lines with a consistency 
reminiscent of her glory days, played one of her finest tactical matches for 
many a long year while in the grip of a virus.

One of the keys is that she has been fit for the past eight months and has 
continued to work on her game out of a determination born of love. "I know that 
one day my professional career will be over," she said, "but I love this game 
and will always play it."

Many critics have pondered just how much the Williams sisters Venus and Serena 
care about tennis in the deepest sense, and not for the first tournament it was 
impossible to be sure here.

Serena pulled out with an ankle injury before the start and Venus has 
complained of tendinitis in her left knee throughout the event. Yesterday, when 
she called for a medical break at 4-4 in the first set, it was initially 
assumed that the problem had flared up again, but this time it was her right 
hamstring.

Between points she walked with a posture that was a cross between John Wayne 
and Donald Duck, but once the ball was in play there were no obvious problems, 
save for a tendency to struggle with her forehand. Seles, aware that an injured 
Williams can be every bit as dangerous as a fully fit one, concentrated on her 
own game and reaped the dividends.

Seles has been working hard to disguise her serve. Too often her variable ball 
toss has been a giveaway, enabling opponents to guess what was coming. But 
Williams could never be sure, and Seles dropped her serve only once, in the 
first set. "Monica deserved to win," said Williams. "Maybe she will win the 
title, and that will be an exciting story."

So it would, but first she has to overcome Hingis, who holds a 12-4 
head-to-head career advantage. Seles has won their past two encounters, but 
those followed seven successive defeats, including the 1999 Australian Open 
semi-final, one of only two matches Seles has lost in this tournament, the 
other being last year's quarter-final against Jennifer Capriati, who beat 
Hingis in the final.

Hingis had a relatively comfortable 6-2, 6-3 quarter-final win over Italy's 
unseeded Adriana Serra-Zanetti to reach the last four. Now, with the Williams 
sisters and the injured Lindsay Davenport not around to block her path, she 
must be thinking that her luck has finally changed and that she might add to 
her previous five grand slam titles.

In the all-Swedish men's quarter-final, the 16th seed Thomas Johansson 
defeated Tim Henman's fourth-round conqueror Jonas Bjorkman 6-0, 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 
and will now meet Jiri Novak (No26) of the Czech Republic in the last four.

Novak, like Johansson, is in his first grand slam semi-final, after a rapid 
straight-sets victory over Austria's Stefan Koubek.
 