
The Senate has blocked the Abbott government’s overhaul of the higher 
education system, as last-minute concessions failed to win over crossbenchers 
determined to defeat the bill.


The government wanted to remove caps on university fees, cut course subsidies 
by about 20% on average, and extend funding to sub-bachelor programs and 
private colleges in 2016.

On Tuesday evening senators voted 33 to 31 against allowing a second reading 
of the bill, thereby blocking its passage in a significant defeat for the 
government during the final parliamentary sitting week of the year.

The Family First senator Bob Day, the Liberal Democratic senator David 
Leyonhjelm <https://www.theguardian.com/world/david-leyonhjelm>, the Australian 
Motoring Enthusiast senator Ricky Muir and the independent senator John Madigan 
sided with the Coalition to allow the debate to continue to the next stage.

But they were outnumbered by Labor, the Greens, the two Palmer United party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/palmer-united-party> (PUP) 
senators, and the independent senators Jacqui Lambie and Nick Xenophon.

Despite the Senate setback, the government immediately announced it would try 
a second time to legislate the changes, setting the scene for Labor, the Greens 
and other groups to continue their campaign against “$100,000 degrees”.

The education minister, Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, said “great 
reform” took time and the government would introduce a new package into the 
lower house to incorporate the amendments it offered crossbench senators, 
including scrapping the plan to increase student loan interest rates.

“The Senate will have the Christmas holiday period to consider this new reform 
bill,” Pyne said, arguing Labor had conducted a baseless and insulting scare 
campaign.

“They will be presented with another opportunity to secure a sustainable 
higher education sector and provide more choices and opportunities for 
students.”

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, seized on the Senate 
result as “another humiliating defeat for Tony Abbott and his unfair budget”.

But Labor’s higher education spokesman, Kim Carr, said the government’s plan 
to try again with the bill showed the fight was “not over yet”.

The Greens senator Lee Rhiannon said the government wanted to avoid removing 
the savings from the budget position in the forthcoming Mid Year Economic and 
Fiscal Outlook (Myefo).

“Reintroducing the bill solves a serious problem the government had when the 
bill went down because they then had a $5bn hole in Myefo,” she said.

The National Tertiary Education Union’s national assistant secretary, Matthew 
McGowan, said: “We’re pleased that the Senate has rejected the disaster 
represented by $100,000 degrees and a cut in funding. We think Pyne should go 
back to the drawing board and not just present an amended version of his 
disastrous bill.”

In the Senate debate, the PUP Senate leader, Glenn Lazarus, said his party was 
determined to vote down the government’s “revolting proposal” to cut funding.

Lazarus said Australia needed to “invest in becoming a smart country”.

“No amount of texting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/02/christopher-pyne-embarrasing-himself-on-university-fees-glenn-lazarus-says>
, chocolates and red roses from Christopher Pyne is going to change my mind,” 
he said.

Madigan, who won several concessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/01/student-loan-interest-backdown-hostile-senators>
 from Pyne, said he did not support the bill in its current form but voted in 
favour of a second reading so the Senate could debate amendments.

Xenophon said he could not, in good conscience, support the bill. He 
contrasted Abbott’s failure to seek a mandate for the higher education overhaul 
with the Howard government’s decision to take the proposed goods and services 
tax to the 1998 election.

Universities Australia, a peak body representing universities, had called for 
senators to support deregulation of fees but suggested the government’s 
concessions were “insufficient”.

It said the $100m structural adjustment package promised by the government 
should be lifted to $500m, and the proposed 20% cut to course subsidies should 
be scaled back.

The government and the university sector had wanted a resolution on the bill 
before parliament rose for the year because prospective students were facing 
considerable uncertainty. The prime minister told party colleagues last week he 
wanted to deal with “one or two barnacles” by Christmas.

The higher education changes are not due to take effect until 2016 but the 
stalemate means people enrolling in 2015 are in the dark about their fees in 
their second year of study.

Rhiannon said the government’s decision to reintroduce the bill prolonged the 
uncertainty.

 