
Venus Williams, speaking through teeth clenched, paid tribute to her little 
sister's achievement of lifting the Australian Open for the first time and 
becoming only the fifth woman to hold all four major titles simultaneously. 
Grudgingly, the vanquished Venus admitted: 'Not many do that, it's really 
wonderful.'

That Venus was so clearly disappointed provided the best news for the women's 
game. At last it has a rivalry at the top, not two sisters whose sole delight 
is to share in each other's glory. At the French Open, Wimbledon, the US Open 
and now here in Melbourne, Serena has beaten her sister in the final and now 
reigns supreme.

The fact that she hasn't won all four in a calendar year (yet) doesn't 
diminish the 21-year-old's achievement and her name is not out of place 
alongside Maureen Connolly, Margaret Court, Martina Navratilova and Steffi Graf 
- the only other players who have held all four of the sport's biggest prizes 
at the same time.

In keeping with a hugely successful tournament, Serena had to win a match of 
high quality to take her place in tennis history. It dispelled doubts that two 
sisters could ever serve up classic contests. This wasn't about keeping it in 
the family, it was about the world's top two players going toe to toe.

Yet, despite their unrivalled physical strength and utter dominance of the 
women's game, the final revolved around weaknesses. Would it be Venus's shaky 
forehand and second serve that would crumble or would the magnitude of the 
moment undo her younger sister? It made for nervy tennis. Points were as likely 
to be settled by an error as a winner, but Serena's 7-6 (7-4) 3-6 6-4 victory 
was always compelling.

With temperatures touching 45 degrees Celsius, the Australian Open 
extreme-heat policy dictated that the retractable roof in the Rod Laver Arena 
should be closed, turning the final into an air-conditioned, indoor contest.

The sisters' day started as it might have done in any family household, with 
Venus sitting on Serena's bed as they both watched breakfast television. But 
normality had evaporated by the time they strode onto court wearing steely 
glares. It was quickly apparent that each was desperate to lift the year's 
first major title.

As a result, there was a discernible edge throughout the two hours 23 minutes 
it took for the 'Serena Slam' to be completed. When the champion lost a 
marathon ninth game to give Venus the chance to serve for the first set, Serena 
uncharacteristically flung her racket to the ground in anger.

The opportunity was squandered, but Venus showed more composure two games 
later to survive set point and, with mother Oracene barely able to watch from 
the players' box, the match nervously went into a tie-break. The technical 
flaws of the older sister, which only become apparent against her sibling, 
surfaced decisively and Serena seized the chance to move ahead.

Not since the Grand Slam Cup final of 1999 had a match between the these two 
gone to a deciding set, but Venus suddenly found reliability on first serve to 
cut off the supply line of easy returns. By contrast, Serena became inhibited 
and trying to force the issue became more error prone, losing serve to fall 4-2 
behind. Venus showed commendable nerve to capitalise. At 30-15 leading 5-3, the 
former Wimbledon and US Open champion fired a 194kph service winner followed by 
an ace to level.

She was soon a break down in the decider, though, but as the tension grew 
Serena surrendered her position of superiority as quickly as it had been won. 
Five break points were fended off as Venus, serving second, bravely held for 
4-all but it was to prove the final resistance. Two games later, her serve 
crumbled to end the contest. It was a sad and inappropriate conclusion because 
it had been the closest, longest and best match we've seen between the sisters.

As she received the trophy, Serena was overcome with emotion, but later 
reflected: 'I have spent many, many hours working for my moment in time, not 
knowing when it would come. I just wanted it so bad, but if Venus served as 
well in the first and third sets as she did in the second I would have had no 
chance. I think she did a mighty fine job.'

Venus disagreed. She said: 'I backed off my game, I wasn't nearly as 
aggressive as in the other matches.'

Even so, it was a fitting climax to the women's championship. Indeed, despite 
the fourth-round loss of the men's top seed and home favourite, Lleyton Hewitt, 
the Australian Open has provided a rousing start to the tennis year.

The epic five-hour quarter-final between Hewitt's conqueror Younes El Aynaoui 
and Andy Roddick is being heralded as one of the game's great matches. More 
than a million Australians were still glued to their television sets when the 
match ended just before one o'clock in the morning.

The experienced Moroccan and the young American have now firmly established 
themselves as the sort of characters upon whom this sport thrives. The list 
also includes the maturing Hewitt, the evergreen Andre Agassi, who played 
Rainer Schüttler in the men's final early today, the charismatic James Blake 
and the exciting Thai Paradorn Srichaphan.

Serena has the undoubted edge in the women's game, but don't forget she had to 
recover from two match points down to beat Kim Clijsters in the semi-finals and 
the intriguing prospect of the 19-year-old Belgian usurping Venus as the number 
one's biggest rival suggests a compelling future for the women's game as well.

· Iain Carter is covering the Open for BBC Radio
 