
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> will meet 
Nicole Vaidisova in the semi-finals of the Australian Open after the pair 
overcame stern challenges. The unseeded American, twice a winner at Melbourne 
Park, managed to claw her way back from the brink of defeat to overcome 
Israel's Shahar Peer 3-6, 6-2, 8-6 in a thrilling clash in the Rod Laver Arena.

Despite heading into the quarter-final match on the back of a stunning win 
over in-form Serbian Jelena Jankovic, Williams looked in trouble early on as 
Peer converted a break point to take the first set. Wrapping it up in just 41 
minutes, the Israeli 16th seed was well-placed to reach her first grand slam 
semi-final until Williams began to fire.

Reducing her rate of unforced errors the 2003 and 2005 champion signalled her 
intent with two clinical service breaks as she romped to the second set. 
However, the match was far from over as the Israeli refused to concede defeat. 
Trading early service breaks in the final set, Peer then had the chance to 
serve for the match at 6-5, but Williams somehow managed to break back when it 
mattered. Then, after holding her next service game with relative ease, 
Williams broke her opponent again to seal victory with her first match point.

Speaking afterwards the two-times Wimbledon champion said she was surprised to 
win. "I don't think I played as strongly [as against Jankovic]," she admitted. 
"I think I came out a little flat, started out a little slow. Maybe I was just 
a little nervous. I didn't have enough blood pressure in my feet. I just had to 
get going. I had to work my way in the match."

In the day's first match, played in sapping heat, Vaidisova marched through to 
the final four after seeing off a brave effort from her unseeded Czech 
compatriot Lucie Safarova 6-1, 6-4. Vaidisova, the tournament's 10th seed, 
claimed an early lead in the first set and never relinquished her hold on the 
match from then on.

After charging into the final eight following a dramatic upset over reigning 
champion Amelie Mauresmo, Safarova was unable to regain her winning touch and 
in just 30 minutes Vaidisova strode out to a one-set lead after a clinical 
performance marred by only four unforced errors.

The second set proved far tougher but the higher-ranked Czech was once again 
up to the challenge. After the players traded breaks in the first two games, 
Vaidisova was momentarily rocked at 3-4 while serving when Safarova amassed 
several break points.

But defending her serve with some clever stroke-play, Vaidisova bounced back 
moments later, breaking her opponent's next service game before holding her own 
to take the match. After making the second grand slam semi-final of her career, 
after last year's French Open, Vaidisova cited her big serve as the major 
difference between her and Safarova.

"It's definitely always a big key, my serve and return. I served pretty well 
and I'm really happy the way I returned her serve," she said. "She's tricky. 
She's a lefty. She can have those weird rotation slices. I read it well. I'm 
happy about that."

Today's womens singles results:

(10) Nicole Vaidisova (Cze) bt Lucie Safarova (Cze) 6-1, 6-4

Serena Williams (USA) bt (16) Shahar Peer (Isr) 3-6 6-2 8-6

 