
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> fired out 
a warning to those writing off her chances by blasting into the second round of 
the Australian Open today.

Williams defeated France's Camille Pin 6-1, 6-1 in just 56 minutes as she 
began her quest for a first grand slam title since winning in Melbourne two 
years ago.

"I was a little nervous going into it but after the first game I was okay," 
said the seventh seed, who was unable to defend her title last year after 
missing eight months following knee surgery. "I think that's just first-round 
nerves."

Williams' injury problems have seen her slip down the world rankings and her 
seventh place at the end of last year was her lowest since 1998.

But she warned her rivals she has not given up hope of further grand slam 
titles despite the threat posed by the new breed of players from Russia and 
Belgians Justine Henin-Hardenne and Kim Clijsters.

"I definitely wouldn't be here if I didn't think I was a leading contender, 
I'd rather stay home," said the 23-year-old.

"I always see myself as someone that's coming here for seriousness and to win 
the tournament. I don't think there's a player out there who would see their 
name against mine and go, 'Oh my God, yes!'.

"I feel, like I've always said, when I'm at my best, no-one can beat me. I 
think that's just the bottom line."

US Open champion Svetlana Kuznetsova also dropped just two games as she joined 
Williams in the second round, beating American Jessica Kirkland 6-1, 6-1.

Former champion and 24th seed Mary Pierce crashed out however, the Frenchwoman 
beaten 6-2, 6-2 by compatriot Stephanie Cohen-Aloro.

The biggest casualty so far in the women's draw was 16th seed Ai Sugiyama, the 
Japanese player losing 7-5, 6-4 to Martina Sucha of Slovakia.

Elsewhere there were wins for 15th seed Silvia Farina Elia of Italy and 
Russian duo Vera Zvonareva and Nadia Petrova.

Wimbledon champion Maria Sharapova also enjoyed an easy passage into the 
second round, beating Sesil Karatantcheva of Bulgaria 6-3, 6-1.

"I played a good solid first round match," said the 17-year-old. "You can't 
expect the best from yourself but it's good to get through.

"My game is still a work in progress. I won a grand slam last year but I know 
I can't win everything."

In the evening match in the Rod Laver Arena, Amelie Mauresmo ended the hopes 
of home favourite Samantha Stosur.

Stosur was runner-up to compatriot Alicia Molik in the Medibank International 
in Sydney on Saturday but found second seed Mauresmo a class above in Melbourne.

The 1999 finalist recorded a 6-2 6-3 victory under the floodlights and now 
faces Dinara Safina, sister of last year's men's finalist Marat Safin, in the 
second round.
 