
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> came back 
from the dead to beat Kim Clijsters 4-6 6-3 7-5 and reach the final of the 
Australian Open.

Williams saved two match points and fought back from 5-1 down in the final set 
to keep her hopes of the Serena Slam alive.

And afterwards, she conceded big sister Venus might not be as charitable as 
the Belgian in Saturday's final.

"Venus is actually playing a little better than me at this tournament, so...I 
just have to pull something out of my back pocket to be able to go on to the 
next level," said Serena.

Venus crushed another Belgian, Justine Henin-Hardenne, 6-3 6-3 to set up a 
fourth straight all-Williams grand slam final.

Having beaten Venus in the finals of the French Open, Wimbledon and the U.S. 
Open last year, the 21-year-old Serena is trying to become the fifth woman to 
hold all four grand slam singles titles at once.

Only Maureen Connolly, Margaret Court, Martina Navratilova and Steffi Graf 
have previously achieved that feat.

Connolly, Court and Graf captured all four in the same calendar year. 

"Obviously, I would like to win one more match. Granted, Venus wants to win 
this one as well (and) get her year started," said Serena, who has won five and 
lost five against Venus since their first match on tour, in the second round 
here in 1998.

"Who knows? She is probably trying to win all four as well." 

Serena paid tribute to Clijsters, who squandered two match points serving at 
5-2 in the third set. The 19-year-old imploded again when attempting to serve 
out the match for a second time at 5-4.

"I was really lucky to be able to get through this match. Kim was really 
playing unbelievable tennis," said Serena. "I just kept fighting. I've always 
been a fighter.

"I don't care if I'm down 6-0 5-0 (and) 0-40. I always think positively out 
there. It was just an unbelievable battle out there.

"I just never think I'm going to lose. I just don't want people to think I'm 
too cocky. It's always something with us Williams sisters, you know."

Whichever sister wins the final on Sunday will move ahead in grand slam titles 
after both players came into the 2003 season with four apiece.

"I'm just going to go out there and try to win two sets by any means 
necessary," said Serena.
 