
Another half a million quid disappeared from the coffers of the England and 
WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board and slid down 
the Oval drain yesterday, along with the water that, contrary to expectations, 
fell over Kennington in sufficiently large quantities to prevent any play after 
an early lunch on the fourth day of the final Test.

Thirty years ago this very day, such rain fell on this ground that it was 
reduced to a lake and only intervention by spectators invited on to help the 
mopping-up process - imagine, the crowd actually asked to get on the playing 
area - allowed England to go on to a famous Ashes victory.

By the time play was called off for the day at 20 to five yesterday, the 
outfield was no less watery. Retro may be chic, and we do like to dwell on 
success achieved long ago to an unhealthy degree, probably because there is so 
little of it about, but this was ridiculous.

Just 21 overs and three balls were possible, but this was time enough for 
Australia to finish off the England first innings 209 runs adrift on 432, a 
total which included a splendid century for Mark Ramprakash, his first in 54 
innings in this country and seven wickets, including his 400th, for Shane Warne.

There was time, too, for Glenn McGrath to get rid of Mike Atherton second time 
around (although there always seems time for that) before the light closed in 
dramatically and the rain followed shortly afterwards.

So weather and mopping up permitted, the series goes into the final day with 
England 40 for one in their second innings, the brace of left-handers Marcus 
Trescothick (20 not out) and Mark Butcher (11 not out) at the crease, requiring 
a further 169 to make Australia bat again or three sessions of resilience to 
earn a draw.

Warne is ripping his leg break square now, and survival will be an onerous 
task but, with confidence as high in the batting ranks as it has been all 
summer, one that is by no means impossible.

The departure of Mike Atherton brought with it a close to an era that began at 
Trent Bridge a dozen years ago. For a while the rumours have been there that 
this, his 150th, would be the final Test before he crosses the boundary into 
the media and although he wisely elected not to make the decision to call it a 
day official in his weekly column, it is expected to be confirmed after this 
game, and no doubt expanded upon in next week's offering.

He would have liked to go out in a manner that embraced all he has meant to 
England, standing steadfast.

Instead McGrath, in an inspired piece of bowling with the new ball, ensured a 
low key ending to a batting career that, with a second-ball duck, had begun 
likewise.

Once, Atherton gathered himself on to his toes and cuffed McGrath away to the 
point boundary. In the following over, when the bowler dropped a fraction 
short, he pulled him through midwicket and scampered four runs. In between, 
though, McGrath sent ball after ball past the outside edge, the batsman's head 
jerking round as if on a string.

There was no avoiding the one that got him: straight, moving away - not 
extravagantly, but just enough - clipping the edge and flying low to Warne at 
first slip.

Atherton walked off the field wearily, thin-lipped until he reached the 
boundary where, as the ground stood to him and the Australians gathered to 
offer their appreciation of a sterling opponent, he waved his bat in 
embarrassed fashion and was gone.

His next appearance here may well be with a microphone in hand, trying to 
wheedle a monosyllable from a reluctant player. It should make for good sport.

It was an apposite end, perhaps reminding Atherton (as if he needed it) that 
nothing is forever. No player in Test history has had to endure such mastery as 
that to which McGrath has subjected Atherton. Thirty-two times they have faced 
one another and on 19 occasions McGrath has been the winner.

Moreover, the bowler has played in every one of Atherton's last 15 Ashes 
matches since June of 1997, and has dismissed him 17 times, at least once in 
all bar one of the games and in single figures on 13 occasions. In that period 
he has reached 50 just four times and averages 20. It is a measure not of 
Atherton's fallibility (although a single hundred in those 32 Tests - and that 
a decade ago - is a blot on an otherwise distinguished career) but of McGrath's 
genius.

Ramprakash, just 18 months Atherton's junior, has picked a good time to fulfil 
the promise that he has shown but not capitalised upon since his debut 10 years 
ago.

His innings, more than six hours of it, had been coming against Australia for 
some time and was ended only when he edged McGrath to Adam Gilchrist as he 
tried to force the pace yesterday.

First Butcher plays the innings of a lifetime at Headingley and now Ramprakash 
follows suit at the Oval, both of them in the side by default. There will be a 
real clamour for places in the side now when all are fit.

Never, as WC Fields said, give a sucker an even break.
 