
Being a sixth-former today is all about being impressive. Gone are the days 
when a good work ethic and passion were enough to put you on a fast track to 
getting a job. The focus now is on Ucas points and good attendance.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are led to believe 
they’re only as good as their grades, and the emphasis on targets is taking the 
fun out of school.

We’re also told employers want us to have acquired “enrichment” and “soft 
skills”. At the beginning of the academic year, I needed to do something that 
displayed such skills to put on my personal statement. So I set up the 
Christian Union (CU) at Hove Park school, with a friend.

It hasn’t been easy. Right from the start we had to learn about the 
difficulties of admin and advertising, having to change the name from 
“Christian Union” to Alpha Group after some teachers suggested it sounded too 
exclusive, and having to reprint and re-paste posters after some were taken 
down.

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> can often feel like a 
hostile place to start and publicise student-run groups and it can be really 
difficult to set up a society while in sixth form.

Rosy Ellis, 18, helped set up a CU at Varndean College. She says it is 
actually members’ parents who have been most hostile because they see school as 
a place of learning, not a place for fun and discussion. But the biggest 
problem Ellis has had, is convincing participants to stay.

Facing hostility helped us to develop resilience and really tune in to what 
made us want to lead the club

I thought this hostility might have been attributable to the nature of the 
group, but after digging around a little more it became clear that I was wrong. 
Other students who set up societies face hostility or apathy too.


Rosie Powell, 16, a student at Priory school, Lewes, set up a choir last year. 
She says that many of her peers weren’t at all interested in what she was 
doing, and this apathy was hard to overcome.

Similarly, Grace Walford, 17, a student at Brighton Hove and Sussex sixth form 
college, battled to set up a netball group when she was at Dorothy Stringer 
school. Students told her they were “tired from work”, or had “better things to 
do”

But we all agree that setting up student groups has enabled us to develop our 
skills, and believe the difficulties we’ve encountered have been worth it.

Facing hostility and apathy has helped us to develop resilience and really 
tune in to what made us want to lead our clubs. Without perseverance, none of 
us would have been able to overcome the obstacles and lead the successful 
groups we do now.

The chance to develop leadership skills was also invaluable; we learned to 
take charge of what the group did and to deal with external issues. Similarly, 
we acquired the skill of building a community – bringing the group together as 
a team and establishing a safe space.

What happened when I started a feminist society at school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2013/jun/20/why-i-started-a-feminist-society>
As well as enabling us to develop skills that “look good” on our personal 
statements and CVs, starting a society at school helped us to refine skills we 
use every day – the ability to gauge the mood in a room, to manage projects, to 
speak in public.


James Miles, head of sixth form at Hove Park school, says students are 
unlikely to set up their own groups without teacher backing. But he emphasises 
that universities and employers value greatly the skills that starting a 
student group can help to cultivate, such as independence, initiative, and 
passion.

Schools and colleges should be doing more to encourage students to set up and 
run groups, if for no other reason than to encourage friendships across year 
groups. My own CU spans four year groups, allowing us to share our knowledge 
and revision tips.

School is a place for young people to explore and discover a sense of self, 
and student-run groups are a fantastic – and free – way of doing this.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 