
 Author:  Alexander Trocchi (1925-84) was born into a family of Italian 
immigrants in Glasgow, and, after studying English and philosophy at Glasgow 
University began his peripatetic literary career. He settled in Paris in 1952, 
where he became founding editor of modernist magazine Merlin (he published the 
first English language version of Samuel Beckett's Watt ). Trocchi also wrote 
pornography for Maurice Girodias's Olympia Press. Girodias agreed to publish
Young Adam <https://www.theguardian.com/film/young-adam> in 1954, on condition 
it contained enough sex scenes. (Trocchi removed most of them when it was 
reissued in 1966.) After developing a heroin addiction, Trocchi ended up in New 
York, where he worked as a seaman and wrote Cain's Book (1960). He became a 
fugitive in 1961 after being charged with the capital offence of supplying 
heroin to a minor, and left the US for Canada, where he met the young Leonard 
Cohen. Trocchi returned to London in time for the counter-culture upsurge, 
becoming the compere for the 1965 Poetry International at the Albert Hall. He 
famously suffered from writer's block, however, and produced little original 
writing, supporting his drug habit by dealing books and translation. He died in 
literary obscurity in 1984 following an operation for lung cancer.

 The story:  Young Adam is a study of a habitual outrager of moral norms and 
hater of the bourgeoisie, with which Trocchi forged a peculiarly Scots variant 
on the beat hipster. Bargehand Joe Taylor helps pull a corpse from the Clyde 
while he is working for married couple Les and Ella Gault. Joe starts an affair 
with Ella, while concealing from his employers that the dead girl is his last 
girlfriend, Cathie Dimly, who died accidentally during an argument. Joe and 
Ella's affair is eventually discovered, and Joe subsequently quits the barge, 
after seducing Ella's sister. Although fearful of discovery, he attends the 
trial of the man wrongly accused of Cathie's murder, and witnesses him being 
condemned to death.

 Film-makers:  David Mackenzie (b1966) is the brother of ex-Monarch of the 
Glen star Alastair Mackenzie, and cast him in his low-budget feature debut, The 
Last Great Wilderness (2002). Mackenzie bought the option on Young Adam from 
Trocchi's partner Sally Childs in 1995, and secured finance from Warner Bros. 
Lead actor Ewan McGregor was already cast, and reportedly pushed for the 
project to be produced despite doubts over its commercial potential.

 How book and film compare:  Mackenzie's script is almost painfully faithful 
to Trocchi's original, though with inevitable telescoping of events. The novel 
and film both operate with a similar flashback structure, though the film's 
functions in accordance with its own editing demands. Minor additions include 
Ella's son Jim falling overboard (an incident from Mackenzie's own childhood) 
and a final glance of recognition between Ella and Joe at the trial.

 Inspirations and influences:  Trocchi's work acted as a key influence on the 
Scottish literary renaissance in the early 1990s, through publication by Rebel 
Inc and fervent championing by Irvine Welsh. Welsh's work itself inspired a 
subsequent Scottish cinematic upsurge with Trainspotting (1996), and despite 
near-total ignorance of Trocchi's work outside Scotland before Young Adam 's 
release, the film's success has led to a new paperback edition.
 