
The last time Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, 
Malaysia's opposition leader, was sent to prison, he read the complete works of 
Shakespeare, (five times), wrote essays and treatises, gave interviews and 
strategised about how best to lead the opposition party to victory against the 
ruling party, which has governed this south-east Asian nation for nearly 60 
years.

Ten years later, he once again faces imprisonment on sodomy charges, which he 
claims are politically motivated.

His case has gripped Malaysia in its range from the absurd to the bizarre. 
Charged in 2008 with sodomising a former male aide, Anwar was cleared in 2012 
on lack of evidence. But anappeals court 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-26479642> overturned the acquittal last 
month on the eve of a byelection in Malaysia's richest state, Selangor, where 
he was tipped to become chief minister.

Not only did the conviction rely on a witness of doubtful testimony, the 
appeal was led by the government and the lead prosecutor suddenly did an 
about-face and switched to Anwar's defence team.

"It's a sign of desperation on the part of the government," said Anwar of his 
conviction, in an interview in London, where he is visiting his friend and 
former American vice-president Al Gore, after being granted a stay of sentence. 
"They think because the [next general] elections are four years away they can 
literally get away with murder."

Anwar, 66, is Malaysia's longest-suffering political opponent and greatest 
threat to the incumbent Umno government, led by the prime minister Najib Razak, 
whose Barisan Nasional (National Front) alliance has ruled the country since 
independence.

Anwar is a polarising figure in a conservative nation of 30 million, where his 
political career has spanned formidable highs and lows: once serving as the 
deputy prime minister and finance minister, he was courted by international 
media and graced the cover of Newsweek, then fell out spectacularly with the 
premier Mahathir Mohamad.

Anwar has long contended that all the charges against him were politically 
motivated, with the sodomy convictions based on an archaic colonial law 
rendering sex between men a punishable offence, even if consensual. Very few 
sodomy cases ever make it to court and Anwar and his supporters believe his 
charges to be a political ploy to keep him out of politics in a conservative 
nation built on family values. He first spent six years in prison, mostly in 
solitary confinement, until his release in 2004.

This second sodomy charge followed a stellar performance by Anwar's 
three-party opposition coalition in the 2008 general elections, at which the 
opposition made huge gains against the Barisan Nasional – and was overturned in 
2012 by Malaysia's high court.

Analysts believe there was "no coincidence" regarding the overturning of that 
acquittal last month, with human rights groups, the US state department and UN 
all questioning the legality of the court decision.

"This trial was all about knocking Anwar Ibrahim out of politics, pure and 
simple," said Phil Robertson, of Human Rights Watch. "TheMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> judiciary … has shown how hard it 
is to get a free and fair trial when political issues are at play."

Yet it is not just Anwar the government seems to be targeting, say civil 
rights groups, who point to the arrest and conviction of other prominent 
opposition MPs, such asKarpal Singh, who was convicted of sedition 
<http://www.themalaysianinsider.com/malaysia/article/karpal-found-guilty-of-sedition>
, under another ill-used colonial-era law, as a means to thwart an opposition 
that has had big gains in the last two general elections, as well as in the 
byelections last month.

"What's alarming is the extent to which this government, which is supposed to 
have won the election, is going to undermine the opposition," said Ambiga 
Sreenevasan, a lawyer and former chair of Bersih, the Coalition for Free and 
Fair Elections. "This is really without a doubt a clear-cut case of selective – 
I'm going to call it persecution – not prosecution."

Anwar's conviction could once again be overturned, pending a federal court 
hearing expected within the next month. But in a nation where the definition of 
justice depends on "what the government of the day feels like doing", said 
Ambiga, it was unclear just how far Malaysia would go to silence its opposition.

As for Anwar, who could well choose to never return to Malaysia, life in his 
home country, whether behind bars or atop rally stages, seems the only option 
for fighting for a democracy that he says will one day prevail.

"There is no benefit to going back to Malaysia," he said. "[But] I decided a 
long time ago that I wanted to go back because it is my conviction, it is my 
firm belief, that Malaysia has to mature as a vibrant democracy that has no 
corruption, abuse of power or leadership that has been squandering billions of 
dollars.

"It's tough when you consider my wife and children suffer, but they know, and 
I discussed it with them, they support me even though they are not happy for me 
to endure this again. But we have to weather the storm. I am always optimistic."

A mass rally backing Anwar is planned for 1 May in Kuala Lumpur, where other 
rallies in support of Bersih, calling for clean and fair elections, have 
attracted hundreds of thousands of Malaysians to take to the streets in recent 
years.

"Tyrants, authoritarian leaders, are not permanent features. They are racing 
against time. Over the temporary setbacks, the clamour for reform or democracy 
is irreversible," Anwar said.
 