
It is not the first time and probably not the last. This week another aid 
worker has come toThe Havens <http://www.thehavens.org.uk/>, a sexual assault 
referral centre (SARC) in London. She tells us a story that is becoming 
familiar. She works for an aid agency, she was sent to a country that is not 
particularly safe and she was raped … by a colleague.

From there on she experienced several days of anxiety, confusion and distress. 
Who can she talk to, what will her organisation do, what will happen if she 
reports it to the police, how can she carry on working with the assailant, what 
if she gets a sexually transmitted infection, what if she gets pregnant? In 
this whirlpool of concerns and questions, she was far from home and far from 
her family and friends. She came back to London, a friend found out about the 
work of SARCs, and she came to us.


Much of the confusion could be avoided if organisations acknowledge that 
sexual assault can happen, speak to their staff about it, plan for the 
unfortunate eventuality and inform their staff of the plans.

Raped by a colleague then fired: the aid worker who refused to keep quiet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/raped-by-a-colleague-then-fired-the-aid-worker-who-refused-to-keep-quiet>
Sexual assault is a complex event, with different aspects: medical, emotional, 
social and legal. Clarity, respect and patience are needed by the victim and 
from all parties involved.

Practical steps to help an aid worker who has been assaulted

From the medical point of view, the majority of sexual assaults do not lead to 
injuries. A tiny minority lead to serious injuries that should be dealt with as 
any serious injury in the field. However, some medication should be discussed 
as soon as possible after the assault. Organisations should be able to inform 
their staff where they can find reliable medical help to assess the risk and 
provide, if needed, emergency contraception,HIV post-exposure prophylaxis 
<https://www.aids.gov/hiv-aids-basics/prevention/reduce-your-risk/post-exposure-prophylaxis/>
, antibiotic prophylaxis for chlamydia and other sexually transmitted 
infections, as well as a hepatitis B vaccination or tetanus booster. If no 
medical facility is reliable or available, then staff should know how to get 
emergency medication and what to do with it.

People react to the trauma of sexual assault in different ways. In the days 
following an assault, the person can experience a vast array of emotions from 
anger to guilt, to sadness and shame, or fear and numbness. Insomnia, 
nightmares and flashbacks can occur. This is when support from friends and 
family becomes crucial and why it can be so difficult for people working abroad 
in a close-knit, transient community to get the support they need. Again, 
planning for this eventuality and finding out what resources are available in 
the country or online or by phone is in the hands of the employer.

The support of family and friends is sometimes not enough to cope with the 
assault and its aftermath. Some victims develop potentially harmful ways of 
coping such as numbing their feelings with self-harm, drinking more than usual, 
taking drugs or working or exercising excessively. While these coping 
mechanisms may work for a while, then can become problematic and require 
professional attention. This is why regular follow-ups with people who have 
been assaulted is so important. By the same token, attention must be given to 
the victim’s ability to deliver and carry on with their own work to the 
required standard.

All victims will have to choose whom they can trust to talk to about the 
assault. The organisation must establish a well-defined confidentiality 
protocol that must be respected and observed by all staff whatever their 
position. A clear referral pathway for medical assessment and psychological 
support must be agreed and in place.

On the legal side, the relevant embassy, high commission or consulate can 
advise about police procedures and can provide details of local lawyers and 
interpreters. The organisation should be able to inform their staff where to 
go, what to do and what to expect if a sexual assault is reported to the local 
police. It is important to keep in mind that in many countries, the victim must 
report the crime before leaving the country. If the victim waits to report the 
crime on return to the UK, countries may not be able to open a criminal 
investigation.

Share your stories: mental health and wellbeing in the aid industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/share-your-stories-mental-health-and-wellbeing-in-the-aid-industry>
To preserve forensic samples, clothes that might have some evidence on should 
not be washed. This is time sensitive and the earlier it is collected, the 
better. It is possible to have evidence collected in Britain in SARCs if still 
within the timeframe, which depends on substance and circumstances. The 
evidence will then be passed to the local police. Intelligence on the crime and 
the suspect will be kept by British police, and this intelligence may come 
useful if the suspect is resident in Britain and involved in other crimes in 
the past or the future.

SARCs provide onsite sexual health clinics, counselling and psychology and 
access to an independent sexual violence adviser and support workers. 
Organisations should be aware that their staff might be victim of sexual 
violence and have a proper plan of action for it.


In our experience up to now, aid workers who have experienced sexual assault 
have felt unsupported and disappointed by their organisations. The absence of 
appropriate protocols enhances these feelings of abandonment. Recognition of 
the problem of sexual assault in the field, together with the robust 
implementation of well-communicated procedures, would help to alleviate the 
sense of isolation that victims often experience.

Muriel Volpellier is lead doctor at The Havens <http://www.thehavens.org.uk/> 
and a consultant with MSF.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 