
Owais Shah, England's coach Duncan Fletcher always said, "brings something 
else to the party". So why did he stop inviting him? England may travel by 
open-top bus these days but the conductor is very choosy about whom he lets on. 
So when next month's tour party to Pakistan is announced on Monday it will be 
no surprise if, once again, there is no room for the most dominant batsman in 
county cricket today.

At almost 27, Shah is getting a little long in the tooth for a prodigy. The 
outstanding teenager who got into the England Under-19 side at 16 and made the 
A team at 17 played the last of his 15 one-day internationals in the winter of 
2002-03.

Consistency of selection also means consistency of non-selection, as Shah 
would ruefully testify, and England may once again turn to the tried and tested 
Paul Collingwood and Robert Key for back-up batsmen this winter. Ian Bell, so 
heavily invested in, will not be discarded now. If there is room for an 
uncapped batsman, Shah may even be beaten to it by hisMiddlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> team-mate Ed Joyce.

Shah's case, though, is compelling. He has scored more runs this season than 
anyone else, 1,656 at an average of 69, with seven centuries and seven other 
fifties, taking his career average to 41.84. He has been equally powerful in 
the one-day game - he had an outstanding Twenty20 tournament.

The best season of his career was last year, when he scored 1,336 first-class 
runs at 53.33. Now he has gone beyond that.

"A real turning point came two years ago when I met Mohammad Azharuddin in 
India," he says. "He changed some things about my game, just little things, 
such as getting more side-on with my stance. Since then I've been much more 
consistent. I've always scored hundreds, even big ones, but now I've got the 
consistency I always wanted."

Shah was born in Karachi, left when he was "seven or eight", returned when he 
was "11 or 12" and came to England for good when he was 15.

He first played for Middlesex in 1995, at 16, in one-day cricket and made his 
championship debut the following year. He captained the England Under-19 side 
to victory in the World Cup in South Africa in 1997-98, scoring 54 in the 
final; he was already an England A player.

Playing for the full England side, he scored an authoritative 62 against 
Pakistan at Lord's in the 2001 NatWest Series, the year he was voted young 
player of the year. But his 15 caps brought him only 283 runs and an average of 
21.76.

"I didn't play that well. But at Middlesex I had always batted at three in 
one-day games and batted all the way through. For England I went in five, often 
coming in in about the 30th over.

"It felt a totally different game. Since then I've often batted four for 
Middlesex, coming in halfway through and finishing it, so it's something that 
wouldn't bother me now. When it comes to playing for England again I feel that 
I've done everything I possibly could to put my name in the hat."

Shah has also been a reliable slip fielder this summer, a position that hides 
his troublesome left knee. "It's been niggling me for a while. But I'm having 
minor surgery to clear it up at the end of the season and should be fit again 
in a couple of weeks."

The Middlesex coach John Emburey says: "Owais is a much more mature player 
these days and off the field he is a much more rounded character.

"He is a very fine player of spin bowling. But he has a good all-round game 
and has the shots to dominate good bowlers.

"If there is no room in the Test side at the moment I'd play him in the 
one-day team. Freddie Flintoff, Kevin Pietersen and Owais would make up a very 
formidable middle order."

England, remember, are still an ordinary one-day side so this could be the 
best way for him to launch his case for Test inclusion. Fletcher, they say, was 
disappointed with him and he has a long memory. But if it is really that long 
he will also recall the brilliant youngster whose promise has now ripened 
across the cricket fields of England.
 