
England's fast bowlers provided the first real evidence of the current Ashes 
series that Australia are vulnerable as the home side struggled to complete a 
five-wickets victory in the fourth Test at the MCG.

Resuming the final day on eight without loss needing a further 99 runs for 
victory, Australia were left reeling by the pace and hostility of Steve 
Harmison and Andrew Caddick, who both claimed two wickets in an over.

From the moment Caddick struck with the first ball of the day to remove 
prolific opener Matthew Hayden, caught in the deep hooking, England had 
Australia under pressure for nearly the first time in the series.

Four years after Dean Headley claimed six for 60 to dismiss Australia for 162, 
when chasing 175 for victory, and inflicted their last home Test defeat, 
England brought back memories of that memorable triumph.

"We've had some problems in the past chasing low totals - I think you can get 
yourself into problems when you don't play your shots and play your natural 
game," admitted Australian captain Steve Waugh.

"England came at us really hard this morning and once you lose a wicket in the 
first over you start to doubt yourself a fraction in the dressing room, then 
you lose a couple more and all of a sudden it's game on - any side is 
vulnerable under pressure."

Durham fast bowler Harmison was the player who really began to worry Australia 
when he struck twice in one over.

First to go was Ricky Ponting, who had hammered 30 off 35 balls, when he 
gloved behind to wicketkeeper James Foster and three balls later Damien Martyn 
was also dismissed when he was caught behind trying to withdraw his bat.

Perhaps the turning point of the final day, though, was in Harmison's next 
over when Waugh, given a standing ovation as he walked out to bat, firstly got 
an inside edge behind which Foster failed to collect and ran to the boundary to 
get him off the mark.

Waugh then appeared to edge the next ball behind but neither Foster or the 
slips reacted and made only a belated appeal after they had seen the replay on 
the big screen.

"They appealed only because of what they saw on the screen, partly in shock 
and disbelief and also because of the rollicking they knew they were going to 
get from me at drinks that they hadn't appealed for one of the greatest batsmen 
ever to play the game," said England skipper Nasser Hussain.

"But you can't see something on the big screen and appeal on that, you can't 
play the game like that. Most of the time we appeal on gut feeling and what we 
see and what we hear, that's the way we play the game and it probably shows 
credit to our boys that they didn't hear anything so they didn't appeal."

England's disappointment turned to despair from Harmison's next ball when 
Waugh drove straight to Hussain at cover, who claimed a brilliant catch only 
for umpire Orchard to rule a no-ball for over-stepping.

Waugh was already walking off the field when he was recalled and underlined 
England's frustration by driving the next delivery down the ground for four, 
although his unconvincing innings lasted only five more overs before Caddick 
also claimed two wickets in an over.

Having demonstrated a weakness to short, fast deliveries, Caddick peppered him 
with bouncers until he surprised him with one that rose unexpectedly and Waugh 
gloved low for Mark Butcher to collect the catch at third slip.

Caddick appeared to have ruined his good work by giving new batsman Martin 
Love an easy leg-stump half-volley to clip for three off the next delivery and 
Justin Langer drove the following delivery to the boundary to take Australia to 
90.

But just two balls later Caddick struck again when he hit Langer on the pads 
as he attempted to clip through square leg and umpire Russell Tiffin continued 
his list of errors during this Test by lifting his finger despite the ball 
pitching outside leg stump.

The arrival of Adam Gilchrist at the wicket calmed Australian nerves, though, 
and he clipped Harmison through point for four in the 24th over of the innings 
to complete the triumph.
 