
I am the chair of Momentum in Bolton – hardly the “metropolitan hardcore” John 
Harris talks about (There’s a fetid cloud of acrimony over Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/15/labour-death-spite-bullying-working-class-base>
, 15 July). A Labour party friend suggested half a dozen of us might get 
together to talk about our response to the PLP’s attack on Jeremy Corbyn. To 
our surprise 40 Labour members turned up, appalled by what was happening in our 
party. We decided to set up a Momentum group. More and more Labour members are 
asking to come to the meetings. Bolton is typical of many other parts of the 
country with increasing levels of unemployment and poverty.

People who never supported Corbyn are appalled by the way the PLP has been 
trying to overturn democracy, especially at a time when the Tories were in 
disarray after Brexit. John Harris talks about the “old calculation whereby 
adversaries are best beaten by making their lives so unpleasant that they 
simply give up”. I cannot think of a better description of how the PLP has 
treatedJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. They 
have not been able to make him resign through all these machinations. They are 
now using false and ridiculous claims of antisemitism and misogynist and 
homophobic bullying in an attempt to undermine his constituency and trade union 
support. Members who have been paying subscriptions for six months have been 
prevented from voting.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party supporters of 
Jeremy Corbyn support the policies which have brought tens of thousands of new, 
especially previously disillusioned young people, into the party. Those MPs who 
have been undermining him since the summer don’t want these policies or the 
members who support them.
Cath Ryde
Bolton

• Why do I have a distinct sense of deja vu from John Harris? Could it be that 
some of us who were members of Norwood Labour party in the 1970s still have 
painful memories of being harangued by Ted Knight in full demagogue flow at 
countless meetings where solidarity was proposed with revolutionary groups all 
over the world, but concrete ideas for resolving domestic problems were in 
short supply. Knight was one of many who had joined the Labour party from the 
Socialist Labour League, and in Norwood Labour party he formed an alliance with 
Ken Livingstone. Once in control of Lambeth council, a succession of “loony 
left” councillors – a term some of them relished – ran a hard-left agenda which 
resulted in inquiries and investigations while Tories and most of the media 
looked on with undisguised delight. Financial mismanagement led in 1985 to 
Knight and other Labour councillors being surcharged and disqualified from 
political office for five years. Moderate Labour party members took their 
support elsewhere, including to the newly founded SDP, and for 18 long years 
the Tories flourished in government, while many of us despaired of ever seeing 
Labour in power again.

Now political history seems to be repeating itself. As recently as February a 
resurgent octogenarian Ted Knight addressed a “rapturous” Momentum audience in 
Brixton, moderate Labour members and supporters complain of political bullying, 
a split seems inevitable and the Conservatives could be looking at another long 
spell of uninterrupted power.
Barbara Richardson
London

• John Harris asserts that “the lion’s share” of “horrible behaviour” comes 
from Corbyn supporters. Being a Corbyn supporter, I’m on the receiving end of 
the shocking abuse from Corbyn’s detractors – words such as “cockroaches”, 
“cancer” and “thugs” are regularly used to describe us. I’m also aware that at 
the top of the Labour party, while Corbyn appeals for restraint, those opposing 
him are less scrupulous. For example, you wouldn’t see Corbyn wind up opposing 
supporters by attempting to change party rules retrospectively; or making the 
price of a democratic “say” prohibitively high; or taking away the rights of 
local democratic bodies to express themselves.

And then there are the Labour MPs who want to “de-seat” Corbyn, who referred 
to me and my family at a recent peaceful demonstration as “dogs” and “rabble”; 
anti-Corbyn MP Jess Phillips boasting in the media of telling a fellow MP to 
“fuck off” and saying rather than “backstab” Corbyn, she’d“knife [him] in the 
front” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/14/labour-mp-jess-phillips-knife-corbyn-vote-loser-general-election>
; and MP Ian Austin, who recently shouted at the elected Labour leader to“sit 
down and shut up” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/david-cameron-uk-must-never-repeat-iraq-war-mistakes>
 in parliament – encouraging contempt for Corbyn, for his supporters and for 
the political system as well as provoking potential reaction. The media must 
also take some responsibility for feeding that reaction whenever there is the 
appearance of bias. How can John Harris discuss the threats made against other 
MPs without mentioning the constant death threats which Corbyn is subjected to? 
They are horrible crimes – not ammunition.
Kate Buffery
London

• I was at the Brighton Labour party meeting John Harris describes, and I saw 
orderly queues of sincere party members conducting themselves in a polite and 
respectful manner. Yes, candidates who support Jeremy Corbyn were elected to 
office. Nothing wrong in backing the elected leader of the party! But they also 
made good speeches about how they wanted to contribute to Brighton and Hove 
district. As a grandmother who has read the Guardian for 50 years, I strongly 
object to being portrayed in your paper as some sort of spitting extremist.
Sandra Tolley
Hove

• The suspension of the Brighton, Hove and District Labour party (Smith and 
Eagle urged to agree on single challenger to take on Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/angela-eagle-or-owen-smith-mps-say-only-one-should-challenge-jeremy-corbyn>
, 16 July) is an interesting example of a wider phenomenon. In effect the 
Labour party hierarchy is “no-platforming” supporters of Jeremy Corbyn. The 
idea, now very familiar, is that anything said which offends or upsets favoured 
groups constitutes “hate speech” and is therefore illegitimate. Arguments about 
whether anything said at a meeting may have been “intimidatory” miss the point. 
The claim by Labour MPs is that support for Corbyn constitutes intimidation per 
se.
Rory O’Kelly
Beckenham, Kent

• As an ordinary Labour party member, I have followed the current situation in 
the party with utter disbelief and extreme concern. Jeremy Corbyn is the best 
socialist leader the Labour party has ever had. There is no one who is his 
equal. Yet this dignified man has been subjected to the most shameful treatment 
from the start of his election as leader. Do his distractors know anything 
about him and why he has the respect of people across the world? Do they know 
that he was given the prestigious Gandhi international peace award for his 
lifelong dedication against injustice and wrong? Do they know of his work for 
the Guildford Four and Birmingham Six? Of his campaigning against apartheid in 
South Africa? Of his support for the campaigns to free Guantànamo prisoners? Do 
they know he went to Washington to plead for the release of Shaker Aamer? That 
he is still working for the return of the British citizen Andrew Tsege, 
unlawfully abducted and imprisoned in Ethiopia? Or of his support for the 
children of Gaza? His hopes and plans for a more equal, just society have 
encouraged massive support for the Labour party, especially from young people. 
And yet we have now an outrageous situation – the farce of another leadership 
election, rigged to exclude as many members as possible who would want to vote 
for Jeremy Corbyn again.The Labour party is privileged to have Jeremy Corbyn as 
leader. I do hope he is re-elected, despite all the shabby attempts to defeat 
him. Those who should have supported him as leader may see that they have 
destroyed the party they profess to love.
Joy Hurcombe
Worthing

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 