
Rafael Nadal remarked last week that he kept falling asleep during the 
afternoon in his hotel room. It was a feeling many others experienced here 
yesterday after Saturday's night match between Lleyton Hewitt and Marcos 
Baghdatis did not finish until 4.34am, with the Australian thankfully the 
winner. But there was no trace of the sandman in the Spaniard's eyes as he 
ripped into Paul-Henri Mathieu under the Rod Laver Arena floodlights, Nadal 
reaching his second successiveAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> quarter-final when the 
Frenchman had to quit at 6-4, 3-0 down after 50 minutes. Nadal now plays Jarkko 
Nieminen of Finland, another left-hander.

Something like mild hysteria broke out in certain sections of the Melbourne 
Park tennis centre when Mathieu's injuredleft calf made it impossible for him 
to continue. Many of the staff were practically propping their eyelids up with 
matchsticks, so the prospects of a relatively early night were seized on with 
undisguised glee. Nadal seemed pretty happy too.

While just about everybody had been trying to readjust to tennis as it is 
normally played, in other words not between the hours of midnight and dawn, the 
seventh day of the Australian Open began to sharpen the focus on what will be 
the defining last few days of the tournament. On the women's side Justine Henin 
will now square up toMaria Sharapova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> tomorrow for a place in the 
semi-finals, a match of rich promise.

Neither Sharapova nor Henin displayed any semblance of weakness, the Belgian 
beating Su-Wei Hsieh of Chinese Taipei 6-2, 6-2 and Sharapova - Shazza in this 
part of the world - won an all-Russian fourth round against Elena Dementieva 
6-2, 6-0. Henin, the world No1, holds a 6-2 advantage over Sharapova, although 
had to be at her best in last year's end-of-season championships in Madrid to 
win their last meeting 5-7, 7-5, 6-3.

Sharapova, crushed unmercifully by Serena Williams in last year's final here, 
struggled for virtually the whole year with a right-shoulder problem and it was 
not until the last tournament that she began to look anything like her old 
self. Henin is on a run of 33 consecutive victories since her shock semi-final 
defeat by France's Marion Bartoli in the Wimbledon semi-finals. "The match in 
Madrid was pretty tough and physically she got me in the end but I was still 
very close," said Sharapova. "I have to take my chances, which I didn't do in 
Madrid. I hadn't played too much tennis and my body was sore and I hit the 
wall."

Henin can match any of the big hitters for power on most days, while her game 
has much more variety than most: "Now it gets serious. It was a big fight in 
Madrid, one of the best matches of last year. Maria is back to her best level. 
She's a real fighter, never gives up." It promises to be the women's highlight 
of the early part of the second week, with the winner likely to play the 
reigning champion, Serena Williams.

Williams shook everybody at this time last year when, patently unfit and out 
of condition to begin with, she battled through the field, unseeded, and 
captured her eighth grand slam title. This year, like her sister Venus, the 
reigning Wimbledon champion, she arrived in Australia fully prepared and 
match-fit from the get-go, as the Americans would have it. Her fourth-round 
match against Nicole Vaidisova threatened to be a considerable test, with the 
18-year-old Czech in previously impressive form, but it was no real test at 
all, with Williams winning ominously easily 6-3, 6-4.

Williams had much more of a struggle against Vaidisova in last year's 
semi-finals, winning 7-6, 6-4, but then that was a different Williams. That 
said, she was not unduly happy with this performance. "I didn't have a lot of 
rhythm," she said. She now plays Serbia's Jelena Jankovic, who ended the 
homespun tale of Casey Dellacqua, the conqueror of Amelie Mauresmo. Jankovic 
and Williams are level at 2-2 in their previous matches, although Serena won 
comfortably enough 6-3, 6-2 in the fourth round here last year.

The third seed Jankovic, who won the Wimbledon mixed doubles with Jamie Murray 
last year and who was one of the up-and-coming stars of women's tennis, agreed 
she would need to raise her game. "I will have to play really great tennis, be 
very accurate and serve well. She's twice as strong as me."

Williams said: "At the end of the day I never really get upset at whoever I 
play because I'm totally fine.

"As long as I'm not playing Venus in the quarters, it doesn't matter to me. 
Eventually you're going to have to play everyone else."
 