
In a final that brought a screeching halt to the run of upsets that had become 
routine at the Australian Open over the past few days,Maria Sharapova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> maintained the dominance 
she had established in earlier rounds and claimed the third grand-slam title of 
her career with a 7-5 6-3 win over Serbia's Ana Ivanovic.

Sharapova did screech, but neither that nor Ivanovic's squeaky shoes (which 
Daniela Hantuchova complained about after her semi-final defeat) had any 
bearing on a match that was won by the stronger and technically sounder player.

Ivanovic did her best and fought valiantly. She masks tigerish qualities 
behind a sweet demeanour and beautiful smile, but there was much evidence that 
her backhand needs some serious attention from Sven Groenveld, the coach who 
helped Mary Pierce win this title in 1995.

The Serb, who has relatives in Melbourne, received the bulk of the support 
from a 15,000 crowd that sweltered in over 30-degree afternoon heat, the 
hottest day of these record-breaking championships so far. It will take 
Sharapova a little while to achieve the same level of popularity, although she 
may look back on this day as the moment when she began to alter her public 
persona for the good.

On the podium after the match, Sharapova referred to the death last year of 
Jane Joyce, the mother of her long-time coach, Michael Joyce. She said how much 
she had been affected and how it had put so many things in perspective for her. 
'It made my injuries look trivial compared to what Michael was going through,' 
she said. 'It reminded us how much you need to treat life with respect and 
prioritise things outside tennis.'

Sharapova also revealed that she had received a text from Billie Jean King 
before the match pointing out that champions take their chances and that: 'We 
need to treat the pressures we face as a privilege.'

Sharapova, 20, related how King had just walked up to her family at a junior 
event at Roehampton in south-west London when she was 13 and introduced 
herself. 'I was like, "Whoa. That's pretty amazing." From that moment on, she's 
been really supportive. It's wonderful because she's done so much for the game 
and I really appreciate it.'

This, I believe, is the true woman talking, not the seemingly haughty 
superstar with the dotty father, Yuri, who brings far too much attention to 
himself in the players' enclosure. He, too, is offering a needlessly poor 
impression of himself because he has obviously done an amazing job in bringing 
up a child he took to Florida at the age of eight with no money in his pocket, 
leaving Maria's mother behind in Siberia for two years.

Yuri Sharapov is probably kept from going over the edge by his daughter, who 
is not afraid to poke fun at him. He wore a hooded camouflage jacket last week, 
which provoked much comment in the local media. 'I'm going to burn it,' 
Sharapova said, laughing. 'He doesn't know it yet but it's gone!'

In the corridors outside the locker room after the match, Sharapova was 
skipping around in glee like a five-year-old. At the press conference, she was 
asked if she had prepared her speech. For a woman some consider calculating, 
the answer may have been surprising. 'I don't even know what I'm saying,' she 
said. 'About five people just told me I said some great things. I'm like, I 
did? I was so overwhelmed about the fact that, you know, in the middle of last 
year I had so many negative thoughts and I don't think I would have believed I 
would be standing on that stage today. And I guess I should thank my mom, too. 
That education and all those essays I wrote for her, that helps as well.'

The match was won and lost in the first set. Having gone a break down, 
Ivanovic, 20, was handed a reprieve when Sharapova double faulted three times 
in the eighth game. 'I was serving with new balls and with the wind and I went 
for a little too much on her second serves.'

Ivanovic went on to lead 5-4 and, having reached 0-30 on the Russian's serve, 
had a brain storm and dumped a drop shot into the net. 'Yes, it was poor shot 
selection,' admitted Ivanovic. It was the turning point for Sharapova quickly 
rediscovered the dominance that had taken her through the entire tournament 
without losing a set and was never really in trouble again.

Asked if she wanted to emulate Justine Henin's 32-match winning run, Sharapova 
was cautious. 'Definitely - but I don't think I'm quite physically ready and 
experienced enough for that. I know I've already won three grand slams but I 
don't think my body has developed 100 per cent yet and I've got many things to 
learn. That takes time. It's not an overnight process. No matter how many tough 
times I'm going to have, as long as I wake up in the morning and can't wait to 
get that tennis racket out of my bag, I'll always be trying to improve.'

And, as a consolation, Ivanovic will find herself as number two in the world 
tomorrow. She, too, will only improve.
 