
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> won her 
first Australian Open title, and her third slam in total, not against Ana 
Ivanovic in the final, but when she defeated Justin Henin, the world No 1, in 
the quarter-finals. That display was as good as anything the US-domiciled 
Russian has ever achieved, a brilliance of serving coupled with a variety of 
shot making that few believed her capable. The Belgian simply could not cope, 
and was thoroughly outplayed. It was always going to be the big match of the 
tournament and thereafter Sharapova made short work of the two Serbians, Jelena 
Jankovic and Ivanovic.

"I've always known what tennis I'm capable of producing. I didn't just do it 
by waking up and eating ice cream all day. I've worked for all the things I 
have achieved, and I know that I'm capable of achieving more," said Sharapova, 
who for the time being will remain at No 5 in the world, while her beaten 
opponent has risen to a career high No2 behind Henin. Both are 20-years-old, 
though in terms of experience Sharapova is far advanced. Fortunately Ivanovic 
did not implode with nerves, as she had against Henin in her first slam final 
at Roland Garros last year, although she never carried the conviction of a 
winner.

She fell behind in the sixth game of the opening set, and then was fortunate 
to level when Sharapova, who had not dropped a point on her previous three 
service games, suddenly double faulted three times. The Serb, Aussie Ana as she 
has become known, held for a 5-4 lead and then had Sharapova at love-30, two 
points from winning the set, but this was as close as she managed to get to 
shifting the momentum. Thereafter the Russian, who was crushed in last year's 
final by Serena Williams, kept an iron grip on the match to win 7-5, 6-3 in 
just over an hour and a half.

There was not enough contrast in styles to make this a great final, with net 
play almost non-existent. This is something Ivanovic will need to address in 
the future. She is quite a good volleyer, but she did not have the confidence 
on this occasion to test herself against Sharapova's ferocious ground-strokes, 
that were accompanied, as always, by shreaks of ear-splitting intensity. It is 
impossible not to admire Sharapova as a force of will, but difficult to embrace 
her usual style of power play as a joy to behold. And she had no need to be 
anything other than orthodox against Ivanovic - "I did the things I needed to 
do in order to win the match" - whereas against Henin's greater wiles she was 
compelled to improvise, and that was altogether more entertaining.

Ivanovic, because she was trying to impose her own similar game on Sharapova, 
made too many mistakes, particularly on the forehand, although despite the 
obvious disappointment was much happier than when she lost the French final: 
"It was only last year that I had the opportunity to play against top players. 
It hurts a bit now, but I'm sure I can learn from it." She surely will.

Sharapova, the Wimbledon champion in 2004, and US Open champion in 2006, had a 
difficult time last year with a prolonged shoulder injury badly affecting her 
serve, one of her great strengths. It had been assumed in her early days that 
she would eventually dominate women's tennis, which she may, although as yet 
she remains circumspect, even though she did not lose a set here in what was a 
testing draw, despite avoiding both the Williams sisters, Serena and Venus. "I 
don't think that I'm quite physically and experienced enough to dominate yet. I 
know I've already won three slams, but I don't think I'm at the peak of my 
career yet. I don't think my body has developed 100 per cent. I've got many 
more things to learn in my tennis, and many things to build and improve."
 