
This was Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> 
like nobody had ever quite seen her before. "The best I have ever seen Maria 
play," was how the former US Open champion Tracy Austin judged it, and the 
15,000 crowd in the Rod Laver arena rose instinctively to its feet after the 
US-based Russian had defeated the world No1 Justine Henin in straight sets. Not 
that this was in the least a one-sided quarter-final. Henin, right, pushed 
herself to the limits, but no matter what she tried and how she tried, 
Sharapova came up with something that little bit better, and sometimes 
spectacularly superior.

On this form, and with this variety, surely nobody can prevent one of the most 
marketable athletes in women's sport from winning her firstAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title, and her third slam 
in total. Last year Serena Williams powered Sharapova into submission in the 
final, but earlier in the day Serbia's Jelena Jankovic had knocked out a 
strangely subdued Williams 6-3, 6-4 and that semi-final obstacle was removed.

What was so impressive about Sharapova's 6-4, 6-0 victory was the way she 
imposed herself against an opponent looking for her 33rd consecutive win, and 
the way she mixed up her game so beautifully. The power has always been there, 
though too often there has been an element of the automaton about her play. 
Henin had won six of their previous eight meetings, essentially because she 
could cope with the raking forehands and backhands, while outwitting her much 
taller opponent with a heady mixture of slice and angle. Not this time. 
Sharapova imposed herself from the first point, and served superbly well, 
whether it was wide or jammed into Henin's body.

For the majority of last year Sharapova struggled with an injured shoulder, 
and only rediscovered her true self at the end-of-season women's championships 
final in Madrid, which Henin won 5-7, 7-5, 6-3 in a match lasting 3hr 25min. It 
was that performance that convinced Sharapova that she was back on track to win 
further grand slam titles, and re-establish herself as the world's No1. She 
worked exceptionally hard during the close season in Florida, and it was 
obvious from her opening match that she was in imperious form.

Henin wore protection around her right knee that had been troubling her during 
the first week, but she was quick not to blame it. "I have no excuse. She 
played a very high level of tennis, and put me under a tremendous amount of 
pressure. It was her day, and it will probably be her tournament." There were 
some astonishing rallies, with Henin hurtling around the court, and making 
Sharapova play the extra shot that can sometimes be her undoing. On this 
occasion, however, she was remarkably consistent, executing several deft drop 
shots, as well as hitting sliced backhands of remarkable touch.

The only glitch came at 5-3 in the first set when she dropped her serve, but 
she immediately broke back with her father, Yuri Sharapov, on his feet when his 
daughter won an 18-stroke rally. He is still wearing his "assassin's" 
camouflaged hoodie and at the end of the match drew his finger across his 
throat. Not a man of much charm. Sharapova was in almost total control during 
the second set and, as well as Jankovic played against Williams, it is 
difficult to imagine her withstanding Sharapova in this form.

The two were at Nick Bollettieri's academy in Bradenton together, with 
Sharapova remembering them rushing to the computer room after they had 
practised and setting up email addresses. Since they turned professional they 
have played four times, with Sharapova winning three, all on hard courts. "Ever 
since the juniors we've always played really tough, and it's great to see her 
in the semis."

Jankovic has been struggling with injury since the Australian Open began. She 
plays more tennis than the majority of her rivals, and to date has not had the 
stamina to get past the semi-finals of a slam. The win over Serena Williams was 
one of her best ever, though whether she can recover in time for the meeting 
with Sharapova tomorrow seems doubtful.

There were concerns last year, voiced by Bollettieri, that Sharapova's long 
limbs might not be able to withstand the rigours of an increasingly physical 
circuit. "I mean, three years ago I was like a little piece of spaghetti. When 
I see tapes of myself you could see the joints were popping out of my body. 
It's amazing to me to see some of the matches I won at Wimbledon when I was 17 
years old. I wasn't strong enough, and I would get tired. I'm 20, and I think 
my body is still developing."

Against Henin the development - physical, mental, and technical - reached a 
new level.
 