
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> will face 
Ana Ivanovic in the Australian Open women's final after two contrasting 
victories in the semi-finals.

Sharapova continued her blistering form with a 6-3, 6-1 win over Serbia's 
Jelena Jankovic, while the No4 seed Ivanovic lost the first set to love against 
Daniela Hantuchova before recovering to take the match 0-6, 6-3, 6-4.

The pair have met on four previous occasions - most recently in the WTA Tour 
Championships in Madrid in November last year when Sharapova won in straight 
sets - with two victories each. Sharapova, though, will start as favourite 
after brushing aside the No3 seed Jankovic.

It was another imposing display from the 20-year-old Russian, with her power 
and athleticism proving too much for Jankovic, whose injury problems finally 
appeared to catch up with her in the second set.

Sharapova continued where she left off against Justine Henin in the 
quarter-final, rattling off the opening five games to take a 5-0 lead. 
Jankovic, though, fought back to 5-3. "I was up 5-0 and I was playing too good 
for my own level," said Sharapova. "I was playing good tennis but as everyone 
knows Jelena plays very well when she's behind."

Nevertheless the No5 seed held her serve to take the first set 6-3, and then 
raced into a 3-0 lead in the second. Jankovic, who has needed treatment for a 
leg injury throughout the tournament and needed four painkillers before the 
match, had to have medical attention on a back injury in the final set and 
could only claim one game, Sharapova showing no mercy and taking it 6-1.

The final will be Sharapova's second in a row after her defeat to Serena 
Williams at the final hurdle last year. "I'm glad I was able to play such good 
tennis and I hope that I can play the same kind of tennis in the final," she 
said.

"I really hope I can take advantage of the experience I have behind me. I'm 
looking forward to being in the final and I hope I can produce some good 
tennis."

Ivanovic's route to the final was not so straightforward, with Hantuchova 
taking the first eight games of the match before the Serbian produced a 
remarkable comeback.

It took Hantuchova just 25 minutes to take the first set 6-0, and she broke 
her opponent again in the first game of the second set. Ivanovic, though, broke 
back soon after to level the scores at 2-2, before a double fault from 
Hantuchova enabled the No4 seed to take a 5-3 lead.

She served out for the set an broke her opponent again at 4-4 in the decider, 
serving out for an incredible victory. "I tried to stay calm but it wasn't 
easy, " Ivanovic said.

It was a continuation of Ivanovic's excellent recent form in the grand slam 
events. She reached the final of the French Open last year - beating Sharapova 
in the semi - and also the semi-finals at Wimbledon. She faces a stern 
challenge though if she is to claim her first grand-slam crown.
 