
Shire, the pharmaceuticals group best known for its attention deficit disorder 
drugs, was rather hyperactive itself as investors were gripped by a new spate 
of takeover talk.

Its shares hit a record high of £38.86 before slipping back to £36.60, still a 
124p or 3.5% rise on the day. The catalyst was a report from Reuters that the 
group had hired Citigroup as an advisor because it expected takeover approaches.

The pharmaceutical and medical sector has been a hotbed of bid activity - real 
and imagined - recently, andShire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> 
has been no exception. US companies in particular have been keen on European 
deals, partly to relocate their tax base and cut their liabilities. Pfizer's 
move on AstraZeneca and Monday's deal by Medtronic for Dublin-based Covidien 
were partly made for that very reason.

Recent speculation put Shire in the sights of Astra or Bristol-Myers Squibb or 
possibly Allergan - fighting off its own unwanted predator in the shape of 
Valeant Pharmaceuticals. In a note last week Deutsche Bank said:
 As a rare mid-cap pharma company without a controlling shareholder stake, 
Shire will in our view be subject to sporadic market reports of possible M&A 
interest in the company.

Elsewhere Whitbread rose 91p to £42.59 after the Premier Inns and Costa Coffee 
group said like for like sales grew by 6.9% in the first quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/17/premier-inn-sales-whitbread-costa-coffee>
, with particularly strong growth from the hotels business.

In typical cynical City fashion, Morrisons' confirmation of 2,600 store 
management job cuts sent its shares up 4.3p to 192.6p.

Overall, despite continuing unrest in Iraq and tensions between Ukraine and 
Russia, theFTSE 100 finished up 12.13 points at 6766.77 after two days of 
decline. Despite better than expected UK inflation figures, investors are still 
cautious ahead of Wednesday's Bank of England minutes and the latest decision 
by the US Federal Reserve on interest rates - and more pertinently, its monthly 
bond buying programme which is expected to be shaved by another $10bn to $35bn.

David Madden, market analyst at IG, said:
 As we get closer to the Federal Open Market Committee meeting, the market is 
becoming increasingly nervous, and the reactions to economic data 
correspondingly more severe. Ahead of a big day for central banks tomorrow, the 
default position is prudence and hibernation, leaving the FTSE struggling 
around 6760.

Among the fallers, Ashtead lost 55.5p to 831.5p on profit taking after the 
equipment rental group reported a 50% rise in full year earnings.

But easyJet climbed 11p to £14.46 as Davy Research moved from underperform to 
outperform. The broker said:
 With fewer concerns about valuation now than at the time of our rating 
downgrade in January 2014, we are upgrading easyJet to outperform with a price 
target of £17.50. Summer trading should be strong (despite foreign exchange 
headwinds on the revenue line), and September's capital markets day could act 
as a catalyst. In summary, returns remain elevated and we assume that they will 
(provided supply/demand remain in balance) continue in the high-teens for the 
next number of years, driven by real unit cost reduction and modest unit 
revenue inflation. This is supportive of the valuation. Cash generation should 
also remain strong, supporting the 3 times cover dividend policy and allowing 
periodical special dividends. 
Among the mid-caps, Crest Nicholson climbed 12p to 337p following news of a 
37% rise in first half profits at the housebuilder.

But Xaar slumped 205.5p to 537p after the inkjet printing specialist warned 
2014 revenues would be below expectations.

Lower down the market Serica Energy added 3.5% to 11.125p after it acquired an 
18% interest in the Erskine Field, in the North Sea, from BP. As part of the 
transaction, BP will become a shareholder in Serica, with a stake of up to 9.7% 
depending on working capital adjustments.

Finally MySale, the Australian fashion flash-sale site, finally got its 
quotation right afterMonday's debacle when its newly listed shares were quoted 
in pounds not pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/16/share-price-blinder-mysale-triggers-selloff>
. It closed at 187.5p, down 26.25p on the day and well below the 226p issue 
price.
 