
It should have been the busiest shopping day of the year. But as blizzard 
conditions caused massive disruption, Britain's beleaguered retailers were left 
forlornly offering deep discounts on clothes, gifts and household goods in an 
attempt to attract reluctant customers.

Crowds thronged pavements in London's West End and many shopping centres 
reported solid trading but experts say that dismal weather is likely to have 
taken an edge off business on an economically crucial weekend as retailers 
struggle to match last Christmas's takings. "The return of the snow and ice is 
a serious body blow for retailers who must have been desperately hoping the 
latest snow blast would not arrive until after the last Saturday before 
Christmas," said Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, who 
said supply chains had been hit, too, as shipments of Christmas goods got stuck 
at ports.

The New West End Company, which represents 600 retailers on Oxford Street, 
Bond Street and Regent Street in the heart of the capital, said that prior to 
the weather closing in, it was expecting 1.2 million shoppers to spend as much 
as £130m this weekend. "It's a critical weekend for retailers," said Sarah 
Cordey, a spokeswoman for the British Retail Consortium (BRC). "Today is some 
people's last chance to go out and shop. People who haven't bought gifts will 
be pretty determined to go out and get them."

For many major retailers, the weeks running up to Christmas can account for as 
much as 60% of the year's turnover. But prospects are cloudy as consumers 
tighten their belts in advance of government spending cuts, which will begin to 
take effect next year. A BRC survey found that only 35% of stores expect a 
better Christmas than last year – while 36% anticipate a worse one, and 29% see 
little change.

Anxious to reap rewards ahead of a VAT rise in early January, stores are 
offering discounts as deep as 50% or even 70%. French Connection, Gap and 
Warehouse are among those offering half-price stock – usually a rarity until 
sales begin on Boxing Day.

At Bluewater shopping centre in Kent, some 160 staff worked to keep car parks 
free of snow, driving snowploughs and gritting trucks. General manager Andrew 
Parkinson said the centre, expecting 700,000 shoppers this week, was holding up 
surprisingly well: "For many people, this will be their last chance to shop. 
For others, it will be the beginning of their Christmas shopping," he said.

Freezing temperatures may encourage some shoppers to turn to the internet. But 
in Scotland, conditions were so poor that several major firms, including Marks 
& Spencer, stopped taking orders as they struggled with a backlog of deliveries.

Andrew Bracey from the online supermarket Ocado, said his firm's trucks had 
been equipped with winter tyres: "The problem can be other road users who 
haven't taken proper precautions. When they get stuck, the roads get 
gridlocked," he said.

• This article was amended on 20 December.
 