
Every woman needing pain relief while giving birth at University College 
London hospital (UCLH) is offered acupuncture, with around half of the 
hospital’s midwives specially trained to give the treatment. UCLH is far from 
typical in this respect, though:acupuncture 
<https://www.uclh.nhs.uk/OurServices/ServiceA-Z/INTMED/IMGAC/Pages/Home.aspx> 
is not standard throughout the UK and many health practitioners claim patients 
are often denied access to it through the NHS because of entrenched scepticism 
from sections of the medical establishment.

Dr David Carr is one of a number of clinicians who is determined to change 
that. A clinical lecturer in maternal foetal medicine at St George’s, 
University of London, he is also an accredited acupuncturist working at the
Royal London hospital for integrated medicine (RLHIM) 
<https://www.uclh.nhs.uk/OurServices/OurHospitals/RLHIM/Pages/Home.aspx>. In 
2013 he established a flagship maternity acupuncture service at UCLH NHS trust, 
which has trained 120 of its midwives.

He has also trained a further 100 midwives, obstetricians and anaesthetists 
throughout the UK since January 2014 – funded by the UCLH charity – to provide 
acupuncture to women in labour through a one-day course endorsed by theBritish 
Medical Acupuncture Society <http://www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/>. 

Carr says: “There are conditions for which acupuncture works and others where 
it doesn’t. It is not a cure-all, and should be open to scrutiny. But the focus 
of my work is for acupuncture to become a standard part of midwifery training, 
and at the same time change perceptions among clinicians about its appropriate 
use for a whole range of other conditions.”

The form of acupuncture in use in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, and being taught by accredited 
trainers like Carr, is western medical acupuncture (WMA) – evolved from Chinese 
acupuncture but using current medical knowledge. The difference is that WMA has 
discarded mystical concepts like yin, yang and qi, and considers itself to be 
part of conventional medicine rather than an “alternative”.

The UK lags behind many other European countries in its support for 
acupuncture. Just 2,500 medical professionals here are qualified to practice 
it, compared with 45,000 in Germany. The National Institute for Clinical 
Excellence (Nice) recommends WMA specifically for the treatment of only two 
conditions – lower back pain (which costs the NHS £1bn a year) and headaches. 
In Scandinavia its use in childbirth is commonplace.

A growing body of healthcare practitioners believe it should be offered 
routinely for a variety of conditions, including pain in labour, cancer, 
musculoskeletal conditions and even irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

At a time of NHS cuts the use of needles at 8p per unit look attractive. In St 
Albans, where a group of nurse-led clinics have been using acupuncture since 
2008 for patients with knee osteoarthritis, economics have been put under 
scrutiny. WMA was offered to 114 patients rather than a knee replacement 
costing £5,000, and 79% accepted. Two years later a third of them had not 
required a knee transplant, representing an annual saving of £100,000, as 
estimated by researchers to the St Albans local commissioning group.

Dr Adrian White, a lead researcher, said: “This first evaluation shows the 
practicability of offering a low-cost acupuncture service as an alternative to 
knee surgery.”

So why is acupuncture not being used more widely? The difficulty of proving 
its efficacy is clearly one of the biggest stumbling blocks. An analysis of 29 
studies of almost 18,000 patients found acupuncture effective in treating 
chronic pain compared with sham acupuncture. But even treatment proponents 
question whether a randomised controlled trial – the gold standard of medical 
research – works, given that faking treatment is nearly impossible.

Emotional responses clearly play their part. Physiotherapist Anna Housley, from
University hospital of south Manchester (UHSM) 
<http://www.uhsm.nhs.uk/Pages/default.aspx>, has used it with spectacular 
results to relieve phantom pain in amputees. She says: “I could have helped 
more people if some of the doctors had been more open-minded. Although some 
medics were very supportive, others were not and one doctor told me that he did 
not see any benefit in acupuncture, and would therefore not refer any patients 
to me.”

Mindfulness: an effective mental health treatment but not a panacea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/may/14/mindfulness-mental-health-treatment-nhs>
Rebecca Jackson, a physiotherapist specialising in knees and hips at UHSM, 
classes herself as being a “very medical model” but uses acupuncture on about a 
third of her patients. She feels professionals like herself need to think 
outside the medical model.

She describes a woman who had exhausted conventional treatments but could not 
lift her arms above 90 degrees, but after two 25-minute sessions of acupuncture 
was able to lift them above her head. Jackson says: “Acupuncture completely 
challenges all my scientific training and I did not get it at first. But now I 
almost feel that the proof lies in what you are doing.”

The key, according to professor of gastroenterology at the University of 
Manchester Peter Whorwell, lies in educating medical students, most of whom are 
taught nothing at medical schools about a treatment popular with patients. 
Whorwell, an international expert on IBS says: “Some teaching about acupuncture 
should be in the curriculum – even in a couple of units. Patients with serious 
IBS tell me that their GPs will not refer them for acupuncture, but they are 
making a judgement on something that they do not know anything about.”

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

This article was amended on 13 October 2015 to correct Dr David Carr’s name. 
 