
William Skidelsky, Observer books editor

Alice Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald> and John 
Kinsella, who withdrew from the shortlist of the TS Eliot prize last week 
because they objected to the fact that an investment firm that manages hedge 
funds, Aurum, now sponsors the prize, deserve admiration for putting principle 
before personal gain. But their decision still strikes me as deeply 
wrong-headed. From their statements, it wasn't entirely clear what their 
rationale for withdrawing was. Kinsella said, rather grandly, that "the 
business of Aurum does not sit with my personal politics and ethics". (What 
these were he didn't elaborate, beyond labelling himself "anti-capitalist".) 
Oswald said that "poetry should be questioning not endorsing such institutions" 
(as if, were she to win, she would never again be free to write a poem that 
evinced any scepticism about capitalist excess).

Behind their statements, I think it is possible to make out the contours of an 
old romantic idea: namely, that art should have no truck with commerce. While 
this may seem an attractive principle, the problem is that, if followed 
through, it would pretty much imply the end of all cultural patronage, since 
who other than overtly money-making organisations are going to stump up the 
funding that culture so urgently needs?

To me, it was striking that neither poet appeared to find anything much out 
about Aurum. For them, apparently, the dread words "hedge fund" were enough. Do 
either of them actually know anything about what hedge funds do? Bankers are 
often accused, rightly, of arrogance, but there's a kind of snobbishness, too, 
in the way that some artists wrinkle their noses up at the mucky dealings of 
business.

Geoff Dyer, novelist

I agree about a tendency to bash bankers and hedgies. But the larger point 
about questioning and worrying where prize or other money comes from is an 
important one. I'd never heard of Aurum until a couple of days ago but let's 
suppose the dough had come from a nice firm that had decided to use the prize 
to enhance its image. Great! But if that firm happened to be an Israeli-owned 
company in the occupied territories, then of course one might be under a 
political and moral obligation to have nothing to do with it. The key thing if 
you are to make some kind of statement or stand is to strike a balance between 
specificity – knowledge of the money's sources etc – and a larger declared 
political point.

So we go back to 1972 when John Berger won the Booker prize. In his speech he 
said "the modern poverty of the Caribbean" was "the direct result" of the 
"extensive trading interests" of outfits such as Booker McConnell. Rather than 
turning it down, however, he tried "to turn this prize against itself" by 
giving half the money to the Black Panthers and keeping half to finance a book 
he was writing on migrant labour. The hope was that the half he gave away would 
"change" the half he kept. Needless to say, he was criticised by the right for 
giving half to the Panthers and by the left for keeping half for himself.

WS Don't get me wrong: I wouldn't for a minute argue that writers shouldn't 
pay any attention whatsoever to where prize money (or other support) comes 
from. Of course, if the source of the money is truly odious, there's an 
obligation to walk away from it. And there's a place in the cultural firmament 
for clever, pointed crusades such as Berger's. But a generalised view that 
bankers are evil doesn't seem, as you say, to have nearly the required degree 
of specificity to be a worthwhile basis for a stand like this.

Besides, there seems to me to be something deeply unfortunate about the timing 
of Oswald's and Kinsella's withdrawal. The reason the TS Eliot prize's 
administrating body – thePoetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Book 
Society – sought sponsorship from Aurum in the first place was because the Arts 
Council last year withdrew its funding. At a time when government support for 
the arts is being scaled back, the arts surely need private patronage more than 
ever. And so it seems self-indulgent and irresponsible to start fretting 
because, heaven forbid, a financial institution has stepped in to support a 
poetry prize. If artists react like this when the suits come with their money, 
then the suits may feel inclined to withdraw it completely. Will the arts be 
better off as a result?

GD I agree there can be an element of grandstanding about protest. I love, by 
contrast, the way that Thomas Bernhard unfailingly bit off every hand that fed 
him: denouncing all the prizes that came his way but always accepting them 
because, in his own words, "I'm greedy for money, I have no character, I'm a 
bastard too." What integrity! It's infinitely preferable to those people who 
say they feel "humbled" by an award. It's so strange that writers, who 
understand words, say something like that, since what they mean, obviously, is 
exactly the opposite: "I've got the biggest hard-on you've ever seen!"

I accept, too, that sponsorship is necessary and inevitable but I think it's 
sometimes useful to step outside the area of discussion and look elsewhere. No 
item of clothing in the world is uglier than a sponsor-adorned football shirt. 
If you go to the big summer festivals, they're rendered hideous by all the 
sponsorship logos. The Burning Man festival, meanwhile, remains a sanctuary of 
beauty because it's sponsor-free. The question I suppose is: does this tainting 
ugliness operate – albeit less visibly – in the realm of the sponsorship of 
literature? And it does, of course, because as the year goes by, so the 
featured stock in shops gets narrowed down to the longlisted books, then the 
shortlisted books and then, ultimately, to the winner. I speak, needless to 
say, as a loser or, to put it into Berger-speak, as the voice of the oppressed 
and marginalised.

WS I agree, too much sponsorship can have an uglifying and, in terms of the 
impact of prizes on reading habits, narrowing effect. I prefer the older 
concept of patronage, which is less about a calculation of likely profit for 
the sponsor, and more about a genuine conviction that it is the responsibility 
of the wealthy to help preserve the good things in society. Of course, 
patronage isn't wholly selfless: the Medicis in Renaissance Florence increased 
their own standing by being able to hang great paintings on their walls. But 
they genuinely loved the art, and did the world a big favour by helping to 
bring it into existence.

My point, to return the discussion to its starting point, is that what Aurum 
is doing in relation to the TS Eliot prize seems closer to patronage than 
sponsorship. Its involvement is pretty discreet, as shown by the fact that some 
of the poets don't seem to have been aware of it until weeks after the 
shortlist was announced. I mean, they could have done away with the old geezer 
entirely and renamed the award the Aurum prize. Now thatwould be grounds for 
protest.

GD Sometimes invisibility – I mean submerged or quiet links – can be more 
dangerous. Whatever your views on the ethical standing of investment firms are, 
I think it's a good thing that doubts or questions about funding sources are 
raised at the outset. With the passage of time we forget where the money came 
from, especially as the list of illustrious winners mounts up and the prestige 
of the authors gets reflected back on the funding institution. Eventually, the 
sponsor-benefactor's name floats free of whatever murk once attached to the 
means of money-making and becomes synonymous with the sweetness and light.
 