
 The author:  The son of a lawyer who committed suicide, Jean Cocteau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeancocteau> (1889-1963) quickly entered 
bohemian circles, publishing his first volume of poetry, Aladdin's Lamp (1908), 
aged 19. Cocteau made many friends across all areas of the art world - Edith 
Wharton, Pablo Picasso, Erik Satie, Serge Diaghilev - and evolved into a 
prolific multi-disciplinary polymath. Les Enfants Terribles (1929) marked the 
high point of his novel-writing output at the same time as he was hospitalised 
for opium addiction; a year later he had moved into film-making with the 
groundbreaking short film Le Sang d'un Poète . The postwar years saw Cocteau 
create his cinematic masterworks, La Belle et la Bête (1946) and Orphée (1949). 
Ill health in the early 1950s put a brake on his activities, but he still 
completed the dream-fable Le Testament d'Orphée (1960). Cocteau died of a heart 
attack in 1963.

 The story:  A young boy, Paul, is injured in a snowball fight as a result of 
a missile thrown by Dargelos, a schoolmate he idolises. As a result, Paul is 
kept at home, tended by his sister Elisabeth, and the isolated siblings extend 
and deepen their intense, quasi-incestuous relationship, termed "the game". 
Over the years, two friends - Gérard, who is infatuated with first Paul and 
then Elisabeth, and Agathe, a co-worker of Elisabeth's who falls in love with 
Paul - are added to their circle. But their world is disrupted by Paul's 
revelation that he has fallen in love with Agathe. Feeling betrayed, Elisabeth 
conspires to keep the putative lovers apart and persuades Agathe to marry 
Gérard. In a bloody finale, she allows Paul to poison himself, and then commits 
suicide.

 The film-maker:  Jean-Pierre Melville (1917-73) was born Jean-Pierre 
Grumbach; he took the name Melville after the Nazis invaded France. After 
fighting with the Free French during the war, he made little headway as a 
film-maker in postwar France until setting up a (then rare) independent 
production company. His first film was an adaptation of the Resistance memoir 
Le Silence de la Mer (1947), which Cocteau liked enough to invite him to make 
the adaptation of Les Enfants Terribles. Cocteau himself scripted it, as well 
as providing a voiceover. He also made sure the totally inexperienced Edouard 
Dermithe, his former gardener and current lover, was cast as Paul. A Melville 
protegee, Nicole Stéphane, who had worked on Le Silence de la Mer, was given 
the role of Elisabeth.

 How book and film compare:  Cocteau's stewardship of the shoot ensured that 
the film deviated little from his original text, though he and Melville clashed 
repeatedly. One of Melville's major victories was to have the same (female) 
actor, Renée Cosima, play both Dargelos and Agathe - thereby undermining part 
of Cocteau's homoerotic vision. Melville also ensured the use of prerecorded 
classical music (Bach and Vivaldi) to accompany the images, rather than, as was 
usual at the time, a specially composed score.

 Inspirations and influences:  Though it was principally his developing 
fascination with pulp American cinema that endeared Melville to the French New 
Wave, Les Enfants Terribles proved inspirational in the long run, with its 
loose, unorthodox camerawork, and the sheer strangeness of its narrative - a 
stark contrast to the mainstream cinema of the time. Its influence has been 
felt recently also, with Bertolucci's événements drama, The Dreamers (2003), 
explicitly paying homage to it.
 