
Matt Niskanen's goal and a key penalty kill extended the Pittsburgh Penguins' 
winning streak to 10 games in theNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl>. 
Niskanen scored the go-ahead goal in the third period and Sidney Crosby had two 
assists as the Penguins beat theWashington Capitals on Tuesday. Goaltender 
Marc-Andre Fleury made 28 saves in his NHL-leading 16th win of the season.

Crosby picked up his league-leading 36th and 37th assists for the Penguins, 
who were without reigning MVP Evgeni Malkin (shoulder) for the sixth game in a 
row. Braden Holtby made 34 saves for Washington. Alexander Ovechkin scored his 
12th goal of the season.

"Obviously it's an important time in the game and I thought the penalty kill 
did an amazing job of stepping up to the challenge," Niskanen said. "We created 
a lot of energy and some momentum from that. You could feel the crowd getting 
into it and we were able to go out on a rush there and finish and get the 
game-winner."

The winning streak is the longest of the season for the Eastern 
Conference-leading Penguins and the second-longest in the NHL this season. The 
Penguins are the first team in NHL history to have 10-game win streaks in three 
consecutive seasons.

"The importance is probably greater just because of a shortened season, but I 
think the good thing for us is that we're playing so many games and I don't 
think anyone is thinking a whole lot about it, we're just going out there and 
playing the way that we need to," Crosby said.

At Newark, Michael Del Zotto scored a short-handed goal and set up Rick Nash's 
game winner to lead theNew York Rangers to a 3-2 victory over the struggling 
New Jersey Devils. Sergei Gonchar scored with 1 minute left for Ottawa, which 
netted four goals in the third period of a 5-3 win over the New York Islanders 
at Uniondale.

The Los Angeles Kings beat the Phoenix Coyotes 3-2, with Jonathan Bernier 
making a career-high 40 saves and defenseman Drew Doughty ending a 32-game, 
regular-season goal drought. Shane Doan scored twice in the third period for 
the Coyotes, who were shut out in their three previous games.

In other matches, the Florida Panthers had a 4-1 win over the Carolina 
Hurricanes, the Columbus Blue Jackets edged the Nashville Predators 4-3, Steve 
Ott scored in overtime to lift theBuffalo Sabres to a 3-2 win over the Montreal 
Canadiens in Canada, the Winnipeg Jets beat the Boston Bruins 3-1 and the 
Vancouver Canucks held out the St Louis Blues 3-2.
 