
York Minster is likely to remain silent over Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> for the first time in more 
than 650 years after bellringers from Leeds refused to step in to replace their 
30 sacked colleagues.

Campanologists from Leeds Minster are the latest to reject an invitation from 
York <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york> to ring the historic bells over the 
festive period, calling the decision an “act of solidarity”.


How York Minster bellringers' sacking blew the lid off bitter dispute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/how-york-minster-campanologists-sacking-blew-the-lid-off-bitter-dispute>
But York Minster claimed that bellringers had been intimidated into declining 
its invitations. In a press statement issued on Friday, the minster said: 
“Bellringing leaders from other parts of the county and country have been in 
contact to explore options for ringing in the next few days and months. We have 
also been approached by individuals keen to help and who are supportive of the 
action Chapter [the minster’s governing body] has taken.


“However, we have learned that many of these kind people have been subjected 
to intimidation on social media and in the local press. At least one member of 
the clergy who has offered to help has been threatened with legal action.”


The Central Council of Church Bell Ringers has advised members to follow their 
consciences when considering approaches from York Minster.

The entire York team was abruptly dismissed in October in what was the 
culmination of a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/how-york-minster-campanologists-sacking-blew-the-lid-off-bitter-dispute>
 within the walls of the 15th-century cathedral. Initially, the minster said 
health and safety factors lay behind the move, but within days John Sentamu, 
the archbishop of York, held a press conference at which he disclosed that a 
safeguarding issue was the reason for the mass dismissal.

Some campanologists had “consistently challenged the chapter’s authority on 
this and other important matters”, he added, requiring decisive action.


In Friday’s press statement, the minster said its actions had followed police 
investigations into a member of the bellringing team in 1999-2000 and 2014 
following allegations of indecent assault against young girls.


“The case went to court in December 2015. The judge decided that no sanction 
would be imposed and the person concerned made certain undertakings,” said the 
minster.

It continued: “Following a detailed review of the matter and with guidance 
from national agencies, Chapter felt that the person presented an ongoing risk 
and that the potential severity of the risk meant they could not be reinstated.

“This decision was not accepted by the bellringing team. There was a 
reluctance to recognise the minster’s concerns despite briefings with staff, 
including our safeguarding officer. This culminated in Chapter’s decision to 
disband the team in October.”


Sources at the minster have suggested that the bellringing team was dominated 
by one extended family that demanded loyalty from other members, resulting in a 
“fiefdom”.

In October, the chapter said it would recruit a new team in the new year, and 
members of the sacked team would be eligible to apply.


The chapter’s actions caused an outcry among campanologists, who accused the 
minster authorities of being vindictive. An online petition supporting the 
bellringers has gathered about 17,000 signatures.


The sacked bellringers have denied they were a closed or secretive group, and 
say the indecent assault allegations were found be groundless.

A spokesperson for York Minster said: “The Chapter of York is making plans for 
future bell ringing arrangements at York Minster and we are drawing on 
expertise from around the county and country to help us shape those plans.

“We are exploring options for ringing at Christmas but are not yet in a 
position to confirm if we will go ahead.”
 