
Muttiah Muralitharan 
Sri Lanka off-spinner

Australia are the stronger team. You can't put them down just because they 
lost one series. England played really well and deserved to win and while 
Australia struggled a bit, I think they will come back. There were times when 
India and Sri Lanka beat Australia at our venues, but we did not consider 
ourselves to be the best in the world. I don't underestimate England, but they 
don't have a really good spinner.

Clive Lloyd Former 
West Indies coach

If England continue to win then we might be able to say so with more 
certainty. After all, Australia have beaten everyone home and away for years. 
England have to win on the subcontinent and they have to win convincingly. They 
are probably the top side at the moment and played some very good cricket but 
time will tell whether they can keep it up.

Imran Khan
 Former Pakistan captain

Australia will still be a formidable force, but they're not as powerful as 
they once were. England, on the other hand, are really emerging. I don't think 
you can say they are the best in the world, though. They could well be the best 
over time and stay there for a while because they have a young team. Flintoff 
is an incredible all-rounder, but I wonder if they have the bowlers to win on 
the subcontinent. The series in Pakistan will be very interesting.

David Lloyd
 Former England coach

England are now the best side in the world and they will prove it in 18 
months' time when they go to Australia and retain the Ashes. Nobody's gloating. 
I just thought that was what it was all about: first v second, and England came 
through. It was interesting to hear Ricky Ponting saying Australia had been 
outplayed for four Tests. It will be fascinating to see what kind of pitches 
Australia produce when we go there, because they've been disturbed by pace this 
summer.

Ray Illingworth
 Former England coach

I don't think you can say that England are the best on the basis of one 
series. Australia have been top for so long and one result shouldn't change 
that. If England go to Australia and win there, then it's a different matter. 
The Australian empire isn't so much crumbling as fraying at the edges.

Steve Rixon
Surrey coach

England have won one series and played fantastically, but they don't have the 
right to call themselves the best just yet. They have to do it against every 
country, in every environment. This is the first time they've flexed their 
muscles against Australia, but you can't start gloating yet.
 