
Singapore's long-serving administration has won some time to ponder how it 
will deal with yet another self-inflicted blow to its global branding.

The reprieve came as a Singapore court today postponed a case against the 
British author Alan Shadrake 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-10813455> for three weeks.

Shadrake, 75, faces contempt of court charges, after Singapore's Media 
Development Authority lodged a police report on 16 July against his book Once a 
Jolly Hangman: Singapore Justice in the Dock, which criticises the application 
of the death penalty. Published in neighbouring Malaysia, the book has sparked 
a criminal defamation investigation against the author inSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>.

Shadrake rejected an offer of mitigation in exchange for an apology at today's 
contempt of court hearing and said he would fight on. This means more 
reputation damage is in store for the People's Action Party administration in 
the weeks ahead.

Local groups and international human rights NGOs such as Amnesty International 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/news_details.asp?NewsID=18899>, Human Rights Watch 
and Reporters without Borders have criticised the decision to prosecute the 
author.

News agencies, websites, blogs and social network sites are carrying news 
about the case around the globe and putting a sharp focus on censorship in 
Singapore.

The Shadrake affair comes as a Malaysian, Yong Vui Kong, faces execution next 
month for a drug-related offence committed when he was 19. The Malaysian 
foreign ministry, under pressure from the public, has written to the Singapore 
government to plead clemency for Yong, now 22.

Meanwhile, the British embassy in Singapore has chosen to play the Shadrake 
affair low key, opting to give the author quiet support without issuing public 
statements.

The timing of the two incidents has regalvanised a small group of activists 
and bloggers. Although most local NGOs and opposition parties have been 
characteristically silent, there is a high level of awareness of the two cases 
among the Singapore public.

The administration has spent large amounts of money on marketing Singapore 
internationally, most recently over the upcoming Youth Olympic Games. But at 
the same time it continues to damage Singapore's reputation with its censorship.

In keeping with tradition, one strategy used at today's court hearings was to 
threaten legal action against the media for publicising the alleged 
contemptuous remarks in Shadrake's book. That was a lost cause, given the 
information already circulating on the internet.

Singapore, like everyone else, has to increasingly contend with information 
disseminated by new media and is no longer able to ensure that only positive 
images of itself appear.

Meanwhile, the book in question is flying off the shelves at bookshops across 
the causeway in Malaysia.

James Gomez is deputy associate dean (international) and head of public 
relations at Monash University, Australia
 