
Your editorial endorsed Mr Alan Shadrake's book as "legitimate and ... largely 
accurate" (Press freedom: The Singpore grip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/nov/17/press-freedom-singapore-grip>
, 17 November). Mr Shadrake had alleged, without any basis, that the Singapore 
courts conspired with state agencies to suppress material evidence. Such a 
statement would be considered to be in contempt of court in many common law 
jurisdictions, including England, Australia, Ireland, Canada and Hong Kong.

This was why Mr Shadrake was charged for contempt of court. The court found 
that he had made grave allegations against the independence and integrity of the
Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> judiciary, without 
rational basis and with reckless disregard as to their truth or falsehood. You 
quoted Mr Shadrake's statements confirming emphatically that his book 
questioned the independence and probity of the judiciary. Yet his lawyer argued 
in court that Mr Shadrake had not intended to allege any cover-up "by the high 
echelons of the judiciary". This duplicity was not lost on the court.

The trial, along with Mr Shadrake's comment that it was a fair hearing, was 
fully reported by local, international and alternative media. The judgment has 
been published and is available for public scrutiny. Every society strikes its 
own balance between the rights of the individual and society. The death penalty 
has been and continues to be openly and vigorously debated in Singapore. But it 
is an issue for Singaporeans to decide, and the majority support the death 
penalty.

The World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report (2009-10) rated 
Singapore first out of 133 countries for public trust of politicians and 
transparency of government policymaking, and 19th out of 133 countries on 
judicial independence, ahead of Japan, France, Belgium and the US. You yourself 
acknowledge Singapore's successes. Part of the reason is that we have sensible 
rules that maintain the standing of our courts.

Michael Eng Cheng Teo

High commissioner of Singapore
 