
 Author:  Heinrich von Kleist (1777-1811) was the scion of a German military 
family from the Prussian town of Frankfurt an der Oder. He gave up his army 
career in 1799 to study philosophy, and a reading of Immanuel Kant's Critique 
of Pure Reason had a devastating effect on his intellectual life. Kant's 
anti-rationalist arguments precipitated a deep spiritual pessimism in Von 
Kleist - humanity, he felt, had no higher purpose or aspiration to truth - and 
triggered his literary output. Plays such as The Broken Pitcher (1807) 
attracted the attention of Goethe, but their relationship deteriorated after 
Von Kleist produced the anti-Napoleonic play Die Hermannsschlacht (1808). 
Prussia and France went to war a year later; Von Kleist responded with his 
best-known play, Prince Frederick of Homburg (1810). He was simultaneously 
writing a series of short novels: The Marquise of O- appeared in 1808 in the 
journal Phöbus, which he co-edited with Adam Müller. However, Von Kleist could 
never escape his overwhelming depression: he killed himself at the age of 34, 
as part of a suicide pact in which he shot dead his terminally ill lover, 
Henriette Vogel.

The story:  Von Kleist is now recognised as the leading light of literary 
Romanticism in Germany, defining its emotional rebellion against 
Enlightenment-inspired determinism. The Marquise of O- begins with a newspaper 
advertisement by the eponymous noblewoman, asking that the father of the child 
she conceived "without knowing the cause" present himself. The widowed marquise 
became pregnant after being captured by Russian troops during a siege of an 
Italian town, after which her aristocratic saviour, Count F-, proposes 
marriage. The marquise refuses and is then driven out of her family home after 
her "interesting condition" is made public. Ostracised, she places the 
advertisement, and is shocked to discover that it is Count F- who was 
responsible.

Film-makers:  Born Jean-Marie Scherer in 1920, Eric Rohmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eric-rohmer> was editor-in-chief of Cahiers 
du Cinema from 1956 to 1963 - the Nouvelle Vague heyday - before he turned to 
film-making. The fourth of his six "Moral Tales", My Night With Maud (1969), 
was an international success, and Rohmer's idiosyncratic and highly verbal 
style was established. The Marquise of O- was his first attempt at a historical 
period piece; he spent four years learning German so as to be able to make it 
in its original language. He cast two theatre actors in the lead: Edith Clever 
and the then little-known Bruno Ganz.

How book and film compare:  Rohmer's adaptation is painfully scrupulous: "I 
wanted to use the text as if Kleist himself had put it directly on stage." To 
flesh out the visuals, Rohmer and cinematographer Néstor Almendros borrowed 
details from specific painters: David, Fragonard, Fuseli.

Inspirations and influences:  Rohmer's film coincided with a mid-1970s 
interest in the late 18th and early 19th century - the most celebrated example 
being Stanley Kubrick's Barry Lyndon (1975), which pioneered the use of 
candle-lit interiors and ultra-authentic period recreation. Rohmer himself 
returned to the theme more recently, with The Lady and the Duke (2001). In it, 
he used digital special effects to create "painted" backdrops that stand in for 
Revolution-era Paris.
 