
Two sisters have been sacked from an Australian television station after 
lodging a sexual harassment complaint against a senior male colleague, who 
continues to work there.

Sisters Amy and Sophie Taeuber had worked for Channel Seven in Adelaide in 
South Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> 
for four years when one of them lodged a sexual harassment complaint against a 
senior colleague who had allegedly made statements of a sexual nature about Amy.

Weeks later both women were suspended, Amy was accused of misconduct, and last 
month both women were sacked.

Bolt's revolt short-lived as ABC votes in favour of Recognition | Amanda Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/18/bolts-revolt-short-lived-as-abc-votes-in-favour-of-recognition>
Amy, who was one year into a two-year cadetship, is now seeking redress at the 
Fair Work Commission.

The 27-year-old has filed a general protections application for adverse action 
againstChannel Seven <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-7>.

When contacted by Guardian Australia, Taeuber declined to discuss the case. 
“The case is in the Fair Work Commission, so I am unable to comment further,” 
she said.

Sources say Taeuber had complained that on her birthday in March, a senior 
colleague victimised her by making comments of a sexual nature without her 
present.

The remarks were allegedly made in front of several staff on the program and 
reported to Taeuber by friends.

Taueber’s sister Sophie, a freelancer, was working on Today Tonight at the 
time and allegedly also heard the remarks.

Encouraged by senior staff, Amy lodged a formal complaint. But weeks later an 
internal investigation by human resources cleared the colleague.

Ten days later Seven turned the tables on Amy and accused her of bringing 
Seven into disrepute by blogging about My Kitchen Rules on her sister Kate’s 
reality TV website. Amy, Sophie and Kate are triplets.

Seven asked that the website be taken down, which the sisters complied with 
but then management accessed her work emails and made different allegations of 
“online misconduct”. In early July the investigation into Amy concluded that 
she was guilty of “serious misconduct” and she was offered the chance to resign 
with a confidentiality agreement. But, sources say, Amy denied any misconduct 
and refused to resign.

A former Seven executive said Amy was a hard working and promising young 
journalist who had been chosen as a news cadet last year on the basis of her 
excellent work for several years at the network.

“The feeling amongst staff is Amy has been victimised for making a complaint,” 
another former Seven staffer said.

Amy was sacked a few days later and her sister Sophie was not given another 
shift.

Workplace lawyer John Laxon, who also represents Stephen Rice who was sacked 
by 60 Minutes, is acting for Amy in the upcoming dispute. He told Guardian 
Australia he couldn’t comment on the case ahead of a conciliation hearing with 
Seven on 30 August.

A spokeswoman for Seven said the “proper process is being followed” and she 
couldn’t comment as it was a legal matter.
 