
Piotr Anderszewski, 39 

The Polish-born Anderszewski first attracted attention by not winning the 
Leeds piano competition in 1990, after he had abandoned his semi-final recital 
because he felt he wasn't playing well enough. That fierce self-criticism 
persists - he recently repeated a Bach partita in a recital because he felt 
he'd delivered it so badly the first time. Yet there's a buoyancy and rhythmic 
clarity that give his performances a special charge. His repertoire includes 
Bartók and Szymanowski, but Bach has become a speciality recently, alongside 
his limpid accounts of Mozart piano concertos.

• At Perth Concert Hall, March 18; Queen's Hall, Edinburgh, March 19; City 
Halls, Glasgow, March 20.

Stephen Hough, 47

There must be something in the psychology of British audiences that requires 
their musical icons to be acquired from abroad. Otherwise Hough would already 
be acclaimed as a national treasure, for over the past decade or so he has 
consistently produced performances that place him in the top flight of 
international pianists. Perhaps the variety of his programming tells against 
him, too - as well as Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert, he also revels in the 
flashy late-Romantic repertoire, and includes salon pieces in his recitals, all 
of it delivered with immaculate polish and unerring style.

• At Wesley Chapel, Harrogate, January 3; Royal Festival Hall, London, January 
18.

Mitsuko Uchida, 59

For London audiences, the Japanese-born Uchida is a firm favourite. She took 
second prize in the 1995 Leeds piano competition, and quickly established her 
reputation as an interpreter of the Viennese classics and of Mozart in 
particular, going on to demonstrate a huge range of musical sympathies in a 
repertoire that ranges from Bach to Birtwistle, and seems to expand every 
season. Her insatiable curiosity and enthusiasm make her a wonderful chamber 
musician, too, but it's the intensity and honesty of her solo performances that 
make her such a compelling favourite.

• At the Hexagon, Reading, January 15; the Sage, Gateshead, January 19.

Andras Schiff, 54

In some quarters the Brendel-style canonisation of Schiff has already begun, 
with his performances of Beethoven, in particular, greeted with a similar 
hushed reverence. Schiff can be a remarkable interpreter, especially in the 
Viennese classics, where his pure tone and phrasing produce performances of 
emotional directness, and his recitals are put together with great imagination 
and attention to detail. At other times, though, his point-making and 
expressive moulding can seem so mannered and arch that the flow of the music is 
all but destroyed, and one longs for him just to play with his natural, 
instinctive intelligence.

• At the Steven Isserlis birthday concert, Wigmore Hall, London, tomorrow.

Murray Perahia, 61

Already awarded an honorary KBE, the New York-born pianist, who won the Leeds 
piano competition in 1973, has a devoted following. Because of a recurring hand 
problem, Perahia's concert appearances and recordings have been sporadic over 
the past decade. His repertoire ranges up to Bartók, but it's in the Viennese 
classical repertoire especially that Perahia remains such a rewarding 
interpreter. In recent years, too, Bach has become a regular feature of his 
programmes, played, like everything else, with an immaculate sense of style, 
honeyed tone and punctilious attention to detail.

• At Symphony Hall, Birmingham, January 31; Barbican, London, February 5

Radu Lupu, 63

Another Leeds winner, in 1969, Lupu is an enigma, a reclusive artist who for 
30 years has refused to play the publicity game, and, in Britain at least, has 
preferred to appear in smaller concert halls around the country rather than 
high-profile London venues. His repertoire has remained confined within Mozart, 
Beethoven, Schubert and Schumann, with occasional forays into the later 19th 
century. Yet in the right mood and on the right occasion, he is a priceless, 
unique artist, whose ability to illuminate music from within places him apart 
from his contemporaries as one of the greatest musicians of our time.

• At the Steven Isserlis birthday concert, Wigmore Hall, London, tomorrow.
 