
Picking your A-level subjects is one of the first big academic decisions that 
students face. Choosing what to study won’t just determine what you’re doing in 
year 12 and 13, it could also affect your university choices and even your 
future career. And it’s not just a case of picking between subject areas – 
you’ll need to decide what type of qualifications you want to sit and whether 
it’s best for you to do them at school or a college.

So, what options are available to year 11 students? And how can you weigh up 
which subjects best suit your ambitions? We spoke to university admissions 
tutors to find out.


1. Should I take a BTec or A-levels?

If you are studying in England, there are two main types of exams you can sit 
– BTecs orA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, says Jamie 
Bradford, school and college liaison manager at De Montfort University. 
“A-levels are exam-focused, and the benefit is that you pick three or four 
different subjects in your first year, so you don’t need to commit to studying 
just one area.” These are well established, have an academic focus and are 
recognised by all universities across the country, he adds.

Two years is a long time to do a subject, so it’s important that you have ​the 
drive and passion to succeed.

BTecs, on the other hand, tend to be more vocational and coursework-focused. 
They’re an increasingly popular option for students who want to go to 
university – last year,one in four people starting a degree course 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/one-four-university-entrants-has-btec-ucas-study-finds>
 had one. They tend to be in subjects such as business, media or performing 
arts and normally students take just one, which is equivalent to three A-levels.

 “It’s increasingly common for students to take a mix of A-levels and BTecs – 
so it’s worth finding out what your local college or sixth form offers,” says 
Philip Bloor, admissions manager at Sheffield Hallam University. If there’s a 
particular university course that you’re keen on applying to, he advises 
checking that BTecs are accepted by its admissions tutors. “In some cases the 
BTec might be better preparation for university, depending on the study style. 
They’re acceptable for lots of courses, but not all.”

2. Are AS exams important?

Students taking A-levels next year may want to find out whether local sixth 
forms will be offering AS qualifications. In the past, AS-level exams, which 
are sat at the end of year 12, made up half of the final A-level grade. However 
in many subjects (full list here 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/timeline-of-changes-to-gcses-as-and-a-levels>
), this is no longer the case. Despite this, many sixth forms are still 
entering students to AS exams, even in subjects where this won’t count towards 
the A-level mark. Doing so means that if a student wants to drop a subject 
after year 12, they’ll still have a qualification to show for their work.

At Abbeywood school in Bristol, students are being entered for AS exams so 
that teachers are able to get a sense of whether they’re on track: “It gives us 
predictions for university admissions and can be useful at a time when the 
A-level reforms are up in the air,” says Gemma Shafto, head of post-16 at the 
school.

Eight things I wish I'd known before starting my A-levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2016/jan/11/eight-things-i-wish-id-known-before-starting-my-a-levels>
3. Picking subjects: which ones do universities prefer?

Among the Russell Group universities, which are rated best for research, some 
subjects are favoured more than others. Each year it publishes an updated guide 
calledInformed Choices 
<http://russellgroup.ac.uk/for-students/school-and-college-in-the-uk/subject-choices-at-school-and-college/>
, which explains what they are looking for. For example, many admissions tutors 
won’t accept critical thinking or general studies as one of your three A-level 
grades.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are also encouraged 
to study some facilitating subjects, which include: maths, English literature, 
physics, biology, chemistry, geography, history and languages.

The number of facilitating subjects required will vary according to degree 
programme, explains Mike Nicholson, head of admissions at Bath University. 
Some, such as medicine, could require three (chemistry, biology and either 
maths or physics). However, in most cases, there’s no harm in doing one subject 
that falls outside this list, even if you are keen to go to a Russell Group 
university.

“For instance, if a student is going to do a degree where they’ll be doing 
lots of presentations, it might be useful to study drama,” he says. “With 
something like a law degree, drama may not be an obvious choice. But if you’re 
thinking about going into the legal profession, where you might need to perform 
in court, it might actually be useful.”

Russell Group universities also value the extended project, which is a 
standalone qualification, equal to an AS-level, that shows independent research 
skills. Some will include this in their offer requirements.

4. Do I need to study maths?

Maths recently overtook English to become the most popular A-level subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/datablog/2015/aug/13/a-level-results-2015-gender-gap-pass-rates-subject-popularity-charts>
. There’s good reason for this: it’s valued by admissions tutors and can help 
students to keep their options open, says Bloor. “It can allow you to apply to 
courses in the sciences, maths or computer science,” he says, but adds: “If you 
already know now that you want to study English, then there’s no need to study 
maths – you may be better off doing English language, English literature and 
history.”

Lots of courses will, however, ask for GCSEs in maths, science and English. 
“This means some students will have to resit, which can be a problem if they 
don’t find out until it’s too late. For example, for primary teaching courses 
you need to have a GCSE in a science subject, irrespective of your A-level 
grades,” says Bloor.

Is the Duke of Edinburgh award really uni application gold?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/12/is-the-duke-of-edinburgh-award-really-uni-application-gold>
5. Should I pick something I’ve never studied before?


Picking subjects can feel high stakes, but Nicholson adds that – as long as 
you’ve done your research – there’s no reason to be put off trying something 
new. “There might be a subject, like politics or the social sciences, that you 
haven’t studied at GCSE but that would be perfect,” he says.

Speak to your teachers and former students, read up on university requirements 
and try subjects out, says Scott Peasey, head of the school of A-levels and 
GCSEs at Kingston College. “A lot of universities will run taster days for year 
11s to give them a sense of what a subject is like at university level – 
they’re keen to do residential events, especially with state schools.”

6. Should I listen to my parents?


University requirements aside, you need to ensure that the subjects you pick 
are ones that you enjoy. This means thinking about what you – rather than your 
parents – believe is the best option. “A problem we often have is parents 
become obsessed with their dream, rather than their son or daughter’s reality. 
They might think ‘I want to go to Oxford’ – that’s a great dream to have, but 
if your son or daughter doesn’t want to go to Oxford, then it’s not going to 
end well.” Shafto says. “Two years is a long time to do a subject, so it’s 
important that you have the drive and passion to succeed.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 