
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> catapulted 
herself back into the world's top two by winning one of the more bizarre 
grand-slam finals of recent years.

The 23-year-old younger Williams beat her fellow-American Lindsay Davenport 
2-6 6-3 6-0 in a final that continued to tax the mind several hours after it 
had finished. As Williams celebrated her seventh grand-slam title last night, 
she owed a toast to Carole Doherty, the British physiotherapist who treated her 
after five games for a back problem that threatened to make her a sitting duck.

The dramatic turnaround in Williams's fortunes mid-way through the second set 
means she jumps from seventh to second in the women's rankings, still trailing 
the top-placed Davenport, but signalling to the tennis world that she is back 
in business after a difficult 18 months that included a serious stomach injury 
and the random murder of her sister Yetunde Price.

Suggestions that the Williams sisters have lost their appetite for tennis have 
been greeted with resentment, especially by Serena, over the past few days, 
hence the note of defiance in her delight at claiming her first major title 
since Wimbledon 2003. 'I'm excited to be number two now,' she said. 'It's been 
a long way coming back. I'm almost to my goal, and it feels great. What makes 
it much sweeter is that people are always wondering what's happening to us. 
It's nothing. We're working really hard and we just lose a few matches because 
of a few points here and there.'

Serena has clearly proved she's back with the best, although her sister Venus 
must do much more before she can claim the same. She lost in the fourth round 
to Alicia Molik, and has not done better than one quarter-final in the five 
majors she has played since losing to Serena in the 2003 Wimbledon final.

For much of yesterday's 89-minute match, it seemed the road back for Serena 
would continue to be bumpy. She was broken in the first game as Davenport came 
out striking the ball superbly and the long rally with which Davenport broke 
jarred something in Williams's back.

For the next four games, Williams looked lame. Her serves barely reached 
90mph, she was moving badly and Davenport was cruising to a fourth grand-slam 
title. It was so one-sided, the atmosphere resembled a church, even a Quaker 
meeting house such were the long silences between points, broken only by 
someone shouting 'Wake up Serena' at 4-0.

Trailing 4-1, Williams took an injury time-out that held up play for nine 
minutes. She received some manipulation from Doherty, most of it off the court, 
but it took about half an hour to have an effect. In the meantime, Davenport 
took the first set 6-2 in 35 minutes with a serve to the backhand, which 
elicited a painful groan as Williams tried in vain to return it.

The restrictions to her movement forced Williams to think. Normally a resolute 
opponent of the sliced backhand, she began using it by choice to break up 
Davenport's rhythm, and at 2-2 the back settled down enough for her to find 
some power to go with her tactical survival skills. Williams fought back from 
15-40 to deuce, and in an eight-deuce game saved another four break points 
before holding serve for 3-2. 'I knew that was a very pivotal game,' she said. 
'I just felt it, I said, "OK I need to win this one." I was serving so many 
balls my arm was hurting, but I said, "I don't care if my arm falls off, I'm 
not going to lose this game."'

She didn't, but when Davenport held to love for 3-3, a comeback still seemed a 
long way off. But from 40-0 at 4-3, Davenport played five dreadful points, 
including two double faults and Williams was away. Although Davenport looked a 
little deflated, few would have bet on her not winning another game. But the 
force was with Williams, who stormed through the third set in just 18 minutes.

Asked to explain her collapse, Davenport said: 'I think at the end I was 
definitely a little fatigued, but she took advantage when she had the 
opportunity, she raised her game, and she's a great frontrunner. Once she took 
the lead she kept playing better and better.'

Such a magnificent tournament as this centenary Australian Open has been was 
due a flat match, and the tennis in this final was not of a quality to live in 
the memory. But then to most people at Melbourne Park, the women's final was 
merely a breathing space before this morning's ecstatic climax to the 
tournament, in which Lleyton Hewitt will attempt to become the first home 
player since 1976 to win the men's singles.
 