
The government yesterday reasserted parents' right to smack their children 
despite overwhelming opposition from charities.

Kevin Brennan, the children's minister, said there was no reason to change the 
law introduced three years ago permitting smacking if it does not leave visible 
bruising, scratches or reddening of the skin.

After a review of the legislation, he told MPs: "Smacking is becoming a less 
commonly used form of discipline. While many parents say they will not smack, a 
majority say smacking should not be banned outright."

Mr Brennan insisted that the government was right to retain the law "in the 
absence of evidence it is not working satisfactorily". The police had 
discretion to prosecute parents, he added.

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, the 
children's commissioner for England, said the decision was a missed opportunity 
to protect children. "Children and young people should have the same right to 
protection under the law on common assault as that afforded to adults. There is 
no good reason why children can still be lawfully hit."

Sir Al said the government consulted children during its review. They said 
smacking was incompatible with the messages they got at school, at home and in 
the media about the need for respect and acceptable behaviour. He added: "Fear, 
shame and anger can never be a positive part of childhood."

A commitment to review the law was given by ministers when the Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> Act was going through parliament 
in 2004. In section 58, it said parents and those acting in loco parentis could 
no longer use the defence of "reasonable chastisement" if they were charged 
with assault causing actual bodily harm or cruelty. But it allowed parents to 
use the defence if the smacking did not leave visible marks.

Mr Brennan said the law was clear, but many people were unaware of its scope 
and application. The government would promote "positive parenting" and the 
police would remind officers in child abuse investigations about the borderline 
beyond which smacking was unlawful.

Tim Loughton, the shadow children's minister, said: "This is a clear victory 
for common sense. Clearly, if any adult is responsible for abuse and violence 
towards a child they need to face the full rigour of the law.

"But there is a world of difference between that and criminalising loving 
parents who use chastisement as they see fit in the interest of their child."

Dame Mary Marsh, chief executive of the children's charity NSPCC, said: "We do 
not agree with the government's view that the law is working effectively. 
Section 58 has not improved protection for children. We will continue to 
campaign for legal reform that will give children equal legal protection from 
assault as adults."

Carolyne Willow, national co-ordinator of the Children's Rights Alliance for 
England, said the government's review found about two-thirds of children had 
been smacked at some point. "Individual parents should be no longer left to 
decide whether or not to hit. The law should be crystal clear - violence is not 
acceptable in any relationship, and children should feel safe in their own 
homes."

Sir William Utting, spokesman for the Children Are Unbeatable! Alliance, said: 
"Ministers have simply put off the inevitable again. A clear majority of 
responses to the public consultation favoured changing the law ... We will now 
step up the pressure on the government."

The alliance published results of a survey of staff in children's centres and 
Sure Start projects, showing 77% wanted to ban smacking in the home because it 
was inconsistent with positive parenting.
 