
As dusk descends, the alleyways of Paradise, at the northern edge of Manila, 
are filled with the scattered laughter of street urchins, begging for money and 
rifling through the rubbish for scraps to ease their hunger.

"Paradise is a factory for [producing] children," says 37-year-old midwife 
Anna Miranda. "Their parents can no longer care for them."

After the People Power Revolution in 1986, poor migrants came from across the 
Philippines armed with hopes of building a new life on this no-man's land 
between earth and sea, once a marshy receptacle for garbage and the dead. The 
settlers named their new home Paradise.

Now, the number of street children swells as pregnancies abound every year – 
many of them unwanted and unplanned. Clandestine abortions are also common, in 
a country where abortion remains illegal. Yet Miranda knows how simple the 
solution can be. "There was one client who was getting pregnant every year," 
she says. "I inserted an IUD [intrauterine contraception device] and her life 
changed. She found work and she looks like a single woman again."

In 2008, Anna opened her own private clinic in Paradise, one of 200 franchises 
set up with the help of Population Services Pilipinas Incorporated's BlueStar 
network. The clinics are run by midwives who receive extensive training on 
family planning, counselling and business management from Marie Stopes 
International. They also have a social goal: to provide, at an affordable 
price, access to contraceptives, pre- and post-natal care, and a safe 
environment for women giving birth.

More than 100 women pass through Miranda's clinic every month, enabling her to 
make enough money to send her children to school and pay for her husband's 
treatment for tuberculosis.

Better services

Every day, 10 women in the Philippines die while giving birth, according to 
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). Nearly half of the pregnancies are 
unintended and many of the deaths could be prevented by providing access to 
reproductive healthcare, skilled birth attendants and emergency obstetric 
services. The Guttmacher Institute, a non-profit organisation which aims to 
promote sexual health, estimates that the provision of modern contraceptives 
alone would avert 2,100 maternal deaths each year.

Social franchises such as BlueStar can play an important role in preventing 
maternal deaths by making reproductive health services more affordable for many 
Filipino women, says Marilen Danguilan, a former adviser on maternal health to 
Unicef. "But [social franchising] wasn't intended to serve the very poor."

If the poor manage to enrol in Philhealth, the national health insurance 
programme, they would eventually be able to access some of BlueStar's services 
free of charge at those clinics that are Philhealth accredited. However, not 
all the clinics have this accreditation and in Paradise, as elsewhere in the 
country, less than a third of poor women are on Philhealth.

That's a problem, says Ugochi Daniels, UNFPA country representative in the 
Philippines. "It is the poor women who are having more kids than they want to 
have," she says. "It is the poor women who are unable to procure the services 
they need when the government is not providing them. And reproductive rights 
are fundamental human rights, so why should my rights be lesser because I am 
poor?"

The numbers are striking: only 25% of the poor have access to a skilled birth 
attendant compared with 94% of the rich, and 13% of the poor are able to give 
birth in a clinic or hospital compared with 83% of the rich.

Danguilan and Daniels agree that though the private sector has a role to play 
in meeting the needs of some Filipino women, a strong public health service is 
essential for the very poor who cannot afford BlueStar's fees.

"I will not let government off the hook," says Danguilan. "They have the basic 
responsibility to provide services."

Dr Sylvia Estrada-Claudio, director of the Centre for Women's Studies at the 
University of the Philippines, goes further, saying that in the long term, 
private healthcare services might actually be detrimental.

"Healthcare is a social responsibility that cannot be solved by private 
efforts," she says. "When a private healthcare clinic is opened, it defeats the 
public sector, which is already skewed. As a result you get greater inequity in 
healthcare services."

In 1995, as a response to the failing health system in the Philippines, Dr 
Estrada-Claudio co-founded Likhaan, one of the first civil society 
organisations in the Philippines devoted to women's health and reproductive 
rights.

Likhaan's work has centred on organising women in poor communities to fight 
for their rights and rigorously training community health workers to provide 
free access to basic family planning and counselling services.

One of its oldest clinics, Mothers, is based in a humble room in Paradise, and 
serves more than 1,000 women every month.

"I was moved by the cause," says 49-year-old Remedios Marcos, one of the 
community leaders at Mothers. She has lived in Paradise for nearly 22 years, 
and is one of 43 community leaders trained by Likhaan and elected by the 
2,000-member strong organisation. "After having a lot of children, and seeing 
neighbourhoods full of children, it came to me that I should help them have the 
right information."

Community leaders provide information to women on their rights, debunk 
prevailing misconceptions about contraceptive use and encourage the women to 
use their voices to change their lives.

Among their successes are the establishment of a fund to help women having 
emergencies during pregnancy; obtaining funding for reproductive health 
services; and a maternity clinic that the women have a say in running.

Yet when asked what needs to be done to improve access to services for poor 
women like themselves, a chorus of women in the clinic shouts: "Pass the RH 
bill."

Progressive legislation

After a 16-year struggle against a political elite that was intimately tied to 
the Catholic church, the Filipino House of Representatives may be as close as 
it has ever been to passing a historic reproductive health (RH) bill. The bill 
would make reproductive health and sex education compulsory in schools and 
require all public health facilities to provide access to family planning 
services, and to offer them to the poor free of charge. Funds would also be 
earmarked for emergency obstetric services.

Over 80% of Filipinos back the bill and the country's president has openly 
declared his support – the first time a president has supported such 
legislation.

If it passes, the bill would help the Philippines move towards one of the 
Millennium Development Goals – reducing maternal mortality rates by 75% and 
providing universal access to reproductive healthcare. In a country that has 
the highest birthrate in Asia – the Philippines' population is expected to 
double in the next three decades – successful passage of the bill is urgently 
needed.

The women of Paradise are not leaving things to chance. Just as the land that 
they live on was reclaimed from the sea, the women are now reclaiming their 
hopes for a better future.

As they set out to join a demonstration in support of the RH bill, one of them 
cries: "I wanted to be free. Now I am."
 