
It feels strange to be angry and disappointed in Amanda Holden. It feels like 
being let down by the little girl chalking on the blackboard on the 
old-fashioned test card. It feels like being angry at a sub-par bowl of Instant 
Whip.Amanda Holden <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> 
sits on the panel of a television talent show. She's rather pretty and has 
always seemed quite sweet. Why on earth would anyone be angry or disappointed 
with her?

Except that on Alan Carr: Chatty Man last week, Holden giggled about how she'd 
watched the Tulisa Contostavlos "sex tape". The sex tape that is not a sex tape 
– the one where Tulisa is a teenage girl and her then boyfriend films her with 
him and later it goes public. If this private stolen moment is a "sex tape!", 
then you or I humming along to the radio is a Vegas dance routine.

Contostavlos was clearly still distressed about the tape on the same Alan Carr 
show the week before. But never mind that. After her sofa-mate David Walliams 
said he'd like to watch the tape, Holden smirked that she already had and that 
theirBritain's Got Talent colleague Alesha Dixon had sent her the link: "It's a 
terrible thing to confess, but everyone wants to see it. It was her." The 
atmosphere was suddenly very sub-Dick Emery, along the lines of: "Ooh, aren't 
we awful?" Actually, Amanda, as women, you and Alesha truly are.

Let's be clear: the filming of Ms Contostavlos was not a sex tape. The sheen 
of showbiz does not alter the fact that the video of her performing a sex act 
was effectively trafficked. In this way, anyone viewing it is directly 
supporting the abuser and the abusive situation. Despite all this (the 
degradation of a young woman who's not only in their own profession but appears 
on another Simon Cowell show), the tape apparently became something for Holden 
and Dixon to girlie-bond over. It was as if the only acceptable response was to 
have a peek; that it would somehow be prudish not to watch grainy footage of a 
young girl unwittingly being set up.

Don't tell me that this is inconsequential. If porn terms make it clearer, 
what Holden and Dixon did was a high-profile act of girl-on-girl treachery, 
full-frontal female betrayal. What else could explain such shallow bitchery at 
another female's expense?

What hypocrites they both are. Holden received lots of female empathy when she 
had a horrible time with her pregnancies. Does she think that it was men 
feeling her pain? Similarly, many, including myself, felt that it was unfair to 
denounce Dixon as the villain of ageism, after she replaced Arlene Phillips on
Strictly Come Dancing. Both women have been recipients of female support and 
goodwill on a national scale. How sad and ugly that this did not translate into 
ordinary human compassion for Tulisa.

When will high-profile women learn that if they don't stick up for each other, 
then no one else will? How difficult is it to refuse to engage with 
misogynistic bullying? To refuse to view such an artefact and explain that you 
know the difference between a "must-see" YouTube footage of, say, a puppy being 
silly and the public humiliation of a young woman?

Oddly, Holden made some reference to females supporting each other on the same 
chat show, moments before smirking about the sex tape. Clearly, she doesn't 
realise that feminism, at its purest, is women simply trying to look out for 
each other, something she and Dixon could have done, instead of what they did 
do. Maybe it was this – the offhand cruelty – that made this female-on-female 
betrayal such an unedifying spectacle. Well, if you can't beat 'em, join 'em. 
To borrow fromBritain's Got Talent, where female solidarity is concerned, I'm 
buzzing Holden and Dixon off.

For Roy Hodgson, the jokes must be a pain in the Rs 

So what of new England football manager, Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson>, and the media merriment 
with him being unable to pronounce his Rs? As it happens, I couldn't say my Rs 
growing up; one of my nicknames was Barbawa.

It's not so bad, these days, though it could still get messy were I suddenly 
called upon repeatedly to enunciate words such as "rhododendron" or "rarefied". 
Any word with a couple of Rs thrown in and I'm linguistic road-kill.

However, as Jonathan Ross pointed out, being R-less isn't too bad.

It's not the same as having a stammer or even a lisp. Rhotacism (the proper 
term) isn't even classed as a speech impediment, just "a variation of 
pronouncement". So nerrr. Or, as I would say, ne.

In Hodgson's case, the problem is not the lack of Rs, it's the England 
manager's job, a position that makes having your face repeatedly plunged into 
boiling tar look infinitely more pleasant and reasonable.

For him, the Rs are only going to matter when England inevitably lose 33-nil 
in a crucial World Cup qualifier, with headlines screaming: "Wubbish!" At which 
point, Hodgson may find that "sorry" is indeed the hardest word.

Doing porridge could be a nice earner

Justice secretary Kenneth Clarke wants major companies, such as Virgin and 
Marks & Spencer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-17938269>correct, to employ 
ex-offenders in an effort to break the cycle of reoffending, which currently 
stands at up to 50% within one year. Clarke also wants prisons to pay for 
themselves by introducing manufacturing and other services on a regular 
commercial basis.

It's certainly better than hang 'em and flog 'em. Nobody in their right mind 
could be against the idea of offering released prisoners employment 
opportunities. I agree with Clarke that most of these prisoners would 
appreciate a second chance and might possibly work harder, with more pride and 
commitment, than the average non-offender.

Just so long as this is about careers and not grisly McJobs, which could 
easily become as depressing and bleak as being unemployed. If companies are to 
demonstrate social responsibility, then so must the government, by regulating 
and facilitating authentic opportunities, where prisoners could be excited by 
the prospect of a new beginning, not discouraged by what amounts to a glorified 
dead end.

The same goes for the idea of commercialising British prisons. A comical 
vision presents itself of Wandsworth as a drive-through burger joint: "Do you 
want fries with that or a sawn-off shotgun?" But what's wrong with the idea of 
sustained prison production or training inmates as apprentices for industry?

However, if prisoners are to take an active part in paying for their own 
incarceration, then they should also reap some gains, obviously with regard to 
sentencing, but in terms of enhanced conditions and privileges. Otherwise it's 
just breaking rocks all over again.

While some of Clarke's penal reforms sound intriguing, they could only be 
truly workable once prisoners' voices are heard.
 