
One of my issues with post-modern society, especially one that’s been spurred 
on by Twitter to enjoy everything ironically, is that things get to “somehow 
work” even when they’re “simply not meant to”. If there’s a cafe furnished with 
broken crates that serves coffee in a rusty sieve, rest assured some blogger 
will crown it a brilliant commentary on cafe culture, even as you’re walking 
home with coffee stains down your front and a bum full of splinters.

Likewise Gogglebox. I remain convinced it’s the most futile thing to have ever 
made it to the small screen but so many people are now singing its praises I 
wonder if it’s just me not getting it. Part of my aversion is the programs it 
curates for the Goggleboxers – shows I’ve done my best to avoid first time 
round, like The Real Housewives of Melbourne, Family Feud, I’m a Celebrity ..., 
and a doco about the royals.

Am I meant to enjoy this masochistic montage simply because I’m watching it 
third-hand with some second-hand commentary plopped on top? You might as well 
toss a dead octopus on my living room carpet and call it scuba. It’s reality TV 
turducken. A sentient fart that’s somehow learnt how to complain about its own 
smell.

The ABC ushered out a rubbish 2014 – now for the pointless Gogglebox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/05/the-abc-helped-us-see-out-a-rubbish-2014-now-for-the-pointless-gogglebox>
Gogglebox’s fans point to the show as proof that TV still brings people 
together, in this case an eclectic bunch including Indigenous art dealers Micki 
and Di, physiotherapy student flatmates Adam and Symon, and four Australian 
families. They’re all friendly and watchable enough – essential if they’re 
going to be the sofa stars of the show. But please tell me they know (and we 
know) what they’ve really signed up to is a last-ditch ad campaign for 
scheduled television.

Museums bring people together too, but they don’t make a habit of proving the 
point, taxidermically, by stuffing their visitors and displaying them in some 
macabre meta-exhibit. “Excuse me, but where are the dinosaurs I paid to see?” 
“Oh we got rid of those in favour of our Museum-goers interactive. But do push 
this button to hear them talking about the TRex.”

In Thursday’s episode (already taken down from Tenplay 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/gogglebox>, so you can’t watch it even if 
you’re mad enough to want to), one Goggleboxer complained that Heston’s 
Fantastical Food was pointless, that all Heston/Wonka was doing was making big 
versions of regular food. This screamed the question: if what they were 
watching had no value, what on earth was I doing?

I might as well watch people watching nothing. Or maybe that is the point: to 
make you realise most TV is a waste of time and that Gogglebox is therefore the 
very pinnacle of its genre.

They’re Good, Get Them a Different Show

While we’re on the topic of harmless faff, the reality TV sentence I’m a 
Celebrity Get Me Out of Here 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here> finally 
came to an end on Sunday, liberating your Twitter feed from the “hashtag celeb” 
production line and crowning cricketer and serial bed-sitter Freddie Flintoff 
as its king of the jungle. At least that’s one less thing to watch the 
Goggleboxers watching (dear me, the wording that show has made possible!).

I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here is television and it's there, so I'll watch 
it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/02/im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-australia>
The celebs themselves were often entertaining and, in between the laughs, some 
interesting issues were debated – fat-shaming, misogyny, depression, homophobia 
– but I’m not sad the format is taking a jungle holiday of its own. It’s 
needless voyeurism occasionally punctuated by plates of maggots. Just because 
he or she is famous, I don’t need to see someone tucking into a pizza last used 
in the opening credits of The Walking Dead.

Also, get Julia Morris and Chris Brown out of there and presenting something 
else. I ended up looking forward to their segments more than the footage from 
camp. They had a dynamic I wouldn’t mind seeing again, just … somewhere else. 
Perhaps we could film them reading Guardian articles on a sofa? No, that would 
be ridiculous. And therefore BRILLIANT! No, just ridiculous. Or … no.
 