
Father Christmas? The tooth fairy? The Easter bunny? Are you someone to 
believe in? With this droll series of questions, the Department for Children, 
Schools and Families invited applications for a children's commissioner for 
England, to replace the incumbent, SirAl Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>. The salary, undisclosed, 
is "attractive".

What qualifications will be required? None, as such. "You might see yourself 
as an ambassador and campaigner for children," suggests the job advertisement. 
"Perhaps you're a kind of children's champion already."

And the job description? This, too, is tantalisingly vague. "It won't be your 
agenda you're pushing, but the children's." Well, someone needs to. Just a few 
days after the ads appeared, Ofsted published a report on the support available 
to those unfortunate children for whom the favoured euphemism is "young 
carers". This designation, with its hint of a precocious commitment to 
selflessness, could not be better chosen to conceal the fact that children 
looking after their disabled parents appear to be Britain's last legal source 
of child labour.Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> describes 
them as often "unidentified, unsupported and without a voice".

Around 175,000 children and young people, some as young as eight, are thought 
to be caring for their parents, doing everything from washing and feeding the 
adults to running the household. "Caring tasks included the collection and 
administration of medicine, first aid and dealing with family finances," Ofsted 
reports, in its "Supporting Young Carers" survey.

Unsurprisingly, many of the children struggle at school, getting there late, 
neglecting homework, missing class altogether. Sometimes, schools are better 
than any other agency at helping young carers. Sometimes not. "They don't 
remember I'm a young carer," says a child quoted in the Ofsted report. He says 
he "just puts up with detention". The young carers, the report notes, "were 
accepting of their caring role. They saw it as part of normal life".

Perhaps the stoicism of these children is one reason why we, too, seem so 
happy to countenance the surrender of their childhoods. In fact, we go further: 
the heroic achievements of young carers are regularly applauded on big 
broadcast charity nights or at tearful award ceremonies, as a model of youthful 
sacrifice. Bizarrely, an audience that would be aghast if prizes rewarded 
British children's commitment to begging, or their ingenuity in surviving on 
the streets, persists in hailing the neglect of these particular children's 
needs as if it were a worthy form of martyrdom. As if we did not have paid 
carers, nowadays, to help disabled people, where no children are available. But 
the more childish time consumed by washing, cooking, turning, nursing, ladling 
out medicine in the night, the louder the cheers.

Can there ever be proper help for schoolchildren caring for sick parents, when 
so many people think this is a defensible form of child abuse? In a decent 
country, we should not need an updated term for this form of drudgery, any more 
than we need one for chimney sweeps or scullery maids. Both of whom, one 
imagines, got time off.

Even professionals, to judge by the Ofsted report, could learn something from 
19th-century philanthropists who campaigned against child servitude. Proper 
assistance for these young carers is partly frustrated, it found, by "a view 
among some professionals that it is acceptable for young family members to 
adopt caring roles".

In Bleak House, Dickens introduces Judy Smallweed, a child who has "never 
owned a doll, never heard of Cinderella, never played at any game". The Ofsted 
survey is hardly less heartbreaking about real children with gruelling duties. 
As noble as their vocation might be, it does not sound like fun.Young carers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/young-carers> describe their lives as 
"hard" and "stressful". "If her speech knocks out I have to lay pillows round 
her in case she fits," explains one child. Another recalls: "I was quite 
lonely; I didn't know how many people were like me."

The government, on the other hand, has known the numbers for a while. The 2001 
census provided the figure of 175,000 young carers, though Ofsted thinks this 
is an underestimate, "because many families do not reveal their situation". Two 
years ago, after the Princess Royal Trust for Carers described exhausted 
children crying themselves to sleep, the then children's minister, Beverley 
Hughes, maintained that the government had the needs of these young carers "in 
the frame".

She insisted a variety of agencies wanted "to make sure that every family gets 
the level of support they need". The Ofsted report confirms that this is 
complete rubbish. The needs of disabled adults continue to be assessed without 
reference to their children's lives. Or worse, they are assessed in the evident 
expectation that children should double as dependable suppliers of free patient 
care.

This failure is all the more shameful when you consider that Gordon Brown's 
default vision is, invariably, his grand scheme for children. It was topped up 
only last week with his absurd proposal to make action on child poverty legally 
enforceable. During the moment when he was popular, after that idyllic, wet 
summer spent seeing off floods and foot and mouth, he went so far as to compare 
himself, where children are concerned, with Jesus. "We all remember that 
biblical saying," he blithered, "'suffer the little children to come unto me'. 
No Bible I have ever read says: 'Bring just some of the children'."

Though his government has no excuse, in that case, for sustained neglect of a 
vulnerable group of children, it does not help that some young carers and their 
parents actively embrace their invisibility. Some families do not know that 
state support exists, others deliberately avoid it. "It's the issue of 
embarrassment," explains Maureen Nuttall, of the charity Action forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, "and fear of outcomes of 
intervention. Will they be judged negatively?"

While parents are anxious about social services, children may realise how 
different their lives are from their peers', become ashamed, or frightened of 
bullying, and yet more isolated. "Often, they are very withdrawn and lack 
confidence," Nuttall says. "They don't want to draw attention to themselves. 
And sometimes parents will say, 'I don't want you to tell anybody.'" A child 
quoted by Ofsted says: "I don't have anyone back and I don't go out - just say 
I can't be bothered, it's easier than explaining."

It was for another character in Bleak House, the ghastly Mrs Jellyby, that 
Dickens coined the phrase "telescopic philanthropy". Consumed by concern for 
the inhabitants of remote Borrioboola-Gha, she ignores deserving causes under 
her nose. Perhaps, given his promise of personal transformation, it is not too 
late for Brown to demonstrate that his own, admirable vision for children is 
universally applicable. If it is pitiful that African children should have to 
stay away from school or forfeit their childhoods in order to care for sick 
parents, it is grotesque to discover that children are doing the same thing 
here, in the land of the attractively paid children's commissioner. No wonder 
the advert compares him to the tooth fairy.
 