
Back off, wrinklies – we can handle it! That's the attitude from teenagers to 
parental concerns about drinking. And it's hardly surprising, says John 
Castleton, a psychologist who specialises in substance misuse: after all, 
adolescence is well-known as a time for risk-taking and testing the boundaries 
– teenagers wouldn't be teenagers if they weren't doing these things.

What's also true, says Castleton, is that alcohol has become a normal part of 
life – so adults can hardly be surprised that it's become normal for young 
people too. "As a society, we have to be careful that what we're saying to 
youngsters doesn't come across as hypocritical. Too many of us have the view 
that we know we drink carefully: it's just everyone else who doesn't."

What's more, it's important not to underestimate the influence parents have as 
role models. Many youngsters say they've watched their parents knocking back 
wine at parties for years – only to have them turn round and say it's not ok 
for them to do it when they reach adolescence.

Binge drinking, of course, is what parents most fear – and there's evidence 
that the teenagers who do drink, drink more than in the past. Some of the 
teenagers we spoke to say they hardly ever drink just one glass – when they go 
out drinking, they're planning to get "hammered".

Stress

There's also evidence that young people are feeling more under pressure than 
in the past, and are turning to alcohol to help deal with the stresses in their 
lives. A study last year found that one in three 16-year-olds uses alcohol to 
help cope with the pressure of looming exams and coursework.

What's very clear, Castleton and most other experts agree, is that there's 
little point in trying to tackle youngsters' drinking by itself. "You can't 
address young people's behaviour if you are not addressing the wider values of 
our society," he says. "Why does anyone drink; why do we as a society think 
alcohol is the acceptable drug? Why is drinking so linked with socialising, and 
why have we as a society made drink so readily available?"

Professor Mark Bellis, director of public health at Liverpool John Moores 
University and one of the leading UK experts on young people and alcohol, 
believes parents need to talk to their children a lot more about drinking – and 
they need to start talking sooner. "By the time young people actually start to 
drink, they already have a whole lot of ideas about what drinking is – and many 
of them have come from advertising and the internet and other places," says 
Bellis, who is also a member of the charity Drinkaware's medical advisory 
panel. "Children need to learn about alcohol, and they need to learn correct 
information and to get the right idea about it."

Consistency is the key to getting the message across: and in the years ahead 
there are likely to be many more properly run, government campaigns aimed at 
reducing alcohol consumption across the board. "The thing we have to remember 
is that it's only in the last few years that we've had a National Alcohol 
Strategy," says Castleton. "We've put nothing like the amount of energy into 
getting messages across on alcohol that we have on drugs." Increasingly, 
though, there's a consensus that will have to change.

Alcohol and teenagers – the facts

• Eight out of 10 15-year-olds have tried alcohol

• Half of 16- and 17-year-olds drink at least once a week

• A Drinkaware survey found more than a third of 16- and 17-year-olds would 
prefer to get advice on drinking alcohol from their parents than from anyone 
else

• Official government advice is that under-15s shouldn't drink at all. 
Over-15s ideally shouldn't drink either – but if they drink at all it should be 
on not more than one day a week. They should only drink below adult daily limits

• Every year 10,000 youngsters aged 11–17 are admitted to hospital because of 
alcohol. Over half are under 16

• Alcohol plays a big part in antisocial behaviour, crime and violence among 
teenagers, as well as unprotected sex and teenage pregnancy

• Drinking can disrupt teenage brain development and cause problems with 
memory and attention span
 