
A stellar year for Ange Postecoglou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> and his Socceroos team 
has been recognised by the Asian Football Confederation at its annual awards 
ceremony in India where Postecoglou took out Asian coach of the year and 
Australia picked up the team of the year award.

The brace of gongs come at the end of a hugely successful 12 months for 
Australian football. The Socceroos won the Asian Cup on home soil at the 
beginning of 2015 and currently sit atop their World Cup 2018 qualifying group 
and on course to reach Russia. Out of 14 games played this year, they have won 
10, losing just twice.

 “I am truly honoured to accept the award,” said Postecoglou after the 
ceremony in Gurgaon, near New Delhi. “As an Australian, coaching our national 
team is a truly humbling experience and to be recognised for what we have 
achieved in the last 12 months is a nice recognition.

 “Australian football is taking significant steps forward and our coaches are 
a huge part of that. Coaching has played a significant role in the evolution of 
the way we play football and this award is also a positive reinforcement of the 
ability of Australian coaches to compete at the highest level.”

Mile Jedinak, the Socceroos captain, said the awards were well deserved and an 
indication of how far the game has progressed inAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> in recent times.

Kyah Simon fires Matildas to friendly victory over South Korea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/kyah-simon-fires-matildas-to-friendly-victory-over-south-korea>
“Everyone involved, from players, coaches, team staff, the FFA and our 
families deserve praise for playing their part in the success of the Socceroos 
in 2015,” Jedinak said. “Winning the Asian Cup on home soil in front of a 
packed stadium ... was a special night and the highlight of the last 12 months. 
The boss [Postecoglou] talks to us a lot about the journey we are on and this 
award shows that we are heading in the right direction.”


Socceroos midfielder Massimo Luongo, who was named the Asian Cup’s player of 
the tournament in January, lost out to Tottenham and South Korean winger Son 
Heung-min in the international player of the year category, while Ahmed Khalil 
of the United Arab Emirates was crowned men’s player of the year.

Matildas midfielder Elise Kellond-Knight will have to wait to find out if she 
has won the women’s player of the year award though, with the announcement 
delayed due to the nominees’ international commitments. TheMatildas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/matildas> were in South Korea on Sunday, 
while fellow nominees Aya Miyama and Rumi Utsugi were in Holland with Japan.

The AFC said a separate ceremony would be organised at a later date to award 
the prize “in a fitting and appropriate manner in order to give it the 
recognition it deserves”.

The big women’s awards that were announced on the night were dominated by 
Japan, with Asako Takakura winning coach of the year and the World Cup 
finalists taking out team of the year.
 