
Iraqis who accused British soldiers of murder and torture after a fierce 
battle are guilty of a "criminal conspiracy" to pervert the course of justice 
and repeatedly lied under oath to a public inquiry, the Ministry of Defence has 
said.

The serious charge was made during bitter and heated exchanges as lawyers for 
the Iraqis accused the British soldiers of "gross violations of the Geneva 
conventions", including mock executions. Lawyers for the British soldiers 
suggested the motive behind the Iraqi allegations was an attempt to extract 
financial compensation.

The sharp claims and counter-claims came at the end of a year-long series of 
hearings into the battle of Danny Boy, a checkpoint on the main Amara-Basra 
road in south-eastIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, on 14 May 
2004. Twenty Iraqis were killed and nine others captured in the battle.

The al-Sweady inquiry, named after a 19-year-old Iraqi killed by British 
troops, was set up to examine allegations that on that the Iraqis were 
unlawfully killed, that dead bodies were mutilated by British soldiers and that 
detainees were ill-treated.

The inquiry, which has so far cost nearly £23m, was set up in 2009 after 
senior high court judges accused the MoD of a "lamentable" failure to disclose 
documents and conduct its own proper investigation into the allegations.

Jeremy Johnson QC, for the MoD, countered that criticism on Wednesday by 
accusing the Iraqis' lawyers of failing to disclose that their clients were 
armed insurgents and not innocent civilians. That disclosure could have stopped 
the call for a public inquiry in its tracks, Johnson claimed.

The inquiry heard that British military police were prevented from conducting 
a speedy investigation into the battle and its aftermath by their commanders, 
who said they wanted to protect young soldiers traumatised by the bloody 
gunfight.

Claims that the soldiers violated the Geneva conventions were made in the 
course of damning criticism of the soldiers' conduct and that of the MoD by 
Patrick O'Connor QC, counsel for the Iraqis.

He accused the soldiers of "inhuman and degrading treatment of wounded, broken 
and helpless young men who were utterly at the mercy of their military handlers 
and interrogators. Trained techniques were used to break them down or condition 
them, as it was called."

O'Connor said: "At its worst, the impression was deliberately created that 
executions were taking place around them – mock executions to terrorise them 
further. Professional doctors and officers and NCOs charged with the duty to 
protect the welfare of prisoners failed in their duties."

He accused the army of a "catastrophic breakdown" in military discipline and 
described the MoD's attempts to dismiss all the allegations as an "Arcadian 
fantasy".

He said the MoD had fought tooth and nail against the independent public 
inquiry, chaired by the former senior judge Sir Thayne Forbes. "We are seeing 
the cold arrogance of the British state at work," he said.

Neil Garnham QC, for the soldiers, accused the Iraqi witnesses of 
"persistently and deliberately giving false evidence under oath".

Garnham repeatedly described evidence from Iraqi witnesses as "lies", and 
strongly attacked the conduct and claims made by Phil Shiner, of Public 
Interest Lawyers, the firm representing the Iraqis.

There were Iraqi witnesses, "who in addition to having a clear ulterior motive 
to make allegations of mistreatment in the form of claims for financial 
compensation, have expressed a violent antipathy towards the coalition forces 
and those they consider responsible for their detention", Garnham said.

Government lawyers representing the soldiers – mainly from the Argyll and 
Sutherland Highlanders and 1 Battalion, the Princess of Wales Royal Regiment – 
said: "Whatever criticism [Forbes] might make about army policies and 
procedures and about the individual acts and omissions of busy servicemen 
seeking to do their best in difficult and trying conditions, he should make it 
crystal clear that the suggestion that the British took captured Iraqis back to 
their bases and tortured or murdered them, or mutilated the bodies of dead 
Iraqis, is a complete fabrication devoid of any evidential support".

O'Connor told the inquiry last month that the Iraqis now conceded there was no 
evidence that prisoners were killed inside the British camp, though he said 
"unlawful killings may well have occurred on the battlefield or elsewhere 
outside the base camp". He added: "That issue has not been fully investigated 
as part of this inquiry."

On Wednesday the MoD said Forbes should consider what happened on the 
battlefield itself, even though this was outside his terms of reference. Forbes 
will give an account of what happened in his report, which he hopes to complete 
by November this year. His main task will be to judge whether young and 
inexperienced British soldiers were adequately prepared and led, and how they 
responded to a violent ambush by Iraqi insurgents.

The inquiry has read more than 5,000 official documents and heard from more 
than 100 Iraqi witnesses and nearly 500 military ones. Lawyers representing 
both sides will have the right of reply to what they heard on Wednesday. 
Forbes's report will be sent to the high court where judges will consider 
whether further action should be taken.
 