
British soldiers were under "almost constant bombardment" in southern Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and it was unsurprising they did not 
want speedy investigations into shooting incidents, the army's most senior 
military police officer there told a public inquiry on Tuesday.

"In Iraq, there were so many shots being fired on a day-to-day basis and so 
many [shooting] contacts the soldiers were facing that it was almost 
overwhelming", said Lt Col Sally Purnell. She was giving evidence to an inquiry 
into allegations that the soldiers killed and mistreated unarmed Iraqis in May 
2004 after the battle of Danny Boy, the name of a checkpoint north of Basra.

The official policy of quick investigations "was written for a more benign 
environment and completely unworkable", Purnell said. However, while she 
sympathised with the soldiers demanding a delay before being questioned about 
the shootings in the battle, she emphasised the need for an investigation into 
how soldiers later collected the bodies of dead Iraqis from the battlefield and 
how they treated prisoners.

The inquiry, in London, heard that an International Committee of the Red Cross 
doctor found on the prisoners "injuries to wrists indicating excessive force in 
manhandling them". The al-Sweady inquiry – named after a 19-year-old Iraqi 
allegedly killed in the battle – was set up after the high court sharply 
attacked the Ministry of Defence for failing to conduct its own proper inquiry. 
The MoD denies the allegations.

Lucy Bowen, a military police special investigations officer, told the inquiry 
on Monday that senior army officers in Iraq "slammed the door" and blocked a 
military police investigation into the treatment of prisoners captured after a 
fierce battle in Iraq, and then tried to deny having done so, a public inquiry 
into the incident has heard.

The inquiry also heard that Major James Coote, of 1 Battalion Princess of 
Wales Royal Regiment, told his soldiers: "No one is to talk to the police until 
briefed by me … there is nothing to hide – we are simply ensuring that nothing 
comes back to haunt us in a few months' time."

Asked about the order, Purnell said she could only assume that Coote was 
trying to protect his soldiers. Coote has told the inquiry that he had given 
his order out of a duty of care to his soldiers, many of whom were "young men 
upset by events".

Major (now Colonel) Simon Hutchings, a senior officer in the army's 1 
Mechanised Brigade then based in Basra, told the inquiry on Tuesday that a 
speedy military police investigation would have "slowed the tempo" of military 
operations.

The hearing continues.
 