
Raffaele Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito>, the 
Italian who, along with Amanda Knox, was definitively acquitted of the murder 
of British student Meredith Kercher, has said he will no longer accept being 
called a murderer and needs “time to heal” following the seven-and-a-half year 
legal saga.

Sollecito, 31, and his former American girlfriend served four years in prison 
after Kercher was found dead in Perugia in 2007. On Monday, he expressed a 
sense of disbelief that the battle to prove his innocence was finally over 
after the unexpected verdict from Italy’s highest court.

“It’s affected my heart, it’s affected my mind. This wound will always bleed,” 
he said at a press conference in Rome.

He added that he had briefly spoken to Knox, who is living in Seattle, and had 
congratulated her after the ruling from the court of cassation came in on 
Friday night. The two did not, however, have any plans to meet, he said.

Sollecito’s words seemed reflective and defiant, even as some press accounts 
of the surprise verdict continued to raise questions about the night of the 
murder and the unanswered questions surrounding the circumstances of Kercher’s 
death.

“I don’t expect from now on to be called an assassin and I’ll be ready to 
defend my dignity,” Sollecito said.

Meredith Kercher murder: Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito acquitted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
Sollecito, who has been fully exonerated, did not explicitly say he would seek 
compensation for being wrongly convicted and imprisoned. But his attorney, 
Giulia Bongiorno, said that her client was “evaluating” whether to seek 
payment. If he did, she said, it would not be as an act of revenge.

“We are not going to whip the people who made mistakes,” she said, adding that 
they would wait to read the legal rationale for the judges’ decision before 
acting.

The full decision will be released in less than 90 days. Sollecito denied 
being surprised at the verdict even though his own attorneys seemed stunned 
when it was read out by the presiding judge in the case.

Such outright acquittals are exceedingly rare in the high court, but Sollecito 
insisted this one had been inevitable. “It had to end this way because this is 
what happened. This is the right ending,” he said. He added: “It was the 
beginning of a new life.”

Kercher and Knox met while they were studying abroad in Perugia, Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. They were housemates when the 
Briton, from Coulsdon, Surrey, was sexually assaulted and killed in November 
2007. Rudy Guede, a petty criminal who was known to Perugian police, was 
convicted of Kercher’s murder but was not believed by judges to have acted 
alone.

Both Sollecito and Knox were convicted of her murder but then acquitted in 
2011. That ruling was subsequently reversed and their convictions were 
reinstated in 2014. The long-running legal saga came to a definitive end on 
Friday, when the high court threw out the charges.

Usually, the high court would send a case back for re-trial or uphold a prior 
conviction. The Kercher family have said that the annulment verdict surprised 
and shocked them. But Sollecito said he had been accused of murder “without an 
element of proof” and that the high court’s decision was like a “rebirth”. “I 
am very sorry that Meredith’s family is disappointed about the verdict,” he 
added.

Speaking in English at the end of the press conference, he said it was hard to 
imagine a life that was no longer in limbo. “Seven years and five months is an 
unbelievably long time and it is hard to think that now everything has 
changed,” he said.
 