
The self-proclaimed king of rock and soul, Solomon Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/solomon-burke>, whose hits included 
Everybody Needs Somebody to Love, has died at Schiphol airport in Holland, aged 
70.

The beautiful voice, apparently effortless style, and pristine diction and 
timing of the preacher turned singer-songwriter were legendary in the business. 
He was described by Jerry Wexler, his producer at Atlantic Records, as "the 
best soul singer of all time", and sold more than 17m records.

Burke had just arrived on a flight from LA and was due to perform in Amsterdam 
on Tuesday with the Dutch rock band De Dijk, to launch their joint album, Hold 
On Tight, his second album of the year.

He said earlier this year that he was clocking up a steady 130,000 annual 
frequent flyer air miles, performing across the States and in Europe – and inan 
interview with the Telegraph last month 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/rockandpopfeatures/8025383/Solomon-Burke-Ill-sing-as-long-as-I-have-breath.html>
, he said: "As long as I have breath to do it, I'll sing."

After years when he was better known through cover versions of his songs than 
his own recordings, his career was reborn after his induction into the Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame in 2001, and first Grammy award for the album, Don't Give Up 
On Me, the following year. Burke won new generations of fans at every 
appearance, including at Glastonbury two years ago.

He was born in Philadelphia in 1940, began singing in a church choir as a 
child and preaching too – he was dubbed The Wonder Boy Preacher – and was 
recording by the age of 14. He once said: "The only thing I don't know is what 
key I was crying in when I came into this world."

His website <http://www.thekingsolomonburke.com/> boasted that he was born "to 
the sound of horns and bass drums". From his earliest songs he created a 
distinctive style, mixing soul, rock and roll and country influences.

His first album for Atlantic Records in 1962, when he was 22 (or possibly 24 – 
he was deliberately vague about his birthdate) was entitled Solomon Burke's 
Greatest Hits.

The country style fooled the Ku Klux Klan into believing he was a white singer 
and he was once booked to entertain at a rally: not only did he escape 
unscathed, the audience repeatedly requested their favourite numbers.

Later hits included the 1964 classic Everybody Needs Somebody to Love, covered 
by everyone from the Rolling Stones to the Blues Brothers, and Cry to Me, used 
in the film Dirty Dancing. He in turn performed songs by Bob Dylan, Tom Waits, 
Van Morrison and Elvis Costello, and duetted with Dolly Parton, Emmylou Harris 
and Joss Stone.

He was a giant of the soul world, literally and figuratively, with 21 
children, 90 grandchildren, and 19 great-grandchildren, and in later life 
became immensely heavy.

In many of his last appearances, including Top of the Pops seven years ago, he 
sang magisteriallyseated in a throne-like armchair 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sbseZp1nbDg>.
 