
Sophie Mirabella is on the cusp of defeat in the Victorian electorate of Indi, 
with the Australian Electoral Commission confirming that independent challenger
Cathy McGowan <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan> is 
"pretty certain" of victory as the final votes are counted.

According to the Australian Electoral Commission, McGowan's lead had been 
whittled down from more than 1,000 to 387 on Tuesday in a count of pre-poll 
absentee and provisional votes.

Mirabella has claimed 57.2% of the postal and pre-poll votes so far, partially 
due to her strong pre-poll campaign, unlike the McGowan camp, which hadn't 
factored postal votes into its strategy. The AEC told Guardian Australia there 
were just 645 pre-poll and postal votes left to process and count, making it 
unlikely that Mirabella, the incumbent Coalition MP, will overtake McGowan.
 Cathy McGowan is waiting for the AEC to declare before claiming victory. 
Photograph: AAP/Cathy McGowan Office 
Steve Kennedy, the director of operations in the AEC's Victoria office, told 
Guardian Australia that McGowan was "pretty certain" of victory by more than 
300 votes, based on current trends.

"I wouldn't like to speculate too much as I like to deal with the counting of 
votes rather than projections, but Cathy McGowan certainly has a reasonable 
lead on 387," he said.

Postal votes will be accepted until Friday, although the AEC has said these 
have "slowed to a trickle" and are unlikely to significantly affect the final 
result.

It's understood that the AEC will declare the poll either on Wednesday or 
Thursday. McGowan is waiting for the AEC to declare before claiming victory. A 
spokesman for Mirabella hadn't returned Guardian Australia's calls at the time 
of publication.

On Monday, Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>
 confirmed that Mirabella, who was shadow science minister, wouldn't be part of 
his first ministry, although he said he hoped she would "claw back" her deficit 
and overtake McGowan.

Mirabella has held Indi, a large rural electorate that covers Victoria's 
north-east, since 2001, but has suffered a fall in her primary vote ever since, 
including a 7% drop in this election.

Should McGowan triumph, Mirabella will become the only sitting Liberal MP to 
lose their seat in the election.
 