
One by one the majors have dropped off Arnold Palmer's to do list. 

In June 1994 he marched up the 18th fairway at Oakmont Country Club, in his 
native western Pennsylvania, through the rolling thunder of adoring fans. He 
sobbed quietly into a towel, not ashamed to show his sadness in a jammed media 
centre and with a wave he was gone from the US Open.

In 1994 he left the PGA Championship in the dense heat at Southern Hills in 
Oklahoma. In 1995 he waved goodbye to the Open Championship from the Swilcan 
Bridge at St Andrews.

This time, in the cool grey of an overcast Georgia day, it is the Masters, his 
50th and last.

A man of 74 is not likely to bounce across this rolling terrain but as he 
trudged the emerald hills of Augusta National yesterday there was a little more 
slump to his shoulders.

It did not help that, though he might have been playing well for a man of 74, 
he was not playing well forArnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>. After going out in a 
four-over-par 40 he finished on 84, making it a near certainty that tomorrow 
will mark his final round in a major field.

At the 10th, he pulled his tee shot down the hill and into the trees on the 
left. The gallery jammed along the ropes was deprived the real Arnie. In 
another time he would have hit a huge sweeping draw - rather die than not go 
for the green. But those tree limbs were dropping low and he had to be content 
with a punch shot on to the fairway before missing the green with a simple 
pitch. There were no groans from the gallery, just polite applause. They were 
watching history not golf and preferred to recall those rosier days.

"I don't remember Arnold in his first Masters in '55," said Furman Bisher, the 
veteran columnist for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. "But I do remember him 
in '57 when Bing Crosby told me, 'You know, the more I see of that Palmer kid, 
the more I think he's going to be a pretty good player.'"

Dan Jenkins, a columnist for Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> 
Digest and the author of numerous books, put Palmer in context. "I told Arnold 
yesterday, I just had my thrill for the day," Jenkins said. "And he said, 
'Yeah? What was that?' And I said, 'I just watched 20 people gallery you 
getting out of your car.'"

By all accounts, Palmer made the Masters what it is today with his bold play 
and four victories in 1958, '60, '62 and '64.

Hootie Johnson, the chairman of Augusta, was asked what Palmer means to the 
tournament. "After Bobby Jones founding this place," said Johnson, "I guess 
Arnold has meant more to the Masters tournament that anyone - he's meant more 
to golf."

This is actually the second "last Masters" for Palmer. The 2002 tournament was 
the first. Then the course had been lengthened and strengthened against the 
onslaught of new equipment and new muscles. At the par-four 1st Palmer hit a 
driver and, where his second shot was never more than a seven-iron, he was 
short of the green with a fairway wood.

"What did you hit?" someone asked. "You had to ask that, didn't you? You just 
want to embarrass me, right?" Palmer said. "I hit a three-wood as hard as I 
could hit that son of a bitch."

By the end of the round he was saying, "It's over. It's done." 

Before long, he was back for another, a notion that moved someone to raise the 
issue with Jack Nicklaus. "Now, will this be Arnold's last one?" Nicklaus said 
with a laugh. "I wouldn't bet on it."
 