
If, as they say, you can judge a country by how it treats its children's 
commissioners, there is certainly reason for hope. Obviously one does not in a 
place like the UK expect to find anything approaching Scandinavian levels of 
commissioner well-being, but reports suggest that these officials are 
increasingly likely to be well-fed and housed, with a number achieving the 
desired grades A to C at GCSE. With the news that mosquito devices have been 
banned by Kent County Council, there is evidence that commissioners are, at 
last, being listened to. While some discrimination persists - many small 
shopkeepers still refuse to have more than two commissioners on their premises 
at any one time - there is evidence of increasingly high levels of self-esteem, 
demonstrated last week in the UK commissioners' new report to the UN Committee 
on the Rights of the Child. 'The fact that we exist,' they begin, 'is evidence 
of some progress.'

Indeed, when you consider how often we now hear from the children's 
commissioner for England, SirAl Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, you wonder what we did 
for child-related lamentation before 2005. Although children's rights were 
already established at that time, as were a number of prominent campaigners for 
childhood and children, it was rare, before Sir Al's chilling conspectuses 
became a fixture of the Today programme, to hear the singular horror that is a 
British childhood accepted as a fact beyond dispute and the 'demonisation' of 
all British children repeated, as it was again last week, as an axiom.

It is courtesy of Sir Al, and his mission to have England recognised as 'one 
of the most child- and young person-unfriendly countries in the developed 
world', that allusions to demonisation are now as routine when miserable 
children are discussed as a reference to malnutrition or illiteracy might have 
been in the old days. No sooner had he started in the job than Sir Al declared 
his role-models to be 'Coram, Dickens, Barnardo, Rowntree', reformers who were, 
as he evidently planned to be, 'outraged by what they saw'.

That a child can no longer be hanged for stealing a loaf or, for that matter, 
sent out to work, or beaten for talking in class, is immaterial: Sir Al has 
identified a new catalogue of abuses, some of which make the Artful Dodger's 
routine look positively child-centred. So he had to live with Fagin? At least 
Fagin never made him do Sats every three or four years: the 'endless testing', 
as the endlessly outraged Sir Al puts it. And even when 19th-century children 
were at their most tormented, exploited and deported, they could at least enjoy 
the bit of spiritual status that comes of being purer than any grown-up: '... 
trailing clouds of glory do we come/ From God, who is our home.'

Instead of a dazzled Wordsworth, the modern infant can look forward to 
nothing, Sir Al points out, but insults and disrespect from a society which - 
lest we forget - confuses children with agents of evil. That demonisation is 
not something that lends itself to very precise measurement; that it might, 
even, loom larger inside Dr Al Aynsley-Green's head than in the real world has 
not prevented it becoming an official term. 'Demonisation: a major issue for 
society,' began a discussion paper produced by 11million.org.uk, Sir Al's 
website for children. It proposed 'redressing the balance' with a 'children's 
takeover day' (the plan, I understand, involved compulsory screenings of Harry 
Potter..., salary increases for Ant and Dec and nonstop TV talent contests in 
which adults would be ritually humiliated by mediocre child prodigies).

After three years of repetition, demonisation has evidently entered the 
discrimination lexicon, a bit like marginalisation or institutional racism, 
only worse. 'Scotland shares with the rest of the UK a public attitude towards 
children and young people that tends to demonise them,' state the UK 
commissioners in their new report, in a list headed, presumably for 
child-friendly reasons, 'Bad Things About Being a Child in Scotland'.

Mercifully and perhaps surprisingly, given the piercing and unmodulated nature 
of Sir Al's exclamations, the new report, addressing 'the reality of children's 
lives', does mention a few non-horrific things about British childhood. Under 
'Good Things About Being a Child in England', we discover, for example, that 
'the majority of children say they are happy'. Another accepted indicator for 
childish well-being is ticked off with: 'The majority of children up to age 15 
say that their general health is either good or very good.' Most say they 'feel 
safe from being hurt'. Most 'are engaged, motivated and making a positive 
contribution, for example, volunteering, helping in the community and peer 
mentoring'. You might think, in the context of the mass demonisation occurring 
within 'one of the most child- and young person-unfriendly countries in the 
developed world', that these findings, drawn from Ofsted's 2007 survey of 
111,000 children, are nothing short of miraculous.

The children's commissioners, however, remain resolutely unimpressed. Although 
Ofsted's survey of last November is allowed, in a muted kind of way, to modify 
the impact of a preceding and much more widely publicised UN report, which 
contrasted the lot of the UK's miserable lumpkins unfavourably with that of 
those bright sparks from Slovenia, the children's commissioners will not be 
deflected from their opinion that, where children's rights are concerned, 'some 
things are actually worse'.

A long list of bad things about being a child ranges from the obviously 
unforgivable - the neglect of disabled children, damaging poverty, premature 
criminalisation - to preoccupations which seem rather more peculiar to the 
average children's commissioner, and that limited number of children likely to 
be affected by mosquito devices and knife-searching arches. Sir Al has already, 
of course, condemned both gadgets, since they contribute to a 'demonising of 
children and young people' which reduces him, he has said, to despair.

You begin to wonder if Sir Al, steeping himself in the history of childhood, 
ever read about the unfortunate Matilda, who told lies and was burnt to death. 
Possibly not or it would not be so easy to picture Sir Al leaning out of a 
burning building and shouting: 'Fire! Fire!' Or: 'Demonisation! Demonisation!' 
Whatever. It's not the words so much as the habit of screaming and bawling 
about the wrong things that could end up with the response to a genuine alarm 
being like Belloc's: 'For every time she shouted, "Fire!"/ They only answered, 
"Little liar!"'

In the case of the truthful Sir Al, one might be more inclined to say: 'Oh why 
must you always be such a Cassandra when the Ofsted report, a sense of 
proportion and the most cursory attempt at a long view all point to the wisdom 
of campaigning on specifics? That's the way you'll get something done!' Only 
there would not be time. And in any case, the question would certainly be 
drowned out by the sound of Sir Al telling the BBC how awful everything is in 
this, the worst of all possible children's worlds.
 