
John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, has come under fresh 
attack from senior Conservatives for trying to appoint an Australian to the 
role of the clerk who oversees parliament.

Andrew Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, the 
former leader of the Commons, accused Bercow of running an "ill-founded" 
process that ended with the appointment of Carol Mills, who is currently 
secretary of the Australian department of parliamentary services. Bercow has 
now "paused" the appointment of Mills to consult with MPs and head off a revolt.

Lansley, a member of the panel that interviewed Mills, told MPs: "I think it 
is particularly regrettable that the Speaker sought expressly to water down the 
2011 requirement in the job description that the clerk should have 'detailed 
knowledge' of the procedures and practices of the House, seeking to replace the 
words detailed knowledge with 'awareness'."

He called for the House of Commons commission to cancel Mills's appointment. 
SirGeorge Young <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeyoung>, another 
former leader and chief whip, also urged Mills to withdraw from the process and 
avert a parliamentary crisis. Several MPs argued that a clerk with extensive 
knowledge of parliamentary procedure was more necessary than ever given the 
impending constitutional changes whichever way Scotland votes in the 
independence referendum.

Their criticisms came in a fierce debate on the issue of clerk's job that saw 
clashes between parliamentary modernisers and traditionalists. After hours of 
debate, MPs appeared to be in favour of a motion to establish a select 
committee to review the governance of the House of Commons, which could 
potentially lead to the role of clerk and chief executive being split.

Introducing the motion, Jesse Norman, MP for Hereford and South Herefordshire, 
said: "This debate arises because of a widespread concern among colleagues 
across the House that the appointment process for the next clerk of this House 
was seriously flawed."

However, a number of senior parliamentarians, including many from Labour, 
spoke up in defence of Bercow, suggesting many of those criticising the process 
are really running a campaign against the speaker.

David Blunkett <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett>, the 
former Labour home secretary, said parliament must modernise or it is "doomed", 
pointing out that many MPs would not put up with the way the House of Commons 
is run if it were a business. He also criticised "whispering campaigns and 
briefing of the media" against Bercow.

"It is time this house got itself well into the 21st century," he said. 
Bernard Jenkin, chairman of the Commons administration committee, highlighted a 
frustration, particularly among younger MPs, about the "Victorian mystery about 
the way this place works".

Hazel Blears, a former Labour cabinet minister, praised Bercow for doing more 
than any other speaker to modernise parliament. She said the behaviour of some 
MPs during the clerk appointment process had been "pretty appalling" and made a 
plea for the House of Commons to embrace change.
 