
John Bercow, the Speaker, has taken a step towards a complete climbdown over 
the appointment of a senior official from the Australian parliament as the new 
clerk and chief executive of theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>.

In the face of a cross-party campaign to challenge the appointment of Carol 
Mills, Bercow said he was "in the hands of the house" as he confirmed that the 
matter will now be considered by a new body consisting entirely of MPs.

Bercow signalled the change of heart as he was challenged by MPs a few hours 
after he announced a "modest pause" in the recruitment of a new clerk and chief 
executive of the House of Commons.

He said parliament would now consider splitting the roles of clerk and chief 
executive. MPs will also decide whether to hold a pre-appointment hearing.

The Speaker told MPs: "In the circumstances, and having discussed the matter 
with the leader and shadow leader of the house, I believe that a modest pause 
in the recruitment process is desirable while such issues are explored and the 
views of members solicited in detail."

Tory MP Michael Fabricant, who has been a strong critic of Mills's 
appointment, shouted "Ha" when the Speaker announced the pause.

A cross-party group of MPs argue that while Mills has strong management 
experience relevant to the role of chief executive, she is less qualified to 
serve as clerk, the guardian of parliamentary privilege and procedure.

Mills was selected by a six-strong panel, chaired by the Speaker, which 
included five MPs and the parliamentary ombudsman, Dame Julie Mellor.

The Speaker confirmed that the Commons commission, which he chairs, would 
consider the matter.

"Of course I am in the hands of, and ready to be guided by the house," he 
said. "With reference to the possibility of pre-appointment scrutiny, if that 
is what the house wants, that is what the house should have."

Bercow is among three members of the commission who were members of the panel 
that selected Mills. The other MPs were the shadow leader of the houseAngela 
Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> and the Liberal 
Democrat MP John Thurso.

William Hague, whose predecessor as leader of the house – Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley> – was on the appointment 
panel, also sits on the commission as do the Tory MP Sir Paul Beresford and the 
Labour MP Frank Doran.

Crispin Blunt, an ex-soldier and former prisons minister, said: "In the 
generally successful history of the British army, some of the most celebrated 
actions, from Corunna to Gallipoli to Dunkirk, have involved evacuations from 
hopeless positions. Can I congratulate you on successful disengagement from the 
opposition forces you have run across?"

Bercow indicated that he will seek to be sensitive towards Mills amid signs 
that MPs will demand the implementation of proposals outlined recently by Sir 
Robert Rogers, who retired on Sunday as clerk and chief executive.

Rogers had opposed splitting the two roles, but said he had changed his mind, 
and thought the clerk should be the more senior figure and the chief executive 
would become chief operating officer.

The Speaker said it would be unseemly to comment on the characteristics or 
performance of any individual when Jesse Norman, the Tory MP who has won the 
support of nearly 80 MPs for a motion calling for a pre-appointment hearing, 
asked him to acknowledge that Mills was unqualified for the role.

Bercow later said: "I am in touch with [Carol Mills], and others are, and it 
is important that clarity is established as soon as is compatible with the 
rights and responsibilities of the house being met and discharged."

In his statement, Bercow said he had wished to separate the roles but had been 
unable to do so owing to strong opposition.

Bercow said: "These two roles are combined in a single post, despite their 
very different nature. Over the years, parliament's affairs have become more 
complex, its budget has ordinarily risen and decisions – such as on a potential 
refurbishment of the house – have become unavoidable. Thus, highly skilled 
management is now vital, as much as expertise in procedure."

The lack of agreement on separating the posts meant a recruitment process for 
the combined roles was launched.

A six-strong panel, chaired by the Speaker and including MPs from the three 
main parties plus the parliamentary ombudsman, Mellor, selected Mills.

"A number of colleagues have since expressed disquiet," Bercow said. "Their 
concerns fall into two broad categories.

"The first, helpfully raised by [Sir Alan Duncan], is whether the panel should 
have recommended separating the roles. I was advised that the panel could not 
adopt this approach without prior legislation.

"As I have said, there is a compelling case for such a separation, but any 
change would of course require the support of the House.

"The second concern is for pre-appointment scrutiny, and was initially put 
forward by [Jacob Rees-Mogg]. A strong case can be made for it and, on this 
point also, I wish to hear colleagues' views."

The Speaker said the work of the clerk and chief executive would be 
distributed between members of the management board during the delay.

He later made clear that David Natzler, the clerk assistant who was the 
favoured internal candidate to replace Rogers, will be the senior figure.
 