
A lingering smell of enmity hangs over the Ashes now, the likes of which we 
haven't had since ... well, 2005.

It is an enduring myth – perpetrated by the famous picture of Andrew Flintoff 
crouching down to console Brett Lee after victory at Edgbaston – that the 
series four years ago was bathed in 24-hour-a-day mutual goodwill.

The bookend to that memory was the one of Ricky Ponting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> scowling up at a grinning 
Duncan Fletcher on the Trent Bridge players' balcony after being run out by the 
substitute fielder Gary Pratt. There were a host of other confrontations, as 
there always were and always will be.

No Australian team – especially one that contains such combative characters as 
Ponting, Matthew Hayden, Justin Langer and Glenn McGrath – comes to England for 
a garden party. It would be daft to expect it. This series, though, is being 
soured by two men we were led to believe had it in their gift to ensure the old 
enemies might at least reach an acceptable level of maturity for once: Ponting 
andAndrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>.

Ponting (perhaps grinding his teeth at the time) brought with him in his back 
pocket another Spirit ofCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
manifesto, promising no more sledging, no more questioning of the umpires' 
decisions and a determination to play hard but fair. To say it might make 
useful toilet paper would not be much of an exaggeration.

England's Minister for Niceness was to be Strauss, an ex-public schoolboy of 
calm demeanour and, seemingly, a man with no known enemies inside or outside 
the game. Captaincy, however, seems to have revealed another side to him, and 
Ponting has been quick to identify in Strauss someone with whom he can have a 
decent argument.

After contretemps at Cardiff and the catch at Lord's that maybe wasn't, they 
ought to be ashamed of themselves for acting like a pair of kids. But they 
won't be.

The grass-level finger scoop by Strauss in the slips on the fourth morning of 
the second Test and which did for Phillip Hughes as Australia contemplated the 
awful prospect of losing their first game at Lord's since 1934, was more than a 
foreshortened TV replay illusion. It looked to be – in super slo-mo – the 
temporary corruption under pressure of one man's better instincts, which in 
turn induced his counterpart's hot-wired surrender to temper.

Hughes was the only player in the drama to emerge with credit. A country boy 
new to the big time, he nicked and walked; Ponting, once a country boy but 
gnarled after years on the frontline, called him back and checked with Strauss. 
The England captain, ex-Radley, said he caught it. The Australian captain 
huffily had to believe him – regretting, no doubt, passing up the opportunity 
offered before the start of the tour to refer such incidents to trial by replay.

Hughes kept walking, and the moment passed without further incident, save the 
agonising of the commentariat. Here's some more.

Anyone who has played the game and taken a catch such as this knows the 
sensation of the turf easing the force of the ball in the hand. It is spookily 
feather-like, considerably softer than a full-on smack of leather on bone.

If Strauss was certain he caught it, there should be no row and Ponting should 
accept his word. If there was the slightest doubt in Strauss's mind about the 
legitimacy of the catch, he owed it to his team, the opposition and the game to 
say so. We are all now left in the position of believing him, even though the 
technology suggests he was wrong, and that leaves an unfortunate taste in the 
mouth.

Ponting, as a visiting long-time villain, is an obvious target for the British 
media especially after his first indiscretion, at Cardiff. It was forgotten in 
the concluding drama of Monty's Drift, but Ponting's bogus silly point shout 
for a bat-pad catch off Paul Collingwood that wasn't plainly contradicted the S 
of C, and was compounded by his "spit the dummy" tantrum that followed.

Let's not revisit the England time-wasting fiasco, but that didn't cool 
matters either. The volume had been turned up, and it remains stuck on 10. 
These are men behaving like boys – but not the boys they once were.

Old dogs Lyle and Monty just can't stop barking

While we're on cheating (or not), the most entertaining by-play at Turnberry 
the past week or so has been that between Sandy Lyle and Colin Montgomerie, two 
Scots who couldn't sound more like Wentworth greenkeepers if they lived on the 
course.

Lyle dredged up allegations about Monty's moved ball in Jakarta and thereafter 
couldn't put a sock in it. This, naturally, got up Monty's nose. He said it put 
him off his game, a claim clearly sustained by his dreadful golf.

The tiff briefly amused golf writers whose lot it is to tip-toe around the 
egos of these and other players, knowing that the sensitive issue of cheating 
is the game's dark secret, but who could hardly ignore the issue when Sandy and 
Monty kept rushing to the nearest microphone.

Curtis Strange once told a young Tiger Woods: "Golf doesn't shout, it 
whispers."

Right.

Hatton hanging on for one final payday

It is not the shock of the week that Ricky Hatton hasn't decided yet whether 
to stick or twist with what is left of his boxing career, but the question 
needs asking: what's taking him so long? It's been a couple of months now since 
Manny Pacquiao rattled his teeth in Las Vegas. Perhaps Amir Khan's win over 
Andreas Kotelnik on Saturday clinched it. Expect an end-of-year all-British 
mega showdown for Amir's world light-welterweight title. Khan is out of 
contract with Frank Warren. Hatton fell out with Warren. Draw the picture.

No one likes the Bambi killer. And why should we?

Spare a thought for Stewart Cink. He is the Open champion nobody wanted, the 
man who killed Bambi, albeit an old one. It is hard to recall a winner who more 
completely spoilt the party in a major sporting event than Cink did when he 
beat Tom Watson in the play-off.

Should we feel sorry for him, this redeemed battler who pick-pocketed the 
biggest prize in golf from Major Tom?

Anyone who uses his acceptance speech to thank his wife for introducing him to 
the Almighty so fits the stereotype of boring American God-bothering 
Republican-supporting lime-green-hat-and-shirt and cream-trouser wearing golfer 
he deserves all the indifference he gets.
 