Who is the highest ranked golfer not playing in the Ryder Cup?  Adam Scott  
Jason DayThe world No1  Branden Grace  Louis Oosthuizen When did USA last win 
the competition?  1999  2002  2008 Europe have won six of the last seven 
tournaments.  2010 Which golfer has played in a record 11 Ryder Cups and won a 
record 25 points?  Bernhard Langer  Phil Mickelson  Nick Faldo Although he was 
the captain when Europe last lost, in 2008.  Arnold Palmer Which of these 
managers has taken charge of the England football team for more than one match? 
 Peter Taylor  Sam Allardyce  Howard Wilkinson Wilkinson was in charge for 2-0 
defeat to France in 1999 a goalless draw against Finland in 2000.  Stuart Pearce
What is unusual about Hartlepool United's goal of the month competition for 
September?  They only scored one goal so it has already won by default  It was 
won by an own goal scored by a Luton Town player  All five contenders were 
scored by the same playerAs the club website put it: 'So will it be Nathan 
Thomas, Nathan Thomas, Nathan Thomas, Nathan Thomas or Nathan Thomas?'  The 
winner has already been given their goal of the season award Which footballer 
offered support to Sam Allardyce with the words: 'So sorry for this story big 
sam! U were the right man for England and I still believe u are! Doesn't matter 
what u did or what u said we all do mistakes. The most important is we still 
love u! Thanks for everything'?  Kevin Nolan  Youri Djorkaeff  Jay-Jay Okocha  
Nicolas AnelkaAnelka played under Allardyce at Bolton. Francesco Totti turned 
40 this week. At what age did he become the Roma captain?  19  22 He made his 
debut at 16, became captain at 22 and last scored for them – with a penalty 
past Joe Hart – on Sunday afternoon.  26  29 Which two ingredients make up 
Arnold Palmer's famous drink, the Arnold Palmer?  Vodka and orange  Iced tea 
and lemonadeAdd in some vodka and you have a John Daly.  Coca-Cola and red wine 
 Cider and lime juice How much prize money is on offer for the golfers at the 
Ryder Cup?  $1,000,000 each  $100,000 each  $2,016 each  None They'll survive 
Which two teams remain unbeaten in the Premier League?  Manchester City and 
Arsenal  Everton and Tottenham  Arsenal and Liverpool  Tottenham and Manchester 
CityThey meet at White Hart Lane on Sunday  You got…  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  