
This year will be, without doubt, the biggest ever at the box office. That’s 
because it’s impossible such big beasts asJames Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> and Star Wars – not to mention the 
Avengers troupe and those dinos from Jurassic World – will again share a 
release year. It’s also highly unlikely that, in the future, we’ll cough up to 
watch them at the cinema.

That said: we seem more than happy to do so. Even the most optimistic 
multiplex owner wasn’t prepared forthe rush on Star Wars tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/star-wars-the-force-awakens-smashes-tickets-sales-records>
 when the first batch was released on Monday (the movie isn’t out until 
Christmas). Sites stalled and web pages crashed like dominos as sales records 
were broken. Elsewhere online there were further server creakings as reaction 
flooded in to the final trailer (does that girl have the force? Is that new 
bloke a Jedi as well as a stormtrooper?) and to the first poster (wot, no Luke 
Skywalker?).

Fans of franchise sci-fi again tested the strength of the internet on 
Wednesday, akaBack to the Future day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/oct/20/back-to-the-future-part-ii-is-the-film-to-watch-this-week-video-review>
, the date to which Doc Brown and Marty McFly journey in the time-travelling 
sequel. Appetite for reflection on this also far exceeded expectation. And 
software programmers will be further girding their loins for a week of 007 
chatter, with the first reviews imminent.

I read it in the Star (War)s: gleaning The Force Awakens' plot from its 
run-time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/14/getting-the-plot-of-force-awakens-from-films-also-running-136-minutes>
Such eager stampeding beneath big cultural tentpoles is, of course, cheering. 
The watercooler is open! It’s free, it’s global, and it’s endlessly 
replenishable. Remember the days everyone use to talk about the previous 
evening’s Hancock’s Half Hour? This is that, all the time, with everybody. It 
is a golden age of democratised mainstream debate. It’s especially great for 
somebody like me, whose job, as this paper’s film editor, is in part to 
encourage such engagement. Right?

Yes. Absolutely. And yet, sometimes, I find the relentless discussion of 
mainstream movie series, both online and in real life, risks alienating as much 
as unifying. Losing yourself in a cinematic universe is fine if you’ve bought 
your own ticket. Less pleasant is to be immersed in a world about which you’re 
ill-equipped and unfamiliar, either through ignorance or design. There’s little 
that can make you feel more alone than everyone agreeing the genius of 
something that leaves you cold.

This isn’t just contrarianism. Personally, I’ve long been a bit lukewarm about 
Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> – sorry. But Back to the 
Future has always been one of my favourite movies. Or it was until I couldn’t 
go a hour without seeing or hearing someone discuss it. There’s now a complete 
confluence between social media and studio blockbusters – even those from 40 
years ago.

Over the past decade the public sphere has undergone a compulsory conversion 
into a sort of Comic-Con-style convention centre. The logic is obvious: all 
creeds define themselves in part by exclusion, and Marvel fans are no worse in 
this regard than disciples of Tottenham Hotspur or Scientology. We all seek a 
place in which we can sink our own demanding and disappointing individuality 
into an ever-comforting communality. The more mysterious the theology, the more 
mutually sustaining the sustenance it offers.

But amid all the costumes and the clamour, it’s hard to hang on to whatever 
might have drawn you to something in the first place. For even those films that 
you see in the company of others depend for their impact on a direct 
connection. They are individual experiences, highly filtered, not live, 
distinct in this way from theatre and from sport.

Hardly a fresh insight, of course: it was back in 1936 in The Work of Art in 
the Age of Mechanical Reproduction that Walter Benjamin pointed out the 
difference between stage and screen – in the former, the audience’s 
identification is with the actor; in the latter, it’s with the camera. Now, 
people forget there’s a lens. They have seized ownership of works of art such 
as movies and TV, and consequently become confused about how far they should be 
integrated into their lives. Ubiquity is the new normal.

Why James Bond is a religion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/03/why-james-bond-is-a-religion-spectre-007-ian-fleming>
Today we treat the imaginary as if it were real. Facebook feeds are filled 
with snaps of friends, selfies styled as celebrities, memes featuring movie 
characters and gossip about the people who play them. The same jargon is used 
for fact and fiction. Both blur. And everything becomes a little blander.

There is, as it happens, a movie coming up about this. It’s called Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> and it’s a stop-motion 
tragi-comedy in which a depressed customer-service guru strikes up a fleeting 
connection with a woman in a Cincinnati hotel. Apart from these two, everyone 
else not only sounds the same – they’re voiced, without any modulation, by the 
same actor, whatever their age or gender – they also have the same faces too, 
just with different hair and make-up.

The hotel is named the Fregoli, after the psychological disorder that causes 
you to believe everyone is the same person. But the film is not about what it’s 
like to be deluded. It’s about the flipside of that global watercooler boom, in 
which people can seem to speak and look and act alike, in which everyone has 
the same purchase on everything: all their experiences, including those that 
once seemed rare and special.

I was lucky enough to see Anomalisa quite early, before a lot of buzz had 
built. Since then, lots of other people have seen it too and, I think, raved 
about it on Twitter. I just mustn’t look.
 