
The current global financial crisis has clearly underlined the need for more 
effective mechanisms of international cooperation. The stumbling initial 
response of the G7 risked prolonging the credit crunch. Today, while panic has 
eased somewhat in wealthy countries, the crisis is spilling into developing 
countries, with potentially devastating effects. Yet there is no coordinated 
effort to address the problems faced by emerging markets.

As Jeffrey Sachs argues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/globaleconomy-g8>, a 
Bretton Woods II may be necessary to build a new global financial and economic 
system. In fact, the multilateral, cooperative spirit of Bretton Woods is 
urgently needed today. If the crisis only deepens the divide between haves and 
have-nots, it is difficult to see how an international summit could be 
successful. And at the top of today's agenda must be saving theeurozone 
<http://24carat.co.uk/eurozoneframe.html>.

Last week's coordinated bank recapitalisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/oct/16/ubs-creditsuisse> helped calm 
the panic in the wealthiest European countries, but there are signs that the 
problem has been stamped out in one place only to resurface in another. Most 
ominously, expectations are rising that some European governments will default 
on their debts. During the last three months, the implied risk that Ireland, 
Italy and Greece will default within five years – based on credit default swap 
spreads for their sovereign debt – has quadrupled from approximately 3% to 12% 
each.

So far, credit default swaps <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_default_swap>
 (CDSs) have correctly predicted the spread of risk from mortgage-backed 
securities, to consumer lenders and investment banks, then to commercial banks. 
Now they are pointing to some of the wealthiest sovereign nations.

This is only logical. In many European nations, banks have amassed more debt 
than taxpayers can afford to repay. These liabilities need to be refinanced 
periodically, but the current crisis has made that more difficult. In addition, 
bank debt was largely used to buy assets based on real property that is falling 
in value. In a severe recession, that decline could render much of the European 
financial sector insolvent.

This is all old news. However, by guaranteeing their systematically important 
financial institutions, European governments assumed that risk themselves. For 
example, the Irish announced they would guarantee all liabilities of their 
major banks – over 3 times current GDP and over 12 times government revenues. 
ING's assets equal 2.9 times Holland's GDP at €1.3tn; the recent 
recapitalisation provides €10bn of new capital, or just 0.8% of total assets. 
If asset values fall sharply, much more capital will be required. Can these 
countries afford to support all of their core financial institutions? This is 
the question markets are starting to focus on.

The 1997-98 emerging markets crisis 
<http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/asia.htm> showed how such conditions 
can lead to collapse. A country finds that its creditors are increasingly 
reluctant to hold its bonds due to perceived risk. Interest rates on that 
nation's debt rise, making the debt harder to pay off. To win back confidence, 
the country needs to tighten fiscal policy, but this can be politically 
difficult. Fear grows that, instead, the country will inflate its debt away or 
default outright; rates rise further. The prophecy is ultimately 
self-fulfilling: fear of a collapse leads to collapse.

The standard policy prescription is to tighten fiscal policy and let the 
exchange rate depreciate sharply. This raises exports, reduces imports and 
improves national savings.

The problem, however, is that eurozone nations no longer have control over 
their monetary policy, the European Central Bank (ECB) does, and its mandate is 
to maintain a 2% inflation target. Troubled countries, including Greece, 
Ireland, Spain, Italy and Portugal, will prefer loose monetary policies, but 
are sure to be opposed by the Germans (and French) who insist on the low 
inflation target. Threatened countries will be forced to tighten their belts 
using fiscal policy and brace for a deep recession. This will be politically 
painful.

If there is a sufficiently deep, global recession, the eurozone may not 
survive. Countries threatened by default will question the merits of the euro; 
they will suffer high interest rates, negating one of its expected benefits, 
and will see other nations as benefiting at their expense. Nationalist 
politicians will argue that they are better off setting policy at home, echoing 
Iceland's cry: "every country for itself." The costs of abandoning the euro 
would be very high, but it could happen, given domestic political instability 
and intransigence within the eurozone. If one nation breaks away, investors 
will wonder who is next, cutting off financing from other countries. Contracts 
in euros will need to be abrogated, causing untold dislocation. The damage will 
be enormous.

However, there is a good chance this scenario can be avoided, if some 
difficult decisions are taken now before markets demand them through higher 
interest rates. At the least, failure to act now will require more expensive 
measures to be taken deeper into the crisis.

First, policy makers must generate confidence that they understand and are 
dealing with these dangers. The ECB's insistence on high interest rates has 
damaged its credibility. Recent joint efforts by governments, along with the 
0.5 percentage point interest rate cut, are steps in the right direction.

Second, there need to be mechanisms to ensure that investors who bet against 
national solvency will lose money. To date, those investors are doing extremely 
well. We need to discourage such bets and cut the potentially self-fulfilling 
cycles of higher interest rates that lead to insolvency.

We recommend the following steps for the eurozone: 

1. Lower the ECB base rate now to 2% from the current 3.75%. The coming global 
recession will dramatically reduce inflation pressures, and a rate cut is 
needed to offset the recession. Lower rates will help recapitalize banks by 
making their lending more profitable, and will allow them to charge less to 
mortgage holders. The 2% inflation target should not be abandoned but should be 
subordinated to the need for financial stability (without which there will 
likely be deflation down the road).

2. Create a European Stability Fund with at least €2tn of credit lines 
guaranteed by all Eurozone member nations and potentially other European 
countries with large financial systems such as Switzerland, Sweden and the UK. 
This fund should provide alternative financing to member countries in case 
market rates on their government debt become too high. This will prevent a 
self-fulfilling cycle of rising interest rates. The fund should be large enough 
to have credibility; countries could access the fund automatically, but should 
then adopt a 5-year program for ensuring financial stability, subject to peer 
review within the Eurozone.

3. All eurozone nations should launch temporary fiscal expansions of at least 
1% of GDP. These plans should be aimed at reducing the severity of the upcoming 
recession and assisting people at risk of default on mortgages or other 
financial instruments, thereby helping people in trouble and reducing default 
rates in the financial sector.

4. The EU and Switzerland should develop a financial regulatory framework that 
recognises that systemically important institutions may need to be bailed out 
by Europe as a whole. One goal should be to reduce extreme differences in 
national financial risk and leverage so that these problems are less likely to 
reoccur.

These measures will not resolve all of Europe's problems. The coming recession 
is likely to be severe, and its impact will vary greatly across the eurozone. 
Some domestic politicians will argue against having one currency for such a 
diverse area. However, it would be far more costly to abandon the euro now than 
to keep it. Ultimately, to make good on last week's promise to support all core 
financial institutions, the eurozone must also promise to support all of its 
member nations. Otherwise the eurozone may become fragmented and the benefits 
of the euro will be lost.

This article was written by Simon Johnson, Peter Boone and James Kwak.

Peter Boone is chairman of Effective Intervention, a UK-based charity, and a 
research associate at the Centre for Economic Performance, London School of 
Economics.

Simon Johnson is a professor at MIT Sloan School of Management and a senior 
fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

James Kwak is a student at Yale Law School. Together, they run the economic 
crisis website,The Baseline Scenario <http://BaselineScenario.com>
 