
It was one of the most spectacular deaths in the known universe: an enormous 
star in a distant galaxy met its doom and as a parting shot released a 
brilliant flash of light half a trillion times brighter than the sun.


The cosmic display was described as a record-breaking supernova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/15/assassin-supernova-discovered-that-is-570bn-times-brighter-than-sun>
 by astronomers who studied the event last year. But according to fresh 
observations, this was no common or garden stellar explosion. Instead, the 
intense burst of light which outshone the whole Milky Way came from a star that 
suffered a much rarer fate: death bysupermassive black hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/08/supermassive-black-hole-eating-gas-clouds-astronomy-chile>
.


Stars explode at the end of their natural lives about once every 50 years in a 
galaxy the size of the Milky Way. But the latest observations have led 
scientists to suspect that a star wandered too close to a spinning supermassive 
black hole and, having been caught in formidable gravitational forces, suffered 
the violent consequences.


“A supermassive black hole exerts enormous tidal forces on any star that comes 
too close and basically rips the star apart,” said Giorgos Leloudas, who led 
the study at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel.


The international team trained a network of land and space telescopes, 
including the European Southern Observatory and Nasa’s Hubble telescope, on the 
bright point of light for 10 months. The event, named “ASASSN-15lh” after the 
All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae, played out in a galaxy 4bn light years 
from Earth.

Leloudas found that the star went through three distinct phases which closely 
resembled what is thought to happen when a star is “spaghettified” by a black 
hole. Rather than going out with a bang, the amount of ultraviolet light and 
heat coming from the star rose over time, in contrast to what is seen in 
supernova explosions. More evidence for the death-by-black-hole theory lay in 
the star’s home galaxy, described by Leloudas as “red and dead”, as opposed to 
the vibrant blue galaxies where active stellar nurseries are still creating new 
stars.


“We’ve always found supernovae in very blue galaxies, which are star forming 
galaxies full of young and massive stars like the ones you expect to explode. 
This is a red and dead galaxy, and very massive, where you don’t expect to find 
any stars that will give supernova explosions. That’s strong evidence against a 
supernova,” Leloudas said.

Writing in the journal Nature Astronomy 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/s41550-016-0002>, Leloudas and his team 
describe how a small star was probably ripped apart by a process that is more 
violent that its name, tidal disruption, might suggest.

In straying too close the spinning, supermassive black hole, the star was torn 
into its constituent gases. Over time, these formed a ring around the black 
hole and eventually fell inside, heating up and releasing immense streams of 
light and radiation as they plunged through the black hole’s event horizon. 
“It’s an efficient mechanism for producing enormous amounts of light,” Leloudas 
said.


Astronomers have witnessed tidal disruption only about 10 times before. If 
Leloudas and his team are right, a spinning supermassive black hole at least 
100 million times the mass of the sun must lurk at the centre of the far away 
galaxy where the star was engulfed. “It’s by far the most likely explanation,” 
Leloudas said.
 