
The American coffee chain Starbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> is about to enter its 40th 
year in an "undeniably healthier" state than ever, according to a Christmas 
message to employees from chairman Howard Schultz, who quoted an industry 
analyst's remark: "What a difference two years makes."

Schultz, the Brooklyn-born caffeine evangelist who turned Starbucks into a 
global brand during the 1990s, has executed a remarkable turnaround since 
seizing back day-to-day management of the chain in early 2008. At the time, 
Starbucks was struggling under chief executive Jim Donald – it had expanded too 
fast, sales were dwindling and its once aspirational outlets were looking tired 
and overpriced.

It's not easy to revive a faded consumer brand and many of us felt, at the 
time, that the Starbucks' phenomenon had fizzled out. Schultz had other ideas – 
he shut down about 1,000 of the chain's 17,000 outlets, pruned back openings 
and pulled off a quick succession of tricks. The baristas were retrained to 
improve service and to inject a little more "theatre" into the coffee-making 
experience. Starbucks entered the instant coffee market with a supermarket 
brand called Via. And the company's ambitions were rejigged – Starbucks now 
aims to open 1,500 stores in China, where annual coffee consumption is a paltry 
22 grams per person and hardly anybody has heard of a cappuccino.

There are plenty of Starbucks haters out there. Some lump the chain in with 
the likes of McDonald's and Walmart as yet another American multinational 
squashing local traders. But Starbucks is a complicated animal. It charges 
premium prices rather than undercutting independent traders. It uses Fairtrade 
produce and has ambitious targets for use of recycled materials. In the US, 
it's unusual among big employers in providing healthcare to part-time staff. It 
has succeeded by offering a better quality product than many smaller 
competitors.

Analysts at JP Morgan expect Starbucks's sales to pass $11bn next year. The 
shares are up 52% in a year. Austerity or not, Schultz has an amazing knack for 
persuading us to cough up £3 or more for a Frappuccino.
 