
State and territory governments have decried what they say is an attempt by 
the commonwealth government to take carriage of the national disability 
insurance scheme (NDIS), saying the program is too important to be the subject 
of an “ideological attack”.

Documents from a meeting of state and commonwealth disability ministers leaked 
on Monday showed proposals that would give the federal minister more power by 
removing the need for governance and compliance issues to be agreed by all 
parties.

Labor says Coalition 'undermining' NDIS over claims it cannot afford funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/28/labor-says-coalition-undermining-ndis-over-claims-it-cannot-afford-funding>
Under the proposal, the NDIS Act would be amended so that enacting changes in 
key areas such as eligibility for the scheme and the content of individual 
plans would require consultation with states, rather than consensus.

The hiring and firing of board members and advisory council members would also 
fall under the remit of the federal minister under proposed measures put to the 
states and territories.

The proposals were shot down by angry state and territory ministers.

“The ACT government does not support any move to give the federal government 
more control over the operation of the national disability insurance scheme. 
The NDIS is a vital and revolutionary system of support for people with 
disability. This reform is too important to be the subject of any ideological 
or financial attack,”Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> 
minister Chris Bourke told Guardian Australia.

New South Wales minister John Ajaka told Guardian Australia that helping 
people living with disability was a “top priority” for the state.

“Under the NSW government’s bilateral agreement, we are partners with the 
commonwealth in both funding and delivering the scheme. As a partner, we 
rightly expect a say in how the scheme operates,” Ajaka said.

Victorian minister Martin Foley told ABC Radio the commonwealth wanted greater 
control of the scheme so it could eventually whittle it back in order to recoup 
money.

Disability conference highlights costs of exclusion and opportunities for 
change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/18/disability-conference-highlights-costs-of-exclusion-and-opportunities-for-change>
“It’s walking away from what has been a 20-year battle by people with 
disabilities,” he said.

Federal Labor said the changes had been proposed in order to sideline the 
states and territories.

“There is a simple reason why the Turnbull government is trying to take 
complete control of the national disability insurance scheme. It wants the 
power to cut the scheme, change the eligibility of participants and delay its 
implementation,” Labor’s disabilities spokeswoman, Jenny Macklin, said.

The federal government has hit out at those claims.

A spokesman for the social services minister, Christian Porter, said: “The 
government is committed to funding the NDIS and fully expects it to be 
delivered within budget.

“Given the complexity of this reform and the significant level of funding 
being invested, governments will continue to closely monitor scheme governance 
and scheme costs to ensure every dollar used is invested as efficiently and 
effectively as possible.

“Crucially, the government has no plans to make changes to rules around NDIS 
eligibility or what is considered reasonable or necessary supports. Claims to 
the contrary are completely false,” he said.

Porter will introduce legislation as early as next week to expand the board of 
the NDIS by three spots, and extend its term beyond its current 30 June expiry 
date.

“The expansion of the board will deliver continuity as the NDIS starts its 
transition to the full scheme in July 2016. It will also ensure there is 
progressive exchange of knowledge and experience to enhance the development and 
governance of the scheme.”

Trial sites for the $22bn scheme are in operation in most jurisdictions, with 
rollout of the full scheme expected in some states, including NSW and Victoria, 
from July 2016.

“The NDIS must be free of government interference and be allowed to proceed 
with the rollout as planned, in conjunction with people with disability,” the 
president of People withDisability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Australia, Craig Wallace, 
said. “People with disability deserve certainty. We have waited long enough for 
the support system we need.”


 