
When news of a Ron Burgundy revival was announced on Conan in early 2013, for 
many comedy fans it was the best thing they would hear all year.

No one can doubt the cultural impact of the original Anchorman – a 2004 
sleeper hit which profiled the wacky adventures of an all-male 70s TV news team 
who were as culturally-insensitive and boorish as they were endearingly 
ridiculous.

For a certain age-group, many a night at university was spent quoting Ron 
Burgundy's greatest clangers ("Discovered by the Germans in 1904, they named it 
San Diego, which of course in German means 'a whale's vagina'") and reminding 
each other about the film's fictional cologne "Sex Panther" which "60% of the 
time, it works every time".

To be sure, excitement for Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues…, was already at 
fever-pitch well before the film's marketing machine started in earnest, but 
nevertheless – four months before the film's December release – fans were 
bombarded with the most content-rich marketing campaign in movie history.

Promotion for films is remarkably standard fare – a couple of trailers and a 
sustained campaign of media appearances by the stars on television chat shows 
and choice editorials.

Online, distributors and film studios can afford to be more creative, but not 
much more: a branded website with a Facebook page and other attendant social 
profiles with periodic updates are the norm.

Yet, Anchorman 2, in classic Burgundy brashness, was not content merely to do 
the 'norm' but went all out to exceed the conventional standard of branded 
entertainment for movies.

To be sure, all the old marketing faithfuls were there: Anchorman 2 had an 
official film Tumblr – which served as both a useful way for the brand team to 
serve original content and curate fan content. Social publishing was also 
present and correct; Anchorman 2 came replete with a Facebook Page 
<https://www.facebook.com/AnchormanUK> (3,486,691 'likes' and counting – 
although don't count onFacebook being effective for content 
<http://www.idioplatform.com/pay-to-play-how-facebook-is-screwing-over-content-marketers/>
 for much longer) and various character Twitter accounts.

Yet extra efforts were made to extend the storytelling narrative of another 
Anchorman film by getting Ron Burgundy (and his on screen cohorts) to move 
beyond perfunctory branded sites to start occupying other channels and 
platforms – both on and offline.

First came the numerous on-air, in-character appearances – Ron Burgundy 
appeared on various local news stations, opined on the Australian elections and 
sold cars in a cross-promotional campaign that lead to a40% increase in Dodge 
sales <http://www.thewrap.com/anchorman-2-durango-sales-ron-burgundy-ads>.

In classic content marketing style, these appearances weren't 'interruptive', 
but rather a natural extension of the Anchorman story: people don't like 
blatant advertising, so simply having Will Ferrell going out there as Ron and 
saying, "There's a new Anchorman movie coming out – it's going to be really 
funny please go and watch it" won't work. Instead, the Anchorman 2 team created 
entertaining content based around the character, designed to both make us laugh 
and indirectly remind us that there is in fact a movie coming out.

This goes back to the classic content marketing maxim of not talking about the 
product (no mention of price, features and benefits –like a regular ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/18/content-marketing-advertising>
) but rather creating engaging experiences that sensitize people who will 
ultimately make a purchase. And that's the great thing about content marketing 
– each piece of content should be independently valuable, as well as when it is 
recognized as part of a larger product-centric whole.

Another impressive factor about Anchorman 2 was its commitment to creating new 
content – and not just slicing and dicing movie footage into new content 
formats. A good example of this was the mobile app 'Scotch and Toss 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/anchorman-2-scotchy-scotch/id737369037?mt=8>
' – which didn't just harvest lines from the movie but required the actors to 
come in record new material.

Perhaps most interesting about Anchorman 2's marketing was when they chose to 
show all this premium content. Most movie reward fans with content after they 
purchase the DVD or stream – usually through secret brand portals, extra 
footage or Easter eggs. By contrast, Anchorman 2 gave all of its content – 
which in many ways was as high-quality as the movie itself – upfront.

Moreover, Anchorman 2's content marketing remains entertaining and searchable 
long after the movie is no longer showing at cinemas. Unlike short-termist 
marketing campaigns that stimulate engagement spikes and then trail off – all 
Ron Burgundy has to do is turn up in a new situation, that is appropriate for a 
'celebrated' news anchor, and the brand storytelling continues.

Jonny Rose is product evangelist at idio <http://idioplatform.com>.

This content is brought to you by Jugglit, sponsors of the digital 
entertainment content series.
 