
Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> joined a 
growing list of fine players who have been humiliated by inspired opposition at 
this Australian Open as Serena Williams emerged from the edge of sporting 
oblivion to win her eighth grand-slam title in startling style.

In 63 minutes, the unseeded Williams, who began the fortnight ranked 81 in the 
world following knee surgery, demolished Sharapova 6-1 6-2 with as devastating 
a demonstration of power tennis as the women's game has ever seen. Like 
number-two seed Rafael Nadal and Tommy Haas, who were blown away by men's 
finalist Fernando Gonzalez, and Andy Roddick, who was thrashed 6-2 6...#8209;0 
6-2 by Roger Federer, Sharapova was left helpless by the magnificence of the 
opposition.

'That was the Serena I've been trying to showcase for years,' said the lady 
herself. 'Like I said from the beginning, when I'm playing well it's difficult 
for anyone to beat me - on the women's tour, just for the record.'

The smile was wide. She knows there are some men around who would be scared to 
play her in this kind of mood. 'I have a unique style, a unique game,' Williams 
added.

Earlier in the week she had been saying how nothing motivated her like proving 
people wrong. She had heard the things her critics were saying - not focused, 
not fit, too caught up in Hollywood, where she is represented by the William 
Morris Agency, which primarily looks after actors and writers. But the whole 
family have been proving people wrong ever since Richard Williams had the gall 
to call the media into the run-down area of Compton in Los Angeles and tell the 
world that Venus, nine, and Serena, eight, would both win Wimbledon and would 
both be number one in the world. It was an outrageous claim from an outrageous 
but engaging man who so confused a Florida judge last month with his mixture of 
fact and fantasy that a huge lawsuit between him and some promoters was settled 
with both parties being told to go away and pay their own costs.

But the whole saga seemed to have derailed any remote chance Williams had of 
doing well here. 'All the hard work she put in early in December was seriously 
disrupted by the trauma of having to testify at that trial,' said an associate 
who works with the family.

The preparation for the kind of performance we saw yesterday was, indeed, 
bizarre. 'But that's Serena,' said Tracey Austin, who is in Melbourne as a 
television commentator. 'She breaks every rule. How long can she go on arriving 
at tournaments half prepared?'

Apparently the answer is: as long as she likes. She played only four 
tournaments in 2006 and, after the Florida hearing, she flew to Hobart and lost 
in the quarter-finals of a second-tier event. Then she came to Melbourne and 
went to the beach. Voluptuous would be one way to describe how she looked in 
her bikini.

There was some serious practice in between, but there were moments in the 
early rounds - notably while losing the first set 6-1 to Nadia Petrova and 
another to Shahar Peer - when predictions of her early demise seemed about to 
bear fruit. But she was out to prove everyone wrong and did she ever.

Not since she was winning five of six grand slams in 2002-03 has Williams hit 
the ball with such thunderous consistency. Sharapova admitted that the match 
was lost in the second game when she dropped serve after leading 40-15. 'After 
that she was just steamrollered,' said coach Larry Stefanki, whose own charge, 
Gonzalez, had done much the same to Haas. 'Serena was like a runaway train. 
There was nothing Maria could do.'

And yet the 19-year-old Russian, who will return to number one in the world 
tomorrow as a result of Justine Henin-Hardenne dropping points by her absence 
here, had appeared to be nearing her best when she beat Kim Clijsters 6-4 6-2 
in the semi-final. But yesterday it didn't matter what state her game was in.

Williams simply did not allow her to play. Balls were blasted back past 
Sharapova before she could point herself in the right direction. In contrast, 
Williams moved like Fred Astaire.

If one point summed up the total athletic and technical superiority Williams 
demonstrated throughout the match, it came at deuce in the third game of the 
second set. Taking a short ball early, Sharapova correctly hit behind Williams 
as the American set off to cover the right-hand court. But in a flash, Williams 
swivelled, found time to set herself for the shot and smacked the most perfect 
backhand pass out of her opponent's reach. If Sharapova had not already 
realised she was doomed, she must have then.

Right back at the beginning, when I saw Venus play her first pro match in 
Oakland, California at the age of 14, Serena was just the giggly little sister 
trailing in her wake. But father Williams was always whispering in our ears 
that it was Serena who had the real talent, the real desire. Right again. It 
remains to be seen how many more times the sisters can confound logic - Venus, 
remember, came back from nowhere to win Wimbledon for the third time in 2005. 
Between them they now have 13 grand-slam titles, this being Serena's third 
Australian and eighth overall.

She is ready now to 'ameliorate her game, to take it to a new level'. The 
shudder in the locker room will be palpable. But, in the meantime, the joy is 
unconfined, tempered only by thoughts of her half-sister Yetunde Price, shot 
and killed in Compton in 2003. Williams wept while speaking of her on court 
after the match. Normally she writes notes, technical stuff, to herself before 
a match. 'This time I just wrote one word: Yetunde,' she said.

'At every changeover I just looked at it and remembered what an amazing sister 
she was to me. I just said, "Serena, this has to be motivating." And I think it 
was.'
 