
European interest in the four Breeders’ Cup races on the opening day of the 
meeting is focused on the two juvenile races on turf, and the fascinating 
match-up between two generations of the O’Brien family in the Juvenile Fillies’ 
Turf in particular.

In the US, however, Songbird’s attempt to extend her unbeaten career record to 
12 races in the Distaff is second only to California Chrome’s meeting with 
Arrogate in Saturday’s Classic in terms of interest and attention. Jerry 
Hollendorfer’s filly has earned a huge following with her flawless march 
towards the Distaff, which includes six wins at Santa Anita and seven at Grade 
One level, including last year’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile Fillies’ at Keeneland.

Aidan O’Brien up against Intricately for Breeders’ Cup win in family affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/aidan-obrien-intricately-breeders-cup-family-affair>
Songbird’s margin of victory in her 11 wins has dipped below four lengths only 
twice, and her last four successes have been achieved by a combined total of 
nearly 25 lengths. She is the best three-year-old in the US by a country mile, 
and yet she is available at odds-against with some British bookmakers to win 
the Distaff, having been odds-on – at prices as short as 1-20 – for her last 
nine starts.

There is a good reason why. Songbird bestrides her generation but her 
exceptional record has been compiled entirely in races involving her own age 
group. To some extent, she has not won 11 races in a row so much as taken the 
same race several times over, and the Distaff will pit her against an 
altogether different level of competitor.

Stellar Wind, a four-year-old who has won two of her three starts this year, 
both at Grade One level, and the veteran Beholder, who was a late scratch from 
last year’s Classic, are the two rivals who could give Songbird a serious race, 
and at the prices on offer, Stellar Wind (11.35) is a solid bet at around 7-2 
to snap the three-year-old’s winning streak.

John Sadler’s filly has only a pound or two to find with Songbird on bare 
ratings, and has beaten Beholder on her last two starts, having finished behind 
Richard Mandella’s mare at Santa Anita in June. Stellar Wind reversed that form 
next time out and then franked her improvement a few weeks later, and only 
needs to maintain her steady progress to stand a major chance of turning over 
the favourite.

Aidan O’Brien’s Roly Poly (10.50) did not fare well in the draw for the 
Juvenile Fillies’ Turf, but she will have Ryan Moore aboard to plot a path from 
stall 13 and a narrow defeat by her stablemate Brave Anna in the Group One 
Cheveley Park Stakes last time out is a match for Intricately’s similarly tight 
success in the Moyglare.

O’Brien also has two runners in the Juvenile Turf but could be frustrated by 
Oscar Performance (9.25), who looked like the best of the US-trained turf 
juveniles with a wide-margin success at Belmont Park in early October, while 
Dortmund (10.05), placed behind California Chrome three times so far this year, 
will find the opposition much less demanding in the Dirt Mile.
 