
It's a tale of crabs, celebrities and a passionate revolt in a small north 
Norfolk coastal town. Stephen Fry, Matthew Pinsent andAlan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh> are among a growing 
number of stars joining the fight to save Cromer's famous crab processing 
factory from closure. Its owners want to move the work to Grimsby and Scotland.

Signs of protest now dominate this picturesque town. Posters calling for the 
rescue of the Cromer Crab Company, owned by Young's Seafood, are stamped in the 
windows of pastel-coloured homes. Protesters in crab outfits occupied the high 
street last weekend. Shops and mock-tudor tearooms sport bright red crab logos 
– a sign that they are collecting names for apetition that is already 
6,000-strong <http://www.petitionbuzz.com/petitions/keepitcromer>.

Fry, who grew up in Norfolk <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk>, 
catapulted the campaign into the national spotlight by tweeting "Nooooo! Youngs 
to take Cromer Crabs out of Cromer? Inconceivable. Sign petition… Keep It 
Cromer", to his three million followers. Pinsent and Titchmarsh followed suit, 
retweeting news from @keepitcromer. Activists are trying to win the support of 
Jamie Oliver – Young's produces a Jamie Oliver seafood range.

The only people who don't seem optimistic about the campaign are the company's 
workers. Standing under a bus shelter outside the factory on their lunch break, 
employees say that despite the firm's 90-day consultation period, the plant's 
closure is afait accompli. "You can't fault the support we've got from the 
town, but it doesn't put money on the table," says one worker who has worked at 
Young's for five years and didn't want to be named. "They [company directors] 
can do what they want – what can guys on the factory floor do about it? They've 
counted the cards, dealt them out and now we're just waiting for them to turn 
them over."

The Cromer Crab Company is the largest private-sector employer in the town, 
and some 230 jobs will be lost if it closes. One employee, a middle-aged 
manager who has worked at the factory for several years, supports a family of 
five. If he can't find a job almost immediately, he says they will lose their 
rented home because his landlord won't accept benefits. "Bedsits are fine when 
you're single but I'm not looking forward to fitting a whole family in there," 
he says.

The workers are well aware that the company is struggling. Opened in the 1970s 
by two locals, the plant began by processing local crabs on a small scale. As 
work expanded, more of the unprocessed seafood started coming from abroad. 
Today, less than 2% of the company's turnover comes from Cromer stocks. The 
bulk comes from processing prawns imported from Asia, which the company sells 
to supermarkets. Half the workforce is now from Eastern Europe.

Young's says the erosion of the pound against the dollar has left it in an 
uncompetitive position. Chief operating officer Peter Ward, who is leading the 
consultation, said the "best scenario" was to close the plant and consolidate 
the work elsewhere: "We didn't put this proposal on the table without 
recognising the gravity of it. This is nothing to do with the performance of 
the workforce. It's the external factors … We have to be sustainable."

But the political heat is increasing on the firm. Norman Lamb, who is the MP 
for the constituency and parliamentary private secretary to Nick Clegg, says 
Young's is missing a trick: "They are sitting on a potential gold mine here. 
We're living at a time when the whole market trend is towards local, 
high-quality food. We just had an event in parliament about Norfolk produce – 
Kettle Chips [made in Norwich] have become an incredibly powerful brand. Cromer 
Crabs could offer the same."

Lamb's senior position in government may explain David Cameron and Nick 
Clegg's recent commitment to support protected EU status for the Cromer crab. 
Like Melton Mowbray pork pies and the Cornish sardine, they want any crab 
labelled Cromer crab to be caught and processed locally. Young's says it is 
prepared to make this concession but given that only 2% of the food it 
processes is sourced locally, it is unlikely to save many jobs.

The more gloomy among the workforce have already left the factory to get a 
head start in the search for alternative work; others are simply trying to fit 
in as many shifts as they can before Christmas. Discussing the closure, many 
fear they will have to move away to find employment, and warn Cromer could end 
up a "ghost town".
 