
Steven Finn has admitted his nightmare Ashes tour last winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/15/steven-finn-england-australia-tour-2012-13>
 left him doubting his international future after his maiden five-wicket haul 
set up anine-wicket Tri-Series victory for England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/20/england-india-tri-series-match-report>
 against world champions India on Tuesday.

The 25-year-old’s match-winning performance at the Gabba came a year after he 
was sent home from Brisbane and branded “unselectable” by Ashley Giles, then 
England’s limited-overs coach.

Finn’s return to form helped Eoin Morgan’s side dismiss the world No2-ranked 
team for 153 and England cruised to their victory target with nine wickets and 
22.3 overs to spare to claim a bonus point, which makes them strong favourites 
to reach the Tri-Series final.

Asked whether he thought he might never be back playing for England in 
Australia, Finn said: “I always thought in the back of my mind it was possible, 
you never know do you? But to come here and be in the same hotels and get over 
those hurdles has been good fun and I’m enjoying my time in Australia.

“It’s just nice to help England win a game of cricket. A lot has happened in 
the last 12 months, it’s pretty much a year to the day where I went home from 
that tour of Australia. But that corner has been turned – I felt like I turned 
it a little while ago – and all of that stuff’s in the past and I’m really just 
looking forward.

“To take five wickets today was very pleasing for me after the work I’ve put 
in but I don’t want to look back now. I just want to look forward.”

Finn did not play a single competitive match on England’s tour here last 
winter as a disintegration in confidence and belief saw him get the yips with 
his bowling action.

Now, though, three weeks before the start of the World Cup, he believes he is 
close to his best again. “I think I’m getting there,” he said. “There might be 
another couple of miles an hour to come in the tank but that will come with 
confidence and getting into my stride as the tour goes on. It’s a good start.”

Finn paid tribute to Morgan, his team-mate at Middlesex who is now England’s 
one-day captain after he replaced Alastair Cook shortly before Christmas. 
“Eoin’s always been a very good friend and to have him as captain is a great 
thing,” he said.

“Eoin’s been great for me over the last year – being captain of the Middlesex 
one-day side and this team now and just in general as a friend. I’m very 
indebted to him.”

There were words of praise, too, for Andrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff>, one of the heroes of 
England’s 2005 Ashes win who spent the day with the team on Monday to offer 
advice and information to the bowlers.

Finn said: “I’ve never really spoken to Freddie about cricket before – it was 
interesting. I thought it was great to have him at nets; to have ex-England 
players around is a fantastic idea. To tap into the knowledge they’ve got and 
to get their perspective on things from outside the bubble was a 
refreshing experience.

“We just chatted about keeping bowling as simple as you possibly can and so 
when you get out to the middle you just bowl. That served him well throughout 
his career and it’s a great piece of advice for any young fast bowler.”

As for England’s hopes of reaching the Tri-Series final, something they could 
take a giant step towards with victory against Australia in Hobart on Friday, 
Finn remains realistic. “To come here and beat the No2 team in the manner we 
did today gives us confidence,” he said.

“But we don’t want to get ahead of ourselves. We’re happy just building as a 
team under our new leader Eoin and hopefully it’ll all come together and 
culminate in us being good in this World Cup – that’s the most important thing.”
 