
A barmy passage of play after lunch - in which Alec Stewart ripped off his 
sergeant's stripes and batted like a squaddie on a bender - put a smile on the 
face of this otherwise predictable Ashes series. It was kids-on-the-beach 
slogging, devoid of science but filled with the joy of desperation.

If the selectors were trying to pressure him into retirement, this was 
Stewart's reply; a succession of wild, heartfelt thumps, an almost angry 
rebuttal of Australia's superiority with the ball. He's had a not-bad series, 
more so with the gloves than the bat, and, once the yoke of match-fixing 
allegations had been lifted from his shoulders, he surely had the right to 
expect there were sunnier times ahead.

When Stewart hoisted the Australians' imperious strike bowler, Glenn McGrath, 
over the fence for six it was as if we had walked in on rehearsals for the 
movie of Headingley '81.

The crowd loved it. 

And then, amid the almost lunatic hitting, another breakdown of the trust one 
hopes used to exist between players - even at this high-octane level - spoilt 
the mood.

It came when Brett Lee, bowling with unrestrained and artful hostility at 
Stewart's batting partner, Andrew Caddick, got a lifter to clip the upper part 
of the guard on Caddick's left arm.

From the boundary and after several TV replay inspections, the ball appeared 
to be nowhere near the batsman's gloves or bat but, when it carried through to 
Adam Gilchrist, the wicketkeeper figured the deflection was reason enough for 
an appeal.

So did his slips cordon, who joined him in what did not impress as the most 
concerted appeal of all time.

Caddick, who had jousted with Lee in good spirit, left the field shaking his 
head. If he did glove it, this was poor, too. If he did not, and if Gilchrist 
knew he did not, then the man standing in for Steve Waugh should be unhappy at 
having contrived the dismissal of a batsman who, in all probability, they would 
have shifted soon enough anyway.

Nobody should deny a player the right to a fair shout if he thinks there is 
half a chance of a result; but it is impossible to see how Gilchrist, an 
upright character who appears to play the game in the right spirit and has been 
pencilled in as Waugh's successor, could have justified this one.

Perhaps the angle deceived him; maybe he mistook the clip of the ball on the 
hard armguard for the timber-sound he wanted to hear. Maybe he actually did see 
the ball hit bat or glove... Or maybe he is a victim, like many players, of the 
uncompromising ethos of modern cricket.

Michael Holding, commentating on Channel 4 on Friday when Mark Waugh's 
probably fair catch off Marcus Trescothick was overturned by the third umpire, 
alluded to the root of the overall problem. He said it should have been enough 
for the batsman to turn to the fielder and ask him if he had made a fair catch, 
to have accepted his word as well as the consequences.

Nobody should be so naive as to imagine this is 'how it always was' - far from 
it, if you believe some of the old stories - but most would agree it is a 
standard at least worth aiming for.

Similarly, Holding pointed out, in Australia's innings, when Ricky Ponting's 
edge to Mark Ramprakash at third slip required a video judgment, the players 
were by-passed. There was no trust.

There is a subtle distinction between claiming a catch that may or may not 
have touched the ground and appealing for a catch that is palpably a try-on. In 
the first instance, the catcher might say he was unsure or, despite the umpire 
giving it, he knows it landed short - during the first Centenary Test in 
Melbourne, for instance, when Rodney Marsh called back Derek Randall.

In the second situation, the fielding side might argue that it is reasonable 
to ask the umpire to decide. This school of thought has it that you should be 
allowed to shout for anything that looks remotely like a chance, the slightest 
nick of ball on shirt, most every collision of ball and pad, and, without 
question, every run-out.

If those are the rules, fine. What you end up with is a shouting match, a 
cacophony of doubt and suspicion.

Holding was not referring to the players involved here when he made the point 
that these incidents are now almost commonplace because 'there is too much 
cheating' in cricket. He was talking about the general malaise, the accepted 
norm. And you can be sure that what young players see on television will be 
repeated on their own patch.

'Cheating' is an ugly word in any sporting context, more so, perhaps, in a 
game that aspires to fair play and, under the weight of technological wizardry, 
is being scrutinised as never before. Gilchrist is not a cheat - but there are 
few other weasel words to describe the 'art' of deceiving an umpire whose job 
becomes more impossible by the replay.

What is doubly unfortunate is that Caddick - always an easy wind-up target for 
the Australians - had taken part in a tough but good-spirited duel with Lee. It 
wasn't quite Atherton v Donald, but it was certainly the tail-end version.

Watching from the other end as Stewart turned into Ian Botham, Caddick had 
taken his licks as Lee peppered him around the ribs with the second new ball 
(Australia's first of the series).

Even when struck near the left elbow at about 90 miles an hour, the England 
number 10 did not flinch. After several minutes of treatment, he lined up in 
the shooting gallery again and Lee splattered his stumps - with a no-ball. Lee 
accepted his rotten luck and steamed in even harder. Caddick's reply was to 
paste Lee's next delivery, a juicy half-volley, through cover for four. Off the 
final ball of the over, he tried an upper-cut of Lee's predictable bouncer and 
missed.

Lee, whose every gesture reflects his utter enjoyment of bowling fast, smiled. 
So did Caddick. As well as Gilchrist. Anyone you ask in the touring party will 
tell you there are few straighter or more amiable cricketers than Lee and 
Gilchrist. The bowler has a glittering future in front of him, almost certainly 
under the captaincy of Gilchrist, the finest wicketkeeper-batsman most of us 
have had the privilege of watching.

In Lee's next over to Caddick, though, they both got down to the serious 
business of modern Test cricket.
 