
A loss of form, a gammy hand and another Ashes drubbing. For many players 
approaching their 40s that would be enough to contemplate retirement, but it 
will hardly come as a surprise that Alec Stewart has other ideas, and still 
plans to be an England cricketer next summer.

Stewart signed a 12-month ECB contract at the end of September and has every 
intention of seeing out his time on the England payroll. If there is one thing 
that has characterised his career it is an ability to withstand change, and he 
is determined to end the latest doubts about his place in the side. Like 
Australia's captain Steve Waugh - who, on the eve of his world record-equalling 
156th cap in the fifth and final Ashes Test, refused to enter the debate raging 
here over his future - Stewart is reluctant to bow to conventional wisdom and 
admit the Sydney game will be his Test swansong.

An arthritic condition in his right hand forced Stewart out of the Boxing Day 
Test and his absence allowed James Foster to give a glimpse of life without the 
former England captain. Foster may not be the permanent heir to Stewart's 
position but his performance raised questions about the wisdom of returning to 
a player closer in age to the coach than the younger members of the squad.

It also put into context the decision to award a 12-month contract to a player 
at a stage in his career when each mistake could set the selectors to thinking 
it is time for change. If the 22-year-old Foster misses a catch, such as the 
one Stewart fluffed in the early stages of Damien Martyn's 95 in Adelaide, it 
is put down to a correctable technical fault, but when a 39-year-old fouls up 
the blame is laid on the date on his birth certificate.

After Foster's tidy performance in Melbourne - he did not concede a single bye 
in the first innings - another former England captain, Michael Atherton, 
suggested a Sydney farewell for Stewart. The man himself is reluctant to 
contemplate retirement publicly and, in the members' pavilion at the Sydney
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground, his response to 
Atherton's suggestion was brusque.

"I will carry on as I've always done. The enjoyment is still there," he said. 

Stewart knows walking away will jeopardise his 12-month contract which the 
England coach Duncan Fletcher confirmed does not automatically lead to a place 
in the side.

The pain from his hand injury has eased but the condition will need periods of 
rest. Next summer contains more international cricket than previous seasons: a 
three- match, one-day series against Pakistan has been tacked on to the usual 
schedule, leaving Stewart little time for recovery. Like all old lags though, 
he has a back-up plan.

"I might change the right glove just to get a bit more protection on the 
hand," he added. "The glove I'm using at the moment is the one I had last year, 
but it's getting to the stage where I need to do something. Batting is not 
affected but catching with fingers down is when it becomes a problem. I 
struggled for a while with it before this tour but it has got progressively 
worse. The World Cup will be fine because after 50 overs I can ice it up and it 
will settle down afterwards."

The ice pack may see Stewart through the World Cup, which starts next month, 
but whether it will be enough to protect him from the rigours of a seven-Test 
summer is doubtful. Zimbabwe are England's first opponents this summer and that 
is when Stewart will be at his most vulnerable to replacement by a younger 
model.

Stewart could quell doubts about his future with a performance in Sydney this 
week. An Australian attack shorn of two key bowlers in Glenn McGrath and Shane 
Warne, who between them have taken his wicket 24 times, offers Stewart a chance 
to perform that he simply cannot afford to squander.
 