
Alec Stewart paid tribute to Steve Waugh's "perfect" innings yesterday, then 
rejected suggestions that both might be making their farewell Test appearances 
here.

"Steve is a fantastic cricketer but for some reason, when you get to a certain 
age, people start writing you off," said Stewart.

"He is a legend, a quality player, a quality person, and to do it on his home 
ground was perfect. Steve will go out on his own terms and, if the Australian 
selectors pick their best side for the West Indies, then he should go as 
captain."

After 30 Tests in opposition Stewart and Waugh have a healthy mutual respect 
to which can be added a tinge of empathy after each had made life difficult for 
selectors on opposite sides of the world.

"People have written me off too," said Stewart after his 71 from 86 balls, his 
best of this Ashes tour, despite a skin infection which may hinder his eyesight 
as the match goes on.

"I've still got a few more matches in me. You go out there and have personal 
pride, which is why people like Steve and I keep playing. I'm 39 and Steve is 
37 and, when you get to our age, people want to get you out of the side for 
some reason or because it fills another paragraph.

"The selectors are the people who count and, if they think you are the best 
players, then you should still be playing."

Like Waugh, Stewart passed another milestone during his innings, overtaking 
Geoff Boycott as England's third highest runscorer in Tests.

"When you're in the company of your Gooches and Gowers and Boycotts, then it 
means you must be a pretty good player," added Stewart. "I read what people 
write but all you can do is go out there and play your best. Steve did that and 
I played pretty well today too. With the publicity Stephen has had recently I 
was pleased he got his hundred. To do what he has done after the tough media he 
has copped over the past 12 months shows what a good player he is."

That tough Australian media burst into applause when Waugh entered the press 
conference. Waugh will decide his future after the Test but clearly has little 
intention of following his twin Mark into retirement.

He said: "I've certainly enjoyed the way I've been playing recently and I feel 
like I did when I was 19. I'm going out there playing shots and the temptation 
is there to keep playing like that.

"I want to keep playing the game for as long as I'm improving. It's something 
I've always strived for and that was pretty close to as good as I can play, 
maybe the defining moment of my career.

"I've always said that desire and passion are what counts and that age is 
irrelevant. If you haven't got that burning desire at 20, then there is no 
point playing but, if you've got it at 40 and are good enough, then you should 
still be in the side. Alec Stewart is still an excellent cricketer and I don't 
believe age is a reason for someone not being in the side. It's certainly a 
temptation to keep playing but I just have to wait until after the game then 
assess things."

Sydney has been gripped by Waugh mania for the past week with speculation that 
this might be his last Test swelling attendances.

"It doesn't get any better than scoring a hundred off the last ball in front 
of your home crowd," he said. "It was one of those occasions as a sportsman 
that only happens a couple of times in your career.

"It felt like my first Test hundred at Headingley [in 1989] with the way I saw 
the ball. It was almost the perfect day. The adrenalin was almost overpowering 
as I felt I had to get my hundred before the end of play.

"I just felt it was my day and meant to happen. Even on 80 with two overs to 
go I felt I could get it. It would have been disappointing for the crowd and I 
wouldn't have slept that easy if I hadn't."
 