
Senior executives in the creative industries and the media need to stop being 
afraid of accusations of political correctness if they implement policies that 
increase diversity, the culture ministerEd Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey> has said.


Speaking before an event on diversity in film at the BFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> London film festival, Vaizey told the 
Guardian it was “completely unacceptable in 2015 that you do not see 
represented onscreen the community that is Britain today, and that if you go 
behind the scenes, you don’t see a community that represents Britain today.”

He said it was particularly odd for an industry with a huge presence in 
London, with its diverse population. “People just think it’s really weird. The 
idea that you’re not going to take action to correct this bizarre anomaly would 
be the thing that should shock people,” he said.

Meryl Streep defends feminist credentials as Suffragette opens London film 
festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/suffragette-london-film-festival-meryl-streep-carey-mulligan>
Vaizey, the minister for culture, communications and the creative industries, 
praised the BFI, which last year introduced new standards requiring all films 
that wished to receive lottery funding to demonstrate a wide commitment to 
diversity and access both on and offscreen.

The BFI Film Fund, which distributes lottery funding to film projects in the 
UK, has extended its scheme to include a set ofdiversity standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/08/film-bfi-diversity-rules-access-to-lottery-funding>
, of which filmmakers must meet a proportion before they can be considered for 
public funding.

These include representing diverse characters or viewpoints; ensuring minority 
groups are represented in artistic leadership positions; offering access and 
opportunities to people from minority backgrounds; and, in the case of 
festivals, showing a commitment to broadening cinema audiences.

The institute has also launched a diversity fund, which will offer grants for 
career development for projects for people from minority or less privileged 
backgrounds.

Fifteen projects currently in development have already received lottery 
funding under the scheme, including films directed by Gurinder Chadha, Ken 
Loach, Andrea Arnold and Amma Asante, whose previous film Belle was also made 
with the support of BFI money.

Vaizey said the BFI had “really led the way in the diversity debate... and 
helped break a logjam by showing you can do it.”

There were obvious lessons for media and other creative industries, he said. 
“People should stop being afraid they are going to be called out for being PC, 
or that they are being unfair in some kind of tortured way, and that if you 
take bold initiatives the sky isn’t going to fall on your head, they are 
generally welcomed, and you are making a difference. You have to get on with 
it.”

London film festival 2015 will be 'year of strong women'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/london-film-festival-2015-will-be-year-of-strong-women>
He declined to comment, however, on whether the principle of directing public 
funds to projects which support diversity should be considered more widely, 
saying “I only deal with the media sector. I can’t comment on the other 
sectors.”

Asked if the government could do more to insist on diversity principles, he 
said: “If you decide there is going to be some significant government 
involvement you end up in a cul de sac argument, where people start debating 
the merits of the government intervention, and you lose sight of the bigger 
picture.”

Camille Gatin, producer of forthcoming zombie film She Who Brings Gifts, which 
received funding under the scheme, encouraged an audience of film industry 
insiders to think creatively about how they could make their projects more 
diverse. The lead character in the movie, which also stars Glenn Close and 
Gemma Arterton, is a 12-year-old black girl. An early decision by the 
filmmakers to remove any description of their eight leading characters from the 
script led to a central cast that was 50% female and 50% black, she said.

Gatin said Arterton’s first day on set had involved a scene in which “four 
actresses talked about science for five pages. She said to me, ‘That has never 
happened to me before.’”
 