
Who was it who said that story is just a trick to keep you watching? I was 
reminded of this as I stared at Amer, trying in vain to get a handle on the 
stream of beautiful and startling imagery. But even beautiful and startling can 
wear thin after a while. If I were a civilian, as opposed to someone trying to 
write for a living, I would have run up the white flag long before those 87 
minutes were up, having already suffered through too much narrative-free pain 
(Jean-Luc Godard's Numéro Deux!) in the 1970s, when I vowed never again to 
venture into plotless territory unless the ordeal was softened by sexual or 
financial reward.

Amer, co-directed by Hélène Cattet and Bruno Forzani, is a Franco-Belgian 
homage to the Italiangiallo thriller, and runs the gamut of that subgenre's 
visual tropes, from split-screen to extreme closeup to colour filters, then 
overlays it with amped-up sound effects and music originally composed for 
genuine gialli with titles such as The Black Belly of the Tarantula or The Case 
of the Scorpion's Tail. The very fact that Cattet and Forzani haven't called 
their film something like The Curse of the Crimson Death Poodle suggests they 
didn't fully enter into the spirit of things.

You could reproach gialli movies for many things – violence, misogyny, 
preposterousness – but you could never accuse them of not having plots. OK, 
most of them consist of psychopaths running around murdering women, but at 
least the narrative poses a couple of questions to keep an audience hooked, 
such as whodunnit, who's next and why must there always be someone who says, 
"I'll tell you who the murderer is! But not right now. Let's meet tomorrow, in 
a dark and lonely place."

Cattet and Forzani told bloody-disgusting.com: "Amer is an enigma and only the 
spectator has the key." I'm sorry, but if I wanted a DIY plot, I would have 
written my own. You can get away with this if you'reLuis Buñuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/luisbunuel>, or if you're making a short 
(Cattet and Forzani's 10-minute La Fin de Notre Amour is perfectly watchable), 
but feature-length is pushing it. Eighty-seven minutes of giallo imagery 
without a coherent narrative adds up to nothing more than an exercise in style 
– and not even original, envelope-pushing style, but a pastiche of one already 
pumped to the max by Mario Bava, Dario Argento and Sergio Martino.

Story is simultaneously the most and the least important element in a movie. 
Most important because it provides the viewer with a guiderope; least because, 
in the best movies, it doesn't actually matter that much, which is why we can 
watch them repeatedly, even when the ending no longer packs the element of 
surprise. Alfred Hitchcock understood this, which is why he didn't blink at 
giving the game away well before the climaxes of Vertigo or North by Northwest. 
And he it was who perfected the art of the MacGuffin – the secret formula or
tchotchke that sets the plot in motion. As he told Truffaut, the best MacGuffin 
is "the emptiest, the most non-existent and the most absurd".

Hollywood movies never shy away from exploiting a narrative hook, though since 
so many of their screenwriters suckled at the same teats (UCLA, Syd Field, 
Robert McKee) it leads to endless regurgitation. Most of last year's action 
flicks, for example, shared a scenario in which special-ops agents are framed 
or targeted by their own people – as seen in The Expendables, The A-Team, The 
Losers, RED, Salt, Knight and Day, Machete etc. But hey, at least those films 
had a plot. Even if it was the same one.

Story is too often scorned by self-consciously serious artists, who, with 
breathtaking arrogance or blinkered stupidity, reckon they're above all that 
populist nonsense. There's a feeling in some quarters that if a film is easy to 
watch, it can't be worth watching, and that if artists suffer for their art, 
then their audiences should suffer even more. But we all need some sort of 
MacGuffin when we watch a movie. And the story is the emptiest, most absurd 
MacGuffin of all.
 