
It carries some of the most striking visual images of any magazine in the 
world, it was founded by an Estonian who has worked for the Australian defence 
department, it is based on the Pacific coast of Canada and perhaps no 
publication could claim to be more in tune with the current international 
campaign against corporatism and globalisation.

It is Adbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adbusters>, the "journal of 
the mental environment", and from its exquisitely executed covers to the call 
for cultural revolution at the end of the magazine it is now, in the wake of 
Prague and Seattle, attracting admirers and readers from all sides of the 
political arena. Next month it will be encouraging the world to take part in a 
Buy Nothing Day and this month it is running a "creative resistance contest" to 
encourage worldwide cultural rebellion. Its ideas come from the French 
Situationists and from Marshal McLuhan but its concepts and execution are very 
much twenty-first century.

The manifesto at the back of the bi-monthly explains who is behind the 
publication: "We are a loose global network of artists, writers, 
environmentalists, ecological econo mists, media-literacy teachers, reborn 
lefties, ecofeminists, downshifters, high-school shit-disturbers, campus 
rabble-rousers, incorrigibles, malcontents and green entrepreneurs . . . We 
believe that culture jamming will become to our era what civil rights was to 
the 60s, feminism to the 70s, and environmental activism to the 80s . . . Above 
all, it will change the way we interact with the mass media and the way in 
which meaning is produced in our society."

Adbusters was actually born more than 10 years ago, but it is only since the 
events of Seattle last year which led up to the demonstrations in Prague this 
year that it has suddenly started to break through to a much wider audience. 
Articles in its latest edition cover everything from the marketing of the 
American elections to a story about McDonald's in Lebanon, from a polemic on 
anarchism to news of what "culture jammers" have been up to in Japan.

Its founder and editor-in-chief is 58-year-old Kalle Lasn, who left Estonia as 
a two-year-old, and grew up in Australia where he worked for the defence 
department before moving first to Tokyo where he was in market research and 
then to Canada. There he became an award- winning documentary film-maker before 
founding Adbusters, which was driven by his increasing disillusionment with the 
corporatisation of the world and the failure of conventional left politics to 
combat it. His philosophy is contained in the book Culture Jam, the Uncooling 
of America, where the list of dedications includes "My mortal enemy, Philip 
Morris Inc which I vow to take down."

Lasn believes that the mass media now dispense a form of the "soma" that 
Aldous Huxley predicted in Brave New World: "The most powerful narcotic in the 
world is the promise of belonging. And belonging is best achieved by conforming 
to the prescriptions of America." In response, Lasn and his colleagues have set 
themselves the task of "unswooshing America" and "jamming its image factory 
until it comes to a sudden, shuddering halt". Adbusters is effectively the 
bulletin of that movement.

Lasn estimates that we receive around 3,000 marketing messages in an average 
day, from the logos on people's clothes to the billboards or posters we pass, 
to the commercials on our televisions and the ads in our daily papers or the 
signs in our super markets; some research puts the figure even higher. 
Adbusters' aim is to start to reverse the process.

"At the beginning, I did feel we were talking to the converted," says Lasn, 
"but all of a sudden there is a well-spring of interest." Initially, Adbusters 
was produced on newsprint and had only a small if loyal following, but it now 
sells 100,000 copies worldwide, mainly in the US, but also throughout Australia 
and New Zealand and with around 2,000 subscribers in the UK. Its small team of 
journalists, based in Vancouver, are mainly in their 20s and 30s.

Lasn attributes the recent attention to the whole post-Seattle effect and 
certainly many of the ideas which come into the magazine and its website have 
the subversive message of the loose movement that has emerged since then and 
been seen on the streets of Washington, Philadelpia, Los Angeles and Prague. He 
sees the growth of a global anxiety that the magazine taps into. "There is a 
messy feeling that things aren't quite right." Essentially he sees the magazine 
as a player in the epic battle between corporate culture and civic culture - "a 
people-driven planet earth or a corporate-driven planet inc".

And for all the playful nature of the publication, Lasn and his colleagues are 
quite serious. As he put it in Culture Jam: "Instead of treating vegetative, 
corporate-driven TV culture as something to be gently, ironically mocked, it's 
time to face the whole ugly spectre of our TV-addicted nation, the savage 
anomie of a society entranced and entrapped and living a lie. It's time to 
admit that chronic TV watching is North America's number-one mental health 
problem and that a society in which citizens spend a quarter of their waking 
lives (more than four hours a day) in front of their sets is in serious need of 
shock therapy."

If you watch people flipping through Adbusters in a bookstore or newsagents, 
you can often sense the slight puzzlement on their faces. Is this ad for 
Absolut Vodka for real? Is this two-page photo-spread of an elderly man asking 
"How can I die with dignity?" an invitation to a website about dying?

This is part of the magazine's intent, a desire to challenge the persuasion 
industry, to subvert the meaning in the message and to encourage people to 
become "culture jammers", taking on the corporations at their own game. 
"Corporations advertise and culture jammers subvertise", is one of their 
credos. Adbusters does take ads itself and will run "advocacy advertisements", 
such as either pro- or anti-abortion, but it reserves the right to vet every 
other kind of ad which means that most that do appear are mainly for books and 
CDs, rather than for, say, cars and alcohol.

Some of the visuals are subversions of well-known ads but although all the 
likely suspects - Nike, McDonald's, Coca-Cola and Walt Disney - have been 
lampooned, only one has sued: "Absolut Vodka came after us with a horde of 
lawyers, but we beat them back quite handsomely. They got scared and ran away 
with their tail between their legs. We have quite consciously provoked people 
like Nike and McDonald's - they haven't sued but they do subscribe." Lasn ran 
into problems, however, when he tried to advertise his Buy Nothing Day on 
television. All the major networks refused to run the commercials and CNN only 
agreed after being hounded by a reporter from the Wall Street Journal.

But Adbusters remains optimistic. If not culture jam today, then certainly 
culture jam tomorrow.
 