
We were waiting at the bus stop. "If the conductor asks how old you are, tell 
him you're four," I instructed my five-year-old son. All I had in my purse was 
11 pence. Enough for my fare into town but not his half fare.

Throughout the journey he asked in a voice that could cut through limestone: 
"Am I four or five?"

"Four," I mumbled, looking at the conductor. We were on our way to the town 
hall. Our party consisted of me, the five-year-old boy, the two-year-old boy 
and my baby daughter. For a treat we sat upstairs on the bus. When we passed 
Leicester prison my eldest son shouted: "Daddy lives there, doesn't he, mummy?" 
His podgy finger pointed at the forbidding building. I was now tired of this 
family joke. My ex-husband was not and has never been in prison, but naturally 
the other passengers on the bus were not to know this.

The five-year-old is now 24 and has (in my opinion) an unhealthy obsession 
with Kafka. I blame this on his earlier, obsessive interest in Leicester prison 
– which looks like a sinister Ruritanian castle.

The four of us were on our way to collect our weekly maintenance. I was 
expecting £9. It wasn't there. The woman behind the grille looked through a 
large ledger. "No," she said. "No money has been paid in."

I didn't know what to do. I asked her advice. "You must go to the Social 
Security office," she said. She gave me the address. I ran across the town, 
pushing the little ones in the pushchair and urging the five-year-old to 
pretend he was in a running race. We got there at about a quarter to four. The 
office was up three flights of filthy stairs. The lift was out of order. 
Precious time passed getting the children up the stairs.

We were given a number and told to wait. It was an awful room: the walls and 
the seats were institutional orange, the floor consisted of fag holes, and 
there were no ashtrays, although most of the claimants were smoking. The 
receptionist sat behind a glass screen. I had to bellow to be heard. "I've got 
no money."

I gave my name and address. She frowned. "You're in the wrong office." The 
office I wanted was on the other side of town; it closed at 5.30. It was now 
five o'clock, the children were hungry, the baby was crying. I was near to 
tears myself. We reached the other office at 5.20pm. This new waiting-room was 
worse than the earlier one. It was an older building, the one where the winos 
and tramps were registered.

There was an air of panic in the room, and a pool of vomit in the corner. I 
had 10 minutes in which to state my case and leave – with money in my pocket. I 
needed the bus fare and money to buy food. As before, I was given a number and 
told to wait. I explained I couldn't wait, I needed 50p in cash. An emergency 
payment. "We'll send it to you," I was told.

"When?"

"In a few days, when we've looked into your case. We need your birth 
certificate, marriage certificate, and a copy of your legal separation 
documents." I agreed to bring these documents in the next day. But in the 
meantime I had no bus fare – how would I get home, and how would I feed my 
children?

"Haven't you got any relatives who'll lend you some money?" said the young man 
behind the desk. It is impossible to convey to somebody who has money and no 
children the nightmare of having children and no money. I knew nobody who was 
on the telephone at that time. I couldn't even reverse the charges and ask for 
help.

I couldn't face walking the five miles home. I begged the young man for 50p, 
but he wouldn't relent. The staff in the back office started to put their coats 
on and tidy their desks. Half-past five arrived. Most of the people in the 
waiting room were ushered out. Others, desperate like me, stayed – explaining – 
some in tears, others shouting, that they hadn't eaten, had nowhere to stay. It 
was bedlam. My children were hot and thirsty. Could I give them a glass of 
water? "No," the office was now closed.

"You lend me 50p – as a person, you'll get it back," I said.

"No," he said. "Where would it end if I started to do that?"

I wanted to tell him that I was a literate and intelligent person, not just 
the young mother of those crying children – for Christ's sake, I had read every 
page ofWar and Peace. When I could afford it I read the Guardian. I was a 
Bessie Smith fan. I had won several prizes for verse speaking. I could read a 
menu in French. A poet had been in love with me. I knew how to spell and 
pronounce Dostoevsky. I had worked hard since I was 15. I had paid my taxes and 
my national insurance. I had never broken the law and all I wanted from the 
welfare state was a stinking, lousy, sodding 50p. I didn't get it.

It is a terrible thing to see your mother crying. I tried very hard, I 
contorted my face this way and that but eventually, when we were out on the 
street, the tears came. The four of us walked along – a quartet of cry-babies.

I was too proud to stop passers-by and ask for help. I scanned the pavements 
looking for money. Instead I found lemonade bottles, Corona brand. There was a 
returnable deposit of 4p on each bottle. My eldest son cheered up; he knew that 
these bottles represented hard cash. My pride vanished, I looked in litter 
bins, I looked over walls and behind fences. Soon we had enough for my bus 
fare, and then we had enough for four ice lollies – don't anybody dare to even 
think that those children should have been given something healthy to eat.

When we got home I bathed the children, and, when they were clean and shining 
in their pyjamas, I said we were going to have a special treat for dinner. I 
emptied the food cupboard of its contents. It didn't take long. There was a 
packet of beef suet, a tin of golden syrup, a tin of peas and one Oxo cube. For 
dinner we had pea soup (put another pea in the soup, Mother) and the golden 
roly-poly. My eldest child still remembers this meal. We laid a tablecloth on 
the living-room floor and ate in picnic fashion.

Late that night I put a note out for the milkman asking him to leave bread, 
butter and eggs, and in the morning our breakfast was waiting on the doorstep. 
Milkmen are a good source of credit. God bless them every one.

Later that day I rang the town hall. There was still no money, so I went back 
to the Social Security office. My family lent me £5. My friend looked after the 
children. I took my documents, but most important of all I put a copy of that 
day'sGuardian on the counter between me and the young counter clerk. He talked 
to me with considerably more respect than he had done the day before. A fat lot 
of good it did me; my social security payment took nine days to arrive, but by 
then I had taken three part-time jobs and employed two young girls as 
baby-sitters, and the system had beaten me. I became a working mother.

I would like to report that the DSS conducts itself with more humanity today, 
but I can't because it doesn't.

In early January 1989 I read a report in the local paper. It said that a man 
had gone berserk in a DSS office. He'd broken the office Christmas tree and 
stamped on the glass baubles. My second son was in the waiting room with a 
friend; he'd already told me about this unhappy scene. Apparently the man had 
been waiting two weeks for a promised giro. He was married with children, he'd 
been sacked from his job as a hosiery mechanic and like all sacked people, he 
was refused dole. He was desperate for money, it was two days before Christmas.

The counter staff told him it was in the Christmas post; they had been telling 
him this for eight days. The man had tried telephoning but the DSS phone lines 
were permanently engaged. Finally, in bad temper, knowing there were only two 
shopping days before Christmas, he had got on a bus and come in person for his 
money. In court he was described as being "of previous good character". But in 
the DSS office he turned into Dr Jekyll, he started to shout.

The police were sent for. When they arrived he tried to explain his case. They 
wouldn't listen, they started to push him out. He refused to leave without his 
money, they pushed harder. The Christmas tree was knocked over, the man 
stumbled and fell amongst the glass baubles which had fallen with the tree. 
Soon wild confusion reigned, the man, the policeman, the DSS staff and a few 
disgruntled DSS petitioners fought amongst the pine needles. Quite soon the man 
was overcome, arrested, and taken to the police station.

He was charged with assaulting the police, resisting arrest, and criminal 
damage to a Christmas tree and decorations. It would be funny if it wasn't so 
tragic. I don't know how much it cost the state to prosecute the poor man and 
lock him up, but I'm sure, absolutely positive, that it would have cost at 
least a hundred times more than his paltry, delayed, giro.

The DSS offices are not given enough funding, their staff are poorly paid and 
are driven to distraction by the amount of work they have to do. There is 
frequent turnover of staff. Morale is extremely low. Working with desperate 
people all day is very dispiriting; their unhappiness rubs off on you. For the 
sake of self-preservation you develop a thicker skin, you come to regard the 
claimants as the enemy. Because they are inarticulate in the presence of 
articulate officialdom, you do not respect them and habitually talk to them as 
though they are of lower intelligence than yourself. You are frightened of 
them, and all your communication takes place behind a glass screen. The 
furniture they sit on is screwed down because, in the past, this furniture has 
been thrown at you.

They offend you in their poverty, you despise their clothes and their shoes. 
Some of them smell and have disgusting personal habits. That is why it is 
impossible to allow them free access to the lavatory; why they must queue up 
and ask for the key.

Nobody goes to a DSS office to ask for state benefits if they are well and 
happy and employed. Nobody needs to. There is no need to have vile surroundings 
and seemingly uncaring staff as a disincentive.

People down on their luck deserve the best: beautiful surroundings and 
well-paid professional staff to help them out of their difficulties. Why not 
train thousands more social workers and let them sit in on claimants' 
interviews? Most social problems could be helped or prevented if people had 
more money and practical advice. The present benefits system is unfair, 
inefficient, and totally unprofessional; which is why millions of people do not 
claim the benefits to which they are legally entitled.

There is hysterical emphasis today on preventing the abuse of the system by a 
tiny proportion of fraudsters (known as scroungers). But the abuse lies 
elsewhere; in the Department of Social Security. They do not aid their staff or 
their clients' health, and they undermine everyone's security.

This is an edited extract from Mr Bevan's Dream by Sue Townsend
 