
Sue Townsend <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend>, who has died 
aged 68 after suffering from a stroke, was one of Britain’s most celebrated 
comic writers: novelist, playwright and journalist. She was best known for the 
fictional diaries of Adrian Mole, a character who, unlike Peter Pan, is allowed 
to grow up, evolving from the penis-measuring adolescent who confides “I was 
racked with sexuality but it wore off when I helped my father put manure on our 
rose bed” in The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13¾ (1982) to the 
middle-aged and, Townsend liked to insist, more evolved and better-dressed 
bloke who survives prostate cancer in Adrian Mole: The Prostrate Years (2009).

The glory of Mole is his inability to see the funny side, his self-importance 
and the way in which his diaries unwittingly accommodate his creator’s social 
commentary. The first book, which in the 80s made Townsend the decade’s 
bestselling novelist, took a shrewd look at Margaret Thatcher’s Britain. In 
Adrian Mole: The Cappuccino Years (1999) she took on New Labour with equivalent 
relish. Mole was a hapless Blairite, in love with Pandora Braithwaite, 
on-message MP. By the time of his last sighting he was living with his 
dissatisfied wife, Daisy, in a converted pigsty.

The Mole books have been translated into 48 languages and sold more than 10m 
copies. Adrian’s career has extended to radio andtelevision 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o2UDWWb4kbYhttp://> adaptations and he has 
been a smash hit in the West End. “Adrian Mole,c’est moi,” Townsend said when I 
interviewed her in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/aug/01/sue-townsend-kate-kellaway>
.


Unlike Adrian, she could spot a joke a mile off. Her ability to entertain 
without compromising her integrity was a gift that defined her and her writing. 
And she was not in the least self-important.


Townsend was born in Leicester, the eldest of five sisters. Her father worked 
in a jet-engine factory and became a postman when it closed. Her mother worked 
in the factory canteen. AtGlen Hills primary school 
<http://www.glenhillsprimary.co.uk/>, Townsend was terrorised by a teacher who, 
when children had failed to master their lessons, would slap their legs and 
make them do handstands.


She could not read until she was eight. It was her mother who taught her, with 
Richmal Crompton’s William books – the inspiration for Adrian. After failing 
the 11-plus, she went to a secondary modern,South Wigston high school 
<http://www.southwigston.leics.sch.uk>. She left at 15 but kept reading. She 
devoured Woolworth’s Classics (Jane Eyre, Heidi and co) and moved on to Russian 
and American literature.

As a chain-smoking teenager, dressed in black, she was fired from a job in a 
clothes shop for reading Oscar Wilde’s The Ballad of Reading Gaol in the 
changing rooms. From the age of 14 she was also writing in secret.


By the time she was 18, she had married a sheet-metal worker and, by 22, had 
three children under five: Sean, Daniel and Victoria. She lived on the Saffron 
Lane estate, not far from the house in which the playwright Joe Orton – another 
of Leicester’s claims to literary fame – had grown up. When, after seven years, 
her marriage ended, she worked in assorted part-time jobs: at a petrol station, 
as a receptionist and for Birds Eye foods.

The toughness of that time was something she never underplayed. She remembered 
making pea soup for her children out of one Oxo cube and a tin of garden peas. 
Although her books later made her fortune, she said that no amount of balsamic 
vinegar or Prada handbags would make her forget what it was like to be poor.

Through one of her many jobs, at an adventure playground, she enrolled on a 
canoeing course, where she found herself attracted to the man running it – 
initially by the way he tried to take off a jumper while simultaneously smoking 
a Woodbine. This was Colin Broadway, who was to become her second husband and 
father of her fourth child, Elizabeth. It was he who encouraged her, in 1975, 
to join a local writers’ group at the Phoenix arts theatre in Leicester.

There she wrote her first play, Womberang, set in a gynaecology clinic, which 
won the 1979 Thames Television Playwright award and gave her a bursary at the 
theatre. Soon afterwards she dug out Adrian – or Nigel, as he was in his 
earliest incarnation – from the cupboard in which he had, for years, been 
snoozing.


She showed the script to the actor Nigel Bennett, who recommended it to John 
Tydeman, then deputy head of radio drama at the BBC. It was first broadcast on 
Radio 4 and its success as a radio drama led Methuen to offer to publish the 
novel, insisting that Nigel be renamed Adrian (to avoid clashing with Ronald 
Searle and Geoffrey Willans’s Nigel Molesworth).


For some years, in Who’s Who Townsend listed her interests as “mooching about, 
reading, looking at pictures, canoeing”. But all these, apart from the 
mooching, were to be sabotaged by illness. She had TB peritonitis at 23, a 
heart attack in her 30s, and Charcot joint degenerative arthritis, which meant 
she had to use a wheelchair. She described herself as the “world’s worst 
diabetic” – finding the disease hard to manage. In the 1990s, she started to 
lose her sight. In 2001, she was registered blind and although, 
characteristically, she made jokes about it, she also wrote about the sense of 
loss, the disappearance of detail, the misery of suddenly finding she could no 
longer distinguish between a daffodil and a tulip.

She talked about what it felt like to “throw words into the dark”. She 
dictated all her later books – usually to her son Sean. In 2007, she suffered 
kidney failure (also diabetes-related) and was put on dialysis. In 2009, after 
a two-year wait for a donor, she had a transplant when Sean donated a kidney. 
In 2013, she suffered a stroke.

She did not appreciate being hailed as “brave” – pointing out that she had no 
choice about her blindness. But her writerly staying power and the continuing 
buoyancy of her prose were remarkable. She used her poor health and failing 
sight in the novels (Adrian’s cancer and his friend Nigel’s blindness, for 
starters). In addition to the Mole books, she wrote half a dozen novels, most 
notably Ghost Children (1997) about the psychological effects of abortion, The 
Queen and I (1992) in which the Queen, after a revolution, is compelled to live 
on benefits (the novel became a play in 1994, starring Pam Ferris and directed 
by Max Stafford-Clark) and its sequel, Queen Camilla (2006), in which Britain 
is run by Jack Barker’s Cromwell party and talking corgis provide the 
commentary.

She wrote a dozen plays and two works of non-fiction, and was a prolific 
journalist, writing for the Observer, the Sunday Times and the Daily Mail, and 
contributing an Adrian Mole column to the Guardian,The Secret Diary of a 
Provincial Man <https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/adrianmole> 
(1999-2001).

A lifelong socialist, Townsend made no secret of her disappointment in New 
Labour. She wrote repeatedly about the way ordinary lives are disfigured by 
politics. While her books made her fortune, the money did not bring about any 
change of heart. She lived in a Victorian vicarage outside Leicester and 
championed the city; she also bought two pubs that would otherwise have closed 
down. She enthusiastically backed Leicester's bid to become City of Culture in 
2017 (it did not succeed, but gave rise to a programme ofevents starting this 
summer 
<http://www.leicester.gov.uk/your-council-services/council-and-democracy/council-news/our-news-service-/ukcity-of-culture-2017/>
).

In 2009, she was given the freedom of Leicester. She was an honorary fellow at 
its university <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ki3rVWxgIGQhttp://>, a doctor 
of letters at Loughborough University and a fellow of the Royal Society of 
Literature.

Townsend's last novel, The Woman Who Went to Bed for a Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/24/woman-went-bed-sue-townsend-review>
 (2012), was her darkest. It is about a middle-aged librarian who, when her 
children leave for university, climbs between the sheets, and stays there. She 
has her bedroom painted luminously white (in contrast to Adrian’s all-black 
teenage bolt hole) and decides to shed all her possessions. It is a fresh start 
– of sorts. And as Townsend had done in the Mole books, she made an invisible 
character visible.

She is survived by Colin, her four children and 10 grandchildren.

• Susan Lillian Townsend, writer, born 2 April 1946; died 10 April 2014

 