
Until I met Sue Townsend <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend>, I 
hadn’t realised it was possible to be hilarious, angry, scathing, sad, kind, 
self-mocking, solitary, gregarious and loveable all at the same time, in one 
breath gathering up a tumult of emotions and ideas. When she went blind, she 
talked to me about it with extraordinary humour (how she chatted to the coat 
hanging on the back of the door, mistaking it for her husband, Colin, threw 
gloves onto the compost heap instead of potato peelings, made a fine debut with 
her white stick) and yet managed to convey her loss and horror. Life had always 
bashed her about and she had always refused to be defeated by it. She was one 
of the most generous-hearted women I’d ever encountered, living life 
full-throttle, and yet somehow she remained mysterious, protecting her secret 
self, the self that wrote and dreamed.

I visited her a couple of times in her Leicester home – a house crammed with 
objects, paintings on every wall, flowers in jugs, plants in pots, bowls and 
cups and knick-knacks and pieces of bric-a-brac everywhere, photographs of her 
family whose faces she could no longer see and messages she couldn’t read 
pinned onto the noticeboards, books she could no longer read on shelves and in 
piles on the floor. After she died, I went back to the house to talk to her 
family (I’m trained as a humanist celebrant and I conducted her funeral). It 
was very strange to be in her home – the house that Sue built – without her in 
it, sitting at the table, exuberant, life-filled, at the heart of things. The 
place was still full of objects (she was no minimalist) and full of people too, 
passionately bereft. Her husband, Colin, was there, and her four children and 
their partners, and also most of her grandchildren – her notion of family was 
broad and inclusive; home was always a place of welcome. They talked over each 
other, interrupted and added to each other, all wanting to share their versions 
of the many-sided Sue Townsend.

She was the young girl who’d not learnt to read until eight and left her 
secondary modern at 15, but who’d devoured Russian, French and American 
literature and who was never without a book; the tree-climber (she would sit 
and read in the branches); the beatnik dressed in black; the single mother who 
had many jobs and no money but who made a feast out of Oxo cubes and tinned 
peas. She was the wife – Colin recalled their first meeting, when she’d seen 
him shepherding geese across the road and thought he was a nutter; their first 
date, when they’d taken her children skating; their holidays together. She was 
the grandmother, who never locked her door so that the grandchildren could come 
and go as they pleased and who let them dress up in her finest clothes and tear 
round the muddy garden. (Her boundless hospitality meant that sometimes there 
was no room for her and she had to book herself into the hotel down the road to 
get her books written.) She was the radicalwho believed in social justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/13/adrian-mole-sue-townsend-welfare>
 and had 20 or so flying picket miners staying with them during the strike, who 
took her daughter to Greenham Common, who never let fame and fortune go to her 
head, who remained a woman of the people. She was the chain smoker, the world’s 
worst diabetic. The cafe-moocher, partygoer, late-nighter, mahjong player, 
vodka drinker, Chanel-No-5 and red-lipstick wearer (she would even put lipstick 
on to have a phone conversation), the beetroot and violet-cream devourer. She 
was the writer, whoseAdrian Mole diaries  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/apr/11/adrian-moles-best-quotes-what-are-your-favourites>
entered the national consciousness and who wrote about lives of quiet 
desperation and made them funny, even poetic. She was the dreamer.

As her family shared their memories with me and with each other, as they 
talked, laughed and wept, what emerged was a woman whose generosity was almost 
reckless. And yet, in the midst of the warmth and chaos, Sue Townsend 
maintained her inviolable secret self – her writing self. And although she’s 
gone, although that house no longer has its centre, that self remains. Open any 
of her books and there she is: the unbeatable, unmistakeable, irreplaceable, 
unforgettable Sue.
 