
Janet Fillingham met Sue Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend> in 1980 while a junior agent 
at Sheil Land Associates. Townsend, then 34, was a new playwright, beginning to 
dabble in prose. Fillingham became Townsend's first agent, representing the 
Leicester-born writer for 11 years. After a career that incorporated 15 novels 
and many plays, Townsend died on Thursday, aged 68.

Sue Townsend, soft-voiced and diffident, was first nurtured as a writer by the 
Phoenix Arts Centre, Leicester <http://phoenix.org.uk> – still going strong, 
still delivering cultural and creative opportunities to its local community 
nearly 40 years after Sue tentatively pushed open their door. Her playWomberang
, developed in Leicester, had a short run in 1979 at Verity Bargate's original 
Soho Poly theatre. Audience instructions on entry to that powerhouse of 
creativity: "Breathe in, we'll squeeze you in somehow."

I breathed in and was touched, inspired and enchanted by the freshness of 
Sue's writing voice. Sitting a little later in her Leicester kitchen, exploring 
what else she might want to write, she told me about her fascination withDaniel 
Lambert 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/leicester/content/articles/2009/06/23/daniel_lambert_feature.shtml>
, the 18th-century fat man and cherished icon of Leicester, but also about an 
audition script she'd been working on and had tried out at the Phoenix writing 
group. It was about a spotty and mule-ish teenager…

I hadn't come across Daniel Lambert and was prepared to support Sue's 
enthusiasm for him, but my attention was diverted as she scurried around her 
kitchen retrieving pieces of handwritten paper from unlikely nooks and crannies 
and then read out to me the first stirrings ofAdrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole>. Sue was in her mid-30s at 
the time and I was in my 20s. Adolescence seemed far away. (And neither of us 
had ever been a teenage boy.) But the character who became Adrian – he was 
called Nigel, then – seemed to me in that kitchen to have an identity entirely 
his own and yet incorporated a universal awkwardness, yearning and sense of 
potential.

I badly wanted others to be able to enjoy him too. Sue – or perhaps Colin, her 
husband, I can't remember – typed up the manuscript and we sent it first to 
John Tydeman at BBC Radio Drama, suggesting that it could form a radio 
monologue. After that we sent it to Geoffrey Strachan at Methuen Books. The 
sharing of Adrian had begun.The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13¾ came out 
in 1982.

More than 30 years have passed, Sue wrote seven more diaries, and to the 
generation that includes my own children it seems as if Adrian Mole has always 
been with us. Well so he has, across generations, cultures and countries. The 
Adrian books (perfectly complemented by Caroline Holden's jaunty line drawings 
in the UK) were published in 30 languages.

Gentle Sue, how grateful we shall always be to you for your writing and your 
other gifts – your ability to always see the best in people, to help them sing 
in their own way, to lead us to healing laughter as well as cleansing tears. 
You made connections with people everywhere. Thank you for leading the way.
 