
Three British soldiers were killed in a suicide attack in southern Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> yesterday, taking the number of 
UK military personnel killed in the country since 2001 to 100, the vast 
majority over the past two years. A fourth soldier was injured.

The soldiers, from 2nd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, whose next of kin 
have been informed, were on a routine foot patrol near their base in the Upper 
Sangin Valley in Helmand province when they were struck by an explosion. Four 
were injured and evacuated to Camp Bastion for treatment, the Ministry of 
Defence said. One was pronounced dead on arrival and, despite medics' efforts, 
another two died from their wounds.

In a statement after the deaths, the chief of the defence staff, Air Chief 
Marshal Sir Jock Stirrup, said: "One hundred brave and professional servicemen 
have now died in Afghanistan ... I only hope that the terrible hardship that 
they have been asked to bear can be eased by the certainty that our forces are 
engaged in a most noble endeavour. In parts of Afghanistan which were once 
lawless, there is now governance and rule of law. Across the country, more than 
seven million children are now in school and increasing numbers of people have 
access to healthcare."

Des Browne, the defence secretary, said: "I would like to express my deepest 
sympathy for the family, comrades and friends of the three soldiers killed." He 
added: "Every visitor to our forces in Afghanistan comes back with the same 
sense of awe and admiration for the courage, professionalism and dedication of 
the remarkable young men and women serving out there."

The Conservative party leader, David Cameron, said: "My heart goes out to 
their families at this time. We owe so much to young servicemen and women who 
risk their lives to fight on our behalf." The shadow defence secretary, Liam 
Fox, added: "Every lost serviceman is a tragedy to their friends and families 
and our hearts go out to them all. We should be grateful as a country for the 
courage and fortitude of those willing to defend the security and values of an 
often ungrateful nation."

The Liberal Democrat leader, Nick Clegg, said: "While the pain of the families 
and friends of the 100 brave servicemen and women who have lost their lives 
must be unbearable, I have no doubt that the cause for which they died is a 
just one. The consequences of failure would be unimaginable - a boost to 
terrorists who seek to harm our way of life, an increase in hard drugs on our 
streets and terrible instability in an already unstable region.

By the time the British military death toll in Iraq reached 100 - in January 
2006 - there had only been five UK fatalities in Afghanistan.
 