
Back when Naseem Hamed's outrageous talent was still keeping pace with his 
galloping ego, I watched him perform a routine that involved throwing 78 
punches in 10 seconds, with 15 different foot movements. The noise of Hamed's 
gloves on his trainer Brendan Ingle's pads – hypnotic, angsty, vaguely 
reflective of the drum 'n' bass popular at the time – grew until it sounded 
like thunder crackers welcoming in the new year. The 5ft 3in Hamed also used to 
spar with the future British cruiserweight champion John "Buster" Keaton, a man 
nine inches taller and five stone heavier. It was like seeing a confused bear 
pawing at a wasp, and being stung to paralysis.

Until last week, I had not seen a more impressive training performance in 20 
years – although there was an intense Oranje crush watching Marco van Basten's
Holland squad show off passing routines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/jun/09/worldcup2006.sport21> of 
nimble-toed bewitchery before Germany 2006; while seeing Mo Farah finish an 
18-mile interval session with a nonchalant 55sec 400m, having had his pleas to 
run it in 51secfriskily dismissed by his coach Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/19/camp-mo-farah-london-marathon>, 
was also off the charts.

But on Thursday I stepped into the British artistic gymnastics' base camp at 
Lilleshall in Shropshire, and into a world where the normal rules of sporting 
physics did not seem to apply.

Almost simultaneously I saw this: women backward-somersaulting along a beam 
not much wider than an iPhone; men elevating their feet from a press-up 
position into a handstand before slow-clapping their legs together like 
dolphins at feeding time; juniors swinging and twisting from sets of uneven 
bars like mini-Tarzans. And these snapshots kept coming, as if taken from a 
camera with its shutter release permanently locked, from 9.30am to 12.30pm and 
then again from 3pm to 6pm.

It was thrilling to watch. And it brought back those promises so many made 
after London 2012, that most intense of summer romances, that these 
underexposed sports would not be a passing fancy. So what happened?

In gymnastics' case, not a great deal. The Olympic effect led to more knocking 
on club doors but no significant increase in bums on sofas. In 2011 a peak of 
1.3m people watched the world gymnastics championships. In 2013, a year after 
4.8m had marvelled at Beth Tweddle's bronze on the uneven bars, the figure for 
the same event was 1.1m.

Of course, these figures are still impressive – higher than most Premier 
League football matches shown on Sky and BT – but you may have expected more 
given the team's medal haul.

Swimming's TV ratings have not enjoyed any greater post-Olympics splash 
either. Peak viewing figures for the 2011 world championships? 1.3m. Peak 
viewing figures for the same event in 2013, after 9.7m had watchedRebecca 
Adlington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rebeccaadlington> win bronze at 
London 2012? 1.1m.

Admittedly, that is not the whole picture – last year's triathlon world series 
grand final attracted 2.1m peak viewers compared with 1.6m for the world 
championship final in 2011 – but after watching and loving the Olympics many of 
us went back to the sports we were enjoying before.

Incidentally, it is not as if people are doing more and sitting less. The most 
recent Sport England Active People Survey, published last December, found the 
number of people playing sport once a week has increased by only 200,000 since 
London 2012.

But perhaps this brief, football-lite window between the end of the league 
season and the start of the World Cup will offer more sports a shop window. 
British gymnastics, whose squads compete at the European Championships starting 
in Sofia on Wednesday, certainly hope so.

The men's team have gone from 23rd in the world in 2006 to Olympic bronze 
medallists and reigning European champions, while the juniors have won the last 
three European championships, unheard of even in the days of the Soviet Union. 
They believe gymnastics is one of the great recent success stories of British 
sport but financially it doesn't feel that way. Only a handful of head coach 
Eddie Van Hoof's "totally focused and dedicated" athletes get between £13,000 
and £27,00 a year from UK Sport. "So when you see footballers on 
£200,000-a-week it galls a little bit," he sighs.

You sympathise. Most of us have experienced – if only for a nanosecond – a 
scratchy approximation of what an elite athlete feels when they throw a perfect 
punch, thread an eye-of-a-needle pass, or sprint beyond the bounds of what they 
suspected was possible. But even the most basic ofgymnastic manoeuvres are 
beyond most us without zero gravity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yEMeoeriz78%C2%A3t=12.>. The sport has the 
wow-factor yet sponsors are not matching gasps with cheques.

"Our sport is looking for some major sponsors to step in," admits Van Hoof, 
"because if we get a few disappointing results we've seen what happens with 
basketball and synchronised swimming."

It is not just gymnastics bidding for more attention before Brazil 2014. In 
the next few weeks the BBC will show the Great City Games in Manchester, 
featuring many of Britain's leading athletes, Alistair andJonny Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee> competing in Japan in the 
world triathlon series, the European rowing championships, even Badminton horse 
trials.

If you were someone who discarded the Olympic bug as quickly as you caught it, 
perhaps now is your chance to reacquaint yourself with sports and stars who 
deserve more than to be noticed just once every four years.
 