
Revellers at Summernats have been banned from riding in the back of utes after 
a man died at the street car festival inCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>.

A 30-year-old from Queensland sustained fatal injuries when he fell from a car 
along the cruise route at Exhibition Park on Thursday afternoon.

It’s the first death at the event in its three-decade history and is being 
investigated by police.

“We were very distressed about it but certainly nothing in comparison to the 
distress and unhappiness that would’ve been experienced by the family and 
friends of the young man,” the Summernats co-owner Andy Lopez told reporters on 
Saturday.

Organisers initially stopped people from riding in flatbed trays, but have 
since extended it to all utes – “no matter what the circumstances” – on police 
advice.

That will stay in place for the rest of the weekend but a decision is yet to 
be made if it will be permanent.

Man dies following incident at Summernats car festival in Canberra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/man-dies-following-incident-at-summernats-car-festival-in-canberra>
“People have been sitting in the back of utilities at Summernats for 30 years 
and riding around in the slow, controlled conditions here,” Lopez said. “Our 
safety record is really strong. What happened in this particular instance will 
be a matter for the police.”

Any recommendations arising from police investigations will be complied with, 
he said.

Tributes for the man, believed to be Luke Newsome, have flowed on social media.

His partner, Caity Lye, said Newsome was her soul mate and love of her life.

“You are the most genuine, caring and loving person that I have ever met and 
you will continue to always be forever in my heart,” she posted on Facebook.

“We had so much life to live together but your beautiful soul was 
unfortunately needed elsewhere.”

Summernats officials revealed details of the incident only after the man died 
on Friday, and did not address the media until Saturday.

They are yet to speak to his family directly.

“The family is going through a grieving process. We’re ready and willing to 
assist and offer support in any way,” Lopez said.
 