
For the writer Susan Beale, it’s no accident that voters on both sides of the 
Atlantic want to turn back the clock to the 1960s. “There’s tremendous 
nostalgia for this time in America, it’s looked back on as this golden era,” 
she says. “And for the baby boomers, who are now working their way into their 
70s, that was the real America.”

Beale returns to this “real America” herself in a debut that has put her on 
the shortlist for the Costa first novel prize, whose winner is due to be 
announced on 3 January. The Good Guy is no honeyed exercise in nostalgia: it’s 
an exploration of the deception and conformity at the heart of the American 
dream. Beale charts how one lie leads to another for car-tyre salesman Ted 
McDougall, who finds himself falling into a relationship that upends his 
comfortable suburban life. As Ted slides from convenient evasions into 
elaborate fabrication, the perspective shifts between the three players in this 
familiar drama. His wife Abigail struggles with the domestic demands of family 
life and tries to expand her role beyond the confines of her stultifying 
environment. The other woman, Penny, falls for the character Ted has invented 
and dreams of the happy ending a 21st-century reader knows is impossible.

It’s a story inspired by a crucial part of the author’s own life. Shortly 
after she was born in Bedford, Massachusetts in 1966, Beale was put up for 
adoption. Raised by a mailman and a schoolteacher on Cape Cod, the fact of her 
adoption was never a secret, becoming instead an important facet of her 
identity. “It was like being left-handed,” she says. “It was my USP.” But 
despite always being curious about her birth mother, this bald fact was swathed 
in mystery – under Massachusetts law, the circumstances of Beale’s birth were 
kept from her.


“When I was growing up, my adoption files were sealed. They were court-ordered 
like a national secret with no expiry date,” she says, compact and full of 
energy as she leans forward to insist upon the absurdity and the words come 
tumbling out. “After 50 years or so you could know about the Cuban missile 
crisis, but apparently I didn’t have the right to know about my biological 
parents.”

Adopted children in the US are issued with a second birth certificate, filled 
in with the names of their adoptive parents. But “everybody is only born once. 
I have this birth certificate that is a lie; it’s fiction.” While her parents 
said they’d help her search for her birth mother, Beale always worried it would 
hurt them. “I felt like they wished I didn’t need to know. They wanted to be 
the only parents I needed, just like I’m the only daughter they needed.”


The possibilities for family life have expanded over the last 50 years to 
embrace divorce, same-sex relationships and interracial marriage, she 
continues, but the “last thing is this idea of adoptees, the idea of a birth 
mother being part of a family … For most adoptees of my generation, you have to 
make an unspoken choice. Which team do you support? Are you on Team Adoptive
Family <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family>, or are you on the 
other side? You don’t want to be disloyal. A lot of adoptees my age will put 
off searching because they don’t want to hurt their adoptive parents.”


So Beale shelved her curiosity through high school – where she threw herself 
into figure skating, competing at regional level – and pressed on through 
college and a career as a journalist. Hers was a very practical family, so 
after graduating at the end of the 1980s, her dreams of being a writer 
translated into a job on the local paper as a reporter. She met her husband 
while working on New Hampshire’s Monadnock Ledger and worked in trade magazines 
as they moved first to the UK, then to France and Belgium. But the experience 
of having children of her own brought her past flooding back.


“It’s a really amazing thing to have a child inside you and to be so in love 
with the baby,” Beale explains, “and you start to think: ‘I don’t even know who 
I was inside.’ It’s the most intimate relationship. This baby is growing, it 
has a personality, you’re communicating, it eats what you eat; sometimes it 
wakes you up when you’re asleep. It’s just this amazing thing. And you think: 
‘I was in there somewhere, but in who? I just don’t know. I could walk past her 
in the street and I wouldn’t know.’”


She began searching for clues on the internet, and in 2002 discovered she had 
the right to know at least some of the details surrounding her birth.


“All the identifying information had been blacked out. “The fact that they 
lived in Harwich [in Massachusetts] was a state secret.”


As she read through the documents, she found herself thinking of it as a 
story, and became obsessed with the demands and constraints of middle-class 
life in the mid-1960s. With four boys between seven and two, at first she 
couldn’t find the space to explore this unmapped inheritance through writing. 
“I was still deep in the trenches of motherhood,” Beale says. It was six years 
before she felt ready to tackle the subject in literature, completing her first 
version as aNaNoWriMo challenge <http://nanowrimo.org/>, but it was clear from 
the start it was an issue she needed to tackle in fiction.


“Memoir doesn’t get you in people’s heads unfiltered,” Beale explains. “It 
doesn’t deliver that level of complexity. Only fiction can allow you to assign 
feelings. Looking back as a person from the future, part of you goes: ‘Come on, 
she didn’t know. Come on, she didn’t see.’ And it’s only when you go back into 
the history and the context and you realise these were the rules that these 
people were playing with, that you say: ‘Well, actually, it would have been 
kind of easy.’”


The massive social shift between the end of the second world war and the end 
of the 1960s, with many people entering the middle class, is fertile ground for 
fiction, she continues. “It was a great time to be a white male without a 
college degree. You could walk into a job that would pay enough to support a 
wife and family. You could have a house, you could have a car, all these 
things, but it came at a price and that price was conformity.” And with a 
society governed by so many rules, the gaps between appearance and reality grow 
ever wider. “The only tool that they had when people fell short of these 
expectations was to lie. And they did it – incredibly. And it was through 
institutions. If you look at my adoption papers, the social worker was helping 
to construct the lie, helping to form the lie, helping to cover the lie. It’s 
shocking.”


When Beale moved back to the UK in 2012 and enrolled for a course in creative 
writing at Bath Spa University, it seemed obvious she should return to explore 
all this deceit, reworking the version of the novel she completed four years 
earlier. Meanwhile, she had arrived at a truth of her own. Massachusetts law 
changed in 2007 to open some adoption records, so when Beale applied for a copy 
of her birth certificate in 2010, she discovered her biological mother’s 
identity. After debating what to do for a few months, she went ahead and 
established contact. It took her a little while to tell her mother she was 
addressing the story of her birth in fiction, but – four decades on – there was 
never a question of any shame.


“She died in 2013,” Beale says, “just as I was finishing the coursework. It 
was June and I went to stay with her for 10 days just before she passed. We 
talked a lot then, and I read stuff to her. She wanted to know how it ended, 
and she was very supportive. She was very happy to have me writing about it. 
She said it was the birth announcement she was never able to give.”


With a second novel exploring Beale’s passion for figure skating already in 
the works, The Good Guy’s arrival on the Costa shortlist has announced Beale’s 
talent for fiction. “This year has been full of surprises, she says, and “this 
one stands out for being a good one.” She says she has no idea what her 
nomination will bring, but “it’s one of those things that will fortunately be 
attached to my name: shortlisted for the Costa. I could get used to that.”


 * The Good Guy by Susan Beale is published by John Murray at £16.99. It is 
available from the Guardian Bookshop for £13.93 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/good-guy.html>.  