
The conveyor belt of Swedish multiple champions - Bjorn Borg, Stefan Edberg, 
Mats Wilander - has ground to a halt, but there are still enough good players 
from that country to cause trouble for the current batch of favourites.

At last year's Australian Open Thomas Johansson, currently injured, shocked 
everybody including himself by becoming one of the most unlikely of recent 
champions, and for several awkward moments yesterday it appeared Lleyton 
Hewitt's ambitions might be scuppered at the first hurdle by another unregarded 
Swede, Magnus Larsson.

The 21-year-old world No1 duly reached the second round with a 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, 
6-7, 6-2 victory, but it took him more than three hours and it was not a match 
he will look back on fondly. "I'm going to get better and better from now on," 
he promised, and he will need to.

Larsson, 32, who in 1995 reached the world's top 10, is now outside the top 
150 and had to qualify here. His career has been a tale of missed opportunities 
and injury but he still has a serve and forehand capable of doing damage. 
Hewitt, perhaps feeling the pressure, had a rough jolt in the second and fourth 
sets.

"Lleyton has no big weapons and if it was not for his fighting spirit he would 
be no different from many of the other guys," said Larsson.

That sounded like a damning critique, but the Swede did not mean it to be. He 
made it clear how much he respected Hewitt, stressing that the Australian 
thoroughly deserved to be world No1 and likening his style of play to that of 
Wilander, the winner of seven slams in 1982-88 and three times Australian 
champion.

Hewitt was flattered by the comparison and returned the compliment, saying: "I 
knew Magnus wouldn't be scared of the situation. He played incredibly well - he 
was the toughest [qualifier] I could have drawn."

But of all the players currently in the top 10, Hewitt is the most difficult 
to beat over five sets - on the way to winning Wimbledon last year he beat 
Holland's Sjeng Schalken after being two breaks down. "One of the reasons I'm 
world No1 is that I train incredibly hard," he said. "Plus my never-say-die 
attitude."

The Swede mixed patience with bold aggression but acknowledged that in the 
first, third and fifth sets he had been well beaten. "Maybe six or seven years 
ago I might have won," he added ruefully.

All of Hewitt's main rivals in the top half of the draw - Marat Safin of 
Russia, Roger Federer of Switzerland, Jiri Novak of the Czech Republic and the 
American Andy Roddick - won. The main casualty of the second day was Alex 
Corretja, the No15 seed, who lost to his fellow Spaniard Feliciano Lopez 6-7, 
7-6, 7-6, 6-3.
 