
 Author:  Sidonie-Gabrielle Colette (1873-1954) first started writing under 
the pseudonym Willy - the nickname of her first husband, music critic Henri 
Gauthier-Villars. Her early work comprised four novels about a teenage 
schoolgirl, beginning with Claudine at School (1900). Their success owed much 
to the racy material, and Colette herself acquired a similarly controversial 
reputation after a string of risqué music-hall performances and well-publicised 
love affairs.

Colette brought much of this into her writing, in stories such as La Vagabonde 
(1911) and La Seconde (1929). In the 1920s, Colette found a home in the 
Parisian avant-garde, becoming friends with radicals like Jean Cocteau. Gigi 
(1944) was published in her 70s, at a time when Colette was herself already 
examining her own iconographic persona in books like The Evening Star (1946). 
In 1953, she was made a grand officer of the Legion of Honour and died a year 
later - but was refused a Catholic funeral because of her two divorces.

 Story:  Gigi is set in 1899, exactly 50 years before it was written. 
Fifteen-year-old Gilberte lives with her mother Andrée and grandmother Mme 
Alvarez, and is schooled in the ways of the world by an elderly aunt, Alicia, a 
veteran of a string of affairs. Gilberte's uncle, rich bachelor Gaston 
Lachaille, is a regular visitor to their humble home, valuing its lack of 
pretension and, after ending a routine love affair of his own, realises that 
his liking for his adolescent relative has flowered into love. Lachaille wants 
a liaison, but the older female family members are wary, and warn Lachaille 
off. Gilberte, too, is unhappy at the prospect of becoming involved with a 
well-known figure like Lachaille - but he finally convinces her that his 
affection is genuine. Brief though the story is, it distils the quandary of the 
fin-de-siècle Frenchwoman: the need to think strategically to secure a husband, 
or remain alone to ensure emotional independence.

 Film-makers:  Vincente Minnelli (1903-1986) was hired by MGM to direct Cabin 
in the Sky (1943), but it was Meet Me in St Louis (1944) that made his name. 
Alan Jay Lerner had impressed producer Arthur Freed with the screenplay of An 
American in Paris (1951), and Freed subsequently signed him to a three-picture 
contract, the first of which was Brigadoon (1954), also directed by Minnelli.

After the success of the stage version of My Fair Lady, Freed suggested Lerner 
consider Gigi for a straight-to-film musical treatment. Frederic Loewe joined 
Lerner to work on the songs. Lerner wanted Audrey Hepburn, who had taken the 
role in a stage play, as the lead; after Hepburn refused, he turned to An 
American in Paris star Leslie Caron. Caron's singing voice was ultimately 
dubbed by Marni Nixon.

 How book and film compare:  Lerner elaborated on a couple of mentions of 
Gaston's uncle to create the pivotal character of Honoré Lachaille. Played by 
Maurice Chevalier, he narrates the action straight to camera, and is given a 
significant subplot of his own as he waxes nostalgic over a past love affair 
with Gigi's grandmother.

 Inspirations and influences:  Gigi bears resemblances to My Fair Lady. Both 
are fables about a young innocent groomed in the ways of sophisticated 
womanhood. The film, which won nine Oscars including best picture, is now 
considered the high-water mark of the classic MGM musical, with its lavish sets 
and elaborately designed costumes.
 