
In theory, Duncan Jones's Source Code opened this year's SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> festival. But another drama by a 
British director screened at exactly the same time: Andrew Haigh's Weekend. The 
low-budget, same-sex romance tracks a one-night stand that develops into 
something deeper over the course of a weekend.

Going head to head with one of the festival's most anticipated films might be 
expected to have a director quaking in his boots. Not Haigh. "We were lucky," 
he says. "That spot in the schedule meant a lot of buyers saw it [Source Code 
had been snapped up long before]. And no one has too high expectations of 
gay-themed cinema. They don't think it'll resonate outside of a niche."

Weekend has defied those expectations. Last Monday it was named the festival's 
"buzz film", meaning it won publicity and extra screenings; later in the week, 
it picked up the emergent visions gong at the awards ceremony, making it one of 
the few British winners at SXSW (Joe Cornish's Attack the Block picked up the 
Midnight Screening/SX Fantastic Audience Award; short The Eagleman Stag the 
SXSW Wholphin Grand Jury Award).

Premiering somewhere with a predominantly straight audience was important to 
Haigh, but when he arrived at the festival he began to appreciate the scale of 
the challenge. "SXSW can feel very male, very straight and very white, and 
though it's a great festival, when you have a film that's different it's hard 
to find your place."

In general, the market for such fare is small. But is it the fault of the 
films themselves or of audiences? "Both," says Haigh. "A lot of gay-themed 
films are terrible. And mainstream audiences and the press aren't interested, 
understandably. Buyers and backers are nervous because they don't know where to 
place the film. And critics sometimes don't feel there's a seriousness to them, 
and so perhaps don't always give them the time they might [give] to straight 
films.

"But I always wanted to make sure Weekend was honest about being gay and 
didn't make it more palatable. I just wanted to make sure the story felt like 
it could be about anybody but also deal with specific gay concerns."

Haigh, who was an adolescent in the 80s, has been heartened by the increased 
understanding extended to gay teenagers. But if homophobia itself is no longer 
rife, fresh challenges have arisen, partly because the climate is perceived as 
so much more tolerant.

"People don't think the struggles gay people have are worth talking about 
because everyone's decided that we're all equals now. Those struggles are much 
more subtle now. But the weight of being different does carry on. My straight 
friends accept I'm gay but they forget that some people don't. Even now if I go 
into a party people don't usually assume I'm gay so you have to keep coming 
out. And if you say you've got a film with a gay subject matter you can 
sometimes see people's eyes going: oh! OK! Society is changing, but you've 
still got to try and fit in with a straight world."

In fact, the gay themes of Weekend, a deftly-played and beautifully-paced 
little romance, are something of a red herring. Unlike Haigh's debut, Greek 
Pete, which is about a rent boy in Soho and places sexuality front and centre, 
the film touches wider issues of inclusivity and isolation. It's shot in 
languorous, long takes, allowing you to absorb the intricacies of body language 
at your leisure, though with more composition and focus than something shot on 
handheld. It's a style that would find a naturally receptive audience in Austin 
(birthplace of mumble-core), among a crowd raised on American neo-realism.

Haigh's background, however, is in blockbuster editing: specifically 
whip-quick, high-gloss, big-bang fare. He worked on Gladiator and Hannibal 
Rising, Kingdom of Heaven and Mona Lisa Smile before taking a turn into the 
left-field; his last film as an editor was Harmony Korine's Mister Lonely. It's 
given him the desire to do things differently.

"Films are so over-edited nowadays. Nobody gives things the space to just 
exist. You don't need to be chopping back and forwards. People like Antonioni 
were happy to just let things exist."

Next up for Haigh is a "slight remake of a French New Wave film", though he's 
cagey about which one. He's also working on a drama about a couple whose 
marriage falls apart when one of their former lovers is found perfectly 
preserved in the ice. This year, Haigh is officially an emerging talent. But 
here's betting that, in years to come, he'll be the one people are quaking to 
be scheduled against.
 