
The Sydney Sixers ended Brisbane Heat’s hopes of sneaking into the Big Bash 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> finals after a 
comfortable six-wicket victory with 14 balls to spare at the Gabba.

The Sixers got off to a flying start in their pursuit of the Heat’s 
competitive total of 6-147, racing to 1-64 at the end of their power play with 
Michael Lumb and Riki Wessels looking particularly dangerous.

Lumb and Wessels combined for a second-wicket stand of 53 runs from 33 balls 
before Heat skipper James Hopes removed Wessels for 28, with Dan Christian 
dismissing Lumb for 25 soon after to stall the Sixers’ momentum at 3-74 in the 
ninth over.

Hopes offered his side further encouragement when he bowled Sixers’ skipper 
Moses Henriques for 18, leaving the game evenly poised with the visitors 4-91 
after 11.2 overs.

However, from that point, debutant Jordan Silk (29 not out from 23 balls) and 
keeper-batsman Ryan Carters (30 not out from 21 balls) steadied the Sixers’ 
ship, taking the wind out of the Heat’s sails with a composed partnership of 57 
runs from 38 balls to steer the Sixers to victory in front of a crowd of 28,724.

The six-wicket win was the Sixers fourth of tournament, seeing them move up to 
third place on the BBL ladder behind the Adelaide Strikers and Perth Scorchers.

Meanwhile, the Heat remain rooted to the foot of the ladder with only pride 
left to play for in their remaining two fixtures against Melbourne Renegades 
(away) and Hobart Hurricanes (home).

After an unconvincing start which saw the Heat struggling at 3-10 after three 
overs, the hosts recovered to post 6-147, thanks largely to the efforts of 
Peter Forrest andAndrew Flintoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff>.

Flintoff joined Forrest in the middle with the Heat reeling at 4-33 in the 
seventh over and blasted an entertaining 46 from 32 balls.

The pair combined for a Heat-record fifth-wicket partnership of 93 runs with 
Forrest carrying the bat to remain unbeaten on 62 runs off 56 balls.

Although the damage was done early on for the Heat with Brett Lee and Moses 
Henriques taking two wickets each for the visitors and man-of-the-match Doug 
Bollinger taking 1-18 off his four overs including 12 dot balls.

“I think we did particularly well with the ball tonight, we really wanted to 
make some inroads upfront,” Brett Lee told Channel 10.

“In all due respect I think they got a few more runs than we first expected, 
but they ended up with 140-odd which was a pretty good total.”

The Sixers now turn their attention to their next match against the 
second-placed Adelaide Strikers with Lee declaring the best is yet to come for 
his side.

“We haven’t played our complete game yet - we’ve been a little bit short with 
the ball, a bit short in the field and a bit short with our batting so 
hopefully that comes together in the next few games.”
 