
T has learned how to kiss, except he'll only do it to C. I cannot tell you how 
gutted I am. It makes no sense! I kiss him all the time. I won't leave him 
alone. I'm like an octopus (it's not an exact analogy, more of an atmosphere 
... a sloppy, grabby mien, like you'd expect from a sea creature with eight 
legs).

If we're being pedantic, it's not exactly a kiss. He hasn't mastered the 
primacy of the lips in the kissing manoeuvre, so it's more like a 
full-face-press against his chosen target, the key fact remaining, of course, 
that I am not that target. Look, it's possible that the reason he didn't start 
with me is that he knew instinctively that, happy as I would be, I would 
instantly get over my joy and start picking apart his kissing technique. At 
least if I believed that, I could have some character flaw to pin my 
unpopularity on, I wouldn't just have to accept that I'm like C, only not as 
good.

We've covered the territory of fun before, I think. C is more fun than me. I 
never used to mind this. Fun schmunn. One person's having fun is simply an 
older person's shouting and roaring, leaping about without structure or 
relevance. Like sport. I will come into my own when T is past this phase and 
more interested in sitting completely still, ... (there's a comma there, as if 
to roll out the punctuation-carpet for the rest of the really fun things I do, 
and now I can't think of any, but I refuse to false-modestly attest that I am 
not fun in other ways. I am really fun in other ways, I just cannot think of 
them). What worries me, all of a sudden, with the kissing, is what if my 
superior fun-generation doesn't appeal to T until he's much older? What if it's 
not when he's seven? What if he's 40? I could be dead before he realises, 
which, besides any considerations of my own ego, would be sad for him.

I am not the first mother in the world this has happened to. 

I know this because of all the incredibly lame excuses I've heard from the 
others. My friend says hers prefer the dad because she is stricter, and she 
ruins everything with demands for courtesy and her endless interruption of 
intoxicating, princess-driven fairytales with plodding village people whose 
looks aren't important because they always say Please and Thank You. Even 
though she bores them now, her theory is that they will thank her in the long 
run when they have friends, and a job, and a place in society. You notice how 
the family pariah always has her eye on the long-game.

My other friend, L, says it's because her husband is at work all day, so he is 
a novelty. But a) I'm sure that's not how the bonds of affection work, that you 
just like best the one you see the least. Otherwise they'd all like the guy in 
the corner shop better than any of us. And b) she was also at work. Anyway, 
that does not work at all with T. I cannot decide whether he is more ardently 
in love with his father - when C's been with him all day, or when he's been 
away for a week. Gah. You couldn't fit a cigarette paper between these two 
states of adoration.

You never hear fathers, by the way, complaining about how their kids love the 
mother more. So either men are too macho to admit this desperate yearning for 
love; or they are less whiny (hah!); or all children like their fathers better 
because men are, in fact, better than women. Only children, in their state of 
purity, can still see it.

It probably doesn't help that I could be leaping about roaring and shouting 
myself, instead of letting him watch CBeebies while I write about how unfair it 
all is. But while that was happening, he left the telly (I didn't notice), and 
went to the bookshelves (still didn't notice), and brought me over some books 
(I did actually notice the appearance by my feet of The Most Puzzling 
Situations in Bridge Play, but I thought nothing of it), and just as I was 
finishing up, came over with a bashed-up 70s copy of A Streetcar Named Desire, 
which had a still from the film on the cover. Then he points to a picture of 
Marlon Brando, naked to the waist, 26 years old, and says ... "Daddy!"

That is 100% true. I'm not even lying a little bit.
 