
Author: Leslie Poles (LP) Hartley (1895-1972) was the son of a wealthy 
brick-maker, and studied modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, before 
briefly joining the army in 1916. Remaining in Oxford after the first world 
war, Hartley worked as a book reviewer, mixing with the aristocratic and 
literary sets of the time. A breakdown in 1922 proved pivotal: he began a 
series of trips to Venice, and precipitated his move into serious fiction with 
the short story collection Night Fears (1924). Hartley only published his first 
novel, The Shrimp and the Anemone, in 1944, when he was 49; it was the first of 
the "Eustace and Hilda" trilogy. Hartley built on the trilogy's success with 
The Go-Between (1953), which was an immediate success, winning the Heinemann 
prize. Hartley never matched its success, however, though he was nominated for 
the Nobel prize for literature.

Story: Told as a memoir by the adult Leo Colston, The Go-Between chronicles a 
traumatic childhood experience in the heat-wave summer of 1900. On a holiday 
visit to schoolfellow Marcus Maudsley, the impressionable Leo is drawn into the 
sexual intrigue of Marcus's older sister, Marian, and her lover, local tenant 
farmer Ted Burgess. Leo becomes a messenger between the two as Marian is 
preparing for marriage to the disfigured Viscount Trimingham. Hartley stresses 
the corruption of Leo's innocence; the boy suffers a breakdown when Marian and 
Ted's affair is discovered. Ted commits suicide; Marian marries Trimingham, but 
bears her lover's child. The novel closes with a much older Leo visiting Marian 
- herself an old woman - living alone near the house where the drama took 
place. Hartley later revealed the story was inspired by a visit he took as a 
16-year-old in 1911.

The film-makers:  Joseph Losey (1909-1984) made his name as a radical 
film-maker with such projects as The Boy with Green Hair (1948), but after 
being summoned before Huac in 1951 he decided not to return to the US. He 
eventually reestablished himself in the UK with The Criminal (1960). The 
Servant (1963) began his creative relationship with Harold Pinter; they started 
working on an adaptation of The Go-Between the same year, but the project 
collapsed. After the pair made Accident (1967), The Go-Between got off the 
ground with the support of Bernard Delfont. Losey was reluctant to cast Julie 
Christie, believing her too old, but Pinter and producer John Heyman insisted.

How book and film compare: Pinter's script adheres substantially to the 
original narrative. Certain crucial details differ in the film, however, such 
as Trimingham's facial injury: Hartley described it as major disfigurement of 
the face and eye, while in the film it is simply a large scar. The script's 
most controversial innovation, however, was a series of "flash forwards", 
inserted at pointed moments in the action, following "older" Leo's return visit 
to Marian.

Inspirations and influences: The Go-Between won the Palme d'Or at the 1971 
Cannes festival, and proved the high-water mark of Losey's career. Losey wanted 
the film to look like "a slightly faded Renoir or Constable", and together with 
the story's preoccupation with the sexual undercurrent of English society, it 
set a template that extended forward through Barry Lyndon (1975), Tess (1979) 
and The Draughtsman's Contract (1982).
 