
The Taliban have attacked the west's view that Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is now seeing steady if fragile 
progress in an annual statement from their leader that also sought to position 
the group as a viable political force that could lead the country.

The online statement on Tuesday was officially a congratulatory message from 
the leader, Mullah Omar, marking the Muslim holiday ofEid al-Fitr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eid-al-fitr>, which falls this week. But the 
missive has evolved into an annual political manifesto for the insurgent group.

This year the message condemned Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> 
plans to keep a small military training and support mission in Afghanistan 
after combat forces leave in 2014 as an encroachment on the country's 
independence, and described a presidential election set for April as a "waste 
of time".

Western politicians and military commanders say that the exit of most foreign 
troops will remove one of the insurgency's main recruiting tools, the presence 
of soldiers theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> call 
"infidel invaders".

But Nato and the US have pledged to leave behind training personnel for the 
still fragile Afghan army and police, and support in key areas ranging from air 
transport to bomb disposal.

They are also expected to keep some elite special forces teams to track down 
al-Qaida-linked groups.

The Taliban say the difference in numbers and roles means nothing if any 
foreign forces remain on Afghan soil. The group has often accused the US of 
seeking permanent Afghan bases, a charge Washington rejects.

"The Afghans consider the presence of a small number of invading troops as an 
encroachment against their independence as they are not willing to accept the 
presence of thousands of foreign troops," the statement said. "The occupying 
countries should learn from the bitter experiences of the past 12 years. They 
should not try their fate once more by prolonging the occupation or by 
establishing permanent bases."

The statement also dismissed as a "deceiving drama" the Afghan presidential 
election due next year. The election has been hailed by the west as a 
potentially transformative political moment because if successful it will give 
the country its first peaceful transfer of power since 1901.

The statement also said: "Our pious and mujahid people know that selection, de 
facto, takes place in Washington. These nominal rulers are not elected through 
the ballots of the people. Rather they are selected as per the discretion of 
Washington! Participation in such elections is only a waste of time, nothing 
more."

In a clear effort to position themselves as potential political leaders of 
Afghanistan, the group rejected any partition of the country along ethnic lines 
and said if the Taliban gained power they would be at the head of an 
"Afghan-inclusive government based on Islamic principles".

"When the occupation ends, reaching an understanding with the Afghans will not 
be a hard task because, by adhering to and having common principles and 
culture, the Afghans understand each other better," said the statement.

There was also a promise of no retribution attacks if the group achieved 
political power, even though the Taliban run a campaign of intimidation and 
assassination of people linked with the Kabul government and foreign forces. "I 
assure all, no personal revenge will be taken on any one following the end of 
occupation because our struggle is neither for achievement of personal gains 
nor personal power."

Omar 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/05/01/taliban-forces-desperate-to-hear-from-their-absent-leader-mullah-omar.html>
 has not been seen by anyone outside a small inner circle since his 2001 
ousting by US-backed forces. Neither has he produced any audio or video 
recordings, leading some to question whether he is still in charge.

However the message for Eid al-Fitr, the Muslim festival that marks the end of 
the fasting month of Ramadan, has become accepted as an annual communication 
from the group's senior leadership.

The statement this year also repeated a previous call for Taliban fighters to 
minimise civilian casualties, and indirectly attacked as distorted a UN report 
that blamed insurgents for three-quarters of the deaths and injuries to 
non-combatants in the first six months of the year.

With civilian killings on the rise, that rang hollow for many Afghans. Shortly 
before the Taliban statement was released, a bomb, reportedly aimed at a police 
vehicle, exploded in a square in Jalalabad city, killing a child and marking 
the third consecutive day of deadly violence there.
 