
Tyler Johnson and Ondrej Palat both scored their first NHL goals, and the 
Tampa Bay Lightning beat theCarolina Hurricanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carolina-hurricanes> 4-1 on Saturday.

Nate Thompson and Teddy Purcell also scored for the Lightning, who stopped a 
five-game losing streak at home.

Eric Staal scored the only goal for the Hurricanes, who have won just three in 
10 attempts against fellow Southeast Division rivals.

Tampa Bay, with Mathieu Garon starting in goal each time, has won all three 
games this season against the Hurricanes. Tampa Bay has beaten three Carolina 
goalies Justin Peters, Cam Ward and Dan Ellis in the process.

Johnson put the Lightning ahead 1-0 when he beat Peters from the low left 
circle with 9:06 left in the first.

After Palat scored on a redirection of Sami Salo's shot from the blue line at 
6:35 of the second, Thompson made it 3-0 with 7:05 to go in the period with a 
breakaway goal.

Purcell scored on a breakaway to put Tampa Bay up 4-0 at 3:54 of the third, 
but Staal ended Garon's shutout bid during a breakaway at 6:21.

At Columbus, Ohio, Sergei Bobrovsky made 39 saves in regulation and overtime, 
then two more in the shootout to finish with his second career shutout both 
coming in the last week to lift surging Columbus to a 1-0 victory over the 
Phoenix Coyotes, extending the Blue Jackets' franchise record point streak to 
10 games.

Artem Anisimov and Mark Letestu scored in the shootout, making nice moves then 
firing shots past Mike Smith, who made 23 saves and also got credit for a 
shutout, his fourth of the season and 23rd of his career. It was the fourth 
straight shootout game for the Blue Jackets.

At Newark, New Jersey, big defenseman Jarred Tinordi, in his NHL debut, set up 
Tomas Plekanec's tiebreaking goal in the third period, and theMontreal Canadiens
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montreal-ca> extended their winning streak 
to five games with a 2-1 victory over the New Jersey Devils.

Plekanec deflected a shot by the 6-foot-6 son of former NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> defenseman Mark Tinordi past Johan 
Hedberg at 6:49 after the goalie made an ill-advised clearing attempt from 
behind his net. Tinordi got the puck above the left circle and let it fly.

Colby Armstrong also scored for Montreal, and Carey Price made 32 saves. The 
Canadiens moved into a tie with Pittsburgh for the most points in the Eastern 
Conference.

Defenseman Peter Harrold scored for New Jersey, which lost for the second time 
in two nights.

At Toronto, Zach Bogosian scored in the 10th round of the shootout to lift 
Winnipeg over Toronto 5-4.

Bogosian beat James Reimer, who replaced starter Ben Scrivens to start the 
third period, for Winnipeg's second goal of the shootout after Blake Wheeler 
scored to open it.

Tyler Bozak had the lone shootout goal for Toronto, which lost its fifth 
straight.
Wheeler had two goals in regulation, and James Wright and Antti Miettinen also 
scored for Winnipeg, which earned its fifth win in six games and moved into 
first place in the Southeast Division.

Also Saturday, Casey Cizikas broke a third-period tie, and the New York 
Islanders <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-islanders> held on to 
beat the Florida Panthers 4-3 after blowing a three-goal lead and Jonathan 
Toews and Marian Hossa each scored twice in leading the Chicago Blackhawks to 
an 8-1 rout of the Dallas Stars.

In other games Saturday, the St Louis Blues beat the Anaheim Ducks 2-1, Boston 
downed Washington 4-1 and Pittsburgh beat the New York Rangers 3-0 for its 
eighth straight victory.
 