 Hospital superbugs such as MRSA are a result of poor leadership, Lord Darzi, 
the health minister, told MPs today, dismissing suggestions that excessive 
targeting or financial programmes were to blame.
"It's a leadership issue," the peer told the health select committee. 

"[We are] working in a very complex system, and there should be a collective 
accountability to the infection.

"Infections don't just arise in the operating theatre, they can arise prior to 
patient coming in. There has been poor leadership in some of the organisations 
that have had significant outbreaks of the type that we've seen in the last 
week."

The minister's comments come in the same month that the Maidstone and 
Tunbridge Wells NHS trust agreed to a £250,000 payoff package for Rosie Gibb, 
who was chief executive of the trust at the time when 90 people died from 
infection by Clostridium difficile bacteria between April 2004 and September 
2006.

Following media criticism of the payment, the health secretary, Alan Johnson, 
instructed the trust to withhold the severance pay pending legal advice.

Lord Darzi addressed the case of Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells, stating that 
the trust had a "systems failure".

"It's not an individual but a collective problem. A number of individuals 
failed at a local level to identify the hazards leading to this tragic outcome, 
but this is not happening in every organisation.

"What we need to do is understand why an organisation like that has been 
through what it has."

Lord Darzi said that £130m would be used to pay for the screening of patients 
coming in for elective surgery - and, eventually, emergency patients, too - and 
that this would help decrease the potential for hospital-acquired infections.

He cited countries such as the Netherlands and Denmark that screen patients as 
normal practice, and have some of the lowest MRSA rates.

A report by the Healthcare Commission said the deaths of 90 patients at the 
Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells hospitals in Kent were "definitely or probably" 
caused by infection from Clostridium difficile, and blamed the trust's board to 
paying too much attention to balancing the books and meeting government 
waiting-time targets, and too little to patient service and infection control.

At the committee meeting today, Lord Darzi said that linking government-set 
targets to how hygienic hospitals were was like comparing "apples and oranges".

"Cleanliness is not a target, it should be part of [the] everyday life" of 
those employed in a hospital, he said.
 