
David Cameron loves tennis. He played a bit at Eton, apparently. He has played 
in his front room at 10 Downing Street with Andy Murray. He has visited the 
NationalTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre at Roehampton, 
shaken hands with the greats and enjoyed the warm glow of publicity that such 
associations invariably bring to politicians.

But when he declared his long-time love of the game, he could not have 
imagined his allegiance might one day drag him into an international tax row. 
And that is where the prime minister and his chancellor could find themselves 
after developments behind the scenes in Greenwich this week.

For some time, the world's elite athletes have thought hard before competing 
in the UK because they are taxed on their endorsement deals while here, a pain 
on their wallet not inflicted in other countries.

However, tennis fan Dave and his chum George Osborne have to step cleverly if 
they are to respond to lobbying by the Lawn Tennis Association, who want to 
ease the tax demands on players such as Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal to save 
their events.

The prime minister's conundrum is to justify giving very rich foreign visitors 
a tax break while letting bankers and company directors grow fat on bonuses in 
an age of "we're all in this together" austerity. Tough gig.

If the players don't come, British sport suffers. And tennis is in the front 
line. The wonderful O2 Arena on the banks of the Thames at Greenwich is hosting 
theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> this week for the 
third year of a five-year deal and, again, it has been a major sporting and 
financial success. Every day is sold out. TV ratings are expected to be good. 
Players and spectators love it.

With flow-charts and stats, the Lawn Tennis Association painted on Tuesday a 
rosy picture for the media of the game's future in this country, but the tax 
ghost will not go away. Rumours that the event would return to the United 
States or be taken to Rio after 2013 have concentrated minds wonderfully.

The LTA's chief executive, Roger Draper, says Osborne has written to him in 
supportive tones, although dialogue is in its early stages. Draper is 
optimistic. He hopes the government will give the tournament and other ATP 
Masters events, such as Queen's, along with athletics and other concerned 
sports, a tax exemption in his March Budget statement.

"Events are a big part of our growth strategy," Draper says. "There's nothing 
better than getting a lot of youngsters coming here and being inspired. We're 
very fortunate to have the event through to 2013 and we have got a few things 
in our favour, such as the calendar. It's a question of getting the right time 
to sit down with the ATP to have discussions.

"The player tax issue has got in the way and we want to have that issue out of 
the way. We've been having high-level discussions with the prime minister, the 
chancellor and treasury minister David Gauke."

Also to be included in the equation is the issue of who will be running the 
Association of Tennis Professionals when Adam Helfant steps down as the chief 
executive next month. There are several candidates, including the frontrunner 
Richard Krajicek, whose fondest playing memory is winning Wimbledon in 1996.

Whether that would be enough to sway him to support keeping this end-of-season 
event in London is a speculative call.

It is not one of the great burning issues of the age but if London loses the 
tournament after 2013 it would be a shame. There are grounds for optimism: next 
year, it will follow on without a break from the BNP Paribas Masters in Paris, 
which cements its appeal, and every year it produces superb tennis in a great 
setting.

What started life as Labour's Millennium Dome of gloom breathes again, through 
marketing that brings together sport, food, entertainment and a tube station 
that sometimes stays open long enough for fans to get home afterwards. We 
should know soon enough if time is running out for tennis in Greenwich.
 