
Despite falling house prices and prospect of interest rate rises, housebuilder 
Taylor Wimpey was among the day's biggest risers.

Its shares added 2.95p to 38.10p, an increase of more than 8%, following an 
upbeat trading statement and confirmation of market speculation that it had 
received approaches for its US business. Analysts believe the division could 
fetch up to £600m, which would make a substantial dent in the company's £660m 
debt, although pension deficit issues may reduce the total proceeds.

The company said it expected to beat the forecasts it made in November, helped 
by a strong performance from the US business and signs of stabilisation in the 
UK market. It has also decided to recognise £300m of deferred tax assets - 
carried since its 2008 write-downs. Panmure Gordon analyst Rachael Waring said:
 The focus of the statement, in our opinion, will relate to two potentially 
positive bits of information – the sale of the group's North American 
operations and the recognition of £300m of deferred tax assets.

As a small caution, the Spring selling season is clearly the most important 
time of the year for housebuilders, and will give us a good indication of 
whether conditions in the UK have actually stabilised, and whether we're going 
to see further deflation (and further write-downs) from here. Whilst it may 
have been a little more prudent to wait until we have seen the direction of the 
market, [the deferred tax recognition] is clearly positive news.

To reflect the recognition of deferred assets, our target price moves from 29p 
to 36p, though our recommendation remains hold for now.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 70.73 points higher at 6056.43, a new 31 month 
peak, as Eurozone fears eased and Wall Street made a positive start after 
yesterday's holiday. With copper rising on hopes of continuing demand from 
China, despite the country's efforts to dampen down inflationary pressures, 
miners were among the biggest risers.

Rio Tinto climbed 65.5p to £44.50 following news that its iron ore production 
had reached a record 65m tonnes in the fourth quarter, although refined copper 
fell 6%, in line with expectations. The company said it could not yet put an 
estimate on the impact of the floods in Australia on its Queensland coal mines, 
or how long the difficulties in the area would last. Credit Suisse gave the 
company an outperform rating, saying:
 We are bullish on outlook for iron ore and continue to believe the market is 
discounting too short an iron ore cycle. Rio trades at 6 times 2011 earnings. 
This remains a 30% discount to the rest of our coverage universe.

But Charles Kernot at Evolution Securities was less upbeat. He said:
 We upgrade our earnings outlook for 2011 and consequently lift our target 
price from 3520p to 4000p. This mainly reflects an increase in our commodity 
price expectations for 2011 – and is at least partially related to coal supply 
problems. With mixed messages, we believe that other major miners will 
outperform Rio Tinto and therefore reiterate our reduce recommendation.

A positive note from Citigroup on base metals, and the prospects for further 
demand from China, also helped sentiment in the sector. The bank said:
 We expect the base metals and bulk commodities to outperform precious metals 
in 2011, as the former benefit from emerging market demand, persistent 
investment fund flow and ongoing supply disruptions. 2011 is the beginning of 
the 12th five-year plan that could reshape the Chinese economy in the next 
decade and benefit late cycle commodities.

Meanwhile Morgan Stanley said its pick of the miners in Europe included Rio, 
Xstrata - up 20.5p at £14.97 - and Kazakhmys, which climbed 49p to £16.65.

Burberry topped the FTSE 100 risers, up 56p to £11.15 after the luxury goods 
group issued an upbeat trading statement. It said profits for the year would be 
at the top end of expectations, helped by buoyant sales of coats and large 
leather goods.

Petrofac put on 67p to £16.85, after news the oil services company had won a 
$1.2bn construction contract in Algeria, butGlaxoSmithKline lost 23.5p to 
1181.5p in the wake of yesterday's news of a £2.2bn legal charge relating to 
its diabetes treatment Avandia.

Essar Energy was the biggest faller in the FTSE 100, down 24.5p to 533p as the 
Indian power group launched a $500m five year convertible bond to fund 
acquisition opportunities. The company is reportedly in talks about buying the 
Stanlow refinery in Cheshire from Royal Dutch Shell.

Meanwhile the company's Indian parent, Essar Group, was criticised by Vodafone 
for a proposed restructuring of its telecoms business, in a move which will 
have an impact on their joint venture Vodafone Essar. Essar plans to reverse 
the telecoms business - which owns an 11% stake in Vodafone Essar - into its 
quoted financial business India Securities Ltd (ISL).Vodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> said ISL was a highly 
illiquid vehicle with more than 95% of the shares under the control of Essar 
Group. It said:
 Accordingly, small amounts of buying or selling could distort ISL's share 
price. Vodafone does not wish a company in which it holds a majority interest 
to become the subject of a false market. Vodafone is concerned that the value 
of ISL could be misinterpreted as a fair market value of Vodafone Essar.

An Essar spokesman said in response:
 Vodafone is neither a shareholder nor a creditor of India Securities Limited 
or Essar Telecommunications Holdings and as such has nothing to do with this 
merger scheme. We have received their communication and are studying it and 
will respond appropriately.

Meanwhile Vodafone Essar added 3.1m new mobile users in December, helping push 
Vodafone's shares 3.7p higher to 178.7p.

Elsewhere Experian added 3.5p to 779p as the financial information company 
said it was seeing renewed growth in all its major markets and its expectations 
for 2010 remained unchanged.

But Prudential fell 1.5p to 688.5p as Nomura downgraded the insurer from 
neutral to reduce, saying the market had underestimated the challenges the 
company faces in the US.

Among the mid-caps spread betting business group IG dropped 37.5p to 481p 
following a cautious outlook for the year and a higher than expected write-off 
of £140m related to its Japanese business, FX Online. Collins Stewart issued a 
sell note and cut its price target by 100p to 450p, saying:
 In December 2010 management warned that leverage restrictions introduced on 1 
January 2011 would reduce FXOnline's revenues and cashflows. We expected a £20m 
write off; the actual write off (based on management's view of cash flows for 
the next five years) is £140m. We (and the market) are surprised at the size of 
the write off. 
Finally Lavendon, which hires out aerial work platforms, lost 12p to 97.25p 
after its would-be suitors decided to walk away.

Last week UK group Ashtead and Belgium's TVH Services made a 115p a share, 
£183m cash offer for Lavendon, topping a previous TVH bid of 111p made in 
December. But today Ashtead said the two partners had decided not to go ahead 
with a bid, after Lavendon rejected it as undervaluing the business.Ashtead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashteadgroup> said:
 The approach was subject to...due diligence and the recommendation of the 
board of Lavendon. Lavendon's rejection means these pre-conditions cannot be 
fulfilled and as a result the joint acquirers will not proceed with an offer. 
Panmure Gordon said:
 With few other likely buyers, we believe Lavendon will now trade closer to 
fundamental valuations once again. We reduce our target price back to pre-bid 
levels of 80p and, at current levels, change our recommendation from hold to 
sell.

But Ashtead added 11.1p to 170.3p, with analysts saying it could now 
concentrate on developing its US business.
 