
The rarefied pinnacles of tennis - the calendar grand slam and Pete Sampras's 
record 14 majors - remain hidden in the clouds for Roger Federer, just as were 
the tops of this city's skyscrapers on a humid evening of high emotion which 
saw the world No1 win his secondAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title and his seventh grand 
slam by beating the Cypriot Marcos Baghdatis 5-7, 7-5, 6-0, 6-2.

"So far my career has followed Pete's almost in parallel," said Federer 
afterwards. "It's kind of scary." The comparison will continue to be made as 
long as he is playing and will grow ever more frenzied, assuming, as everybody 
currently must, that the Swiss is not cut down by injury or by the sudden rise 
of someone vastly superior. And for the moment the latter is hard to imagine. 
Sampras and Federer are far from being peas in a pod. The American rarely 
displayed much emotion whereas Federer finds it hard to contain the tears. 
Those who may be present should he reach one of those twin pinnacles may 
consider collecting wood to build an ark, for there may be a flood. "I don't 
know what to say," said Federer yesterday after Rod Laver presented him with 
the trophy, and from then on whatever he tried to say was accompanied by many a 
gulp and many a tear.

Federer had met Laver for the first time earlier in the week and was clearly 
affected by his presence in the arena named after the player who was arguably 
the greatest of them all. The Rockhampton Rocket won 11 slam titles and managed 
the calendar slam twice, the first in 1962 when he was 24, Federer's age now. 
That same year Laver turned professional, thereby missing, in the amateur era, 
four majors for the next six years. The Australian performed the calendar slam 
again in 1969.

"Roger has so much talent but the main thing is that he so enjoys playing the 
game. It's easy to get mentally drained and for the desire to ebb if you have 
to grind out matches, but Roger loves playing. And when things are not working 
he tries something else and finds a way to win," said Laver yesterday.

Minutes after this latest victory, Federer's mind was already turning to this 
spring's French Open, the only major title to elude him: "Last year was the 
first time that I really committed myself to try and win it, and I reached the 
semi-final which was a pretty good effort. Providing I stay healthy I think I 
can do it."

The Spanish teenager Rafael Nadal, who is currently injured, beat Federer at 
Roland Garros and went on to win the title, and whether he recovers fully may 
be crucial to Federer fulfilling his ambition.

Federer, despite his apparent nonchalance on court, admitted to being 
extremely nervous at the outset against Baghdatis, the 20-year-old from 
Limassol who had previously defeated three top-10 players here and whose 
success up to the final had been the story of the tournament.

The opening set saw Baghdatis continue his rich vein of form and in the second 
he was twice within a point of a 7-5, 3-0 lead. "I started thinking about the 
trophy and I stopped playing," he said. "I gave Roger the chance to come in and 
be more aggressive. And that cost me the match."

Federer has multiple gifts of which his movement is the most underestimated. 
Whereas many modern players stand well behind the baseline and slog away with 
huge top-spin ground-strokes, the Swiss hugs the line, ready to pounce on the 
short ball and open up the court.

"His court coverage and his anticipation are uncanny," said Laver, "and if his 
backhand is in shape he just seems to roll."

This was Federer's third successive slam win, something only Sampras has 
achieved since Laver in 1969. Here in 2003 Serena Williams completed four slams 
in succession, the so-called "Serena slam", so the "Roger slam" is a 
possibility at Roland Garros this June which, if achieved, would make Federer 
only the sixth man to win all four majors.

This victory moved him ahead of Boris Becker and Stefan Edberg of the modern 
players, and he is now on level terms with John McEnroe, John Newcombe and Mats 
Wilander. Of the current men players only Andre Agassi, with eight, has won 
more slams.

It was clearly Federer's plan not to give Baghdatis any pace, although this 
tended to make the world No1 err on the side of caution initially. "Maybe I was 
a little passive in the beginning, not as aggressive maybe as I should have 
been, but he was the better shot-maker and totally deserved the first set."

The fact that Federer had looked more vulnerable than usual here over the past 
two weeks no doubt accentuated his emotions. This and the fact that his coach, 
Tony Roche, is an Australian icon, and he also holds dear the memories of his 
former Australian coach Peter Carter, who died in a car crash four years ago 
and whose family were present yesterday.

To see Federer cry may be regarded as a weakness by some, but not by his 
opponents. Last year he lost only four matches. This year he remains undefeated 
in tournament play.

He is without doubt a thoroughly nice man, but on the court, as the defeated 
Baghdatis discovered, Federer is as mean as any champion.
 