
Over the decade technology has transcended poverty, race and economics to 
become a driving force in the lives of people across the world. More than two 
billion of us now have access to the internet and five billion of us have 
mobile phones.

Children are growing up in a world where social media, mobile technology and 
online communities are fundamental to the way that they communicate, learn and 
develop. In recent years the speed, flexibility and affordability of rapidly 
evolving digital technology has helped slowly prise shut the digital divide 
between the haves and have-nots and enabled millions of young people in 
developing countries to join the digital world.

Increasingly, technology is being seen as a powerful development tool, used in 
the global battle to hit child and youth-focused targets in global education, 
livelihoods and health.

"This technology wasn't developed as a development tool yet has become one of 
the greatest vehicles for change," says Charles Kenny, a senior fellow at the
Centre for Global Development <http://www.cgdev.org/>.

He adds: "Young people are natural adopters of new technologies and certainly 
the potential for technology and digital media to be a force for innovation, 
education and change is just beginning to be realised."

When it comes to education, there is evidence that young people are 
increasingly using ICTs and technology as learning tools.

In an upcoming series of studies into how young people are using ICT's in 
Zambia, South Africa and Vietnam, Unicef found that 40% of Vietnamese children 
surveyed in rural areas used the internet for educational purposes, with 34% 
sending school-related text messages. In urban areas this spiked to 62% and 57% 
respectively.

Several high-profile tech companies have launched global initiatives to 
increase access to technology by children and young people in the world's 
poorest countries, pouring millions of computers and educational materials into 
ICT training programmes.

Computer giant Dell runs its own computer hardware and literacy programme 
calledYouth Learning <http://www.dell.com/Learn/us/en/uscorp1/corp-comm/ 
powering-possible-learning?c=>, which initially launched in India and is now 
operating in 15 countries across the world.

"It's our belief that access to technology brings young people into contact 
with the broader world, opening up access to education and vocational training 
in a very cost-effective way," says Deb Bauer, director of Dell Giving.

"What we've learnt is that it isn't enough to simply provide the hardware, 
it's the quality the wrap-around services – the teacher training, maintenance 
of technology, reliability of power, which provides the long-term benefits and 
this is one of the learnings we've been taking forward."

The potential of mobile technology as an educational tool is also steadily 
growing.

Mobile phone technology in developing countries now accounts for four out of 
every five connections worldwide. In a recent report bythe GSMA 
<http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mlearning> into 
m-learning, more than half of all young people surveyed in Ghana, India, Uganda 
and Morocco who had accessed the internet, had done so on a mobile device.

Duncan Clark <http://donaldclarkplanb.blogspot.com/>, a British tech investor 
and founder of e-learning company Epic Group, goes further when he says he 
believes that mobile technology has produced a "renaissance of reading and 
writing" among young people across the world.

"[Mobile phones] will, I think, be the single most important factor in 
increasing literacy on the planet. Why? Every child is massively motivated to 
learn to text, post and message on mobiles. The evidence shows that they become 
obsessive readers and writers through mobile devices," he says.

"Texting is a significant form of literacy, introduced by youngsters, on their 
own, spontaneously, rapidly and without tuition."

Mobile phones are also proving effective tools in engaging and mobilising 
children and young people to engage in economic, social and political spheres.

The Text to Change <http://www.texttochange.org/> (TTC) project in Africa 
recently launched the Voice Africa's Future project, which aims to engage 
150,000 young people across Africa by asking them to text what they think the 
future of their own countries should look like. In Ghana last year, a community 
of young people formed a netizens community and set up a hashtag on twitter – 
#GhanaDecides – to try and involve more young people and eligible voters to get 
involved in the general elections.

Yet the wholesale embracement of the idea of reaching young people through 
technology has also proved problematic.

"In fact, despite all the big-name sponsors and tech-led education initiatives 
there have been rather disappointing results in efforts to integrate ICTs into 
education systems," says Kenny.

"There needs to be a massive training programme put in place alongside any 
kind of imported initiatives as you don't suddenly get a whole bunch of kids 
from slums in India applying for jobs at Microsoft and Google just because 
they've had one computer in the classroom."

The darker side of internet use and issues over privacy and safety of children 
and young people in developing countries is also a concern.

Unicef's upcoming research into children and young people's use of ICT's 
exposes the lack of data and research on protecting children's safety online in 
developing countries compared to developed countries such as the UK or US.

Initial research findings reveal that up to a quarter of children in urban 
areas and one in every five children in rural areas surveyed in Vietnam had 
shared personal information such as their phone number or name of their school 
with someone online. In South Africa, more than 70% of users on an online 
social networking site talked to strangers at least once a week. In Vietnam 49% 
of urban children had been exposed to indecent content online, while 20% of 
rural children reported having been bullied, threatened or embarrassed online.

"Technology has the potential to be a huge force for good but it is not a 
silver bullet, a fix-all solution to how to fix the education and employment 
problems for young people in developing countries," says Kenny. "Yet one thing 
is clear – it will undoubtedly play an increasingly important part of millions 
of young people's lives across the world."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 