
Senior figures behind efforts to curtail the powers of American spy agencies 
have seized onthe decision by the world’s largest tech companies to call for 
radical surveillance reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/09/nsa-surveillance-tech-companies-demand-sweeping-changes-to-us-laws>
, saying the unexpected intervention is a potential “game-changer”.

In an open letter published jointly on Monday <http://97.74.205.113/>, eight 
tech giants, including Apple, Google and Facebook, said disclosures by the 
National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden revealed that basic 
rights and freedoms were being undermined.

The companies – which also include Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft>, Yahoo, AOL, LinkedIn and 
Twitter, and have a combined value of $1.4tn – called for widespread changes 
that, if enacted, would end many of the current programs through which 
governments spy on citizens at home and abroad.

"This is a major game-changer,” Leslie Harris, president of the Center for 
Democracy and Technology, an advocacy group, told the Guardian.

She said the letter was certain to get the attention of the White House and 
Congress, not least because the often-cautious tech companies wrote the letter 
in unison, accompanied by personal statements from the likes of Mark 
Zuckerberg, the founder ofFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, and his counterpart at 
Google, Larry Page.

Tech giants usually leave public lobbying to the dozen or so industry 
associations in Washington. It is unprecedented for the major tech giants to 
put their names to a single political statement of this kind.

“These are companies that have been deputised to be in the middle of a new, 
massive, systematic collection regime, against their will,” Harris said. “They 
are being told they can’t tell their users about it; they are losing business 
around the world and discovering that their data centres are being broken into. 
And I think they’re ready to fight back.”

Harris said senior executives in tech companies had coalesced around a set of 
political demands closely aligned with those called for by the internet freedom 
community, including her organisation. The Center for Democracy and Technology 
receives some funding from all eight tech giants behind the letter, but is a 
non-profit advocacy group.

The letter comes at a critical juncture. In six days, President Barack Obama 
will receive the findings of an independent review panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/28/obama-nsa-dossier-classified-surveillance>
, consisting of five top-level experts appointed by the White House to propose 
a raft of possible reforms. 

The make-up of the group, which includes Richard Clarke, a former White House 
counter-terrorism chief, and Michael Morell, the previous deputy director of 
the CIA, has been criticised as being too close to the intelligence community, 
but the administration insists its work has been independent and robust and 
will inform Obama's thinking about surveillance reform.

Next month, Congress is expected to debate competing legislation that will 
either substantially change how the NSA and partner agencies do business – for 
example, by rendering illegal the current practice of collecting phone records 
in bulk – or make only a few marginal changes.

The US intelligence community and its supporters on Capitol Hill are 
advocating only superficial changes that would leave their powers untouched and 
even codify practices that some legal experts argue are unconstitutional. This 
sets up a major legislative battle in the new year, which observers say could 
go either way. The position the White House takes in the debate could prove 
crucial.

A key barometer of change will be whether the phone records collection program 
survives. In their letter, the eight internet companies pointedly said 
governments should “limit surveillance to specific known users for lawful 
purposes” and “should not undertake bulk data collection”. The letter also does 
not distinguish between citizens and non-citizens, revealing, perhaps, that 
executives at the companies are acutely aware of the potential for NSA 
revelations to damage their business abroad.

Justin Amash, the House Republican whose amendment to end the mass collection 
of American citizens’ phone recordswas only narrowly defeated in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/25/nsa-surveillance-amash-amendment-narrow-defeat>
, said the tech companies' statement would galvanise support for the USA 
Freedom Act, the bill which is proposing to end bulk collection. “Businesses 
increasingly recognise that our government's out-of-control surveillance hurts 
their bottom line and costs American jobs,” Amash said in a statement.

The legislation, which is authored by Republican Jim Sensenbrenner in the 
House and Democrat Patrick Leahy in the Senate, and has 120 bipartisan 
co-sponsors in both chambers, has become the rallying point for advocates of 
reform on Capitol Hill. Sensenbrenner said on Monday that tech companies were 
among those “directly impacted by the NSA’s overreach”. The open letter, he 
added, “helps add to the growing momentum for much-needed reform”.

Leahy, in a statement emailed to the Guardian, pressed the case for reform in 
the wake of the letter. “The global competitiveness of the American technology 
industry has been undermined by revelations of massive dragnet surveillance 
programs," Leahy said. "We need to make substantial reforms to our surveillance 
laws to address the privacy concerns of innocent people whose information has 
been swept up in these programs, and to rebuild confidence in the US technology 
industry.”

Zoe Lofgren, a Democratic congresswoman whose California district includes 
part of Silicon Valley, said it was too early to determine the extent to which 
the intervention would alter the debate in a significant way. She pointed out 
that while the tech industry has a large and growing influence in Washington, 
and includes major donors to Obama’s re-election campaign, “they’ve not always, 
or even often, got their way on policy issues”.

“It is my perception that the spy agencies are pretty much oblivious to the 
impact on the country when it comes to the economy, credibility and the like,” 
she told the Guardian. “I don’t know if this is going to convince them.”

Lofgren is close to the tech industry; earlier this year she introduced 
legislation to enable tech firms to disclose the nature of government 
surveillance orders they receive – a proposal that was incorporated into the 
USA Freedom Act and was among the demands in Monday’s open letter.

She said that irrespective of whether Congress implemented the kind of reform 
advocated by the likes ofGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>
, Yahoo and Microsoft, those companies already recognise “the potential 
economic harm to overseas business is substantial”, and are taking defensive 
action. That involves hiring the best cryptologists they can find in what 
Lofgren described as a developing “encryption race” between the private sector 
and government.

“All of these companies are scrambling to increase security in order to 
prevent surveillance from their own government,” she said. “It is very clear 
that the technology companies are not going to wait for Congress. They are 
going to amplify and deploy additional measures to protect the privacy of their 
users.”

Additional reporting by Spencer Ackerman in New York
 