
A 14-year-old boy has died after suffering an allergic reaction to the acne 
medication he was given by his doctor, his father said yesterday.

An inquest into the death of Shaun Jones, from Rhydyfelin in Pontypridd, south 
Wales, has been opened and adjourned while further inquiries are made. Jones 
was said to be a fit and healthy rugby player, but appeared to suffer a severe 
reaction on October 21 after taking the first dose of antibiotic tablets.

Graeme Jones, the boy's father, said nobody was to blame and it was just "one 
of those terrible things."

"He was popular with the girls and had a couple of spots, so the doctor gave 
him some antibiotic acne tablets. A lot of his friends are taking them," Jones 
told BBC online news.

"It was the first time he'd taken them and he developed breathing 
difficulties. We called 999 and he went to hospital - but it was too late. The 
doctors couldn't save him.

"The doctor that gave him the tablets is really upset, but we don't blame him. 
It was just one of those terrible things. We're still coming to terms with 
losing him. One minute he was here and now he's gone.

"Shaun's little sister is devastated. She can't bear to leave our sides 
because she thinks something will happen to us too."

Jones declined to name the tablets while inquiries are ongoing. Many 
antibiotics commonly used to treat acne do have warnings of the possibility of 
allergic reactions, which can cause breathing difficulties, but deaths are rare.

Teresa Bates, a local councillor and governor at Hawthorn high school, which 
Shaun attended, said: "I understand he had acne and was given medication and 
had a massive allergic reaction to it.

"I know his grandmother and the family is devastated. So is the whole 
community."

Shaun played for his village rugby club. Rhydyfelin coach Dai Watkins said: 
"He was an awesome player whose name was first on the teamsheet.

"The fact that he was so fit and strong makes it all the harder to take. He 
was so dedicated and talented."
 