
While media luminaries from Rupert Murdoch to Michael Grade were happy to face 
a grilling before the Lords communications committee, its report on media 
ownership and plurality in news provision is scathing about one notable 
absentee:Telegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> chairman Aidan Barclay.

Despite four invitations he steadfastly refused to appear for anything but a 
private and off the record chat - which did not take place - saying it was not 
in the "commercial interests" of TMG, a private company, for him to share his 
views or strategy with competitors.

"We were not going to ask him about commercially sensitive issues," said the 
committee chairman, Lord Fowler.

"You only have to say in response to a question 'that is commercially 
sensitive' and we don't press that particular point.

"What is objectionable is that newspapers are there to reveal and to disclose 
and I don't think you can then, as a proprietor of a newspaper, say 'although 
we ask all these questions we are not there to answer any questions that you 
may have'.

"I don't think total freedom of the press means you cannot answer some 
questions about how the newspaper is run."

Barclay's refusal to appear has led Fowler and his fellow members to call for 
a simplification of the process of compelling the appearance of witnesses 
before Lords committees. Making such an order currently requires time be 
provided on the floor of the House of Lords.

House of Commons select committees, in contrast, already have the power to 
demand attendance without using parliamentary time.

The committee wanted to grill Barclay about the attitude of TMG's owners the 
Barclay Brothers - one of whom, Sir David, is Aidan's father - after wildly 
conflicting reports about their management style from former Sunday Telegraph 
editor, Dominic Lawson, and the company's current editor-in-chief, Will Lewis.

Lawson, who worked under the ownership of former Telegraph titles' owner 
Conrad Black as well as briefly under the Barclays, told the committee that
Aidan Barclay <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay> unsuccessfully 
tried to get him to pull a story about a paternity case involving David 
Blunkett because he did not want to find himself on the wrong side of a 
"powerful man".

"Conrad Black understood that a lot of what newspapers did was about causing 
trouble, making mischief, throwing bricks through windows - what newspapers do 
from time immemorial.

"I think the Barclay brothers want a quiet life, do not want any aggro, want 
it all to be nice and smooth," Lawson told the committee.

However, in his appearance before the committee Lewis came to the defence of 
his bosses, saying that he did not recognise Lawson's description or their 
approach to reporting.

In a subsequent interview with MediaGuardian Lewis added "I don't recognise 
what he said ... In terms of the owners, would they interfere? Have they 
interfered - in specific stories? In general? No, no, no."

Fowler said he would have preferred to hear from Aidan Barclay himself. "We 
would have wanted to ask him what approach his family takes to proprietorship," 
he explained.

In stark contrast the committee did not expect to hear from News Corporation 
chairman and chief executive Rupert Murdoch in person, having merely requested 
a meeting with senior company management.

To their surprise, Murdoch volunteered himself during the committee's trip to 
New York last year and the septuagenarian media mogul made some of the most 
forthright comments the committee heard. As far as his British tabloids are 
concerned he is a "traditional proprietor", he said.

"He was very frank about the position. 'There is nothing', he said, 'I can do 
as far as the Times and Sunday Times are concerned, but when it comes to the 
Sun and the News or the World then I am a traditional proprietor'," Fowler 
remembered of his meeting with Murdoch.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 