
Ten candidates from the 2013 federal election, including one Nationals 
candidate, have been referred to the commonwealth director of public 
prosecutions for failing to lodge paperwork.


The Commonwealth Electoral Act requires election candidates to disclose 
details of any gifts or donations, as well as details of expenditure on their 
election campaign, such as advertising costs.

In February, the Australian Electoral Commission released a list of 11 
candidates who had failed to lodge a return 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/Parties_and_Representatives/financial_disclosure/2013-election-non-returns.htm>
. The AEC revealed in its annual report, released on Monday, that 10 candidates 
had subsequently been referred to the CDPP over the matter. One of the 
candidates, Charles Blake, had lodged a late return in March, making him 
unlikely to be among the 10 referred.

The list includes two Katter’s Australian party candidates, one from the 
Australian Sex party and one South Australian National, as well as five other 
candidates, either independent or from minor parties.

The CDPP confirmed that one matter had been finalised and five other matters 
were now before the courts but would not confirm any candidate names.

According to the Richlands magistrates court, Kathleen Hewlett, a Katter’s 
Australian party candidate, pleaded guilty to two charges under the 
Commonwealth Electoral Act and was discharged without conviction and given a 
one-year good behaviour bond.

Rachel Titley, who was a National party senate candidate for South Australia, 
also failed to lodge a return by the deadline of 23 December 2013. Titley has 
sincefiled her return, on 24 October 2014 
<http://electiondisclosures.aec.gov.au/Candidate.aspx?SubmissionID=17496&ClientID=32381>
, lodging a “nil” return. According to the AEC, “officially endorsed” 
candidates of political parties may submit a nil return and roll their 
reporting into the annual party return which will be released in February next 
year.

Grantley Siviour, head of the South Australian Nationals, said the lack of 
lodgment had been an oversight on Titley’s part.

“Rachel failed to lodge a nil return after being advised early in 2014 that 
she should have completed a return even though the group return had been lodged 
on behalf of the party ticket by the lead candidate as is required by law,” he 
said.

“Rachel completed the required form last week and the AEC has acknowledged she 
is no longer in breach of the electoral act.”

While acknowledging that Titley was at fault, Siviour said the matter could 
have been better dealt with by the authorities, and that when she was in court 
the prosecution had failed to turn up on the day.

“My personal opinion is that this matter could simply have been handled quite 
differently and if the party had been advised that one of its candidates was 
recalcitrant in lodging a nil return, we would have dealt with it, but we were 
not advised,” he said.

“To be summonsed to a magistrates court for not filling in a return that the 
AEC already knew was a nil return, wasting police and DPP resources, as well as 
the time of the court which surely had more urgent and serious matters to deal 
with, beggars belief.”

The Liberal Democratic party senator David Leyonhjelm is also the registered 
officer of the Outdoor Recreation party, which had one candidate who failed to 
file a return. He said it “wasn’t unusual” for this to happen to candidates in 
small parties.

“The candidates are individually liable to lodge these forms,” he said. “The 
party itself is compliant, it’s individual candidates who are at fault. Also, 
as it’s invariably a nil return they often think they have nothing to declare, 
but the AEC takes the view that a failure to lodge is still a problem.”

Katter’s Australian party said the national office had directed all candidates 
to lodge returns.

“In the leadup to the federal election of 2013 all Katter’s Australian party 
candidates were informed that the candidate return form was their own 
responsibility,” a spokeswoman said.

“Reminders were issued throughout the duration of the election and AEC 
candidate handbooks detailing the appropriate process were also distributed to 
the individuals mentioned.

“Neither Kathleen, who is no longer a member of KAP, or Justin have indicated 
they will run in any further elections.”
 