
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has named John Allan, 
chairman of the housebuilder Barratt Developments and the card-processor 
Worldpay, as its new chairman, completing a sweeping overhaul at the top of 
Britain’s biggest retailer.

The troubled supermarket said Allan, 66, would take over from Sir Richard 
Broadbent on 1 March, after a year that has also seen the exit of the former 
finance director, Laurie McIlwee, chief executive,Philip Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-clarke>, and head of UK 
operations, Chris Bush, and the emergence of a £263m accounting scandal.

Allan, who will be paid £650,000 a year, brings experience of food retail to 
Tesco’s board, albeit from 30 years ago when he was head of marketing, buying 
and store operations at Fine Fare, a now-defunct supermarket chain.

Tesco’s new chief executive, Dave Lewis, has never run a retailer before, 
having spent 27 years at the consumer goods company Unilever. Matt Davies, the 
recently hired head of Tesco’s UK business, has spent his career at bicycle and 
car parts store Halfords and Pets at Home.

Analysts said there was some disappointment that Tesco had not been able to 
find a chairman with more up-to-date experience of food retail. Shareholders 
were thought to be keen onArchie Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> for the top job – the ITV 
chairman who led the turnaround of Asda in the late 1990s and is on the board 
of the Australian grocer Coles.

Tesco held talks with Norman, who is thought to have turned the job down 
because of his other commitments, as well as Ian Cheshire, the former chief 
executive of B&Q owner Kingfisher, who decided he wanted a chief executive role.

Allan said: “I’m very pleased to be taking on this role at such a critical 
moment for the business.”


Clive Black, a retail analyst at Shore Capital, said: “A proper win-win would 
have been someone like Archie Norman who has been in a turnaround and known the 
industry for years. Investors would have taken comfort from that. But whoever 
is chairman at Tesco needs to support Dave Lewis and the board has decided the 
best person is Allan.”


Patrick Cescau, Tesco’s senior independent director who has played a key role 
in restructuring the retailer’s board in recent months, said Allan had been 
appointed following a “deep and thorough process” and the board had unanimously 
agreed he was the right candidate.

The former Dixons chairman will need to draw on all his skills as Tesco 
undergoes a massive overhaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/08/tesco-chief-unveils-dramatic-shake-up-troubled-supermarket>
with plans to close 43 stores, scrap 49 new developments andcut up to 9,000 
jobs across its head office and shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/15/tesco-supermarket-plans-management-cull->
.

Broadbent announced in October he would be stepping down after a disastrous 
three-year tenure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/23/tesco-profits-black-hole-bigger>
 in which sales and profits fell and the company had to admit it had overstated 
profits by £263m. The matter is currently being investigated by the Serious 
Fraud Office, the Financial Reporting Council and the grocery market watchdog.

Broadbent said on Tuesday that Allan’s “wide expertise, his experience and his 
personal qualities will contribute greatly to the future of the group”.

For the majority of his career Allan has been involved in distribution 
businesses, heading up the freight company Ocean Group, which merged with its 
rival NFC to become Exel, which was acquired by Deutsche Post in 2005. He stood 
down as chief financial officer of Deutsche Post in 2009, returning from 
Germany to the UK to become chairman of Dixons, overseeing a turnaround at the 
electricals group under John Browett and then Seb James. He stepped down to 
deputy chairman when it merged with Carphone Warehouse last year.

Allan is quitting his role at Dixons Carphone and as a non-executive director 
of Royal Mail and senior adviser to the consultancy Alix Partners. He has 
agreed to step down as chairman of DHL once a successor is found but will 
continue as chairman of Barratts and WorldPay for the foreseeable future.

Allan has previously said that his role model is Sir John Parker, currently 
chairman of Anglo American, with whom he worked on the board of National Grid. 
“He is very organised, thoughtful and very good at ensuring the whole board 
gets an opportunity to contribute to discussions,” Allan said.


Fran Minogue, managing partner at the retail executive search specialist 
Clarity, said Allan was well suited to the Tesco job: “He has excellent 
experience as a retail chairman at a company undergoing a turnaround and is 
well regarded in the City. He is astute, measured and calm, and knows how to 
bring people together and focus them.”

Seb James of Dixons paid tribute to Allan, saying he had been “a force for 
good” at the newly merged Dixons Carphone. “Allan has been an excellent 
chairman to Dixons Retail for many years, playing an important part in a great 
turnaround story,” he said.

 