
Tesco wants to make an energy manager out of every employee, the company says.

Having halved its energy consumption per sq ft across its UK business between 
2000 and 2006, the UK's largest retailer is now looking to halve its 
business-wide carbon emissions by 2020.

Using interactive electronic energy boards is a new initiative to help the 
company meet this target.

The boards have a touch-screen display tool and have been installed in 614 
stores since December 2010 and are due to roll out to 900 stores in the UK and 
Ireland during 2011.

This will immediately give more than 200,000 employees – nearly half Tesco's 
workforce – access to easy-to-understand energy data and provide them with tips 
to improve energy efficiency and cut carbon.

The company says that alternative systems usually consist of straightforward 
energy use reports, or basic software packages that only display one set of 
data values, often a day or more in arrears.

Tesco claims to be the first major retailer to deploy an energy management 
tool that works in real-time, is easy-to-use and aimed at all staff.

The system forms part of Tesco's climate change strategy in which the company 
aims to become zero-carbon by 2050, without purchasing offsets.

Making the energy boards available to all staff achieves two objectives, says 
Tesco. Firstly, to help consistently reduce energy consumption, and secondly to 
help employees make the right decisions in their day-to-day work.

They not only display information on energy use but, because they are 
interactive, also help to raise awareness about energy efficiency.

Trials showed that the boards have potential to save the energy equivalent of 
34,000 tonnes of CO2 per year across Tesco's UK estate, or the equivalent of 
the annual emissions of over 19,000 medium-sized homes.

In the company's largest stores, they could save as much as 180,000 kWh per 
year , the equivalent usage of 54 medium-sized homes.

To ensure that this energy efficiency drive is itself sustainable, components 
for the boards have been carefully sourced.

Each board includes an energy efficient screen and the supporting computer 
system is configured to use minimal processing power. In addition, recycled 
wood holds the screen and the boards use low backlighting.

Training staff how to use the boards is another company priority. As well as a 
pop-up screen showing tips on how each area of a site can be more energy 
efficient, the dynamic display gives a clear perspective of performance and 
enables people to quickly see the impact of change.

What's more, the boards are located in busy areas to make sure as many people 
as possible see them.

The introduction of the boards follows Tesco's £25m investment in the 
Sustainable Consumption Institute <http://www.sci.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/>, 
which alerted the retailer to some of the behavioural implications of trying to 
grow greener.

It has now employed a doctoral student from Loughborough University to 
research energy saving behaviour and to help develop the boards for users.

In future the system is intended to be a focal point for energy saving. It 
will be extended to all office buildings in the UK and is being assessed for 
international markets too. Tesco believes the system is lasting could easily be 
transfered to other industries.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 