 The country's leading anti-terrorist officer quit unexpectedly yesterday after 
more allegations emerged about his private conduct.
The resignation of Assistant Commissioner Andy Hayman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/andy-hayman> followed revelations about his 
frequent contacts with a member of the body that investigates complaints 
against the police while he himself was under investigation.

Hayman was already under pressure after allegations about his expenses claims 
and trips he was said to have made abroad with a female staff officer. He 
apparently decided to resign yesterday after being asked by Channel 4 News 
about 400 phone calls and text messages that he had sent to a female member of 
the Independent Police Complaints Commisssion while it was investigating the 
Met over the shooting ofJean Charles de Menezes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/menezes> in Stockwell tube station in 2005.

Further allegations against Hayman concerned the refurbishment at the cost of 
£1m of a suite of offices at the central London headquarters of the Association 
of Chief Police Officers. Hayman speaks for ACPO on terrorism. One senior 
source, with knowledge of the allegations against Hayman, said: "Nothing so far 
seen would on its own merit disciplinary action, but this does raise issues of 
judgment."

Barely a week after it emerged that he was facing an investigation into his 
expenses, Hayman announced that he had enough of the "unfounded allegations". 
Now the man who used to start his day with a dawn run round St James's Park, 
central London, has walked out at the very top of his profession, claiming to 
have been the victim of a smear campaign.

Hayman made his surprise announcement yesterday after the start of an inquiry 
into £15,000 in expenses claims over the past three years and foreign trips 
with a female officer. He had also come in for criticism last month from the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) over his handling of the De 
Menezes affair but few anticipated his departure.

For the past week, Hayman had been bullish in his own defence and had 
indicated that he would stay on to clear his name. He spelt out in a statement 
why he felt he had to go. "Recent weeks have seen a series of leaks and 
unfounded accusations about me, which I have and will continue to refute 
strongly," he said. "It has been a great honour and privilege to lead 
specialist operations in its challenging work protecting this country from the 
palpable terrorist threat we face.

"This role requires total commitment in both time and effort and has a 
considerable impact on your personal life, your family and friends. It also 
puts you in the spotlight, often in ways that are very hurtful. Recent weeks 
have seen a series of leaks and unfounded accusations about me, which I have 
and will continue to refute strongly.

"However, these events take their toll ... and I feel now is the right time 
for me to step aside. I wish my successor and all my colleagues every success 
in their efforts to defend the United Kingdom."

Last night, the IPCC issued a statement saying it did not know why Hayman had 
decided to go. "The Metropolitan police service drew to our attention that they 
had evidence of a significant number of calls between AC [Assistant 
Commissioner] Hayman and a former member of IPCC staff. That member of staff, 
who is not an investigator, had no involvement or contact with the IPCC's two 
Stockwell inquiries. We have satisfied ourselves as far as we can that there 
was no improper sharing of information; it appears that the calls were not work 
related."

The commissioner of the Metropolitan police, Sir Ian Blair, a close ally of 
Hayman, paid tribute to Hayman. "I fully understand his decision to leave at 
this time and wish him well for the future," said Sir Ian. "Andy Hayman can be 
very proud of the achievements and successes during his time in charge of 
specialist operations."

It is known that Hayman felt increasingly beleaguered and believed that he had 
been made the Met's scapegoat in the De Menezes affair. Last night, the Jean 
Charles de Menezes family campaign welcomed his departure. "We welcome the fact 
that Andy Hayman is no longer in office given he was found to have deliberately 
'misled the public' after the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes," said a 
spokesperson. "His resignation is a further indictment of the attempted 
cover-up by the Metropolitan police."

The head of the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO), Ken Jones, moved 
swiftly to reassure the public that there would not be a vacuum in 
anti-terrorist policing. "The business of protecting the public from terrorism 
continues," he said.

Fast track

1959 Born 31 July 1959

1978 Joined Essex Police

1998 November Appointed commander in the Metropolitan police, responsible for 
drugs, crime and complaints investigations. Later became head of the unit 
investigating anti-corruption and complaints

2001 April Became Deputy Assistant Commissioner in the Met 

2002 December Appointed Chief Constable of Norfolk police

2005 February Became head of the specialist operations directorate (including 
counter terrorist command). Heavily criticised over De Menezes shooting

2006 June Received a CBE days after he had to apologise when officers shot an 
innocent man during a terror raid in Forest Gate, east London
 