
A professional basketball player was about to give a handout to a man asking 
for money when police officers took him to the ground and arrested him, a 
former teammate testified Wednesday.

Ex-Atlanta Hawks power forward Pero Antic said he was sitting in an Uber car 
with the door open near a trendy Manhattan nightclub in the early hours of 
April 8 when he heard officers arguing with guard-forward Thabo Sefolosha as he 
tried to give a man money.

The silence over the Thabo Sefolosha trial is deafening ... and mystifying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/12/the-silence-over-the-thabo-sefolosha-trial-is-deafening-and-mystifying>
“They didn’t allow him to give the money,” said Antic, who was also arrested 
after he climbed out of the car and touched an officer’s shoulder while asking 
why his friend was being placed under arrest. “The police officers arrested him 
before he got to.”

Sefolosha has pleaded not guilty to misdemeanor obstructing government 
administration, disorderly conduct and resisting arrest charges stemming from 
the confrontation with police outside the 1Oak nightclub. Charges against Antic 
have been dropped. Prosecutors have said in court papers that Sefolosha was 
lunging toward an officer when he was confronted.

The Swiss national’s leg was fractured in the struggle. His attorney has 
argued that injury was caused by the officers, one of whom had a baton in his 
hand during the confrontation.

On Wednesday, the man who had asked Sefolosha for money, Amos Canty, testified 
for the defense that he never received the donation and instead saw Sefolosha 
being “pushed on the floor.”

“They handled him rough,” said Canty, a regular outside the nightclub.

Antic, Sefolosha and others were told to move up the block and away from a 
crime scene where anotherNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> basketball 
player, Indiana Pacers forward Chris Copeland, and two women were stabbed 
earlier, prosecutors have said. But the 6ft 6in Sefolosha repeatedly refused to 
move away from the scene, calling the 5ft 7in inch officer who was clearing the 
block a “midget,” an assistant district attorney argued.

Sefolosha’s attorney, Alex Spiro, has argued that his client, who is black, 
was targeted because of his race by a white officer.

The Manhattan Criminal Court judge hearing the case rejected two motions 
Wednesday to dismiss the disorderly conduct and resisting arrest charges. He 
said he’s still deciding a defense motion to dismiss the obstructing government 
administration charge.
 