
 Carter Beats the Devil 
Glen David Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/books/glen-david-gold> 
 (Sceptre, £6.99)

 A stormer of a novel, this - the perfect read for people who despise airport 
blockbusters yet find themselves on aeroplanes longing for a good, meaty 
page-turner. Carter is a magician in 1920s San Francisco for whom "magic was 
not an amusement, but a means of survival". By the time the opening chapter of 
the book is done, he has apparently killed the President, shot a lion, carved 
it open to allow the beaming President to step out of its belly, and then 
booked a ticket out of town some hours later when said President turns up dead 
- for real. With elements of the whodunnit and, crucially for a book about 
magic tricks, the howdunnit, this is a tasty four-course meal of a novel.

 Five Boys 
 Mick Jackson
 (Faber, £6.99)


 We begin with just one boy, Bobby, as he prepares for the long coach ride out 
of wartime London. In south Devon he meets the Five, who after some initial 
hostility ("Where's the swastika?") take him along on their mischief-making in 
the village. The place has a rather League of Gentlemen feel, with its 
eccentric locals and deep suspicion of the unfamiliar - and it's impossible not 
to warm to Bobby as he stumbles through it. But Jackson unaccountably ditches 
the poor lad halfway through the book, concentrating instead on a rather 
heavy-handed allegory of the beehive as it correlates to society. We're left 
wondering how a warm human story could end so coldly.

 My Summer of Love 
 Helen Cross 
 (Bloomsbury, £6.99)


 A story of teenage lust, power and "drunkishness" in 1980s Yorkshire. Mona, 
15, spends her days thieving, drinking brandy and applying Plum Shimmer nail 
varnish. When she meets Tam, a posh girl with curves, she is smitten - with 
deadly results. Cross, a first-time novelist, uses her words like little 
truncheons, slamming you with murder, flesh, fags, custard, rash, lipstick and 
so on. It's powerful at first but has a numbing effect in the long run, leaving 
you eager for the last page. Where the novel shines is in its depiction of the 
adolescent girl's attitude to food: Mona's slide into anorexia, punctuated by 
binges on mash-with-chocolate-and-chilli, is convincingly fraught.

 Bel Canto 
Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> 
 (Fourth Estate, £6.99)


 It is the diplomatic party of the year. Closeted in a luxurious house in an 
unnamed South American country, 100-odd guests, among them the President of 
Japan, listen enraptured to a famous soprano after dinner. Then the lights go 
out. So begins a hostage drama that sees 52 of the guests holed up with the 
terrorists for weeks, while Patchett follows the subtle allegiances, shifts of 
loyalty and blossomings of love that ensue in this tiny, divided community. She 
stays strictly within the limits of the house, so that you soon feel you are 
among the hostages - and her ability to convey emotion is so finely honed that 
you hardly want to leave.
 