
Here is a typical sentence from Alan Hollinghurst's The Line of Beauty: "He 
ate his salmon and drank his rather sweet hock with an indefinable air of 
relished routine, an admission of lifelong lunching in boardrooms and country 
houses and festival restaurants all over Europe." This is Lord Kessler, 
brother-in-law of Tory MP Gerald Fedden, in whose Victorian stately home 
Hollinghurst's protagonist, Nick Guest, is having "an exquisite light lunch" 
with the rest of the Fedden family. Lord Kessler's easy grandeur intrigues 
Nick. That sentence is characteristic not because of its subject – the 
mannerisms of the ruling class – but because of its phrasing. It is that 
"indefinable air", to which Nick attaches experiences of which he actually 
knows nothing. He detects the intimations of a whole social history.
Everything in The Line of Beauty is filtered through Nick's consciousness. 
There is no line of dialogue that he does not hear; there is no event that he 
does not witness. A student of the fiction of Henry James, the ultimate sensor 
of unspoken implications, he is always detecting what is not explicit. So one 
of the narrative's favourite phrases is "as if". The arriviste Thatcherite, 
Barry Groom, presented with venison from Lord Kessler's estate, "sniffed at it 
testily, as if he knew he was thought to have more money than taste". When Nick 
pays the rent, Rachel reacts "as if the two ten-pound notes were a form of mild 
extravagance, like a box of chocolates, or like flowers brought by a dinner 
guest, which were also a bit of a nuisance". The analogy is all in Nick's head. 
Rachel, Gerald's wife, a person of subtlety married to a blustering, ambitious 
politician, is a peculiar mystery, and invariably described in terms of what 
she suggests but does not specify. "'No, she's awfully promising . . . ' – the 
remark hesitating towards something she seemed to see in the middle distance 
but which, as so often, she left amiably unexpressed."
So much is "as if" something else. When Gerald Fedden stages a piano recital 
at his home to impress his political friends and grand relations, the guests 
are observed with a tincture of Nick's puzzled amusement. "A thin-lipped man 
from the Cabinet Office groped for his programme sheet as if the music had come 
as a slightly unpleasant surprise . . . Lady Partridge smiled slyly too, as if 
she'd been cleverer than she knew . . . Trudi Titchfield came past with a 
grimace, as if not expecting to be remembered." We cannot know if these are 
really the feelings of these characters.
When Nick chats with the irritable millionaire whose son is secretly his 
lover, all meaning is merely guessed at. "'I know, I know,' said Bertrand, as 
though cross at being taken seriously . . . Bertrand smiled as if nothing would 
surprise him." These intimations of unspoken thoughts, of feelings behind or at 
variance with what people are saying, testify to the opaqueness of this world 
to Nick. "Guest" by name and nature, he observes a social milieu with all his 
Jamesian sensitivity, and often with the coolness of a satirist, but its 
psychological nuances are his own suppositions. Outside the Notting Hill house, 
he and his lover, Leo, bump into Lady Partridge, Gerald's haughty, intimidating 
mother. "She smiled and said, 'How do you do?' in an extraordinarily cordial 
tone, in which none the less something final was conveyed – the certainty that 
they would never speak again." But certainty is just what we cannot have.
The narrative often signals Nick's uncertain sense of what he is observing. 
"There was a vague air of intrusion." "Monique looked at him with vague 
concern." Catherine arriving at the party with her disreputable boyfriend wears 
"a stunned, vaguely cunning smile". An innocent story about Lady Partridge is 
told in a "vaguely risqué way". Even the furnishings of one of Lord Kessler's 
bedrooms can seem "vaguely comic" (Nick, whose father runs an antique shop, is 
something of an expert on furniture and furnishings). Words like "strangely" 
and "oddly" catch Nick's slight bemusement at what he witnesses. Gerald's 
speech at his son Toby's birthday party is an "oddly relished ordeal"; Toby's 
"tone combined candour and insincerity to oddly charming effect".
Combinations of incongruous qualities are caught in surprising pairings of 
words, a favourite Hollinghurst device. Gerald can be "marvellously 
supercilious"; when the ladies have left the room at one of his dinner parties, 
the mood becomes "grimly convivial". There is the "helpless boldness" of a Tory 
wife's maternity dress; the "defiant sensitivity" of a man weeping at a 
Beethoven recital. A buffet after a piano recital chez Fedden is "all chaffing 
courtesy and furtive ruthlessness" – the Tory grandees have been invited in 
order to be impressed, but have had their meal unconscionably delayed. Nick is 
an outsider, a grammar school boy fallen amongst toffs. He is also gay, 
inhabiting a parallel world to that of the Feddens, who seem to know of his 
sexuality without ever acknowledging it. He is, as he thinks, "used to living 
by hints and approximations", and the reader lives by these too.
• John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. Join him 
and Alan Hollinghurst for a discussion at 7pm on Monday 8 August, Hall Two, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG. Tickets cost £9.50 fromkingsplace.co.uk
 <http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/> and £11.50 at the box office. Tel: 020 7520 
1490.
 