
A recent referendum and the magnitude of the political change it heralded does 
not alter the fact that Britain is a parliamentary democracy. Theresa May was 
able to become prime minister without a general election because she commands a 
majority in the Commons. By contrast, Jeremy Corbyn mustcontest a leadership 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/owen-smith-calls-for-single-labour-challenger-take-on-corbyn>
 because he has lost the confidence of the overwhelming majority of his MPs. On 
Monday, they will begin the process of formal nominations and informal 
negotiations to choose which of them is best placed to compete with him.

This is not, as some of Mr Corbyn’s supporters assert, an offence against 
democracy.Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> evolved as a 
vehicle for advancing the interests of working people in recognition of 
Britain’s parliamentary system and respect for its virtues. Labour’s function 
is to send MPs to parliament who might form a government. If those MPs lose 
confidence in their leader, they cannot recommend him to the country as a prime 
minister and are duty-bound to replace him. The challenge to Mr Corbyn may not 
be pretty, but it has a basis in principle.

Shameful treatment of Jeremy Corbyn and shades of deja vu | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/shameful-treatment-of-jeremy-corbyn-and-shades-of-deja-vu>
The situation is complicated by Mr Corbyn’s overwhelming victory in last 
summer’s leadership contest. That result must be read as a rejection of a whole 
set of Labour orthodoxies and hierarchies represented by those MPs who now want 
to reverse the outcome. Those who voted for radical change reasonably feel 
aggrieved. But this equation cannot simply be solved by the assertion that Mr 
Corbyn’s mandate trumps other considerations. Likewise, the recruitment of 
enthusiastic new members under his banner, while impressive, does not override 
concerns that his evangelical reach is far too narrow. Labour MPs also have 
mandates, and many represent constituencies where the political balance is 
finer than it is in Islington North, where Mr Corbyn has been unthreatened for 
decades. Meetings with constituents, combined with a wealth of campaign 
experience, inform MPs that their leader is a serious obstacle to general 
election success; that his incumbency makes prolonged Tory government more 
likely.That judgment 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2016/06/corbyns-supporters-loved-his-principles-he-ditched-them-eu-campaign>
 is worth heeding.

Whether Angela Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> or 
Owen Smith, Mr Corbyn’s potential rivals, would fare better is a moot point. 
Whichever becomes the sole challenger will have to find some capacity to 
inspire confidence that neither has projected so far. While it makes tactical 
sense for rebellious MPs to unite behind a single candidate, Monday’s hustings 
entrench a misconception about the balance of opinion in the Labour party. The 
meeting reinforces the idea that politics on the left is neatly divided between 
pro- and anti-Corbyn factions. This promotes a false belief among some of Mr 
Corbyn’s supporters that their opponents are hostile to everything he stands 
for, that they are all “Blairites” who support austerity and neoliberalism.

The truth is that all Labour MPs share the party members’ craving for a more 
equal society. They too want to reshape Britain’s economy so that wealth and 
opportunity are more fairly distributed. They too want to invest in public 
services and restore compassion to the social security system. There are 
disputes about the methods for achieving those ends and differences over the 
strategy for winning permission from the wider electorate to do the job, but 
that is the stuff of normal debate within a unified political party. A 
destructive feature of the past year has been the emergence of a puritan 
ideology that casts many long-standing Labour members and MPs beyond the pale – 
as if any disagreement with Mr Corbyn is a betrayal of the true path. This 
would be damaging even if he were always right.

It is unlikely that any rival will have all of the answers to the complex 
array of problems facing the party, and those challenges have evolved rapidly 
even in the months since the party last elected a leader. There is a new prime 
minister. The budget parameters that defined the battle against austerity are 
shifting. The terms of Britain’s exit from the European Union must be debated 
and negotiated. None of this was foreseen when Mr Corbyn was chosen. Since 
then, he has not shown enough agility or competence to suggest he can grapple 
with the task ahead. He has restoredenergy to Labour’s grassroots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/16/momentum-labour-party-jeremy-corbyn-politics-john-harris>
 but he is not rehabilitating the party as a force that can win power and 
govern by the rules of parliamentary democracy. In the coming contest he must 
show that he can. Readiness for that mission, not abstract tests of ideological 
purity, should be the criterion on which the leader is chosen.

• This article was amended on 19 July 2016. An earlier version used the word 
“criteria” where “criterion” was required.
 