
Duncan Baker-Brown <http://www.bbm-architects.co.uk/> has seen the future of 
housing – and it's rubbish. "It's a depressing fact," the architect says, "that 
for every five houses we build in the UK, the equivalent of one house in waste 
materials gets put into landfill." What makes that even worse is that much of 
it is still perfectly usable.

To prove the point, Baker-Brown and his students at the University of Brighton 
have just spent a year building a house almost entirely out of garbage. But is 
it the kind of place you might want to live in, or more like a strange 
hobbyist's trash-cave worthy of Stig of the Dump?

Curling in the midday sun, a scaly surface of rubbery black shingles covers 
the walls of the two-storey building in the university grounds, like the 
ruffled plumage of some mysterious fowl. It turns out these are carpet tiles, 
2,000 of them, salvaged from a nearby office building and hung with their 
waterproof underside facing outwards. "We had to blowtorch them on site to 
satisfy the building control officer," grins Baker-Brown, who runs Brighton's 
undergraduate structures course. "But they just wouldn't ignite – they're 
already fire-retarded for use as flooring." Chopped up and repurposed, they 
make an intriguing feathery facade that thankfully looks more Wallpaper* than 
Scrapheap Challenge.

Stepping inside, you find a series of rooms that could pass as a normal home. 
There are white-painted plasterboard walls – leftover paint on "damaged and 
returned" sheets of plasterboard that look brand new – and a fine timber 
staircase, finished with a decorative flourish of offcuts by carpentry students 
atCity College Brighton and Hove <http://www.ccb.ac.uk/>.
 The interior of the waste house is built from offcuts of plasterboard and 
wood, insulated with a host of recycled materials such as plastic and denim. 
Photograph: Ian McKay 
The same students also made the structural frame of the house, crafting 
columns and beams from sheets of plywood discarded from site hoardings and 
concrete shuttering. Cross-braced with more offcuts, they are oversized at 
almost half a metre thick. "When you don't know the provenance of the material, 
calculations have to be based on the worst-case scenario," says Baker-Brown. 
The frame was originally going to support a roof of concrete paving slabs, 
until a source of lightweight clay tiles appeared in the nick of time – sourced 
on theFreegle <http://www.ilovefreegle.org/> website (similar to Freecycle), 
like most of the materials in the project.

"It's a process of designing where you have to be agile, and maybe change your 
plans according to what becomes available," Baker-Brown says. Conceived as an 
educational tool more than an actual home, the building is pierced by little 
peephole windows that show what's going on inside the walls – and, strangely, 
they reveal piles of toothbrushes and stacks of video cases.

"All the video rental shops seemed to be closing down while we were on site," 
he explains. "So we took all the DVD cases and VHS tapes to use as insulation." 
The 20,000 toothbrushes, meanwhile, came from a company that cleans planes 
after long-haul flights. This vast quantity represents the harvest of just four 
days, which would otherwise end up in landfill, or the sea, joining the islands 
of plastic that are swirling around our oceans, some the size of Texas. 
Upstairs, the peepholes reveal stacks of denim, sourced from a local firm that 
imports jeans from China and slices off the legs to make cut-off shorts.

How these odd new forms of insulation (which are supplementary to conventional 
recycled sheets of polyurethane foam) perform will be monitored throughout the 
year by a PhD student at Brighton's department of science and engineering, who 
has fitted sensors throughout the house to measure temperature and humidity. 
The aim is to achieve something close toPassivhaus standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/01/passivhaus-fabric-first-energy-efficiency>
 – aided by triple-glazed windows, the only brand-new element in the building, 
along with the wiring and plumbing.

So are any of these lessons scalable, or is this just a novelty exercise?

"It's more of a provocation, to say we need to see a step-change in how we use 
materials," says Baker-Brown. "The current ethos in the industry is to throw 
loads of material at the building site, rather than risk having people hanging 
around if anything runs out. There has to be a way of storing and reusing all 
the surplus, rather than throwing it in landfill."

Dutch architects Superuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/jun/05/superuse-architecture-design-recycling-waste>
 have established an onlineHarvest Map <http://www.oogstkaart.nl/oogstkaart/> 
for people to advertise such supplies, but it will take something far bigger to 
have any impact. "It needs a company like Amazon, with great big sheds and an 
online network," says Baker-Brown, describing a future where all materials in 
new buildings will be tagged , so you know exactly what's in them and how it 
can be reused when they come to be demolished. "Builders can avoid landfill 
charges, and the materials can find a new home – it's a culture of ReIY, rather 
than DIY."
 