
Q I'm looking for a pair of knee-high leather boots with a pointed toe and 
small heel. I have wide calves and I'm having trouble finding a good fit: they 
all seem to bag at the ankle or won't zip up over my calves. Can you help?
 Michelle

A There is nothing worse than having your heart set on something and not being 
able to find it. I've made it my mission this week to track down the perfect 
boot for you. Duo is primarily an online store that specialises in 
wider-fitting shoes and boots. You might be wary of buying over the internet 
when fit has been such an issue, but this company has a fitting room on Savile 
Row in London. Pay them a visit, and you can be measured up and guided through 
the whole range. Once you have decided on your style, staff will place an order 
for you online and the goods will be delivered to your door. The styles Navia 
and Monaco from Duo fit your brief perfectly, and prices aren't too high: most 
cost around £100 to £150. I also love the riding style Cyprus - it's a style 
that's on-trend this season. For a cheaper option, try Evans. This high-street 
shop's styles include extra calf-width and most have elasticated inserts for 
flexibility. It's not your dream footwear, but if you do pop into Evans, do try 
a pair of Georgina Goodman at Evans grey ankle boots - the style is key this 
winter and you won't have to worry about the fit around your calves at all.

Q I would like a blazer for autumn. I loved those on the Balenciaga catwalk, 
but do you have any cheaper suggestions?
Charlotte

A The preppy blazer is a must-have - the one by Balenciaga has become a 
sought-after piece this season. But finding a cheaper version doesn't mean 
compromising on the look. Sonia by Sonia Rykiel has a cropped two-button navy 
blazer, and there's a black moleskin tuxedo-style jacket by McQ which caught my 
eye. Both have great shape. If you fancy a striped version, then look at 
Jaeger's velvet one. On the high street, Topshop offers a neat grey blazer and 
Cos has a perfect black one which will become a treasured part of your winter 
wardrobe.

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
 