
What began with a constitutional bang will end with a constitutional whimper. 
Whether more by inheritance (from John Smith) than by choice, Tony Blair began 
the NewLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> era with a 
fusillade of reforms that changed the British political landscape forever. A 
new parliament in Scotland, an assembly in Wales, self-rule in northern 
Ireland, a mayoralty in London, the introduction of proportional representation 
for almost all UK elections bar the House of Commons – it amounted to a quiet 
revolution that may well endure as New Labour's most permanent legacy.

In the Queen's speech <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/queens-speech> 
there was only a shadow of that former ambition.

There will be a constitutional reform bill which will aim to tidy up a few 
remaining loose ends, focused on the House of Lords. It will abolish the absurd 
"byelections" among hereditary peers – under which as one blueblood dies his 
fellow aristocrats get to choose which hereditary takes his place – so that 
this most exclusive of franchises will no longer be able to renew itself in 
perpetuity. It will also allow for expulsion of peers who've been guilty of 
egregious dodginess and allow those in ermine to renounce their titles (the 
so-calledMandelson clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2009/jul/30/peter-mandelson-for-pm> 
that would enable the first secretary to quit the Lords for the Commons).

It doesn't sound like much, but at least that bill has a chance to get 
through. No such luck for the draft bill onLords reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lordreform>. On the plus side, at least 
this bill will – at long last – set out Labour's policy on the second chamber, 
finally answering all those fiddly questions about composition, electoral 
method, length of terms and the rest. But on the downside, it has no chance of 
becoming law. The government is not even going to attempt to drive it through.

It means the administration that arrived in 1997 hoping to be remembered as a 
great, reforming government is poised to leave office with one of the most 
extraordinary set-ups in the democratic world still intact. To remind 
ourselves: one half of our legislature, which writes the laws of the land, is 
not chosen by the people. Its members were appointed – rather than elected – 
when Labour arrived in office and they will still be appointed when it leaves. 
That remains an indictment of the New Labour era.

Some reformers hoped the government might redeem itself with a bold move: 
holding a referendum on changing the electoral system on the day of the 2010 
general election. But, says Downing Street, the civil service advice was 
unanimous: it could not be done in time. Even if the government had got a bill 
through the Commons and the Lords – hardly likely – the law on referendums 
requires a set period for consultation on the wording of the question, then 
more consultation about funding of the yes and no campaigns and on and on. 
Labour was defeated by the clock.

Instead, reformers are meant to be cheered that at least Labour's next 
manifesto will now include not only the detailed Lords reform plan contained in 
that draft bill but also a pledge for a referendum on the alternative vote 
system of election for the Commons.

Perhaps that would lift the spirits if anybody thought Labour were going to 
win. Instead reformers face the prospect of a Tory government led by a man who 
says change in the Lords is a "third term issue" and who is immovably committed 
to first-past-the-post for the Commons.

Those who want Britain's political system dragged into the 20th century – let 
alone the 21st – have already waited a long, long time. It seems they're going 
to have to wait a whole lot longer.
 