
International meetings are routinely described as "crucial". But few are as 
significant as the UN Climate Change conference in Copenhagen beginning 7 
December.

Rising sea levels, widespread crop failures, catastrophic flooding and mass 
displacement of people creating intense hardship and economic devastation is 
what awaits the world if the world's leading scientists are to be believed.

The aim at Copenhagen is to reach global agreement on deep cuts in greenhouse 
gas emissions to limit this. There are equally thorny subsidiary issues: who 
should pay for C02 cuts and how should they be achieved.

An agreement at Copenhagen would succeed the Kyoto Protocol. Signed in 
December 1997, Kyoto expires in 2012. Countries who signed up to Kyoto - 184 of 
them but not the United States - agreed to stabilise and reduce greenhouse 
gases.

Under Kyoto, rich countries agreed to reduce emissions by 5.2% from 1990 
levels. Shipping and aviation was not included in the agreement. Neither were 
countries like India and China.

A way of "buying" yourself out of pollution was established. The so-called 
carbon trading market allowed companies to sell a given allocation of carbon 
credits to others. This provided a financial incentive to clean up your act. 
The so-called cap and trade mechanism has been good in principle but initially 
offered over generous allowances and has been subject to abuse.

So now, 15,000 officials, advisers, diplomats, campaigners and journalists 
representing 192 countries will mostly fly into the Danish capital. Initially 
the aim was to legally bind countries to cuts of at least 20% by 2020 and 80% 
by 2050 to give the world a chance of avoiding a 2C rise in temperature.

Though most leading scientists now believe such a rise is all but unavoidable 
and so deep carbon cuts is important to ensure the world does not heat up by 
more than 3C.

But dominating the run up to the conference is the reluctance of the US to set 
legally binding carbon reduction targets. This has hit hopes that complete 
agreement can be reached in Copenhagen. Negotiations leading up to the talks 
have been painfully slow, fractious and characterised by walk outs by officials 
from African nations.

Despite this, Europe is reluctant to openly criticise the United States 
because at least Obama takes climate change seriously unlike his predecessor.

George Bush refused to countenance a 5% cut in the US's emissions over fears 
it would destroy America's economy.

Obama's election last year has changed climate change politics. This year, the 
US House of Representatives passed a bill setting a 17% reduction in America's 
emissions from 2005 levels, and a version currently in the Senate aims for a 
20% cut by 2020.

Obama said recently that he saw the key to successful talks was establishing a 
workable framework between the US and China which Europe, India and other 
nations could buy into.

He has not ruled out flying into Copenhagen if he thinks his presence can 
swing a deal. But after failing to land Chicago as an Olympic host, Obama will 
be wary of associating himself with failure if as many now predict, agreement 
cannot be reached.

For the first time, pressure will be on the world's emerging economies - 
China, India and Brazil - to make cuts to their CO2 emissions. This is highly 
controversial, potentially divisive but unavoidable.

Though the Chinese per head emits just a quarter of CO2 compared with an 
American Two new coal power stations open in China every week. Its rapid 
industrialisation poses an enormous threat to climate stability. And China 
knows it. Its leader, President Hu Jintao said he was prepared to set his 
country's first carbon targets. This will not involve an overall cut, but an 
"intensity" reduction relative to the growth of the economy.

China says it will also establish national tree planting campaigns and even 
provide a small amount of support for renewable energy projects for poorer 
nations. It will also raise its renewable energy target and set a date to start 
reducing overall emissions.

Latin American economic colossus, Brazil has pointed the way for possible 
progress by pledging a big curb in its greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 as a 
"political gesture" aimed at pressing rich nations into agreeing to large cuts 
in carbon. Though the cuts are voluntary, not binding. That said, it is a 
significant gesture from an emerging economy and is intended to pressurise the 
developed world into adopting deep cuts. Half of Brazil's proposed cuts will 
come from a reduction in deforestation, while the remaining 20% relates to 
industry and farming.

Agreement on limiting deforestation should also be part of a successful 
conference. Chopping down forests in Brazil, Indonesia and the Democratic 
Republic of Congo is responsible for at least 20% of harmful greenhouse gases.

But for many living in poor countries, logging is a vital source of income and 
there is intense pressure from giant businesses to cleared land to grow crops.

Negotiators will attempt to formulate a system which pays countries and 
regions to maintain their forests compensating them for loss of income. The 
crucial issue will be the shape of that mechanism.
However, the onus will be on rich countries to take the lead.

The European Union estimates the bill for providing a clean tech 
infrastructure for the developing world which has done next to nothing to 
contribute to climate change could be as much as $100bn each year. It has 
called for a fund to help poorer nations. The EU has promised to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 20% from 1990 levels by 2020 and to raise this 
level to 30% if a global deal is reached in Copenhagen.

But developing countries insist even that is not enough. They demand the rich 
world cuts emissions by 40% by 2020. This is a huge decrease and one that only 
Norway has achieved.

Developing countries could walk out of the Copenhagen talks if they believe 
rich countries commit themselves to greater cuts in greenhouse gas emissions.

The smart money is on a political agreement in Copenhagen which will provide a 
timetable to complete a new treaty in 2010. The world has too much to lose to 
tolerate a complete breakdown though this cannot be ruled out.
 