
A Giacometti story: in 1939, at the outbreak of war, Alberto Giacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti> started making figures 
from memory. But each time he tried to create the image of someone known or 
once seen, not from the life, the figure ended up smaller and smaller.

The problem grew worse when he left occupied Paris. Over and again, back in 
his native Switzerland, Giacometti would begin the same sculpture of a woman 
glimpsed on the Boulevard Saint-Michel and watch it shrink beneath his fingers. 
Still he persisted. At the war's end, when he finally boarded the train back to 
France, the works of those years fitted entirely into a handful of matchboxes.

At Compton Verney, in a rare and transforming show of Giacometti's sculptures, 
paintings and drawings, you can see four minuscule women only a fraction bigger 
than those needle-sized figures. Perched on top of a pedestal the size of a 
high chair, they appear as remote, perceptually, as wrens on a wire or walkers 
on distant cliffs.

They don't walk - women stand, men stride in Giacometti - but somehow a 
febrile motion, something like anxious conversation, is communicated purely 
through the line of their bodies. And it is not much more than a black metal 
line, pencil-fine, that doesn't even develop into expressive limbs. Yet with 
the faintest twist, the slightest irregularity, the figures are given 
individual character. Everything that distinguishes one person from another - 
the slope of the shoulders, the tilt of the head - is marvellously condensed in 
miniature: intimate knowledge is somehow combined with the sense of viewing 
far-off figures.

Thin men and women, elongated, improbably fragile: Giacometti's distortions 
are a byword in modern sculpture, as instantly recognisable as a Henry Moore 
hole. But his figures, as few others, irresistibly raise the question of their 
own form over and again - why did he shape them like this? You don't wonder why 
Rodin's Burghers of Calais are knotted in an agonised ring, chained by fate, or 
why the Easter Island statues are so awesomely vast. But these skinny 
striplings, no arms, no knees, no flesh, their dimensions no fuller, almost, 
than a pencil drawing, not quite portraits, not quite types, nearly 
dematerialising and yet heavily rooted to the spot - is this how Giacometti 
sees the human race?

'If you sit for me, you become a perfect stranger, even if I know you.' So 
says Giacometti, one of art's great self-explainers, filmed in the silvery 
gloom of his studio. Watch the reel at Compton Verney and count how often the 
artist speaks of his total failures; one man sat for him 400 times and still 
the final sculpture couldn't summon the sitter.

This is Giacometti the existentialist: how can any sculptor know, and make 
known to anybody else, the being who sits before them? Mankind is unknowable, 
unbearably solitary and complex, and Giacometti, according to this received 
version, is the Sartre of sculpture.

But look at the work and you sense he must have meant something else. Figures 
in groups, isolated figures, portrait heads: they are always enthrallingly 
handled, their surfaces still bearing the subtle impression of Giacometti's 
fingers, as mutable as human faces that may change the next moment. 'Art is the 
residue of vision,' he said, and this goes to a central truth of his art, and 
his subject: the problem of looking - of getting any proper correspondence 
between seeing a person and describing that experience - which becomes the 
intense pleasure, for us, of viewing.

Take the portrait of Giacometti's brother Diego, on permanent display at Tate 
Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern>. It is 
magnetically strange and sends the viewer in circles. From the front, the long 
black figure is nearly as thin as a blade, the sides flattened, throwing all 
the emphasis on the profile. Here, Diego emerges like an ink drawing, still 
glistening, his sharp nose and high forehead quickening into life with 
tremendous force, which, in turn, drives you back to consult the front. Where 
the intense psychology of the face flashes back at you anew, compressed in its 
few fierce centimetres.

Diego is practically anamorphic, like the famous skull among the bric-a-brac 
in Holbein's The Ambassadors. You feel you have to stand at a particular angle 
to catch the whole of him and yet you never will. At Tate Modern, moreover, the 
sheer pressure of crowds prevents you from seeing the sculpture from many 
viewpoints, still less at a distance (great art blocked by the size of its 
public). The ideal viewing conditions for Giacometti, or so it seems, are 
probably at Compton Verney.

This is an almost perfect show. Like the figures themselves, it is slender and 
silent. There are just enough works to give you the essence of Giacometti's art 
and plenty of room to give the sense of figures lost in space, looking out to 
sea like those Easter Island statues. Reduced, withdrawing into their own 
essence, they keep their distance even at your approach. One of the women in 
The Forest - that beautiful stand of figures, rooted like plants, tall and slim 
as Monet's poplars - shivers slightly at every passing footfall, yet remains 
steadfast and paradoxically weighty.

But Giacometti liked to imagine his sculptures stationed on a street corner or 
crossing a piazza, out there in the real world. And The Forest itself, its 
trees transformed into people who have stopped motionless in their tracks, 
makes one think again about how he viewed the world and how his world should be 
viewed.

They walk tall, his figures, no matter how tiny and exiguous they are. Even in 
the throng of Tate Modern they stand out. Like the paintings, in which faces 
resolve out of misty blurs, but resolve with extraordinary clarity of likeness, 
these dark sculptures draw your vision into them like black holes. Perhaps we 
should see them through a milling crowd, a rival crowd of their own; always 
alone, but always alike. As the subject of one of Giacometti's greatest 
portraits wrote: 'The resemblance of his figures to each other seems to me to 
repeat that precious point at which human beings are confronted with the most 
irreducible fact: the loneliness of being exactly equivalent to all others.'
 