
‘The end of an era’

It was a warm summer’s afternoon in South Melbourne. The Albert Park Lake 
sparkled in the sun and the city skyline shimmered in the distance. Young men 
filed into Middle Park in baggy colourful t-shirts and shorts, as was the style 
at the time, while the elderly Greek men wore sunglasses with their usual 
Sunday shirt and slacks. The blue and white of South Melbourne Hellas was 
complemented by the familiarsound of Lefteri’s trumpet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGerZzrg_QI> and the sweet smell of souvlaki. 
It was a time to say goodbye. October 23, 1994, 20 years ago to the day, was 
the opening round of the 19th season of the National Soccer League, and the 
final game at Middle Park, the cradle of football in Australia.

Middle Park, or Oval 18 as it was once known, sat on an old landfill site in 
between the Albert Park Lake and the St Kilda railway line, and 18,000 fans 
could cram inside for a big game. Built on land that was once shared with 
cyclists, the ground traced the shape of a velodrome, and a tin shed grandstand 
with wooden seats faced northwest towards the lake. Spectators were free to 
wander around the ground to select the best vantage point, but from the 
bleachers you could see all the way to the city. When it was full, as it was 
for the final match between SouthMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> and Heidelberg, it was a 
fortress.

“It was a Greek derby, but although there was intense rivalry between the 
clubs there wasn’t any nastiness,” remembers Francis Awaritefe, who was left on 
the bench for South Melbourne by coach Frank Arok.

South Melbourne went ahead after just three minutes through Con Boutsianis, 
but he went off injured half an hour later, to be replaced by Awaritefe. 
Minutes after Boutsianis left the field and just before half-time, South 
midfielder Jason Polak handled the ball on the goalline. Suddenly, South were 
back on level terms and down to 10 men. To add insult to injury, it was an 
ex-South man Peter ‘Gus’ Tsolakis who converted the penalty for Heidelberg.

“Tsolakis celebrated like a dickhead,” remembers South Melbourne fan Paul 
Touliatos. “He was celebrating in front of the stands, tapping his chest and 
gesturing towards us in the crowd.”

South Melbourne didn’t often lose to Heidelberg, and the pressure mounted when 
Mehmet Durakovic missed a penalty that would have given them the lead. “Teams 
were always intimidated coming to Middle Park because they knew that South 
Melbourne had such a tremendous advantage towards the end of the game,” 
explains Kimon Taliadoros, who played with South from 1987 to 1992. “Even when 
we were down in games we would often rescue a point simply because we had that 
crowd behind us.”

It wasn’t until 1993 that Taliadoros fully understood just how influential the 
atmosphere was at Middle Park. “I could hear the insults. Coming back as a 
Marconi player I came to realise how irresistible South Melbourne was in the 
second half with that home support. The intensity and momentum created at 
Middle Park was incredible. It was so intimate, it was a cauldron of emotion 
and pressure. It was a state of mind, it was like riding a wave of emotion, and 
that wave powered South Melbourne.”

Coming on for Boutsianis, it was Awaritefe who changed the game for South 
Melbourne. “I went on and I played out of my skin,” he says. Awaritefe put the 
home side ahead after half-time with a tremendous goal from an acute angle, and 
wheeled away to the crowd with his trademark celebration, his dreadlocks flying 
wildly as his legs whirred up and down on the spot.

Ivan Kelic scored the final two goals for South Melbourne to complete a famous 
second-half comeback, and Middle Park was given the farewell it deserved. “You 
had a sense that something historic had happened,” explains Awaritefe. “Middle 
Park just had a magic and a history that the others didn’t. It was a privilege 
to be able to play the last game at that ground. I remember people running on, 
hugging and thanking us. It was a big deal that we didn’t lose that last game.”

“That final day it just forced you to think about all those times, and the 
fact you weren’t going to be able to show people the grandstand and the 
dressing rooms and the history,” says the current Socceroos coachAnge 
Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou>, who was on 
the bench as the assistant to Arok. “It was the end of an era.”

A place to belong
 Friendships were forged between those who became Australians at Middle Park. 
Francis Awaritefe is third from right on the back row, Paul Touliatos is second 
left on the front row. Photograph: Paul Touliatos 
Middle Park was demolished as a result of state government planning and 
opportunism by the South Melbourne board in late 1994 but by 1989 the ground 
was already in a state of disrepair. “The toilets stunk, and the social club 
was tiny,” says Touliatos. “It was pretty run down and needed a lot of work.” A 
federal government grant was initially meant to redevelop the stadium, however 
these plans were interrupted in December 1993 when the Victorian Liberal 
government controversially bought the Australian Grand Prix to Melbourne, and 
announced that a new race track would be built at Albert Park.

As Jill Barnard and Jenny Keating note in People’s Playground: A History of 
the Albert Park, motor racing was not a new phenomenon at the park. Just as in 
the 1950s, the sport promised to bring much needed revenue for the park’s 
management. However, local residents were outraged by the imposition of a noisy 
racetrack on crown land, while South Melbourne were told that their home needed 
to be demolished. The place where Middle Park once stood is now a pit lane, and 
although junior fields bearing the names of Ange Postecoglou, Alan Davidson and 
Paul Wade still surround the site, there is little to show for the place which 
nurtured successive generations of Australian footballers.

If history is written by the victors, perhaps it is fitting that Middle Park 
was bulldozed to make way for another sporting event. From the early days, the 
ground had to be fought for by football people in the face of local opposition. 
When the state Labor government tried to enclose the ground for football in the 
1950s, they were met with protests against the siphoning off of community land, 
despite the fact that both cricket and Australian Rules had their own enclosed 
grounds at Albert Park.

Furthermore, the plan by South Melbourne Hellas and Hakoah to erect a 
grandstand was criticised by a 1961 report into the management of the park. 
“All kinds of exotic exercises have been introduced into Victoria, and few have 
flourished to the same extent as cricket and Australian Rules football”, wrote 
Oliver James Gillard, QC, the author of the report, who noted that football “is 
comparatively novel to our country … because of the influence of persons from 
overseas.”

Although Middle Park had been home to football since the 1880s, the great 
Australian chauvinism towards the game and its participants remained prevalent. 
“Nothing can draw them [immigrants] from their national games,” read an article 
in the Argus newspaper in 1954. “What they do has no effect upon Australian 
Rules. What does matter, however, is what their children do.”

In Victoria at least, assimilation meant speaking English, finding a job, and 
dropping soccer for Australian Rules football. During the 1960s anti-soccer 
slogans were daubed at Middle Park, the grandstand was set on fire and the 
goalposts were chopped down.

In this context, the fight for Middle Park was important not only for the 
co-tenants Hakoah and South Melbourne, but for soccer in Victoria. “There must 
be a united front from all Australian football clubs to halt the soccer 
movement,”commented <http://neososmos.blogspot.com.au/2012/05/1954.html> Harold 
Snook, the secretary of the Victorian Football Association, in 1954. “After 
all, the grounds and their amenities were built by the pioneers of the 
Australian game, yet soccer is just stepping in and taking it all away.” As 
other soccer clubs, often backed by immigrants, were bullied by Australian 
Rules football into marginal areas of outer Melbourne, Middle Park remained 
soccer’s refuge in the heart of the city. If Albert Park is “the lungs of 
Melbourne”, then Middle Park provided the crucial oxygen for the world game.

In the face of often xenophobic opposition, friendships were forged between 
those who became Australians at Middle Park. As an Englishmen of African 
descent, Awaritefe remembers being welcomed into the community. “Middle Park 
was open and it was accessible. The openness of the ground lent itself to a 
diverse support base,” he says. “They couldn’t do enough for you. A lot of the 
guys I ended up hanging around with were Greek, and we’d go out to a restaurant 
or bars and if the owner was a South supporter we wouldn’t have to pay. It was 
just incredible the generosity.”
 Jimmy Armstrong (far right, bottom row) and Michael Mandalis (second from 
left standing) forged a friendship at Middle Park. Photograph: Jimmy Armstrong 
Michael Mandalis and Jimmy Armstrong played for both Hakoah and South 
Melbourne Hellas at Middle Park during the 1960s and 1970s, and have remained 
friends ever since. I meet them at Jimmy’s house in Ivanhoe, where we pore over 
old black and white photos and newspaper clippings from scrapbooks. “Good on 
you, Jimmy! This is like a museum,” grins Mandalis as he finds old photos of 
himself. “Look at my hair, my goatee! You better enjoy yours while you’ve still 
got it” he says, winking at me.

Jimmy and Michael are an odd pair. Jimmy is a tall, thin Scotsman, with a neat 
pageboy haircut and a quiet, no-nonsense demeanour. Michael is short, squat and 
dark, with a moustache and white hair as wild as his stories. As he recalls the 
goals he scored at Middle Park, he rises from his seat for dramatic effect. “I 
loved to dance, man,” he says as he swivels his hips and drops his shoulder. Of 
his many tales, the best is about meeting the legendary Indigenous activist and 
soccer playerCharles Perkins <http://sesasport.com/?p=1591>. “We became very 
good friends because he thought I was Aboriginal,” he explains with a 
mischievous grin. “He said to me ‘what mob are you from, boy?’ I said ‘I’m from 
themalaka tribe’.”

The son of the chef to the King of Egypt, Mandalis arrived in Australia in 
1958 from Egypt via Israel and Greece. “I went to Prahran when I arrived, and 
they were waiting for me,” he says. “If I went to the Prahran Market with my 
mum and spoke Greek because she didn’t speak English … The wog problem upset me 
a lot back then. I really wanted to make my parents welcome in a very racial 
situation.”

Football became the bridge into Australia for the Mandalis family, and as 
Michael tells it, he turned down an offer from Chelsea in order to stay with 
the club. “It was the wog game, and I was a wog. How could you change this face 
of mine back then? The migrants suffered, they went to factories where they 
were called wogs and dagoes, so the weekend when you played for South Melbourne 
Hellas, they belonged somewhere. I survived to win five premierships with 
Hellas. But my biggest achievement was to put a smile on the face of the wogs, 
to put a smile on the face of those workers.”

Two of those workers were Postecoglou’s mum and dad, who emigrated to 
Australia from Greece to give their children a better life. “It certainly 
wasn’t a better life for them, because all I can remember is them working,” 
says Postecoglou. “My dad was a cabinet maker and my mum was a machinist. Mum 
would work in the factory and at home at night while dad was always doing 
overtime. Football became my social connector with my dad, because that’s the 
only time I got to see him.

“You know, it was all part of my dad’s plan. He came from a foreign country, 
he didn’t know the culture of the place, he didn’t understand a lot of the 
things that happened here, and he wanted me to have the same values as him. At 
South he knew who my friends were going to be and what my values were going to 
be.

“It went beyond football. That place moulded me as a person. I grew up playing 
at the grounds around Middle Park. You know I only have a few close friends, 
and many of them were made there.”

As a kid, one of Postecoglou’s favourite players was Jimmy Armstrong, who is 
still spoken of in reverential tones by those who watched him play at Middle 
Park. Transformed from a midfielder to a striker by coach Manny Poulikakos, 
Jimmy found a new position and a new home in Australia. He remembers crowds of 
people coming to watch the team train, and the generosity of the Greeks who 
adopted him. “As we’d walk into the dressing rooms they’d say ‘here you are 
Jimmy’, and I’d end up with $20 a goal. It was unbelievable.”

The field of dreams
 Middle Park in its last days. Photograph: Paul Touliatos 
It’s not just South Melbourne players who remember the allure of Middle Park. 
“What I always admired about Hellas was the crowd,” says the former Socceroo 
Hammy McMeecham, who played with Melbourne Croatia in the 1960s. “Its size, its 
passion, its noise. I would have loved to have played there every second week 
with that crowd behind me for at least a season or two.”

“I remember when we were at Melbourne Croatia, Ivan Kelic used to rave about 
Dougie Brown,” says Awaritefe, “that was his hero! When I went to South 
Melbourne I was told about all the great stories of Jimmy Armstrong, Charlie 
Egan, Alan Davidson and Dougie Brown.”

Combined with the vociferous supporters, many former players believe the small 
dimensions of Middle Park gave South Melbourne a great advantage. “The crowd 
was really really close, almost on top of you,” says Awaritefe. “It was a 
lovely little ground, a proper football ground.There was the tradition of 
terracing where people could stand. It adds to the energy and the atmosphere 
when the fans are standing.”

“A goalkeeper with a good strong shot could virtually kick it to the other 
end,” says Armstrong, “You felt like you were part of the crowd, that’s how 
close you were.”

“Middle Park during the day was like the old lady,” says Mandalis. “But come 
the weekend it was like an exploding volcano. The crowd, the amazing voices, 
the arguments, the roar. It was like an eruption. The thing was built like a 
mouth of a volcano, and the noise would carry as far as St Kilda!”

In 1966, Con Nestoridis, one of Greece’s greatest players, came to Middle Park 
as captain/coach of South Melbourne Hellas. “Beckham was nothing, man,” says 
Mandalis who, like many players of his generation, raves about Nestoridis’ 
ability to score from corners.

“There was a corner kick, and Nestoridis scored directly from the corner,” 
explains Armstrong. “The referee blew his whistle and said take it again. So 
what did he do? He scored again. Do you remember it?”

“Yeah,” replies Mandalis with a wistful smile. “I was playing that game. When 
I was a young kid in Egypt, I went to see Greece play Egypt, and who was 
playing for Greece? Con Nestoridis. We were never accepted as Egyptians, so we 
stayed Greek. I’m sitting with my dad, and I’m watching this guy and thinking, 
I want to be like him!

“And then, in 1966, to have him come over to Australia and I’m playing next to 
him! I play No10, he plays No8. I’m there getting goosebumps, man. He showed me 
how to run with the ball, he said, ‘don’t look down, you know where the ball 
is. You haven’t been playing all this time to not know where the fucken ball 
is!’”

Mandalis stands up from his chair and in slow motion imitates running with the 
ball with his head in the air. “I learned so much from him. That was the best 
feeling I ever had at Middle Park. To watch my hero, and then come to Australia 
to play with him. Unbelievable. I was 21, he was 37. That was my best moment.”

Nestoridis was one of several football luminaries to grace Middle Park. In 
1989, Hungarian legend Ferenc Puskas came to coach South Melbourne in the NSL. 
Paul Touliatos remembers trying to get as close to him as possible in the 
stadium. “How often do you get that opportunity? He was a figurehead, he was 
like an emperor.”

Training sessions with Puskas were all ball work and no fitness, team meals 
were steak and consomme, and the approach to the game was ‘you score six, we 
score seven’. “For him it was all about ball mastery and calisthenics,” 
remembers Taliadoros, who says Puskas introduced them to the 4-3-3 formation. 
“Puskas liked to see one-on-one contests and Ange Postecoglou, who was the 
overlapping left-back, was particularly effective at Middle Park. He was 
tremendous the way he got down the left side. He was one of the guys who was 
able to generate momentum and enthusiasm from the crowd by beating his defender.

“It [4-3-3] was a complete anathema to us at the time,” continues Taliadoros. 
“He was different from a structural perspective with strikers. I played on the 
right as a right winger, and it took me a while to understand how to play high 
and wide. We used to dominate possession against most sides, particularly at 
Middle Park.”

Indeed the knowledge transfer at Middle Park and its legacy for Australian 
football is nothing short of incredible. Perhaps more than any other player, 
Postecoglou – then affectionately known as Angie – was a product of Middle 
Park. Hewatched 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/a-league/its-not-you-david-its-the-gimmick-20121122-29ss5.html>
 superstars Malcolm ‘Supermac’ McDonald and Charlie George play there in 1977 
with his dad in the first season of the NSL, and he was assistant coach to Arok 
for that final game in 1994.

Postecoglou’s playing debut in 1984 occurred in drastic circumstances. Alan 
Davidson, the South Melbourne left-back, had swallowed his tongue after a heavy 
challenge. While he was shaking on the ground, a spectator jumped the fence and 
rushed to his aid. Davidson literally had his life saved at Middle Park, and as 
he was rushed to hospital, his replacement was a skinny young Angie Postecoglou.

“I was only a young player but I ended up being captain of the club,” explains 
Postecoglou. “When Puskas came he didn’t speak a lot of English but his Greek 
was OK, so he’d go through me a lot of the time as an intermediary with a lot 
of the boys.

“I’d often pick him up from his house and drive him to the ground. I spent a 
lot of time chatting about football with him – people talk a lot about me being 
an attacking coach and I think that was where the seed was sown. I loved it. He 
was so much more open than the previous coaches who were so regimented and 
structured.

“He was so humble that you’d quickly forget that he was once one of the 
world’s best players. He had no tickets on himself at all. The biggest lessons 
I learned in life were from those days”

‘Because we’ve been here’

I first met Paul Touliatos at the Cascade Hotel in Hobart in September. He, 
along with many other traveling fans, was celebrating South Melbourne’s victory 
over South Hobart FC in the second-tier National Premier Leagues preliminary 
final. As we entered the pub the rugged, hard-as-nails Tasmanian men at the bar 
turned around quickly to size us up, then slowly away, returning to their beer 
and conversation. It was the typical wary response of smalltown barflies to 
having their local overrun by dozens of strangers from the mainland.

The gold earring of Paul’s youth has gone the way of his once-thick hair, the 
loud shirts have been replaced by a more sensible polo, and these days a blue 
South Melbourne cap faces forwards rather than backwards on his head. When he’s 
not wearing his sunglasses, his eyes sparkle and smile wider than his mouth. 
And he grins a lot as we chat. The conversation at our table is typical state 
league football fare: giggling at insane internet messageboard arguments, 
recounting the ridiculous stories of the NSL, recalling the great players. “We 
got long memories, man,” Paul chuckles as he remembers Kimon Taliadoros’ return 
to Middle Park.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhUtzXxH0DQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhUtzXxH0DQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhUtzXxH0DQ&media=>
Paul’s uncle Con has been a South supporter since the days of Nestoridis, 
Armstrong and Mandalis, and he was the one who took him to games as a little 
kid. With South Melbourne Hellas running through his veins, Paul can’t bring 
himself to support the new franchises Melbourne Victory or Melbourne City. “I 
don’t see it,” he says, shaking his head. “I mean, you pick a club, you’ve just 
got to stick with it. Why? Because we’ve been here ... people get married, they 
get divorced, but they always keep their same footy club don’t they? They never 
change their clubs.”

Paul has never been to an A-League game, but he’s only missed three South 
Melbourne games since they were kicked out of the national league in 2004. “You 
can’t abandon your club and mates,” he says. “If I abandoned the club, if my 
brother did, if all these guys did, there wouldn’t be a club left. Who would be 
here? You have to come back. They gave us four titles and so much joy over the 
years, it’s just like repaying it by sticking around.”

There is something wonderfully Nick Hornby-esque 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gGv8S1nqzdk> about his dedication to South in 
such trying circumstances. With no system of promotion or relegation in 
Australia, I put it to him that he might be slightly mad. “Maybe,” he replies, 
“maybe I am crazy in a way. You’ve gotta be a bit nuts to come week in week 
out.”

After Middle Park was bulldozed, South Melbourne relocated to the old Lake 
Oval, just a 10-minute walk across Albert Park. Surrounded by an athletics 
track, Lake Oval - or Lakeside Stadium as it is now called - is still home to 
South Melbourne. Embedded at the base of the grandstand is a plaque, which was 
originally laid at Middle Park in 1961. Carrying the names of Messrs Maramas, 
Zola, Drew and Keneally, the plaque is a testament to the multicultural spirit 
of football at Albert Park.

“I knew what was done was for the progress of the game, and we were going to 
get a bigger stadium,” says Mandalis. “We thought something big was going to 
happen, and it did for a while. We can always build and destroy, but we carry 
the stories of Middle Park into the new ground. The club is now run by kids who 
used to come with their parents and watch Jimmy and me play.”

South Melbourne have a 40-year licence at Lakeside Stadium, which director Tom 
Kalas describes as “basically ownership”. This new stadium, along with the 
training grounds at Albert Park, is the centrepiece of the club’s push to get 
back into the A-League. A new social club and bistro is currently being built 
underneath the stadium as a revenue driver for the club, while a Legends Bar 
will house the memories of Middle Park.

In 2009, Kalas began a reform process at South Melbourne. “We had to market 
ourselves to something bigger,” he explains. “We asked FFA if they were 
comfortable with us, and they are. We were approached to bid for a licence.

“65% of our membership is non-Greek, and they all have voting rights. We are 
not an ethnic club that plays footy on the side. We are a football club. We 
have a women’s side, we have juniors, we have an NPL side, we have our own TV 
show <http://www.c31.org.au/program/view/program/smfc-tv>.”

Expansion will be back on the agenda for the next television rights deal in 
2017, and FFA chief executive David Gallop says the A-League will “fish where 
the fish are”. The major centres along the Eastern Seaboard are the target, and 
South Melbourne know that they are well-positioned. And this time, there is a 
rare spirit of mutual trust and understanding with head office following the 
leading role Kalas and the board at South Melbourne played in the establishment 
of the NPL in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/dec/09/national-premier-leagues-victoria>
 last year.

When the South Sydney Rabbitohs won the 2014 rugby league grand final, their 
first since being kicked out of the competition, more than a few South 
Melbourne fans wondered if they’d ever get their own chance to right the wrongs 
of history. “We want to play in the top flight,” says Touliatos. “We deserve a 
chance. A chance. That’s all we want. We said that before Victory came in, we 
said that before City came in, and we still didn’t get it.”

However, unlike in previous years where South Melbourne have tried to reenter 
the national league 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/football/a-league/cross-flags-a-league-pitch/story-e6frf4hl-1111117255049>
, there is now a precedent for their bid. The expansion success of the Western 
Sydney Wanderers over the last two seasons was predicated largely on history. 
It was marketed as“the newest, oldest club” 
<http://www.footballaustralia.com.au/gorman-opinion-display/The-newest-oldest-club-in-Australian-football/47869>
, while the first chief executive Lyall Gorman spoke eloquently and frequently 
about the importance of football in the region dating back to the 1880s. The 
now-famousPoznan <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXLT-SvzH9Q> performed by the 
fans in the 80th minute is a tribute to that heritage. The community was 
encouraged to look back in order to imagine the future.

Can the same process be replicated with South Melbourne? Albert Park has 
hosted football since 1884, from the pre-war English, Irish and Scottish 
immigrants to the post-war arrivals from southern Europe. Clubs and players of 
all hues have played football at Albert Park, either at the Middle Park ground 
or at Lakeside. Where the AFL has long since abandoned Albert Park, there is an 
uninterrupted lineage stretching back to the genesis of soccer in Australia.

“Mate, I think if they do it the right way, they should go back to the 
A-League as a complete Australian side,” says Mandalis. “South Melbourne was a 
bunch of English migrants, then the Greeks, then Australians. Now it’s just 
South Melbourne football club. History blends into the future, and that will 
take us to other places. The Greeks played their part, now let the 
multicultural side take it back. What other club has this culture?”

 * With special thanks to Paul Mavroudis 
<http://southmelbournefc.blogspot.com.au/>.  