
It was 1955 and I was a lanky 15-year-old, on holiday in south-west France 
with my parents. On the way back to our hotel one day my mother said to my 
father: “David looks like aGiacometti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/giacometti> figure; why don’t we get 
Giacometti to do some drawings of him?” My father thought it was a great idea, 
so I was taken to Paris by train the next day, to his studio.

My parents had first met Giacometti in 1949, when they bought two pieces from 
him. They’d kept in touch over the years, so it didn’t seem at all strange to 
visit. His studio was small and dilapidated, and overcrowded with large 
sculptures at various stages of completion. I was extremely nervous about the 
whole thing: I’d gone from theLascaux caves 
<http://www.lascaux.culture.fr/?lng=en#/fr/00.xml> to being drawn by a great 
artist within the space of 24 hours. He answered the door in a jacket and tie, 
looking not at all as I, an English public schoolboy, expected an artist to 
look. My parents left and he began to draw. For the next two hours there was 
silence. He spoke very little English and I was too shy to utter any of my 
limited French. Occasionally he’d put his head in his hands and groan.

By the time my parents came back, there were five beautiful drawings. My 
father decided he wanted to buy three, but Giacometti refused, telling us he 
wouldn’t sell them because they were no good. My father insisted on paying, but 
he wouldn’t take a penny. After much to-ing and fro-ing, Giacometti’s 
girlfriend, Annette, came into the room and after a chat about life it emerged 
that, more than anything else in the world, Annette wanted a mackintosh from 
Marks & Spencer. So Giacometti struck a deal: my parents would be given the 
three drawings and, when we got back to England, they would send a mackintosh 
to Annette by way of payment.

He spoke very little English and I was too shy to try French. Occasionally 
he’d put his head in his hands and groan

I met with Giacometti a few more times in subsequent years. He was the most 
fascinating man, a respected artist who’d come from quite a comfortable 
background, but was most at ease in his rundown studio or a cheap hotel with 
just a notebook for company. It was very clear he didn’t want middle-class 
comforts. They were a distraction. It was a bleak setting, but in that room he 
created the most beautiful works. He was on an endless search for perfection 
and would make no issue of destroying pieces that weren’t up to scratch. He 
even asked my father to return the drawings of me “to be finished”, but it was 
known that he’d often do that with works he was unhappy with and then never 
return them.

I was recently going through some papers when I discovered a bill from 
Aquascutum for a mackintosh, with a letter to my parents from Annette. She 
thanked them for the “most beautiful thing in the world” – the coat – and made 
a point of saying how much “Alberto” loved it, too.•

Alberto Giacometti: A Line through Time 
<http://scva.ac.uk/img/uploads/press/Alberto-Giacometti-Press-Release-FINAL.pdf>
 runs from 23 April-29 August at the Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, 
University of East Anglia, Norwich
 