
Adrien Brody <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody> is not such a 
good actor that he can stifle his yawns. Perhaps it's the plate of scones and 
clotted cream he has inhaled during the course of our interview that has 
exhausted him. Or perhaps it's the fact he has been talking about his new film, 
Hollywoodland, to various journalists for two days now. Or perhaps it's me. 
'I'm just tired,' he mumbles from behind his napkin, as his watery green eyes 
search the bar of the Dorchester hotel for the not one, but two PR people who 
accompanied us to the table and assured him that they would be back to pick him 
up within the hour.

His mood is apparent when we get into the lift down to the bar. Brody's 
surprisingly broad shoulders are hunched, his baseball cap pulled down so low 
that there are only shadows where his eyes should be and he is bemoaning the 
stupidity of the questions he had just been asked at a Q&A session. 'One woman 
wanted to know how I lost so much weight in preparation for The Pianist,' he 
groans. 'So I told her what I ate and she said, "So it was a protein diet," and 
I said, "No, it wasn't. Did you not listen when I just told you what I ate?"' 
As the doors ping open, I make a quick note to self: Do not, whatever you do, 
ask Brody how he lost all that weight (30lb) for The Pianist.

Brody can certainly be fierce when he wants to be. I make the mistake of 
reminding him of something he said just before the release of King Kong last 
year - 'I have been looking for this kind of iconic leading man guy for years, 
but they are hard to find.' Does he, I wonder, still feel like he's looking for 
those roles? 'I am a leading man,' he points out.

To be fair, he does try to be accommodating (insofar as he answers my 
questions), but it is obviously something that doesn't come very easily to him. 
He lacks the smooth-talking, soundbite suaveness that defines so many of his 
contemporaries. Would you like to talk about your next movie, Manolete (in 
which he plays legendary matador Manuel Rodriguez Sanchez), I ask at one point. 
'I guess,' he says, 'but I'd rather talk about Hollywoodland.'

Right. So Hollywoodland is the first feature film from Allen Coulter, a 
director who made his name in television and whose credits include The Sopranos 
and Six Feet Under. Set in Hollywood in the Fifties, it centres around the 
real-life story of the death of George Reeves (played by Ben Affleck), an actor 
best known for his portrayal of the heroic Man of Steel on TV's Adventures of 
Superman. Brody plays Louis Simo, a slapdash private detective who is hired by 
the actor's grieving mother to prove that his death - from a single gunshot 
wound - was not suicide, but murder. Its film noir view of the cynical movie 
industry and the studio system, of the relative importance of truth versus 
reputation, impressed the judges at this year's Venice Film Festival (they 
awarded Ben Affleck the Best Actor award). But Brody's performance, true to 
form, is also intensely watchable; there's something behind those hangdog 
handsome eyes that defies you not to be drawn in.

Brody is an actor down to the tiniest tick in his cheek. It consumes him, 
defines him even. In the past he has been compared to a young Al Pacino - all 
hooked-nose, hollow-eyed intensity and commitment to his 'craft' - but he has 
also carved out his own, unique niche (to that Pacino comparison, he replied, 
'I'm a young Adrien Brody, thanks'). The characters he plays are usually loners 
- isolated, complicated and often subversive. He was a bisexual punk in Spike 
Lee's Summer of Sam, a half-witted outcast in M Night Shyamalan's The Village 
and an amnesiac war veteran in John Maybury's The Jacket. But most famously of 
all he played Wladyslaw Szpilman, a Polish Jewish pianist who, against all the 
odds, clung on to life in the Warsaw ghetto during the Second World War. His 
startling performance in Roman Polanski's The Pianist secured his place in 
cinema history; he became the first American actor to be awarded a Cesar (the 
French equivalent of an Oscar) and, at 29, knocked Richard Dreyfuss (30 when he 
won for The Goodbye Girl) off his post to become the youngest ever recipient of 
the Best Actor Academy Award.

When Brody bounded up on to the stage to receive his Oscar in 2003, he grabbed 
Halle Berry, who was presenting it to him, bent her backwards and kissed her 
passionately. 'Bet you didn't know that was in the gift bag,' he teased 
immediately afterwards. The following year, he played on the joke, spritzing 
his mouth with breath spray before presenting the Best Actress award to 
Charlize Theron. The same twinkling mischief twitches around the corners of 
Brody's mouth when I ask him where he keeps his gold statuette. 'I don't have 
it,' he smirks. For a moment, I glimpse the man behind the mantle. Where is it? 
I wonder, hoping I might have cracked him. 'I'm not going to tell you where it 
is,' he says, resolutely not looking me in the eye. I can practically hear the 
visor of his professional helmet clunk back down as he fixes me with a serious 
stare. 'I have it in spirit, which is all that really matters.'

The road leading to recognition was not a smooth one for Brody. Many thought 
the young Oscar winner had come from nowhere, but he had in fact made more than 
20 films before Polanski cast him in The Pianist. He was born in Woodhaven, 
Queens, in 1973, the only son of Elliot Brody, a history teacher of 
Polish-Jewish descent and Sylvia Plachy, a Hungarian-born photojournalist. It 
was a creative, questioning household. A 'sensitive' young boy, Brody would 
often accompany his mother on assignments. Aged six, he hung around Timothy 
Leary's apartment while his mother photographed him for The Village Voice. As 
he got older, Brody fell victim to the pressures of his 'not-so-kind' 
environment and started to hang out with the local troublemakers who were into 
drag racing. Quick to spot a potential problem, his parents encouraged him to 
attend acting classes. 'I liked it instantly. I felt I was good at it,' Brody 
remembers. Enthused enough to enrol at the LaGuardia High School of Music and 
Art and Performing Arts (immoralised in Fame), he began to focus on his acting. 
To make money outside school hours he would put on regular performances as 'The 
Amazing Adrien', a magician at children's parties.

'I guess it was my gateway into acting,' he has said. 'I enjoyed creating 
illusions and pulling the wool over people's eyes.'

His first acting job - as an orphan in a Midwestern pioneer family in TV drama 
Home at Last - came when he was just 15. But his big break - as a 
Depression-era delinquent in Steven Soderbergh's King of the Hill - didn't come 
until five years later. Even after that, Brody continued to skirt around the 
periphery of fame for a further five years. When, in 1998, the call came from 
director Terrence Malick, it looked as though his fortunes had been reversed. 
On paper, the part of Corporal Fife in The Thin Red Line was a dream come true. 
He spent six months filming in the Australian outback alongside acting heroes 
such as Sean Penn and, just before the film's release, the birth of a new star 
was announced when Brody appeared on the cover of Vanity Fair. It wasn't until 
he went with his parents to an early screening that Brody's dream turned into a 
nightmare when he realised that his character had been all but totally cut out 
of the story. He has always been honest about how it made him feel. 'I was 
publically humiliated,' he remembers. 'It was a very painful, difficult 
experience. I was 24 years old and it sucked.'

In the past, Brody has likened the Thin Red Line experience to that of a 
real-life soldier. 'That movie was my experience of being at war. I'd given 
everything to the general and my country and, when I returned home, I was let 
go.' Needless to say, he will have channelled those feelings of rejection on 
screen. For Brody, life is a toolbox for his work; every emotion he has ever 
experienced is valuable by virtue of the fact that it can be used. 'I do 
everything in my power to feel a connection with a person that I have no 
connection to,' he deadpans. 'Whatever it takes.'

Little wonder, then, that Brody says he feels older than his 33 years. His 
commitment started relatively gently; when he was preparing to play a strike 
organiser in Ken Loach's Bread and Roses in 2000, he joined a janitors' union 
and sat in on strike talks. But by the time he landed the part in The Pianist, 
Brody was a full-blown Method man. Not only did he lose the aforementioned 30lb 
from his already lean frame in just six weeks, and learn to play Chopin, he 
also went to extreme measures to feel as cut off and isolated as Szpilman must 
have felt. He gave up life's trappings - his mobile phone, his Porsche, his 
long-term girlfriend. Hang on a minute, did he say girlfriend? 'I have made 
tremendous sacrifices in my personal life in order to dedicate myself to my 
work,' he concedes rather forlornly. Thankfully (and not totally surprisingly) 
Brody wasn't with anyone when he made The Jacket two years later. In order to 
enhance his performance as a man who can only piece his life together when he's 
undergoing brutal psychological treatment in a straitjacket in a morgue drawer, 
Brody would often ask to be left strapped up in the drawer even when the 
cameras weren't rolling.

It would be easier to dismiss Brody as a man who takes his career too 
seriously if it weren't for how much pleasure it seems to give him. When I ask 
him about his private life, his inner self, his soul, Brody freezes. His body 
goes rigid, his eyes dart around nervously, he shifts uncomfortably in his 
chair. His answers are clipped, inarticulate, incomprehensible

('I guess I do, uh, pretty much, uh, yeah, uh, feel relatively complete at 
this stage in my life'). But when I ask him about his work and how it feels to 
do what he does, he can barely contain his lyrical enthusiasm. 'When I'm 
playing a character, I'm being them in those moments,' he explains happily. 'It 
is definitely the closest thing to a real spiritual experience that I can 
describe. It's like I connect to the emotional state of another being that's 
other than my own and that is very freeing.'

Thankfully for Brody, Hollywoodland didn't involve too much tortuous 
preparation. Ironically, in fact, the only preparation he could do was to be 
unprepared. 'Adrien and I felt very strongly that Simo is a guy who doesn't 
really know anything at all about George Reeves's case,' director Allen Coulter 
explains. 'For that reason, he came at it fairly cold.' 'It was fun to play a 
guy like that,' Brody grins. 'I felt I knew him from my adolescent years. He's 
cocky, careless and playing at being cool and we've all been guilty of that.' 
Which isn't to say that Brody didn't give it his perfectionist all. 'He really 
reminds me of a finely tuned athlete,' Coulter says. 'He's like a golfer who 
carries on practising his swing, even when it's getting dark.'

After he won the Oscar, Brody didn't stop to pat himself on the back. He 
carried on practising that swing over and over. 'Of course I felt a pressure to 
continue doing good work,' he snaps when I suggest that it must have been a bit 
of a double-edged sword. 'But that's better than the pressure of never having 
won it, or been acknowledged.'

For what seems like forever, silence falls. I feel exhausted from the effort 
of trying to get him to want to talk to me and he is now doing back-to-back 
yawns. And then something funny happens; Brody - from nowhere - starts to talk. 
'Professionally, I guess I have fulfilled a lot of my dreams,' he admits 
cautiously. 'But ultimately I know that that isn't what's going to make me a 
happy human being. I'm not less passionate about my work, but I understand that 
there are different things which are equally important. My priorities need to 
change.'

The night before our interview, Brody was photographed on the red carpet at 
the London Film Festival premiere of Hollywoodland with his beautiful Spanish 
girlfriend Elsa Pataky (a famous actor in her homeland who recently made the 
transatlantic leap when she starred alongside Samuel L Jackson in Snakes on a 
Plane). In the pictures is an entirely different Brody from the one hunched in 
front of me today. As he looks proudly down at the girl on his arm, he looks 
genuinely, hopelessly happy. Is she, I ask tentatively, his new priority? 'At 
this point in my life, I am much more aware of the simpler things in life and 
how valuable that simplicity is to me,' he replies. Which I guess is Hollywood 
speak for Yes.

These days, Brody is at pains to point out, he is very much 'keeping it real' 
when he isn't working. 'I handle a lot of my own things on my own,' he insists. 
'I don't have many people doing a lot of my stuff. Obviously there are a few 
things I need help with, but I do my laundry and I cook dinner for my 
girlfriend.' How funny that he should even need to point it out. But then he 
lives life in that strange netherworld of Hollywood celebrity (he even has the 
obligatory pet chihuahua, called Ceelo). It must be hard finding who you really 
are when the thing you are best at is being somebody else.

Ironically, by the time his escorts come and rescue him, Brody is just warming 
up. He even cracks a joke at his own expense. 'I don't want to end up sitting 
alone in a room looking at an Oscar I don't even have any more,' he says, 
before laughing so explosively that it seems to surprise him even more than it 
does me.

But our time is up and, as we are led back to the lifts that will take Brody 
back up to Hollywoodland's temporary press HQ - a cluster of rooms full of 
posters, rows of empty tea cups and people talking in whispers - he is very 
much back in movie-star mode, walking several paces ahead with his head bowed 
against recognition. As he gets to the lift, he turns to me to say goodbye. He 
shakes my hand warmly, smiles even, but the real person that - just for a 
moment - glimmered behind those watery green eyes has gone again. Back to 
Hollywoodland.

· Hollywoodland opens on 24 November
 