
If you're a long-term reader of this blog then – of course – thank you, and 
meanwhile, you will be aware that we have together gone through the process of 
researching a novel and then preparing to write, starting to write, continuing 
to write, finishing, losing the author's marbles, finding the author's marbles, 
rewriting, tweaking, discussing the cover of, hammering out the cover blurb for 
andgenerally the entire genesis of a novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/al-kennedy-on-writing>. Next month 
the bloody thing – wearing its cover and blurb - will actually appear to annoy 
people in person. So again, to those of you who have been around throughout – 
thank you for your company and support. (And a big hello to all those of you 
who think I'm a Left Wing fanatic who should be shot as soon as possible. 
Somehow, the fact that you are of that opinion makes me delighted that you can 
manage to hold it of harmless old me.) Given that we've been trundling along 
for some considerable period now, I would imagine that a number of you have 
also completed projects. If this is the case, I hope they prosper.

I am now about to embark upon the round of promotional activities which is 
always appreciated – if no one were taking an interest that would be a very sad 
thing for the book – and yet which is, also, hideous. I will soon have my 
photograph taken by professionals who usually deal with attractive human beings 
who can be safely enlarged across newspaper pages without causing public 
distress – we will both know that many things are very, very wrong with this 
picture. Still, I must try not to look as if I would rather slit my throat that 
be repeatedly humiliated in this manner. I must somehow stand at an angle that 
implies I have written something readers might like and smile the small smile 
that makes me seem human, or at least not dangerous. Over time, I have got 
slightly better at this, but not much. Sometimes circumstances are kind, or I 
know the photographer, or we can chat about lenses, or light, or puppies and 
pretend that the photos aren't happening. Sometimes occasions inform against 
me. For example, I was once snapped exhaustively in Paris quite close to the 
offices of Vogue. Parisian passers-by - who tend to be dapper, suave and 
socially engaged – made no secret of the fact that they were finding it very 
hard to work out why their arrondissement suddenly had a blighted gonk lurking 
in it for a photo-shoot, rather than the usual, achingly gorgeous succession of 
Brazilian lingerie models. For a long moment they would stare, then they would 
reflect and then they would make an internal statement which ran something 
along the lines of "Ah ... the Before picture." Or, indeed, "Ah ... she must 
have been in a terrible accident and can no longer model lingerie, only 
surgical corsets and veils. Quel dommage."

And then there are the interviews, during which – as a contractual and 
career-sustaining obligation – the author must be enthusiastic about his or her 
own work, must be coherent about his or her own working process, must not say 
anything that inadvertently damages or embarrasses a friend or loved one, must 
try to appear in some way interesting and must not mention anything inept or 
controversial, or comment on anything to do with the Wonderful World of 
Literature that might blow up in his or her face later, causing untold woe. 
Given that I have broken all of these rules at one time or another, I'm kind of 
past saving – but I do try to steer as sane and uncataclysmic a course as I 
can. This causes me stress – which causes me to make the mistakes that I am 
stressed about avoiding. There have been occasions when I have steadfastly and 
repeatedly shot myself in both feet and gone on to double tap some additional 
pairs of shoes in the cupboard for good measure. There have been occasions when 
journalists have turned up determined to be nice, no matter what – even 
bringing gifts with them – and others have arrived and seemed entirely pleasant 
before putting together the type of knife-job I would think of as worthwhile 
only if I were anyone of whom anybody had actually heard. And then there was 
the time when an ex-boyfriend phoned up repeatedly with scathing comments upon 
my person until even the knife-wielder in receipt of his revelations became 
uneasy. There is nothing like any kind of public exposure to make both friends, 
enemies and total strangers act oddly around you. Sometimes, they give you free 
fruit. (Proper famous people get cars and suits and electrical goods, I know, 
but once-every-four-years-in-a-weekend-supplement people get fruit. Or maybe 
it's just me. I look as if I need fruit.) And sometimes I don't get any fruit 
at all.

When I first started writing, I used to read most of the interviews. I would 
think, "I shall study this and find out useful stuff about me that I didn't 
realise and can put to work in my ongoing processes of personal improvement. It 
won't all just confuse and scare the crap out of me." In fact, interviews have 
– over the years – informed me that I dress badly, look ill, have a dingy flat 
and illogical furniture, while creating an alternative persona for me which is 
mildly useful as a way of being myself in public without getting threadbare, 
but which is bewildering as an artefact. I do have chums who are interviewed 
far more than me, and I have never learned anything about them from the press 
that I didn't know already, beyond random facts that might mean I can provide 
them with slightly more accurate Christmas presents. This isn't surprising – 
they are my friends, of course I know them better than someone they met for an 
hour in a hotel suite or a moderately quiet restaurant. But print seems so 
authoritative ... If you're in any way unhappy with feeling as if your arse has 
been shoved out of a window for no good reason, then it's probably best to keep 
away from the thought of interviews, or their printed actuality and to 
concentrate on being profoundly grateful that someone is helping you sell 10 or 
11 extra books.

Which is the point to remember – I am trying to assist my work. I did what I 
could to help it be alive – it came to me to be expressed and I was grateful 
and I put the hours in as best I could. A number of other people at my 
publishers have also put in their hours. I am mainly worrying about the next 
novel – but they are still working on this one. And now it has its metaphorical 
haversack over its brave, small metaphorical shoulders and is trotting off to 
do some Youth Hostelling in Indonesia without me. I'll worry, but there's no 
more I can do, beyond trying to get people to look out for it and maybe pat its 
head as it goes by and not murder it, slice it up and make it disappear into a 
series of oozing airline holdalls. Which brings us to the reviews. Onwards.
 