
The arrest and conviction of three al-Jazeera journalists in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has been the subject of a worldwide 
campaign to secure their release. The men were seized from a hotel and given 
long jail sentences on charges of abetting terrorists, spreading false news and 
endangering national security.

On Friday 2 January 2015 the Guardian published online an interview with Amal 
Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/02/egypt-amal-clooney-arrest-al-jazeera-three>
, who represents Mohamed Fahmy, one of the three jailed journalists. The other 
two are Baher Mohamed and Peter Greste.

The interview, which ranged over many aspects of the case, was given in the 
wake of the appeal hearing in Cairo on 1 January in which the three men were 
told they would have to face a retrial. During the course of it, Clooney 
revealed that a report which she co-authored had pinpointed flaws in the 
Egyptian judicial system that subsequently contributed to the three men’s 
conviction.

She told the Guardian that when the report, compiled on behalf of the 
International Bar Association 
<http://www.ibanet.org/Article/Detail.aspx?ArticleUid=B30A63AE-8066-4B49-8758-C1684BE5E9B9>
, was due to be published “...first of all they stopped us from doing it in 
Cairo. They said: ‘Does the report criticise the army, the judiciary, or the 
government? We said: ‘Well, yes.’ They said: ‘Well then, you’re risking 
arrest.’”

A story headlined: “Egypt warns Amal Clooney she risks arrest over al-Jazeera 
three” was published at 3.19pm on 2 January on the Guardian’s website. The 
first sentence said: “Egyptian officials have warned human rights barristerAmal 
Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> that she risks 
arrest after identifying serious flaws in its judicial system that contributed 
to the conviction of three al-Jazeera journalists now jailed in Cairo.”

However, due to an editing error in London, two key aspects of the story had 
been conflated, and both the headline and first sentence were wrong. Clooney 
had not been warned that she risked arrest “over the al-Jazeera three”. The 
warning about what might happen if the report was published in Egypt had been 
given in February 2014, long before she had any involvement in the case. This 
was a significant error.

Patrick Kingsley, the Guardian’s Cairo correspondent, who has reported on the 
case of the three journalists since they were arrested and who also conducted 
the interview, contacted the Guardian’s foreign desk within 35 minutes of the 
story going up on the website to warn of the errors and amend the copy. He had 
received complaints about the headline and the thrust of the story from Clooney.

Amendments were made and the headline now ran: “Egypt warns Amal Clooney she 
risked arrest”. But there was no footnote or correction published because of 
the short time lapse between publication and amendment. While our guidelines 
state that errors caught within the first hour or so, which have not excited 
comment, do not necessarily need to be footnoted, I think that on this occasion 
it was a mistake not to add one. It was a significant error, and one has to 
recognise that Clooney is a well-known figure.

The amended version was the one used in the print edition published on 
Saturday 3 January.

At 10.05 on Sunday 4 January the story was updated, with the addition of two 
paragraphs from the Egyptian police denying the allegation that Clooney faced 
arrest.

Editors were still concerned that the story lacked clarity, and further 
changes were made to the first few paragraphs to make the chronology clearer, 
ie that the warning of possible arrest related to what might happen if the 
report earmarking judicial flaws was published in Egypt.

These changes were made on the evening of Monday 5 January, and finally a 
footnote was added: “This article was amended on 4 January 2015 to include 
comments from the Egyptian police. It was further edited for clarity on 5 
January 2015.”

At this stage there had still been no formal complaint to the readers’ 
editor’s office, but by 5pm editors made me aware of the problems. I wrote a 
longer, fuller footnote, and acorrection was published online that evening and 
in print on Tuesday 6 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2015/jan/05/corrections-and-clarifications>
.

However, what I had not initially realised was that Clooney had co-authored an 
article for the Huffington Post website with Mark Wassouf, who also represents 
Fahmy, published on Sunday 4 January 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/Amal-Clooney/al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-release-statement_b_6414028.html>
. In it, primarily, she set out the issues facing the three men including 
Fahmy, but also addressing her concerns about the Guardian story. In it she 
raised a fresh concern of which we were unaware. She described those who warned 
her of a possible arrest if any attempt was made to publish the report as 
“experts in Egyptian affairs”, whereas they were described in the text of the 
Guardian story as “Egyptian officials” and a subheading said she was 
“threatened by the authorities”.

The Huffington Post story said: “An article was published in the Guardian 
newspaper on 2 January 2015 stating that officials threatened Amal Clooney with 
arrest in Egypt in connection with her representation of Fahmy. The incident 
that was recounted in fact arose in early 2014 when the International Bar 
Association’s Human Rights Institute (IBA) – which was organizing the launch of 
a report co-authored by Mrs Clooney – was warned by experts in Egyptian affairs 
who were consulted on the launch that she and her colleague risked arrest if 
they launched the report in Cairo, in light of the criticisms made in the 
report and recent prosecutions for ‘crimes’ like insulting the judiciary, 
government or military in Egypt. As a result of these warnings, the IBA decided 
that it was not safe to hold the launch in Cairo, and the authors were forced 
to hold it in London instead. This incident arose before Mrs Clooney’s 
involvement in the Fahmy case, before the current president was in office and 
in a context entirely unrelated to this case … More importantly, the focus 
today should not be on the risks that lawyers or journalists faced in the past. 
The focus should be on the risks of free speech in today’s Egypt.”

When the Guardian asked Clooney on 5 January for more details of the 
individuals who gave the warning, she replied that the language she used had 
been reviewed by a colleague in the International Bar Association’s Human 
Rights Institute who was involved in writing the report and organising the 
launch, who agreed with the description that they were “experts in Egyptian 
affairs”.

I am not able to establish any more details about them. I think the Guardian 
believed that, in the context of the interview, the “they” to which Clooney 
refers were Egyptian officials who had given the warning. But we didn’t confirm 
that before publication, and in the light of that we have made a further set of 
changes to the headline, subheading and text.

In my view, it is a legitimate story and a matter of public interest that 
there was a warning of possible arrest in relation to publishing in Egypt a 
report about flaws in the country’s judicial system that subsequently 
contributed to the conviction of the three men.

The report said Egypt’s judicial system was not as independent as it could be. 
It pointed out that officials in the ministry of justice have wide powers over 
nominally independent judges, and highlighted the control the government can 
exert over state prosecutors. There is a clear link.

However, the Guardian collectively made a number of errors by conflating two 
key aspects of the story, including a significantly misleading headline, and I 
apologise on behalf of the newspaper to Amal Clooney for those errors.
 