
Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another by Philip Ball (Heinemann)
 A thought-provoking book by one of Britain's leading young science writers. 
In it, Ball asks us to examine our own behaviour; whether buying the latest 
Harry Potter, voting for a particular party or responding to the lure of 
advertisers. He demonstrates how much we can understand about human behaviour 
when we cease trying to analyse the behaviour of individuals and instead look 
to the impact of hundreds, thousands or millions of individual human decisions.

The Ancestor's Tale by Richard Dawkins (Weidenfeld & Nicholson)
 A pilgrimage back through time that provides the setting for a collection of 
40 tales, each exploring an aspect of evolutionary biology through the 
experiences of characters met along the way. Together they offer an explanation 
of the processes which shape life on earth; convergent evolution, the isolation 
of populations, continental drift and the great extinctions.

Why Life Speeds Up As You Get Older by Douwe Draaisma (CUP)
 Where do the long, lazy summers of our childhood go? Why is it that as we 
grow older time seems to speed up, while in old age significant events from our 
distant past can seem more vivid than what happened yesterday? Draaisma, author 
of the acclaimed Metaphors of Memory, explores the nature of autobiographical 
memory and phenomena such as deja-vu, the memory feats of idiot-savants or the 
effects of extreme trauma on recall.

Matters of Substance: Drugs and Why Everyone's a User by Griffith Edwards 
(Penguin)
 A radical approach to the question of drug control. Arguing for a 
consideration of all drugs - licit and illicit - as more than the sum of their 
chemical structure, Edwards suggests that the effect of a drug is just as 
dependent on the social setting, historical legacy and psychology of the 
individual as on any inherent quality of the drug itself. Examining the history 
of our relationship with the vast array of mind-acting drugs since the 14th 
century, he explores why drugs are as important to the global youth culture of 
the 21st century as they were then.

The Long Summer: How Climate Changed Civilization by Brian Fagan (Granta)
 From the hostile climate of the last ice age to the present day, this book 
tells the story of how humanity has been influenced by the planet's 
ever-changing climate. Deploying the most modern climatological resources 
available, Fagan provides us with a historical context in which to understand 
today's unprecedented global warming.

Pandora's Breeches: Women, Science and Power in the Enlightenment by Patricia 
Fara (Pimlico)
 An exploration of the role of women in the history of science. Fara claims 
not that women have been written out of the history of science, but that they 
have never been written in. If mentioned at all, she says, they appear in 
subservient roles as helpless admirers or menial assistants. She reevaluates 
the contribution of individual women in the 17th and 19th centuries to the 
rapid growth of science, setting out a compelling new version of science's past.

The Earth: An Intimate History by Richard Fortey (HarperCollins)
 Fortey introduces his readers to the earth's distinct character, revealing 
the life that it leads when humans aren't watching. He follows the continual 
movement of seabeds, valleys, mountain ranges and ice caps and shows how 
everything - culture, natural history, even the formation of our cities - has 
its roots in geology.

Deep Simplicity: Chaos, Complexity and the Emergence of Life by John Gribbin 
(Penguin)
 Gribbin synthesises concepts of chaos and complexity to show that at the root 
of the most random behaviour are simple laws of cause and effect. Through the 
study of chaos and the emergence of complexity from simple systems, scientists 
are on the brink of unravelling the origins of human life itself and gaining an 
insight into how life may have evolved on worlds beyond our solar system.

Aspirin: The Story of a Wonder Drug by Diarmuid Jeffreys (Bloomsbury)
 The story of aspirin is rich in dramatic twists and surprising discoveries. 
Jeffreys follows the story from the drug's origins in ancient Egypt to its 
exploitation by today's pharmaceutical conglomerates, taking in its industrial 
development at the end of the 19th century, and its key role in the 1918 flu 
epidemic (which killed more people than the first world war).Status Syndrome by 
Michael Marmot (Bloomsbury)
 Based on more than 25 years of research into how there appears to be a clear 
correlation between an individual's social status and the state of their 
health. Marmot's work took him around the world as he puzzled this relationship 
out, finding similar patterns emerging across the globe where control over 
lives and opportunities for full social participation were key factors for good 
health.

Hippocratic Oaths: Medicine and its Discontents by Raymond Tallis (Atlantic 
Books)
 Tallis blends philosophy with public opinion, polemic and personal experience 
to bridge the disjunction between the health care we believe we are entitled to 
expect and the difficult realities of what is possible.

Brainwashing: The Science of Thought Control by Kathleen Taylor (OUP)
 The first book to combine the latest findings in social psychology and 
neuroscience to try to understand the workings of the human brain. In elegant 
and accessible prose, and with many anecdotes and case-studies, Taylor looks at 
the ethical problems involved in carrying out the required experiments on 
humans and animals, and the frightening implications of such research.

The Human Mind by Robert Winston (Bantam Press)
 Winston tells us how our senses, emotions, personality, feelings and 
intelligence are the result of a ballet of genes and environment that shapes 
the path of our lives. He explains how memories are formed and lost, how the 
ever-changing brain is responsible for toddler tantrums, teenage angst, the 
battle of the sexes, the insights gained from Shakespeare, Pirandello and 
Larkin and the truth behind extra-sensory perception, deja vu and out-of-body 
experiences.
 