
All Tomorrow's Parties

The music festival season kicks off this weekend with an antidote to mud and 
tents. Spanning multiple weekends plus US offshoots, ATP's underground music 
pow-wow combines civilised touches – roofs, bathrooms, kettles - with feral 
aural challenges from big names and margin-walkers alike. A no-VIP ethos means 
you'll spot your indie rock heroes mooching about in search of the pool. The 
beach is great for sleeping off the Aphex Twin of the night before.

ATP curated by Matt Groening, Butlin's Holiday Centre, Minehead, today

atpfestival.com <http://www.atpfestival.com/> 

Glastonbury

Gentrified it may be, but nothing says "festival" quite like a sprawling, 
rain-lashed Pilton dairy farm with the name Eavis on the letterbox. The days of 
free milk and getting one's dreadlocks caught scaling the fence may be long 
gone, but Glasters still combines vast musical variety (meat'n'spuds main 
stage, banging raves in copses) with a right-on spirit and the finest Angolan 
vegan-fusion barbecues. Having taken over from her dad in recent years, Emily 
Eavis is arguably the most powerful woman in the music industry – able to 
baptise new acts with ancestral mud. Glasto virgins U2 are one of this year's 
anniversary headliners; but you go for the experience, maaan.

Worthy Farm, Pilton, Somerset 23-27 June glastonburyfestivals.co.uk 
<http://www.glastonburyfestivals.co.uk/>

Larmer Tree 

You don't go to Larmer for achingly hip asymmetric synth-pop. This 20-year-old 
West Country institution is strong on world music and curveballs: this year, 
they've got Alison Moyet and the Hypnotic Brass Ensemble (although, sadly, not 
together). Friendliness is key; children are everywhere, making stuff; 
workshops emphasise activity rather than passivity. The Larmer Tree Gardens 
site boasts peacocks and macaws, and it's set on chalky ground that never 
floods. Four thousand people a day, over five days, equals a festival that 
makes a lot of former Womad-goers happy, while never feeling full.

Larmer Tree Gardens, near Salisbury, 14-18 July

larmertreefestival.co.uk <http://www.larmertreefestival.co.uk/>

Latitude

Catering to a constellation of arts as well as music, Latitude is often cast 
as the broadsheet newspaper of festivals – something deputations from Radio 4, 
and the BBC political editor manqué Martha Kearney taking in the Afrobeat, do 
little to dispel.

But there is nothing wrong with being punted around a small lake by a 
Cambridge undergrad while Vampire Weekend tune up. There are excellent 
children's facilities, meaning that Latitude is appreciated by families, but 
there are plenty of wild-eyed twenty-nothing East Anglian hedonists up to 
mischief after sunset. This year's line-up is the best ever, and includes 
Florence + the Machine and Grizzly Bear.

Henham Park, Southwold, 15-18 July

latitudefestival.co.uk <http://www.latitudefestival.co.uk/home/>

Secret Garden Party

Having staged embryonic versions of SGP, the organisers went to Nevada's 
Burning Man and returned with a mission: to bring esoteric themes (2010's is 
Fact or Fiction) and a genial party atmosphere to British festival-going. The 
numbers are small(ish), the formalities minimal, and although there is a Great 
Stage and a central lake, this is more a confederacy of little events than a 
mass singalong. An excellent choice of medium-sized and up'n'coming acts 
indicates SGP has its finger on the pulse, and small touches – lots of places 
to sit down – belie the thought and care applied here. This year, the 
multi-sensory Gorillaz Sound System is one of the draws.

Near Huntingdon, Cambs, 22-25 July

secretgardenparty.com <http://www.secretgardenparty.com/2010/>

Truck

Plucky little Truck started out as DIY as can be, on a set of trailers in an 
Oxfordshire field. Now encompassing more of the farm, Truck remains titchy 
(5,000-strong), with the emphasis on niche young bands and the personal touch 
of a village fete. The local vicar runs the tea stall, whispering Bob Harris 
was last year's special guest. The smell of manure doesn't put people off – 
rather, Truck prides itself on a ramshackle, rural-acousticky response to the 
mega-fests which have lost sight of the pleasures of simplicity. See also: 
Truck's their even more small'n' family-friendly offshoot, Wood.

Hill Farm, Steventon, Oxon, 23-25 July

Thisistruck.com <http://www.thisistruck.com/>

Indietracks

Indie fans are often accused of being trainspotters. That Venn diagram overlap 
is given life at Indietracks, a gem of a festival that we really ought not to 
tell you about, because it might spoil it. The Midland Railway Centre in 
Derbyshire plays host to this dense concentration of cutie-pop and 
below-the-radar guitar bands. Last year, bands played on moving trains. Ticket 
numbers (2,500) are so small you can make shy advances to half the festival. 
Cutie revivalists the Pains Of Being Pure At Heart are joined by the reunited 
Primitives. All together now: "Nah nah nah nah nah/nah nah nah nah naaa-ah, 
we're gonna craaaash…"

Midland Railway Centre, near Ripley, Derbyshire, 23-25 July

indietracks.co.uk <http://www.indietracks.co.uk/>

Green Man

It keeps getting bigger, which annoys the faithful, but this jewel of a 
festival, set in the Brecon Beacons in Wales, is famed for its great beauty, 
its natural amphitheatre, its pioneering line-ups and the all-important 
enlightened vibes. Uncorporate and unconcerned with fame, Green Man has been a 
crucible of the folk-themed revival, with the cream of the US psych-folk 
underground rubbing guitar necks with like-minded UK stars like Robert Plant, 
Jarvis Cocker and Spiritualized. When it rains, the mud is a fetching red. And 
the toilets! You could eat your gourmet curry off them.

Glanusk Park, Brecon Beacons National Park, Wales, 20-22 August

greenman.net <http://www.greenman.net/>

Reading

Also incorporating a Leeds site, the blasted heath of Reading's Carling 
Weekender is where fans of rock, indie and repetitive beats have been gifted 
with tinnitus, sunburn, urinary tract infections and dioxin highs from all 
those plastic pint-fuelled bonfires. Nirvana staged their comeback here after 
the Coma In Roma; the Stone Roses ended here, shabby and off-key; for some 
reason, the Leeds site attracts arsonists. You haven't really been to a British 
festival, however, until you've been in a Reading moshpit, playing ping-pong 
with pints of piss.

Richfield Avenue, Reading, 27-29 August

readingfestival.com <http://www.readingfestival.com/home/>

Bestival

No one really remembers that Bestival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bestival> was technically the offshoot of R1 
DJ Rob Da Bank's Sunday Best label activities. Aficionados just think it is the 
best festival, full stop. A pioneer of the boutique'n'bijou school, its (still 
just about) human size, pretty Isle of Wight site and eclectic line-up have 
made it a favourite of evolved festival-goers keen on elaborate fancy dress and 
Hot Chip (do they ever not play?). You can meet a fellow undersea creature, get 
married in the inflatable church, breast-feed in a yurt and still get to hear 
the electronic flavour-of-the-summer.

Robin Hill Countryside Adventure Park, near Newport, Isle of Wight, 9-12 
Septemberbestival.net  <http://www.bestival.net/>
 