
British Red Cross
 British Red Cross. 
The British Red Cross has provided independent living services in the UK for 
the last 30 years and health and social care support at community level for 
much longer. These services, which supported more than 439,000 people in 2013, 
fall into three categories:


 * Support at home to help people cope following discharge from hospital or 
when at risk of admission.

 * Short term loan of mobility aids including wheelchairs (we are currently 
the only organisation which loans wheelchairs nationally without charge).

 * Transport support for medical appointments and daily activities.

Our aim is to support people with moderate needs before they escalate to the 
point where hospitals or social services need to step in. We know from 
experience that basic support, like visiting vulnerable patients at home in the 
days after being discharged from hospital, can have a huge impact. In some 
cases it makes the difference between a return to living independently or 
readmission to hospital – which is both better for people’s wellbeing and less 
costly for statutory services.

Ultimately, we believe that better support networks, including preventative 
services like these, are vital if we are going to adequately care for our 
ageing population.

Hanover
 Hanover. 
Hanover Housing Association is a leading national provider of housing and 
services for older people wishing to live independent, active and fulfilling 
lives.


We believe that a good home, choice, and a supportive community are key to a 
good later life. We aim to provide a range of attractive affordable housing 
options that meet different individual needs and local demands.

Currently we manage around 19,000 properties for rent, sale and shared 
ownership in approximately 600 locations. This includes nearly 2,500Extra Care 
<http://www.hanover.org.uk/extra-care/> properties where residents can access 
24-hour care on-site.


Our 50-year history, expertise and track record in innovation make us a 
trusted housing provider, and a valuable partner, ready for the challenge of 
our ageing society.


Over the next five years, Hanover intends to develop 1,250 downsizer homes to 
help meet the changing needs and aspirations of the new generation of ‘younger 
old’ and releasing larger family properties for the wider market.


Our services include an around-the-clock emergency response service, Hanover 
on Call 
<http://www.hanover.org.uk/properties/resident-information/our-services/hanover-on-call/>
, for those who need it. We also offer a free and confidential service,Be Wise 
<http://www.hanover.org.uk/media/163924/Energy-Wise_A5lft_r2.pdf>, which has 
helped residents save money and access unclaimed benefits worth well in excess 
of £1 million.

Hanover is a not-for-profit, charitable organisation – our first priority is 
to serve our residents and other customers, and any surplus we make is 
reinvested in housing and services for older people.

Independent Age

 Independent Age. 
Independent Age is an established voice for older people. Founded 150 years 
ago we are a growing charity helping older people to live more fulfilling lives 
through the ABC of advice, befriending and campaigning. We help alleviate the 
three types of poverty that can affect older people: financial poverty, poverty 
of social contact and poverty in the information and advice older people need. 
We provide advice on getting help at home and moving into a care home, paying 
for care, benefits and so much more. We also provide befriending and we 
campaign for older people to get a fair deal, a reasonable income and high 
quality of life. As the UK’s population is ageing, we are asking how we can 
make the UK a better country to grow older in and how public services can 
prepare for dramatic demographic change.

PA Consulting Group

 PA Consulting Group. 
We are an employee-owned consulting, technology and innovation firm. Our 2,500 
people operate globally and are experts in a wide range of industries and 
services. We work with public, private and not-for-profit organisations to help 
them achieve financial sustainability and find innovative ways to deliver 
health and adult social care services. Our deep industry knowledge together 
with skills in management consulting, technology and innovation allows us to 
challenge conventional thinking and deliver exceptional results with lasting 
impact.


 For local authorities, we provide the practical experience and technical 
expertise they need to deliver care to people in their own homes. Our recent 
successes include:

 * Leading an innovative partnership to deliver telecare in Hampshire – we 
helped the council save £850 for each user, improving the quality of care for 
vulnerable people and putting Hampshire on track to realise £3.4 million in 
financial benefits over three years.

 * Reviewing the Learning Disability Service in the Borough of Poole, where we 
identified opportunities for improving independence for service users and 
reducing cost.

 * Helping the Royal Borough of Greenwich transform its telecare services to 
give residents more choice about how services are delivered and enable people 
to stay in their homes for longer.

 * Using an innovative cost benchmarking approach with West Sussex County 
Council to set sustainable rates for care home places for older people.  