
Sixty five years on, D-Day still stirs powerful emotions. So Antony Beevor's 
book on the subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/24/antony-beevor-d-day-bombing>, 
about which he spoke at Hay on Saturday, has inevitably stirred strong 
feelings, too. Beevor's emphasis on thecruelty and bloodiness of the invasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/31/d-day-the-battle-for-normandy-antony-beevor>
 of Normandy rather than on the heroic mythology of the subject has coincided 
with a diplomatic rumpus with France over the less than central role to be 
played by the British in next weekend's 65th anniversary events. With not much 
to feel good about in their present-day public life, the British are now faced 
with a pair of Grinches who are stealing our heroic history from us, too.

The British myth of D-Day is that we and the Americans jointly undertook a 
heroic landing on the Normandy beaches on 6 June 1944, then fought our way 
through Normandy over the summer, with the British facing particularly tough 
German opposition, before the breakout towards Paris two months after the 
landings. The French play little part in this British version of events; their 
role is confined to: (a) plucky but marginal acts by the resistance; and (b) a 
preposterous desire on the part of De Gaulle to lead the Allies into Paris as 
part of a national conceit about being treated as victorious combatants in a 
conflict where their role was somewhere between marginal and non-existent.

Beevor's book, and President Sarkozy's snub to the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/may/29/queen-d-day-france-invitation>, 
have each been a snub to this British myth. Beevor does not relegate the French 
to the margins. Instead, he remembers that they were among the most major 
victims of the Normandy campaign. Altogether, 15,000 French people were killed 
by the bombing of early 1944 with which the Allies softened up Normandy before 
D-Day. After the landings, 19,890 French civilians were killed during the 
battle for Normandy. In thedépartement of Calvados alone, 76,000 people lost 
their homes in the fighting. More French people died in aerial bombardment by 
the Allies in the second world war than British people died in aerial 
bombardment by the Germans.

Sarkozy's role in stealing D-Day from the British should bother us less. The 
French president wishes to gain whatever political advantage is on offer from 
the commemorations next weekend. He is keen to milk the presence of Barack 
Obama. He is less interested in the presence of the Queen (who is not going) or 
of Gordon Brown (who is). To those of us who have watched our own prime 
minister attempting to pose as the man who saved the world at the recent G20 in 
London, there is nothing new or surprising in what Sarkozy is doing.

The real tragedy about D-Day, 65 years on, is that it should still be so 
entangled in unnecessary myths, rather than necessary ones. The British desire 
to see ourselves as co-equals with the Americans (forgetting not just the 
French but the Canadians, Australians, Indians, Dutch and other forces who took 
part in the invasion) persists in defiance of the realities of 1944. It may not 
be a more untruthful myth than the American version, in which the US fought 
alone up the beaches to freeEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> from fascism. But it is a 
national self-deception all the same.

The truth about D-Day is that it was both heroic and brutal. A lot of soldiers 
fought bravely – not least, the Germans who, as Beevor points out, were often 
terrified of the punishment they might face from their own side, as well as of 
the Allies (and both sides took few prisoners in Normandy). The French were 
caught up in the killing and experienced terrible things. On all sides, there 
was bad behaviour – the Americans got drunk, the British pilfered local homes, 
the French turned against often powerless collaborators, and the Germans fought 
fanatically and often with great brutality against all-comers.

In the end, though, something of the original myth survives. The young men 
from Kansas and Kent who fought their way up the beaches and through thebocages 
<http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bocage> did save the world. It was a war worth 
winning and they did the right thing bravely. We are permanently in their debt. 
But they did some very cruel things on the way.
 