
The fall of a Williams sister no longer reverberates across the tennis forest 
like it used to, but the element of surprise was real enough when Serena, the 
reigning champion, was beaten 6-3, 6-4 by Jelena Jankovic.

From the moment she stepped into the Melbourne tennis centre last week it had 
seemed that the younger of the sisters meant business. She looked fit and 
determined, as if she had turned over a new year leaf and was intent on 
concentrating her attentions on tennis, and adding to her eight grand slam 
titles.

At this time last she year had been so out of condition, so obviously unfit, 
that it had seemed inconceivable she would be able to survive the first week. 
In truth it was one hell of a struggle, but she hung in like a true champion 
and, when it came to the final against Maria Sharapova, was a blur of almost 
terrifying aggression that left the US-based Russian as limp as a rag doll.

Something similar had been expected on this occasion. Serena's mighty serve 
had propelled her through the opening week, while the Serb had been struggling 
with both injuries and form, and might easily have gone out in the first round, 
winning 12-10 in the third set against Tamira Paszek of Austria. When Williams 
held serve with comfort and broke Jankovic for a 2-0 first-set lead, it seemed 
that a gloriously sunny Melbourne morning, of the sort that have been few and 
far between this year, would match the serenity of Serena's progress.

The change was as sudden as it was unexpected, as if someone had passed a 
screen across the match and the previous reality had become frozen some place 
in the past. Jankovic is one of the game's great movers. She glides across 
court with a smoothness that is almost uncanny. It is seemingly effortless, and 
so it was that Williams found everything coming back at her with a rapidity 
that she was unable to quell. Eight successive points and the sweetly smiling 
Serb was level.

She is wonderfully ebullient, frequently laughing at what she perceives as the 
absurd. Williams, like her sister Venus, is not inclined to be anything other 
than intense while in mid-match, although on this occasion she was clearly 
perplexed by her own inability to serve at her usual level, together with a 
propensity to finish second best in the majority of the long rallies. Realising 
her opponent's serve was way off its usual groove, Jankovic returned 
beautifully, notably on the backhand which was a significant weapon throughout 
this quarter-final.

Both women needed treatment midway through the second set: Williams for a 
blister on her foot; the Serb No3 seed for the multitude of pains and niggles 
that have been troubling her since the tournament began. "I can't give you all 
the details because once I began I would never stop," Jankovic laughed. The 
second set was a struggle for both players, though Williams always seemed the 
more likely to fragment as the rallies lengthened.

So Williams has now lost four slam quarter-finals in succession since winning 
the title here last year, while her total number of titles since the beginning 
of 2004 amounts to only five. Had she not appeared so relatively fit when she 
arrived in Australia, even deciding to play in the doubles with her sister, 
there would have been numerous further questions asked about her true 
commitment to the sport. As it is, nobody can be the least sure what may happen 
next. It was ever thus with the Williams sisters.
 