


When the first hippies came through the Glastonbury gates in 1970, the ladies 
of the Women’s Institute were busy campaigning to ban smoking in public places. 
This year, the members of this august institution were limbering up to watch 
six half-naked Australian hunks writhe around on stage at the burlesque cabaret.

Alas, when midnight arrived, the six ladies found they were just too tired – 
though they can hardly be blamed for opting for sleeping bags over striptease. 
Having opened the first WI stall on the Glastonbury site this year, they spent 
nine hours on Friday serving up some of the 5,000 cakes baked by the women of 
Somerset.

This year also marks the first time that Margaret Bigg, the 77-year-old 
chairwoman of the Somerset WI, has ever been to Glastonbury – or even been 
camping at all.

“Well, it’s quite an experience, but the camping is getting better each day,” 
said Bigg, who has been a member of the WI since 1973.

“You’re never too old to try new things. I would never have called myself a 
festival person, but I’m having a lovely time. And we’re so glad we’ve been 
given such a good spot for our stall, we’ve been rushed off our feet since we 
opened.”

Glastonbury may be in its 45th year, but it is a festival that increasingly 
caters for ticket-holders of all ages. In fact, the average age of the 
headliners is getting older every year – from 29 in 1997 to 43 this year. 
Closing the festival this year is 71-year-old Roger Daltrey of the Who. Hours 
earlier Patti Smith, 68, and Lionel Richie, 66, will draw the crowds to the 
Pyramid stage.

Sheltering from the rain with a cup of tea in the Avalon cafe , Judy and Pete 
Orme wish they had discovered the festival years ago. The pair, both in their 
60s, decided to lose their Glastonbury virginity this year having lived 35 
miles away in north Somerset for 30 years.

“There are so many different ages here and everyone can get what they want out 
of it,” says Judy, 61. “Every turn of every corner you find something 
interesting. The sheer size of it, but also the colour and variety – it’s just 
brilliant. We’ve just dived in, wandered around and done tons of stuff.”

Having completed a six-and-a-half-mile run around the festival perimeter by 
10am, Judy and Pete have seen more of the festival in one morning than most do 
in a weekend. Their favourite moment was marvelling at the 900-acre site from 
the famous Glastonbury sign, overlooking Worthy Farm’s 175,000 temporary 
inhabitants.

“Nothing is so special as the first time,” says Pete, 64, who compares the 
atmosphere to the feelgood aura surrounding the London Olympics in 2012. 
“Because it’s so different it’s a huge thing in our minds but we’d definitely 
come again – but the first time is probably the best.”

A 15-minute walk away, through the mid-afternoon crowds enjoying theatreland, 
is Kidz Field – a child-friendly oasis at the edge of the site marked out by a 
giant red-and-yellow helter skelter.

A fairytale castle on the hill of the field is the only structure that remains 
once the revellers have headed home and the cows return to Michael Eavis’s farm 
in the Vale of Avalon.

The Kidz Field opened 21 years ago, billing itself as Europe’s largest free 
children’s festival because under-12s get in free. Its founder, Tony Cordy, 
boasts that the area has “put kids on the main stage” – with Lily Allen among 
those who have played there in their youth, only to perform years later as pop 
superstars.

Hundreds of children spend hours in this little sanctuary, passing a sign 
warning: “You are now entering a frown-free zone!” as they learn to play 
musical instruments, tangle with a giant parachute or take shelter under a huge 
gazebo where a cabaret act sings about a “hippy hanky panky cranky stinky dinky 
lanky honky winky wonky donkey”.

In the carpentry tent, 150 children a day hammer at bits of wood while others 
– with braver parents – go to work with metal saws. Mark Pettifer is one of the 
bolder parents. His daughter Maisie, 8, wields a saw while her brothers Alfie, 
10, and Stanley, 4, dust up on their carpentry skills. It is the children’s 
fourth Glastonbury.

“They bill Bestival as child-friendly and they are OK, but you pay extra 
whereas this is all free,” Mark says. “The children love it. As they get older 
we get them out of the kids’ bit and into the other areas.”

Ellis Milgate, 4, is enjoying his second Glastonbury from the comfort of a 
high-end pram, complete with noise-cancelling headphones. “It’s lesser known 
that Glastonbury is massively for kids,” says his mother Mary Milgate, 43. 
“People just think it’s for young people getting hammered but it’s really 
child-friendly.”

The family, from Epping in Essex, are staying in a caravan and say Glastonbury 
is just like any other family holiday – but with more live music.

“There’s loads going on for kids,” says Mary’s husband Kelvin, 36. “He’s done 
the helter skelter, painting ... he’s a bit too young for carpentry – we 
wouldn’t want any lost fingers.”
 