
When, in the mid-1990s, Dr Xiao-Ping Zhai began using traditional Chinese 
medicine to treat infertility, her Harley Street practice was confined to a 
couple of rooms, each no bigger than a stationery cupboard. Patients would 
climb the four flights of stairs to sit on a hard chair in the tiny hallway 
outside her room, like lost and frightened children waiting to see the 
headmistress.

Along with the usual complex and paradoxical emotions felt by those 
desperately trying for a baby, the swings from optimism ("Yes – this could be 
the month it happens!") to panic ("I'll never have a child. Why me? Why me?"), 
there was also for many of them the feeling that Zhai was another guilty 
secret, in addition to their infertility. If these women revealed to friends 
and family, but especially to their mainstream gynaecology and fertility 
consultants, that they had resorted to acupuncture and brewing up bits of twig 
and moss to help them get pregnant, it would be the final proof that, in their 
quest to achieve what most women take for granted, they had lost the plot 
completely.

I first met Zhai more than six years ago, when Michael Dooley, a gynaecologist 
and fertility consultant, formerly at the Lister hospital in London and now 
running his own clinic in Dorset, told me about her success rate in getting 
women pregnant. Between 1995 and 2000 she had treated 224 patients (average age 
37) with traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). After treatment for at least six 
months 76% of the women had become pregnant. Of these pregnancies, 77% resulted 
in a baby, and of the 23% who miscarried, 69% went on to have a baby later. In 
2000 the fertility clinic at the very top of the Human Fertilisation and 
Embryology Authority league table was claiming a success rate of up to 38.8%. 
Zhai's success was in the 70s.

"I don't know what she does," Dooley told me. "I don't understand it at all, 
but her results are amazing and I'm keeping an open mind." He'd begun sending 
his most difficult patients to her, many of them poor candidates for IVF due to 
age or egg supply or FSH levels (a measure of the perimenopause); women who, by 
normal diagnosis, did not stand a hope in hell's chance of conceiving naturally 
or through assisted treatment (many of them wouldn't even qualify for treatment 
in some clinics). Zhai, with her herbs and her acupuncture and all the bizarre 
practices that go with a TCM consultation – more of which later – was Dooley's 
last-chance saloon.

As it turns out, it was just the beginning. Today, as I sit across from Zhai, 
she is still the tiny, polished woman I first met, except that her once stiff, 
bowl-like bouffant has now grown into soft shoulder-length curls. If a hairdo 
can ever be a metaphor for the relaxing consequences of success and acceptance, 
hers would do perfectly.

"I've seen so many women," she says smiling, "I know what I do works."

That is putting it mildly. Her practice has more than doubled in size in the 
past five years. She sees between 50 and 80 women a week, some of whom fly in 
from other countries. She now has two clinical assistants and a PA; the rooms 
are five times bigger and there are more of them. Her patients still come to 
her by word of mouth, but an increasing number are referred by mainstream 
consultants such as Michael Dooley and Stuart Lavery, director of the IVF unit 
at Hammersmith hospital, who work in conjunction with Zhai to maximise women's 
chances of success of conception.

It helps that Zhai trained in western medicine in China, working as a 
paediatrician in Guangzhou before coming to the UK, and consultants seem happy 
that she speaks their language in clinical terms. Lavery says: "We have had 
pregnancies occur in which her input has been critical. It is quite rare to 
come across somebody practising such therapies with a degree of credibility, 
but the thing about Zhai is that she doesn't only embrace her own philosophy. 
She works with us, not against us, and that overlap with western medicine is 
what makes her unique. I don't know if her success is to do with her 
acupuncture, her herbs or just her being a very, very good physician – which is 
an important part – but the feedback is remarkable. At our clinic, we think she 
brings something new to the table."

Zhai's success rate remains phenomenal. In 2005 alone, for example, she helped 
61 women get pregnant – 80.3% of her patients that year; 45 of them carried the 
baby full term. News of her extraordinary talents is spreading. She regularly 
flies off to international conferences – proof that she has gained respect and 
acceptance beyond the UK. "I've seen her hold a room in front of fertility 
consultants from all over the world," says Dooley. "I've seen her at medical 
conferences and presenting national meetings, and she is fantastic."

It is for this reason that she has been nominated by Clare Lewis-Jones, CEO of 
Infertility Network UK, as a key speaker at the Fertility Show in London next 
month. This follows on the heels of another breakthrough: Zhai has secured an 
agreement with the London Fertility Centre that allows her to use its 
facilities to carry out natural-cycle IUI (intra-uterine insemination) without 
losing control of the patient's care. With natural-cycle IUI there are no 
drugs, no invasive procedures – sperm is simply placed near the Fallopian tube 
at the start of ovulation. Zhai says she will use this on the patients for whom 
she feels IVF is not necessary, but for whom time might be running out.

"The downside of Chinese medicine is that it is a slow process," Zhai says. "I 
often get a woman's body very, very ready for pregnancy and then we are waiting 
for it to happen. These women do not need IVF, they don't need the invasive 
procedure or the expense or the drugs, but in the past I'd send them to a 
consultant for something quite natural like IUI, and before I'd know it the 
women would be back to me in tears saying the clinic had refused something so 
low-tech and that they were being steered towards IVF or ICSI 
[intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection]. It was very frustrating for me. This new 
agreement is very exciting. It is not necessary for every woman, and I won't be 
using it when I can avoid it, but it gives me another way of shortening the 
treatment cycle and staying in control."

The first – and as yet only – woman Zhai sent over to the London Fertility 
Centre successfully conceived on her second try – at the age of 43. Amanda (not 
her real name) married when she was 40 and started trying immediately with no 
success. Her baby is due on 1 January next year and she is over the moon.

"I'm now 44," she says. "I'd had three IUIs and IVF before going to Zhai, and 
my consultant told me to give up because I was just too old and my eggs were 
too weak. I saw Zhai throughout 2008 and then we did one IUI in the LFC and I 
got pregnant but miscarried. The second time, in April, it worked. I was 43. I 
still can't believe it. It can only be because of her – not only did she 
improve my egg quality, but the IUI at the LFC, with her in charge, was 
completely different to any other clinic, where you are aware that, really, you 
have people around you thinking you're past it and should have a donor egg."

Dr Magdy Asaad, clinical director of the LFC, stops short of endorsing TCM for 
fertility: "For it to be really accepted there have to be big trials, 
double-blinded and evidence-based research, and our physicians at the clinic 
here only follow evidence-based medicine." But he stresses that he is entirely 
comfortable with his new arrangement with Zhai. "The patients who come to us 
from her clinic are very happy with what she does. They are convinced that that 
is the way they want their treatment handled, and we understand that it is not 
harmful to them and that it is actually very good to offer them what they want."

Despite the conferences and meetings, for Zhai the most important part of what 
she does remains getting her patients pregnant. She passes me a handwritten 
note across the table. It is from a woman called Susan Namkung-Torch, an 
American corporate lawyer approaching 40 and now living in London, who saw Zhai 
for secondary infertility (she now has a nine-and-a-half-month-old son as well 
as her first child, who is seven and a half): "Thank you so much for bringing 
about the delivery of our long-awaited son after five long years, failed IVF 
attempts, two miscarriages and countless IUI attempts," Namkung-Torch writes. 
"I will be forever grateful for not only your medical expertise and wisdom but 
for maintaining my hopes during the darkest days when even I could not imagine 
a positive outcome and had all but given up… you always stated that I could – 
and would – get pregnant."

When I talk to Namkung-Torch she tells me that at first she and Zhai didn't 
get along. "I fired questions at her," she says. "I wanted answers, I wanted 
strategies. And some she could give, some she couldn't – but she remained very, 
very calm and, crucially, absolutely confident of my body getting fit enough to 
conceive. 

"You see, I'm a corporate lawyer, very proactive. I am a very positive person, 
and for five years of trying to get pregnant, I remained positive. I did 
everything, from skipping, because I read it increased the circulation, through 
to colonoscopies and three cycles of IVF. My husband and I enlisted the most 
prestigious IVF doctors in the world, in London, in LA, in New York. I'd either 
not get pregnant or when I did, I didn't hold the pregnancies.

"By the end, I went to Dr Zhai. I saw her for 18 months, and still nothing 
happened. But never once did she give up hope. She just kept telling me that 
every month my body was getting stronger and stronger. Finally, I told her I 
was considering surrogacy. She just said: 'Susan, that's the right decision for 
your personality. You need to feel in control.'

"Having got her blessing, I think I relaxed. That month I conceived, and I now 
have a little boy. People say I would have got pregnant anyway, but that's not 
true, otherwise why didn't I get pregnant at the start? My hormones were all 
over the place, and she prepared my body, and because she is who she is, I 
finally relaxed. She was critical, and I'm going back to her again for our 
third child."

''When I tell a couple they do not need to waste their time and money on IVF, 
I know what I'm talking about," Zhai says. "Often it is a matter of clearing 
the system, increasing the blood supply to the ovaries, and restoring a level 
of general health in order to make pregnancy possible. Men are very easy to 
treat – sperm counts can improve very quickly – but I always treat the man and 
the woman to make sure there is optimum health."

Zhai often hears what Namkung-Torch reported, that sceptics say to her 
patients: "You would have got pregnant anyway."

This, understandably, angers her: "When a woman comes under my care, I am 
looking at the overall picture. I tell them that we will see the difference in 
their bodies. It is different from anything else. It is not about blood tests 
or scans – although I do use scans occasionally – but a scan is a scan; it is 
not going to tell you how your body is functioning. I see their temperature 
charts every month, and often women who think they have normal cycles actually 
show in temperature charts to have hormones all over the place. I regulate the 
body and I watch those charts change. It is not a matter of chance or luck, the 
evidence is there for me. You can measure it."

With some women, she tries to steer them away from IVF, or at least delay it. 
Some take her advice, some don't. Anne Spencer, an economics lecturer at London 
University, who conceived with Zhai when she was nearly 44, said: "We came to 
her in the middle of other treatments. Six months in, Zhai said: 'Don't do this 
scheduled IVF! Your body is not ready yet.' I went ahead anyway, and it failed. 
She said: 'Let's carry on anyway.' Four months later, she got me pregnant 
naturally. I have complete faith in her, complete faith. You are so pressured 
by clinics that time is running out, but she kept saying: 'You have eggs; this 
can happen.'"

As we talk, Spencer begins to cry. I can hear her three-month-old daughter 
snuffling on her lap: "This is very emotional for me," she says. "I had always 
wanted a family and spent my career competing with men and putting it off. She 
gave us the hope we needed."

Zoë Evans, 39, spent two years on an NHS list for a free cycle of IVF/ICSI 
while she was seeing Zhai, who was also treating her husband for problems with 
his sperm. Then the call came that Evans had finally reached the top of the 
list. She began taking the contraceptive pill to shut down her system ready for 
the crash menopause that comes with IVF – and then she changed her mind: "My 
husband and I concluded that we were not prepared to pursue a baby at any cost. 
I had real ethical issues with ICSI, and so pulled out of the NHS treatment. 
Zhai had done wonders with my husband's sperm count to such an extent that the 
fertility nurse at the clinic was gobsmacked at the improvements. We agreed to 
give TCM until Christmas. Last September I got pregnant, and in June I gave 
birth to our son."

Stuart Lavery is right when he says Zhai is a first-class physician. Though 
far from touchy-feely, there is something extremely assured and calming about 
her bedside manner. She is very confident in the prognosis she gives. How can 
you possibly know for sure, I ask her. Does it not keep you up at night, 
telling older women to delay or cancel their IVF cycles?

"I do know," she says, "because I'm treating the whole body, man and woman, 
and I can see the improvements. The only thing I don't know is which bit of the 
treatment helps a pregnancy to happen." She stresses, too, that she will also 
be the first to refer on if she believes surgery or western treatment – say for 
blocked tubes – is needed. Lavery tells me of an experimental treatment they 
worked on together in which a patient was given a drug used for diabetes mixed 
with TCM. The patient conceived: "That's what makes her so unique," Michael 
Dooley says. "It is a proper integrated approach."

It is estimated that between 10% and 15% of all British couples have trouble 
conceiving and will, at some point, look for specialist fertility treatment. 
The latest statistics from the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority 
show that in 2007 alone, 36,861 women received some kind of IVF treatment in UK 
clinics, an increase of 5.8% on 2006. Women aged 35 and below were successful 
in 32.3% of cases. Only 3.1% of 44-year-old women ended up with a baby.

Given that only 18% of all IVF is NHS-funded, Zhai's treatment presents an 
attractive alternative – not cheap, but cheaper than IVF. An initial 
consultation with her costs £190, and then there are the twice-a-month 
appointments, including acupuncture at £85. The herbs cost roughly £180-£200 
each month. And as she is the first to point out, even if a couple is prepared 
to pay £5,000 for a cycle of IVF, clinics do not pay attention to the state of 
the woman's body. In other words, you wouldn't dream of running a marathon with 
a broken leg.

Watching a Zhai consultation is bizarre. She will check the tongue, the pulse, 
sleep patterns, whether a patient is thirsty, peeing a lot and their bowel 
movements. Often changes are made to the diet – no sugar, coffee, alcohol, 
dairy, wheat, spicy foods – and every month a woman is asked to keep a 
temperature chart.

Slowly, through the use of herbs and acupuncture, Zhai begins to regulate the 
vital energy, or Qi, that flows through the body. According to this ancient 
practice, good health and metabolism depend on Qi. As it flows, it provides 
warmth and distributes body fluids.

Each organ has its own pattern of Qi and each organ is represented on the 
tongue, which presents Zhai with a kind of map of the body's health. If one 
organ is not functioning properly, it affects the rest of the body: "It only 
takes one thing to be wrong to throw the whole system out," she explains.

Common diagnoses seem to be too much liver heat and blood stagnation, 
damp-heat obstruction in the abdomen, slow blood circulation to the ovaries – 
you get the picture.

Zhai says she can start seeing changes within three months but will not put a 
time frame on treatment: "Every woman is different."

The herbs she uses are mostly shipped in from China and made up to her 
prescriptions, although she is currently looking at manufacturing them in the 
UK. They include carthamus flower (huang hua) for regulating the flow of Qi to 
alleviate pain, glossy privet fruit (nu zhen zi) for nourishing the kidney and 
liver, as well as peach kernel, angelica root and codonopsis root.

It is easy to see why many western clinicians distrust TCM. To them it seems 
so random, so weird, although acupuncture is slowly gaining more credibility 
for fertility. (Last year a Dutch and US research project published in the
British Medical Journal revealed that for every 10 cycles of IVF with 
acupuncture there would be one extra pregnancy compared with cycles performed 
without acupuncture.)

Zhai is aware of the scepticism: "I wish TCM could be regulated," she says, "I 
really do."

She tells me about a recent collaboration with Darren Griffin, professor of 
genetics at the University of Kent. Zhai entered into a trial in which the 
university's biosciences department tested some of her male patients to measure 
the effectiveness of her herbs on their sperm count. All six men had severe 
genetic abnormalities in their sperm, and by the end of the trial on Zhai's 
treatment, all had "levels not distinguishable from normally fertile males".

"What you don't know is how much of that was determined by her lifestyle 
advice," says Griffin, "but we were very, very surprised by the findings." A 
man's sperm quality is closely linked to his lifestyle and varies greatly from 
month to month. In other words, a period of no booze, no cigarettes and healthy 
eating could have just as good an effect: "I suspect it was a combination of 
both," says Griffin. "Also, six is a tiny study."

But then this study was followed up by a second last year, which tested the 
properties in the herbs Zhai had used to treat the men. The herbs contained 
every ingredient the scientists were looking for in order to explain such a 
positive causal effect. Could TCM be working on correcting genetic 
abnormalities?

Griffin says it would be necessary to take the study further. "I'd like to do 
double-blinded trials with placebos in which even the doctors don't know if 
they are giving the medicine. I want three groups of 20 to 50 men in each 
group, with men getting changing herbs every time, men getting the same herbs 
and men getting a placebo. But a trial like that will cost up to £1m."

He has already approached the Medical Research Council, the NHS and the 
Wellcome Trust charity, but so far there have been no takers. "It is very hard 
to establish the veracity of non-standard medicine," Griffin says, "precisely 
because it is not controlled. Every treatment is different."

Whether or not you buy into Zhai's clinic, there can be no doubt about one 
thing: her patients get pregnant when previously they did not. I'd bet £1m that 
if you asked any woman who had faced infertility whether, in the event of 
finally becoming a mother, she cared how or why it had happened, she would not 
give a hoot. Just having a baby is enough. And if what Zhai offers is choice 
and hope – another way of making a pregnancy happen – then what could be better?

The Zhai Clinic, 020 7486 8438; zhaiclinic.com <http://zhaiclinic.com>

The Fertility Show is at London's Olympia, 6 and 7 November 
 