
As health and care leaders, we believe passionately in the NHS, one of this 
country’s proudest achievements. Since its creation in 1948, it has constantly 
adapted to improve care for patients. Today is no different. Staff in health 
and social care do a superb job treating record numbers, but they are under 
pressure as our nation’s needs increase rapidly. There are also new 
opportunities to improve care by making practical changes to the way the NHS 
works (A&E, cancer and maternity units to close in major NHS overhaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/ae-cancer-and-maternity-units-to-close-in-major-nhs-overhaul>
, 19 November).

The good news is that NHS bodies and local councils have come together for the 
first time across England to develop shared, long-term proposals to improve 
health and care in the communities they serve, based on collaboration not 
competition. Their aim is to make real-world improvements for patients: making 
it easier to see a GP, providing more specialist care in people’s homes, 
speeding up the diagnosis of cancer and offering help faster to people with 
mental ill health. The NHS has begun to set out its own stall to meet the 
challenges of the future. We have a good plan in the Five Year Forward View, 
and are beginning important conversations with the public about how to make its 
vision a reality through sustainability and transformation plans (STPs). Now is 
not the time to go back to the drawing board – instead, we hope that all who 
value our health and care system will support local leaders getting on with 
the important task at hand.
Sir Andrew Cash Chief executive, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Dr Amanda Doyle 
Chief clinical Officer, Blackpool CCG, Sir Andrew Morris Chief executive, 
FrimleyHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> NHS Foundation Trust
, David PearsonSustainability and transformation plan (STP) lead for 
Nottinghamshire

• The Guardian is right to expose the scandal unfolding regarding plans for the
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in many areas of the UK . Local 
campaigners have mounted vociferous opposition to try to protect vital services 
such as consultant-led maternity and A&E. Many are also promoting Save our Beds 
campaigns to try to preserve hospital beds in places with poor public transport 
links. Although people are allowed to speak at local forums, or respond to 
glossy consultation documents, they wonder whether anyone is really listening 
to their concerns.

It feels as if there is a hidden agenda and that the lives of those who live 
in locations with scattered populations and poor infrastructure are not 
important. It may be the case thatJeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> and the government are 
trying to shift the responsibility on to those working at local level, but 
local people know where the blame lies. Further investment in the NHS is vital: 
the alternative is unthinkable. The plan to save £22bn by 2020 must be 
abandoned.
Gillian Telford
Cockermouth, Cumbria

• As a former nurse and now a grandmother I completely agree with Cumbrian 
campaigner Annette Robson (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/ae-cancer-and-maternity-units-to-close-in-major-nhs-overhaul>
, 19 November) that thousands of people, including mothers and babies, will die 
if further NHS cuts go ahead. The feasibility examination of the policy must 
have told the government at least some of this. It is no surprise that mothers 
along with other carers are taking action. We are defending the children we 
have carried for nine months, given birth to and raised, invested our hearts 
and minds in, and others in our families and communities. You report that 
Theresa May told a health chief to ensure hospital closures “did not become a 
big issue in the newspapers”. But she cannot hide the widespread opposition.
Caroline Barker
London

• Centralised health services impose greater demands upon remaining hospitals. 
As catchment areas and their populations increase, so do hospital workloads – 
but there is little present evidence of any hospital having capacity to serve 
more people. Hospitals are required to have capacities to provide ambulance and 
A&E services not only to individuals, but sometimes to large numbers of people 
affected by industrial accidents, large fires, multiple vehicle collisions, 
bridge and building collapse, storm damage, or by river or sea flooding. And 
the additional transferred workload of a centralised hospital shutting down, 
not an unprecedented possibility, is clearly beyond conception.

The proposed centralisation, easy on paper, diminishes essential services of 
whatever kind and for contingencies of whatever cause, at times when immediate 
assistance is essential and close by.
James Lewis
Marshfield, South Gloucestershire

• When Simon Stevens announced the Five Year Forward View he said it would 
cost £30bn. He said he could make £22bn savings in this time and needed £8bn 
more from the government. As the Commons health select committee has shown, the 
NHS is not getting the £10bn that Jeremy Hunt insisted it was getting over six 
years and, as the BMA says, savings are to be made using STPs (NHS plans may be 
cover for cuts, BMA warns, 21 November). Hospitals are in deficit because the 
tariff has been set too low to cover costs and they cannot control the demand 
for A&E services, or the flow of patients trapped in hospital because of lack 
of social care.GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> have had their 
share of the NHS budget cut and are buckling under the strain – which increases 
pressure on emergency services.

The chief executive of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson, told the health committee 
that STPs would not work because there were insufficient funds. Thinktanks such 
as the King’s Fund and Nuffield Foundation also say that the NHS needs more 
money. One would hope that a prime minister who promised to fight against “the 
burning injustice that, if you’re born poor, you will die on average nine years 
earlier than others” would accept that the NHS and social care need more money. 
We spend 9.9% of our GDP on health, while France and Germany spend 11%. If we 
spent another 1% we would have another £20bn each year to spend on health.
Wendy Savage 
President, Keep Our NHS Public

• So NHS England says that sustainability and transformation plans are to 
“drive genuine and sustainable transformation in patient experience and health 
outcomes of the longer term”. What a wonderful double meaning. Our patient 
experience in North Devon will be transformed alright, but not by a fairy 
godmother. And the health outcomes will be transformed as, for example, women 
in labour are forced to travel for anything up to two hours to receive 
obstetric care.

The government is insulting our intelligence over social care, on which the 
STP sums depend so heavily, by discharging patients from hospital more rapidly 
(a main source for its alleged savings). Local government was indeed allowed to 
increase council tax for 2016-17 by 2% for social care. But that figure did not 
even cover the cost of the rise in the minimum wage, so was actually another 
cut, following six years of cuts. Sustainability means underfunding and 
transformation means cutting services. The NHS is being destabilised – staff 
will not apply for jobs at a hospital under threat. We need to speak out now.
Ruth Funnell
Save Our Hospital Services

• What a shame that Margaret Thatcher didn’t live to see her successors 
implement her plan to dismantle the NHS (Thatcher pushed for breakup of welfare 
state despite NHS pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/margaret-thatcher-pushed-for-breakup-of-welfare-state-despite-nhs-pledge>
, 25 November).
Dr Bob Bury
Leeds

• It was deeply disappointing to see the inaccurate reporting on proposals 
under the Bedfordshire, Luton and Milton Keynes sustainability and 
transformation plan (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/ae-cancer-and-maternity-units-to-close-in-major-nhs-overhaul>
, 19 November). Our plans to date are all publicly available. Nowhere does it 
say that any A&E, maternity department or indeed any other hospital service is 
being closed or moved. We have repeatedly said that no decision about any 
service has been made, nor will any decision be made without full public 
involvement and consultation.

Of course none of these messages make for exciting headlines. But it is 
irresponsible and misleading for the reality – that plans are in their early 
stages of being developed and that no decisions about any service have been 
made nor are they a forgone conclusion – to be misrepresented. This is causing 
unnecessary anxiety for local people and for staff. Our commitment is to 
providing the best possible health and social care services for our area. We 
will be working hard to make sure we get clear, consistent information out to 
local people to ensure they are well informed and can get involved in how 
health and social care services are designed and delivered.
Pauline Philip
CEO, Luton and Dunstable University hospital, lead for the Bedfordshire, Luton 
and Milton Keynes STP

• There’s nothing new about the inadequate provision of hospital beds in this 
country. In Miranda Seymour’s book Noble Endeavours, which examines the 
relations between England and Germany over many centuries, reference is made to 
the state of hospitals in 1843. “Berlin, with a population of 365,000, offered 
3,000 hospital beds. Paris with a population of 1 million offered 20,000. 
London, with an enormous population of 2 million could supply a mere 5,000 
beds.” It seems we are determined to cling to Victorian values.
John Watkins
Blackwood, Caerphilly

• I am wondering if there has been any modelling on the ability to staff those 
hospitals which will take over functions of hospitals being downgraded. It 
cannot be assumed that nurses in downgraded hospitals will undertake to travel 
tens of miles each way or relocate nearer to their new jobs. A strong reason to 
pilot this experiment in one area first.
Dr John Watt
Ormskirk, Lancashire

• Dr Griffith’s assertion (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/nhs-private-providers-part-of-problem-not-solution>
, 24 November) that for private companies profit comes before patients is 
correct. This can be demonstrated in Cambridgeshire where ENT outpatient 
referrals were awarded to a private company by the clinical group 
commissioners. Its performance was so dire that in September it had to suspend 
accepting any new referrals for four weeks because of its failure to deal with 
waiting lists. Yet in 2015 the company paid out £1m in dividends, director’s 
fees and profits – money that should have been spent on patient care.
Ian Arnott
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire

• A bit rich of Andrew Lansley (Plea for NHS funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/andrew-lansley-chides-chancellor-lack-of-nhs-and-social-care-funding>
, 25 November) to criticise lack of extra funding for NHS in the autumn 
statement. Remind me, who was it who saddled it with massive spending on 
needless costly reorganisation?
Chris Baker
Minety, Wiltshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 