
There are few things so forlorn as a cliche that has turned into the opposite 
of the truth. One such is the aphorism of Lord Kilmuir, the Tory grandee, who 
declared that "loyalty is the secret weapon of the Conservative party". If you 
were to tell this toDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, he'd surely laugh. So 
would all his recent predecessors as Tory leader. It was not even true in 
Kilmuir's day as he discovered when he was summarily sacked from the cabinet by 
Harold Macmillan in the 1962 "Night of the Long Knives".

The trademark of much Tory history is that the party frequently kills its 
leaders and its leaders often betray their friends. Ted Heath was toppled by 
Margaret Thatcher. She was defenestrated and replaced by John Major. That saved 
the 1992 election for theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, but the Thatcher regicide 
injected a virus into the party's bloodstream that has made life hell for every 
leader since. His party so tortured Mr Major that he felt compelled to reapply 
for his job in the "put up or shut up" contest of 1995. They re-elected him and 
then promptly went back to torturing him. After their 1997 defeat, the Tories 
went through three leaders in eight years before they arrived at David Cameron. 
Just half way into his first (and possibly only) term as prime minister, they 
are at it again. His party swirls with talk of knives being sharpened, 
signatures on no-confidence letters being collected and assassination plots 
being hatched.

And replace him with whom exactly? What fabulously popular alternative do the 
conspirators have in mind? George Osborne? The chancellor who was booed at the 
Paralympics? You cannot be serious. Michael Gove? Move along. Liam Fox? In his 
dreams, but no one else's. Boris Johnson? They'd have to get him into 
Parliament first.

Absurd though it may seem, there are said to be at least three leadership 
campaigns already underway, including a "secret operation" (not very secret 
now, is it?) to seize the succession forAdam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/31/adam-afriyie-pm-in-waiting>, 
a little-known Conservative MP who has never been a minister. This surreal 
story has been so embarrassing for Mr Afriyie that I have to assume that it was 
either promoted by enemies or put about by friends who have an IQ lower than 
room temperature.

For all his flaws, Mr Cameron is more popular than his party or any currently 
viable alternative as leader. So it all sounds ridiculous. Yet this febrility 
over his leadership is the symptom of something serious, a toxic cocktail of 
discontent in his own ranks. Some of it is about specific grievances. More than 
100 Tory MPs will vote against their leader this week overgay marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/01/tories-gay-marriage-defections-resignations>
. For others, the hot issue is the prospect of thehigh speed rail link  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jan/28/hs2-high-speed-rail-links-unveiled>
cutting through their constituencies. There is much fuming that the prime 
minister is keeping the pledge to protect the international aid budget while 
overstretching the military. Some of the right clamour for even sharper 
spending cuts (so long as it is not their own voters who feel the pain). One 
minister who is administering the squeeze on local government told me recently 
that he found negotiating with Labour council leaders much easier than dealing 
with those from his own party who just came to his office to shout at him. A 
further cause of Tory anger with its leadership is the failure to deliver the 
changes to parliamentary boundaries that would have helped their prospects at 
the next election. Hilariously, some of the very same Tories who are blaming 
David Cameron are those who sabotaged reform of the Lords, the act that gave 
the Lib Dems the excuse they needed to put a block on the boundary changes.

Then there are the familiar charges that Mr Cameron is arrogant, cliquey and 
snooty. I have lost count of the number of times I have been regaled by 
Conservative MPs with anecdotes about snubs by the prime minister and his 
circle. It should be said that backbenchers always feel that they are not paid 
enough attention by the boss, but there is a startling malice about the way in 
which some Tory MPs spit about their leader.

None of this reflects well on Mr Cameron's skills as a people manager, but it 
also says something even more worrying about the mental state of his party. No 
leader can accommodate every ideological impulse, personal ambition or 
individual grievance among his MPs. Grown-up parties understand that to govern 
is to compromise. Yet a significant element of the Conservative party, an 
outfit that once prided itself on its pragmatism, seems to have lost sight of 
that.

The most bizarre of the accusations levelled against the prime minister by his 
internal enemies is the charge that he is not really a true Tory. To the 
dispassionate eye of the outside observer, the thesis that their party is 
unpopular and their government is struggling because Mr Cameron is not 
right-wing enough seems ludicrous. He is presiding over a more rapid shrinking 
of the state than Margaret Thatcher ever did. At the same time, he is pushing a 
more radical agenda in welfare and some of the public services than was ever 
achieved by the old heroine of the right. Moreover, he is doing so despite 
operating in coalition with a parliamentary majority borrowed from the Liberal 
Democrats.

That, of course, is his unforgivable crime for many of them: not winning a 
proper Tory victory at the last election, which fuels the growing fear in 
Conservative ranks that the same will happen next time. Mr Cameron's enemies 
within are absolutely correct that this was a big failure, but they are quite 
wrong when they go on to say it was because he did not offer enough right wing 
meat to the voters. The party tried that in 2001 and 2005. In 2001, after four 
years of Labour government, the Tories made a net gain of just one seat. In 
2005, after eight years of Labour and the Iraq war, the Tories made a net gain 
of less than 1% in the share of vote. There has been some fascinating analysis 
of voters who thought about voting Conservative in 2010 but in the end didn't. 
The conclusion from these studies is that swing voters were unpersuaded by the 
Tories not because they were insufficiently right wing, but because they were 
not detoxified enough. Mr Cameron is now paying the price for that.

It was never resolved – probably because he was not sure in his own mind – 
whether his modernisation project was intended as a root-and-branch 
reconstruction of the Tories to make them a majority party over many elections 
or merely a public relations makeover to try to snatch one victory. Because he 
was not clear, the enemies of modernisation within his party were never fully 
confronted and defeated. He campaigned for the leadership on the slogan "change 
to win". But it only half-changed and then it only half-won. Modernisation not 
having been firmly established in opposition, it has gone backwards in 
government.

Most leaders are plotted against at some point and all leaders must handle 
discontent, but there is an intensity to the malcontent among Tories that is 
particular to that party. The Lib Dems have suffered much worse in terms of 
electoral pummellings and miserable poll ratings. Yet Nick Clegg's party has 
broadly displayed a resilience and discipline that must make Mr Cameron 
envious. In the wake of one of Labour's worst election defeats in history and 
then a leadership contest that pitted brother against brother, many predicted 
that it would descend into civil war, as Labour has historically done when 
removed from power. Yet Labour has managed to sustain at least an appearance of 
unity. It may be brittle and rather dependent on Ed Miliband sustaining his 
poll lead. There are tensions that could boil up to the surface as the next 
election comes closer and the party is confronted with some tough choices. But 
at least for now, Labour looks like a model of harmony and discipline in 
contrast to its Tory rivals.

One of the more confident predictions that I make is that these Conservative 
conspiracies will come to nothing before the next election. Barring the 
unforeseeable, David Cameron will lead his party into the contest. But the 
plots are nevertheless damaging; in some ways, the more so if they never come 
to a head. It is destabilising for the prime minister to be constantly looking 
over his shoulder for the flash of daggers. This chips away at his authority 
and makes managing his relations with the Lib Dems even more fraught. It tugs 
him away from the centre and prevents him from being the sort of prime minister 
he wants to be. It impels him to try to soothe the malcontents by throwing them 
reckless policies – such as his about-turn on Europe – that he never originally 
wanted to concede. Each act of appeasement only encourages them to come back 
for more.

The plotters will claim that they have the best interests of their party at 
heart and want to enhance its chances of winning the next election. The hangmen 
will pose as paramedics. Yet their activities make a victory for their party 
even less likely. Labour learned the hard way in the 1980s that fratricidal 
parties do not win elections. The Tories were administered a similar lesson in 
the 1990s and early 2000s. How quickly they have forgotten.
 