
Roland Garros had been hosting the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen> championships for 60 years when 
the second Grand Slam event of the 1988 season began in Paris. The tournament 
featured former greats falling by the wayside, teenagers invading the women's 
singles, French hopes rising and then falling, the Golden Grand Slam dream 
staying alive for two players, and a women's final that set records, yet one 
which Natasha Zvereva would probably prefer to forget.

Brits abroad

For the three British women involved, their experiences at Roland Garros were 
short but not particularly sweet. Clare Wood and Monique Javer both lost in 
straight sets in the opening round, Javer suffering the ignominy of a double 
bagel (she would be in good company come the end of the women's event). Javer, 
a Californian representing Britain, at least offered up a unique reason for her 
loss: "I practised for five hours a day, so I might have over-prepared."

Jo Durie was the only British woman to make the second round and her 
participation had only been secured once Japan's Etsuko Inoue withdrew from the 
tournament. Durie's 7-6 6-2 win over American Terry Phelps was her first win in 
Paris since she had reached the semi-finals of the 1983 tournament. "After four 
years, it was getting to the point where I wondered if I'd ever win a match in 
Paris again," said Durie. Her 6-1 6-4 loss to Elna Reinach in the next round 
quashed any signs of hope.

It was again left to Jeremy Bates to fly the flag for Britain. A four-set win 
over 17-year-old Todd Woodbridge set up a second round match with Italian 
Francesco Cancellotti, a player ranked 44 places below Bates, but a man 
comfortable on clay. At 2-4 down in the deciding set, the writing seemed on the 
wall for Bates, yet in a sterling comeback, he refused to give up, eventually 
taking the set 7-5 in a gruelling contest lasting 3 hours 26 minutes.

Warren Jacques, the Davis Cup captain, was certainly impressed: "We've all 
seen Jeremy let other opportunities slip. This time he showed true grit. It's 
what I've been waiting to see". Bates may have been easily beaten by Magnus 
Gustafsson, but he had at least won a couple of matches, and was the first 
British man to reach the third round since John Lloyd in 1982. Yes, you had to 
claim any little victories you could as a British tennis follower during my 
childhood.

Return of the Mac

From 1986 onwards, John McEnroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-mcenroe> had appeared sporadically on 
the tour, his self-imposed exile from the sport and chronic back injuries 
limiting his chances of adding to his seven Grand Slam singles titles. But in 
1988 he was back at Roland Garros, although he was understandably a little 
apprehensive about his chances: "I've not set my sights too high here, but I 
can't win if I don't enter and this is the one big tournament I haven't won."

A straight sets win over Alexander Volkov set McEnroe on his way – or should 
that be MacEnroe as his name was displayed on the scoreboard – yet the American 
joked that he had been so bad that he could have been defaulted by the umpire. 
McEnroe's unusually relaxed demeanour even extended to sharing a moment with a 
linesman who had inadvertently called a foot fault before McEnroe had thrown 
the ball into the air. "Thanks for calling it before I hit it. You woke me up," 
McEnroe later said to the relieved line judge.

McEnroe's third round opponent was the 16-year-old Michael Chang, a man, or 
should that be boy, who admitted to fantasising about playing against McEnroe 
from a very young age. "Hopefully he'll be intimidated by my reputation," 
McEnroe told the media, before promptly disposing of the young hopeful 6-0 6-3 
6-1. Chang had said before the match: "If he kicks my butt, I'll learn from 
it." Chang must have been a fast learner,judging by his efforts a year later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2013/may/21/michael-chang-ivan-lendl-french-open-1989>
.

The easy win set up a mouthwatering last-16 clash with McEnroe's old foe Ivan 
Lendl. In a match heavily disrupted by rain, McEnroe played some sublime tennis 
to take the first set 7-6, before a moment of controversy levelled matters. 
Leading 6-3 in the tie-break, Lendl hit a shot that looked out, but the 
decision went the way of the world No1,much to the disgust of McEnroe and the 
crowd <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcCYUEj9OzI&t=3m37s>.

Umpire Richard Kaufman had to summon assistant referee Charles Guillemot on to 
the court to calm McEnroe down and to control the crowd, who were fully behind 
the cause of the American. Eventually play resumed, although at 9.23pm the 
match was suspended, an increasingly tetchy McEnroe adamant that conditions 
were so dark that they needed "balls that glow in the dark".

Lendl closed out the match the following morning, winning the last two sets 
6-4 6-4, but McEnroe had been mightily impressive for a man feeling his way 
back into world class tennis on a surface that was not his preferred choice. 
"Hopefully I'll be playing even better by Wimbledon," a departing McEnroe said. 
It didn't quite work out like that, though it was good to have McEnroe back on 
the tennis landscape.

The kids are alright

The women's game was fast becoming the teenagers' tournament. A glance at the 
age range of the quarter-finalists emphasises this: Steffi Graf (18), Bettina 
Fulco (19), Gabriela Sabatini (18), Helen Kelesi (18), Nicole Provis (18), 
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario (16), Natasha Zvereva (17), and the ancient Helena 
Sukova (23). Graf, who had been the youngest winner of the title a year before, 
would be the oldest semi-finalist in the 1988 French Open.

The observant reader may well have spotted an abnormality with regards to the 
last eight: the absence of Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert. For the first 
time since 1981, there would be a Grand Slam singles final that did not have 
either player involved, and you had to go back to 1970 for a quarter-final that 
did not feature either of them. The two stalwarts of the game were beginning to 
be edged out by the younger guns.

Navratilova had been bullish during the championships. She had lost none of 
her confidence. "I consider I'm the best player on the circuit. I'm getting to 
the point where I can't see myself lose," she trumpeted. Her early form was 
good, but there was trouble ahead in the shape of Natasha Zvereva, as a 
complacent Navratilova paid the price for her brashness.

"I just didn't take her seriously enough," admitted Navratilova after her 6-3 
7-6 defeat to Zvereva, an opponent she had previously beaten twice and had only 
lost seven games to. Navratilova's cockiness was perhaps excusable, but Zvereva 
was a dangerous talent; she had won the 1987 girls French Open, Wimbledon and 
US Open titles. Despite declaring that she was not finished and would be back, 
Navratilova now faced a tough slog to regain her glory days.

Evert's career was naturally drawing to an end – her retirement only a year 
away – and the 1988 French Open was another sign that her time was almost up. A 
heel injury had forced her to withdraw from the recent Italian Open, and a 
recurrence of her bursitis condition in Paris was not what the doctor ordered. 
The French tournament officials pushed Evert's third round match with Sanchez 
Vicario back a couple of days to assist her recovery, but even with injections, 
Evert was up against it. Her 6-1 7-6 loss to an opponent more than half her age 
was sadly inevitable.

Jonas Svensson stuns Ivan Lendl

With the surface at Roland Garros not to the liking of the faster court 
specialists in Stefan Edberg, Pat Cash and Boris Becker, all looked set for a 
repeat of the 1984, 1985 and 1987 French Open finals between Mats Wilander and
Ivan Lendl <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ivan-lendl>. Wilander did not 
have things all his own way, however, coming from 5-2 down in a deciding set of 
his third round match against Slobodan Zivojinovic to win 7-5, in a narrow 
escape. Lendl would not be as fortunate though.

Lendl had won the Italian Open before Paris and had not lost on clay for over 
12 months, so his subsequent quarter-final defeat to Sweden's Jonas Svensson 
was a major surprise. It fully deserved the description in The Times as "one of 
the most startling results in the recent history of the French championships".

Lendl's only losses in his previous 32 French Open matches had been to 
Wilander, and now the path looked clear for the Swede to reclaim the title. In 
fairness, there were mitigating circumstances behind Lendl's demise, a chest 
injury greatly restricting his movement and requiring an ice spray on every 
change over. But Lendl did not use his injury as an excuse, giving full credit 
to Svensson, whose position as Sweden's No6 only went to show just how strong a 
nation they were.

"Slowly but surely I knew I was gone. In the end I was hoping for a miracle. 
Perhaps he would be injured, or the ice spray would heal me," said Lendl after 
his exit. The miracle did not arrive though, and Lendl had to tend to his 
wounds and try and get himself ready for Wimbledon a little over a fortnight 
later.

Henri Leconte thrills a nation

When 1983 champion Yannick Noah exited at the fourth round stage to Emilio 
Sanchez (Arantxa's brother), French hopes rested on the shoulders of the 11th 
seed Henri Leconte. The crowd favourite was giving home fans value for money, 
his first two matches going the distance, as Leconte defeated Australian 
qualifier Simon Youl and Bruno Oresar on his way to another marathon against 
Boris Becker in the fourth round.

Rain would again interrupt play, with Leconte finally winning seven hours 
after the start, in a match that saw nearly four hours of gripping drama. "The 
tennis was rich, like a full-bodied red wine," wrote Malcolm Folley in the 
Daily Express. The pendulum swung one way and the other, Becker taking the 
first set, before Leconte took the next two, as the angry German lost his cool 
and was warned for verbally abusing a line judge.

Becker levelled the match, which at times was played in a sandstorm due to the 
blustery conditions on the centre court. Leconte had never lost a five-set 
match in the French Open and he maintained his proud record by breaking Becker 
in the seventh game. He threatened to lose his nerve in the final game – losing 
the first two points and then double faulting on match point – but Leconte let 
out a yell of delight as he got over the line,leaping over the net to embrace 
Becker <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eIfkAdaoyg>.

Inevitably the media references to musketeers and D'Artagnan were widespread 
after Leconte's fine win and during his subsequent passage to the final, 
completed with straightforward wins over Andrei Chesnokov and Lendl's conqueror 
Svensson. Leconte's adventurous approach to the game fitted with these titles, 
as the swashbuckling and charming Frenchman now stood one match away from 
winning a first Grand Slam singles title, and as ever, giving the public what 
they wanted.

Steffi Graf's dominance

Graf had reacted strongly to Navratilova's claims that she was still the best 
player in the world: "She can say what she wants. If I play my best, she'd 
better be careful". Fighting talk from the young German, although to say she 
had the game to back it up was a slight understatement. The Australian Open 
champion, and the recent winner of the West German Open on clay, Graf's route 
to the final left a trail of destruction that was frightening.

A 6-0 6-4 first round win against Natalie Guerree became so mundane for the 
German that she began to experiment with drop shots from the baseline and 
visits to the net. "I shouldn't have done that. I tried too much," admitted 
Graf later. The press were left in no doubt that this would not be happening 
again.

From that point, Graf obliterated anyone else in her path: Ronni Reis 6-1 6-0; 
Susan Sloan 6-0 6-1; Nathalie Tauziat 6-1 6-3; Bettina Fulco 6-0 6-1. Many were 
left in shock and awe at the ease of Graf's journey to the semi-finals.

Before meeting Sabatini in the last four, Graf had played five matches, losing 
just 11 games on the way, and playing a total time of only 3 hours 41 minutes. 
Folley calculated that Graf's earnings for the tournament were working out at 
£156 a minute and it was an often repeated statement that Graf was spending a 
lot longer in the press room than on court.

Sabatini at least pushed Graf a little, losing 6-3 7-6. We didn't know it at 
the time, but the Argentinian had just taken the last games off of Graf in the 
tournament, and could at least boast to having taken 45% of games that the 
German had conceded in Paris. Graf had actually led 5-3 in the second set, 
"before displaying a familiar tendency to pause on the brink of success," as 
The Times put it. Zvereva was about to discover that Graf would not always be 
so charitable.

Andre Agassi arrives

The search for an American winner of the men's singles would go on for another 
year, but the emergence of a fresh talent on the scene in Paris gave hope for 
the future.Andre Agassi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> 
announced himself on the international stage with a run to the semi-finals, and 
along the way made a lot of fans with his superb tennis and charismatic nature.

"Agassi is the tonic American tennis needs. He smiles easily, enjoys his 
tennis, and his opponent's, and flings himself into his shots," wrote the 
Times' Rex Bellamy, who was not the only journalist wowed by the new kid on the 
block.

Dressed in cut-down denim shorts and with his shoulder-length streaked hair, 
18-year-old Agassi was a breath of fresh air, the Daily Mirror reporting how 
his "extravagant shot-making and brilliant movement" had inspired his 
quarter-final win over Perez Roldan. After the match, Agassi blew kisses to the 
crowd, bowed, and shook hands with courtside spectators, further ingratiating 
himself into the hearts of the watching public.

His semi-final against Mats Wilander highlighted just how good Agassi was, 
although he ran out of steam eventually, losing the final set decider 6-0. He 
gave the crowd a few demonstrations of his cheeky persona during the match, 
when he pretended to give money to a linesman after a call in his favour and 
when he stood under an umbrella during a spell of drizzle as Wilander was about 
to serve.

A star had been born, and Wilander was one of many who knew it. "He's a hell 
of a player," Wilander said in gushing praise. "He surprised me. I didn't think 
he was this good. I've never played anybody who hits the ball like that. He's 
going to be in the top 10 for the next five to 10 years."

Wilander was accurate, as he had needed to be in that semi-final. Agassi was 
here to stay and although he would not be the man to break America's French 
Open drought which stretched back to 1955, Nigel Clarke's assertion in the 
Daily Mirror that Agassi "is the most exciting young tennis star in the world" 
was not hyperbole.

Natasha Zvereva's pain

Natasha Zvereva proved that her win over Navratilova was no fluke, defeating 
Sukova and Australian Nicole Provis in the next two rounds. The semi-final win 
was a little fraught, Zvereva squandering two match points in the second set, 
and then having to save one in the decider as she had to fight off stomach 
cramps at the same time. Zvereva had become the first Soviet to reach a Grand 
Slam final since 1974, swelling the coffers of the SovietTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation by £75,000, the 
Minsk-born player given a whopping £10-a-day expenses during her stay in Paris.

Such was the excitement back home that the final would be shown live on Soviet 
television, but it soon became apparent thatthis Glasnost policy should have 
seen the output given an X-rating <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-pHxWFK9KQ0>
. Zvereva was simply blown away by Graf, in a display of ruthlessness from the 
German, as she secured the second leg of her 1988 Golden Slam.

The statistics of that final do not make happy reading: the first double bagel 
in a Grand Slam final since the 1911 Wimbledon women's final; just 32 minutes 
of playing time, split into two periods of nine and 23 minutes due to a rain 
break (the official time given on the scoresheet was 34 minutes, but this was 
being generous to Zvereva); and most damning of all, Graf conceded just 13 
points in the whole match, as a final that many had hoped would be a real 
examination for the German turned into uncomfortable viewing.

Bellamy had written in his final preview that Zvereva was not expected to win 
more than four or five games, and that she would have to cope with the pressure 
of her first Grand Slam final and the intimidation of Graf. Unfortunately, the 
words in his match report reflected Zvereva's plight: "The girl from Minsk, 
intimidated by Graf and the occasion, was reduced to lolloping, lunging 
helplessness and public shame. She was overawed and overpowered".

There should have been no shame in losing so comprehensively to Graf, but of 
course there was. Zvereva never did reach a women's Grand Slam singles final 
again in her career, and although she had a fine doubles record, mention the 
name now and many tennis fans will immediately think of Saturday 4 June 1988. 
It's a shame, as she played her full part in the 1988 French Open tournament 
and she would not be alone in suffering at the hands of Graf.

Mats Wilander gatecrashes the party

The men's final was not quite as one-sided as the Graf-Zvereva match, but for 
the French nation it would provide the dampest of damp squibs. Wilander's 
straight sets win in an hour and 52 minutes was the quickest French Open final 
since 1980, as like Graf,Wilander took the title to complete one half of a 
potential Golden Grand Slam <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RMu1lEKh80>.

It could have been so different had Leconte successfully served out the 
opening set at 5-4. But Wilander went on a run of six consecutive games, losing 
just eight points, as Leconte's challenge disintegrated. No matter how hard the 
16,500 crowd tried, the frailties in Leconte's game as well as the solidity of 
Wilander meant that any hope of the Frenchman staging a dramatic fightback 
faded quickly. At 0-5 down in the last set, Leconte did manage to save a couple 
of match points, yet minutes later Wilander had taken his third French Open 
title with a comfortable 7-5 6-2 6-1 win.

"It's too optimistic to talk about the Grand Slam," Wilander responded as the 
assembled media naturally began to wonder if Rod Laver's 1969 achievement could 
be matched. "There is a chance, but it's still a dream. Winning at Wimbledon is 
a completely different story to winning here."

And so it would prove. But for now Wilander could savour his title win at 
Roland Garros and a move back to world No2. His form may have been a little 
shaky coming into the tournament, but Wilander was making sure he peaked at the 
right time, as his marvellous 1988 continued.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 