
BIG ANNIVERSARY

Expect plenty of footage of Arsène Wenger looking young on TV this week: 
Thursday marks 20 years to the day since Grampus Eight’s highbrow, low-profile 
coach pitched up at Arsenal. At his first press conference at Highbury in 1996 
the 47-year-old told reporters he’d hired Pat Rice as No2, would show 
recovering alcoholic Tony Adams “every respect”, and planned to take a relaxed 
view when it comes to spending money: “Yes, I will sign players but I’m not in 
any hurry.” He also set out his broader philosophy – “I like real, modern 
football, football made of compact lines, of zones, of pressure and quick, 
coordinated movements” – and revealed his biggest personal challenge: “I am 
like every human, I have my weaknesses. I would say to you I try every day to 
be better than the day before but I am conscious that I have to win over these 
supporters. They don’t know me.” They do now.

Bubba Watson is not clubbable but he still has a strong Ryder Cup case | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/14/bubba-watson-ryder-cup-davis-love-wildcards>
MOST EXHAUSTING EVENT

Four weeks after starring in Rio, the Brownlee brothers are back at it again, 
in gruelling action in Mexico at the five-dayITU World Triathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> Grand Final. Highlights of the 
men’s finale are on BBC Two tomorrow at 1.45pm – Alistair and Jonny battling 
Spain’s Mario Mola for the title.

WILDCARD CHOICE

Rickie Fowler, Matt Kuchar and JB Holmes won USA Ryder Cup wildcard status 
last week – a low blow for two-times Masters championBubba Watson. But captain 
Davis Love III still has one wildcard choice left and will make his mind up 
after this week’sTour Championship in Atlanta (from 6pm Thursday, Sky Sports 
4). Watson, last year voted the most disliked player on the PGA Tour by his 
fellow pros, needs to shine to win him over. “My whole goal this year was the
Ryder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> and the Olympics,” he 
said recently. “That’s all I cared about the whole year was making those two 
events. I didn’t care how I did it, as long as I made those events. And I got 
in the Olympics, so I got one more to go, I guess.”

BIG FIGHT

Less than two years after a burglar he was chasing smacked him over the head 
with a lump of concrete, 29-year-oldAnthony “Million Dollar” Crolla takes on 
VenezuelanJorge Linares on Saturday (SS2, 8pm) in the second defence of his 
lightweight belt. Linares isn’t concerned about Crolla’s home advantage. “I 
love fighting in my opponent’s backyard, I love the noise,” he says. “His 
supporters can’t get in the ring with their fighter, it’s just me and him. The 
best fighter is going to win, and I think that’s going to be me.”

INTERNATIONAL ACTION

Having seen how not to do it during Euro 2016, England’s women – already 
qualified – are inEuro 2017 action on Tuesday, facing Belgium (6pm, BBC Red 
Button). Scotland, meanwhile, face Iceland (6pm, BBC Alba).
 