
Tears may dry in seconds. Bruises may disappear in days – and scars might 
eventually fade. But of all the devastating consequences of violence against 
women and girls, there is one lasting impact that cannot be hidden underneath 
clothing or concealed behind a forced smile. In sub-Saharan Africa, every 
minute of every day a woman becomes infected with HIV, adding to the tragic and 
persistent spread of theHIV/Aids 
<https://africansolutions.org/?gclid=CJbCn_r1jLsCFZQ72wodGVoAKQ> epidemic.

They are someone's mother, wife, daughter or sister – and often they are also 
someone's battered and abused victim. Rape, child abuse and domestic violence 
are all driving HIV on the continent. Rapists care little for condoms, which 
means every victim faces a vastly higher risk of HIV infection. African women 
abused by their partner are 1.5 times more likely to acquire HIV; women who 
have been sexually abused in childhood are more prone to the virus; one study 
revealed that child abuse leads to a 66% higher chance of being infected.

These brutal statistics, coupled with the poverty and disempowerment faced by 
most African women, might give a clue or explanation as to why there are twice 
as many young African women living with HIV than young men. There is a direct 
link between violence and HIV. Women and girls living with HIV are more prone 
to abuse, due to the stigma of the virus. A gruesome vicious cycle is formed, 
with violence feeding the epidemic, which in turn feeds the brutality.

Malawi <http://www.malawi.gov.mw> is a case in point. We have both visited 
this small African country and have witnessed women's extraordinary courage, as 
well as their darkest despair: 61% of HIV-positive Malawians are women; 41% of 
Malawian women experience physical or sexual violence. Two-thirds of girls 
experience child abuse, with three-quarters of these incidents taking place in 
schools – the very place where they should be safe and protected from the evils 
of this world. Most pupils suffer in silence, as speaking out is deemed to be 
unacceptable. Fear, stigma and the threat of retribution keeps everything 
closeted, while the issue remains unacknowledged.  

Confronted with this abysmal situation, it is easy to feel helpless; to think 
that there's nothing we can do. Global efforts to prevent new infections, such 
as by condom provision and education programmes have helped lead to dramatic 
drops in HIV rates across the world and more access to anti-retroviral drugs is 
helping millions live normal lives. But there is not an endless supply of money 
to treat the ever increasing numbers of women – and men – who live with HIV.

If we are to reverse the soaring rates of infection, we have to acknowledge 
and break the link with violence. A solely medical approach will not work by 
itself. The root causes, including social behaviour and abusive attitudes 
towards women and girls, have been ignored for far too long and urgently need 
to be addressed.

Malawi, one of the worst-affected countries, has recognised this. Joyce Banda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2012/dec/17/madam-president-malawi-joyce-banda-video>
, the president, has publicly acknowledged the impact that domestic violence 
had on her own life. By doing so, she is helping to break the taboo and bring 
the issue into the open. The government has also drastically improved the way 
it reports and responds to violence against women and girls in recent years, 
while its efforts to tackle HIV have led to a significant drop in the rate of 
infection.

Britain is supporting these efforts. As well as supporting HIV prevention and 
treatment inMalawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, the UK has 
funded a police-led victim support unit to help women who have been abused. We 
also support community work to bring HIV sufferers together, reducing the 
social stigma associated with the disease. We need other African countries, 
together with western donors and NGOs, to build on this work.

Too many governments turn a blind eye, while the lives of their women and 
girls are shattered. We are not fooled by the carefully placed clothing or the 
forced smile. We refuse to look the other way while millions of women and girls 
suffer needlessly. It is time to break the cycle. We must end the violence if 
we are to beat HIV once and for all.

 

Lynne Featherstone is parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Department 
for International Development.Annie Lennox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox> is an HIV/Aids campaigner and 
Unaids ambassador.
 