
Bang on St Stephen's Green in the heart of Dublin, an ugly concrete building 
houses Ireland's most notorious financial institution – Anglo Irish Bank, which 
spearheaded the country's doomed lending binge. And it will be the first Irish 
bank to evaporate – its nameplate will be unscrewed as early as January as the 
government tries to clean up the mess left by toxic finance.

Hot on the heels of an €85bn (£72bn) international bailout, the Irish 
government is preparing a swingeing austerity budget, due to be presented to 
the Dáil on Tuesday under the watchful eyes of the IMF and the country's 
European partners. The Irish people are frustrated and disenchanted – they want 
to punish a "toxic triumvirate" of builders, bankers and politicians.

Spending a few days in Dublin last week, I had a chance to sample a little of 
the vibe close up. The leader of Ireland's trade union congress, David Begg, 
summed it up: "There's a very angry mood in the country. Until recently, if 
you'd stopped somebody on the street and asked them what they really thought, 
they'd have said 'If we keep our heads down for a couple of years, we can get 
back to where we were before'. That was fed by government fiction about green 
shoots of recovery. The dawning realisation is that the picture is far worse."

So far, provisions have been made for €45bn of losses at Ireland's leading 
banks – Anglo Irish, AIB, Bank ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and Irish Nationwide, which amounts 
to €10,000 for every Irish man, woman and child. Using funds from the country's 
national pension reserve, a further €10bn will be added to the bill following 
last month's international rescue package. That's not gone down well.

"It's not a bailout package, it's a transfer of wealth from the ordinary 
worker to the banks," Colm Stephens, a university administration worker, told 
me. "We're being asked to rescue the richest people in the world – the people 
who gambled and lost, who bet on every horse in the race."

If George Osborne took a pillorying for wielding the axe on British spending 
in October, Ireland's Brian Lenihan can expect deeper unpopularity. Expected 
cuts of €15bn over four years in Ireland amount to twice as much, per head of 
population, as Osborne's £81bn slashbacks in Westminster.

Public sector workers in Ireland have taken pay cuts of around 15%, although 
they remain well paid by international standards. The public sector workforce 
will be drop by 25,000 by 2014 compared with 2008, hitting the police, 
judiciary, local government and Ireland's health service. Benefits are falling 
and lower- paid workers are to be brought back into the income tax system. Even 
Ireland's football manager is to share in the pain; Giovanni Trapattoni has 
accepted a 5% pay cut, though as this is from a salary of £1.8m, he should 
still be able to rub along tolerably.

One poll suggested that the senior partner in Ireland's governing coalition, 
Fianna Fáil, has fallen into fourth place behind the two main opposition 
parties, Fine Gael and Labour, and Sinn Féin, raising the prospect of an 
electoral meltdown for Brian Cowen's administration.

There's almost universal agreement that the true villains in Ireland's fiscal 
crisis are the banks who, for all their supposed financial acumen, became 
addicted to lending into a property bubble that was neither rational nor 
sustainable. But the people running Ireland's national finances also have much 
to answer for. It wasn't a good idea, during the boom years, to raise income 
tax threshholds to the point where 45% of the workforce pays nothing. That left 
the state reliant on "transaction taxes" dependent on property deals that were 
never going to last for ever.

It would be foolish to exaggerate Ireland's problems. The shops are still 
busy, the bars are still buzzing. And home repossessions have been fairly 
modest, partly because of the political risk of soon to be state-controlled 
banks such as AIB and Bank of Ireland turfing people out on to the streets.

But behind the scenes, things are tricky – some 23% of Dublin's offices are 
vacant, says property firm CB Richard Ellis. And hopes of an export-led 
recovery will be damaged if contagion spreads acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as Portugal, Spain and Italy 
struggle to shore up confidence in the financial markets.

Ireland's trade union supremo reckons that the country could face a "lost 
decade" of stagnation akin to Japan's experience in the 1990s. Begg has an 
interest in being apocalyptical as he argues against cuts that harm his 
members. But it's going to be a long, hard haul back to prosperity for whoever 
succeeds Cowen as Ireland's taoiseach.
 