
The Darzi review <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/jul/01/nhs.health2> 
treats the paitent as consumers, shopping for the GP or surgeon he or she 
fancies – but is that really what people want from the NHS?

The NHS isn't a branch of Ikea. So, injecting marketplace consumer ideas such 
as "choice 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2224458/GP-catchment-areas-to-end-under-NHS-plans.html>
", defined as shopping around for the GP and surgeon you fancy, plus personal 
budgets and the right to top-up payments, is bound to damage the founding 
principle of the service – equal access to all, free at the point of use.

A Financial Times/Harris poll shows that almost nine out of 10 people believe 
that allowing top up payments without losing the right to other NHS treatment, 
would mark theend of the model 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2e3c3104-4898-11dd-a851-000077b07658.html> that has 
applied for 60 years.

Survey after survey gives the same message. Taxpayers understand that when it 
comes to caring for the sick, some "choices" have to have priority over others. 
But that has to be regulated by a system, however inadequate, not left to the 
ebb and flow of whoever has the most muscle and spare cash amongst individual 
patients.

Allowing top-up payments means that the inequalities that the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> needs to eradicate will, instead, be 
perpetuated. Those who can pay, presumably will. But what of those who can't? 
Similarly with self-management. The depressed, downtrodden and generally 
ill-equipped may prefer access to a decent health centre operated by people 
they know able to give an appointment when required somewhere close to home. 
(One "choice" that seems to find particularly difficult to satisfy.)

"Choice" is a reflector of class. Those with the greatest confidence, 
eloquence and sense of entitlement will exercise that choice most skilfully. 
"Choice" also distorts future planning for the NHS. A poll for the Fabians 
reveals that while 52% believe the NHS should in future "focus more on 
preventing disease and protecting good health", 66% would choose to spend more 
money on hospital doctors and nurses. The budget simply won't stretch both ways.

The NHS is over-influenced by the hospital dominance of the past while trying 
to deal with long-term conditions (asthma, depression, respiratory problems) 
that have no cure and, with the right kind of care, can be managed outside the 
hospital ward in peoples' own homes. Up to 80% of GP consultations now concern 
chronic ill health.

Already 17.5 million people suffer from long-term conditions, some have two or 
three. At the same time, the so-called diseases of affluence, such as obesity, 
are also taking a toll. On present trends, 75% of men will beoverweight by 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/aug/26/health.medicineandhealth>, 
risking cancer, diabetes, and erectile dysfunction among other diseases. If the 
electorate "choose" to invest more and more on hospital care, pumping money 
into private coffers via the private finance initiative, there will be less to 
allocate to the vitally needed area of public health and prevention. The well 
will become an ever increasing minority.

Spending on the NHS is almost £100bn a year yet the wellness part of the 
equation, investment in public health, is infinitesimal in comparison to the 
money that goes on acute spending. The result, in 10 years time, will be a 
bankrupt NHS and a seriously ill population. Of course, that's what comes from 
the exercise of "choice" but it's uninformed choice and therefore, 
paradoxically, damaging to health.

Labour MP and GP Dr Howard Stoate and Bryan Jones, in Challenging the Citadel 
<http://fabians.org.uk/publications/ideas/stoate-nhs-06/>, called for 
government to give a clearer vision of what a non-hospital based NHS might look 
like. In France , in the 1990s, for instance, regional boards were set up to 
cut acute care bed provision by 24,000 beds. In five years, 17,000 beds went. 
In their place was a range of community facilities including Alzheimer's 
centres, dialysis units and specialist cancer units – also releasing resources 
for prevention.

Darzi has said that patients have the right to be treated with dignity and 
respect. No one would disagree with that – but how is high quality care to be 
returned to centre stage when NHS staff are so utterly demoralised, exhausted 
by one wave of reform after another and impotent in the face of managerial and 
target-driven mania?

Planetree <http://www.planetree.org/> is a not-for-profit US organisation that 
has pioneered patient-centred care. It was begun by Angelica Thieriot in the 
1980s. She had had a series of traumatic hospital experiences – high-quality 
high-tech treatment but appalling personal care. Planetree is the result.

"Care" in Planetree hospitals, from small to large, is demonstrated in the way 
staff treat each other as well as the patient. It also means much more than the 
"safe and clean" environment that Darzi's review has demanded. Planetree 
architecture in over 95 hospitals, spread internationally, is 
non-institutional. Instead, it is more like home with kitchens, libraries, 
lounges, gardens and fountains. Good food matters, as does collaboration and 
openness with the patient and his or her family, including a lot of emphasis on 
compassion and touch. It's a lost opportunity that Darzi didn't touch on, an 
alternative vision of what care might mean in the 21st century.

The proportion of people buying private medical insurance has barely shifted 
in the past 15 years. In the FT/Harris poll, 69% agreed that "the NHS is 
crucial to British society and we must do everything to maintain it".

Instead of the recreation of the NHS as a shopping mall, could "care" mean 
something more holistic, acknowledging the huge importance of staff morale in 
its delivery? Could we see a genuine shift away from the domination of 
hospitals to community and primary care and a bigger investment in public 
health ?.

Could we also perhaps recognise that, as the largest employer in Europe, the 
NHS itself is suffering from a chronic case of obesity? It is far too bloated 
for its own good – so how best can it be slimmed down so it is fit for purpose 
for the next 60 years?
 