
Everything you ever wanted to know about being a cartoonist, including how to 
create, write and draw a cartoon for a magazine or newsletter and how to get 
your work published.

This course is for you if...

You’re an amateur cartoonist
You’re interested in the realities of being a full-time cartoonist
You want to create a cartoon for the school publication
You’re a fan of First Dog

Course description

This Masterclass will cover both the theory and practical components of 
cartooning. First Dog will draw on his own experiences to cover issues such as 
how to create a story, how to work with editors, and the realities of being a 
full-time cartoonist. Students will also be given the opportunity to draw a 
cartoon and get feedback on their projects from First Dog – however, please 
note: this is not a drawing course.

You will leave this Masterclass with a clear understanding of how to create a 
cartoon story, what you need to produce a daily or weekly cartoon strip, and 
how to get your cartoons published.

It is recommended that students come to the course with ideas on cartoons they 
enjoy and why, as well as a cartoon they’d like to create. On the day, please 
bring a note pad or drawing pad, pen and pencil.

Topics covered on the day include

 * The First Dog on the Moon story including a show and tell of influences and 
process

 * What is your story?

 * What do we mean by cartoon writing: story, characters, narrative

 * Nuts and bolts: some handy hints

 * Watch First Dog create a complete cartoon using digital gadgets

 * Dealing with editors and publishers

 * Tips on how to market your work through social media

 * Bloggery: how to make yourself famous

 * Merchandising and the t-shirt economy 
Tutor profile

First Dog on the Moon is Australia’s only Walkley Award-winning 
marsupial-based cartoonist and he has done all sorts of things including books, 
radio, stage shows and a lot of lying down. Find First Dog on Twitter 
@firstdogonmoon

Book now

MELBOURNE - Saturday 18 October




Details

Melbourne 


Date: Saturday 18 October
Times: 10am - 5pm
Location: Australian Centre for the Moving Image
Price: $199
Event capacity: 20
Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you 
feel comfortable in.



 