 Anne Frank, The Diary of ANNE FRANK 
I was overwhelmed after finishing this book. Anne's writing had so much depth 
and feeling that it almost felt as if I had travelled to the Secret Annexe and 
spent time with her. After I had finished reading the book, I considered myself 
genuinely lucky because I didn't have to live in a cramped little house with 
eight people; I didn't have to listen to the marching army boots,; I didn't 
have to hear the army planes soaring high above; and I did not have to listen 
to the pounding of my heart in terror.

"I don't think of all the misery, but of the beauty that still remains."

Her courage, bravery and determination stunned me. Had I been in her shoes, 
who knows how long I would have survived… In fact, I always say that if I ever 
see a snake, I would die on the spot; seeing a snake would have been just a 
fraction of the tension she had been under.

I cried as I read the book, especially the section where the family expects a 
visit from the police and goes through a sleepless night.

"The best remedy for those who are afraid, lonely or unhappy is to go outside, 
somewhere where they can be quite alone with the heavens, nature and God. 
Because only then does one feel that all is as it should be and that God wishes 
to see people happy, amidst the simple beauty of nature. As longs as this 
exists, and it certainly always will, I know that then there will always be 
comfort for every sorrow, whatever the circumstances may be. And I firmly 
believe that nature brings solace in all troubles."

We all know her story, but here it is anyway…

Anne was a Jewish girl who had to go into hiding during World War Two to avoid 
the Nazis. Together with seven others, she hid in the Secret Annex on the 
Prinsengracht 263 in Amsterdam. After almost two years in hiding they were 
discovered and deported to concentration camps. Anne's father, Otto Frank, was 
the only one of the eight people to survive. After her death, Anne became world 
famous because of the diary she wrote while in hiding, which Otto finally 
published after returning to Amsterdam. Various other biographies, movies and 
plays followed the diary.

I have been to Amsterdam, but I didn't visit the Anne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> House. (I went to the Van Gogh 
museum. I had not read the book then.) But I can still look through the house 
with the help of the 360 degree tour on Anne Frank's official website.

I hope you are moved by this book. I certainly was. I would request you to 
read this sad and at the same time heart-warming book and it would mean so much 
to me and to Anne (I am sure). Please do read it and I would recommend to 
people of all ages.

"I don't want to have lived in vain like most people. I want to be useful or 
bring enjoyment to all people, even those I've never met. I want to go on 
living even after my death!"

• Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-anne-frank.html>.

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 