
It was not an auspicious start. Just six weeks into Ellie Roy's new job as 
chief executive of the Youth Justice Board (YJB), a 14-year-old boy became the 
youngest person to commit suicide in a British jail. The death ofAdam Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-rickwood>, who was last week found hanging 
in his cell at Hassockfield secure training centre, Co Durham, has prompted 
calls from prison reformers for a public inquiry into the youth justice system 
that Roy now presides over.

In particular, they want the use of secure training centres (STCs) - a new 
breed of privately-run child prisons, funded by the YJB, where children as 
young as 12 are locked up - to be investigated. Roy is unconvinced. She says 
demands for a review must be weighed against the needs of local neighbourhoods 
where young people can wreak havoc. "It's a real dilemma because we have not 
found anything to solve the problems faced by these kids from very troubled 
backgrounds, nor the problems they pose," she says.

"When it gets to the point of locking them up we are either talking about a 
kid who has committed a very serious offence, or a kid who has persistently 
offended no matter what you try."

Roy has spoken to Adam's mother and hopes to meet his family next week. "All 
you can say is what a desperate tragedy it is for them," she says. The board 
has launched a full investigation into the circumstances surrounding Adam's 
death. There are currently 2,637 people under the age of 18 in secure detention 
in England and Wales - double the number a decade ago. Since 1998, 15 children 
have killed themselves in custody.

Perhaps surprisingly, Roy agrees with her detractors who criticise the youth 
justice system for locking up too many youngsters and point to most other EU 
countries where fewer children are channelled through the penal system. "I 
agree with the campaigners who say we lock up too many kids, in the sense that 
we ought to be doing a lot more at a much earlier stage to make sure we don't 
end up having to remove kids from their families and communities because of the 
difficulties they are presenting," she says. "The board's view is that we 
should do more, and we are keen to do more, to ensure that where possible those 
kids are supervised in the community."

She stresses the excellent work that multi-agency youth offending teams - 
whose work is overseen by the YJB - have been doing across England and Wales in 
the past four years to support and advise young offenders. "We do everything 
possible to get them into constructive activities and to deal with the problems 
they are facing in their own lives."

The board's hands are tied when it comes to the courts serving increasing 
numbers of custodial sentences on children. It does, however, have a choice 
about which type of detention to send them to: young offenders institutions 
(YOIs), where the majority are detained; local authority secure units, which 
have around 260 boys and girls; or the three STCs where 180 are currently 
locked up.

Some 76% of the YJB's budget is spent purchasing custodial places from the 
prison service, local authorities and private contractors including Premier 
Custodial Group, which runs Hassockfield, and Group 4, which operates the two 
other STCs in Medway, Kent, and Rainsbrook, near Rugby.

Roy, who is married to the head of the prison service, Phil Wheatley, denies 
any conflict of interest over purchasing decisions and says it is "neither here 
nor there" whether the private or public sector is running the service. What is 
critical, she believes, is to ensure the custodial experience is a constructive 
one. Where a child is particularly vulnerable because of their age or mental 
health she says the board would try to make sure that they were detained in a 
local authority unit or a STC.

Local authority secure units, which often have no more than 20 beds, are 
staffed by people trained in child welfare - including experienced social 
workers - with a high ratio of staff to young people, allowing for intensive 
support. In comparison, STCs have up to 72 beds and recruit staff from a 
variety of backgrounds, who undergo a nine-week training course which Roy says 
gives them enough skills to recognise mental health issues.

Roy talks at some length about the tremendous problems faced by most children 
in custody including "great difficulties at school, being excluded from school, 
being failed by family, mental health issues and substance abuse: many have 
been in the care system", and she rattles off statistics about their low 
educational attainment - "more than a quarter have literacy and numeracy levels 
equivalent to those of an average seven-year-old".

She adds: "It's probably beyond the imagination of the average person in the 
street to understand just what they've been through and where they've come 
from."

If there were better mental health teams working with these kids at an early 
stage, they would probably not end up in the criminal justice system, she 
accepts. "Mental health needs are a big, big, big issue and one we haven't 
really got to grips with at all."

Given the kids' high levels of need, you could be mistaken for thinking that 
the YJB must be purchasing more custodial places from local authorities. But 
quite the opposite. Between April 2003 and June 2004, there were a fifth fewer 
children in local authority secure units. The board has contracts with 15 local 
authorities. It stopped contracting with two local authority-run units last 
year that have subsequently closed and a further two which are planning to 
close.

A place at a local authority secure unit does not come cheap: around £150,000 
a year, compared to £100,000 at a STC and just £50,000 at a YOI. Does cost 
determine purchasing decisions? "There is a cost factor," admits Roy. "We can't 
afford to lock everyone up in a local authority secure unit and there are not 
enough local authority places. We shouldn't be spending money on intensive 
things if we can provide a decent regime for less."

No doubt this is one reason why the board is pressing ahead with the opening 
of the fourth and largest STC - Oakhill, in Milton Keynes - later this month. A 
fifth is scheduled to open soon in Wales.

As their name suggests, STCs focus on education and training. Roy claims a 
number of children are making good progress - though no figures are yet 
available - and she cites positive inspectorate reports to emphasise that they 
are doing a good job. She is keen to stress, however, that the YJB's primary 
purpose is to prevent offending. "What we know is that if a child hasn't 
offended by the age of 14 then they are much less likely to."

The YJB is in discussions with the Department for Education and Skills about 
how to identify kids and parents who need help at an early stage and providing 
intensive support for families. It is also in talks with the Home Office about 
the impact that initiatives from Number 10 - which have widened the pool of 
young people who could now be drawn into the criminal justice system for 
staying out late or spraying graffiti - might have on its work.

"We need to be very careful in demonising and criminalising young people," 
says Roy. "We do that at our peril." She admits she hung around on street 
corners with her friends when she was growing up in Co Tyrone. "Lots of us did. 
I wasn't an angel but I didn't get into grievous trouble and I had a mother who 
would have punished me if I'd done anything anti-social."

The CV

 Age  50 

 Status  Married, two children, two stepchildren 

 Lives  Hertfordshire 

 Education  Strabone Convent Grammar School; University of Ulster (BSc/MSc in 
social administration)

 Career  1974-76: social worker, Northern Ireland; 1976-78: social worker, 
London; 1979-85; probation officer/senior probation officer, Northern Ireland; 
1985-92: senior probation officer, Humberside; 1992-95: assistant chief 
probation officer, Lincolnshire; 1997-2000: chief probation officer, 
Northamptonshire and member of national Parole Board; 2000-03: crime reduction 
director, Government Office for London; 2003-04: national crime reduction 
director, Home Office

 Interests reading, music, travel
 