
Under the watchful stare of her father-in-law, Nargis says she felt "shy" on 
her wedding day. Away from him, she looks around nervously, whispering "I was 
frightened. Again and again I felt fear, fear, fear." Nargis was married when 
she was just 12 years old; her parents made the decision without consulting 
her. "When I was in school and with my friends, I was very happy," she 
remembers fondly. Now, Nargis's days consist of cooking, cleaning, and obeying 
orders.

Nargis is just one of 10 million girls worldwide married every year as 
children, according to the World Health Organisation. The United Nations 
identifies children as anyone under 18, and declares the decision to marry 
cannot be made until that age as children lack the "full maturity and capacity 
to act". In Bangladesh, early marriage is illegal, yet 66% of girls are married 
off when they are still considered children in the eyes of the law – the 
highest rate in south Asia and the fourth highest in the world.

Early marriage abuses a girl's human rights. Boys are affected too, but the 
effect on girls is more widespread and has greater impact. The practice is at 
odds with three UN human rights documents that Bangladesh has signed, such as 
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, 
but its consequences violate many more.

When a girl marries she usually leaves school and is taken to her marital home 
where she often remains, rarely venturing to towns and sometimes with limited 
access to her family. Poor maternal health, sexually transmitted infections, 
infant mortality, violence, abuse, illiteracy, isolation, psychological trauma 
and suicide are common among young brides. "I want to tell other girls that the 
age I got married was not good. Not for health, for family, for education, for 
anything," says Nargis.

"Two years after my marriage, I gave birth to a baby boy." Nargis frowns, 
looking at the floor. "There were complications after the birth. I don't know 
why. He survived for 16 days, but then he died." Nargis was 14 years old.

A teenage girl's child is more likely to be premature and less likely to 
survive than if the mother is in her 20s, states Unicef. The mother, in turn, 
is twice as likely to die (five times more likely if under 15). Early marriage 
hinders Bangladesh's progress towards the internationally agreed Millennium 
Development Goals, two of which address the need to reduce child mortality and 
improve maternal health. Nargis was lucky to survive. Four years later she gave 
birth again – to a healthy son.

"I really want to go back to school," says Nargis sadly. Her education ended 
after her marriage, which is underreported as a reason for leaving school. Many 
girls' families believe the primary responsibility of a wife is to the home and 
children. Without schooling, girls lose the chance to gain skills to build 
better livelihoods for themselves and their families.

However, child marriage continues and girls' views and needs count for little 
because of double discrimination: as females, they are disadvantaged by 
negative attitudes and beliefs about the value of a woman's life; as children, 
they have reduced status in their household and community because of their 
youth.

"In Bangladesh, families believe that sons are the ones to take care of the 
family in the future," explains Runia Mowla, gender specialist in Bangladesh 
for the charity Plan International. "But if they have a daughter, she just gets 
married. So, for a poor family, what's the point of investing in her health or 
education?" When families cannot support their children, marriage can ease the 
financial burden. Where families value girls less, they are first to go.

Families also think early marriage will avoid the risk of social shame if 
their unmarried daughters get pregnant, whether through consensual sex or rape. 
Nargis's family worried that she would receive inappropriate attention from 
boys if she remained unmarried.

Attempts to enforce laws against child marriage are hampered by a lack of 
birth registration: without a birth certificate, girls cannot prove they are 
too young to marry. "We try to prevent, rather than prosecute," says Debashish 
Nag, government administrator in Nargis's area, Sreepur, "because there is no 
law to separate a child marriage once it occurs."

Early marriage receives little international coverage because, despite being 
illegal, tolerance for it comes from all levels of Bangladeshi society: 
government officials, community elders, fathers, mothers and brothers. However, 
signatories to the UN's Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, including Bangladesh, are obliged to prevent child marriage. It is easy 
to write these girls off as victims of religious, cultural or traditional 
extremism, but early marriage is just as much a result of poverty, gender 
inequality, and even increased financial pressure caused by natural disasters 
or climate change.

Earlier this year, Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh's female prime minister, made 
commitments to enforce existing legislation for ending child marriage. Some 
opponents described this move as anti-Islamic; using the prophet Muhammad, who 
married a child, Aisha, as an example. Changing traditional belief systems is 
difficult, but Runia Mowla believes the few people who support child marriage 
for religious reasons have misinterpreted texts, and many Bangladeshi 
politicians support international efforts to halt the practice.

Education projects raise awareness and encourage collective action at the 
grassroots. The Bashantek Slum Children's Group, in inner-city Dhaka, meets in 
a tin shed decorated with posters about health and the impact of child 
marriage. "Whenever we try to stop a marriage, we visit the family and talk to 
them about the negative impacts. Then we go to the local elders for help. It is 
really painful when they don't listen to us, when they don't want to 
understand," says 17-year-old group member Deepa earnestly. "But when we can 
stop a marriage we feel proud, and we are happy."

Early marriage happens in the UK too. The Forced Marriage Unit works with 
diplomatic missions abroad to help UK nationals who are victims. Within the UK, 
it assists individuals and professionals, such as teachers, to protect these 
children. Adam Short of Plan UK says it is "leading the way" among donor 
countries, and hopes that the government will "step up education efforts in 
communities to which UK nationals are likely to be taken". Nag emphasises that 
UK efforts will be most effective in partnership with local NGOs, to ensure 
cultural sensitivity.

Girls and women show little support for a practice that robs girls of their 
childhoods and catapults them into womanhood. However, with good public 
education, proper law enforcement and more attention from the international 
community, girls like Nargis can be protected in future. "If you read this, 
tell your friends," shouts an impassioned Jaya, 13, from the Bashantek group. 
"Tell everybody what is happening to our girls all over the world. If everybody 
knows, then we can make it change!"

• Some names have been changed
 