
It was the defining book of my early adolescence and, it seemed at the time, 
everybody else's as well.The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jan/15/adrian-mole-townsend-classic-review?newsfeed=true>
 was the only book I can remember becoming a phenomenon, in the same way that a 
film or a TV show or a band would become a phenomenon. It swept through my 
school like a craze, like the Rubik's Cube with knob jokes, or Panini Football 
'81 stickers with a streak of social comment about Margaret Thatcher's Britain.

Indeed, it became such a craze that my school eventually banned it, with 
exactly the effect you might expect: it made the book even more popular, 
lending Adrian Mole, an Abba fan who still wore flares in the early 80s, a 
deeply unexpected sense of outlaw cool. Perhaps they banned it because of the 
amount of time its hero spends obsessing about his penis and reading a porn 
magazine called Big and Bouncy; they were saving us from ourselves. More likely 
because banning it formed part of the English department's apparently dauntless 
campaign to dissuade pupils from reading anything at all: the classroom was 
lined with Penguin Classic editions of The Moonstone, Dombey and Son, Jane 
Eyre, and sundry other novels carefully handpicked for their lack of appeal to 
your average 12-year-old boy. They were the kind of books that evenAdrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adrian-mole>, with his pretensions to 
being an intellectual ("I wrote to Malcolm Muggeridge asking what to do about 
being one"), would have considered a schlep.

The ban notwithstanding, something similar was clearly happening all over the 
country. The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole was published on 7 October 1982: three 
days, coincidentally, afterthe Smiths <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/smiths> 
played their first gig, which rather makes the week commencing 4 October 1982 
the zero hour of solipsistic 80s angst. Initially, it received little fanfare, 
as befits a book that was written in secret: its author Sue Townsend had been 
writing for 20 years, always hiding the results from her then-husband and 
children. A glowing review by Jilly Cooper first pushed it into the bestseller 
chart, but teenagers kept it there "for what seemed like years," laughs 
Townsend down the phone from her home in Leicester, where she has just 
completed a new novel, The Woman Who Went to Bed. "At one point the hardback 
and the paperback were both No 1. Then The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole came 
out and that went to No 1. They just stayed there. There was cheering all over 
literary London when they finally weren't No 1 any more. I was carving up the 
bestseller list with these two bloody books."

The thing is, she says, the book wasn't even aimed at teenagers: "It was 
written for parents, that was the intended audience. It was for the mothers of 
teenage boys."

That seems obvious now. Reading it as a 40-year-old father, I recognise it as 
a book clearly written by one of my own: Mole is simultaneously lovable and 
completely exasperating, and as anyone who has had kids will tell you, love and 
complete exasperation are pretty much the defining emotions of parenthood. I 
find my interest resting less on Mole and his on-off girlfriend Pandora than 
his mum and dad, particularly his mum Pauline, with her ambitions crushed by 
the suburbs and her late-flowering feminism and her fantastic line in The 
Growing Pains about how the only thing more boring than listening to other 
people's dreams is listening to other people's problems.

Indeed, reading it as a 40-year-old father, I occasionally wonder what I got 
out of it 30 years ago. I missed almost everything I now love about the book. I 
didn't notice how doleful its very Midlands sense of humour is – like a long 
resigned sigh you laugh at – or how beautifully drawn the other characters are: 
not just his parents, but Bert Baxter, the octogenarian communist who refuses 
to die until he sees capitalism dismantled, and Pandora's earnest, 
Guardian-reading family, their marriage torn asunder bythe foundation of the SDP
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/jan/25/past.julianglover>. I didn't 
get a lot of the references. I had no idea who Iris Murdoch was, nor Malcolm 
Muggeridge, nor indeed RD Laing, whom one of Mole's teachers doorsteps during a 
school trip to London in the hope he will give the delinquent Barry Kent "a 
quick going-over". And I completely overlooked how Townsend uses Mole's naivety 
as a vehicle for the occasional burst of more vicious wit: "Bert showed me a 
picture of his dead wife," he writes. "It was taken in the days before they had 
plastic surgery."

"That would have been a completely serious point to Adrian too," says 
Townsend. "He wouldn't think there was any humour in that at all. When it was 
done as a radio play that was what was so wonderful, the actor who read it was 
13¾ as well and he didn't get it at all. He read it without any semblance of 
humour in it: he didn't know."

And 30 years ago, that was the point. I identified with Adrian Mole, which on 
one level seems bizarre – he is a self-obsessed prig and a hypochondriac to 
boot – but on another seems perfectly understandable. His brand of adolescent 
angst felt and still feels more realistic and relevant to me than any other 
hero of the great teenage novels I went on to read.Holden Caulfield 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2011/jan/13/catcher-in-the-rye-sequel-good-idea?intcmp=239>
 might have been alienated, but he knew how to book into a hotel, get served 
cocktails and hire a prostitute, all of which marked him out as almost 
unfathomably exotic and alien. Adrian Mole couldn't even repaint his bedroom 
without the Noddy wallpaper showing through, which seemed much more my style.

I fell so in love with Mole that, in lieu of any new books about him, I bought 
Joe Orton's diaries <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/orton>, simply because 
they had a quote from Townsend on the cover, thus adding myself to a long line 
of teenage boys who found an encounter with Joe Orton to be rather an 
eye-opening experience. And I fell so in love with Mole that I made the fateful 
decision to start keeping a diary of my own. Actually, fateful isn't the right 
word: it implies something happened. That was the problem. Nothing happened. 
The only way my diary would ever have been considered fateful was in the event 
that someone read it and was bored to death as a result.
 Alexis Petridis as a teenager in the 1980s. Photograph: Guardian 
Adrian Mole may have been largely oblivious to the events that were taking 
place in his life - "there's always drama swirling around him, affairs 
happening, people falling in love," says Townsend, "but most of it passes him 
by. He really believes that his mother and Mr Lucas won't let him in the 
kitchen because they've got their hands full fixing the boiler" – but at least 
he had events to be oblivious of. I, on the other hand, embarked on a career as 
a diarist unabashed by the fact that nothing of interest whatsoever took place 
in my life. I went to an all-boys school, so there was no Pandora and thus no 
need to spend time worrying about the size of my thing. Our school trips passed 
without a Barry Kent-like figure going awol, then getting arrested in a sex 
shop for the theft of some Grow It Big cream and two "ticklers". My parents 
stubbornly declined to lose their jobs in the recession, or get wildly drunk or 
run off to Sheffield to set up home with an insurance salesman ("Was it an act 
of God?" cackles Bert Baxter, brilliantly, when Mole informs him of this turn 
of events).

Furthermore, I didn't use it to record my feelings either, thus managing the 
remarkable feat of being even more buttoned-up than Adrian Mole. I suspect my 
reluctance to do so might have had something to do with growing up in 
Yorkshire, a part of the world famed for many things, but never a fatal lack of 
reserve on the part of its male population. For all I know, it might have 
changed with the times –the streets of Keighley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2011/mar/26/lets-move-to-keighley-and-haworth-west-yorkshire>
 might these days be thronged with men weeping on strangers' shoulders as they 
unburden themselves of their innermost woes – but in the Yorkshire that I knew, 
discussing your feelings as a man wouldn't have been considered a sign of 
weakness so much as proof that you were mentally ill. So I didn't. "Got up, 
went to school, came home, had tea, played computer games, went to bed," read 
my diary, over and over again, like someone making an incredibly heavy-handed 
point about the mundanity of middle-class life in the suburbs.

The book's other great appeal, even before my school banned it, was that it 
carried the slight whiff of the forbidden. Perhaps because it wasn't actually 
intended for kids, perhaps because Townsend "thought it was a scandal that 
children didn't know about their sexuality, that no one ever talked about boys 
and what happened to them at that age", the book was pretty racy stuff, at 
least by the standards of the time. Watch a sitcom from the early 80s and you 
can still hear a slight gasp in the audience's laughter when a character says 
"bloody": two years before Adrian Mole was published,the BBC had banned the 
Specials' Too Much Too Young 
<http://www.last.fm/music/The+Specials/_/Too+Much+Too+Young> because it 
featured the word "contraception". I can remember a cassette of the Jam's 
Setting Sons being passed around like contraband at my school: astonishingly, 
one song used the word "fucking". So did 12-year-old schoolboys, of course, and 
so did The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole: decorously asterisked out, but you 
didn't need to be an expert in semantics to know what had been censored. It 
addressed sex and drugs, albeit through a cloud of bathos, which was, and 
probably still is, how most teenagers experience them. Mole ends the book 
hospitalised after attempting to sniff glue ("nothing spiritual happened but my 
nose stuck to the model aeroplane"). Almost uniquely, it pulled off the trick 
of appearing to speak to teenagers unmediated.

Speaking to Townsend <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/sue-townsend> 30 years 
later, I am struck by the fact that she sounds exactly like I had thought the 
author of Adrian Mole would sound when I was 12, like a kind of dream auntie, 
with an innate understanding of teenagers, a propensity for hooting with 
laughter and telling funny stories: about her friendship with the late Jeffrey 
Bernard, her time working in youth clubs and a South American tribe she once 
read about who banished their children at age 12. "Imagine the meeting where 
they decided on it! 'God, what can we do about this? Why won't they come out of 
their hut? If they kick that football into the fire again…'"

And occasionally, she sounds remarkably like Adrian Mole. When I tell her 
about my school banning the book, she laughs again. "That's so ridiculous. I 
can remember being sent out of class for reading Madame Bovary under the desk 
when I was about 14, instead of listening to some crappy thing about British 
fishing methods, dredging as opposed to trawling. Thrown out for reading 
a classic!" Just my luck! No one notices I'm an intellectual!

But perhaps we all sound remarkably like Adrian Mole sometimes. Townsend kept 
writing about him: eight books in total, all brilliantly funny, dragging him 
from the height of Thatcherism to the dying days of New Labour, from acne to 
prostate cancer. In some ways, that first book reads like a period piece now, 
perfectly capturing a Britain that I can just about remember, a grimmer, 
greyer, more earnest country than the popular image of the early 80s as a riot 
of shoulder pads, dayglow legwarmers and New Romantics would have you believe: 
a country where everybody smoked indoors all the time, the only thing open on 
Sundays was the garden centre, Channel 4's idea of prime-time programming was 
In The Pink ("a feminist cabaret celebrating women's lives through poetry, 
dance and music") and the letters page of Smash Hits hosted what editor David 
Hepworth memorably described as "letters from schoolgirls about the miners' 
strike, written on Holly Hobby notepaper". Yet something about the central 
character transcends his era and even his age. After all, his default position 
is that his is the solitary voice of sanity in a world gone mad. Who can 
honestly say they don't feel like that on a regular basis?
 