
The stately homes of England 

How beautiful they stand!

Amidst their tall ancestral trees,

O'er all the pleasant land.

(Felicia Hemans, 1827)

Evelyn Waugh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh> came to regret 
Brideshead Revisited. In a 1959 preface to its reissue, he apologised for 
having infused it "with a kind of gluttony, for food and wine, for the 
splendours of the recent past, and for rhetorical and ornamental language, 
which now with a full stomach I find distasteful". The excess was due to the 
wartime conditions in which the novel had been written, he explained:

It was impossible to foresee, in the spring of 1944, the present cult of the 
English country house. It seemed then that the ancestral seats which were our 
chief national artistic achievement were doomed to decay and spoliation like 
the monasteries in the sixteenth century. So I piled it on rather, with 
passionate sincerity.

Pile it on he certainly did, revering Brideshead for its continuity ("Year by 
year, generation after generation, they enriched and extended it; year by year 
the great harvest of timber in the park grew to ripeness"), and condemning the 
chippy provincial platoon commander, Hooper, for daring to comment, as he and 
his troops set about requisitioning Brideshead: "It doesn't seem to make any 
sense – one family in a place this size. What's the use of it?" In the event 
the anticipated destruction of the English country house by socialist vandals 
like Hooper did not occur, and Waugh was relieved as well as embarrassed to 
find that his novel had been a "panegyric preached over an empty coffin". 
Still, its redundancy seems to have gone unnoticed both by admiring readers and 
by the makers of the 1981 television series and 2008 film.

That his novel would still be popular more than half a century later would 
have surprised Waugh. He would be even more surprised to find that novels with 
an English country house setting are among the most acclaimed written in recent 
years, among them Kazuo Ishiguro'sThe Remains of the Day (1989), Ian McEwan's 
Atonement (2001) and Sarah Waters's The Little Stranger (2009). Next month 
brings another notable addition to the genre, Alan Hollinghurst's compelling 
new novelThe Stranger's Child, set partly in a 3,000-acre estate called Corley 
Court. All these are historical novels, set at different points of the last 
century, with Hollinghurst's spanning 95 years and concluding in 2008. Like 
Waugh's novel, they're also revealing about present-day preoccupations. And 
what they confirm is the continuing attraction of the English country house to 
the literary imagination.

Although they've done enough research plausibly to depict what goes on in one, 
or what used to, none of these novelists grew up in a country house. If it's 
inside knowledge we're after, we'd do better to readSnobs by Julian Fellowes 
(aka Baron Fellowes of West Stafford, author ofDownton Abbey), or pay a visit 
to a National Trust or English Heritage property, or tune in to Dan 
Cruickshank's television seriesThe Country House Revealed, which takes us 
behind doors normally closed to the public. What attracts the non-U 
contemporary novelist to country houses is the space they afford for gathering 
a group of diverse characters – servants as well as masters – under one roof, 
so as to watch how tensions develop, love affairs begin and catastrophes 
unfold. In this, they're also engaging with a tradition that runs from Pope, 
Fielding and Austen to Forster, Wodehouse and Waugh. That tradition is 
reflected in the number of classics with houses as their title –Howards End, 
Waverley, Wuthering Heights, Mansfield Park, Northanger Abbey, The Spoils of 
Poynton – not to mention the fictional houses made so memorable that they rank 
with real ones – Pemberley (home to Mr Darcy), Manderley (home to Max de 
Winter) Thornfield (home to Mr Rochester), Baskerville Hall, and so on.

As Mark Girouard points out in his anthology A Country House Companion, 
there's a mythology surrounding English country houses that extols them as 
"magical places" and their owners as wise custodians who tend the land, look 
after their tenants and servants, devote their lives to public service, fill 
their galleries with beautiful pictures and their libraries with rare books, 
and are unfailingly hospitable to friends and guests. Predictably, the most 
zealous purveyors of the myth have been aristocrats themselves, who depict 
their homes not as monuments to power and wealth but as embodiments of grace 
and gentility. Eager to establish its democratic credentials, Vita 
Sackville-West portrays her family home, Knole, not as the vast pile it is – 
365 rooms, 52 staircases, 12 entrances and 7 courtyards, set in a 1,000-acre 
deer park – but as "the greater relation of those small manorhouses which hide 
themselves away so innumerably among the counties . . . It has all the quality 
of peace and permanence; of mellow age; of stateliness and tradition. It is 
gentle and venerable."

The myth of the country house is seductive but authors aren't obliged to sign 
up to it; they can also question, satirise and subvert, as Noël Coward does 
when he rewrites Felicia Hemans: "The stately homes of England / How beautiful 
they stand, / To prove the upper classes / Have still the upper hand." 
Certainly the country houses that appear in contemporary fiction are far from 
gentle and venerable. The home of the Tallis family in McEwan'sAtonement is 
ugly – "barely forty years old, bright orange brick, squat, lead-paned baronial 
Gothic, to be condemned one day in an article by Pevsner, or one of his team, 
as a tragedy of wasted chances, and by a younger writer of the modern school as 
'charmless to a fault'." Hundreds Hall, in Waters's novel, is decaying, creepy 
and a home – or so it seems – to poltergeists. As for the "violently Victorian" 
Corley Court in Hollinghurst's novel, with its "stained glass windows that kept 
out the light, the high ceilings that baffled all attempts at heating, the 
barely penetrable thickets of overladen tables, chairs and potted palms that 
filled the rooms", the suggestion that these "inhuman aspects" and 
"grotesqueries" might be part of its charm is rudely discarded by its owners, 
who are keen to make fashionable alterations.

If the houses themselves are unattractive, their occupants are even less so. 
Stevens, the butler inThe Remains of the Day, might stay loyal to his boss Lord 
Darlington but the reader unmasks him as a Nazi sympathiser. The frozen 
Caroline inThe Little Stranger feels more protective of her dog than of the 
child it savages, and – like her war-damaged brother Roderick – is snobbishly 
inept when dealing with the lower orders. The Tallis family inAtonement, when 
misled by 13-year-old Briony, are all too quick to identify Robbie – the son of 
the cleaning lady – as a rapist, though the real offender comes from their own 
social caste. Hollinghurst's Cecil is charismatic, a poet in the manner of 
Rupert Brooke, but there's a dangerous power about him, a droit de seigneurial 
swagger, which he doesn't fail to exploit.

These four novels are about much more than country houses: Waters's plays with 
the conventions of the ghost story, McEwan's has a section on Dunkirk, 
Ishiguro's is a study in emotional repression, and Hollinghurst's is, among 
other things, a bibliographical thriller. And insofar as they take property as 
a theme, they address issues familiar to most of us – everything from 
inheritance and refurbishment to faulty wiring. "Aren't you ever amused at the 
solemnity with which we middle classes approach the subject of houses?" 
Margaret Schlegel asks Mr Wilcox inHowards End. What she calls solemnity has 
now become a national obsession, fed by endless television documentaries about 
buying houses and doing them up. Like property pages and estate agent windows 
with their multimillion-pound homes, country house novels allow us to luxuriate 
in places we could never own – to linger in long galleries, gaze at ancestral 
portraits and roam the gardens and parkland. They're appealing to film 
companies, too –Atonement and The Remains of the Day became big-budget movies, 
and there's every chanceThe Little Stranger and (no relation) The Stranger's 
Child will follow suit.

But the motivation for these authors isn't the prospect of movie deals. Nor do 
nostalgia, aestheticism or attachment to privilege play much of a part. What 
draws them to a country house setting is the space it offers for everything to 
happen under one roof; the house of fiction has many rooms, but country house 
fiction has more rooms than most. There's also the opportunity to play with 
ideas and motifs that date back centuries. Plus ça change; in country house 
literature things move slowly or not at all. However smartly renovated, the 
same few themes, characters and plot-twists come up again and again.

1 Englishness?


The Stately Homes of England

Although a trifle bleak

Historically speaking

Are more or less unique.

"Of all the great things that the English have invented and made part of the 
credit of the national character," wrote Henry James, "the most perfect, the 
most characteristic, the only one they have mastered completely in all its 
details, so that it becomes a compendious illustration of their social genius 
and their manners, is the well-appointed, well-administered, well-filled 
country house." Coward and Waugh likewise bought into the notion of uniqueness. 
But is Chatsworth any more quintessentially English than, say, a working-class 
terrace in Derby or a mobile home in Jaywick? Besides, the idea that there's 
something quintessentially English about country houses is to ignore Russian 
dachas, French châteaux, Italian villas, Anglo-Indian hill stations and the 
"big houses" of the Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland.

As with the houses, so with the literature. It's arguable that Irish country 
house literature surpasses ours, because the conflicts it dramatises – both 
political and religious – are on a larger scale. William Trevor'sThe Story of 
Lucy Gault, for instance, begins in 1921, during the struggle for independence, 
with an episode involving the IRA, the British army, an Anglo-Irish landlord, 
and an arson attack. Then there's Yeats, Elizabeth Bowen, Jennifer Johnston, 
Molly Keane, Caroline Blackwood'sGreat Granny Webster, and many more.

And the master of the form is surely Chekhov, whose plays – set on country 
estates under threat of being sold off because their owners are indolent, 
prodigal, alcoholic or unworldly – have become integral to British theatre. In
The Cherry Orchard (currently playing at the National) Madame Ranevskaya and 
her brother Gayev carelessly assume that something will turn up to solve their 
financial problems, despite warnings from the entrepreneurial Lopakhin that 
they must act. Like Mr Wilcox inHowards End, Lopakhin belongs to the world of 
"telegrams and anger", and in his forward thinking, if nothing else, he's the 
natural partner of the leftwing student Trofimov, who rages against the sins of 
his aristocratic hosts:

All your ancestors were serf-owners, possessors of living souls. Don't you see 
that from every cherry tree, from every leaf and trunk, human beings are 
peering out at you? Don't you hear their voices? To possess living souls – that 
has corrupted all of you, those who lived before and you who are living now, so 
that [you] no longer perceive that you are living in debt, at someone else's 
expense, at the expense of those who you wouldn't allow to cross your threshold 
. . . We are at least two hundred years behind the times . . . We only 
philosophise, complain of boredom or drink vodka. Yet it's quite clear that to 
begin to live we must first atone for the past. . .

Forthright political condemnation of this sort is rare in British fiction; the 
atoning that Briony Tallis has to do, in McEwan's novel, is of a different kind.

2 Illicit sex


It's difficult to have sex in a flat or a small house without the other 
occupants noticing: hence the scene inSons and Lovers when Paul Morel and Clara 
Dawes have to wait for her mother to go to bed before they get on with it. The 
country house affords more opportunities: bedrooms lie further apart and can be 
crept into in secrecy; gardens offer hidden bowers and trysting-spots; and if 
all else fails, and two people are desperate enough, there'll always be an 
empty room where they can risk it. InAtonement, Robbie and Cecilia have sex in 
the library, not the best of choices, given Cecilia's bookish younger sister 
Briony, who walks in on them. In Hollinghurst's new novel – a demure one 
compared to his earlier work – erotic excitements happen in the linen-room, and 
in woodland, and the garden at night.

The ultimate achievement in country house sex is Lady Chatterley's Lover, in 
which Connie finds fulfilment not in the bedroom at Wragby (her crippled 
husband Clifford is impotent and sex with a house-guest, Michaelis, fails to 
satisfy her), but in a cottage in its grounds, with the gamekeeper, Mellors. 
Connie is transformed by the experience ("she was gone, she was not, and she 
was born: a woman"), though at least her metamorphosis is less drastic than 
that of Sylvia, the wife in David Garnett'sLady into Fox (another memorable 
country house novel), who becomes a vixen.

A later variant on the Connie-Mellors liaison comes in LP Hartley's The 
Go-Between, published in the 1950s but set in 1900. Now an old man, the 
narrator, Leo, recalls the hot summer he spent at Brandham Hall in Norfolk, 
acting as messenger-boy for the beautiful Marian (played by Julie Christie in 
Joseph Losey's film version) and for Ted Burgess (Alan Bates), the local tenant 
farmer with whom – although engaged to marry a viscount – she is having an 
affair. The past might be a foreign country, where they do things differently, 
but Marian and Ted suffer the same fate as other star-crossed lovers down the 
centuries; because they come from different social classes, their relationship 
ends tragically, in suicide.

3 Rightful ownership


In Fielding's novels, the handsome but lowly heroes end up owning country 
estates. The footman Joseph Andrews has the patronage of Mr Booby to thank and 
the foundling Tom Jones turns out to be of noble birth; because they're 
essentially good men, despite some rough and tumble, they merit their good 
fortune. Heathcliff inWuthering Heights has no such entitlement, either by 
birth (he's a "gypsy brat" from Liverpool) or through his behaviour, but he 
revenges himself on his betters by becoming the owner of both Wuthering Heights 
and Thrushcross Grange – a troubling outcome for 19th-century readers and 
reviewers. Then there's Dr Faraday inThe Little Stranger, whose desire to marry 
the awkward Caroline isn't easily disentangled from his desire to live in 
Hundreds Hall. (Is it a coincidence or a subtle allusion that the owner of 
Darlington Hall in Ishiguro's novel is called Farraday?)

For every surprise possession of a country house, there must also be a 
dispossession, and fiction is full of these, too. At the start ofSense and 
Sensibility, John Dashwood succeeds to the Norland estate and defies his 
father's dying wishes by failing to provide for his three half-sisters and 
their mother, who're forced to move out and rent the "defective" if charming 
Barton Cottage. The romantic twists that follow – is Edward a suitable match 
for Elinor? Will Marianne end up with Willoughby or Colonel Brandon? – include 
many references to property, to what these men do and don't own. Austen 
heroines aren't so vulgar as to gossip about wealth; they leave that to others 
("His woods! I have not seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire!"). But come 
the denouement, it's unthinkable that their circumstances should be reduced. 
The same goes for Charlotte Brontë'sJane Eyre: "Reader I married him" – and 
lived happily ever after in a manor-house.

Spiritual entitlement to a house is a trickier business, though many have 
experienced the feeling that a place is somehow "right" for them. InHowards End
, Mrs Wilcox, whose only passion in life is her country house with its nine 
windows, five acres and wych-elm, asks that it be left to Margaret Schlegel. 
The family ignores the request but Margaret ends up there anyway, as the second 
Mrs Wilcox. "Houses have their own ways of dying," Forster writes, "falling as 
variously as the generations of men, some with a tragic roar, some quietly . . 
. while from others the spirit slips before the body perishes." Until Margaret 
takes possession of it, Howards End seems to be slipping away, but the novel 
concludes with images of spring and rebirth.

4 Poetry


Hollinghurst's new novel opens at a house called Two Acres, where the budding 
poet Cecil Valance is visiting his friend from Cambridge, George Sawle. As its 
name suggest, Two Acres is a paltry suburban plot compared with Cecil's estate. 
But he writes a poem as a thankyou for the hospitality he receives, and "Two 
Acres" later becomes his best-known work. Hollinghurst, who began as a poet, 
clearly enjoys composing Cecil's poems for him, and also enjoys reversing the 
convention whereby a poet of modest means writes a homage to his better-off 
hosts.

This kind of poem was a popular genre from the 16th to the 18th centuries, one 
associated with Spenser, Carew, Jonson, Marvell ("Upon Appleton House"), 
Herrick, Dryden and Pope. Building design, fountains, garden statuary, the 
provision of beef and beer: any of these might win compliments, so long as they 
reflected well on the taste and generosity of the owners. "Thou are not, 
Penshurst, built to envious show, / Of touch, or marble; nor canst boast a row 
/ Of polished pillars or a roof of gold," Ben Jonson writes, contrasting it 
with the "proud, ambitious heaps" of showier estates. Alongside the vanity and 
indulgence of Brideshead, Jonson's Penshurst is a model of social 
responsibility:
The blushing apricot and woolly peach
Hang on thy walls, that every child may reach.
And though thy walls be of the country stone,
They're reared with no man's ruin, no man's groan:
There's none, that dwell about them, wish them down;
But all come in, the farmer, and the clown,
And no one empty-handed, to salute
The lord and lady, though they have no suit. 


These poems celebrate simple rural virtues as against the dubious pleasures of 
London (and never mind that the hosts own a place there too). In this, Jonson 
et al were following the Ancients – Horace, Juvenal and Virgil – who contrasted 
wholesome estate life with urban vice. Satires on mean hosts or hubristic 
houses were less common but not unknown. "Thanks, sir, cried I, tis very fine, 
/ But where d'ye sleep, or where d'ye dine," goes a poem on Blenheim, "I find 
by all you have been telling / That tis a house, but not a dwelling."

As well as writing thankyou letters in verse, visiting poets sometimes had to 
sing for their supper. Edmund Gosse's biography of Swinburne describes the 
excitement Swinburne aroused when he arrived looking like Apollo at a country 
house party in 1863. Asked to read aloud after dinner, he chose a poem that 
shocked the Archbishop of York and sent two young ladies into giggles. There's 
a similar mix of excitement and discomfort inThe Stranger's Child, when Cecil 
recites his verse at Two Acres.

5 Americans


Only Americans can afford to buy English country houses: so goes the joke in 
The Remains of the Day when Stevens confesses that his new employer, Mr 
Farraday, comes from the United States. In a Britain of mega-rich pop stars, 
footballers and hedge-fund managers, the joke no longer holds true; in the 21st 
century, stately homes aren't necessarily bought by magnates from the US. But 
the joke made sense in 1956, when the outer narrative ofThe Remains of the Day 
is set, as it also did for Coward in 1938: "The stately homes of England / We 
proudly represent / We only keep them up for / Americans to rent." InThe Little 
Stranger, circa 1948, Caroline cynically suggests that "you can get an American 
to buy any old bit of black timber, just by telling him it comes from the 
Forest of Arden, or was sneezed on by Shakespeare, or something."

The gibe seems apt when you consider Henry James, many of whose novels and 
stories are set in English country houses, and several of whose heroines – from 
Isabel Archer inPortrait of a Lady to Fleda Vetch in The Spoils of Poynton – 
share their author's aristo-Anglophilia. "It is not too much to say," he wrote, 
"that after spending twenty-four hours in a house that is six hundred years old 
you seem yourself to have lived in it six hundred years." And though it was too 
much to say it, he said it again, many times: "Those delicious old houses, in 
the long August days, in the south of England air, on the soil over which so 
much has passed and out of which so much has come, rose before me like a series 
of visions. I thought of a thousand things . . . of stories, of dramas, of all 
the life of the past." The houses didn't just give James the milieu for his 
fiction, the great good place, they also defined its style – the decorative 
borders of his semi-colons, the long corridors of his sentences, the spreading 
parklands of his paragraphs.

6 Ghost stories and whodunnits


Coward is spot-on again: "The stately homes of England / Though rather in the 
lurch / Provide a lot of chances / For psychical research." Country house 
Gothic goes back to Austen'sNorthanger Abbey (itself indebted to Ann Radcliffe's
The Mysteries of Udolpho) and Wuthering Heights, and through to Waters. 
Rustling wainscots, hidden panels, dusty attics, secret gardens: the country 
house is the perfect backdrop for ghosts.

For whodunnits, as well. "This whole thing's getting rather like one of Agatha 
Christie's," a character in the new Hollinghurst novel remarks, and few plots 
in fiction are as familiar as a murder committed during a country house 
weekend, followed by an interrogation of every servant and house guest, and a 
resolution that requires all remaining characters to come to the drawing-room 
so that Hercule Poirot (or Miss Marple, or Sherlock Holmes, or Lord Peter 
Wimsey) can deliver a verdict.

7 Upstairs/Downstairs


Country house literature isn't only about nobs; there are also the servants. 
The idea that pre-modern writers failed to pay them heed doesn't survive a 
reading of Sophocles, let alone Shakespeare or Goldoni. Still, they get more 
attention than they used to. The Losey/Pinter filmThe Servant features a 
live-in manservant, a gentleman's gentleman, played by Dirk Bogarde.The Remains 
of the Day is narrated by a butler. And a current popular choice for book 
groups is Kathryn Stockett'sThe Help, about black maids in Mississippi in the 
1960s.

At Two Acres, young Jonah is asked to valet for the visiting Cecil, which 
means unpacking his suitcase and arranging the contents "convincingly". He's 
fascinated by Cecil's ivory-coloured drawers, "fine as a lady's". There's an 
echo here of Rose Harrison, in her memoir of a life in service, recalling Lady 
Astor's underwear: "It was kept in sets in silk pouches which I had to make and 
decorate in his lordship's racing colours, blue and pink. Every evening I would 
leave one pouch on her stool and she would fold her underwear into it and tie 
the ribbon, and so it would be sent to be laundered." Cecil has no such 
fastidiousness: he strews his stuff around for Jonah to clear up.

To a contemporary, it's amazing how little the servants complain – and how 
often they are complained about by their employers. Ishiguro's Stevens is a 
paragon of forbearance, enduring humiliation without complaint and subduing his 
own interests so comprehensively that he can't even recognise what they are. He 
sees himself as a witness to world-changing events, having come to believe that:
the great decisions of the world are not, in fact, arrived at . . . under the 
full gaze of the public and the press. Rather, debates are conducted, and 
crucial decisions arrived at, in the privacy and calm of the great houses of 
this country . . . To us, then, the world was a wheel, revolving with these 
great houses at the hub, their mighty decisions emanating out to all else, rich 
and poor, who revolved around them.

This might stand as a last word on country house fiction, defining it (and 
defending it) as a literature about great men and their machinations. But 
Stevens is an unreliable narrator. What the contemporary novelist finds in 
country houses isn't greatness but loss, failure and everyday human struggle, 
writ large.

Alan Hollinghurst will be at the Guardian book club <> on 8 August.
 