
Kevin Lygo, the managing director of ITV Studios, was in Los Angeles last week 
at the LA Screenings, pitching the upcoming US version of Lynda La Plante's 
Prime Suspect to international broadcasters. By all accounts the show, which 
will air in primetime on NBC and stars Maria Bello in the Helen Mirren role, 
has "generated fantastic interest" with a number of deals expected to follow.

This is the kind of new business Lygo, nine months into his job running ITV's 
production subsidiary, needs to drum up if he is to achieve the company's 
ambition of growing its international programming revenues.

Boosting the ITV Studios business is a key plank of the strategy outlined by 
Archie Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman> and Adam 
Crozier, ITV's chairman and chief executive, to wean the company off its 
reliance on TV advertising. They admit it is much the same as the strategy 
pursued by their predecessor, Michael Grade, diagnosing that it was the 
execution that was at fault, not the plan itself.

Overseas broadcasters

Execution is where Lygo comes in – and a peek at ITV Studios' performance in 
2010 highlights the scale of the task. Last year total external revenues from 
other UK and overseas broadcasters fell 12.5% year-on-year to £293m, while 
earnings dropped 11% to £81m. Total revenues, including commissions from ITV 
channels, fell more than 7% year-on-year to £554m.

Highlighting some of the reasons for this malaise, Crozier has pointed out 
that ITV Studios has not generated an international entertainment hit since 
Dancing on Ice in 2006; while on the home front if Emmerdale and Coronation 
Street are stripped out only 16% of ITV's output is made in-house.

All a far cry from Grade's target of a £1.2bn-a-year content business by 2010, 
set in 2007 and later abandoned when ITV was blown off course by the recession. 
Crozier has wisely not set specific revenue targets – instead focusing on a 
five-year transformation plan – yet the underlying aspiration for significant 
growth at ITV Studios remains.

However, organic growth in the UK and abroad will only take the business so 
far. ITV is on the lookout for acquisitions, particularly of independent 
producers of formats with the potential to become global hits, but has yet to 
secure any deals to beef up its programme-making arm. "They still don't seem to 
really want to invest in the production division," says a senior TV executive. 
"Where is an acquisition? No big one, no small one, nothing internationally. My 
question is less about what they might buy and whether, given all the talks I 
have heard have gone on, Crozier and Norman have the appetite to seal any deal."

ITV has a potential £1bn to spend on acquisitions and had been linked to a bid 
for All3Media, maker of shows including ITV's Midsomer Murders and Channel 4 
dramas Skins and Shameless, but the prospect of a bid receded last month.Last 
week it emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/22/itv-eyes-norton-production-deal?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that ITV is looking at Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's company 
Gallowgate and Graham Norton's So Television as reasonable talent tie-ups but 
hardly transforming deals.

One City source believes that, despite the clamour for a deal, ITV management 
is right to exercise caution with media assets, particularly in the production 
sector, considered to be too highly priced. "Remember they have day jobs to 
worry about as well, the core is still advertising, and I believe they are 
showing discipline," says the source. "The last thing [investors] want is to 
see them go 'bang', get sucked in and buy something for 12 times earnings when 
it was worth eight and is loaded with a bunch of expensive earnouts."

Lygo can point to progress in securing a deal to co-produce Simon Cowell's 
next big bet, Red or Black, with his company Syco. A move considered a step 
forward after years of criticism that ITV committed a cardinal sin in not 
nailing down a share of rights to the X Factor franchise.

"One of the best things [Lygo] has done so far was securing the co-production 
with Cowell," says a former senior ITV executive. "At least if his next show is 
a success ITV is in on the ground floor."

Push The Button

ITV Studios is believed to have explored options to co-produce or 
internationally exploit Push The Button – the ITV1 show starring Ant and Dec 
made by Gallowgate – in case it became a hit, but it was thwarted. It is 
thought one of the reasons why Crozier and Norman have explored a potential 
tie-up with Gallowgate is to avoid being put in such a position again by ITV's 
key talent.

"Look at what happened with Cowell," says one senior production industry 
source. "ITV stars and talent have a habit of not playing nicely with the 
family that brought them up. An NBC or ABC would never be in that position, it 
would never happen. I think Crozier and Norman are amazed it can happen at ITV."

Since Lygo's arrival from Channel 4 in August last year ITV Studios has also 
been putting its own house in order with a series of senior hirings to help 
reverse years of production talent exodus, as several rounds of redundancies 
and the lure of better remuneration in the independent sector took their toll.

Denise O'Donoghue, the co-founder of Have I Got News for You producer Hat 
Trick, was brought in as UK managing director to look after the commercial side 
of the ITV Studios business; while Million Pound Drop co-developer Nic McNeilis 
(entertainment) and Wallander executive producer Francis Hopkinson (drama) add 
creative expertise.

Lygo has £12m to hire production talent and develop pilots with the aim of 
launching more hit international franchises. ITV Studios also has high hopes 
for the international sales potential of Downton Abbey writer Julian Fellowes's 
next drama, Titanic, which will air on ITV1 and has already been sold to a 
number of markets, and a US version of Jeremy Kyle's daily talk show.

There are signs that Lygo's new ITV Studios regime is starting to have a 
positive impact on the bottom line, with revenues from non-ITV shows up 7% in 
the first three months of 2011 to £64m, driven by a "stronger international 
performance". ITV Studios' share of ITV1 network spend has also increased from 
50% to 53% — the first major boost since at least 2005.

"I think that Kevin has done a good job, he takes Peter [Fincham, ITV director 
of television] on and is getting more ITV Studios programming on the air on 
ITV1," says a senior production industry executive. "He has pushed for 
commissions and pilot funds, which is always damn hard when you are an internal 
business which is seen as unsexy."
 